not all languages have gendered pronouns . 
the `` grammatical gender '' of a noun does not always coincide with its natural gender . 
the distinction between the gender of a noun and the gender of the object it refers to is clear when nouns of different genders can be used for the same object ,  e . g . 
it is relatively uncommon for a noun to have more than one possible gender . 
as noted above ,  pronouns may agree in gender with the noun or noun phrase to which they refer  -lrb-  their antecedent  -rrb-  . 
gender is sometimes reflected in other ways . 
in languages with grammatical gender ,  each noun is assigned to one of the classes called `` genders '' ,  which form a closed set . 
the gender of a noun may affect the modifications that the noun itself undergoes ,  particularly the way in which the noun inflects for number and case . 
the `` natural gender '' of a noun ,  pronoun or noun phrase is a gender to which it would be expected to belong based on relevant attributes of its referent . 
given names are proper nouns and they follow the same gender grammatical rules as common nouns . 
in other cases ,  a word may be usable in multiple genders indifferently . 
although gender inflection may be used to construct nouns and names for people of opposite sexes in languages that have grammatical gender ,  this alone does not constitute grammatical gender . 
when a language has gendered pronouns ,  the use of a particular word as a dummy pronoun may involve the selection of a particular gender ,  even though there is no noun to agree with . 
adjectives are affected by gender in a similar way . 
grammatical gender manifests itself when words related to a noun like determiners ,  pronouns or adjectives change their form  -lrb-  `` inflect ''  -rrb-  according to the gender of noun they refer to  -lrb-  `` agreement ''  -rrb-  . 
modern english makes use of gender in pronouns ,  which are generally marked for natural gender ,  but lacks a system of gender concord within the noun phrase which is one of the central elements of grammatical gender in most other indo-european languages . 
few or no nouns can occur in more than one class . 
suffixes often carry a specific gender . 
in some languages the gender is distinguished only in singular number but not in plural . 
according to one definition: `` genders are classes of nouns reflected in the behaviour of associated words . `` 
in some cases the gender of a pronoun is not marked in the form of the pronoun itself ,  but is marked on other words by way of agreement . 
hence the grammatical gender of `` mädchen '' is neuter ,  although its natural gender is feminine  -lrb-  because it refers to a female person  -rrb-  . 
for other situations in which such a `` default '' gender assignment may be required ,  see below . 
in some languages the declension pattern followed by the noun itself will be different for different genders . 
as an example ,  we consider spanish ,  a language with two noun genders: masculine and feminine . 
in this case ,  nouns may be considered the “triggers” of the process ,  because they have an inherent gender ,  whereas related words that change their form to match the gender of the noun can be considered the “target” of these changes . 
 -lrb-  this is reflected in dictionaries ,  which typically indicate the gender of noun headwords where applicable .   -rrb- 
one of the values of the movement was gay pride . 
lesbian ,  gay ,  bisexual ,  and transgender  -lrb-  lgbt  -rrb-  social movements are social movements that advocate for lgbt+ people in society . 
on june 24, 1994, the first gay pride march was celebrated in asia in the philippines . 
the gay liberation movement overall ,  like the gay community generally and historically ,  did not welcome transgender individuals . 
immediately after stonewall ,  such groups as the gay liberation front  -lrb-  glf  -rrb-  and the gay activists' alliance  -lrb-  gaa  -rrb-  were formed . 
in japan ,  lgbt groups were established in the 1970s . 
bisexuals became more visible in the lgbt rights movement in the 1970s . 
lgbt movements are opposed by a variety of individuals and organizations . 
as with other social movements ,  there is also conflict within and between lgbt movements ,  especially about strategies for change and debates over exactly who represents the constituency of these movements ,  and this also applies to changing education . 
from the anarchist gay liberation movement of the early 1970s arose a more reformist and single-issue gay rights movement ,  which portrayed gays and lesbians as a minority group and used the language of civil rights—in many respects continuing the work of the homophile period . 
a commonly stated goal among these movements is social equality for lgbt people ,  but there is still denial of full lgbt+ rights . 
colleges also became places of lgbt activism and support for activists and lgbt people in general ,  with many colleges opening lgbt centers . 
a `` war conference '' of 200 gay leaders was held in warrenton ,  va in 1988.
the term `` gay '' came to be more strongly associated with homosexual males . 
the netherlands was the first country to allow same-sex marriage in 2001.
in canada ,  the coming into effect of section 15 of the canadian charter of rights and freedoms in 1985 saw a shift in the gay rights movement in canada ,  as canadian gays and lesbians moved from liberation to litigious strategies . 
lgbt movements have often adopted a kind of identity politics that sees gay ,  bisexual ,  and transgender people as a fixed class of people; a minority group or groups ,  and this is very common among lgbt communities . 
an early lgbt movement also began in germany at the turn of the 20th century ,  centering on the doctor and writer magnus hirschfeld . 
south africa became the first african nation to legalize same-sex marriage in 2006, and it remains the only african country where same-sex marriage is legal . 
gay and lesbian rights advocates argued that one's sexual orientation does not reflect on one's gender; that is ,  `` you can be a man and desire a man .  .  .  without any implications for your gender identity as a man , ``  and the same is true if you are a woman . 
scottish anarchist john henry mackay also wrote in defense of same-sex love and androgyny . 
some historians posit that a new era of the gay rights movement began in the 1980s with the emergence of aids ,  which decimated the leadership and shifted the focus for many . 
such attempts are often based in religious beliefs that perceive gay ,  lesbian ,  and bisexual activity as immoral . 
the 1990s also saw a rapid push of the transgender movement ,  while at the same time a `` sidelining of the identity of those who are transsexual . `` 
the earliest organizations to support lgbt+ rights were formed in the 19th century . 
iceland became the first country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage through a unanimous vote: 49-0, on 11 june 2010.
in 1977, harvey milk was elected to the san francisco board of supervisors becoming the first openly gay man in the united states elected to public office . 
this new radicalism is often attributed to the stonewall riots of 1969, when a group of gay men ,  lesbians ,  and drag queens at a bar in new york resisted a police raid . 
bisexual activist brenda howard is known as the `` mother of pride '' for her work in coordinating the first lgbt pride march; the first christopher street liberation day march eventually occurred in new york on june 27, 1970.
a month later ,  argentina became the first country in latin america to legalize same-sex marriage . 
the book is often critically described by social conservatives such as focus on the family as important to the success of the lgbt movement in the 90's and as part of an alleged `` homosexual agenda '' . 
the great victoria desert ,  an interim australian bioregion ,  is a sparsely populated desert area in western australia and south australia . 
young indigenous adults from the great victoria desert region work in the wilurarra creative programs to maintain and develop their culture . 
version 3 of the lgpl is not inherently compatible with version 2 of the gpl . 
paragraph 5 of the lgpl version 2.1 states:
version 3 of the lgpl addresses such cases in section 3.
one feature of the lgpl is the permission to relicense under the gpl any piece of software which is received under the lgpl  -lrb-  see section 3 of the lgpl version 2.1, and section 2 option b of the lgpl version 3 -rrb- . 
version 3 of the lgpl was published in 2007 as a list of additional permissions applied to gpl version 3.
gosford itself was explored by governor phillip between 1788 and 1789.
east gosford was the first centre of settlement . 
in 1825, gosford's population reached 100, of whom 50% were convicts . 
gosford became a town in 1885 and was declared a municipality in 1886.
gosford is a new south wales suburb located in the heart of the central coast region ,  about north of the sydney cbd . 
gosford is situated along an identified business growth corridor between erina ,  the west gosford light industrial zone and somersby . 
brown has two brothers ,  john brown and andrew brown . 
in april 2010, brown asked the queen to dissolve parliament . 
brown was re-elected as mp for kirkcaldy and cowdenbeath with 29,559 votes . 
on 1 december 2014, brown announced that he would not be seeking re-election to parliament . 
between 1999 and 2002 brown sold 60% of the uk's gold reserves shortly before gold entered a protracted bull market ,  since nicknamed by dealers as the brown bottom or brown's bottom . 
brown is concerned about child poverty and poverty in general . 
brown's premiership coincided with the global recession ,  during which brown called for fiscal action in an attempt to stimulate aggregate demand . 
brown also stated in the manifesto that the nhs was his top priority . 
his political opponents accused him of being indecisive ,  which brown denied . 
brown and the labour party had pledged to allow a referendum on the eu treaty of lisbon . 
it has long been rumoured a deal was struck between blair and brown at the former granita restaurant in islington ,  in which blair promised to give brown control of economic policy in return for brown not standing against him in the leadership election . 
brown ceased to be chancellor and became the prime minister of the united kingdom on 27 june 2007.
during his labour leadership campaign brown proposed some policy initiatives which he called the `` manifesto for change . `` 
from 1976 to 1980 brown was employed as a lecturer in politics at glasgow college of technology . 
brown later referred to the call for a secret ballot as a `` form of silliness '' . 
in 2007, tony blair resigned as prime minister and labour leader and brown was chosen to replace him in an uncontested election . 
brown was brought up there with his elder brother john and younger brother andrew brown in a manse; he is therefore often referred to as a `` son of the manse '' . 
brown was elected to parliament on his second attempt as a labour mp for dunfermline east in the 1983 general election . 
under brown ,  the tax-code ,  the standard guide to tax ,  doubled in length to 17,000 pages . 
brown was a member of parliament  -lrb-  mp  -rrb-  from 1983 to 2015, first for dunfermline east and later for kirkcaldy and cowdenbeath . 
as chancellor ,  brown argued against renationalising the railways ,  saying at the labour conference in 2004 that it would cost £22 billion . 
brown announced on 10 may 2010 that he would stand down as labour leader ,  with a view to a successor being chosen before the next labour party conference in september 2010.
in mid-2008, brown's leadership was presented with a challenge as some mps openly called for him to resign . 
brown was mentioned by the press in the expenses crisis for claiming for the payment of his cleaner . 
the jet propulsion laboratory built the `` galileo '' spacecraft and managed the `` galileo '' mission for nasa . 
 ''galileo '' prime mission was a two-year study of the jovian system . 
the mission was initially called the `` jupiter orbiter probe ''; it was christened `` galileo '' in 1978.
 ''galileo '' flew by venus at 05:58:48 utc on february 10, 1990, at a range of  . 
in 1994, `` galileo '' observed comet shoemaker–levy 9's collision with jupiter . 
the radiation environment near io was very unhealthy for `` galileo '' systems ,  and so these flybys were saved for the extended mission when loss of the spacecraft would be more acceptable . 
the garden of eden is considered to be mythological by most scholars . 
circular motifs represent flowers of the garden of eden . 
according to jewish eschatology ,  the higher gan eden is called the `` garden of righteousness '' . 
the term `` jannāt ʿadni ''  -lrb-  `` gardens of eden '' or `` gardens of perpetual residence ''  -rrb-  is used in the qur'an for the destination of the righteous . 
the garden of eden  -lrb-  hebrew גַּן עֵדֶן ,  `` gan ʿeḏen ''  -rrb-  ,  also called paradise ,  is the biblical `` garden of god '' described in the book of genesis and the book of ezekiel . 
the hebrew bible depicts adam and eve as walking around the garden of eden naked due to their innocence . 
the man was free to eat from any tree in the garden except the tree of the knowledge of good and evil . 
the gurmukhi script has roots in the brahmi script like most indian ,  tibetan ,  and southeast asian languages . 
gurmukhi  -lrb-  ; gurmukhi  -lrb-  the literal meaning being `` from the guru's mouth ''  -rrb- : ਗੁਰਮੁਖੀ  -rrb-  is a sikh script modified ,  standardized and used by the second sikh guru ,  guru angad  -lrb-  1504–1552 -rrb- . 
geneva's sports teams are called the golden tornadoes . 
geneva was founded by scottish and scots-irish immigrants . 
geneva sports teams were nicknamed the `` covenanters '' until the 1950s . 
geneva college is a christian liberal arts college in beaver falls ,  pennsylvania . 
geneva college was founded in 1848 in northwood ,  ohio ,  by john black johnston ,  a minister of the rpcna . 
geneva also offers graduates studies in several fields . 
geneva also has one of the oldest basketball courts in collegiate sports in the johnson gymnasium . 
the third gorillaz studio album ,  `` plastic beach '' ,  was released on 3 march 2010.
on 1 june 2018, gorillaz embarked the now now tour ,  in nuremberg ,  germany . 
the idea to create gorillaz came about when albarn and hewlett were watching mtv . 
gorillaz are a british virtual band created in 1998 by musician damon albarn and artist jamie hewlett . 
on 8 july 2017, gorillaz embarked upon the humanz tour ,  the band's second world tour and first since 2010.
in april 2012, albarn told `` the guardian '' that he and hewlett had fallen out and that future gorillaz projects were `` unlikely '' . 
in late 2007, albarn and hewlett began working on `` carousel '' ,  a new gorillaz project which eventually evolved into the band's third studio album `` plastic beach '' . 
on 20 september 2016, gorillaz began an abridged retrospective timeline of the history of gorillaz releases since 2000.
although not released under the gorillaz name ,  albarn has said that `` one of the first ever gorillaz tunes '' was blur's 1997 single `` on your own '' ,  which was released for their fifth studio album `` blur '' . 
on 23 march 2017, gorillaz announced via instagram that the new album will be entitled `` humanz '' ,  with a scheduled release date of 28 april 2017.
on 2 june 2006 the hopes for a gorillaz film were revived ,  when hewlett stated that they would be producing the film on their own . 
in an interview with `` q magazine '' in september 2017, albarn hinted at another potential gorillaz album being in production . 
the band headlined the festival . 
in april 2014, albarn told the `` national post '' that he `` wouldn't mind having another stab at a gorillaz record . `` 
basic-80 programs not using peek/poke statements would run under gw-basic . 
gw-basic is a dialect of the basic programming language developed by microsoft from basica ,  originally for compaq . 
gw-basic 3.20  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- added ega graphics support  -lrb-  no version of basica or gw-basic had vga support  -rrb-  and was in effect the last new version released before it was superseded by qbasic . 
ibm basica and gw-basic were largely ports of mbasic version 5.x ,  but with added features specifically for the ibm pc hardware . 
the initial version of gw-basic was the one included with compaq dos 1.13  -lrb-  released with the compaq portable in 1983 -rrb- and was analogous to ibm basica 1.10.
there are two major hypotheses for the ascent of magma through the crust:
both types are produced by partial melting of crustal rocks ,  either metaigneous rocks or metasedimentary rocks . 
granite has a felsic composition and is more common in continental crust than in oceanic crust . 
strictly speaking ,  granite is an igneous rock with between 20% and 60% quartz by volume ,  and at least 35% of the total feldspar consisting of alkali feldspar ,  although commonly the term `` granite '' is used to refer to a wider range of coarse-grained igneous rocks containing quartz and feldspar . 
rocks there do not deform so easily: for magma to rise as a pluton it would expend far too much energy in heating wall rocks ,  thus cooling and solidifying before reaching higher levels within the crust . 
granite containing rock is widely distributed throughout the continental crust . 
as these narrow conduits open ,  the first magma to enter solidifies and provides a form of insulation for later magma . 
fractional crystallisation serves to reduce a melt in iron ,  magnesium ,  titanium ,  calcium and sodium ,  and enrich the melt in potassium and silicon – alkali feldspar  -lrb-  rich in potassium  -rrb-  and quartz  -lrb-  sio2 -rrb- ,  are two of the defining constituents of granite . 
granite is classified according to the qapf diagram for coarse grained plutonic rocks and is named according to the percentage of quartz ,  alkali feldspar  -lrb-  orthoclase ,  sanidine ,  or microcline  -rrb-  and plagioclase feldspar on the a-q-p half of the diagram . 
soil development on granite reflects the rock's high quartz content and dearth of available bases ,  with the base-poor status predisposing the soil to acidification and podzolization in cool humid climates as the weather-resistant quartz yields much sand . 
this process operates regardless of the origin of parental magmas to granites ,  and regardless of their chemistry . 
gcc was funded by membership dues . 
gcc opposed the signing of the kyoto protocol by clinton . 
in 2001, gcc's executive director compared the kyoto protocol to the `` rms titanic '' . 
gcc was one of the most powerful lobbyist groups against action to mitigate global warming . 
prior to 1997, gcc spent about $1 million annually lobbying against limits on emissions; before kyoto ,  gcc annual revenue peaked around $1.5 million; gcc spent $13 million on advertising in opposition to the kyoto treaty . 
gcc registered with the united nations framework convention on climate change as a non-governmental organization ,  and executives from gcc members attended official un conferences as gcc delegates . 
in 2001, after us president george w .  bush withdrew the us from the kyoto process ,  gcc disbanded . 
gcc was run by ruder finn ,  a public relations firm . 
gcc was the largest industry group active in climate policy . 
the narrows is an island in the middle of the gotham river ,  situated between midtown district and downtown gotham city . 
 ''batman: shadow of the bat '' ,  annual #1  -lrb-  june 1993 -rrb- further establishes that gotham city is in new jersey . 
midtown is a region of the gotham city metropolitan area . 
downtown is a region of the gotham city metropolitan area . 
uptown is a region of the gotham city metropolitan area . 
otisburg is the district in gotham that runs straight through the northern segment of the island and connects to gotham county on the mainland . 
 ''the atlas of the dc universe '' from the 1990s places metropolis in delaware and gotham city in new jersey . 
over the years ,  gotham's look and atmosphere has been influenced by cities such as new york city and chicago . 
gotham city  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  or simply gotham ,  is a fictional city appearing in american comic books published by dc comics ,  best known as the home of batman . 
notable locations include: gotham tower ,  wayne tower ,  gotham international airport ,  thomas and martha wayne international airport ,  gotham pier and the prewitt building . 
apart from gotham's superhero residents ,  the residents of the city feature in a back-up series in `` detective comics '' called `` tales of gotham city '' and in two limited series called `` gotham nights '' . 
 ''detective comics '' #503  -lrb-  june 1983 -rrb- includes several references suggesting gotham city is in new jersey . 
in the 1966 television series ,  `` batman '' ,  the gotham city police force was not a focus of the stories . 
in contemporary times ,  batman is considered the protector of gotham ,  as he is fiercely protective of his home city . 
gotham city is traditionally depicted as being located in the state of new jersey ,  in close proximity to metropolis . 
the 2016 film `` suicide squad '' reveals gotham city to be in the state of new jersey within the dc extended universe . 
 ''new adventures of superboy '' #22  -lrb-  october 1981 -rrb- and the 1990 `` atlas of the dc universe '' both show maps of gotham city in new jersey and metropolis in delaware . 
work hired goren to help with his bridge articles and columns ,  and eventually goren began ghostwriting work's material . 
goren became world champion at the bermuda bowl in 1950.
goren died on april 3, 1991, in encino ,  california ,  at the age of 90.
goren `` became mr .  work's technical assistant at the end of the decade '' . 
goren was born in philadelphia ,  pennsylvania ,  to russian jewish immigrants . 
tribune content agency distributes the daily column goren bridge ,  written by bob jones ,  using the goren method . 
goren also worked to continue the practice of opening four-card suits ,  with an occasional three-card club suit when the only four-card suit was a weak  . 
6, #1–5  -lrb-  jan .  – may 2011 -rrb- and was the antagonist in `` the mighty thor '' #1–6  -lrb-  april – sept .  2011 -rrb- . 
galactus also featured in `` fantastic four '' #172–175  -lrb-  july – oct .  1976 -rrb- and #208–213  -lrb-  july – dec .  1979 -rrb- . 
galactus was featured in the miniseries `` infinity gauntlet '' #1–6  -lrb-  july – dec .  1991 -rrb- ,  `` infinity war '' #1–6  -lrb-  june – nov .  1992 -rrb- and `` cosmic powers '' #1–6  -lrb-  march – aug .  1994 -rrb- . 
the character made appearances in `` fantastic four '' #120–123  -lrb-  march – june 1972 -rrb- and `` thor '' #225–228  -lrb-  july–oct . 
the character guest-starred in `` rom '' #26–27  -lrb-  jan .  – feb .  1982 -rrb- . 
galactus' origin was eventually revealed in `` thor '' #168–169  -lrb-  sept .  – oct .  1969 -rrb- . 
after appearing in the limited series `` stormbreaker: the saga of beta ray bill '' #1–6  -lrb-  march – aug .  2005 -rrb- galactus was a central character in the `` annihilation '' storyline ,  appearing in the limited series ``  '' #1–4  -lrb-  june – sept .  2006 -rrb- ,  `` annihilation '' #1–6  -lrb-  oct .  2006 – march 2007 -rrb- and the epilogue ,  ``  '' #1–2  -lrb-  feb .  – april 2007 -rrb- . 
galactus was an antagonist in `` fantastic four '' #545–546  -lrb-  june – july 2007 -rrb- ,  where he tried to devour fellow cosmic function epoch . 
galactus's origin is re-examined in `` fantastic four '' #520–523  -lrb-  oct .  2004 – april 2005 -rrb- ,  in which the character is temporarily reverted to his mortal form . 
the consequences of galactus's death are explored in the `` fantastic four annual 2001 '' and `` fantastic four '' #46–49  -lrb-  oct .  2001 – jan .  2002 -rrb- ,  resulting in galactus's revival . 
issues #7–12, written by keith giffen ,  introduce galactus' first herald  -lrb-  the   -rrb-  . 
after consuming saiph ,  galactus' hunger returns and the silver surfer becomes his herald again as silver surfer takes him to find an uninhabited planet . 
stan lee and jack kirby reunited for the origin of silver surfer and galactus in the one-shot graphic novel `` the silver surfer ,  the ultimate cosmic experience ! `` 
returning to earth ,  galactus unsuccessfully tries to re-enlist the silver surfer . 
galactus also appeared in the limited series `` beta ray bill: godhunter '' #1–3  -lrb-  june – aug .  2009 -rrb- ,  a sequel to `` stormbreaker: the saga of beta ray bill '' . 
galactus played a pivotal role in the limited series `` secret wars '' #1–12  -lrb-  may 1984 – april 1985 -rrb- ,  and became a recurring character in the third volume of the `` silver surfer ''  -lrb-  beginning with issue #1, july 1987 -rrb- . 
it is the successor of the game boy . 
the game boy color features a color screen . 
during the `` axis '' storyline ,  magneto enters the island of genosha to find that it had turned into a concentration camp for mutants . 
to date genosha is now completely dead . 
the united nations ceded the island nation to the powerful mutant magneto ,  after he demanded an entire mutants-only nation . 
in the ultimate marvel reality ,  genosha has made an appearance . 
in this reality ,  there is a prison called genosha bay prison which is somewhat similar to guantánamo bay . 
genosha had a population of sixteen million mutants and a stable ,  advanced society . 
a few survivors and newly arriving mutants who wish to help with the rebuilding process remain on the island . 
magneto and xavier have since then joined forces to rebuild the island nation as detailed in the series `` excalibur '' vol . 
as part of the `` all-new ,  all-different marvel , ``  magneto and his use genosha as a staging ground for an ambush on the dark riders ,  who have been targeting mutants with healing powers . 
it was a sign that magneto has `` no intention of 'laying low' . `` 
the building is the first in iowa to receive the designation . 
according to data for students enrolled approximately in 2008, the median family income for students was us $119,700  -lrb-  74th percentile  -rrb-  . 
early decision rounds are offered to students in the fall; most students apply in january of their final year in high school . 
all students begin classes in august . 
internationally renowned architect césar pelli designed the athletics center ,  the joe rosenfield '25 student center ,  and the bucksbaum center for the arts . 
nationwide ,  only 20% of college students complete a four-year undergraduate degree within four years ,  and only 57% of college students graduate within six years . 
during the 2000s ,  the college completed the charles benson bear '39 recreation and athletic center ,  the bucksbaum center for the arts ,  the renovation of the robert noyce '49 science center and the joe rosenfield '25 student center . 
grinnell also has invested in several interdisciplinary programs: the center for prairie studies ,  center for the humanities ,  center for international studies ,  noun program in women's studies ,  peace studies program ,  rosenfield public affairs program ,  and the donald l .  wilson program in enterprise and leadership . 
all other classes are chosen ,  with the direct guidance of a faculty member in the student's major department ,  by the student . 
grinnell became known as the center of the social gospel reform movement ,  as robert handy writes ,  `` the movement centered on the campus of iowa  -lrb-  now grinnell  -rrb-  college . 
a few months later ,  iowa joined the union . 
this is the highest graduation rate of any college in iowa . 
nearly half of enrolled grinnellians self-identify as international students or students of color . 
while private tutors can be hired ,  participation in these programs is free for any enrolled student . 
in `` forbes '' magazine's 2018 rankings of academic institutions ,  `` america's top colleges ''  -lrb-  which uses a non-traditional ranking system based on ratemyprofessors . com evaluations ,  notable alumni ,  student debt ,  percentage of students graduating in four years ,  and the number of students or faculty receiving prestigious awards  -rrb-  ,  grinnell college was ranked 57th among all colleges and universities ,  28th among liberal arts colleges ,  and 8th in the midwest . 
many students exceed the minimum requirements . 
with the first-year students enrolled in the 2006–2007 school year ,  grinnell has ended its need-blind admissions policy for international applicants . 
the school's varsity sports teams are named the pioneers . 
the first 25 years of grinnell's history saw a change in name and location . 
 ''u . s .  news & world report '' ranked grinnell 11th best overall and 2nd best for undergraduate teaching among liberal arts colleges . 
a compendium of poll results on public perceptions about global warming is below . 
the measured temperatures show continuing global warming . 
the global climate coalition was an industry coalition that funded several scientists who expressed skepticism about global warming . 
in the u . s .  global warming is often a partisan political issue . 
a 47-nation poll by pew global attitudes conducted in 2007, found ,  `` substantial majorities 25 of 37 countries say global warming is a 'very serious' problem . `` 
nonetheless ,  one argument against global warming says that rising levels of carbon dioxide  -lrb-    -rrb-  and other greenhouse gases  -lrb-  ghgs  -rrb-  do not correlate with global warming . 
a 15-nation poll conducted in 2006, by pew global found that there `` is a substantial gap in concern over global warming—roughly two-thirds of japanese  -lrb-  66%  -rrb-  and indians  -lrb-  65%  -rrb-  say they personally worry a great deal about global warming . 
the global climate coalition closed in 2002, or in their own words ,  'deactivated' . 
scientists opposing the mainstream scientific assessment of global warming express varied opinions concerning the cause of global warming . 
in recent years some skeptics have changed their positions regarding global warming . 
global warming skeptic reid bryson said in june 2007, `` there is a lot of money to be made in this .  .  . 
the global warming controversy concerns the public debate over whether global warming is occurring ,  how much has occurred in modern times ,  what has caused it ,  what its effects will be ,  whether any action should be taken to curb it ,  and if so what that action should be . 
attribution of recent climate change discusses the evidence for recent global warming . 
they state that even if global warming is caused solely by the burning of fossil fuels ,  restricting their use would have more damaging effects on the world economy than the increases in global temperature . 
while some critics have argued that the ipcc overstates likely global warming ,  others have made the opposite criticism . 
on a local or regional level ,  some specific effects of global warming might be considered beneficial . 
the ipcc assessments have been too conservative in recognizing the importance of these human climate forcings as they alter regional and global climate . `` 
an example of the poor understanding is public confusion between global warming and ozone depletion or other environmental problems . 
in 2006, he stated ,  `` based on the data i'm now switching sides regarding global warming ,  from skeptic to convert . `` 
disputes over the key scientific facts of global warming are more prevalent in the media than in the scientific literature ,  where such issues are treated as resolved ,  and such disputes are more prevalent in the united states than globally . 
environmentalists' more recent advocacy for big economic and social intervention against global warming ,  according to mead ,  has made them ,  `` the voice of the establishment ,  of the tenured ,  of the technocrats '' and thus has lost them the support of a public which is increasingly skeptical of global warming . 
this became part of the public debate in the global warming controversy ,  particularly between advocacy groups of both sides in the public arena ,  as well as the popular media . 
weather stations that are used to compute global temperature records are not evenly distributed over the planet ,  and their distribution has changed over time . 
in the united states ,  the mass media devoted little coverage to global warming until the drought of 1988, and james e .  hansen's testimony to the senate ,  which explicitly attributed `` the abnormally hot weather plaguing our nation '' to global warming . 
attribution of recent climate change discusses how global warming is attributed to anthropogenic greenhouse gases  -lrb-  ghgs  -rrb-  . 
the 2001 ipcc third assessment report  -lrb-  tar  -rrb-  acknowledged that the urban heat island is an important `` local '' effect ,  but cited analyses of historical data indicating that the effect of the urban heat island on the `` global '' temperature trend is no more than 0.05 °c  -lrb-  0.09 °f  -rrb-  degrees through 1990.
on 10 december 2008, a report was released by the u . s .  senate committee on environment and public works minority members ,  under the leadership of the senate's most vocal global warming skeptic jim inhofe . 
as more evidence has become available over the existence of global warming debate has moved to further controversial issues ,  including:
there has been a public dispute regarding the apparent contradiction in the observed behavior of antarctica ,  as opposed to the global rise in temperatures measured elsewhere in the world . 
public disputes that also reflect scientific debate include estimates of how responsive the climate system might be to any given level of greenhouse gases  -lrb-  climate sensitivity  -rrb-  ,  how global climate change will play out at local and regional scales ,  and what the consequences of global warming will be . 
the fossil fuels lobby has been identified as overtly or covertly supporting efforts to undermine or discredit the scientific consensus on global warming . 
mike lockwood and claus fröhlich reject the statement that the warming observed in the global mean surface temperature record since about 1850 is the result of solar variations . 
by 2007, he wrote `` details like sea level rise will continue to be debated by researchers ,  but if the debate over whether or not humanity is contributing to global warming wasn't over before ,  it is now .  .  .  as the new ipcc summary makes clear ,  climate change pollyannaism is no longer looking very tenable . `` 
a 2013 study ,  published in the peer-reviewed journal `` environmental research letters '' analyzed 11,944 abstracts from papers published in the peer-reviewed scientific literature between 1991 and 2011, identified by searching the isi web of science citation index engine for the text strings `` global climate change '' or `` global warming '' . 
similarly ,  groups employing global warming skeptics ,  such as the george c .  marshall institute ,  have been criticized for their ties to fossil fuel companies . 
the canadian science broadcaster and environmental activist david suzuki reports that focus groups organized by the david suzuki foundation in 2006 showed that the public has a poor understanding of the science behind global warming . 
in its 2007 fourth assessment report ,  ipcc said that climate sensitivity is `` likely to be in the range 2 to 4.5 °c with a best estimate of about 3 °c '' . 
in 2007, the bbc announced the cancellation of a planned television special planet relief ,  which would have highlighted the global warming issue and included a mass electrical switch-off . 
lockwood and fröhlich conclude ,  `` the observed rapid rise in global mean temperatures seen after 1985 cannot be ascribed to solar variability ,  whichever of the mechanisms is invoked and no matter how much the solar variation is amplified . `` 
global warming skeptic fred singer stated `` some good experts believe '' that atmospheric concentration will not double since economies are becoming less reliant on carbon . 
the other point that leads to major controversy—because it could have significant economic impacts—is whether action  -lrb-  usually ,  restrictions on the use of fossil fuels to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions  -rrb-  should be taken now ,  or in the near future; and whether those restrictions would have any meaningful effect on global temperature . 
in 2015, according to `` the new york times '' and others ,  oil companies knew that burning oil and gas could cause global warming since the 1970s but ,  nonetheless ,  funded deniers for years . 
george dantzig received his b . s . 
dantzig is known for his development of the simplex algorithm ,  an algorithm for solving linear programming problems ,  and for his other work with linear programming . 
in 1963, dantzig’s `` linear programming and extensions '' was published by princeton university press . 
as dantzig told it in a 1986 interview in the `` college mathematics journal '':
in 1952 dantzig joined the mathematics division of the rand corporation . 
dantzig was the professor emeritus of transportation sciences and professor of operations research and of computer science at stanford . 
early in the 1920s the dantzig family moved from baltimore to washington . 
dantzig's original example of finding the best assignment of 70 people to 70 jobs exemplifies the usefulness of linear programming . 
much of ryman's work is based on travels to cambodia . 
geoffrey charles ryman  -lrb-  born 1951 -rrb- is a writer of science fiction ,  fantasy ,  slipstream and historical fiction . 
ryman was born in canada and moved to the united states at age 11.
ryman has written ,  directed and performed in several plays based on works of other writers . 
eggs develop in archegonia and sperm in antheridia . 
these gametophytes are dioicous ,  producing either sperm or eggs but not both . 
two nuclei fuse with a sperm nucleus to form the endosperm ,  which becomes the food storage tissue in the seed . 
the gametophytes develop into multicellular organisms while still enclosed within the spore wall ,  and the megaspores are retained within the sporangium . 
a gametophyte  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the two alternating phases in the life cycle of plants and algae . 
the sporophyte can produce haploid spores by meiosis . 
gavoi is a `` comune '' in central sardinia  -lrb-  italy  -rrb-  ,  part of the province of nuoro ,  in the natural region of barbagia . 
she was the first italian woman to receive the prize . 
the first novel she wrote and published was `` fiori di sardegna ''  -lrb-  flowers of sardinia  -rrb-  . 
she was a very prolific writer publishing ,  on average ,  a novel a year . 
“if checcha has had enough ,  so have i , ” deledda was quoted as saying . 
the museum consists of 10 rooms where the stages of the writer's life are reconstructed . 
seaborg served as chancellor at the university of california ,  berkeley ,  from 1958 to 1961.
seaborg remained at the university of california ,  berkeley ,  for post-doctoral research . 
seaborg then postulated that a distinct alpha-producing element was being formed from element 93.
in february 1941, seaborg and his collaborators produced plutonium-239 through the bombardment of uranium . 
seaborg served as chairman of the atomic energy commission until 1971.
seaborg kept a daily journal from 1927 until he suffered a stroke in 1998.
seaborg was an enthusiastic supporter of cal's sports teams . 
seaborg learned to state his questions to oppenheimer quickly and succinctly . 
seaborg also became an expert in dealing with noted berkeley physicist robert oppenheimer . 
glenn theodore seaborg was born in ishpeming ,  michigan ,  on april 19, 1912, the son of herman theodore  -lrb-  ted  -rrb-  and selma olivia erickson seaborg . 
also of note is the volcanic cone of mount amiata ,  bandite di scarlino  -lrb-  213 m  -rrb-  ,  promontorio di punta ala e delle rocchette  -lrb-  350 m  -rrb-  ,  monti dell'uccellina  -lrb-  417 m  -rrb-  ,  monte argentario  -lrb-  635 m  -rrb-  ,  and promontorio di ansedonia  -lrb-  113 m  -rrb-  . 
this is the complete list of `` comuni '' in the province of grosseto: this is the complete list of the  -lrb-  singular:   -rrb-  – towns and villages – in the province of grosseto:
his name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the eiffel tower . 
he was the first to use the term `` work '' for the transfer of energy by a force acting through a distance . 
in 1838, he succeeded dulong as `` directeur des études ''  -lrb-  director of studies  -rrb-  in the école polytechnique . 
géza succeeded his father around 972.
géza was the elder son of taksony ,  grand prince of the hungarians . 
géza  -lrb-   940 – 997 -rrb- ,  also gejza ,  was grand prince of the hungarians from the early 970s . 
unlike most lizards ,  geckos are usually nocturnal . 
more than 1,650 species of geckos occur worldwide ,  including these familiar species:
geckos are polyphyodonts and able to replace each of their 100 teeth every 3 to 4 months . 
these lipids lubricate the setae and allow the gecko to detach its foot before the next step . 
gecko skin has been observed to have an anti-bacterial property ,  killing gram-negative bacteria when it comes in contact with the skin . 
all geckos shed their skin at fairly regular intervals ,  with species differing in timing and method . 
most gecko species can lose their tails in defense ,  a process called autotomy . 
geckos are lizards belonging to the infraorder gekkota ,  found in warm climates throughout the world . 
until the 1960s ,  most game shows did not offer a bonus round . 
an early variant of the game show ,  the panel game ,  survived the quiz show scandals . 
a bonus round  -lrb-  also known as a bonus game or an end game  -rrb-  usually follows a main game as a bonus to the winner of that game . 
the end game of `` match game '' ,  hosted for most of its run by gene rayburn ,  served as the impetus for a completely new game show . 
game shows began to appear on radio and television in the late 1930s . 
there has also been a rise of live game shows at festivals and public venues ,  where the general audience can participate in the show ,  such as the science-inspired `` geek out game show '' or the `` yuck show '' . 
after the popularity of game shows hit a nadir in the mid-1990s united states  -lrb-  at which point `` the price is right '' was the only game show still on daytime network tv  -rrb-  ,  the british game show `` who wants to be a millionaire ? `` 
these game shows originally aired once a week ,  but by the late 1970s and early 1980s most of the games had transitioned to five days a week . 
game shows remained a fixture of us daytime television through the 1960s after the quiz show scandals . 
the game play of a bonus round usually varies from the standard game play of the front game ,  and there are often borrowed or related elements of the main game in the bonus round to ensure the entire show has a unified premise . 
among other influences ,  napalm death took impetus from the industrial music scene . 
grindcore is an extreme fusion genre of heavy metal and hardcore punk that originated in the mid-1980s ,  drawing inspiration from abrasive-sounding musical styles ,  such as: thrashcore ,  crust punk ,  hardcore punk ,  extreme metal and industrial . 
grindcore evolved as a blend of thrash metal ,  thrashcore and hardcore punk . 
brutal truth was a groundbreaking group in the american scene at the beginning of the 1990s . 
post-punk ,  such as killing joke and joy division ,  was also cited as an influence on early napalm death . 
other groups in the british grindcore scene ,  such as heresy and unseen terror ,  have emphasized the influence of american hardcore punk ,  including septic death ,  as well as swedish d-beat . 
pig destroyer's style is sometimes referred to as `` deathgrind '' ,  because of the prevalence of death metal influences ,  as are cattle decapitation . 
grindcore ,  as such ,  was developed during the mid-1980s in the united kingdom by napalm death ,  a group who emerged from the anarcho-punk scene in birmingham ,  england . 
however ,  sharp indicates that they were more inspired by the thrash metal of dark angel than the british groups . 
earache records founder digby pearson concurs with embury ,  saying that napalm death `` put hardcore and metal through an accelerator . `` 
some musicians have also produced hybrids between grind and electronic music . 
nasum ,  who emerged from the swedish death metal scene ,  became a popular group ,  addressing political topics from a personal perspective . 
crust punk had a major impact on grindcore's emergence . 
george frederick of brandenburg-ansbach  -lrb-  ; 5 april 1539 in ansbach – 25 april 1603 -rrb- was margrave of ansbach and bayreuth ,  as well as regent of prussia . 
he was the last of the older franconia line of the house of hohenzollern . 
he made efforts to secure preachers of the new gospel from hungary ,  silesia ,  and franconia ,  and tried to introduce the church order of brandenburg-nuremberg ,  which had already found acceptance in the franconian territories . 
earlier than any other german prince or any other member of the hohenzollern line including even his younger brother albert ,  the grand master of the teutonic order ,  he turned his eyes and heart to the new faith proceeding from wittenberg . 
but the pressure of the estates of the land soon compelled him to allow preaching according to luther's doctrine ,  although he ensured retention of the old church ceremonies ,  even of those that were contrary to the new faith . 
after its introduction in nuremberg and his territories in franconia ,  it was also introduced in his dominions in upper silesia . 
the generalized mean is also known as power mean or hölder mean  -lrb-  named after otto hölder  -rrb-  . 
if `` p '' is a non-zero real number ,  and formula_1 are positive real numbers ,  then the generalized mean or power mean with exponent `` p '' of these positive real numbers is:
cardano later wrote that those were the happiest days of his life . 
someone also assigned to cardano the credit for the invention of the so-called `` cardano's rings '' ,  also called chinese rings ,  but it is very probable that they predate cardano . 
cardano was the first mathematician to make systematic use of negative numbers . 
with the help of a few noblemen ,  cardano obtained a teaching position in mathematics in milan . 
cardano later wrote that he turned down offers from the kings of denmark and france ,  and the queen of scotland . 
he assigned the name `` gabbro '' to rocks that geologists nowadays would more strictly call `` metagabbro ''  -lrb-  metamorphosed gabbro  -rrb-  . 
cumulate gabbros are more properly termed `` pyroxene-plagioclase adcumulate '' . 
gabbro may be extremely coarse grained to pegmatitic ,  and some pyroxene-plagioclase cumulates are essentially coarse grained gabbro ,  some may exhibit acicular crystal habits . 
the term `` gabbro '' was used in the 1760s to name a set of rock types that were found in the ophiolites of the apennine mountains in italy . 
he called it `` star trek '' . 
barrett and he had an apartment together by the opening weeks of `` star trek '' . 
the popularity of the `` star trek '' universe and films has inspired films ,  books ,  comic books ,  video games ,  and fan films set in the `` star trek '' universe . 
adjusted for inflation ,  it was the third-highest grossing `` star trek '' movie ,  with the 2009 film coming in first and the second . 
when roddenberry pitched `` star trek '' to mgm ,  it was warmly received ,  but no offer was made . 
in addition to his film and television work ,  roddenberry wrote the novelization of `` star trek: the motion picture '' . 
on march 1, 1968, nbc announced on air ,  at the end of `` the omega glory '' ,  that `` star trek '' would return for a third season . 
the majority of the awards and nominations received by roddenberry throughout his career were related to `` star trek '' . 
on may 24, the first episode of the `` star trek '' series went into production; desilu was contracted to deliver 13 episodes . 
the network had initially planned to place `` star trek '' in the 7:30 pm monday-night time slot freed up by `` the man from u . n . c . l . e . `` 
in february 1966, nbc informed desilu that they were buying `` star trek '' and that it would be included in the fall 1966 television schedule . 
lacking funds in the early 1970s ,  roddenberry was unable to buy the full rights to `` star trek '' for $150,000 from paramount . 
 ''the questor tapes '' project reunited him with his `` star trek '' collaborator ,  gene l .  coon ,  who was in failing health at the time . 
in 1985, gene roddenberry was the first television writer to receive a star on the hollywood walk of fame . 
after his death ,  `` star trek: the next generation '' aired a two-part episode of season five ,  called ``  '' ,  which featured a dedication to roddenberry . 
roddenberry worked with several cast and crew who would later join him on `` star trek '' ,  including: gene l .  coon ,  star gary lockwood ,  joe d'agosta ,  leonard nimoy ,  nichelle nichols ,  and majel barrett . 
the conventions began to build the fan support to bring back `` star trek , ``  leading `` tv guide '' to describe it ,  in 1972, as `` the show that won't die . `` 
j .  michael straczynski ,  creator of the `` babylon 5 '' franchise ,  appreciated `` star trek '' amongst other science fiction series and `` what they had to say about who we are ,  and where we are going . `` 
roddenberry and barrett had begun an affair by the early days of `` star trek '' ,  and he specifically wrote the part of the character number one in the pilot with her in mind; no other actresses were considered for the role . 
following the cancellation of `` star trek , ``  roddenberry felt typecast as a producer of science fiction ,  despite his background in westerns and police stories . 
having stepped aside from the majority of his `` star trek '' duties ,  roddenberry sought instead to create a film based on asimov's `` i ,  robot '' and also began work on a `` tarzan '' script for national general pictures . 
the film was financially successful . 
the film proved quite popular with `` star trek '' fans . 
the fans at the convention ranked it the seventh best `` star trek '' film . 
 ''galaxy quest '' received positive reviews from critics ,  both as a parody of `` star trek '' ,  and as a comedy film of its own . 
it was included in `` reader's digest ''s list of the top 100+ funniest movies of all time in 2012, while `` star trek '' fans voted it the seventh best `` star trek '' film of all time in 2013.
after filming wrapped ,  weaver kept the wig she wore for the role . 
the film's visual effects were created by industrial light & magic ,  which had a long history with `` star trek '' . 
during the period of filming ,  the entire cast attended a 20th-anniversary screening of `` alien '' . 
several actors who have had roles on various `` star trek '' television series and films have commented on `` galaxy quest '' in light of their own experiences with the franchise and its fandom . 
galaxy quest is the film debut of both justin long and rainn wilson  -lrb-  in a bit part  -rrb-  . 
both allen and rockwell almost dropped out of the film; allen had to choose between `` galaxy quest '' and `` bicentennial man '' and chose the first ,  with his `` bicentennial man '' role going to robin williams instead ,  while rockwell almost backed out of the film after obtaining a lead role in an independent film; kevin spacey convinced him otherwise . 
additionally ,  the time between the original `` galaxy quest '' series and its sequel ,  `` galaxy quest: the journey continues '' is 17 years ,  the same amount of time that elapsed between the original `` star trek '' series and ``  '' . 
the film was justin long's acting debut ,  and rainn wilson's film debut  -lrb-  his only previous credit was the soap opera `` one life to live ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''galaxy quest '' went on to achieve cult status through the years ,  especially from `` star trek '' fans for its affectionate parody ,  but also to more mainstream audiences as a comedy film in its own right . 
the name of rockwell's character ,  guy fleegman ,  is an homage to guy vardaman ,  a little-known `` star trek '' actor who worked extensively on `` star trek '' as either a stand-in or in minor roles . 
in the earlier sumerian texts ,  enkidu is gilgamesh's servant ,  but ,  in the `` epic of gilgamesh '' ,  they are companions of equal standing . 
in `` gilgamesh and the bull of heaven '' ,  gilgamesh and enkidu slay the bull of heaven ,  who has been sent to attack them by the goddess inanna . 
gilgamesh's name was originally misread as `` izdubar '' . 
 ''gilgamesh and agga '' describes gilgamesh's successful revolt against his overlord agga ,  the king of the city-state of kish . 
in the epic ,  gilgamesh is introduced as `` two thirds divine and one third mortal '' . 
gilgamesh was a historical king of the sumerian city-state of uruk ,  a major hero in ancient mesopotamian mythology ,  and the protagonist of the `` epic of gilgamesh '' ,  an epic poem written in akkadian during the late second millennium bc . 
starting in the late twentieth century ,  the `` epic of gilgamesh '' began to be read again in iraq . 
meanwhile ,  gilgamesh holds a celebration over the bull of heaven's defeat . 
early interest in the `` epic of gilgamesh '' was almost exclusively on account of the flood story from tablet xi . 
the `` epic of gilgamesh '' exerted substantial influence on the `` iliad '' and the `` odyssey '' ,  two epic poems written in ancient greek during the eighth century bc . 
the remaining portion of the poem is a dialogue in which gilgamesh asks the shade of enkidu questions about the underworld . 
 ''the quest of gilgamesh '' ,  a 1953 radio play by douglas geoffrey bridson ,  helped popularize the epic in britain . 
gluten ataxia is an autoimmune disease triggered by the ingestion of gluten . 
 ''gluten-free '' is defined as 20 parts per million of gluten or less and `` very low gluten '' is 100 parts per million of gluten or less; only foods with cereal ingredients processed to remove gluten can claim `` very low gluten '' on labels . 
generally ,  bread flours are high in gluten  -lrb-  hard wheat  -rrb- ; pastry flours have a lower gluten content . 
gluten ataxia accounts for 40% of ataxias of unknown origin and 15% of all ataxias . 
it only applies to foods that would normally contain gluten . 
gluten is a protein complex that accounts for 75–85% of the total protein in bread wheat . 
the protein content of some pet foods may also be enhanced by adding gluten . 
all foods containing gluten as an ingredient must be labelled accordingly as gluten is defined as one of the 14 recognised eu allergens . 
 ''gluten-related disorders '' is the umbrella term for all diseases triggered by gluten ,  which include celiac disease  -lrb-  cd  -rrb-  ,  non-celiac gluten sensitivity  -lrb-  ncgs  -rrb-  ,  wheat allergy ,  gluten ataxia and dermatitis herpetiformis  -lrb-  dh  -rrb-  . 
the formation of gluten affects the texture of the baked goods . 
gluten is also used in cosmetics ,  hair products and other dermatological preparations . 
the film has deleted scenes . 
this was the only film wood directed but did not also produce . 
a remake of the film ,  entitled `` glen & glenda '' ,  was released the same year as `` ed wood '' and featured much the same script as the original film ,  as well as explicit scenes . 
the flirtatious and striptease-themed vignettes were typical of 1950s exploitation films and grindhouse films ,  as was the rape scene . 
in 1994, tim burton chronicled the troubled production of `` glen or glenda '' in `` ed wood '' . 
following a brief epilogue ,  the film ends . 
this last comment starts the narrative of the film . 
glen or glenda is a 1953 american drama film written ,  directed by and starring ed wood  -lrb-  credited in his starring role as `` daniel davis ''  -rrb-  ,  and featuring bela lugosi and wood's then-girlfriend dolores fuller . 
at this point ,  the film was reviewed seriously ,  and reclaimed as a radical work ,  by steve jenkins in the `` monthly film bulletin '' . 
the critic leonard maltin names `` glen or glenda '' as `` possibly the worst movie ever made '' . 
in addition ,  the golden turkey awards had a reader's choice category for worst film of all time ,  voted upon by readers of `` the fifty worst films of all time '' . 
in the book `` the fifty worst films of all time '' the authors invited readers to write in nominating their favorite `` worst films '' . 
the `` acknowledgements '' page of `` the fifty worst films of all time '' ends with:
the golden turkey awards is a 1980 book by film critic michael medved and his brother harry . 
at least on one point ,  charles listened to fox . 
once again ,  fox was released after demonstrating that he had no military ambitions . 
by 1671 fox had recovered and margaret had been released by order of the king . 
fox left no record of encountering slaves on the mainland . 
fox wrote ,  `` there was now a wicked spirit risen amongst friends '' . 
perrot emigrated to the new world ,  and fox retained leadership of the movement . 
stephens considered fox a gifted young man but the two disagreed on so many issues that he later called fox mad and spoke against him . 
fox petitioned cromwell over the course of 1656, asking him to alleviate the persecution of quakers . 
fox remained at swarthmoor until summer 1653 then left for carlisle where he was arrested again for blasphemy . 
primary sources various editions of fox's journal have been published from time to time since the first printing in 1694:
penington and others ,  such as john perrot and john pennyman ,  were uneasy at fox's increasing power within the movement . 
fox's aphorisms have found an audience beyond quakers ,  with many other church groups using them to illustrate principles of christianity . 
for three months in 1677 and a month in 1684, fox visited the friends in the netherlands ,  and organized their meetings for discipline . 
fox ,  however ,  did not perceive this ,  brought up as he was in a wholly protestant environment hostile to `` popery '' . 
with the restoration of the monarchy ,  fox's dreams of establishing the friends as the dominant religion seemed at an end . 
in the last years of his life ,  fox continued to participate in the london meetings ,  and still made representations to parliament about the sufferings of friends . 
at the same time ,  quakers and others can relate to fox's religious experience ,  and even those who disagree with many of his ideas regard him as a pioneer . 
in 1897 father john gerard of stonyhurst college ,  namesake of john gerard  -lrb-  who ,  following the plot's discovery ,  had evaded capture  -rrb-  ,  wrote an account called `` what was the gunpowder plot ? 
grant ,  morgan ,  rookwood ,  and wintour were arrested . 
the gunpowder plot of 1605, in earlier centuries often called the gunpowder treason plot or the jesuit treason ,  was a failed assassination attempt against king james i by a group of provincial english catholics led by robert catesby . 
the catholic community responded to news of these plots with shock . 
it was announced on 24 december that the re-opening of parliament would be delayed . 
henry garnet's execution took place on 3 may 1606.
the details of the plot were finalised in october ,  in a series of taverns across london and daventry . 
the letter was shown to the king on friday 1 november following his arrival back in london . 
many at the time felt that salisbury had been involved in the plot to gain favour with the king and enact more stridently anti-catholic legislation . 
garnet may have been questioned on as many as 23 occasions . 
on 15 january a proclamation named father garnet ,  father gerard ,  and father greenway  -lrb-  tesimond  -rrb-  as wanted men . 
robert catesby  -lrb-  1573–1605 -rrb- ,  a man of `` ancient ,  historic and distinguished lineage '' ,  was the inspiration behind the plot . 
fawkes was taken to the king early on the morning of 5 november . 
percy ,  keen to improve his standing ,  went further ,  claiming that the future king would guarantee the safety of english catholics . 
the cellars under the houses of parliament continued to be leased out to private individuals until 1678, when news of the popish plot broke . 
coke spoke with feeling of the probable fate of the queen and the rest of the king's family ,  and of the innocents who would have been caught up in the explosion . 
details of the assassination attempt were allegedly known by the principal jesuit of england ,  father henry garnet . 
tresham declined both offers  -lrb-  although he did give £100 to thomas wintour  -rrb-  ,  and told his interrogators that he had moved his family from rushton to london in advance of the plot; hardly the actions of a guilty man ,  he claimed . 
by the time the plotters reconvened at the start of the old style new year on lady day ,  25 march ,  three more had been admitted to their ranks; robert wintour ,  john grant ,  and christopher wright . 
between 1533 and 1540, king henry viii took control of the english church from rome ,  the start of several decades of religious tension in england . 
by coincidence ,  and ignorant of the plot ,  father john gerard  -lrb-  a friend of catesby's  -rrb-  was celebrating mass in another room ,  and the five men subsequently received the eucharist . 
on 19 march ,  the king gave his opening speech to his first english parliament in which he spoke of his desire to secure peace ,  but only by `` profession of the true religion '' . 
wintour travelled to flanders to enquire about spanish support . 
the plot was revealed to the authorities in an anonymous letter sent to william parker ,  4th baron monteagle ,  on 26 october 1605.
coke later revealed that the threat of torture was in most cases enough to elicit a confession from those caught up in the aftermath of the plot . 
the foiling of the gunpowder plot initiated a wave of national relief at the delivery of the king and his sons ,  and inspired in the ensuing parliament a mood of loyalty and goodwill ,  which salisbury astutely exploited to extract higher subsidies for the king than any  -lrb-  bar one  -rrb-  granted in elizabeth i's reign . 
when he realised the plot had been uncovered ,  he took his horse and made for his sister's house at norbrook ,  before continuing to huddington court . 
gelatin also can be prepared at home . 
within the gelatin industry ,  the gelatin obtained from acid-treated raw material has been called type-a gelatin and the gelatin obtained from alkali-treated raw material is referred to as type-b gelatin . 
the amino acid content of hydrolyzed collagen is the same as collagen . 
the worldwide production amount of gelatin is about  . 
substances containing gelatin or functioning in a similar way are called `` gelatinous '' . 
this is important for gelation properties of gelatin . 
some companies specify the source of the gelatin used . 
advances are occurring to optimize the yield of gelatin using enzymatic hydrolysis of collagen . 
the fillings of both are made by combining ground pork with gelatin cubes ,  and in the process of cooking ,  the gelatin melts ,  creating a soupy interior with a characteristic gelatinous stickiness . 
while many processes exist whereby collagen may be converted to gelatin ,  they all have several factors in common . 
the manufacturing processes of gelatin consists of three main stages:
vegans and vegetarians do not eat foods containing gelatin made from animals . 
the physical properties of the final gelatin product are considered better . 
the bloom strength of a gelatin mixture is the measure of how strong it is . 
they can be made by combining plain gelatin with other ingredients or by using a premixed blend of gelatin with additives . 
jelly is a dessert made with a sweetened and flavored processed collagen product  -lrb-  gelatin  -rrb-  . 
to make a jelly ,  gelatin is dissolved in hot liquid with the desired flavors and other additives . 
this gelatin was used for savory dishes in aspic ,  or was mixed with fruit juice and sugar for a dessert . 
george `` the bearded '' ,  duke of saxony  -lrb-  meissen ,  27 august 1471 – dresden ,  17 april 1539 -rrb- ,  was duke of saxony from 1500 to 1539 known for his opposition to the reformation . 
 ''orthogneiss '' designates a gneiss derived from an igneous rock ,  and `` paragneiss '' is one from a sedimentary rock . 
gneiss  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a common and widely distributed type of metamorphic rock . 
brundtland was born in oslo in 1939, the daughter of physician and politician gudmund harlem . 
she is also known for having chaired the brundtland commission which presented the brundtland report on sustainable development . 
gregory was ordained bishop of sasima in 372 by basil . 
in the roman catholic church he is numbered among the doctors of the church; in the eastern orthodox church and the eastern catholic churches he is revered as one of the three holy hierarchs ,  along with basil the great and john chrysostom . 
along with the brothers basil the great and gregory of nyssa ,  he is known as one of the cappadocian fathers . 
with the death of the emperor ,  gregory and the eastern churches were no longer under the threat of persecution ,  as the new emperor jovian was an avowed christian and supporter of the church . 
he is also one of only three men in the life of the orthodox church who have been officially designated `` theologian '' by epithet ,  the other two being st .  john the theologian  -lrb-  the evangelist  -rrb-  ,  and st .  symeon the new theologian . 
basil ,  who had long displayed inclinations to the episcopacy ,  was elected bishop of the see of caesarea in cappadocia in 370.
additionally ,  the liturgy of st gregory the theologian in use by the coptic church is named after him . 
the lutheran church–missouri synod commemorates gregory ,  along with basil the great and gregory of nyssa  -lrb-  the cappadocian fathers  -rrb-  on 10 january . 
the roman catholic church observes his feast day on 2 january ,  which is also gregory's holy day ,  on 2 january ,  a `` lesser festival '' ,  in the church of england . 
as a classically trained orator and philosopher he infused hellenism into the early church ,  establishing the paradigm of byzantine theologians and church officials . 
gregory is a saint in both eastern and western christianity . 
html elements are the building blocks of html pages . 
after the html and html+ drafts expired in early 1994, the ietf created an html working group ,  which in 1995 completed `` html 2.0 '' ,  the first html specification intended to be treated as a standard against which future implementations should be based . 
hypertext markup language  -lrb-  html  -rrb-  is the standard markup language for creating web pages and web applications . 
the world wide web consortium  -lrb-  w3c  -rrb-  ,  maintainer of both the html and the css standards ,  has encouraged the use of css over explicit presentational html
then hector rallies the trojans:
according to the `` iliad '' ,  hector did not approve of war between the greeks and the trojans . 
ajax gave hector his girdle that achilles will later attach to his chariot to drag hector's corpse around the walls of troy . 
in the ensuing fight ,  hector killed him ,  fulfilling the prophecy . 
in the `` iliad '' ,  hector's exploits in the war prior to the events of the book are recapitulated . 
in greek mythology and roman mythology ,  hector  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  was a trojan prince and the greatest fighter for troy in the trojan war . 
hera  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` hērā '';  ,  `` hērē '' in ionic and homeric greek  -rrb-  is the goddess of women ,  marriage ,  family ,  and childbirth in ancient greek religion and myth ,  one of the twelve olympians and the sister-wife of zeus . 
around the 17th and 16th centuries bc most of the older centers had been overrun . 
persia controlled the levant but by the 4th century bc ,  persia had fallen into decline . 
at the end of the 13th century bc ,  all of these powers suddenly collapsed . 
by 650, arab forces had conquered all of persia ,  syria ,  and egypt . 
the old syrian period was dominated by the eblaite first kingdom ,  nagar and the mariote second kingdom . 
from 1550 until 1100, much of the levant was conquered by egypt ,  which in the latter half of this period contested syria with the hittite empire . 
in this period a number of technological innovations spread ,  most notably iron working and the phoenician alphabet ,  developed by the phoenicians or the canaanites around the 16th century bc . 
however ,  the empire began to collapse toward the end of the 7th century bc ,  and was obliterated by an alliance between a resurgent new kingdom of babylonia and the iranian medes . 
in the 12th century bc ,  most of the interior ,  as well as babylonia ,  was overrun by arameans ,  while the shoreline around today's gaza strip was settled by philistines . 
