lymphedema is the result of a compromised lymphatic system . 
most studies investigating the effects exercise in patients with lymphedema or at risk of developing lymphedema examined patients with breast-cancer-related lymphedema . 
some cases of lymphedema may be associated with other vascular abnormalities . 
primary lymphedema may be inherited or arise sporadically . 
cdt is a primary tool in lymphedema management . 
few studies examine the effects of exercise in primary lymphedema or in secondary lymphedema that is not related to breast cancer treatment . 
secondary lymphedema affects both men and women . 
diagnosis or early detection of lymphedema is difficult . 
resolution of the blood clots or dvt is needed before lymphedema treatment can be initiated . 
cdt ,  mld and compression bandaging are all helpful components of conservative lymphedema treatment . 
the lymphedema expert dr .  ming-huei cheng developed a cheng’s lymphedema grading tool to assess the severity of extremity lymphedema based on objective limb measurements and providing appropriate options for management . 
surgery or treatment for prostate ,  colon and testicular cancers may result in secondary lymphedema ,  particularly when lymph nodes have been removed or damaged . 
congenital lymphedema is swelling that results from abnormalities in the lymphatic system that are present from birth . 
he was an important citizen of haarlem and held the position of sexton  -lrb-  `` koster ''  -rrb-  of sint-bavokerk . 
the land rover name was originally used by the rover company for the land rover series ,  launched in 1948.
in 1994 rover group plc ,  including land rover ,  was acquired by bmw . 
land rover as a company has existed since 1978.
land rover lrx – land rover's second concept vehicle ,  first unveiled at the 2008 detroit auto show . 
the consequence was that jaguar land rover limited became responsible in the uk for the design ,  manufacture and marketing of both jaguar and land rover branded products ,  and land rover and jaguar cars ceased to be separate vehicle producing entities . 
land rovers are currently assembled in england ,  india ,  china ,  and other markets . 
the international numbering system for food additives  -lrb-  ins  -rrb-  is a european-based naming system for food additives ,  aimed at providing a short designation of what may be a lengthy actual name . 
ins numbers are assigned by the committee to identify each food additive . 
the law takes the form
wilhelm ostwald’s dilution law is a relationship proposed in 1888 between the dissociation constant ' and the degree of dissociation ' of a weak electrolyte . 
lleida  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a city in the west of catalonia ,  spain . 
during the reapers' war ,  lleida was occupied by the french and rebel forces . 
it is the capital city of the province of lleida . 
lleida is one of the oldest towns in catalonia ,  with recorded settlements dating back to the bronze age period . 
the university of lleida is nowadays active again since 1991.
le mans  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city in france ,  on the sarthe river . 
intercourse between england and le mans continued throughout the angevin period . 
 ''cel- '' was taken to be a form of the french word for `` this '' and `` that '' ,  and was replaced by `` le '' ,  which means `` the '' . 
the gare du mans is the main railway station of le mans . 
le mans is a part of the pays de la loire region . 
in 2017 she won a hugo award for best series ,  for the vorkosigan saga . 
by 2010, baen books claimed to have sold 2 million copies of bujold's books . 
bujold married john fredric bujold in 1971, but they divorced in the early 1990s . 
lois mcmaster bujold  -lrb-   ; born november 2, 1949 -rrb- is an american speculative fiction writer . 
bujold has discussed her own views on the optimum reading order for the vorkosigan series in her blog . 
foods that are not red may also contain lycopene ,  such as asparagus and parsley . 
lycopene  -lrb-  from the neo-latin `` lycopersicum '' ,  the tomato species  -rrb-  is a bright red carotene and carotenoid pigment and phytochemical found in tomatoes and other red fruits and vegetables ,  such as red carrots ,  watermelons ,  gac ,  and papayas ,  but it is not in strawberries or cherries . 
although lycopene from tomatoes has been tested in humans for cardiovascular diseases and prostate cancer ,  no effect on any disease was found . 
some foods that do not appear red also contain lycopene ,  e . g .  ,  asparagus ,  which contains about 30 μg of lycopene per 100-g serving  -lrb-  0.3 μg/g  -rrb-  and dried parsley and basil ,  which contain around 3.5-7.0 μg/g of lycopene . 
lycopene dietary supplements  -lrb-  in oil  -rrb-  may be more efficiently absorbed than lycopene from food . 
processed tomato products such as pasteurized tomato juice ,  soup ,  sauce ,  and ketchup contain a higher concentration of bioavailable lycopene compared to raw tomatoes . 
lycopene absorbs all but the longest wavelengths of visible light ,  so it appears red . 
a 2017 review concluded that tomato products and lycopene supplementation had small positive effects on cardiovascular risk factors ,  such as elevated blood lipids and blood pressure . 
landau was part of bas-rhin department between 1789 and 1815.
landau was first mentioned as a settlement in 1106.
liv johanne ullmann  -lrb-  born 16 december 1938 -rrb- is a norwegian actress and film director . 
ullmann began her acting career as a stage actress in norway during the mid-1950s . 
during 1971, ullmann was nominated for an academy award for best actress for the movie `` the emigrants '' ,  and again during 1976 for the movie `` face to face '' . 
she was one of the `` muses '' of swedish director ingmar bergman . 
ullmann made her new york city stage debut in 1975 also in `` a doll's house '' . 
laika ,  a stray mongrel from the streets of moscow ,  was selected to be the occupant of the soviet spacecraft sputnik 2 that was launched into outer space on 3 november 1957.
laika  -lrb-  ; c .  1954 – 3 november 1957 -rrb- was a soviet space dog who became one of the first animals in space ,  and the first animal to orbit the earth . 
on 11 april 2008, russian officials unveiled a monument to laika . 
sputnik 2 was not designed to be retrievable ,  and laika had always been intended to die . 
laika was found as a stray wandering the streets of moscow . 
before the launch ,  one of the mission scientists took laika home to play with his children . 
the soviet scientists had planned to euthanise laika with a poisoned serving of food . 
future space missions carrying dogs would be designed to be recovered . 
she also appears on the monument to the conquerors of space in moscow . 
in the soviet union ,  there was less controversy . 
master of puppets is the third studio album by american heavy metal band metallica . 
was dedicated to the album and gave away to readers the cover album `` master of puppets: remastered '' . 
 ''welcome home  -lrb-  sanitarium  -rrb- ``  is the second-most performed song from the album . 
released on march 3, 1986, the album had a 72-week run on the `` billboard '' 200 album charts and earned the band its first gold certification . 
 ''master of puppets '' has appeared in several publications' best album lists . 
many of the songs that appeared on the band's next album ,  ``  .  .  . and justice for all '' ,  were composed during burton's career with the band . 
 ''master of puppets ``  became thrash metal's first platinum album and by the early 1990s thrash metal successfully challenged and redefined the mainstream of heavy metal . 
in a retrospective review ,  allmusic's steve huey viewed `` master of puppets '' as metallica's best album and remarked that ,  although it was not as unexpected as `` ride the lightning '' ,  it is a more musically and thematically consistent album . 
metallica opted for extensive touring instead of releasing a single or video to promote the album . 
released to critical acclaim ,  the album is considered to be one of the best in history ,  and one of the most influential to heavy metal . 
ride the lightning is the second studio album by american heavy metal band metallica ,  released on july 27, 1984, by the independent record label megaforce records . 
metallica released their debut album ,  `` kill 'em all '' ,  on the independent label megaforce records on july 25, 1983.
at this gig ,  metallica premiered `` master of puppets '' and `` disposable heroes '' ,  songs from the then-upcoming third studio album . 
metallica rehearsed the album's material at mercyful fate's practice room in copenhagen . 
metallica had to record quickly because of european shows scheduled 29 days after it entered the studio . 
in 2017, it was ranked 11th on `` rolling stone '' list of `` 100 greatest metal albums of all time '' . 
metallica played the album in its entirety during the 2012 european black album tour . 
metallica played the album in its entirety during the 2012 european black album tour . 
album cover was also black . 
metallica  -lrb-  commonly known as the black album  -rrb-  is the self-titled fifth studio album by american heavy metal band metallica . 
in 2003, the album was ranked number 255 on `` rolling stone ''s 500 greatest albums of all time . 
in 1999, eight years after its release ,  the album won a billboard music award for catalog album of the year . 
 ''metallica '' was released on august 12, 1991, and was the band's first album to debut at number one on the `` billboard '' 200, selling 598,000 copies in its first week . 
because it was rock's first time producing a metallica album ,  he had the band make the album in different ways; he asked them to record songs collaboratively rather than individually in separate locations . 
in 1991, for the fourth time ,  metallica played as part of the monsters of rock festival tour . 
at 79 minutes ,  `` load '' is metallica's longest studio album . 
at 79 minutes ,  it is metallica's longest studio album . 
 ''load '' was metallica's first album on which all tracks were down-tuned to e♭ tuning . 
metallica worked with producer bob rock ,  who had been at the helm during the recording process for `` metallica '' . 
in a 2009 interview with `` classic rock '' ,  hetfield expressed his dislike of the album cover and its inspiration:
garage inc .  is a compilation album of cover songs by american heavy metal band metallica . 
the cover for `` garage inc . ``  had a ross halfin photograph of metallica dressed as mechanics . 
this is the final metallica album to feature jason newsted as metallica's bassist . 
the album was included in the book `` 1001 albums you must hear before you die '' . 
s&m  -lrb-  an abbreviation of `` symphony and metallica ''  -rrb-  is a live album by american heavy metal band metallica ,  with the san francisco symphony conducted by michael kamen . 
metallica is an american heavy metal band . 
metallica's first studio album since burton's death ,  ``  .  .  . and justice for all '' ,  was released in 1988.
metallica finished its tour in the early months of 1987.
in october 1990, metallica entered one on one recording's studio in north hollywood to record its next album . 
metallica has released ten studio albums ,  four live albums ,  a cover album ,  five extended plays ,  37 singles and 39 music videos . 
it said ,  'fuck you' '' ,  and adema drummer kris kohls said the band is influenced by metallica . 
mtv ranked metallica the third `` greatest heavy metal band in history '' . 
metallica announced they would be touring the us in summer of 2017 for the worldwired tour . 
the album entered the `` billboard '' 200 at number two . 
on april 4, 2009, metallica were inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame . 
after almost three years of touring to promote `` metallica '' ,  including a headlining performance at woodstock '94, metallica returned to the studio to write and record its sixth studio album . 
 ''death magnetic '' debuted at number one in the u . s .  selling 490,000 units; metallica became the first band to have five consecutive studio albums debut at number one in the history of the `` billboard '' 200.
in november 2008, metallica's record deal with warner bros .  ended and the band considered releasing its next album through the internet . 
metallica's third studio album ,  `` master of puppets '' ,  was recorded at sweet silence studios and was released in march 1986.
metallica recorded its second studio album ,  `` ride the lightning '' ,  at sweet silence studios in copenhagen ,  denmark . 
on march 7, 1999, metallica was inducted into the san francisco walk of fame . 
in a june 2009 interview with italy's rock tv ,  ulrich said metallica was planning to continue touring until august 2010, and that there were no plans for a tenth album . 
this was the first time the two bands performed live together . 
the album was released as scheduled and debuted at number one on the `` billboard '' 200.
metallica has become one of the most influential heavy metal bands of all time ,  and is credited as one of the `` big four '' of thrash metal ,  along with slayer ,  anthrax ,  and megadeth . 
metallica was ready to record their debut album ,  but when metal blade was unable to cover the cost ,  they began looking for other options . 
many ancient murals have been found within ancient egyptian tombs  -lrb-  around 3150 bc  -rrb-  ,  the minoan palaces  -lrb-  middle period iii of the neopalatial period ,  1700–1600 bc  -rrb-  ,  the oxtotitlán cave and juxtlahuaca in mexico  -lrb-  around 1200-900 bc  -rrb-  and in pompeii  -lrb-  around 100 bc – ad 79 -rrb- . 
murals of sorts date to upper paleolithic times such as the cave paintings in the lubang jeriji saléh cave in borneo  -lrb-  40,000-52,000 bp  -rrb-  ,  chauvet cave in ardèche department of southern france  -lrb-  around 32,000 bp  -rrb-  . 
murals today are painted in a variety of ways ,  using oil or water-based media . 
the utility maximization problem is a constrained optimization problem in which an individual seeks to maximize utility subject to a budget constraint . 
the utility maximization problem is the heart of consumer theory . 
that is ,  the utility maximization problem is used by economists to not only explain `` what '' or `` how '' individuals make choices but `` why '' individuals make choices as well . 
economists call the solution to the utility maximization problem a walrasian demand function or correspondence . 
it also analyzes market failure ,  where markets fail to produce efficient results . 
the lm curve is upward sloping because interest rate and output have a positive relationship in the money market: as output increases ,  the demand for money increases ,  resulting in a rise in interest rate . 
the is–lm model represents all the combinations of interest rates and output that ensure the equilibrium in the goods and money markets . 
since the economy cannot produce beyond the potential output ,  any ad expansion will lead to higher price levels instead of higher output . 
milton friedman updated the quantity theory of money to include a role for money demand . 
the is curve is downward sloping because output and interest rate have an inverse relationship in the goods market: as output increases ,  more money is saved ,  which means interest rates must be lower to spur enough investment to match savings . 
central banks continuously shift the money supply to maintain a targeted fixed interest rate . 
the is curve consists of the points where investment ,  given the interest rate ,  is equal to savings ,  given output . 
like classical models ,  new classical models had assumed that prices would be able to adjust perfectly and monetary policy would only lead to price changes . 
in the conventional keynesian use of the as-ad model ,  the aggregate supply curve is horizontal at low levels of output and becomes inelastic near the point of potential output ,  which corresponds with full employment . 
central bankers ,  who manage a country's money supply ,  try to avoid changes in price level by using monetary policy . 
for example ,  if the economy is producing less than potential output ,  government spending can be used to employ idle resources and boost output . 
the neoclassical growth model of robert solow has become a common textbook model for explaining economic growth in the long-run . 
lucas also made an influential critique of keynesian empirical models . 
central banks can use unconventional monetary policy such as quantitative easing to help increase output . 
he generally favored a policy of steady growth in money supply instead of frequent intervention . 
in the typical view of the quantity theory ,  money velocity  -lrb-  v  -rrb-  and the quantity of goods produced  -lrb-  q  -rrb-  would be constant ,  so any increase in money supply  -lrb-  m  -rrb-  would lead to a direct increase in price level  -lrb-  p  -rrb-  . 
new keynesian models investigated sources of sticky prices and wages due to imperfect competition ,  which would not adjust ,  allowing monetary policy to impact quantities instead of prices . 
national output is the total amount of everything a country produces in a given period of time . 
pickford left biograph in december 1910.
pickford was married three times . 
pickford starred in 52 features throughout her career . 
pickford was at this time baptized as gladys marie smith . 
in addition ,  pickford's compensation was half of a film's profits ,  with a guarantee of $1,040,000  -lrb-  us$ in 2019 -rrb- . 
after retiring from the screen ,  pickford became an alcoholic ,  as her father had been . 
pickford was known in her prime as `` america's sweetheart '' and the `` girl with the curls '' . 
in january 1910, pickford traveled with a biograph crew to los angeles . 
after completing the broadway run and touring the play ,  however ,  pickford was again out of work . 
pickford made her last biograph picture ,  `` the new york hat '' ,  in late 1912.
pickford became secretly involved in a relationship with douglas fairbanks . 
pickford added to her 1909 biographs  -lrb-  `` sweet and twenty '' ,  `` they would elope , ``  and `` to save her soul '' ,  to name a few  -rrb-  with films made in california . 
pickford's work in material written for the camera by that time had attracted a strong following . 
in the mid-1960s ,  pickford often received visitors only by telephone ,  speaking to them from her bedroom . 
actually ,  sennett was not involved in the making of this film .   -rrb- 
in 1917, sennett gave up the keystone trademark and organized his own company ,  mack sennett comedies corporation . 
sennett's studio did not survive the great depression . 
dan aykroyd portrayed mack sennett in the 1992 movie `` chaplin '' . 
the sennett bathing beauties continued to appear through 1928.
many of sennett's films of the early 1920s were inherited by warner bros . 
in `` a story of water '' ,  a 1961 short film by jean-luc godard and françois truffaut ,  the directors dedicate the film to mack sennett . 
mack sennett died on november 5, 1960, in woodland hills ,  california ,  aged 80.
in the mid-1920s ,  sennett moved to pathé exchange distribution . 
as a result ,  many of sennett's films from his most productive and creative period no longer exist . 
the mppc was preceded by the edison licensing system ,  in effect in 1907–1908, on which the mppc was modeled . 
the reasons for the mppc's decline are manifold . 
since 1902, edison had also been notifying distributors and exhibitors that if they did not use edison machines and films exclusively ,  they would be subject to litigation for supporting filmmaking that infringed edison's patents . 
likewise ,  the trust's control of patents on motion picture cameras ensured that only mppc studios were able to film ,  and the projector patents allowed the trust to make licensing agreements with distributors and theaters – and thus determine who screened their films and where . 
thus the mppc lost the ability to control the american film industry through patent licensing ,  and had to rely instead on its subsidiary ,  the general film company ,  formed in 1910, which monopolized film distribution in us . 
the mppc also strictly regulated the production content of their films ,  primarily as a means of cost control . 
both produce the md5 hash 79054025255fb1a26e4bc422aef54eb4.
in 1996, a flaw was found in the design of md5.
the security of the md5 hash function is severely compromised . 
md5 was designed by ronald rivest in 1991 to replace an earlier hash function md4, and was specified in 1992 as rfc 1321.
in april 2009, a preimage attack against md5 was published that breaks md5's preimage resistance . 
the md5 message-digest algorithm is a widely used hash function producing a 128-bit hash value . 
in 1996, dobbertin announced a collision of the compression function of md5  -lrb-  dobbertin ,  1996 -rrb- . 
an example md5 collision ,  with the two messages differing in 6 bits ,  is:
we also hope that use of md5 in other applications will be reconsidered as well . `` 
later that year ,  md5's designer ron rivest wrote that `` md5 and sha1 are both clearly broken  -lrb-  in terms of collision-resistance  -rrb- ``  . 
md5 processes a variable-length message into a fixed-length output of 128 bits . 
 ''magic '' tournaments regularly occur in gaming stores and other venues . 
magic: the gathering is both a trading card and digital collectible card game created by richard garfield . 
while the game was simply called `` magic '' through most of playtesting ,  when the game had to be officially named a lawyer informed them that the name `` magic '' was too generic to be trademarked . 
 ''magic: the gathering '' cards are produced in much the same way as normal playing cards . 
 ''magic '' ,  like many other games ,  combines chance and skill . 
magic: the gathering online is the closest to paper magic of the digital alternatives . 
 ''magic '' was an immediate success for wizards of the coast . 
the overwhelming majority of `` magic '' cards are issued and marketed in the form of sets . 
in 1999, wizards of the coast was acquired by hasbro for $325 million ,  making `` magic '' a hasbro game . 
once the draft is done ,  players create 40-card decks out of the cards they picked and play games with the players they drafted with . 
players begin the game by shuffling their decks and then drawing seven cards . 
in addition to the quarterly set releases ,  `` magic '' cards are released in other products as well ,  such as the `` planechase '' and ``  '' spin-off games . 
confessing his love for games combining both luck and skill ,  `` magic '' creator richard garfield admitted its influence in his design of `` magic '' . 
hiberium and d3 publisher licensed `` magic: the gathering '' for its mobile game ,  ``  '' ,  combining deck building with match-3-style casual gaming . 
this was released in december 2015 and continues to be updated with new card sets from the physical game . 
different formats of constructed `` magic '' exist ,  each allowing different cards . 
the original set of rules prescribed that all games were to be played for ante . 
released in 1993 by wizards of the coast ,  `` magic '' was the first trading card game created and it continues to thrive ,  with approximately twenty million players  ,  and over twenty billion `` magic '' cards produced in the period of 2008 to 2016 alone . 
a `` mulligan '' rule was introduced into the game ,  first informally in casual play and then in the official game rules . 
a new ,  updated version of `` magic online '' was released in april 2008.
although the original concept of the game drew heavily from the motifs of traditional fantasy role-playing games such as `` dungeons & dragons '' ,  the gameplay of `` magic '' bears little similarity to pencil-and-paper adventure games ,  while having substantially more cards and more complex rules than many other card games . 
with the release of the ``  '' in 2003, `` magic '' also received a major visual redesign . 
three official parody expansions of `` magic '' exist: ``  '' ,  ``  '' ,  and ``  '' . 
a game of `` magic '' involves two or more players who are engaged in a battle acting as powerful wizards called planeswalkers . 
 ''magic '' cards are also printed specifically for collectors ,  such as the `` from the vault '' and `` premium deck series '' sets ,  which contain exclusively premium foil cards . 
 ''magic: the gathering '' video games ,  comics ,  and books have been produced under licensing or directly by wizards of the coast . 
certain `` magic '' cards can be valuable due to their rarity and utility in game play ,  with prices ranging from a few cents to thousands of dollars . 
by april 1997, cards had been sold . 
there is an active secondary market in individual cards among players and game shops . 
in february 2018, wizards noted that between the years of 2008 and 2016 they had printed over 20 billion `` magic: the gathering '' cards . 
normally the first player to win two games is the winner of the match . 
in formal systems ,  an axiom is a combination of tokens that is included in a given formal system without needing to be derived using the rules of the system . 
the babylonians also possessed a place-value system ,  and used a sexagesimal numeral system ,  still in use today for measuring angles and time . 
mathematicians refer to this precision of language and logic as `` rigor '' . 
as the number system is further developed ,  the integers are recognized as a subset of the rational numbers  -lrb-  `` fractions ''  -rrb-  . 
the study of space originates with geometry – in particular ,  euclidean geometry ,  which combines space and numbers ,  and encompasses the well-known pythagorean theorem . 
these include the aleph numbers ,  which allow meaningful comparison of the size of infinitely large sets . 
thus one can study groups ,  rings ,  fields and other abstract systems; together such studies  -lrb-  for structures defined by algebraic operations  -rrb-  constitute the domain of abstract algebra . 
most of the mathematical notation in use today was not invented until the 16th century . 
practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered . 
albert einstein  -lrb-  1879–1955 -rrb- stated that `` as far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality ,  they are not certain; and as far as they are certain ,  they do not refer to reality . `` 
the fields medal is often considered a mathematical equivalent to the nobel prize . 
in the context of recursion theory ,  the impossibility of a full axiomatization of number theory can also be formally demonstrated as a consequence of the mrdp theorem . 
similarly ,  one of the two main schools of thought in pythagoreanism was known as the `` mathēmatikoi ''  -lrb-  μαθηματικοί  -rrb- —which at the time meant `` teachers '' rather than `` mathematicians '' in the modern sense . 
beginning in the 6th century bc with the pythagoreans ,  the ancient greeks began a systematic study of mathematics as a subject in its own right with greek mathematics . 
the study of quantity starts with numbers ,  first the familiar natural numbers and integers  -lrb-  `` whole numbers ''  -rrb-  and arithmetical operations on them ,  which are characterized in arithmetic . 
the overwhelming majority of works in this ocean contain new mathematical theorems and their proofs . `` 
the word `` mathematics '' comes from ancient greek μάθημα  -lrb-  `` máthēma ''  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` that which is learnt '' ,  `` what one gets to know '' ,  hence also `` study '' and `` science '' . 
nonetheless mathematics is often imagined to be  -lrb-  as far as its formal content  -rrb-  nothing but set theory in some axiomatization ,  in the sense that every mathematical statement or proof could be cast into formulas within set theory . 
mathematical logic is concerned with setting mathematics within a rigorous axiomatic framework ,  and studying the implications of such a framework . 
it is often shortened to `` maths '' or ,  in north america ,  `` math '' . 
in the history of europe ,  the middle ages  -lrb-  or medieval period  -rrb-  lasted from the 5th to the 15th century . 
few large stone buildings were constructed between the constantinian basilicas of the 4th century and the 8th century ,  although many smaller ones were built during the 6th and 7th centuries . 
the byzantines also faced a revived bulgaria ,  which in the late 12th and 13th centuries spread throughout the balkans . 
the migrations and invasions of the 4th and 5th centuries disrupted trade networks around the mediterranean . 
legal studies advanced during the 12th century . 
in the 12th and 13th centuries ,  europe experienced economic growth and innovations in methods of production . 
the first years of the 14th century were marked by famines ,  culminating in the great famine of 1315–17.
monks were also the authors of new works ,  including history ,  theology ,  and other subjects ,  written by authors such as bede  -lrb-  d .  735 -rrb- ,  a native of northern england who wrote in the late 7th and early 8th centuries . 
jews also spread across europe during the period . 
the frankish kingdom in northern gaul split into kingdoms called austrasia ,  neustria ,  and burgundy during the 6th and 7th centuries ,  all of them ruled by the merovingian dynasty ,  who were descended from clovis . 
christian spain ,  initially driven into a small section of the peninsula in the north ,  expanded slowly south during the 9th and 10th centuries ,  establishing the kingdoms of asturias and león . 
missionary efforts to scandinavia during the 9th and 10th centuries helped strengthen the growth of kingdoms such as sweden ,  denmark ,  and norway ,  which gained power and territory . 
as western europe witnessed the formation of new kingdoms ,  the eastern roman empire remained intact and experienced an economic revival that lasted into the early 7th century . 
in eastern europe ,  byzantium revived its fortunes under emperor basil i  -lrb-  r .  867–886 -rrb- and his successors leo vi  -lrb-  r .  886–912 -rrb- and constantine vii  -lrb-  r .  913–959 -rrb- ,  members of the macedonian dynasty . 
under the capetian dynasty the french monarchy slowly began to expand its authority over the nobility ,  growing out of the île-de-france to exert control over more of the country in the 11th and 12th centuries . 
during the 11th century ,  developments in philosophy and theology led to increased intellectual activity . 
the high middle ages was the formative period in the history of the modern western state . 
in the 10th century the establishment of churches and monasteries led to the development of stone architecture that elaborated vernacular roman forms ,  from which the term `` romanesque '' is derived . 
the caricature of the period is also reflected in some more specific notions . 
christian forces advanced again in the early 13th century ,  culminating in the capture of seville in 1248.
in the 11th century ,  the seljuk turks took over much of the middle east ,  occupying persia during the 1040s ,  armenia in the 1060s ,  and jerusalem in 1070.
conditions were further unsettled by the return of the plague throughout the rest of the 14th century; it continued to strike europe periodically during the rest of the middle ages . 
the carolingian dynasty ,  as the successors to charles martel are known ,  officially took control of the kingdoms of austrasia and neustria in a coup of 753 led by  -lrb-  r .  752–768 -rrb- . 
throughout the 14th century ,  french kings sought to expand their influence at the expense of the territorial holdings of the nobility . 
the high middle ages was a period of great religious movements . 
by the end of the 5th century the western section of the empire was divided into smaller political units ,  ruled by the tribes that had invaded in the early part of the century . 
in the early 15th century ,  the countries of the iberian peninsula began to sponsor exploration beyond the boundaries of europe . 
in the eastern lands the dynasty had died out earlier ,  in 911, with the death of louis the child ,  and the selection of the unrelated conrad i  -lrb-  r .  911–918 -rrb- as king . 
the political structure of western europe changed with the end of the united roman empire . 
under childeric's son clovis i  -lrb-  r .  509–511 -rrb- ,  the founder of the merovingian dynasty ,  the frankish kingdom expanded and converted to christianity . 
the medieval period is itself subdivided into the early ,  high ,  and late middle ages . 
the coronation of charlemagne as emperor on christmas day 800 is regarded as a turning point in medieval history ,  marking a return of the western roman empire ,  since the new emperor ruled over much of the area previously controlled by the western emperors . 
in 376, the goths ,  fleeing from the huns ,  received permission from emperor valens  -lrb-  r .  364–378 -rrb- to settle in the roman province of thracia in the balkans . 
under louis ix  -lrb-  r .  1226–70 -rrb- ,  royal prestige rose to new heights as louis served as a mediator for most of europe . 
another change was the christianisation ,  or conversion of the empire to christianity ,  a gradual process that lasted from the 2nd to the 5th centuries . 
during the tumultuous 14th century ,  disputes within the leadership of the church led to the avignon papacy of 1309–76, also called the `` babylonian captivity of the papacy ''  -lrb-  a reference to the babylonian captivity of the jews  -rrb-  ,  and then to the great schism ,  lasting from 1378 to 1418, when there were two and later three rival popes ,  each supported by several states . 
12th century  -rrb-  ,  a teacher at bologna ,  wrote what became the standard text of canon law—the `` decretum '' . 
although the palaeologi emperors recaptured constantinople from the western europeans in 1261, they were never able to regain control of much of the former imperial lands . 
at the end of the period ,  the development of the printing press in about 1450 led to the establishment of publishing houses throughout europe by 1500.
the median is the fourth of them ,  which is 6.
the median is the mean of the middle two numbers: this is formula_1, which is formula_2.
so the median can be represented by the following formula:
for example ,  in the data set
most mammals ,  including the six most species-rich orders ,  belong to the placental group . 
the word `` mammal '' is modern ,  from the scientific name `` mammalia '' coined by carl linnaeus in 1758, derived from the latin `` mamma ''  -lrb-  `` teat ,  pap ''  -rrb-  . 
most mammals are polygynous ,  but some can be monogamous or polyandrous . 
the most species-rich group of mammals ,  the cohort called placentals ,  have a placenta ,  which enables the feeding of the fetus during gestation . 
music theory encompasses the nature and mechanics of music . 
musical texture is the overall sound of a piece of music or song . 
in the 1800s ,  the phrases `` the elements of music '' and `` the rudiments of music '' were used interchangeably . 
see glossary of musical terminology . 
in its most general form ,  the activities describing music as an art form or cultural activity include the creation of works of music  -lrb-  songs ,  tunes ,  symphonies ,  and so on  -rrb-  ,  the criticism of music ,  the study of the history of music ,  and the aesthetic examination of music . 
music has many different fundamentals or elements . 
although a musical composition often uses musical notation and has a single author ,  this is not always the case . 
music ranges from strictly organized compositions–such as classical music symphonies from the 1700s and 1800s ,  through to spontaneously played improvisational music such as jazz ,  and avant-garde styles of chance-based contemporary music from the 20th and 21st centuries . 
a distinction is often made between music performed for a live audience and music that is performed in a studio so that it can be recorded and distributed through the music retail system or the broadcasting system . 
even when music is notated relatively precisely ,  as in classical music ,  there are many decisions that a performer has to make ,  because notation does not specify all of the elements of music precisely . 
the two most common contexts can be differentiated by describing them as the `` rudimentary elements of music '' and the `` perceptual elements of music '' . 
and as such cannot be included as a unique perceptual element of music ,  although it can be considered an important rudimentary element of music . 
in the 2000s ,  music notation typically means the written expression of music notes and rhythms on paper using symbols . 
written notation varies with style and period of music . 
in western art music ,  the most common types of written notation are scores ,  which include all the music parts of an ensemble piece ,  and parts ,  which are the music notation for the individual performers or singers . 
mice are typically distinguished from rats by their size . 
typical mice are found in the genus mus . 
mice and rats have the same organs in the same places ,  with the difference of size . 
mice are a staple in the diet of many small carnivores . 
mice build long intricate burrows in the wild . 
many people buy mice as companion pets . 
multics was the first major operating system to be designed as a secure system from the outset . 
honeywell continued system development until 1985.
multics was the first operating system to provide a hierarchical file system ,  and file names could be of almost arbitrary length and syntax . 
 ''all '' memory in the system was part of `` some '' segment ,  which appeared in the file system; this included the temporary scratch memory of the process ,  its kernel stack ,  etc . 
multics supported multiple cpus; it was one of the earliest multiprocessor systems . 
in 1964, multics was developed initially for the ge-645 mainframe ,  a 36-bit system . 
after honeywell stopped supporting multics ,  users migrated to other systems like unix . 
bell labs pulled out of the project in 1969; some of the people who had worked on it there went on to create the unix system . 
the entire system ,  including the operating system and the complex pl/1 compiler ,  user commands ,  and subroutine libraries ,  consisted of about 1500 source modules . 
the protection architecture of multics ,  restricting the ability of code at one level of the system to access resources at another ,  was adopted as the basis for the security features of icl's vme operating system . 
in 1985, multics was issued certification as a b2 level secure operating system using the trusted computer system evaluation criteria from the national computer security center  -lrb-  ncsc  -rrb-  a division of the nsa ,  the first operating system evaluated to this level . 
in 2006, bull sas open sourced multics versions mr10.2, mr11.0, mr12.0, mr12.1, mr12.2, mr12.3, mr12.4 & mr12.5.
every word comprises one or more morphemes . 
from 1995 to 2000, mtv played 36.5% fewer music videos . 
in 1988, mtv debuted `` yo ! 
the channel's iconic `` i want my mtv ! `` 
mtv was also the major influence on the growth of music videos during the 1980s . 
as mtv expanded ,  music videos were no longer the centerpiece of its programming . 
 ''music feed '' is the only current program on mtv's main channel that is dedicated to music videos . 
in 1984, the channel produced its first `` mtv video music awards '' show ,  or vmas . 
presently ,  mtv airs sporadic live specials called `` mtv first '' . 
mtv itself only mentioned the anniversary once on `` trl '' . 
mtv's rebranding was overseen by popkern . 
mtv's effect was immediate in areas where the new music video channel was carried . 
presently ,  the `` video music awards '' are mtv's most watched annual event . 
mtv has positioned its website ,  mtv . com ,  as its primary destination for music videos . 
also by 1997, mtv was criticized heavily for not playing as many music videos as it had in the past . 
following the success of the `` mtv video music awards '' ,  in an effort to branch out from music into movies and broader pop culture ,  mtv started the `` mtv movie awards '' in 1992, which continues presently . 
from this time until 2004, mtv made some periodic efforts to reintroduce pop rock music videos to the channel . 
non-music video programming began in the late 1980s ,  with the introduction of a music news show `` the week in rock '' ,  which was also the beginning of mtv's news division ,  mtv news . 
these bands received some airtime on mtv and more so on mtv2, though both channels gave emphasis to the rock/rap acts . 
during the `` 2011 mtv video music awards '' ,  clay was in attendance where he confirmed that the channel lifted the ban . 
mtv would also hold week-long music events that would take over the presentation of the channel . 
mtv again resurrected the long-running series `` mtv unplugged '' in 2009 with performances from acts such as adele and paramore . 
these new shows would be just the beginning of new genres of shows to make an impact on mtv . 
also at this time ,  mtv introduced its new studios in times square . 
the network's director of music programming ,  buzz brindle ,  told an interviewer in 2006, `` mtv was originally designed to be a rock music channel . 
the service was no longer active by the time mtv launched in 1981.
mtv had debuted `` dial mtv '' in 1986, a daily top ten music video countdown show for which viewers could call the toll-free telephone number 1-800-dial-mtv to request a music video . 
mtv was experimenting at the time with new ideas for music programs to replace the purpose of `` trl '' but with a new format . 
mtv launched a live talk show ,  `` it's on with alexa chung '' ,  on june 15, 2009.
the first video played on that channel was `` video killed the radio star '' ,  following in the footsteps of mtv . 
the 1983 film `` flashdance '' was the first film in which its promoters excerpted musical segments from it and supplied them to mtv as music videos ,  which the channel then aired in regular rotation . 
before 1983, michael jackson also struggled to receive airtime on mtv . 
during mtv's first few years on the air ,  very few black artists were included in rotation on the channel . 
other programs were `` direct effect '' ,  `` return of the rock '' ,  `` mtv jams '' ,  `` beatsuite '' ,  `` mtv soul '' ,  and blocks of music videos hosted by vjs simply called `` music television '' in the spirit of the channel's original purpose . 
also in 1986, the channel introduced `` 120 minutes '' ,  a show that would feature low-rotation ,  alternative rock and other `` underground '' videos for the next 14 years on mtv and three additional years on sister channel mtv2.
as a black woman ,  i did not want that representing my people as the first black video on mtv . `` 
mtv targeted an audience between the ages of twelve to thirty-four . 
the `` mtv europe music awards '' ,  or the emas ,  were created in 1994, ten years after the debut of the vmas . 
the first music video shown on mtv was the buggles' `` video killed the radio star '' ,  originally only available to homes in new jersey . 
the program initially aired weekly from mtv's studios in times square . 
hbo also had a 30-minute program of music videos called `` video jukebox '' ,  that first aired around the time of mtv's launch and would last until late 1986.
mtv's earliest format was modeled after aor  -lrb-  album-oriented rock  -rrb-  radio; mtv would transition to mimic a full top 40 station in 1984.
before 1987, mtv featured almost exclusively music videos ,  but as time passed ,  they introduced a variety of other shows ,  including some that were originally intended for other channels . 
despite its cancellation on mtv ,  a weekly countdown of hip hop videos known as `` sucker free '' still airs on mtv2 through the present day . 
the channel has also broadcast several of its own films from its production division mtv films ,  such as `` crossroads '' and ``  '' ,  and airs original made-for-television movies from mtv studios such as ``  '' . 
tbs founder ted turner started the cable music channel in 1984, designed to play a broader mix of music videos than mtv's rock format allowed . 
from 1998 to 2001, mtv also aired several other music video programs from its studios in times square and on location at various beach-themed locations each summer . 
a daily music video program on mtv that carried the name `` return of the rock '' ran through early 2001, replaced by a successor ,  `` all things rock '' ,  from 2002 until 2004.
in 1985, viacom bought warner-amex satellite entertainment ,  which owned mtv and nickelodeon ,  renaming the company mtv networks and beginning this expansion . 
mtv also aired `` hot zone '' ,  hosted by ananda lewis ,  which featured pop music videos during the midday time period and was a casual alternative to `` trl ''; it later became `` mtv hits '' . 
dunn also appeared in segments between mtv's shows throughout the day as a recognizable personality and face of the channel in the absence of traditional vjs aside from its mtv news correspondents . 
the original purpose of mtv was to be `` music television '' ,  playing music videos 24 hours a day and seven days a week ,  guided by on-air personalities known as vjs ,  or video jockeys . 
five years later ,  on august 1, 2006, mtv celebrated its 25th anniversary . 
a weekly block of music videos with the name `` headbangers ball '' aired from 2003 to 2011 on sister channel mtv2, before spending an additional two years as a web-only series on mtv2's website ,  until `` headbangers ball '' was discontinued once again in 2013.
beginning in late 1997, mtv progressively reduced its airing of rock music videos ,  leading to the slogan among skeptics ,  `` rock is dead . `` 
in the early 1990s ,  mtv debuted its first reality shows ,  `` the real world '' and `` road rules '' . 
nirvana led a sweeping transition into the rise of alternative rock music on mtv in 1991 with their video for `` smells like teen spirit '' . 
programs like these did not feature music videos ,  but they were still largely based around the world of music . 
the new video quickly received over 10,000 dislikes and fewer than 100 likes from only 20,000 views ,  and mtv deleted the video for a second time . 
the sea otter ,  which has the densest fur of any animal ,  narrowly escaped the fate of the sea mink . 
others have been important in the fur trade—the mink is often raised for its fur . 
one species ,  the sea mink  -lrb-  `` neovison macrodon ''  -rrb-  of new england and canada ,  was driven to extinction by fur trappers . 
the rare european mink `` mustela lutreola '' is one of the most endangered mustelid species . 
in recent centuries ,  fur farming ,  notably of mink ,  has also become widespread and provides the majority of the fur brought to market . 
as well as being one of the most species-rich families in the order carnivora ,  the family mustelidae is one of the oldest . 
maryland's state sales tax is 6 percent . 
the government of maryland is conducted according to the state constitution . 
maryland has a large food-production sector . 
in 1980, maryland was one of six states to vote for jimmy carter . 
as of 2017, non-hispanic white americans were 50.9% of maryland's population ,  making maryland on the verge of becoming a majority minority state . 
a new state constitution in 1864 abolished slavery and maryland was first recognized as a `` free state '' in that context . 
maryland has an area of and is comparable in overall area with belgium  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
maryland's history as a border state has led it to exhibit characteristics of both the northern and southern regions of the united states . 
the appearance of the judges of the maryland court of appeals is unique; maryland is the only state whose judges wear red robes . 
maryland's food-processing plants are the most significant type of manufacturing by value in the state . 
as of 2011, 58.0 percent of maryland's population younger than age 1 were non-white . 
there are also several auxiliary interstate highways in maryland . 
cumberland was maryland's second-largest city in the 19th century . 
as is typical of states on the east coast ,  maryland's plant life is abundant and healthy . 
maryland's state flower ,  the black-eyed susan ,  grows in abundance in wild flower groups throughout the state . 
the eastern shore is less populous and more rural ,  as are the counties of western maryland . 
in 2014, larry hogan ,  a republican ,  was elected governor of maryland . 
earthquakes in maryland are infrequent and small due to the state's distance from seismic/earthquake zones . 
the next larger state ,  its neighbor west virginia ,  is almost twice the size of maryland  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 2007, forbes . com rated maryland as the fifth `` greenest '' state in the country behind three of the pacific states and vermont . 
after england's `` glorious revolution '' of 1688, maryland outlawed catholicism . 
the bureau of economic analysis estimates that maryland's gross state product in 2016 was $382.4 billion . 
the maryland department of transportation oversees most transportation in the state through its various administration-level agencies . 
unlike many other states ,  significant autonomy is granted to many of maryland's counties . 
with more than 400 biotechnology companies located there ,  maryland is the fourth-largest nexus in this field in the united states . 
maryland joined with neighboring states during the end of the 20th century to improve the health of the chesapeake bay . 
maryland is a major center for life sciences research and development . 
maryland  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a state in the mid-atlantic region of the united states ,  bordering virginia ,  west virginia ,  and the district of columbia to its south and west ,  pennsylvania to its north ,  and delaware on its eastern side . 
despite its historic relevance to the catholic church in the united states ,  the percentage of catholics in the state of maryland is below the national average of 20% . 
aside from the oriole ,  435 other species of birds have been reported from maryland . 
most of the population of maryland lives in the central region of the state ,  in the baltimore metropolitan area and washington metropolitan area ,  both of which are part of the baltimore-washington metropolitan area . 
the state insect is the baltimore checkerspot butterfly ,  although it is not as common in maryland as it is in the southern edge of its range . 
maryland has been historically prominent to american catholic tradition because the english colony of maryland was intended by george calvert as a haven for english catholics . 
the independent maryland transportation authority maintains and operates the state's eight toll facilities . 
the government of maryland ,  like the other 49 state governments ,  has exclusive authority over matters that lie entirely within the state's borders ,  except as limited by the constitution of the united states . 
maryland blacks were part of a biracial republican coalition elected to state government in 1896–1904 and comprised 20% of the electorate . 
i-83 has in maryland and connects baltimore to southern central pennsylvania  -lrb-  harrisburg and york ,  pennsylvania  -rrb-  . 
as of february 2018, the state's unemployment rate was 4.2 percent . 
and was later adopted by the university of maryland ,  baltimore county as their mascot . 
according to pew research 69 percent of maryland's population identifies as christian . 
maryland's regions experienced economic changes following wwii . 
the royal charter granted maryland the land north of the potomac river up to the 40th parallel . 
the u . s .  census bureau designates maryland as one of the south atlantic states ,  but it is commonly associated with the mid-atlantic states and/or northeastern united states by other federal agencies ,  the media ,  and some residents . 
in southern maryland ,  tobacco farming nearly vanished due to suburban development and a state tobacco buy-out program . 
in 1970 the census bureau reported maryland's population as 17.8 percent african-american and 80.4 percent non-hispanic white . 
in 1790, the state ceded land for the establishment of the u . s .  capital of washington ,  d . c . 
a large percentage of the population of the eastern shore and southern maryland are descendants of british american ancestry . 
this geographical curiosity makes maryland the narrowest state ,  bordered by the mason–dixon line to the north ,  and the northwards-arching potomac river to the south . 
there are 83 counties in michigan . 
michigan is the only state to consist of two peninsulas . 
with 78 state parks ,  19 state recreation areas ,  and 6 state forests ,  michigan has the largest state park and state forest system of any state . 
michigan  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the great lakes and midwestern regions of the united states . 
 ''see also michigan regions ''
farther north ,  in central michigan ,  northern michigan ,  and the upper peninsula ,  tornadoes are rare . 
no point in michigan is more than from an inland lake or more than from one of the great lakes . 
the great lakes that border michigan from east to west are lake erie ,  lake huron ,  lake michigan and lake superior . 
michigan was the home of gerald ford ,  the 38th president of the united states . 
michigan held its first united states presidential primary election in 1910.
the geographic orientation of michigan's peninsulas makes for a long distance between the ends of the state . 
michigan has the largest dutch ,  finnish ,  and macedonian populations in the united states . 
the michigan state capitol was dedicated in 1879 and has hosted the executive and legislative branches of the state ever since . 
michigan was recaptured by americans in 1813 after the battle of lake erie . 
michigan is the leading auto-producing state in the us ,  with the industry primarily located throughout the midwestern united states ,  ontario ,  canada ,  and the southern united states . 
residents have called for secession from michigan and establishment as a new state to be called `` superior '' . 
economic issues are important in michigan elections . 
the geological formation of the state is greatly varied ,  with the michigan basin being the most major formation . 
lansing is the state capital and is home to all three branches of state government . 
michigan has had four constitutions ,  the first of which was ratified on october 5 and 6, 1835.
these parks and forests include holland state park ,  mackinac island state park ,  au sable state forest ,  and mackinaw state forest . 
michigan ,  like every u . s .  state except louisiana ,  has a common law legal system . 
the united states census bureau estimates the population of michigan was 9,995,915 on july 1, 2018, an increase of 1.14% from 9,883,635 recorded at the 2010 united states census . 
the ojibwe were established in michigan's upper peninsula and northern and central michigan ,  and also inhabited ontario and southern manitoba ,  canada; and northern wisconsin ,  and northern and north-central minnesota . 
the michigan judiciary consists of two courts with primary jurisdiction  -lrb-  the circuit courts and the district courts  -rrb-  ,  one intermediate level appellate court  -lrb-  the michigan court of appeals  -rrb-  ,  and the michigan supreme court . 
there is debate about the effect of minimum wages . 
minimum wage laws ,  for instance proposals to index the minimum wage to average wages ,  have the potential to keep the dollar value of the minimum wage relevant and predictable . 
an imposition or increase of a minimum wage will generally only affect employment in the low-skill labor market ,  as the equilibrium wage is already at or below the minimum wage ,  whereas in higher skill labor markets the equilibrium wage is too high for a change in minimum wage to affect employment . 
it also has one of the most complicated systems with more than 1,200 minimum wage rates . 
surveys of labor economists have found a sharp split on the minimum wage . 
economists disagree as to the measurable impact of minimum wages in practice . 
economists and other political commentators have proposed alternatives to the minimum wage . 
in 1996 and 1997, the federal minimum wage was increased from $4.25 to $5.15, thereby increasing the minimum wage by $0.90 in pennsylvania but by just $0.10 in new jersey; this allowed for an examination of the effects of minimum wage increases in the same area ,  subsequent to the 1992 change studied by card and krueger . 
in 2014, supporters of minimum wage cited a study that found that job creation within the united states is faster in states that raised their minimum wages . 
in the united states ,  the minimum wage promulgated by the fair labor standards act of 1938.
a minimum wage is the lowest remuneration that employers can legally pay their workers . 
the following table summarizes the arguments made by those for and against minimum wage laws:
most countries had introduced minimum wage legislation by the end of the 20th century . 
in 2007, klein and dompe conducted a non-anonymous survey of supporters of the minimum wage who had signed the `` raise the minimum wage '' statement published by the economic policy institute . 
instead ,  minimum wage standards in different sectors are set by collective bargaining . 
the supply and demand model implies that by mandating a price floor above the equilibrium wage ,  minimum wage laws will cause unemployment . 
the restaurant industry is commonly studied because of its high number of minimum wage workers . 
several researchers have conducted statistical meta-analyses of the employment effects of the minimum wage . 
supply and demand models suggest that there may be welfare and employment losses from minimum wages . 
the argument that a minimum wage decreases employment is based on a simple supply and demand model of the labor market . 
some research suggests that the unemployment effects of small minimum wage increases are dominated by other factors . 
the dollar value of the minimum wage loses purchasing power over time due to inflation . 
additionally ,  it is extraordinarily difficult to separate the effects of minimum wage from all the other variables that affect employment . 
a 2014 analysis based on panel data found that the minimum wage reduces employment among teenagers . 
the adam smith institute prefers cutting taxes on the poor and middle class instead of raising wages as an alternative to the minimum wage . 
in 2013, a diverse group of 37 economics professors was surveyed on their view of the minimum wage's impact on employment . 
customs and extra-legal pressures from governments or labor unions can produce a `` de facto '' minimum wage . 
