in 2014, ice cube appeared on mc ren's remix for `` rebel music '' . 
1991's `` niggaz4life '' would be the group's final album . 
the original lineup ,  formed in 1986, consisted of arabian prince ,  dr .  dre ,  eazy-e ,  and ice cube . 
having both parted with ruthless records on bad terms ,  tensions between ice cube and dr .  dre eventually eased on their own . 
dr .  dre and dj yella were present in the studio for the latter song . 
n . w . a released their debut studio album ,  `` straight outta compton '' ,  in 1988.
dr .  dre ,  mc ren and ice cube would later express their re-evaluated feelings to their old friend on 1998's `` ruthless for life '' ,  1999's `` what's the difference '' and `` chin check '' ,  2000's `` hello '' ,  2006's `` growin' up '' ,  and in the 2011 music video `` i need a doctor '' . 
2  -lrb-  the peace disc  -rrb- ``  ,  and the song `` chin check '' for the `` next friday '' soundtrack ,  a movie starring ice cube . 
following a 27-year hiatus ,  the group reunited with surviving members ice cube ,  mc ren ,  dr .  dre and dj yella taking the stage during the second weekend of the coachella valley music and arts festival in april 2016, just days following the group's rock n' roll hall of fame induction . 
the term 'nibble' originates from its representing 'half a byte' ,  with 'byte' a homophone of the english word 'bite' . 
a full byte  -lrb-  octet  -rrb-  is represented by two hexadecimal digits; therefore ,  it is common to display a byte of information as two nibbles . 
today ,  the terms 'byte' and 'nibble' almost always refer to 8-bit and 4-bit collections respectively and are very rarely used to express any other sizes . 
these acts were sometimes labeled `` new wave of new wave '' . 
new wave died out in the mid-1980s ,  knocked out by guitar-driven rock reacting against new wave . 
new wave is a genre of rock music popular in the late 1970s and the 1980s with ties to mid-1970s punk rock . 
by 1983, the term of choice for the us music industry had become `` new music '' ,  while to the majority of us fans it was still a `` new wave '' reacting to album-based rock . 
new wave represented a break from the blues and rock & roll sounds of late 1960s to mid-1970s rock music . 
the catch-all nature of new wave music has been a source of much confusion and controversy . 
most distance travelled on dutch public transport goes by rail . 
the busiest dutch motorway is the a13 between the hague and rotterdam ,  with a traffic volume of 140,000 motor vehicles per day . 
for longer distances the main public transport in the netherlands is the train . 
for 2019, also 8 percent more freight trains are scheduled than in 2018.
the widest dutch motorway is the a15/a16 just south of rotterdam with 16 lanes in a 4+4+4+4 setup . 
already half of all dutch train travelers cycle to the railway station ,  amounting to half a million cyclists daily . 
in 2015 dutch airports handled passengers at a ratio of 47 million on european flights versus 18 million on intercontinental flights ,  and in 2013 a slightly less 1.6 million metric tons of airfreight . 
in the rotterdam and `` -drecht '' towns region ,  a water bus public transport service operates as well . 
with a total road network of 139,000 km ,  including 3,530 km of expressways ,  the netherlands has one of the densest road networks in the world; much denser than germany and france ,  but still not as dense as belgium . 
prorail also coordinates the totality of scheduling and proper meshing of the dutch railway services . 
in other regions there are much smaller international airports ,  the most prominent being eindhoven airport ,  rotterdam the hague airport ,  maastricht aachen airport and groningen airport . 
the armed forces of the netherlands consist of the army ,  navy ,  and air force . 
the dutch have been strong advocates of european integration ,  and most aspects of their foreign ,  economic ,  and trade policies are coordinated through the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  . 
the dutch have been active in international peacekeeping roles . 
the dutch government conducted a review of foreign policy main themes ,  organization ,  and funding in 1995.
the father claims that the dutch government has promised not to prosecute him for the abduction . 
the netherlands is one of the founding members of what today is the european union . 
however ,  a dutch prosecutor claims that he is free to prosecute the father and may well do that ,  and that the dutch have only retracted the international request to arrest him outside the netherlands . 
the dutch also pursue defense cooperation within europe ,  both multilaterally – in the context of the western european union and the european security and defence policy of the eu – and bilaterally ,  as in the german-netherlands corps . 
in the dutch golden age ,  which had its zenith around 1667, there was a flowering of trade ,  industry ,  the arts and the sciences . 
the drug policy of the netherlands is marked by its distinguishing between so called soft and hard drugs . 
legal distinctions are made in the opium law between drugs with a low risk of harm and/or addiction ,  called soft drugs ,  and drugs with a high risk of harm and/or addiction ,  called hard drugs . 
most of these are investigations of hard drug crime  -lrb-  specifically cocaine and synthetic drugs  -rrb-  although the number of soft drug cases is rising and currently accounts for 69% of criminal investigations . 
in 2006 there were 20,769 drug crimes registered by public prosecutors and 4,392 persons received an unconditional prison sentence the rate of imprisonment for drug crimes is about the same as in sweden ,  which has a zero tolerance policy for drug crimes . 
importing and exporting of any classified drug is a serious offence . 
despite the high priority given by the dutch government to fighting illegal drug trafficking ,  the netherlands continue to be an important transit point for drugs entering europe . 
on 27 november 2003, the dutch justice minister piet hein donner announced that his government was considering rules under which coffeeshops would only be allowed to sell soft drugs to dutch residents in order to satisfy both european neighbors' concerns about the influx of drugs from the netherlands ,  as well as those of netherlands border town residents unhappy with the influx of `` drug tourists '' from elsewhere in europe . 
a study conducted by the european monitoring centre of drugs and drug addiction report that 25.3% of irish people smoked cannabis at some stage in their life . 
in may 2011 the dutch government announced that tourist are to be banned from dutch coffeeshops ,  starting in the southern provinces and at the end of 2011 in the rest of the country . 
although drug use ,  as opposed to trafficking ,  is seen primarily as a public health issue ,  responsibility for drug policy is shared by both the ministry of health ,  welfare ,  and sports ,  and the ministry of justice . 
whereas 25.7% of dutch people have tried cannabis . 
notably absent from toleration of drugs is its production ,  particularly the cultivation of weed . 
for example ,  `` 11 '' represents the number `` eleven '' in the decimal numeral system  -lrb-  used in common life  -rrb-  ,  the number `` three '' in the binary numeral system  -lrb-  used in computers  -rrb-  ,  and the number two in the unary numeral system . 
love constructed international auxiliary languages such as esperanto and interlingua  -lrb-  even those that have native speakers  -rrb-  are not generally considered natural languages . 
such examples include bees' waggle dance and whale song ,  to which researchers have found or applied the linguistic cognates of dialect and even syntax . 
in a 2014 `` sight and sound '' poll ,  film critics voted `` nanook of the north '' the seventh best documentary film of all time . 
as the first `` nonfiction '' work of its scale ,  `` nanook of the north '' was ground-breaking cinema . 
in 1989, `` nanook of the north '' was one of the first 25 films to be selected for preservation in the united states national film registry by the library of congress as being `` culturally ,  historically ,  or aesthetically significant '' . 
nanook of the north  -lrb-  also known as nanook of the north: a story of life and love in the actual arctic  -rrb-  is a 1922 american silent documentary film by robert j .  flaherty ,  with elements of docudrama ,  at a time when the concept of separating films into documentary and drama did not yet exist . 
the full collaboration of the inuit was key to flaherty's success as the inuit were his film crew and many of them knew his camera better than he did . 
in 1999, `` nanook of the north '' was digitally remastered and released on dvd by the criterion collection . 
liquid nitrogen is a cryogenic liquid . 
five nitrogen fluorides are known . 
liquid nitrogen readily evaporates to form gaseous nitrogen ,  and hence the precautions associated with gaseous nitrogen also apply to liquid nitrogen . 
a nitrogen atom has seven electrons . 
they hydrolyse only very slowly to give ammonia or nitrogen . 
all four simple nitrogen trihalides are known . 
given the great reactivity of atomic nitrogen ,  elemental nitrogen usually occurs as molecular n ,  dinitrogen . 
nitrogen dissolves in the blood and body fats . 
vessels containing liquid nitrogen can condense oxygen from air . 
atomic nitrogen ,  also known as active nitrogen ,  is highly reactive ,  being a triradical with three unpaired electrons . 
nitrogen is one of the most important elements in organic chemistry . 
nitrogen is a chemical element with symbol n and atomic number 7.
for a long time ,  sources of nitrogen compounds were limited . 
due to these very high figures ,  nitrogen has no simple cationic chemistry . 
nitrogen has two stable isotopes: n and n .  the first is much more common ,  making up 99.634% of natural nitrogen ,  and the second  -lrb-  which is slightly heavier  -rrb-  makes up the remaining 0.366% . 
nitrogen compounds have a very long history ,  ammonium chloride having been known to herodotus . 
there are some theoretical indications that other nitrogen oligomers and polymers may be possible . 
because the liquid-to-gas expansion ratio of nitrogen is 1:694 at 20 °c ,  a tremendous amount of force can be generated if liquid nitrogen is rapidly vaporised in an enclosed space . 
nitrogen compounds constantly interchange between the atmosphere and living organisms . 
nitrogen is commonly used during sample preparation in chemical analysis . 
the applications of nitrogen compounds are naturally extremely widely varied due to the huge size of this class: hence ,  only applications of pure nitrogen itself will be considered here . 
the liquid in such a vessel becomes increasingly enriched in oxygen  -lrb-  boiling point −183 °c ,  higher than that of nitrogen  -rrb-  as the nitrogen evaporates ,  and can cause violent oxidation of organic material . 
nitrogen is the most common pure element in the earth ,  making up 78.1% of the entire volume of the atmosphere . 
nitrogen gas ,  formed from the decomposition of sodium azide ,  is used for the inflation of airbags . 
by the same token ,  however ,  the complexity of the phosphorus oxoacids finds no echo with nitrogen . 
greenness is repeatable because there is one thing that manifests itself wherever there are green things . 
the other version specifically denies the existence of abstract objects – objects that do not exist in space and time . 
most nominalists have held that only physical particulars in space and time are real ,  and that universals exist only `` post res '' ,  that is ,  subsequent to particular things . 
the platonist answer is that all the green things are green in virtue of the existence of a universal: a single abstract thing that ,  in this case ,  is a part of all the green things . 
one wants to know by virtue of `` what '' are fluffy and kitzler both cats ,  and `` what '' makes the grass ,  the shirt ,  and kermit green . 
in metaphysics ,  nominalism is a philosophical view which denies the existence of universals and abstract objects ,  but affirms the existence of general or abstract terms and predicates . 
moderate realists hold that there is no realm in which universals exist ,  but rather universals are located in space and time wherever they are manifest . 
a version of class nominalism that sees some classes as `` natural classes '' is held by anthony quinton . 
however ,  some versions of nominalism hold that some particulars are abstract entities  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  numbers  -rrb-  ,  while others are concrete entities – entities that do exist in space and time  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  pillars ,  snakes ,  bananas  -rrb-  . 
nominalism denies the existence of universals . 
conceptualists hold a position intermediate between nominalism and realism ,  saying that universals exist only within the mind and have no external or substantial reality . 
nominalism is primarily a position on the problem of universals ,  which dates back at least to plato ,  and is opposed to realist philosophies ,  such as platonic realism ,  which assert that universals do exist over and above particulars . 
if moral statements cannot be true ,  and if one cannot know something that is not true ,  noncognitivism implies that moral knowledge is impossible . 
are the clearest expressions of morality ,  while reformulations like `` killing is wrong '' tend to obscure the meaning of moral sentences . 
a non-cognitivist would have to disagree with someone saying ,  `` 'eating meat is wrong' is a false statement ''  -lrb-  since `` eating meat is wrong '' is not truth-apt at all  -rrb-  ,  but may be tempted to agree with a person saying ,  `` eating meat is not wrong . `` 
prescriptivism can fit the theist idea of morality as obedience towards god . 
it is however different from the cognitivist supernaturalism which interprets morality as subjective will of god ,  while prescriptivism claims that moral rules are universal and can be found by reason alone without reference to a god . 
a similar argument against non-cognitivism is that of ethical argument . 
arguments for emotivism focus on what normative statements `` express '' when uttered by a speaker . 
one might more constructively interpret these statements to describe the underlying emotional statement that they express ,  i . e . 
 ''on the north . `` 
the north sea canal connects amsterdam with the north sea . 
copepods and other zooplankton are plentiful in the north sea . 
the north sea is more than long and wide ,  with an area of and a volume of  . 
the north sea is also home to marine mammals . 
315 citizens of hamburg died in the north sea flood of 1962.
through history various names have been used for the north sea . 
the north sea continues to be an active trade route . 
in 2006 a bone fragment was found while drilling for oil in the north sea . 
the beaches and coastal waters of the north sea are destinations for tourists . 
the climatic conditions on the north sea coast have been claimed to be healthful . 
tensions in the north sea were again heightened in 1904 by the dogger bank incident . 
north sea has provided waterway access for commerce and conquest . 
the british did not face a challenge to their dominance of the north sea until the 20th century . 
the coast of the north sea presents a diversity of geological and geographical features . 
in the north sea the average tide difference in wave amplitude is between zero to  . 
shallow epicontinental seas like the current north sea have since long existed on the european continental shelf . 
sometimes it was connected with other shallow seas ,  such as the sea above the paris basin to the south-west ,  the paratethys sea to the south-east ,  or the tethys ocean to the south . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the north sea as follows:
the north sea located on the continental shelf has different waves from those in deep ocean water . 
though rare ,  the north sea has been the site of a number of historically documented tsunamis . 
the north sea coasts are home to numerous canals and canal systems to facilitate traffic between and among rivers ,  artificial harbours ,  and the sea . 
as germany's only outlet to the ocean ,  the north sea continued to be strategically important through both world wars . 
north sea cetaceans include various porpoise ,  dolphin and whale species . 
the eastern and western coasts of the north sea are jagged ,  formed by glaciers during the ice ages . 
the main pattern to the flow of water in the north sea is an anti-clockwise rotation along the edges . 
after the war ,  the north sea lost much of its military significance because it is bordered only by nato member-states . 
 ''entertainment weekly '' ranked the film as the eighth most controversial film ever . 
when they saw the completed film ,  they were furious . 
during this time ,  mickey rapes the hostage . 
furthermore ,  both films fall under the road film genre through their constant challenges of the society in which the characters live . 
other critics found the film unsuccessful in its aims . 
the film's soundtrack was produced by stone and trent reznor of nine inch nails ,  who reportedly watched the film over 50 times to `` get in the mood '' . 
lionsgate films released a director's cut on dvd . 
the film was released on august 26, 1994 in the united states ,  and also screened at the venice film festival on august 29, 1994.
in a 1993 interview ,  tarantino stated that he did not hold any animosity towards stone ,  and that he wished the film well . 
when the film was first handed in to the mpaa ,  they told stone they would give it an nc-17 unless he cut it . 
tarantino disowned the film ,  saying ,  `` i hated that fucking movie . 
the police taser him and the scene ends with mickey and mallory being beaten by a group of vengeful policemen as a news crew films the action . 
notorious for its violent content and inspiring `` copycat '' crimes ,  the film was named the eighth most controversial film in history by `` entertainment weekly '' in 2006.
principal photography took only 56 days to shoot ,  but the editing process went on for 11 months ,  with the final film containing almost 3,000 cuts  -lrb-  most films have 600–700 -rrb- . 
david veloz ,  associate producer richard rutowski ,  and stone rewrote the script ,  keeping much of the dialogue but changing the focus of the film from journalist wayne gale to mickey and mallory . 
in 1982, reagan was asked by a schoolgirl what to do when offered drugs; reagan responded: `` just say no . `` 
reagan became the first lady of the united states when ronald reagan was inaugurated as president in january 1981.
in october 2008, reagan was admitted to ronald reagan ucla medical center after falling at home . 
nancy reagan was first lady of california during her husband's two terms as governor . 
reagan hosted a 2012 republican presidential debate at the reagan presidential library on september 7, 2011.
after the funeral ,  nancy reagan was interred next to her husband . 
ronald reagan died in their bel air home on june 5, 2004.
reagan reflected on the criticisms in her 1989 autobiography ,  `` my turn '' . 
reagan's interest in fashion was another one of her trademarks . 
reagan was the first lady of california when her husband was governor from 1967 to 1975, and she began to work with the foster grandparents program . 
but the reagan library is ronnie ,  so that's where i spend my time . `` 
reagan assumed the role of unofficial `` protector '' for her husband after the attempted assassination of him in 1981.
the reagan library opened the temporary exhibit `` nancy reagan: a first lady's style '' ,  which displayed over eighty designer dresses belonging to her . 
reagan's health and well-being became a prominent concern in 2008.
when ronald reagan was released from the hospital on april 12, she escorted him back to the white house . 
reagan was the second-longest-lived first lady of the united states ,  after bess truman who died at the age of 97.
the reagans held dinners for former pows and vietnam war veterans while governor and first lady . 
on march 6, 2016, reagan died of congestive heart failure at the age of 94.
reagan concluded ,  `` it was a perfect ending for one of the great evenings of my husband's presidency . `` 
reagan became first lady of the united states in january 1981, following her husband's victory in the 1980 presidential election . 
she was the first lady of the united states from 1981 to 1989.
fashion designers were pleased with the emphasis reagan placed on clothing . 
her funeral was held on march 11, 2016, at the ronald reagan presidential library in simi valley ,  california . 
after ronald reagan left the white house in 1989, the couple retired to their home in bel air ,  los angeles ,  california . 
nancy davis reagan  -lrb-  born anne frances robbins; july 6, 1921 – march 6, 2016 -rrb- was an american film actress and the wife of ronald reagan ,  the 40th president of the united states . 
these included `` ford television theatre ''  -lrb-  her first appearance with ronald reagan came during a 1953 episode titled `` first born ''  -rrb-  ,  `` schlitz playhouse of stars '' ,  `` dick powell's zane grey theatre ''  -lrb-  appearing with ronald reagan in the 1961 episode `` the long shadow ''  -rrb-  ,  `` wagon train '' ,  `` the tall man '' ,  and `` general electric theater ''  -lrb-  hosted by ronald reagan  -rrb-  . 
nancy reagan stated in her memoirs ,  `` i felt panicky every time ronald reagan left the white house '' following the assassination attempt ,  and made it her concern to know her husband's schedule: the events he would be attending ,  and with whom . 
in 1985, reagan expanded the campaign to an international level by inviting the first ladies of various nations to the white house for a conference on drug abuse . 
present-day new brunswick became part of the colony of nova scotia . 
by the early 1700s the area that is now new brunswick was part of the french colony of acadia ,  which was in turn part of new france . 
according to the constitution of canada new brunswick is the only bilingual province . 
new brunswick is 83% forested ,  and less densely-populated than the rest of the maritimes . 
the flag of new brunswick ,  based on the coat of arms ,  was adopted in 1965.
new brunswick  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is one of four atlantic provinces on the east coast of canada . 
on 1 july 1867 new brunswick entered the canadian confederation along with nova scotia ,  quebec and ontario . 
in 1937 new brunswick had the highest infant mortality and illiteracy rates in canada . 
in 1867 new brunswick was one of four founding provinces of the canadian confederation ,  along with nova scotia ,  quebec ,  and ontario . 
the ownership of new brunswick was disputed ,  with an informal border on the isthmus of chignecto . 
the acadians in northern new brunswick had long been geographically and linguistically isolated from the more numerous english speakers to the south . 
nova scotia is canada's smallest province in area after prince edward island . 
 ''nova scotia '' means `` new scotland '' in latin and is the recognized english-language name for the province . 
it has a land area of  . 
between 1925 and 1999, the northwest territories covered a land area of – larger than that of india . 
the northwest territories is bordered by canada's two other territories ,  nunavut to the east and yukon to the west ,  and by the provinces of british columbia ,  alberta ,  and saskatchewan to the south . 
in 1906, the parliament of canada renamed the `` north-west territories '' as the `` northwest territories '' ,  dropping all hyphenated forms of it . 
the northwest territories extends for more than and has a large climate variant from south to north . 
in inuktitut ,  the northwest territories are referred to as ᓄᓇᑦᓯᐊᖅ  -lrb-  `` nunatsiaq ''  -rrb-  ,  `` beautiful land . `` 
after the 1870 transfer ,  some of the north-west territories was whittled away . 
the route of the nez perce flight is preserved by the nez perce national historic trail . 
a total of 3,499 nez perce were counted in the 2010 census . 
the nez perce horse breed is noted for its speed . 
the party stayed with the nez perce for a month before moving on . 
today they are a federally recognized tribe ,  the nez perce tribe of idaho ,  and govern their indian reservation in idaho through a central government headquartered in lapwai ,  idaho known as the nez perce tribal executive committee  -lrb-  nptec  -rrb-  . 
fishing is traditionally an important ceremonial and commercial activity for the nez perce tribe . 
nez perce oral tradition indicates the name `` cuupn'itpel'uu '' meant `` we walked out of the woods or walked out of the mountains '' and referred to the time before the nez perce had horses . 
more than 300 us soldiers and 1,000 nez perce  -lrb-  including women and children  -rrb-  were killed in these conflicts . 
in 1994 the nez perce tribe began a breeding program ,  based on crossbreeding the appaloosa and a central asian breed called akhal-teke ,  to produce what they called the nez perce horse . 
like salmon ,  plants contributed to traditional nez perce culture in both material and spiritual dimensions . 
cut off from most of their horticultural sites throughout the camas prairie by an 1863 treaty ,  confinement to reservations in idaho ,  washington and oklahoma indian territory after the nez perce war of 1877, and dawes act of 1887 land allotments  -lrb-  today some nez perce lease land to farmers or loggers ,  but the nez perce only own 12% of their own reservation  -rrb-  ,  the nez perce remain as a distinct culture and political economic influence within and outside their reservation . 
lapwai is the seat of tribal government ,  and it has the highest percentage of nez percé people as residents ,  at about 81.4 percent . 
after first contact ,  the name `` nez perce '' was given to the niimíipuu and the nearby chinook people by french explorers and trappers . 
ubaid culture from 6,900 bc . 
in east asia ,  the earliest sites include nanzhuangtou culture around 9500–9000 bc ,  pengtoushan culture around 7500–6100 bc ,  and peiligang culture around 7000–5000 bc . 
in south india ,  the neolithic began by 6500 bc and lasted until around 1400 bc when the megalithic transition period began . 
the neolithic 1  -lrb-  ppna  -rrb-  period began roughly around 10,000 bc in the levant . 
the chalcolithic  -lrb-  stone-bronze  -rrb-  period began about 4500 bc ,  then the bronze age began about 3500 bc ,  replacing the neolithic cultures . 
anthropomorphic figurines have been found in the balkans from 6000 bc ,  and in central europe by around 5800 bc  -lrb-  la hoguette  -rrb-  . 
the neolithic 3  -lrb-  pn  -rrb-  began around 6,400 bc in the fertile crescent . 
mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the neolithic revolution from around 10,000 bc . 
neolithic cultures are also attested in southeastern anatolia and northern mesopotamia by around 8000 bc . 
considered to be one of the largest prehistoric settlements in the near east ,  called 'ain ghazal ,  it was continuously inhabited from approximately 7250 bc to approximately 5000 bc . 
in mesoamerica ,  a similar set of events  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  crop domestication and sedentary lifestyles  -rrb-  occurred by around 4500 bc ,  but possibly as early as 11,000–10,000 bc . 
the neolithic 2  -lrb-  ppnb  -rrb-  began around 8800 bc according to the aspro chronology in the levant  -lrb-  jericho ,  palestine  -rrb-  . 
in 2006, remains of figs were discovered in a house in jericho dated to 9400 bc . 
in the middle east ,  cultures identified as neolithic began appearing in the 10th millennium bc . 
domestication of sheep and goats reached egypt from the near east possibly as early as 6000 bc . 
by 10,200–8800 bc farming communities had arisen in the levant and spread to asia minor ,  north africa and north mesopotamia . 
the cucuteni-trypillian culture built enormous settlements in romania ,  moldova and ukraine from 5300 to 2300 bc . 
in southeast europe agrarian societies first appeared in the 7th millennium bc ,  attested by one of the earliest farming sites of europe ,  discovered in vashtëmi ,  southeastern albania and dating back to 6500 bc . 
another facet of nomic is the way in which the implementation of the rules affects the way the game of nomic itself works . 
a rule change may be:
nomic now refers to a large number of games ,  all based on the initial ruleset . 
nomic is a game created in 1982 by philosopher peter suber in which the rules of the game include mechanisms for the players to change those rules ,  usually beginning through a system of democratic voting . 
one spin-off of a now-defunct nomic  -lrb-  nomic world  -rrb-  is called the fantasy rules committee; it adds every legal rule submitted by a player to the ruleset until the players run out of ideas ,  after which all the `` fantasy rules '' are repealed and the game begins again . 
in 1996, nintendo released the ultra 64 as the nintendo 64 in japan and north america . 
in 2004, nintendo released the nintendo ds ,  its fourth major handheld system . 
in 2001, nintendo introduced the redesigned game boy advance . 
game & watch is a line of handheld electronic games produced by nintendo from 1980 to 1991.
in 2011, nintendo released the nintendo 3ds ,  based upon a glasses-free stereoscopic 3d display . 
during the holiday season of 2008, nintendo followed up the success of the ds with the release of the nintendo dsi in japan . 
from 1990 to 1992, nintendo opened `` world of nintendo '' shops in the united states where consumers could test and buy nintendo products . 
in 1963, yamauchi renamed nintendo playing card co .  ltd .  to nintendo co .  ,  ltd . 
in 2003, nintendo released the game boy advance sp ,  a redesign of the game boy advance that featured a clamshell design that would later be used in nintendo's ds and 3ds handheld video game systems . 
in 1998, the successor to the game boy ,  the game boy color ,  was released . 
on 20 october 2016, nintendo released a preview trailer about the nx ,  revealing the official name to be the nintendo switch . 
a hardware revision ,  `` new nintendo 3ds '' ,  was unveiled in august 2014.
it was the earliest nintendo product to garner major success . 
kimishima stated that nintendo would release a couple of mobile games each year from then on . 
in 1997, nintendo released the sns-101  -lrb-  called super famicom jr .  in japan  -rrb-  ,  a smaller redesigned version of the super nintendo entertainment system . 
in 1975, nintendo moved into the video arcade game industry with `` evr race '' ,  designed by their first game designer ,  genyo takeda ,  and several more games followed . 
although originally advertised as an alternative to the game boy advance ,  the nintendo ds replaced the game boy line after its initial release in 2004.
nintendo also released the wii mini ,  a cheaper and non-networked redesign of the wii . 
nintendo's first venture into the video gaming industry was securing rights to distribute the magnavox odyssey video game console in japan in 1974.
in september 2017, nintendo announced a partnership with the chinese gaming company tencent to publish a global version of their commercially successful mobile game ,  `` honor of kings '' ,  for the nintendo switch . 
further expanding the nintendo ds line ,  the nintendo 3ds uses the process of autostereoscopy to produce a stereoscopic three-dimensional effect without glasses . 
the will of the swedish scientist alfred nobel established the five nobel prizes in 1895.
between 1901 and 2018, the nobel prizes  -lrb-  and the prizes in economic sciences ,  from 1969 on  -rrb-  were awarded 590 times to 935 people and organizations . 
all nomination records for a prize are sealed for 50 years from the awarding of the prize . 
the royal swedish academy of sciences awards the nobel prize in chemistry ,  the nobel prize in physics ,  and the sveriges riksbank prize in economic sciences in memory of alfred nobel; the nobel assembly at the karolinska institute awards the nobel prize in physiology or medicine; the swedish academy grants the nobel prize in literature; and the norwegian nobel committee awards the nobel peace prize . 
four people have received two nobel prizes . 
except for the peace prize ,  the nobel prizes are presented in stockholm ,  sweden ,  at the annual prize award ceremony on 10 december ,  the anniversary of nobel's death . 
two laureates have voluntarily declined the nobel prize . 
the prize is not awarded posthumously; however ,  if a person is awarded a prize and dies before receiving it ,  the prize may still be presented . 
the highlight of the nobel prize award ceremony in stockholm occurs when each nobel laureate steps forward to receive the prize from the hands of the king of sweden . 
nobel's will provided for prizes to be awarded in recognition of discoveries made `` during the preceding year '' . 
in 1968, sweden's central bank ,  sveriges riksbank ,  established the `` sveriges riksbank prize in economic sciences in memory of alfred nobel '' ,  which ,  although not a nobel prize ,  has become informally known as the `` nobel prize in economics '' . 
once the nobel foundation and its guidelines were in place ,  the nobel committees began collecting nominations for the inaugural prizes . 
a prize may not be shared among more than three individuals ,  although the nobel peace prize can be awarded to organizations of more than three people . 
the executors of nobel's will ,  ragnar sohlman and rudolf lilljequist ,  formed the nobel foundation to take care of nobel's fortune and organised the award of prizes . 
according to the official sources ,  alfred nobel bequeathed from the shares 94% of his fortune to the nobel foundation that now forms the economic base of the nobel prize . 
none of the nobel peace prize laureates has ever had a citation on their diplomas . 
the award process is similar for all of the nobel prizes; the main difference is in who can make nominations for each of them . 
the curie family has received the most prizes ,  with four prizes awarded to five individual laureates . 
this includes films like `` the prize '' and `` nobel son '' about fictional nobel laureates as well as fictionalised accounts of stories surrounding real prizes such as `` nobel chor '' ,  a film based on the unsolved theft of rabindranath tagore's prize . 
in 1944, the nobel foundation ,  together with the three members in exile ,  made sure that nominations were submitted for the peace prize and that the prize could be awarded once again . 
this made those critics feel the prizes were too eurocentric . 
the board of the nobel foundation decided that after this addition ,  it would allow no further new prizes . 
nobel's instructions named a norwegian nobel committee to award the peace prize ,  the members of whom were appointed shortly after the will was approved in april 1897.
during the 1930s ,  bohr helped refugees from nazism . 
planetary models of atoms were not new ,  but bohr's treatment was . 
some of bohr's biographers suggested that this disagreement stemmed from kierkegaard's advocacy of christianity ,  while bohr was an atheist . 
an asteroid ,  3948 bohr ,  was named after him ,  as was the bohr lunar crater and bohrium ,  the chemical element with atomic number 107.
bohr did not enjoy teaching medical students . 
bohr received numerous honours and accolades . 
heisenberg worked in copenhagen as a university lecturer and assistant to bohr from 1926 to 1927.
bohr founded the institute of theoretical physics at the university of copenhagen ,  now known as the niels bohr institute ,  which opened in 1920.
in copenhagen in 1927 heisenberg developed his uncertainty principle ,  which bohr embraced . 
bohr was also a philosopher and a promoter of scientific research . 
bohr was warmly received by james chadwick and sir john anderson ,  but for security reasons bohr was kept out of sight . 
einstein and bohr had good-natured arguments over such issues throughout their lives . 
bohr died of heart failure at his home in carlsberg on 18 november 1962.
there has been some dispute over the extent to which kierkegaard influenced bohr's philosophy and science . 
bohr was born in copenhagen ,  denmark ,  on 7 october 1885, the second of three children of christian bohr ,  a professor of physiology at the university of copenhagen ,  and ellen adler bohr ,  who came from a wealthy danish jewish family prominent in banking and parliamentary circles . 
bohr kept the institute running ,  but all the foreign scholars departed . 
the notion of complementarity dominated bohr's thinking in both science and philosophy . 
bohr received an invitation from rutherford to conduct post-doctoral work at victoria university of manchester ,  where bohr met george de hevesy and charles galton darwin  -lrb-  whom bohr referred to as `` the grandson of the real darwin ''  -rrb-  . 
the nfl operates several other drafts in addition to the nfl draft . 
the salary cap for the 2017 nfl season was about $167 million . 
the nfl consists of 32 clubs divided into two conferences of 16 teams in each . 
the nfl operated in a two-conference system from 1933 to 1966, where the champions of each conference would meet in the nfl championship game . 
from 1920 to 1934, the nfl did not have a set number of games for teams to play ,  instead setting a minimum . 
following the addition of the former afl teams into the nfl in 1970, the nfl split into two conferences with three divisions each . 
the nfl recognizes a number of awards for its players and coaches at its annual nfl honors presentation . 
in addition to radio networks run by each nfl team ,  select nfl games are broadcast nationally by westwood one  -lrb-  known as dial global for the 2012 season  -rrb-  . 
the nfl also gives out weekly awards such as the fedex air & ground nfl players of the week and the pepsi max nfl rookie of the week awards . 
the nfl season format consists of a four-week preseason ,  a seventeen-week regular season  -lrb-  each team plays 16 games  -rrb-  ,  and a twelve-team single-elimination playoff culminating in the super bowl ,  the league's championship game . 
the only other postseason event hosted by the nfl is the pro bowl ,  the league's all-star game . 
the team with the most nfl championships is the green bay packers with thirteen  -lrb-  nine nfl titles before the super bowl era ,  and four super bowl championships afterwards  -rrb- ; the team with the most super bowl championships is the pittsburgh steelers with six . 
every nfl team is based in the contiguous united states . 
the nfl's deal with westwood one was extended in 2012 and will run through 2017.
in total ,  each team plays sixteen games and has one bye week ,  where they do not play any games . 
nfl regular season matchups are determined according to a scheduling formula . 
through the 2014 season ,  the nfl had a blackout policy in which games were 'blacked out' on local television in the home team's area if the home stadium was not sold out . 
most nfl games are played on sundays ,  with a monday night game typically held at least once a week and thursday night games occurring on most weeks as well . 
the current nfl champions are the philadelphia eagles ,  who defeated the new england patriots in super bowl lii ,  their first super bowl championship after winning three nfl titles before the super bowl era . 
the nfl preseason begins with the pro football hall of fame game ,  played at fawcett stadium in canton . <ref name= ''nfl/hall of fame game ''></ref> each nfl team is required to schedule four preseason games ,  two of which must be at its home stadium ,  but the teams involved in the hall of fame game ,  as well as any teams playing in an american bowl game ,  play five preseason games . 
during the course of the war ,  the nazis captured 5.75 million soviet prisoners of war  -lrb-  pows  -rrb-  ,  more than were captured by the germans from all the other allied powers combined . 
estimates of the total german war dead range from 5.5 to 6.9 million persons . 
in 1934, hitler told his military leaders that a war in the east should begin in 1942.
mass rapes of german women also took place . 
the german instrument of surrender was signed 8 may ,  marking the end of the nazi regime and the end of world war ii in europe . 
the poles shall be the slaves of the greater german reich . `` 
by targeting oil refineries and factories ,  they crippled the german war effort by late 1944.
six million people were unemployed when the nazis took power in 1933 and by 1937 there were fewer than a million . 
popular support for hitler almost completely disappeared as the war drew to a close . 
by 1944 over a half million women served as auxiliaries in the german armed forces . 
nazi germany is the common english name for germany between 1933 and 1945, when adolf hitler and his nazi party  -lrb-  nsdap  -rrb-  controlled the country through a dictatorship . 
the nazi regime ended after the allies defeated germany in may 1945, ending world war ii in europe . 
in addition ,  the nazis issued a ban on sexual relations between germans and foreign workers . 
in 2006, the german government reaffirmed its position that 2.0–2.5 million deaths occurred . 
poles were viewed by nazis as subhuman non-aryans ,  and during the german occupation of poland 2.7 million ethnic poles were killed . 
some of the conquered territories were incorporated into germany as part of hitler's long-term goal of creating a greater germanic reich . 
the nazi regime dominated neighbours through military threats in the years leading up to war . 
hitler's refusal to allow a retreat led to the deaths of 200,000 german and romanian soldiers; of the 91,000 men who surrendered in the city on 31 january 1943, only 6,000 survivors returned to germany after the war . 
the nazi war economy was a mixed economy that combined a free market with central planning . 
during the course of the war ,  the nazis extracted considerable amounts of plunder from occupied europe . 
the victory in france resulted in an upswing in hitler's popularity and an upsurge in war fever in germany . 
the political programme espoused by hitler and the nsdap brought about a world war ,  leaving behind a devastated and impoverished europe . 
four days later ,  germany declared war on the united states . 
germany's war in the east was based on hitler's long-standing view that jews were the great enemy of the german people and that `` lebensraum '' was needed for germany's expansion . 
hitler knew that reviving the economy was vital . 
during the war ,  poland lost an estimated 39 to 45 percent of its physicians and dentists ,  26 to 57 percent of its lawyers ,  15 to 30 percent of its teachers ,  30 to 40 percent of its scientists and university professors and 18 to 28 percent of its clergy . 
the reaction among germans was one of surprise and trepidation as many were concerned about how much longer the war would continue or suspected that germany could not win a war fought on two fronts . 
the national socialist german workers' party  -lrb-  `` nationalsozialistische deutsche arbeiterpartei '' ,  nsdap; nazi party  -rrb-  was founded in 1920.
at the end of the war ,  europe had more than 40 million refugees ,  its economy had collapsed ,  and 70 percent of its industrial infrastructure was destroyed . 
the treaty also contained secret protocols dividing poland and the baltic states into german and soviet spheres of influence . 
overy argues that the bombing strained the german war economy and forced it to divert up to one-fourth of its manpower and industry into anti-aircraft resources ,  which very likely shortened the war . 
alfred rosenberg ,  head of the nsdap office of foreign affairs and hitler's appointed cultural and educational leader for nazi germany ,  considered catholicism to be among the nazis' chief enemies . 
racism and antisemitism were basic tenets of the nsdap and the nazi regime . 
the official name of the state was `` deutsches reich '' from 1933 to 1943 and `` großdeutsches reich '' from 1943 to 1945, while common english terms are `` nazi germany '' and `` third reich '' . 
while the german invasion of the soviet union in 1941 was initially successful ,  the soviet resurgence and entry of the us into the war meant the wehrmacht lost the initiative on the eastern front in 1943 and by late 1944 had been pushed back to the pre-1939 border . 
jewish civil servants lost their jobs in 1933, except for those who had seen military service in world war i . 
between 1939 and 1941, german forces invaded poland ,  denmark ,  norway ,  france ,  luxembourg ,  the netherlands ,  belgium ,  yugoslavia ,  greece ,  and the soviet union . 
women were a cornerstone of nazi social policy and the nazis opposed the feminist movement ,  claiming that it was the creation of jewish intellectuals ,  instead advocating a patriarchal society in which the german woman would recognise that her `` world is her husband ,  her family ,  her children ,  and her home '' . 
when the nazis seized power in 1933, roughly 67 percent of the population of germany was protestant ,  33 percent was roman catholic ,  while jews made up less than 1 percent . 
the book counted the holy roman empire  -lrb-  962–1806 -rrb- as the first reich and the german empire  -lrb-  1871–1918 -rrb- as the second . 
hundreds of camps of varying size and function were created by the end of the war . 
the crisis led to war preparations by britain ,  czechoslovakia ,  and france  -lrb-  czechoslovakia's ally  -rrb-  . 
the average german worked 43 hours a week in 1933; by 1939 this increased to 47 hours a week . 
the allied powers organised war crimes trials ,  beginning with the nuremberg trials ,  held from november 1945 to october 1946, of 23 top nazi officials . 
about 3.8 to 4 million poles would remain as slaves ,  part of a slave labour force of 14 million the nazis intended to create using citizens of conquered nations . 
in march 1935, hitler announced the creation of an air force ,  and that the `` reichswehr '' would be increased to 550,000 men ,  britain agreed that the germans would be allowed to build a naval fleet with the signing of the anglo-german naval agreement on 18 june 1935.
hitler sent military supplies and assistance to the nationalist forces of general francisco franco in the spanish civil war ,  which began in july 1936.
the estimates at end of the war put the total death toll at around 220,000, which equalled approximately 25 percent of the romani population in europe . 
food supplies were precarious; production dropped in most of europe ,  but not as much as during world war i .  famine was experienced in many occupied countries during the war . 
according to 1939 census ,  54 percent considered themselves protestant ,  40 percent roman catholic ,  3.5 percent `` gottgläubig ''  -lrb-  god-believing; a nazi religious movement  -rrb-  and 1.5 percent nonreligious . 
historian richard j .  evans states that most german citizens disapproved of the genocide . 
pamphlets enjoined german women to avoid sexual relations with foreign workers as a danger to their blood . 
following operation barbarossa ,  the soviet union was also plundered . 
while virtually every family suffered losses during the war has a story to tell ,  germans kept quiet about their experiences and felt a sense of communal guilt ,  even if they were not directly involved in war crimes . 
some debate is still going on if the parent taxon `` nektaspida '' should be included in the trilobita ,  or is better placed as a sister group . 
naraoiids probably were deposit feeders  -lrb-  `` naraoia '' and `` pseudonaraoia ''  -rrb-  ,  predators or scavengers  -lrb-  `` misszhouia ''  -rrb-  ,  living on the sea floor . 
arctic sea ice decline has rendered the waterways more navigable for ice navigation . 
the northwest passage  -lrb-  nwp  -rrb-  is ,  from the european and northern atlantic point of view ,  the sea route to the pacific ocean through the arctic ocean ,  along the northern coast of north america via waterways through the canadian arctic archipelago . 
while searching for him the mcclure arctic expedition discovered the northwest passage in 1850.
the first commercial cargo ship to have sailed through the northwest passage was in august 1969.
england called the hypothetical northern route the `` northwest passage '' . 
those freighters did not sail west through the remainder of the northwest passage ,  they sailed east ,  rounded the tip of greenland ,  and transitted russia's northern sea route . 
nevada  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the western united states . 
nevada is the driest state in the united states . 
nevada is the most mountainous state in the contiguous united states . 
from about the 1940s until 2003, nevada was the fastest-growing state in the us percentage-wise . 
the vegetation of nevada is diverse and differs by state area . 
the name `` nevada '' comes from the spanish `` nevada ''  ,  meaning `` snow-covered '' ,  after the sierra nevada  -lrb-  `` snow-covered mountains ''  -rrb-  . 
nevada has 172 mountain summits with of prominence . 
nevada has a reputation for its libertarian laws . 
nevada's capital ,  however ,  is carson city . 
mining shaped nevada's economy for many years  -lrb-  see `` silver mining in nevada ''  -rrb-  . 
thus ,  in terms of population ,  nevada is one of the most centralized states in the nation . 
eight days before the presidential election of 1864, nevada became the 36th state in the union . 
nevada is one of only two states to significantly expand its borders after admission to the union . 
nevada is officially known as the `` silver state '' because of the importance of silver to its history and economy . 
the center of population of nevada is in southern nye county . 
nevada is largely desert and semi-arid ,  much of it within the great basin . 
as of 1919 there were 17 counties in the state ,  ranging from  . 
native americans served in both the union and confederate military during the american civil war . 
native americans ,  also known as american indians ,  indigenous americans and other terms ,  are the indigenous peoples of the united states ,  except hawaii . 
united states policy toward native americans continued to evolve after the american revolution . 
in 1817, the cherokee became the first native americans recognized as u . s .  citizens . 
the terms used to refer to native americans have at times been controversial . 
as many as 100,000 native americans relocated to the west as a result of this indian removal policy . 
the british made peace with the americans in the treaty of paris  -lrb-  1783 -rrb- ,  through which they ceded vast native american territories to the united states without informing or consulting with the native americans . 
it is not definitively known how or when the native americans first settled the americas and the present-day united states . 
the woodland period of north american pre-columbian cultures refers to the time period from roughly 1000 bce to 1000 ce in the eastern part of north america . 
during the american revolution ,  the newly proclaimed united states competed with the british for the allegiance of native american nations east of the mississippi river . 
in 1924, native americans who were not already u . s .  citizens were granted citizenship by congress . 
as american expansion continued ,  native americans resisted settlers' encroachment in several regions of the new nation  -lrb-  and in unorganized territories  -rrb-  ,  from the northwest to the southeast ,  and then in the west ,  as settlers encountered the native american tribes of the great plains . 
the indian citizenship act of 1924 granted u . s .  citizenship to all native americans born in the united states who had not yet obtained it . 
native american nations on the plains in the west continued armed conflicts with the u . s .  throughout the 19th century ,  through what were called generally indian wars . 
some iroquois who were loyal to the british ,  and helped them fight in the american revolution ,  fled north into canada . 
the reintroduction of the horse to north america had a profound impact on native american culture of the great plains . 
it was the first federal program created to address a health problem of native americans . 
after european explorers reached the west coast in the 1770s ,  smallpox rapidly killed at least 30% of northwest coast native americans . 
king philip's war ,  also called metacom's war or metacom's rebellion ,  was the last major armed conflict between native american inhabitants of present-day southern new england and english colonists and their native american allies from 1675 to 1676.
in 1779 the sullivan expedition was carried out during the american revolutionary war against the british and the four allied nations of the iroquois . 
in japan ,  `` nights into dreams '' was the bestselling saturn game and the 21st-bestselling game of 1996.
in 2014, gamesradar listed `` nights into dreams '' as the best sega saturn game of all time ,  stating that the game `` tapped into a new kind of platform gameplay for its era '' . 
the game features several unlockable bonuses ,  such as being able to play the game's soundtrack ,  observe the status of the a-life system ,  experiment with the game's music mixer ,  time attack one mare ,  or play as sega's mascot sonic the hedgehog in the minigame `` sonic the hedgehog: into dreams . `` 
reviewers also praised the game's soundtrack and audio effects . 
in the us ,  the game was advertised with the slogan `` prepare to fly . `` 
since its release ,  `` nights into dreams '' has appeared on several best game of all time lists . 
the game's difficulty was designed with the intent that young and inexperienced players would be able to complete the game ,  while more experienced players would be compelled by the replay value . 
aside from a handheld electronic game released by tiger electronics and small minigames featured in several sega games ,  no full sequel was released for a sega console . 
an analogue controller ,  the saturn 3d controller ,  was designed alongside the game and included with some retail copies . 
 ''nights into dreams '' was introduced alongside an optional gamepad ,  the saturn 3d controller ,  included with some copies of the game . 
in 2010, iizuka said that he would be interested in making a third `` nights into dreams '' game ,  should the management of sega decide to commission one . 
in the hd version of `` nights '' ,  the `` christmas nights '' content is playable after the game has been cleared once . 
 ,  or christmas nights into dreams .  .  .  ,  is a christmas-themed two-level game of `` nights into dreams '' that was released in december 1996.
the game was developed using silicon graphics workstations for graphical designs and sega saturn emulators running on hewlett-packard machines for programming . 
negligence `` per se '' involves the concept of strict liability . 
in order to prove negligence `` per se '' ,  the plaintiff usually must show that:
in this light ,  `` negligence `` per se '' '' may be criticised as running counter to the general tendency . 
nmt is a diverse disorder . 
these can affect the central nervous system  -lrb-  brain and spinal cord  -rrb-  ,  the peripheral nervous system ,  the autonomic nervous system ,  and the muscular system . 
some neurologists specialize in certain parts of the nervous system or in specific procedures . 
neurologists are also asked to evaluate unresponsive patients on life support to confirm brain death . 
many neurologists also have additional training or interest in one area of neurology ,  such as stroke ,  epilepsy ,  neuromuscular ,  sleep medicine ,  pain management ,  or movement disorders . 
some neurologists enter the field of rehabilitation medicine  -lrb-  known as physiatry in the us  -rrb-  to specialise in neurological rehabilitation ,  which may include stroke medicine ,  as well as brain injuries . 
some neurologists may develop an interest in particular subfields ,  such as stroke ,  dementia ,  movement disorders ,  neurointensive care ,  headaches ,  epilepsy ,  sleep disorders ,  chronic pain management ,  multiple sclerosis ,  or neuromuscular diseases . 
some neurologists receive additional subspecialty training focusing on a particular area of the field . 
in some instances ,  neurologists may order additional diagnostic tests as part of the evaluation . 
also ,  many nonmedical doctors ,  those with doctoral degrees -lrb-  usually phds  -rrb-  in subjects such as biology and chemistry ,  study and research the nervous system . 
niue uses the new zealand dollar . 
niue's economy is small . 
niue has a representative mission in wellington ,  new zealand . 
the people of niue have fought as part of the new zealand military . 
niue is separated from new zealand by the international date line . 
niue is one of the world's largest coral islands . 
traditionally ,  niue's foreign relations and defence have been regarded as the responsibility of new zealand . 
niue is a self-governing state in free association with new zealand; and new zealand conducts most diplomatic relations—though not all—on its behalf . 
the niue constitution act of 1974 vests executive authority in her majesty the queen in right of new zealand and in the governor-general of new zealand . 
polynesians from samoa settled niue around 900 ad . 
in world war i ,  niue sent about 200 soldiers as part of the māori battalion in the new zealand forces . 
niue has no political parties; all assembly members are independents . 
niue  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is an island country in the south pacific ocean ,  northeast of new zealand ,  east of tonga ,  south of samoa ,  and west of the cook islands . 
the first europeans to sight niue sailed under captain james cook in 1774.
