by another human – in early common law ,  suicide was considered murder . 
the eighteenth-century english jurist william blackstone  -lrb-  citing edward coke  -rrb-  ,  in his `` commentaries on the laws of england '' set out the common law definition of murder ,  which by this definition occurs the elements of common law murder are:
of a human – this element presents the issue of when life begins . 
the modern english word `` murder '' descends from the proto-indo-european `` mrtró '' which meant `` to die '' . 
the mariner program was a 10-mission program conducted by the american space agency nasa in conjunction with jet propulsion laboratory  -lrb-  jpl  -rrb-  . 
the spacecraft is now derelict in an exterior heliocentric orbit . 
a consistent problem that plagued the spacecraft during the early portion of its mission was that roll error signal transients would occur frequently and on occasion would cause loss of the canopus star lock . 
the spacecraft performed all programmed activities successfully and returned useful data from launch until 22:05:07 ut on october 1, 1965, when the long distance to earth  -lrb-  309.2 million km  -rrb-  and the imprecise antenna orientation led to a temporary loss of communication with the spacecraft until 1967.
the total data returned by the mission was 5.2 million bits  -lrb-  about 634 kb  -rrb-  . 
the mariner 4 spacecraft consisted of an octagonal magnesium frame ,  127 cm across a diagonal and 45.7 cm high . 
total research ,  development ,  launch ,  and support costs for the mariner series of spacecraft  -lrb-  mariners 1 through 10 -rrb- was approximately $554 million . 
other measurements that could be made included:
the moo programming language is a relatively simple programming language used to support the moo server . 
moo has a very basic set of control structures ,  with for-in-list being the only `` fancy '' feature . 
moo programs are orthogonally persistent through periodic checkpoints . 
the vast majority of the functionality of a running moo is handled 'in-core . '
in jazz ,  there are several types of trios . 
conductors are also used in jazz big bands and in some very large rock or pop ensembles  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  a rock concert that includes a string section ,  a horn section and a choir which are accompanying a rock band's performance  -rrb-  . 
  -rrb-  ,  one or more singers ,  and a rhythm section made up of a bass guitar and drum kit . 
a musical ensemble ,  also known as a music group or musical group ,  is a group of people who perform instrumental or vocal music ,  with the ensemble typically known by a distinct name . 
a string orchestra has only string instruments ,  i . e .  ,  violins ,  violas ,  cellos and double basses . 
jazz quartets typically add a `` horn ''  -lrb-  the generic jazz name for saxophones ,  trombones ,  trumpets ,  or any other wind or brass instrument commonly associated with jazz  -rrb-  to one of the jazz trios described above . 
the string `` quintet '' is a common type of group . 
the smallest ensemble that is commonly used in rock music is the trio format . 
in jazz ensembles ,  the instruments typically include wind instruments  -lrb-  one or more saxophones ,  trumpets ,  etc . 
a pops orchestra is an orchestra that mainly performs light classical music  -lrb-  often in abbreviated ,  simplified arrangements  -rrb-  and orchestral arrangements and medleys of popular jazz ,  music theater ,  or pop music songs . 
a total of 1,200 afghan officers have been trained up to 2013.
the afghan armed forces are the military forces of the islamic republic of afghanistan . 
the total manpower of the afghan armed forces was around 164,000 in may 2011.
the afghan air force was relatively capable before and during the 1980s but by late 2001, the number of operational aircraft available was minimal . 
the afghan armed forces reached a strength of 98,000  -lrb-  90,000 soldiers and 8,000 airmen  -rrb-  by this period . 
as the size of afghan armed force is growing rapidly so is the need for more aircraft and vehicles . 
the united states has also been largely responsible for the growth of the afghan air force ,  as part of the combined air power transition force ,  from four aircraft at the end of 2001 to about 100 as of 2011.
the afghan armed forces were expanded during king zahir shah's reign ,  reaching a strength of 70,000 in 1933.
about 400 of these were used by americans and isaf forces with the remaining 300 or so by afghan national security forces . 
the air force had over 150 combat aircraft with about 7,000 officers who were supported by an estimated 5,000 cuban revolutionary air and air defense force and czechoslovak air force advisers . 
time and observation trials are trials with a time limit . 
similar to car autocross ,  motorcycle gymkhana is a motorcycle time trial sport round cones on a paved area . 
enduro is not exactly racing ,  because the main objective is to traverse a series of checkpoints ,  arriving exactly `` on time '' in accordance with your beginning time and the time it is supposed to take to arrive at each checkpoint . 
one of the most famous time and observation trials is the `` scott '' trial held annually in north yorkshire . 
known in the us as observed trials ,  it is not racing ,  but a sport nevertheless . 
the winner is the rider with the least penalty points . 
marina ivanovna tsvetaeva  -lrb-  ; 31 august 1941 -rrb- was a russian and soviet poet . 
in 1902 tsvetaeva's mother contracted tuberculosis . 
the moscow famine was to exact a toll on tsvetaeva . 
tsvetaeva and pasternak were not to meet for nearly twenty years ,  but maintained friendship until tsvetaeva's return to ussr . 
in june 1904 tsvetaeva was sent to school in lausanne . 
on 31 august 1941, while living in yelabuga  -lrb-  elabuga  -rrb-  ,  tsvetaeva hanged herself . 
meanwhile ,  tsvetaeva's husband was developing soviet sympathies and was homesick for russia . 
the soviet composer dmitri shostakovich set six of tsvetaeva's poems to music . 
in the town of yelabuga ,  the tsvetaeva house is now a museum and a monument stands to her . 
in 1908, aged 16, tsvetaeva studied literary history at the sorbonne . 
in may 1922, tsvetaeva and ariadna left the soviet union and were reunited with efron in berlin ,  whom she had thought had been killed by the bolsheviks . 
in summer 1924, efron and tsvetaeva left prague for the suburbs ,  living for a while in jíloviště ,  before moving on to všenory ,  where tsvetaeva completed `` the poem of the end '' ,  and was to conceive their son ,  georgy ,  whom she was to later nickname 'mur' . 
according to book `` the death of a poet: the last days of marina tsvetaeva '' ,  the local nkvd department tried to force tsvetaeva to start working as their informant ,  which left her no choice other than to commit suicide
matilda became a widow on 26 february 1076.
matilda ,  however ,  didn't surrender . 
by the end of 1071, matilda had left her husband and returned to tuscany . 
by legend matilda of canossa is said to have founded one hundred churches . 
matilda and her young husband separated a few years later  -lrb-  1095 -rrb-; they had no children . 
this was the first serious military defeat of matilda  -lrb-  battle of volta mantovana  -rrb-  . 
in spite of its fearful power ,  the imperial army was defeated by matilda's liegemen . 
sometimes called la gran contessa  -lrb-  `` the great countess ''  -rrb-  or matilda of canossa after her ancestral castle of canossa ,  matilda was one of the most important figures of the italian middle ages . 
later matilda allied with the two sons of henry iv ,  conrad and henry ,  who rebelled against their father . 
godfrey fiercely protested the separation and demanded that matilda come back to him ,  which she repeatedly refused . 
in 1079, matilda gave the pope all her domains ,  in open defiance of henry iv's claims both as the overlord of some of those domains ,  and as her close relative . 
matilda and welf's wedding was part of a network of alliances approved by the new pope ,  urban ii ,  in order to effectively counter henry iv . 
these attempts floundered after matilda  -lrb-  with help of the city of bologna  -rrb-  defeated them at sorbara near modena on 2 july 1084.
around 150 bc ,  mesopotamia was under the control of the parthian empire . 
a further distinction is usually made between northern or upper mesopotamia and southern or lower mesopotamia . 
mesopotamia is the site of the earliest developments of the neolithic revolution from around 10,000 bc . 
the sumerians and akkadians  -lrb-  including assyrians and babylonians  -rrb-  dominated mesopotamia from the beginning of written history  -lrb-  c .  3100 bc  -rrb-  to the fall of babylon in 539 bc ,  when it was conquered by the achaemenid empire . 
early in mesopotamia's history  -lrb-  around the mid-4th millennium bc  -rrb-  cuneiform was invented for the sumerian language . 
the earliest language written in mesopotamia was sumerian ,  an agglutinative language isolate . 
ancient mesopotamian religion was the first recorded . 
in modern academic usage ,  the term `` mesopotamia '' often also has a chronological connotation . 
the oldest babylonian texts on medicine date back to the old babylonian period in the first half of the 2nd millennium bc . 
the art of mesopotamia rivalled that of ancient egypt as the most grand ,  sophisticated and elaborate in western eurasia from the 4th millennium bc until the persian achaemenid empire conquered the region in the 6th century bc . 
the geography of mesopotamia had a profound impact on the political development of the region . 
ancient mesopotamians had ceremonies each month . 
during the 8th and 7th centuries bc ,  babylonian astronomers developed a new approach to astronomy . 
later ,  during the parthian or sasanian periods ,  the baghdad battery ,  which may have been the world's first battery ,  was created in mesopotamia . 
in the `` anabasis '' ,  mesopotamia was used to designate the land east of the euphrates in north syria . 
akkadian gradually replaced sumerian as the spoken language of mesopotamia somewhere around the turn of the 3rd and the 2nd millennium bc  -lrb-  the exact dating being a matter of debate  -rrb-  ,  but sumerian continued to be used as a sacred ,  ceremonial ,  literary ,  and scientific language in mesopotamia until the 1st century ad . 
lower mesopotamia is the area from baghdad to the persian gulf and includes kuwait and parts of western iran . 
hundreds of graves have been excavated in parts of mesopotamia ,  revealing information about mesopotamian burial habits . 
the neighbouring steppes to the west of the euphrates and the western part of the zagros mountains are also often included under the wider term mesopotamia . 
mesopotamia encompasses the land between the euphrates and tigris rivers ,  both of which have their headwaters in the taurus mountains . 
in the long span of this period ,  mesopotamia housed some of the world's most ancient highly developed and socially complex states . 
with irrigation ,  the food supply in mesopotamia was comparable to the canadian prairies . 
city-states of mesopotamia created the first law codes ,  drawn from legal precedence and decisions made by kings . 
it also became one of history's greatest centers of learning . 
the most extensive babylonian medical text ,  however ,  is the `` diagnostic handbook '' written by the `` ummânū '' ,  or chief scholar ,  esagil-kin-apli of borsippa ,  during the reign of the babylonian king adad-apla-iddina  -lrb-  1069-1046 bc  -rrb-  . 
miranda jane richardson  -lrb-  born 3 march 1958 -rrb- is an english actress . 
richardson appeared in the bbc sitcom ,  `` the life and times of vivienne vyle '' . 
richardson was cast as queen ulla in `` maleficent '' ,  where she was to play the titular character's aunt ,  but her role was cut from the film during post-production . 
in 2008, richardson was cast in a leading role in original amc pilot ,  `` rubicon '' . 
richardson began her career in 1979 and made her west end debut in the 1981 play `` moving '' ,  before being nominated for the 1987 olivier award for best actress for `` a lie of the mind '' . 
a seven-time bafta award nominee ,  she won the bafta award for best actress in a supporting role for `` damage '' ,  and golden globe awards for `` enchanted april ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- and the tv film `` fatherland ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- . 
mecklenburg is known for its mostly flat countryside . 
the soviets changed the name from `` mecklenburg-western pomerania '' to `` mecklenburg '' in 1947.
during the reformation the duke in schwerin would convert to protestantism and so would follow the duchy of mecklenburg . 
mecklenburg was assigned to an area headquartered at schwerin ,  which was responsible for military units in schwerin; rostock; parchim; and neustrelitz . 
the middle arms show the shield of mecklenburg as arranged in the 17th century . 
the traditional symbol of mecklenburg ,  the grinning steer's head  -lrb-  low german: `` ossenkopp '' ,  lit . 
mecklenburg is the site of many prehistoric dolmen tombs . 
the dukes of strelitz used according to siebmachers the blue-yellow-red flag with just the  -lrb-  oval  -rrb-  shield of mecklenburg in the yellow band . 
linguistically mecklenburgers retain and use many features of low german vocabulary or phonology . 
the flag of both mecklenburg duchies is traditionally made of the colours blue ,  yellow and red . 
the field was initially an outgrowth of applied mathematics ,  where early challenges were problems relating to the optimization of systems which could be modeled linearly ,  i . e .  ,  determining the optima  -lrb-  maximum value of profit ,  assembly line performance ,  crop yield ,  bandwidth ,  etc . 
today ,  management science encompasses any organizational activity for which the problem can be structured as a functional system so as to obtain a solution set with identifiable characteristics . 
music notation has been adapted to many kinds of music ,  including classical music ,  popular music ,  and traditional music . 
byzantine music has mainly survived as music for court ceremonies ,  including vocal religious music . 
a ♭ in music lowers a pitch down one semitone . 
many short classical music pieces from the classical era and songs from traditional music and popular music are in one time signature for much or all of the piece . 
even in the same time period ,  such as in the 2010s ,  different styles of music and different cultures use different music notation methods; for example ,  for professional classical music performers ,  sheet music using staves and noteheads is the most common way of notating music ,  but for professional country music session musicians ,  the nashville number system is the main method . 
these two notes are known as achala swar  -lrb-  'fixed notes'  -rrb-  . 
music notation or musical notation is any system used to visually represent aurally perceived music played with instruments or sung by the human voice through the use of written ,  printed ,  or otherwise-produced symbols . 
a staff  -lrb-  or stave ,  in british english  -rrb-  of written music generally begins with a clef ,  which indicates the position of one particular note on the staff . 
the problem with this notation was that it only showed melodic contours and consequently the music could not be read by someone who did not know the music already . 
for relative pitch ,  a solmization system was used . 
other systems exist for non-twelve-tone equal temperament and non-western music ,  such as the indian `` swaralipi '' . 
music from the romantic music era and later ,  particularly contemporary classical music and rock music genres such as progressive rock and the hardcore punk subgenre mathcore ,  may use mixed meter; songs or pieces change from one meter to another ,  for example alternating between bars of `` 5/4 '' and `` 7/8 '' . 
modern music notation is used by musicians of many different genres throughout the world . 
in music for ensembles ,  a `` score '' shows music for all players together ,  with the staves for the different instruments and/or voices stacked vertically . 
the earliest known examples of text referring to music in china are inscriptions on musical instruments found in the tomb of marquis yi of zeng  -lrb-  d .  433 b . c .   -rrb-  . 
martin david kahane was born in brooklyn ,  new york ,  in 1932 to an orthodox jewish family . 
the jewish defense league  -lrb-  jdl  -rrb-  was founded by kahane in new york city in 1968.
in 1971, kahane emigrated to israel . 
he supported violence against those he regarded as enemies of the jewish people ,  called for immediate jewish mass migration to israel to avoid a potential `` holocaust '' in the united states ,  supported the restriction of israel's democracy to its jewish citizens ,  hoped that israel would eventually adopt jewish religious law ,  and endorsed the annexation of the west bank and gaza strip . 
kahane proposed enforcing jewish law ,  as codified by maimonides . 
it was based on the code of jewish law compiled by maimonides in the mishneh torah . 
in 1968, kahane was one of the cofounders of the jewish defense league  -lrb-  jdl  -rrb-  in the united states . 
in 1985, the knesset passed an amendment to the basic law of israel ,  barring `` racist '' candidates from election . 
in 2016, kahane's widow claimed that modern jewish extremists in israel are not following the ideology of her late husband ,  rabbi meir kahane . 
his work influenced most modern jewish militant and far-right political groups . 
kahane argued that there was a glory in jewish destiny ,  which came through the observance of the torah . 
in international relations from new york university . 
they must understand that a bomb thrown at a jewish bus is going to mean a bomb thrown at an arab bus . `` 
marietta alboni  -lrb-  6 march 1826 – 23 june 1894 -rrb- was a renowned italian contralto opera singer . 
alboni was born at città di castello ,  in umbria . 
her debut at teatro alla scala took place in december 1842 as `` neocle '' in the italian version of `` le siège de corinthe '' ,  which was followed by roles in operas by marliani ,  donizetti  -lrb-  as `` maffio orsini '' and `` leonora '' in the scala premiere of an italian version of `` la favorite ''  -rrb-  ,  salvi and pacini . 
manatees have four rows of teeth . 
they often graze on water plants in tropical seas . 
west indian manatees prefer warmer temperatures and are known to congregate in shallow waters . 
photos are rare; although very little is known about this species ,  scientists think it is similar to west indian manatee . 
manatees have been known to eat small numbers of fish from nets . 
the coast of the state of georgia is usually the northernmost range of the west indian manatees because their low metabolic rate does not protect them in cold water . 
manatees inhabit the shallow ,  marshy coastal areas and rivers of the caribbean sea and the gulf of mexico  -lrb-  `` t .  manatus '' ,  west indian manatee  -rrb-  ,  the amazon basin  -lrb-  `` t .  inunguis '' ,  amazonian manatee  -rrb-  ,  and west africa  -lrb-  `` t .  senegalensis '' ,  west african manatee  -rrb-  . 
marsupials are any members of the mammalian infraclass marsupialia . 
the remaining 100 are found in the americas — primarily in south america ,  but thirteen in central america ,  and one in north america ,  north of mexico . 
the green belt was first drawn up in 1961.
andy burnham was elected as the first mayor of greater manchester in 2017.
like most of the uk ,  the manchester area was mobilised extensively during the second world war . 
significant quantities of cotton began to be used after about 1600, firstly in linen/cotton fustians ,  but by around 1750 pure cotton fabrics were being produced and cotton had overtaken wool in importance . 
manchester  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city and metropolitan borough in greater manchester ,  england ,  with a population of 545,500 as of 2017.
large quantities of machinery ,  including cotton processing plant ,  were exported around the world . 
the number of cotton mills in manchester itself reached a peak of 108 in 1853.
in 1889, when county councils were created in england ,  the municipal borough became a county borough with even greater autonomy . 
the name manchester ,  though officially applied only to the metropolitan district within greater manchester ,  has been applied to other ,  wider divisions of land ,  particularly across much of the greater manchester county and urban area . 
cotton processing and trading continued to fall in peacetime ,  and the exchange closed in 1968.
the manchester ship canal was built between 1888 and 1894, in some sections by canalisation of the rivers irwell and mersey ,  running from salford to eastham locks on the tidal mersey . 
the attack caused worldwide condemnation and the changing of the uk's threat level to `` critical '' for the first time since 2007.
much of the wider area was laid waste in the subsequent harrying of the north . 
in november 2014, it was announced that greater manchester would receive a new directly elected mayor . 
murray's witch-cult theories provided the blueprint for the contemporary pagan religion of wicca ,  with murray being referred to as the `` grandmother of wicca '' . 
wicca's early system of seasonal festivities were also based on murray's framework . 
murray's interest in popularising egyptology among the wider public continued; in 1949 she published `` ancient egyptian religious poetry '' ,  her second work for john murray's `` the wisdom of the east '' series . 
the author sylvia townsend warner cited murray's work on the witch-cult as an influence on her 1926 novel `` lolly willowes '' ,  and sent a copy of her book to murray in appreciation ,  with the two meeting for lunch shortly after . 
murray's interest in folklore led her to develop an interest in the witch trials of early modern europe . 
although characterising it as being `` written in a clear and engaging manner '' ,  one reviewer noted that sheppard's book focuses on murray the `` scientist '' and as such neglects to discuss murray's involvement in magical practices and her relationship with wicca . 
the historian of archaeology rosalind m .  janssen titled her study of egyptology at ucl `` the first hundred years '' `` as a tribute '' to murray . 
margaret alice murray  -lrb-  13 july 1863 – 13 november 1963 -rrb- was an anglo-indian egyptologist ,  archaeologist ,  anthropologist ,  historian ,  and folklorist . 
murray's work was increasingly criticised following her death in 1963, with the definitive academic rejection of the murrayite witch-cult theory occurring during the 1970s . 
in 1924, ucl promoted murray to the position of assistant professor ,  and in 1927 she was awarded an honorary doctorate for her career in egyptology . 
in 2013, on the 150th anniversary of murray's birth and the 50th of her death ,  the ucl institute of archaeology's ruth whitehouse described murray as `` a remarkable woman '' whose life was `` well worth celebrating ,  both in the archaeological world at large and especially in ucl '' . 
during murray's 1935 trip to palestine ,  she had taken the opportunity to visit petra in neighbouring jordan . 
in `` the witch-cult in western europe '' ,  murray stated that she had restricted her research to great britain ,  although made some recourse to sources from france ,  flanders ,  and new england . 
in 2005, noble suggested that `` murray's name might be all but forgotten today if it were not for gerald gardner '' . 
margaret murray was born on 13 july 1863 in calcutta ,  bengal presidency ,  then a major military city in british india . 
recognising that british egyptomania reflected the existence of a widespread public interest in ancient egypt ,  murray wrote several books on egyptology targeted at a general audience . 
similarly ,  catherine noble stated that `` murray caused considerable damage to the study of witchcraft '' . 
according to murray ,  the records of the coven were kept in a secret book ,  with the coven also disciplining its members ,  to the extent of executing those deemed traitors . 
members joined the cult either as children or adults through what murray called `` admission ceremonies ''; murray asserted that applicants had to agree to join of their own free will ,  and agree to devote themselves to the service of their deity . 
at this point ,  murray had no experience in field archaeology ,  and so during the 1902–03 field season ,  she travelled to egypt to join petrie's excavations at abydos . 
the italian historian carlo ginzburg has been cited as being willing to give `` some slight support '' to murray's theory . 
soon after ,  one of the foremost specialists of the trial records ,  l'estrange ewen ,  brought out a series of books which rejected murray's interpretation . 
he also challenges murray's claim that the majority of britons in the middle ages remained pagan as `` a view grounded on ignorance alone '' . 
aoraki / mount cook is the highest mountain in new zealand . 
it is 7 km from the end of the tasman glacier and 15 km south of aoraki / mount cook's summit . 
aoraki / mount cook is a technically challenging mountain with a high level of glaciation . 
the settlement of mount cook village ,  also referred to as `` aoraki / mount cook '' ,  is a tourist centre and base camp for the mountain . 
following the settlement between ngāi tahu and the crown in 1998, the name of the mountain was officially changed from mount cook to aoraki / mount cook to incorporate its historic māori name ,  aoraki . 
aoraki / mount cook was measured in 2013 to be 3724 m ,  which is 30 m down from its pre-1991 rock-fall measurement . 
captain cook did not sight the mountain during his exploration . 
as a result of the local weather patterns ,  the western slopes of aoraki / mount cook can receive well over of annual precipitation ,  whereas the nearby mount cook village ,  only south of the mountain receives of rain or snowfall . 
the mountain is in the aoraki/mount cook national park ,  in the canterbury region . 
aoraki / mount cook became known to māori after their arrival in new zealand some time around the 14th century ce . 
the height of aoraki / mount cook was established in 1881 by g .  j .  roberts  -lrb-  from the west side  -rrb-  and in 1889 by t .  n .  brodrick  -lrb-  from the canterbury side  -rrb-  . 
gwenview has native mng support . 
mng is closely related to the png image format . 
web servers generally don't come pre﹘configured to support mng files . 
version 1.0 of the mng specification was released on 31 january 2001.
the mng developers had hoped that mng would replace gif for animated images on the world wide web ,  just as png had done for still images . 
john smith hurt  -lrb-  possibly march 3, 1892 – november 2, 1966 -rrb- ,  better known as mississippi john hurt ,  was an american country blues singer and guitarist . 
brno and olomouc served as moravia's capitals until 1641.
moravia occupies most of the eastern part of the czech republic . 
moravia  -lrb-   ; ; ; ;   -rrb-  is a historical country in the czech republic  -lrb-  forming its eastern part  -rrb-  and one of the historical czech lands ,  together with bohemia and czech silesia . 
moravia occupies an exceptional position in central europe . 
an area in south moravia ,  around hodonín and břeclav ,  is part of the viennese basin . 
moravia has an area of over 22,000 km and about 3 million inhabitants ,  which is roughly 2/7 or 30% of the whole czech republic . 
the beginnings of the electrical industry in moravia date back to 1918.
moravia borders bohemia in the west ,  lower austria in the south -lrb-  west  -rrb-  ,  slovakia in the southeast ,  poland very shortly in the north ,  and czech silesia in the northeast . 
after the battle of legnica ,  the mongols carried their raids into moravia . 
following the break-up of the austro-hungarian empire in 1918, moravia became part of czechoslovakia . 
during the ww ii moravia lost 46,306 jews according to religion . 
after the death of king louis ii of hungary and bohemia in 1526, ferdinand i of austria was elected king of bohemia and thus ruler of the crown of bohemia  -lrb-  including moravia  -rrb-  . 
rothbard was a strong critic of egalitarianism . 
rothbard continued in this role for twenty years until 1986.
rothbard was critical of monetarist economist milton friedman . 
rothbard's parents were david and rae rothbard ,  jewish immigrants to the united states from poland and russia ,  respectively . 
noting that rothbard has `` been nasty to me and my work '' ,  friedman responded to rothbard's criticism by calling him a `` cult builder and a dogmatist '' . 
rothbard died of a heart attack on january 7, 1995 at the age of 68.
economist jeffrey herbener ,  who calls rothbard his friend and `` intellectual mentor '' ,  wrote that rothbard received `` only ostracism '' from mainstream academia . 
like randolph bourne ,  rothbard believed that `` war is the health of the state '' . 
in an article for rothbard's 50th birthday ,  rothbard's friend and buffalo state college historian ralph raico stated that rothbard `` is the main reason that revisionism has become a crucial part of the whole libertarian position '' . 
upon its publication ,  mises praised rothbard's work effusively . 
after rothbard's death in 1995, lew rockwell ,  president of the mises institute ,  told `` the new york times '' that rothbard was `` the founder of right-wing anarchism '' . 
though he self-identified as an austrian economist ,  rothbard's methodology was at odds with many other austrians . 
in 1988, boettke noted that rothbard `` vehemently attacked all of the books of the younger austrians '' . 
in his `` power and market ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- ,  rothbard describes how a stateless economy might function . 
rothbard held strong opinions about many leaders of the civil rights movement . 
rothbard authored a series of scathing polemics against modern mainstream economics . 
tony endres called rothbard's treatment of adam smith a `` travesty '' . 
like buchanan ,  rothbard opposed the north american free trade agreement  -lrb-  nafta  -rrb-  . 
according to economist peter boettke ,  rothbard is better described as a property rights economist than as an austrian economist . 
according to his protégé hans-hermann hoppe ,  `` there would be no anarcho-capitalist movement to speak of without rothbard '' . 
according to lew rockwell ,  rothbard is the `` conscience '' of all the various strains of libertarian anarchism ,  whose contemporary advocates are former `` colleagues '' of rothbard personally inspired by his example . 
the short film won the academy award for animated short film . 
on march 20, 2015, brooks was awarded a british film institute fellowship from the british film institute . 
a musical adaptation of his first film ,  `` the producers '' ,  ran on broadway ,  from 2001 to 2007.
three of his films ranked in the american film institute's list of the top 100 comedy films of the past 100 years  -lrb-  1900–2000 -rrb- ,  all of which ranked in the top 15 of the list: `` blazing saddles '' at number 6, `` the producers '' at number 11, and `` young frankenstein '' at number 13.
the american film institute  -lrb-  afi  -rrb-  list three of brooks' films on their afi's 100 years .  .  . 100 laughs list: `` blazing saddles ''  -lrb-  #6 -rrb- ,  `` the producers ''  -lrb-  #11 -rrb- ,  and `` young frankenstein ''  -lrb-  #13 -rrb- . 
in middle age ,  brooks became one of the most successful film directors of the 1970s ,  with many of his films being among the top 10 moneymakers of the year they were released . 
one of his most recent successes has been the musical adaptation of his film `` the producers '' to the broadway stage . 
brooks' film resurrected several pieces of dialogue from his tv series ,  as well as from earlier brooks films . 
the film received poor reviews and was not financially successful . 
 ''young frankenstein '' was the third-highest-grossing film domestically of 1974, just behind `` blazing saddles '' . 
with the moderate financial success of the film `` the producers '' ,  glazier financed brooks' next film in 1970, `` the twelve chairs '' . 
although not as successful as his previous two films ,  `` silent movie '' was a hit and grossed $36 million . 
when gene wilder replaced gig young as the waco kid ,  he did so only if brooks agreed that his next film would be an idea that wilder had been working on: a spoof of the old universal studios `` frankenstein '' films . 
this film is a satire on the western film genre and references older films such as `` destry rides again '' ,  `` high noon '' ,  `` once upon a time in the west '' ,  and `` the treasure of the sierra madre '' ,  as well as a surreal scene towards the end of the film referencing the extravagant musicals of busby berkeley . 
composer john morris again provided the music score and universal monsters film special effects veteran kenneth strickfaden worked on the film . 
in 1977, brooks made a parody of the films of alfred hitchcock in `` high anxiety '' . 
in 1976, brooks followed up his two hit films with an audacious idea: the first feature-length silent comedy in four decades . 
in 2014, a protein was described called protein m from `` m .  genitalium '' . 
the discovery of protein m ,  a new protein from `` m .  genitalium '' ,  was announced in february 2014.
mycoplasma genitalium  -lrb-  mg ,  commonly known as mgen  -rrb-  ,  is a sexually transmitted ,  small and pathogenic bacterium that lives on the skin cells of the urinary and genital tracts in humans . 
the genome of `` m .  genitalium '' consists of 525 genes in one circular dna of 580,070 base pairs . 
the synthetic genome of mgen named `` mycoplasma genitalium '' jcvi-1.0  -lrb-  after the research centre ,  j .  craig venter institute ,  where it was synthesised  -rrb-  was produced in 2008, becoming the first organism with a synthetic genome . 
treatment of `` mycoplasma genitalium '' infections is becoming increasingly difficult due to rapidly growing antimicrobial resistance . 
ağca was released from jail on january 18, 2010.
ağca was not released and the hijackers surrendered . 
ağca was released on parole on 12 january 2006.
when the pope died on 2 april 2005, ağca's brother adnan gave an interview in which he said that ağca and his entire family were grieving ,  and that the pope had been a great friend to them . 
ağca was born in the hekimhan district ,  malatya province in turkey . 
the pope survived the assassination attempt . 
the mummies are dated between the 14th and 19th centuries . 
he also founded and directs the institute for plastination in heidelberg . 
the egtved girl ,  dated to 1370 bc ,  was also found inside a sealed coffin within a tumulus ,  in 1921.
aspergillus niger has been found in the mummies of ancient egyptian tombs and can be inhaled when they are disturbed . 
4 in south america . 
all three mummies were dated to 1351–1345 bc . 
in 1994, 265 mummified bodies were found in the crypt of a dominican church in vác ,  hungary from the 1729–1838 period . 
lucas also made significant contributions to the analysis of tutankhamun in 1922.
the natural preservation of the dead had a profound effect on ancient egyptian religion . 
the first mummy to be discovered in south africa was found in the baviaanskloof wilderness area by dr .  johan binneman in 1999.
mummification is one of the defining customs in ancient egyptian society for people today . 
the earliest ancient egyptian mummies were created naturally due to the environment in which they were buried . 
further research revealed that the child had been around 30 months old at the time of death ,  though gender could not be determined due to poor preservation of the sex organs . 
many thousands of mummified cats were also sent from egypt to england to be processed for use in fertilizer . 
the majority of the vamberk mummies date from the 18th century . 
several naturally-preserved ,  unintentional mummies dating from the incan period  -lrb-  1438–1532 ad  -rrb-  have been found in the colder regions of argentina ,  chile ,  and peru . 
the tomb of tjay designated tt23, is one of only two known which show the wrapping of a mummy  -lrb-  riggs 2014 -rrb- . 
the chinchorro mummies are the oldest intentionally prepared mummified bodies ever found . 
apart from several bog bodies ,  denmark has also yielded several other mummies ,  such as the three borum eshøj mummies ,  the skrydstrup woman and the egtved girl ,  who were all found inside burial mounds ,  or tumuli . 
the mummies of the torres strait have a considerably higher level of preservation technique as well as creativity compared to those found on australia . 
mexican mummies are also on display in the small town of encarnación de díaz ,  jalisco . 
the aboriginal mummification traditions found in australia are thought be related to those found in the torres strait islands ,  the inhabitants of which achieved a high level of sophisticated mummification techniques  -lrb-  see:torres strait  -rrb-  . 
kwäday dän ts'ìnchi  -lrb-  `` long ago person found '' in the southern tutchone language of the champagne and aishihik first nations  -rrb-  ,  was found in august 1999 by three first nations hunters at the edge of a glacier in tatshenshini-alsek provincial park ,  british columbia ,  canada . 
in 1875, the borum eshøj grave mound was uncovered ,  which had been built around three coffins ,  which belonged to a middle aged man and woman as well as a man in his early twenties . 
their bodies were naturally mummified by the sub-zero temperatures and dry winds in the cave in which they were found . 
his skin was also marked with tattoos of two monsters resembling griffins ,  which decorated his chest ,  and three partially obliterated images which seem to represent two deer and a mountain goat on his left arm . 
the unique air quality and topsoil within the crypt naturally preserved the bodies over time . 
there is also evidence that some maori tribes may have practiced full-body mummification ,  though the practice is not thought to have been widespread . 
found with the girl ,  at her feet ,  were the cremated remains of a child and ,  by her head ,  a box containing some bronze pins ,  a hairnet ,  and an awl . 
many of the egyptian animal mummies are sacred ibis ,  and radiocarbon dating suggests the egyptian ibis mummies that have been analyzed were from time frame that falls between approximately 450 and 250 bc . 
also applied to the frozen carcase of an animal imbedded in prehistoric snow '' . 
general modern consensus tends to agree that there could be a mixture of both types of mummification ,  similar to that of the ancient egyptian mummies . 
inca emperors . 
to this day ,  only the head of tollund man remains ,  due to the decomposition of the rest of his body ,  which was not preserved along with the head . 
melilla ,  like ceuta ,  was a free port before spain joined the european union . 
macaroni  -lrb-   ,  italian: maccheroni  -rrb-  is dry pasta shaped like narrow tubes . 
as is the case with dishes made with other types of pasta ,  macaroni and cheese is a popular dish in north america ,  and is often made with elbow macaroni . 
in north america ,  the word `` macaroni '' is often used synonymously with elbow-shaped macaroni ,  as it is the variety most often used in macaroni and cheese recipes . 
refer to elbow-shaped pasta similar to macaroni in north american culture . 
this mature mrna is then translated into a polymer of amino acids: a protein ,  as summarized in the central dogma of molecular biology . 
mount saint vincent university is the only university in canada to offer a master of public relations program  -lrb-  mpr  -rrb-  . 
mount saint vincent university ,  often referred to as the mount ,  is a primarily undergraduate public university located in halifax ,  nova scotia ,  canada ,  and was established in 1873.
the mount houses 16 research centres and institutes . 
in addition to these programs ,  mount saint vincent university also has numerous programs for youth ,  such as summer camps ,  and chess tournaments . 
the mount saint vincent university art gallery is located on the first floor of seton academic centre . 
the mount offer 10 full undergraduate degree programs and four graduate degree programs online . 
during the 1995 g7 summit ,  mount saint vincent university awarded an honorary doctor of laws degree to hillary clinton . 
a new charter was granted in 1966 and the college became mount saint vincent university ,  bringing forth the establishment of a board of governors and senate . 
phonemic differentiation may vary between different dialects of a language so a particular minimal pair in one accent may be a pair of homophones in another . 
all of the possible minimal pairs for any language may be set out in the same way . 
in phonology ,  minimal pairs are pairs of words or phrases in a particular language ,  spoken or signed ,  that differ in only one phonological element ,  such as a phoneme ,  toneme or chroneme ,  and have distinct meanings . 
the principle of a simple binary opposition between the two members of a minimal pair may be extended to cover a minimal set in which a number of words differ from one another in terms of one phone in a particular position in the word . 
thus ,  italian has the following minimal pair that is based on long and short :
in addition to the minimal pairs of vowels and consonants provided above ,  others may be found:
in modern italian there are three words corresponding to the english word `` soup '': `` zuppa '' ,  which is used in the sense of tomato soup ,  or fish soup; `` minestra '' ,  which is used in the sense of a more substantial soup such as a vegetable soup ,  and also for `` dry '' soups ,  namely pasta dishes; and `` minestrone '' ,  which means a very substantial or large soup or stew ,  though the meaning has now come to be associated with this particular dish . 
minestrone  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a thick soup of italian origin made with vegetables ,  often with the addition of pasta or rice ,  sometimes both . 
the word `` minestrone '' ,  meaning a thick vegetable soup ,  is attested in english from 1871.
spelt flour was also removed from soups ,  as bread had been introduced into the roman diet by the greeks ,  and `` pulte '' became a meal largely for the poor . 
like many italian dishes ,  minestrone was probably originally not a dish made for its own sake . 
at 1.2 g/cm ,  miranda is the least dense of uranus's round satellites . 
miranda ,  also designated uranus v ,  is the smallest and innermost of uranus's five round satellites . 
miranda's orbit is the most inclined of any of uranus's large satellites ,  at 4.232° ,  it is 10-20 times that of titania ,  ariel and umbriel and 73 times that of oberon . 
due to uranus's near-sideways orientation ,  only miranda's southern hemisphere was visible to `` voyager 2 '' when it arrived . 
the following works of fiction deal with the planet itself ,  with any assumed martian civilization as part of its planetary landscape . 
exploration of the planet has continued in the 21st century on to the present day . 
the mcintosh  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  mcintosh red ,  or colloquially the mac ,  is an apple cultivar ,  the national apple of canada . 
the mcintosh has been designated the national apple of canada . 
john mcintosh discovered the original mcintosh sapling on his dundela farm in upper canada in 1811.
the mcintosh or mcintosh red  -lrb-  nicknamed the `` mac ''  -rrb-  ,  is the most popular apple cultivar in eastern canada and the northeastern united states . 
the mcintosh made up 40% of the canadian apple market by the 1960s; and at least thirty varieties of mcintosh hybrid were known by 1970.
mcintosh was selling seedlings from the tree by 1820, but they did not produce fruit of the quality of the original . 
john mcintosh's son allan  -lrb-  1815–1899 -rrb- learned grafting about 1835; with this cloning the mcintoshes could maintain the distinctive properties of the fruit of the original tree . 
the mcintosh is one of the most common cultivars used in cloning; a 1996 study found that the mcintosh was a parent in 101 of 439 cultivars selected ,  more than any other founding clone . 
the `` makhaira '' is also similar ,  but was intended primarily to be a weapon rather than a tool . 
machetes were also a distinctive tool and weapon of the haitian `` tonton macoute '' . 
the nepalese `` kukri '' is a curved blade that is often used for similar tasks . 
the `` seax '' is a germanic weapon that is also similar in function ,  although different in shape . 
in the philippines ,  the `` bolo '' is a very similar tool ,  but with the blade swelling just before the tip to make the knife even more efficient for chopping . 
machetes are often considered tools and used by adults . 
the `` panga '' or `` tapanga '' is a variant used in east and southern africa . 
the `` kukri '' is a nepalese curved blade used for many purposes similar to the machete . 
a machete  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a broad blade used either as an implement like an axe ,  or in combat like a short sword . 
they `` mushroom '' to full size . 
most mushrooms sold in supermarkets have been commercially grown on mushroom farms . 
approximately 14,000 species of mushrooms are described . 
cultural or social phobias of mushrooms and fungi may be related . 
mushrooms lacking partial veils do not form an annulus . 
psilocybin mushrooms possess psychedelic properties . 
within the main body of mushrooms ,  in the agaricales ,  are common fungi like the common fairy-ring mushroom ,  shiitake ,  enoki ,  oyster mushrooms ,  fly agarics and other amanitas ,  magic mushrooms like species of `` psilocybe '' ,  paddy straw mushrooms ,  shaggy manes ,  etc . 
other mushrooms are not gilled ,  so the term `` mushroom '' is loosely used ,  and giving a full account of their classifications is difficult . 
china is a major edible mushroom producer . 
this is how the mushroom got another of its names ,  `` krötenstuhl ''  -lrb-  a less-used german name for the mushroom  -rrb-  ,  literally translating to `` toad-stool '' . 
the most important microscopic feature for identification of mushrooms is the spores . 
the standard for the name `` mushroom '' is the cultivated white button mushroom ,  `` agaricus bisporus ''; hence the word `` mushroom '' is most often applied to those fungi  -lrb-  basidiomycota ,  agaricomycetes  -rrb-  that have a stem  -lrb-  stipe  -rrb-  ,  a cap  -lrb-  pileus  -rrb-  ,  and gills  -lrb-  lamellae ,  sing . 
the cultivated mushroom as well as the common field mushroom initially form a minute fruiting body ,  referred to as the pin stage because of their small size . 
mushrooms can be used for dyeing wool and other natural fibers . 
delineation between edible and poisonous fungi is not clear-cut ,  so a `` mushroom '' may be edible ,  poisonous ,  or unpalatable . 
some fungi ,  types of polypores loosely called mushrooms ,  have been used as fire starters  -lrb-  known as tinder fungi  -rrb-  . 
in 2012, nasa powered down its last mainframe ,  an ibm system z9.
ibm ,  with z systems ,  continues to be a major manufacturer in the mainframe market . 
modern mainframes can run multiple different instances of operating systems at the same time . 
software upgrades usually require setting up the operating system or portions thereof ,  and are non-disruptive only when using virtualizing facilities such as ibm z/os and parallel sysplex ,  or unisys xpcl ,  which support workload sharing so that one system can take over another's application while it is being refreshed . 
in addition to ibm ,  significant players in this market include bmc ,  compuware ,  and ca technologies . 
during the 1980s ,  minicomputer-based systems grew more sophisticated and were able to displace the lower-end of the mainframes . 
mainframes can add or hot swap system capacity without disrupting system function ,  with specificity and granularity to a level of sophistication not usually available with most server solutions . 
nec with acos and hitachi with ap10000-vos3 still maintain mainframe hardware businesses in the japanese market . 
excel 2016 has 484 functions . 
excel 2.0 is the first version of excel for the intel platform . 
online excel viewers do not require users to have microsoft excel installed . 
excel forms part of microsoft office . 
excel was not designed to be used as a database . 
in the figure the fraction 1/9000 is displayed in excel . 
microsoft has announced some of these issues are addressed in excel 2010.
openoffice . org has created documentation of the excel format . 
excel has issues with modulo operations . 
several are provided with excel ,  including:
microsoft excel viewer is a freeware program for viewing and printing spreadsheet documents created by excel . 
programmers have produced apis to open excel spreadsheets in a variety of applications and environments other than microsoft excel . 
all versions of excel ,  including excel 2010 are capable of running an xlm macro ,  though microsoft discourages their use . 
js-xlsx and js-xls can open excel spreadsheets from javascript . 
macro recorded code may not be compatible with excel versions . 
this is because excel calculates with about half a digit more than it displays . 
microsoft excel is a spreadsheet developed by microsoft for windows ,  macos ,  android and ios . 
microsoft excel up until 2007 version used a proprietary binary file format called excel binary file format  -lrb-   . xls  -rrb-  as its primary format . 
excel works with a modified 1985 version of the ieee 754 specification . 
in 1977, a new band ,  the farriss brothers ,  was formed with tim farriss on lead guitar ,  his younger brother andrew as keyboardist ,  and youngest brother jon on drums . 
tiger was adopted by bob geldof ,  the father of her half-sisters . 
according to hutchence ,  most of the songs on the band's second album ,  `` underneath the colours '' ,  were written within a fairly short space of time: `` most bands shudder at the prospect of having 20 years to write their first album and four days to write their second . 
yates and geldof divorced in may 1996.
hutchence later returned to sydney with his mother . 
the band made their debut on 16 august 1977 at whale beach ,  40 km  -lrb-  25 mi  -rrb-  north of sydney . 
hutchence's solo album ,  `` michael hutchence '' ,  was released in october 1999.
he commenced work on a self-titled solo album in the mid-1990s . 
on the morning of 22 november 1997, hutchence was found dead in his hotel room in sydney . 
in 1987, hutchence provided vocals for richard clapton's album `` glory road '' ,  which was produced by jon farriss . 
after hutchence and andrew finished their secondary schooling ,  the rest of the band followed . 
inxs released `` kick '' in october 1987, and the album provided the band with worldwide popularity . 
his death was reported by the new south wales coroner to be the result of suicide . 
he co-wrote almost all of inxs's songs with andrew farriss ,  who has attributed his own success as a songwriter to hutchence's `` genius '' . 
hutchence provided four songs on the film's soundtrack . 
1 in the uk . 
in the mid 1970s ,  the 8-bit microprocessor manufacturers raced to introduce the 16-bit generation . 
the motorola 68000  -lrb-  `` 'sixty-eight-thousand' ''; also called the m68k or motorola 68k ,  ``  ''sixty-eight-kay '' ''  -rrb-  is a 16/32-bit cisc microprocessor ,  which implements a 32-bit instruction set ,  with 32-bit registers and 32-bit internal data bus ,  but with a 16-bit data alu and two 16-bit arithmetic alus and a 16-bit external data bus ,  designed and marketed by motorola semiconductor products sector . 
motorola replaced the mc68008 with the mc68hc001 in 1990.
thus ,  like the 68008, it could be used in systems with cheaper 8-bit memories . 
in 1989, motorola introduced the mc68302 communications processor . 
a further extended version ,  which exposed 31 bits of the address bus ,  was also produced in small quantities as the 68012.
to support lower-cost systems and control applications with smaller memory sizes ,  motorola introduced the 8-bit compatible mc68008, also in 1982.
after being succeeded by `` true '' 32-bit microprocessors ,  the 68000 was used as the core of many microcontrollers . 
the 68000 has a 24-bit external address bus and two byte-select signals `` replaced '' a0.
motorola's intent with the internal 32-bit address space was forward compatibility ,  making it feasible to write 68000 software that would take full advantage of later 32-bit implementations of the 68000 instruction set . 
the term `` minicomputer '' is little used today; the contemporary term for this class of system is `` midrange computer '' ,  such as the higher-end sparc ,  power architecture and itanium-based systems from oracle ,  ibm and hewlett-packard . 
dec was sold to compaq in 1998, while data general was acquired by emc corporation . 
many of the first generation of pc programmers were educated on minicomputer systems . 
at the time ,  microcomputers were 8-bit single-user ,  relatively simple machines running simple program-launcher operating systems like cp/m or ms-dos ,  while minis were much more powerful systems that ran full multi-user ,  multitasking operating systems ,  such as vms and unix ,  and although the classical mini was a 16-bit computer ,  the emerging higher performance superminis were 32-bit . 
in the 1970s ,  they were the hardware that was used to launch the computer-aided design  -lrb-  cad  -rrb-  industry and other similar industries where a smaller dedicated system was needed . 
several pioneering computer companies first built minicomputers ,  such as dec ,  data general ,  and hewlett-packard  -lrb-  hp  -rrb-   -lrb-  who now refers to its hp3000 minicomputers as `` servers '' rather than `` minicomputers ''  -rrb-  . 
the nsk operating system ,  now termed nonstop os ,  continues as the base software environment for the nonstop servers ,  and has been extended to include support for java and integration with popular development tools like visual studio and eclipse . 
they were used in that role in the soviet invasion of afghanistan in 1979.
even more important for future developments was the soviet bmp-1, which was the first true ifv . 
the red army began the war while still in the process of reorganizing its armored and mechanized formations ,  most of which were destroyed during the first months of the german invasion of the soviet union . 
some of the first mechanized infantry were assault teams mounted on a7v tanks . 
many ifvs were also equipped with firing ports from which their infantry could fire their weapons from inside ,  but they were generally not successful and have been dropped from modern ifvs . 
the support weapons for mechanized infantry are also provided with motorized transport ,  or they are built directly into combat vehicles to keep pace with the mechanized infantry in combat . 
towards the end of world war i ,  all the armies involved were faced with the problem of maintaining the momentum of an attack . 
a line of development in the soviet armed forces from the 1980s was the provision of specialized ifvs for use by the russian airborne troops . 
a7v tank would often carry a second officer to lead the assault team . 
mechanized infantry are infantry equipped with armored personnel carriers  -lrb-  apcs  -rrb-  or infantry fighting vehicles  -lrb-  ifvs  -rrb-  for transport and combat  -lrb-  see also mechanized force  -rrb-  . 
in the vietnam war ,  the m113 was often fitted with extra armament and used as an `` ad hoc '' infantry fighting vehicle . 
in the postwar era ,  the early years of the cold war ,  the soviet red army and nato further developed the equipment and doctrine for mechanized infantry . 
the lesson was re-learned ,  first by the pakistani army in the 1965 war with india ,  where the nation fielded two different types of armored divisions: one which was almost exclusively armor  -lrb-  the 1st  -rrb-  ,  while another was more balanced  -lrb-  the 6th  -rrb-  . 
malachi ,  malachias ,  malache or mal'achi  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was the writer of the book of malachi ,  the last book of the neviim  -lrb-  prophets  -rrb-  section in the hebrew bible . 
in the septuagent or greek old testament ,  the prophetic books are placed last ,  making book of malachi the last protocanonical book before the deuterocanonical books or the new testament . 
because malachi's name does not occur elsewhere in the bible ,  some scholars doubt whether `` malachi '' is intended to be the personal name of the prophet . 
fowler has written eight books on the topic of software development  -lrb-  see `` publications ''  -rrb-  . 
fowler was born and grew up in walsall ,  england ,  where he went to queen mary's grammar school for his secondary education . 
microsoft word  -lrb-  or simply word  -rrb-  is a word processor developed by microsoft . 
word 2004 was released in may 2004.
autosummarize was removed from microsoft word for mac os x 2011, although it was present in word for mac 2008.
word files are commonly used as the format for sending text documents via e-mail because almost every user with a computer can read a word document by using the word application ,  a word viewer or a word processor that imports the word format  -lrb-  see microsoft word viewer  -rrb-  . 
the first version of word for windows was released in 1989.
that year microsoft demonstrated word running on windows . 
microsoft released patches for word x and word 2004 that effectively eliminated the macro problem on the mac by 2006.
microsoft word viewer and office online are freeware editions of word with limited features . 
microsoft announced multi-tool word for xenix and ms-dos in 1983.
starting with word 95, releases of word were named after the year of its release ,  instead of its version number . 
microsoft word supports bullet lists and numbered lists . 
users can also create tables in word . 
opening a word document file in a version of word other than the one with which it was created can cause incorrect display of the document . 
no version of microsoft word has support for the common svg vector image format . 
in february 2007, this project released a first version of the odf plugin for microsoft word . 
the second release of word for mac os ,  shipped in 1987, was named word 3.0 to synchronize its version number with word for dos; this was microsoft's first attempt to synchronize version numbers across platforms . 
instead ,  the next versions of word for windows and mac os ,  dubbed version 6.0, both started from the code base of word for windows 2.0.
microsoft office is a family of client software ,  server software ,  and services developed by microsoft . 
microsoft also produces and runs office online ,  a web-based version of core office apps ,  which is included as part of a microsoft account . 
multimate was a word processor developed by multimate international for ibm pc ms-dos computers in the early 1980s . 
the review concluded `` multimate stands head and shoulders above many if not most ibm pc word processors  .  .  .  an impressive entrant '' . 
other versions were written to match pcs by radio shack ,  texas instruments ,  toshiba ,  the early grid laptop and the ibm pc junior . 
early versions of the program came with both color-coded key stickers and a plastic full-keyboard template to make wang operators more comfortable with the smaller ibm pc keyboard . 
with 1,000 computers ,  connecticut mutual life insurance was one of the first large-volume customers for the ibm pc . 
one of the first `` clone '' versions of multimate was bundled with an early portable pc made by corona . 
najibullah continued karmal's economic policies . 
najibullah was born in february 1947 in the city of kabul ,  in the kingdom of afghanistan . 
he returned to kabul after the soviet intervention in 1979.
in april 1978 the pdpa took power in afghanistan ,  with najibullah a member of the ruling revolutionary council . 
while he may have been the `` de jure '' leader of afghanistan ,  soviet advisers still did the majority of work when najibullah took power . 
during najibullah's tenure as khad head ,  it became one of the most brutally efficient governmental organs . 
najibullah ahmadzai  -lrb-  pashto/  -rrb- ; february 1947 – 27 september 1996 -rrb- ,  commonly known as najibullah or dr .  najib ,  was the president of afghanistan from 1987 until 1992, when the mujahideen took over kabul . 
in 1965 najibullah joined the parcham faction of the communist people's democratic party of afghanistan  -lrb-  pdpa  -rrb-  . 
najibullah accused karmal of trying to wreck his policy of national reconciliation ,  which were a series of efforts by najibullah to end the conflict . 
he reported directly to the soviet kgb ,  and a big part of khad's budget came from the soviet union itself . 
not long before kabul's fall ,  najibullah appealed to the un for amnesty ,  which he was granted . 
in january 1992, the russian government ended its aid to the najibullah government . 
from 1989 to 1990, the najibullah government was partially successful in building up the afghan defence forces . 
multiplan was an early spreadsheet program developed by microsoft . 
in france ,  multiplan was also released for the thomson computers in 1986.
microsoft carried multiplan's r1c1 legacy forward into microsoft excel ,  which offers both addressing modes; although a1 is ms excel's default addressing mode . 
it was replaced by microsoft excel ,  which followed some years later on both the apple macintosh  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- and microsoft windows  -lrb-  1987 -rrb- . 
the 6502 is a little-endian 8-bit processor with a 16-bit address bus . 
the 6502 was designed by many of the same engineers that had designed the motorola 6800 microprocessor family . 
the 6502 would cost only $25.
motorola offered a design kit containing the 6800 with six support chips for $300.
the `` break '' flag of the processor is very different from the other flag bits . 
the size goal for the 6502 chip was 153 x 168 mils  -lrb-  3.9 x 4.3 mm  -rrb-  or an area of 16.6 mm . 
immediate mode uses an 8-bit literal operand . 
the 6502's registers include one 8-bit accumulator register  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  ,  two 8-bit index registers  -lrb-  x and y  -rrb-  ,  7 processor status flag bits  -lrb-  p  -rrb-  ,  an 8-bit stack pointer  -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  and a 16-bit program counter  -lrb-  pc  -rrb-  . 
like its precursor ,  the motorola 6800, the 6502 has very few registers . 
like most eight-bit microprocessors ,  the chip does some limited overlapping of fetching and execution . 
the atari lynx used a 4mhz version of the chip ,  the 65sc02.
the 65c816, the 16-bit cmos version of the 6502, also supports 24-bit addressing ,  which results in instructions being assembled with three-byte operands ,  also arranged in little-endian format . 
the `` so '' input pin ,  when asserted ,  will set the processor's overflow status bit  -lrb-  deasserting it does not clear the overflow bit ,  however  -rrb-  . 
one of the first `` public '' uses for the design was the apple i microcomputer ,  introduced in 1976.
in this case ,  no address lines are among the 8 removed pins . 
the 6501 and 6502 have 40-pin dip packages; the 6503, 6504, 6505, and 6507 are 28-pin dip versions ,  for reduced chip and circuit board cost . 
the commodore 1551 disk drive used the 6510t ,  a version of the 6510 with eight i/o lines . 
the primary change from the 6502 was the addition of an 8-bit general purpose i/o port ,  although only six i/o pins were available in the most common version of the 6510.
it was possible ,  by writing the correct bit pattern to the processor at address $01, to completely expose almost the full 64 kb of ram in the c64, leaving no rom or i/o hardware exposed except for the processor i/o port itself and its data directional register . 
motorola did not chronicle the development of the 6800 microprocessor the way that intel did for their microprocessors . 
the price of a single mc6800 microprocessor was $175.
the 6800  -lrb-  ``  ''sixty-eight hundred '' ''  -rrb-  is an 8-bit microprocessor designed and first manufactured by motorola in 1974.
in the early 1970s motorola started a project that developed their first microprocessor ,  the mc6800.
the motorola 6800 and the intel 8080 were designed at the same time and were similar in function . 
there he led the team that designed the 6500 microprocessor family . 
later mensch would design the mos technology 6502 microprocessor . 
motorola reduced the single-unit price of the 6800 to $35.
the intel 8080 and the motorola mc6800 processors both began layout around december 1972.
the 6502 would only cost $25.
this was followed by single-chip microcontrollers such as the mc6801 and mc6805.
a new low-cost clock generator chip ,  the mc6875, was released in 1977.
peddle continued working for motorola while looking for investors for his new microprocessor concept . 
john buchanan was a memory designer at motorola when bennett asked him to design a voltage doubler for the 6800.
it was the first microprocessor to offer built-in support for dynamic ram .   -rrb- 
wiles stayed with motorola ,  moved to austin and helped design the mc6801 microcontroller that was released in 1978.
later orgill would design the mos technology 6501 microprocessor that was socket compatible with the 6800.
higher-speed versions of both microprocessors were released by 1976.
the 68020 had 32-bit internal and external data and address buses ,  compared to the early 680x0 models with 16-bit data and 24-bit address buses . 
the main difference between the two is that the 68ec020 only has a 24-bit address bus ,  rather than the 32-bit address bus of the full 68020, and thus is only able to address 16 mb of memory . 
the 68ec020 is a lower cost version of the motorola 68020.
the motorola 68020  -lrb-  ``  ''sixty-eight-oh-twenty '' '' ,  ``  ''sixty-eight-oh-two-oh '' '' or ``  ''six-eight-oh-two-oh '' ''  -rrb-  is a 32-bit microprocessor from motorola ,  released in 1984.
in a multiprocessor system ,  coprocessors could not be shared between cpus . 
the hp 54520, 54522, 54540 and 54542 also use the 68020, together with a 68882 math coprocessor . 
the 68020 has a coprocessor interface supporting up to eight coprocessors . 
