as a name for the morning star ,  `` lucifer '' is a proper name and is capitalized in english . 
lucifer  -lrb-   ; `` light-bringer ''  -rrb-  was a latin name for the planet venus as the morning star in the ancient roman era ,  and is often used for mythological and religious figures associated with the planet . 
the motif of a heavenly being striving for the highest seat of heaven only to be cast down to the underworld has its origins in the motions of the planet venus ,  known as the morning star . 
in greco-roman civilization the morning star was often personified and considered a god or the title of a deity associated with the planet . 
lambda phage is a non-contractile tailed phage ,  meaning during an infection event it cannot 'force' its dna through a bacterial cell membrane . 
it must instead use an existing pathway to invade the host cell ,  having evolved the tip of its tail to interact with a specific pore to allow entry of its dna to the hosts . 
armstrong was born and raised in new orleans . 
armstrong was born in new orleans on august 4, 1901 to mary albert and william armstrong . 
armstrong played in brass band parades in new orleans . 
when armstrong was eleven ,  he dropped out of school . 
armstrong developed his cornet skills by playing in the band . 
armstrong and oliver parted amicably in 1924.
armstrong often stated that he was born on july 4, 1900.
during the next 30 years ,  armstrong played more than 300 performances a year . 
armstrong moved to los angeles in 1930 to seek new opportunities . 
armstrong played in brass bands and riverboats in new orleans ,  first on an excursion boat in september 1918.
on june 14, 1914, armstrong was released into the custody of his father and his new stepmother ,  gertrude . 
young musicians across the country ,  black or white ,  were turned on by armstrong's new type of jazz . 
with this band ,  the thirteen year-old armstrong attracted the attention of kid ory . 
louis armstrong was raised by his grandmother until the age of five when he was returned to his mother . 
as with his trumpet playing ,  armstrong's vocal innovations served as a foundation stone for the art of jazz vocal interpretation . 
hines and armstrong became fast friends and successful collaborators . 
armstrong adapted to the tightly controlled style of henderson ,  playing trumpet and experimenting with the trombone . 
some institutions in the new york city section of the island use the island's names ,  like long island university and long island jewish medical center . 
long island has a wide variety of golf courses found all over the island . 
these islands include fire island ,  the largest of the outer barrier islands that parallels the southern shore of long island for approximately ; plum island ,  which was home to the plum island animal disease center ,  a biological weapons research facility; as well as robins island ,  gardiners island ,  fishers island ,  long beach barrier island ,  jones beach island ,  great gull island ,  little gull island ,  and shelter island . 
long island's population is greater than 37 of the 50 u . s .  states . 
the 1664 land patent granted to the duke of york included all islands in long island sound . 
broadly speaking ,  `` long island '' may refer both to the main island and the surrounding outer barrier islands . 
all of long island  -lrb-  as well as the islands between it and connecticut  -rrb-  became part of the province of new york within the shire of york . 
long island has historically been a center for fishing and seafood . 
long island is also home to the long island ducks minor league baseball team of the atlantic league . 
long island is also known for its school music programs . 
a 2010 article in `` the new york times '' stated that the expansion of the immigrant workforce on long island has not displaced any jobs from other long island residents . 
long island is somewhat vulnerable to tropical cyclones . 
the more southerly moraine ,  known as the ronkonkoma moraine ,  forms the `` backbone '' of long island; it runs primarily through the very center of long island ,  roughly coinciding with the length of the long island expressway . 
with a land area of 1,401 square miles  -lrb-  3,630 km  -rrb-  ,  long island is the 11th-largest island in the united states and the 149th-largest island in the world—larger than the of the smallest u . s .  state ,  rhode island . 
long island is well known for its production of alcoholic beverages . 
there are ten road crossings out of long island ,  all within new york city limits at the extreme western end of the island . 
adriaen block followed in 1615, and is credited as the first european to determine that both manhattan and long island are islands . 
the islanders played at nassau coliseum from their 1972 inception through 2015.
it is unclear when the name `` nassau island '' was discontinued . 
half of the immigrants on long island hold white-collar positions . 
several smaller islands ,  though geographically distinct ,  are in proximity to long island and are often grouped with it . 
long island is one of the most densely populated regions in the united states . 
both the longest and the largest island in the contiguous united states ,  long island extends eastward from new york harbor to montauk point ,  with a maximum north-to-south distance of between long island sound and the atlantic coast . 
while the eastern region of long island was first settled by the english ,  the western portion of long island was settled by the dutch; until 1664, the jurisdiction of long island was split between the dutch and english ,  roughly at the present border between nassau county and suffolk county . 
long island is home to a range of higher-education institutions ,  both public and private . 
the very first settlements on long island were by settlers from england and its colonies in present-day new england . 
long island has played a prominent role in scientific research and in engineering . 
plans for a long island crossing at various locations in nassau and suffolk counties  -lrb-  a proposed bridge or tunnel that would link long island to the south with new york or connecticut to the north across long island sound  -rrb-  have been discussed for decades ,  but there are no firm plans to construct such a crossing . 
music on long island  -lrb-  nassau and suffolk  -rrb-  is strongly influenced by the proximity to new york city and by the youth culture of the suburbs . 
in august 2011, portions of long island were evacuated in preparation for hurricane irene ,  a category 1 hurricane which weakened to a tropical storm before it reached long island . 
long island is a densely populated island off the east coast of the united states ,  beginning at new york harbor approximately 0.35 miles  -lrb-  0.56 km  -rrb-  from manhattan island and extending eastward into the atlantic ocean . 
in 2012, nice replaced the former long island bus in transporting long islanders across nassau county while still allowing them to use mta metrocards as payment . 
the counties of nassau and suffolk have been long renowned for their affluence . 
the lower peninsula of michigan is the southern of the two major landmasses of the u . s .  state of michigan ,  the other being the upper peninsula . 
the lower peninsula is dominated by a geological basin known as the michigan basin . 
the lower peninsula is bounded on the south by the states of indiana and ohio . 
the `` toba eruption ''  -lrb-  the `` toba event ''  -rrb-  occurred at what is now lake toba about 75,000±900 years ago . 
lake toba  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a large natural lake in indonesia occupying the caldera of a supervolcano . 
it is the largest lake in indonesia and the largest volcanic lake in the world . 
most of the people who live around lake toba are ethnically bataks . 
the subsequent collapse formed a caldera that filled with water ,  creating lake toba . 
on 18 june 2018, lake toba was the scene of a ferry disaster ,  in which over 190 people drowned . 
the island in the center of the lake is formed by a resurgent dome . 
lake toba lies near the great sumatran fault ,  which runs along the centre of sumatra in the sumatra fracture zone . 
more complex are aspheric lenses . 
devices that similarly focus or disperse waves and radiation other than visible light are also called lenses ,  such as microwave lenses ,  electron lenses ,  acoustic lenses ,  or explosive lenses . 
it is this type of lens that is most commonly used in corrective lenses . 
lenses are classified by the curvature of the two optical surfaces . 
the more complicated shapes allow such lenses to form images with less aberration than standard simple lenses ,  but they are more difficult and expensive to produce . 
lamorna birch was born in egremont ,  cheshire ,  england . 
at the suggestion of fellow artist stanhope forbes ,  birch adopted the `` soubriquet '' `` lamorna '' to distinguish himself from lionel birch ,  an artist who was also working in the area at that time . 
the library of congress classification  -lrb-  lcc  -rrb-  is a system of library classification developed by the library of congress . 
the classification was invented by herbert putnam in 1897, just before he assumed the librarianship of congress . 
the national library of medicine classification system  -lrb-  nlm  -rrb-  uses the initial letters `` w '' and `` qs ''– ''qz '' ,  which are not used by lcc . 
the library classification numbers can be considered identifiers for resources but are distinct from the international standard book number  -lrb-  isbn  -rrb-  or international standard serial number  -lrb-  issn  -rrb-  system . 
there are many standard systems of library classification in use ,  and many more have been proposed over the years . 
library classification is distinct from the application of subject headings in that classification organizes knowledge into a systematic order ,  while subject headings provide access to intellectual materials through vocabulary terms that may or may not be organized as a knowledge system . 
is f  -rrb-  . 
in 1990, during its first full year of sales ,  lexus sold 63,594 ls 400 and es 250 sedans in the u . s .  ,  the majority being the ls model . 
in 2006, lexus began sales of the gs 450h ,  a v6 hybrid performance sedan ,  and launched the fourth generation ls line ,  comprising both standard- and long-wheelbase v8  -lrb-  ls 460 and ls 460 l  -rrb-  and hybrid  -lrb-  ls 600h and ls 600h l  -rrb-  versions . 
by the end of 1989, a total of 16,392 ls 400 and es 250 sedans were sold in the four months following the u . s .  launch . 
the f1 designers targeted their new sedan at international markets and began development on a new v8 engine . 
in 1993, lexus launched the mid-size gs 300 sports sedan ,  based on the toyota aristo using the toyota `` s '' platform from the toyota crown ,  which had sold for two years prior in japan . 
lexus also recorded its 1 millionth vehicle sold in the u . s .  market ,  being ranked as the top-selling premium car maker in the u . s .  overall . 
toyota’s market research concluded that a separate brand and sales channel were needed to present its new sedan ,  and plans were made to develop a new network of dealerships in the u . s .  market . 
by 1992, the ls 400's base price had risen 18 percent . 
the latest editions to the performance f sport marque include the lexus rc f sport and lexus gs f sport and lexus ls f sport . 
lexus originated from a corporate project to develop a new premium sedan ,  code-named f1, which began in 1983 and culminated in the launch of the lexus ls in 1989.
the largest sales markets in order of size for 2007 were the u . s .  ,  japan ,  the uk ,  china ,  canada ,  and russia . 
currently all of lexus’s models for the us market are imported from japan ,  with the exception of the rx ,  which is also produced in cambridge ,  ontario for north america ,  and the es ,  which is also produced in georgetown ,  kentucky . 
in 2006, lexus incorporated the first production eight-speed automatic transmission in an automobile with the ls 460, and the gearbox was later adapted for the gs 460 and is f models . 
lexus' arrival in the japanese market in july 2005 marked the first introduction of a japanese premium car marque in the domestic market . 
lexus' marketing efforts have extended to sporting and charity event sponsorships ,  including the u . s .  open tennis grand slam event from 2005 to 2009, and the united states golf association's u . s .  open ,  u . s .  women's open ,  u . s .  senior open ,  and u . s . 
the japanese government imposed voluntary export restraints for the u . s .  market ,  so it was more profitable for japanese automakers to export more expensive cars to the u . s . 
the first lexus vehicles were manufactured in toyota's tahara plant ,  a highly sophisticated ,  computerized manufacturing plant in japan . 
in january 2012, the marque began sales of the fourth generation gs line ,  including gs 350 and gs 450h variants ,  as well as a lower-displacement gs 250 model for select markets . 
the global lexus lineup features sedans of different size classes ,  including the compact is and hs models ,  mid-size es and gs models ,  and the full-size ls . 
in 2008, amidst the late-2000s recession and a weakened world car market ,  global sales fell 16 percent to 435,000, with declines in markets such as the u . s .  and europe where deliveries fell by 21 percent and 27.5 percent ,  respectively . 
toyota researchers visited the u . s .  in may 1985 to conduct focus groups and market research on luxury consumers . 
by the end of the decade ,  lexus ranked as the fourth-largest premium car make in the world by volume ,  and was the number one selling premium car marque in the u . s .  for 10 consecutive years . 
hybrid models have been differentiated by separate badging and lighting technology; in 2008, the ls 600h l became the first production vehicle to use led headlamps . 
in april 2012, the sixth generation es line ,  include es 350 and es 300h variants ,  debuted at the new york international auto show . 
in 1989, lexus became among the first premium car marques to equip models with premium audio systems ,  in partnership with stereo firm nakamichi . 
gender changes are legal in guam . 
this includes legal change of gender classification . 
this includes legal change of gender classification . 
the gender identity law allows individuals over 18 to legally change their name ,  gender and photography on legal documents . 
the legal system in korea does not prevent marriage once a person has changed their legal gender . 
the law allows an adult person to change their legal gender without any requirements . 
since 1980, germany has a law that regulates the change of first names and legal gender . 
the ruling permits a gender registration of `` non-specific '' . 
there is no legislation expressly allowing transsexuals to legally change their gender in malaysia . 
in october 2009, lawmakers passed the gender identity law allowing transgender people over the age of 18 to change their name and legal gender on all official documents . 
peru allows legal name change after surgery ,  however gender change is not allowed by courts . 
ireland is one of four legal jurisdictions in the world where people may legally change gender through self-determination . 
the dsm-v recognizes gender dysphoria as an official diagnosis . 
on july 15, 2015, ireland passed the gender recognition act of 2015 that allows legal gender changes without the requirement of medical intervention or assessment by the state . 
in april 2014, the supreme court of india declared transgender to be a 'third gender' in indian law . 
they need only demonstrate that they have suffered gender dysphoria ,  have lived as `` your new gender '' for two years ,  and intend to continue doing so until death . 
a person may be considered to be a transgender person if their gender identity is inconsistent or not culturally associated with the sex they were assigned at birth ,  and consequently also with the gender role and social status that is typically associated with that sex . 
in 1983, the supreme court ruled that in some cases ,  when the attributes of the individual's preferred gender were predominant ,  it is possible to change one's legal gender even before genital reassignment surgery . 
changing legal gender assignment in brazil is legal according to the superior court of justice of brazil ,  as stated in a decision rendered on october 17, 2009.
whilst it is believed that gender identity is protected under the laws preventing discrimination on the basis of either sex or sexual orientation ,  it is not known how this applies to those who have not had ,  or will not have ,  gender reassignment surgery . 
globally ,  most legal jurisdictions recognize the two traditional gender identities and social roles ,  man and woman ,  but tend to exclude any other gender identities ,  and expressions . 
in finland ,  people wishing to change their legal gender must be sterilized or `` for some other reason infertile '' . 
transgender persons in the northern mariana islands may change their legal gender following sex reassignment surgery and a name change . 
both cases applied the united kingdom case of corbett v corbett in defining legal gender . 
since 2016, ecuadorians are allowed to change their birth name and gender identity  -lrb-  instead of the sex assigned at birth  -rrb-  on legal documents and national id cards . 
the legal gender recognition bill followed a 20 july 2016 decision of the county court of athens ,  which ruled that a person who wants to change their legal gender on the registry office files is no longer obliged to already have undergone a sex reassignment surgery . 
in biochemistry ,  a ligase is an enzyme that can catalyze the joining of two large molecules by forming a new chemical bond ,  usually with accompanying hydrolysis of a small pendant chemical group on one of the larger molecules or the enzyme catalyzing the linking together of two compounds ,  e . g .  ,  enzymes that catalyze joining of c-o ,  c-s ,  c-n ,  etc . 
commercial logos that are still widely used in schools include `` microworlds logo '' and `` imagine logo '' . 
the first working logo turtle robot was created in 1969.
kturtle is a variation of logo implemented at qt for the kde environment loosely based on logo . 
logo is not case-sensitive but retains the case used for formatting . 
logo is usually an interpreted language ,  although there have been developed compiled logo dialects  -lrb-  such as lhogho and liogo  -rrb-  . 
logo was a primary influence on the smalltalk programming language . 
the last rites ,  in roman catholicism ,  are the last prayers and ministrations given to an individual of the faith ,  when possible ,  shortly before death . 
lamorna cove is at the southern end of a north-west to south-east valley . 
lamorna  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a village ,  valley and cove in west cornwall ,  england ,  uk . 
the lamorna arts festival was launched in 2009 to celebrate the original lamorna colony and today's lamorna art community . 
lamorna has been immortalised in the song `` way down to lamorna '' ,  about a wayward husband receiving his comeuppance from his wife . 
 ''lamorna cove '' was the title of a poem by w .  h .  davies published in 1929.
the actor robert newton  -lrb-  1905–1956 -rrb- was educated in lamorna and his ashes were scattered in the sea off lamorna by his son ,  nicholas newton . 
here is the statement of the law:
the ratio of those weights is 1.125, which can be expressed as the ratio of two small numbers 9:8.
in chemistry ,  the law of multiple proportions is one of the basic laws of stoichiometry used to establish the atomic theory ,  alongside the law of conservation of mass  -lrb-  matter  -rrb-  and the law of definite proportions . 
the law of averages is the fallacious belief that a particular outcome or event is inevitable or certain simply because it is statistically possible . 
predictions based on the law of averages are even less useful if the sample does not reflect the population . 
the gambler's fallacy is a particular misapplication of the law of averages in which the gambler believes that a particular outcome is more likely because it has not happened recently ,  or  -lrb-  conversely  -rrb-  that because a particular outcome has recently occurred ,  it will be less likely in the immediate future . 
in april 2012, avtovaz confirmed the end of the model 2107  -lrb-  lada riva or lada nova  -rrb-  ,  after more than forty years . 
in the fall of 2014 avtovaz began production of a new kalina model ,  the lada kalina cross . 
avtovaz produces over 400,000 cars a year ,  under its lada brand as well as cars of renault–nissan–mitsubishi alliance brands renault ,  nissan and datsun . 
total lada sales in 2015 amounted to 269,096 cars ,  of which 207,389 were built by avtovaz in tolyatti ,  while the rest were made by lada izhevsk ,  giving the company a 17.9% share of the russian automotive market . 
after having built a number of prototypes and experimental vehicles ,  avtovaz designers launched the first car entirely of their own design ,  the vaz-2121 niva ,  in 1977.
in january 1993 avtovaz was re-established as a joint-stock company under russian law . 
the avtovaz factory is the largest car manufacturer in russia and eastern europe . 
 ,  avtovaz's owner is alliance rostec auto b . v .  ,  which is a joint venture of renault and russian company rostec . 
a five-door version of the niva ,  the vaz-2131, was introduced in 1995.
in december 2018, renault and rostec completed the acquisition of all avtovaz shares through their alliance rostec venture . 
the original ,  fiat-based models included the vaz-2101 sedan and the vaz-2102 station wagon . 
in march 2008, renault purchased a 25% stake in avtovaz in a us$1 billion deal ,  with rostec retaining the remaining 75% . 
by 1995 car sales ,  distribution and spare parts at avtovaz were all controlled by criminal organizations . 
the same year ,  total vaz production reached 1.5 million . 
by april 2009 avtovaz was on the verge of bankruptcy ,  which was only avoided because of $600 million bailout from the russian government . 
the lada largus was launched in the russian market in the middle of july 2012.
the deal was agreed at a time when the russian car market was booming . 
between 1977 and 1981, avtovaz acquired 30 welding robots from japanese firms . 
lundy  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the largest island in the bristol channel . 
most visitors are day-trippers ,  although there are 23 holiday properties and a camp site for over-night visitors ,  mostly also around the south of the island . 
the name lundy is believed to come from the old norse word for `` puffin island ''  -lrb-  compare lundey  -rrb-  ,  ' being the old norse word for a puffin and ' ,  an island ,  although an alternative explanation has been suggested with lund referring to a copse ,  or wooded area . 
after death ,  lindow man was deposited into lindow moss face down . 
lindow man is held in the british museum . 
lindow man and lindow iii were found to have elevated levels of copper on their skin . 
lindow man's official name is lindow ii ,  as there are other finds from the area: lindow i  -lrb-  lindow woman  -rrb-  refers to a human skull ,  lindow iii to a `` fragmented headless body '' ,  and lindow iv to the upper thigh of an adult male ,  possibly that of lindow man . 
lindow man is one of 27 bodies to be recovered from such areas . 
a year later a further discovery was made at lindow moss ,  just south-west of the lindow woman . 
in life ,  lindow man would have measured between 5'6 '' and 5'8 ''  -lrb-  1.68 and 1.73 m  -rrb-  tall and weighed about  . 
lindow man ,  also known as lindow ii and  -lrb-  in jest  -rrb-  as pete marsh ,  is the preserved bog body of a man discovered in a peat bog at lindow moss near wilmslow in cheshire ,  north west england . 
lindow moss is a peat bog in lindow ,  an area of wilmslow ,  cheshire ,  which has been used as common land since the medieval period . 
lombok is an island in west nusa tenggara province ,  indonesia . 
to the east of lombok lies the alas strait ,  a narrow body of water separating the island of lombok from the nearby island of sumbawa . 
the dutch are remembered in lombok as liberators from balinese hegemony . 
lombok is surrounded by a number of smaller islands locally called gili . 
the highlands of lombok are forest-clad and mostly undeveloped . 
other than the `` babad lombok '' document which records the 1257 samalas eruption ,  little is known about lombok before the seventeenth century . 
after this lego released titles such as `` lego creator '' and `` lego racers '' . 
lego operates 132 so-called `` lego store '' retail shops . 
the definitive shape of the lego bricks ,  with the inner tubes ,  was patented by the lego group in 1958.
more recently ,  lego has created a game based on `` the lego movie '' ,  due to its popularity . 
lego  -lrb-  ; stylised as lego  -rrb-  is a line of plastic construction toys that are manufactured by the lego group ,  a privately held company based in billund ,  denmark . 
as of july 2015, 600 billion lego parts had been produced . 
lego branched out into the video game market in 1997 by founding lego media international limited ,  and `` lego island '' was released that year by mindscape . 
the modern lego brick design was patented on 28 january 1958.
 ''the lego movie '' ,  a feature film based on lego toys ,  was released by warner bros .  in february 2014.
lego digital designer is an official piece of lego software for mac os x and windows which allows users to create their own digital lego designs . 
the lego group began manufacturing the interlocking toy bricks in 1949.
a television series of `` lego city '' has also been announced . 
lego pieces of all varieties constitute a universal system . 
before my lego network ,  there were lego club pages ,  which essentially held the same purpose ,  although the design lacked complex interaction . 
in the us ,  lego education north america is a joint venture between pitsco ,  inc .  and the educational division of the lego group . 
there is also the lego club and brickmaster magazine ,  the latter discontinued in 2011.
a spin-off of `` the lego movie '' ,  entitled `` the lego batman movie '' ,  directed by chris mckay was released in the us in february 2017.
the li ,  lizu ,  or hlai are a kra–dai speaking ethnic group ,  one of the 56 ethnic groups officially recognized by the people's republic of china . 
the language spoken natively by the sai  -lrb-  also known as tai or jiamao  -rrb-  subgroup has been noted for its dissimilarity to the dialects or languages spoken by the other subgroups of the li . 
the cgs unit of luminance is the stilb ,  which is equal to one candela per square centimetre or 10 kcd/m . 
luminance is a photometric measure of the luminous intensity per unit area of light travelling in a given direction . 
lycos ,  inc .  ,  is a web search engine and web portal established in 1994, spun out of carnegie mellon university . 
the word `` lycos '' comes from the latin word for `` wolf spider '' . 
luton town football club was formed on 11 april 1885.
in yo-yo club fashion ,  luton were to return . 
the club reached the league cup final once more in 1988–89, but lost 3–1 to nottingham forest . 
luton town's most recent successful period began in 1981–82, when the club won the second division ,  and thereby gained promotion to the first . 
luton town's first ground was at dallow lane ,  the former ground of excelsior . 
however ,  the club was relegated the following season and ,  by 1964–65, was playing in the fourth tier . 
luton are wearing orange shirts ,  navy shorts and white socks during the 2015–16 season . 
eight years later another song featuring vocals by the luton players ,  `` we're luton town '' ,  was released to celebrate the club's promotion to the first division . 
the record for the most appearances for luton is held by bob morton ,  who turned out for luton 562 times in all competitions . 
relegation meant that 2009–10 saw luton playing in the conference premier ,  a competition in which the club had never before participated . 
the club first stated its intent to leave kenilworth road in 1955.
luton town football club  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a professional association football club based in the town of luton ,  bedfordshire ,  england ,  that competes in league one ,  the third tier of the english football league system . 
luton town have traditionally used the town's crest as its own in a manner similar to many other teams . 
the club was relegated from the top division at the end of the 1991–92 season ,  and sank to the third tier four years later . 
most calendars referred to as `` lunar '' calendars are in fact lunisolar calendars . 
these fractions can be used to construct a lunar calendar ,  or in combination with a solar calendar to produce a lunisolar calendar . 
lunar and lunisolar calendars differ as to which day is the first day of the month . 
present-day lunisolar calendars include the chinese ,  hindu ,  and thai calendars . 
the mt . 
mt . 
mt . 
mt . 
mount lykaion  -lrb-   ,  `` lýkaion óros '';   -rrb-  is a mountain in arcadia ,  greece . 
lykaion and crete ,  both of which are given as the birthplace of zeus by ancient sources . 
lykaion has two peaks: `` stefani '' to the north and st .  ilias  -lrb-   ,  `` agios īlías ''  -rrb-  to the south where the altar of zeus is located . 
the hippodrome at mount lykaion ,  located in a valley below and to the north of the altar ,  is the only extant hippodrome from greek antiquity ,  and is therefore crucial to our understanding of greek athletic festivals . 
the earth-altar may correspond to a linear b mention of an `` open-fire altar ''; linear b  -lrb-  14th-13th centuries bce  -rrb-  inscriptions also give the first mentions of offerings to zeus and of the sacred precinct  -lrb-  temenos  -rrb-  near the altar ,  such as has been excavated at lykaion . 
according to pausanias and the greek historian polybius ,  an inscribed pillar  -lrb-  `` stele ''  -rrb-  was erected near the altar of zeus on mt . 
the lake is the area of maximum deposition of sediment in the lake eyre basin . 
when the lake is full ,  it has the same salinity level as the sea ,  but as the lake dries up and the water evaporates ,  salinity increases . 
most of the water entering the lakes arrives via warburton river . 
the average rainfall in the area of the lake is per year . 
in strong la niña years the lake can fill . 
the shallow endorheic lake is the depocentre of the vast lake eyre basin and is found in northern south australia ,  some north of adelaide . 
the lake eyre yacht club is a dedicated group of sailors who sail on the lake's floods ,  including recent trips in 1997, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2007 and 2009.
the high rainfall in summer 2010 sent flood water into the diamantina ,  georgina and cooper creek catchments of the lake eyre basin ,  with the cooper creek reaching the lake for the first time since 1990.
the system ran until september 1947.
the resulting system was known as cytac . 
the result was loran-c . 
there are two ways to implement the timing measurements needed for a hyperbolic navigation system ,  pulse timing systems like gee and loran ,  and phase-timing systems like the decca navigator system . 
critics ,  who have called for the elimination of the system ,  state that the loran system has too few users ,  lacks cost-effectiveness ,  and that gnss signals are superior to loran . 
in 1958 the operation of the loran system was handed over to the us coast guard ,  which renamed the system `` loran-a '' ,  the lower-case name being introduced at that time . 
with the evolution of other electronic navigation systems ,  such as satellite navigation systems ,  funding for existing systems is not always assured . 
thus the coast guard was given the choice of naming the systems ,  and decided to rename the existing system loran-a ,  and the new system loran-b . 
similar concepts were also used in the experimental navarho system in the us . 
this is part of the wider eurofix system which combines gps ,  galileo and nine loran stations into a single integrated system . 
although mutns was unrelated to the loran systems ,  it was sometimes referred to as loran-f . 
a system called sps  -lrb-  saudi positioning system  -rrb-  ,  similar to eurofix ,  is in use in saudi arabia . 
at about the same time ,  motorola proposed a new system using pseudo-random pulse-chains . 
the second system uses constant signals  -lrb-  `` continuous wave ''  -rrb-  and takes measurements by comparing the phase of two signals . 
when loran-c became widespread ,  the usaf once again became interested in using it as a guidance system . 
the long-range option was of considerable interest to the coast guard ,  who set up an experimental system known as lf loran in 1945.
instead ,  radio navigation systems adopted the `` multilateration '' concept . 
loran data channel  -lrb-  ldc  -rrb-  is a project underway between the faa and uscg to send low bit rate data using the loran system . 
the transmission of canadian loran-c signals was terminated on 3 august 2010.
a list of loran-c transmitters . 
timing systems can reveal the absolute distance to an object ,  as is the case in radar . 
supporters of continued and improved loran operation note that loran uses a strong signal ,  which is difficult to jam ,  and that loran is an independent ,  dissimilar ,  and complementary system to other forms of electronic navigation ,  which helps ensure availability of navigation signals . 
loran-c had originally been designed to be highly automated ,  allowing the system to be operated more rapidly than the original loran's multi-minute measurement . 
as loran systems are maintained and operated by governments ,  their continued existence is subject to public policy . 
in practice ,  radio navigation systems normally use a `` chain '' of three or four stations ,  all synchronized to a `` master '' signal that is broadcast from one of the stations . 
however ,  in the 1940s no suitable system was available that could hold an accurate signal over the time span of an operational mission . 
numerous efforts were made to provide some sort of secondary low-accuracy system that could be used with a phase-comparison system like decca in order to resolve the ambiguity . 
they turned their attention to the use of inertial platforms and doppler radar systems ,  cancelling work on cytac as well as a competing system known as navarho . 
the sim concept became a system for sending additional data . 
magnetic storms have serious effects as with any radio based system . 
in december 2015 in the us ,  there was also renewed discussion of funding an eloran system and nist was offering to fund development of a microchip-sized eloran receiver for distribution of timing signals . 
the term was once commonly used in law . 
in the jurisdiction of england and wales the lunacy acts 1890–1922 referred to `` lunatics '' ,  but the mental treatment act 1930 changed the legal term to `` person of unsound mind '' ,  an expression which was replaced under the mental health act 1959 by `` mental illness '' . 
lunatic is an antiquated term referring to a person who is considered as mentally ill ,  dangerous ,  foolish ,  unpredictable ,  or crazy—conditions once attributed to lunacy . 
care has to be taken with analog audio to avoid audible 'breakthrough'  -lrb-  aka `` crosstalk ''  -rrb-  from the ltc track to the audio tracks . 
linear  -lrb-  or longitudinal  -rrb-  timecode  -lrb-  ltc  -rrb-  is an encoding of smpte timecode data in an audio signal ,  as defined in smpte 12m specification . 
in 1873, on the death of his father ,  john strutt ,  2nd baron rayleigh ,  he inherited the barony of rayleigh . 
lord rayleigh was buried in the graveyard of all saints' church in terling in essex . 
in 1919, rayleigh served as president of the society for psychical research . 
rayleigh was elected fellow of the royal society on 12 june 1873, and served as president of the royal society from 1905 to 1908.
both the hebrew calendar and the julian calendar use this sequence . 
the gregorian calendar has a lunisolar calendar ,  which is used to determine the date of easter . 
the islamic calendar is lunar ,  but not a lunisolar calendar because its date is not related to the sun . 
the leonids are famous because their meteor showers ,  or storms ,  can be among the most spectacular . 
the leonids  -lrb-     -rrb-  are a prolific meteor shower associated with the comet tempel–tuttle . 
meteor storms  -lrb-  large outbursts  -rrb-  exceed 1000 meteors per hour ,  to be compared to the sporadic background  -lrb-  5 to 8 meteors per hour  -rrb-  and the shower background  -lrb-  several per hour  -rrb-  . 
viewing campaigns resulted in spectacular footage from the 1999, 2001 and 2002, storms producing up to 3,000 leonid meteors per hour . 
then ,  in 1966, a spectacular storm was seen over the americas . 
the meteoroids left by the comet are organized in trails in orbits similar to though different from that of the comet . 
 ''a description of the standard of the cross ,  which the romans now call the labarum . `` 
as for the labarum itself ,  there is little evidence for its use before 317.
he made extensive use of the chi-rho and the labarum later in the conflict with licinius . 
the labarum ,  with minor variations in its form ,  was widely used by the christian roman emperors who followed constantine . 
eusebius then continues to describe the labarum ,  the military standard used by constantine in his later wars against licinius ,  showing the chi-rho sign . 
beyond its derivation from latin `` labarum '' ,  the etymology of the word is unclear . 
the labarum  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a `` vexillum ''  -lrb-  military standard  -rrb-  that displayed the `` chi-rho '' symbol ☧ ,  a christogram formed from the first two greek letters of the word `` christ ''  -lrb-   ,  or χριστός  -rrb-  — `` chi ''  -lrb-  χ  -rrb-  and `` rho ''  -lrb-  ρ  -rrb-  . 
the name labarum was applied both to the original standard used by constantine the great and to the many standards produced in imitation of it in the late antique world ,  and subsequently . 
having converted to christianity ,  he resigned his post before diocletian's purging of christians from his immediate staff and before the publication of diocletian's first `` edict against the christians ''  -lrb-  february 24, 303 -rrb- . 
lactantius had a successful public career at first . 
lucius caecilius firmianus lactantius  -lrb-  c .  250 – c .  325 -rrb- was an early christian author who became an advisor to the first christian roman emperor ,  constantine i ,  guiding his religious policy as it developed ,  and a tutor to his son crispus . 
like many writers in the first few centuries of the early church ,  lactantius took a premillennialist view ,  holding that the second coming of christ will precede a millennium or a thousand-year reign of christ on earth . 
lactantius ,  a latin-speaking north african of berber origin ,  was not born into a christian family . 
as a part of the 2011 kallikratis government reform ,  regional unit laconia was created out of the former prefecture laconia  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
laconia  -lrb-   ,  `` lakonía '' ,    -rrb-  is a region of greece in the southeastern part of the peloponnese peninsula . 
the regional unit ,  laconia ,  is subdivided into five municipalities . 
in the medieval period ,  laconia formed part of the byzantine empire . 
the island ,  elafonisos ,  situated between the laconian mainland and kythira ,  is part of laconia . 
with the fall of the despotate to the ottomans in 1460, laconia was conquered as well . 
the episode furnished the subject of sophocles' lost tragedy ,  `` laocoön '' . 
laocoön had insulted apollo by sleeping with his wife in front of the `` divine image '' . 
there is proof of a mint in limburg in 1180.
limburg is the landing site of the tourboat `` wappen von limburg '' . 
limburg is a traditional transport hub . 
once the `` lahntalbahn '' had been built ,  limburg was joined to the railway network in 1862.
limburg an der lahn  -lrb-  officially abbreviated `` limburg a .  d .  lahn ''  -rrb-  is the district seat of limburg-weilburg in hesse ,  germany . 
one line of the lords of ysenburg resided from 1258 to 1406 at limburg castle and took their name from their seat ,  limburg . 
only in 1458 were they allowed to send two representatives to town council . 
during world war i there was a major prisoner of war camp at limburg an der lahn . 
limburg lies in western hessen between the taunus and the westerwald on the river lahn . 
the town lies roughly centrally in a basin within the rhenish slate mountains which is surrounded by the low ranges of the taunus and westerwald and called the limburg basin  -lrb-  `` limburger becken ''  -rrb-  . 
after stalin's death ,  beria claimed to have killed him . 
after stalin's death ,  beria's ambitions sprang into full force . 
beria also worked for the anti-bolshevik mussavatists in baku . 
when stalin fell unconscious again ,  beria immediately stood and spat . 
beria recommended that stalin install a communist leader in the occupied territories . 
beria's sexually predatory nature was well known to the politburo ,  and though stalin took an indulgent viewpoint  -lrb-  considering beria's wartime importance  -rrb-  ,  he said ,  `` i don't trust beria . `` 
 ''pravda '' did not announce beria's arrest until 10 july ,  crediting it to malenkov and referring to beria's `` criminal activities against the party and the state . `` 
with stalin's approval ,  beria's nkvd executed them in what became known as the katyn massacre . 
after 1946, beria formed an alliance with malenkov to counter zhdanov's rise . 
in december 1944, beria's nkvd was assigned to supervise the soviet atomic bomb project  -lrb-  `` task no . 
by 1922, beria was deputy head of the georgian branch of cheka's successor ,  the ogpu . 
in march 1939, beria became a candidate member of the communist party's politburo . 
after stalin's death in march 1953, lavrentiy beria became first deputy premier of the soviet union and head of the ministry of internal affairs . 
in his autobiography ,  lavrentiy beria mentioned only his sister and his niece ,  implying that his brother was  -lrb-  or any other siblings were  -rrb-  dead or had no relationship with beria after he left merkheuli . 
on 26 june 1953, beria was arrested and held in an undisclosed location near moscow . 
these operations were aimed by stalin—initially tangentially ,  but with time more directly–at beria . 
this was the beginning of beria's alliance with malenkov ,  which later became of central importance . 
evidence suggests that not only did beria abduct and rape women ,  but that some were also murdered . 
regarding east germany beria said ,  `` it's not even a real state but one kept in being only by soviet troops . `` 
feininger started working as a fine artist at the age of 36.
he was elected to the american academy of arts and letters in 1955.
a major retrospective exhibition of lyonel feininger's work ,  initially at the whitney museum of american art during june 30 october 16, 2011, was subsequently due to run at the montreal museum of fine arts during january 20–may 13, 2012.
in 1900, he met clara fürst ,  daughter of the painter gustav fürst . 
at a 2017 sotheby's auction in new york ,  feininger's oil painting `` fin de séance ''  -lrb-  1910 -rrb- sold for $5,637,500.
artificial life is the simulation of any aspect of life ,  as through computers ,  robotics ,  or biochemistry . 
artificial life is a computer simulation or man-made reconstruction of any aspect of life ,  which is often used to examine systems related to natural life . 
though life is confirmed only on earth ,  many think that extraterrestrial life is not only plausible ,  but probable or inevitable . 
there is no current scientific consensus as to how life originated . 
one of the challenges in defining death is in distinguishing it from life . 
there is currently no consensus regarding the definition of life . 
biology is the science concerned with the study of life . 
some of the earliest theories of life were materialist ,  holding that all that exists is matter ,  and that life is merely a complex form or arrangement of matter . 
while life is ,  by definition ,  alive ,  artificial life is generally referred to as data confined to a digital environment and existence . 
investigation of the tenacity and versatility of life on earth ,  as well as an understanding of the molecular systems that some organisms utilize to survive such extremes ,  is important for the search for life beyond earth . 
death is the permanent termination of all vital functions or life processes in an organism or cell . 
the various forms of life are caused by an appropriate mixture of elements . 
microbial life forms thrive even in the mariana trench ,  the deepest spot in the earth's oceans . 
virus self-assembly within host cells has implications for the study of the origin of life ,  as it may support the hypothesis that life could have started as self-assembling organic molecules . 
democritus  -lrb-  460 bc  -rrb-  thought that the essential characteristic of life is having a soul  -lrb-  `` psyche ''  -rrb-  . 
more than 99% of all species of life forms ,  amounting to over five billion species ,  that ever lived on earth are estimated to be extinct . 
he elaborates on fire because of the apparent connection between life and heat ,  and because fire moves . 
since there is no unequivocal definition of life ,  most current definitions in biology are descriptive . 
death is the permanent termination of all biological functions which sustain an organism ,  and as such ,  is the end of its life . 
a systems view of life treats environmental fluxes and biological fluxes together as a `` reciprocity of influence , ``  and a reciprocal relation with environment is arguably as important for understanding life as it is for understanding ecosystems . 
evidence suggests that life on earth has existed for at least 3.5 billion years ,  with the oldest physical traces of life dating back 3.7 billion years; however ,  some theories ,  such as the late heavy bombardment theory ,  suggest that life on earth may have started even earlier ,  as early as 4.1–4.4 billion years ago ,  and the chemistry leading to life may have begun shortly after the big bang ,  13.8 billion years ago ,  during an epoch when the universe was only 10–17 million years old . 
all life forms require certain core chemical elements needed for biochemical functioning . 
a major strength of this definition is that it distinguishes life by the evolutionary process rather than its chemical composition . 
robert ulanowicz  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- highlights mutualism as the key to understand the systemic ,  order-generating behavior of life and ecosystems . 
all known life forms share fundamental molecular mechanisms ,  reflecting their common descent; based on these observations ,  hypotheses on the origin of life attempt to find a mechanism explaining the formation of a universal common ancestor ,  from simple organic molecules via pre-cellular life to protocells and metabolism . 
one possibility for how life began is that genes originated first ,  followed by proteins; the alternative being that proteins came first and then genes . 
the biosphere is postulated to have evolved ,  beginning with a process of biopoesis  -lrb-  life created naturally from non-living matter ,  such as simple organic compounds  -rrb-  or biogenesis  -lrb-  life created from living matter  -rrb-  ,  at least some 3.5 billion years ago . 
the diversity of life on earth is a result of the dynamic interplay between genetic opportunity ,  metabolic capability ,  environmental challenges ,  and symbiosis . 
this account is consistent with teleological explanations of life ,  which account for phenomena in terms of purpose or goal-directedness . 
the mechanism by which life began on earth is unknown ,  though many hypotheses have been formulated and are often based on the miller–urey experiment . 
the age of the earth is about 4.54 billion years . 
the coin's diameter is 26.5mm . 
the loonie  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  formally the canadian one-dollar coin ,  is a gold-coloured coin that was introduced in 1987 and is produced by the royal canadian mint at its facility in winnipeg . 
by 1982, the royal canadian mint had begun work on a new composition for the dollar coin that it hoped would lead to increased circulation . 
over 800 million loonies had been struck by the coin's 20th anniversary . 
in 1997, 2002, and each year since 2004, the royal canadian mint has issued a one-dollar coin that depicts a different and unique image of a bird on the coin's reverse . 
initial support for the coin was mixed ,  but withdrawing the banknote forced acceptance of the coin . 
the government announced on march 25, 1986, that the new dollar coin would be launched the following year as a replacement for the dollar bill ,  which would be phased out . 
alongside the regular minting of the loonie with the standard image of the common loon on the coin's reverse ,  the royal canadian mint has also released commemorative editions of the one-dollar coin for a variety of occasions . 
in fluid dynamics ,  laminar flow  -lrb-  or streamline flow  -rrb-  occurs when a fluid flows in parallel layers ,  with no disruption between the layers . 
in non-scientific terms ,  laminar flow is `` smooth '' ,  while turbulent flow is `` rough '' . 
luanda was portugal's bridgehead from 1627, except during the dutch rule of luanda ,  from 1640 to 1648, as fort aardenburgh . 
by the time of angolan independence in 1975, luanda was a modern city . 
luanda is divided into two parts ,  the `` baixa de luanda ''  -lrb-  lower luanda ,  the old city  -rrb-  and the `` cidade alta ''  -lrb-  upper city or the new part  -rrb-  . 
carnap and other vienna circle members ,  including hahn and neurath ,  saw need for a weaker criterion of meaningfulness than verifiability . 
the vienna circle ,  gathering around university of vienna and café central ,  was led principally by moritz schlick . 
still ,  some logical positivists ,  including carl hempel ,  continued support of logicism . 
as neurath and somewhat carnap posed science toward social reform ,  the split in vienna circle also reflected political views . 
the lorentz transformation is a linear transformation . 
the transformations connect the space and time coordinates of an event as measured by an observer in each frame . 
the lorentz transformation is in accordance with special relativity ,  but was derived before special relativity . 
the invariance of light speed is one of the postulates of special relativity . 
the most common form of the transformation ,  parametrized by the real constant formula_1 representing a velocity confined to the -direction ,  is expressed as  where and are the coordinates of an event in two frames ,  where the primed frame is seen from the unprimed frame as moving with speed along the -axis ,  is the speed of light ,  and formula_3 is the lorentz factor . 
einstein explained that the `` aether of general relativity '' is not absolute ,  because matter is influenced by the aether ,  just as matter influences the structure of the aether . 
aether fell to occam's razor . 
christiaan huygens hypothesized that light is a wave propagating through an aether . 
the only aether which has survived is that which was invented by huygens to explain the propagation of light . 
lorentz on his side continued to use the aether hypothesis . 
luminiferous aether or ether  -lrb-  `` luminiferous '' ,  meaning `` light-bearing ''  -rrb-  ,  was the postulated medium for the propagation of light . 
by the early 20th century ,  aether theory was in trouble . 
in another paper of 1924, named `` concerning the aether '' ,  einstein argued that newton's absolute space ,  in which acceleration is absolute ,  is the `` aether of mechanics '' . 
the two most important models ,  which were aimed to describe the relative motion of the earth and aether ,  were augustin-jean fresnel's  -lrb-  1818 -rrb- model of the  -lrb-  nearly  -rrb-  stationary aether including a partial aether drag determined by fresnel's dragging coefficient ,  and george gabriel stokes'  -lrb-  1844 -rrb- model of complete aether drag . 
the only similarity of this relativistic aether concept with the classical aether models lies in the presence of physical properties in space ,  which can be identified through geodesics . 
when einstein was still a student in the zurich polytechnic in 1900, he was very interested in the idea of aether . 
in the 17th century ,  robert boyle was a proponent of an aether hypothesis . 
this implied that there must be a separate aether for each of the infinitely many frequencies . 
thus at any point there should be one special coordinate system ,  `` at rest relative to the aether '' . 
a simple example concerns the model on which aether was originally built: sound . 
by the late 1800s ,  the existence of the aether was being questioned ,  although there was no physical theory to replace it . 
another ,  completely different attempt to save `` absolute '' aether was made in the lorentz–fitzgerald contraction hypothesis ,  which posited that `` everything '' was affected by travel through the aether . 
since the miller experiment and its unclear results there have been many more experimental attempts to detect the aether . 
the assumption of a spatial plenum of luminiferous aether ,  rather than a spatial vacuum ,  provided the theoretical medium that was required by wave theories of light . 
between 1892 and 1904, hendrik lorentz developed an electron-aether theory ,  in which he introduced a strict separation between matter  -lrb-  electrons  -rrb-  and aether . 
aethers were invented for the planets to swim in ,  to constitute electric atmospheres and magnetic effluvia ,  to convey sensations from one part of our bodies to another ,  and so on ,  until all space had been filled three or four times over with aethers . 
the name lame is a recursive acronym for `` lame ain't an mp3 encoder '' . 
lame is required by some programs . 
in 1973 and 1974, miller was the secretary of the pzpr plant committee . 
in turn ,  cimoszewicz later became the minister of foreign affairs in miller’s cabinet . 
in 1969, miller married aleksandra ,  three years his junior ,  in church . 
the 16-person cabinet of prime minister miller has been the smallest government of the polish republic so far . 
leszek cezary miller  -lrb-   ; born 3 july 1946 -rrb- is a polish left-wing politician who served as prime minister of poland from 2001 to 2004.
at the end of its term of office ,  miller’s government had the lowest public support of any government since 1989.
in 1997-2001 he was the chairman of the sld’s caucus . 
on 4 december 2003, leszek miller suffered injuries in a helicopter crash near warsaw . 
in july 1986, miller was elected as first secretary of the pzpr provincial committee in skierniewice . 
in mathematics ,  a set of elements  -lrb-  vectors  -rrb-  in a vector space is called a basis ,  if every element of may be written in a unique way as a  -lrb-  finite  -rrb-  linear combination of elements of  . 
a vector space can have generally several bases; however all the bases have the same number of elements ,  called the dimension of the vector space . 
a vector space that has a finite basis is called finite-dimensional . 
for nonlinear systems ,  which cannot be modeled with linear algebra ,  linear algebra is often used as a first-order approximation . 
linear algebra is the branch of mathematics concerning linear equations such as  linear functions such as and their representations through matrices and vector spaces . 
linear algebra is central to almost all areas of mathematics . 
linear algebra grew with ideas noted in the complex plane . 
together with the labia minora they form the labia of the vulva . 
being thinner than the outer labia ,  the inner labia can be also more narrow than the former ,  or wider than labia majora ,  thus protruding in the pudendal cleft and making the term `` minora ''  -lrb-  latin for smaller  -rrb-  essentially inapplicable in these cases . 
the labia minora ,  latin for `` smaller lips , ``  singular: `` labium minus ``  ''smaller lip '' '' '' ,  also known as the inner labia ,  inner lips ,  vaginal lips or nymphae ,  are two flaps of skin on either side of the human vaginal opening in the vulva ,  situated between the labia majora  -lrb-  the latin for `` larger lips; '' also called outer labia ,  or outer lips  -rrb-  . 
they can also be smooth or frilled ,  the latter being more typical of longer or wider inner labia . 
the posterior ends  -lrb-  bottom  -rrb-  of the labia minora are usually joined across the middle line by a fold of skin ,  named the frenulum of labia minora or fourchette . 
the labia minora extend from the clitoris obliquely downward ,  laterally ,  and backward on either side of the vulval vestibule ,  ending between the bottom of the vulval vestibule and the labia majora . 
sacher-masoch was not pleased with krafft-ebing's assertions . 
an english translation of the french edition was published as `` the confessions of wanda von sacher-masoch ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- by re/search publications . 
sacher-masoch pressured his first wife – aurora von rümelin ,  whom he married in 1873 – to live out the experience of the book ,  against her preferences . 
leopold ritter von sacher-masoch  -lrb-  27 january 1836 – 9 march 1895 -rrb- was an austrian nobleman ,  writer and journalist ,  who gained renown for his romantic stories of galician life . 
von sacher-masoch was born in the city of lemberg  -lrb-  now lviv ,  ukraine  -rrb-  ,  the capital of the kingdom of galicia and lodomeria ,  at the time a province of the austrian empire ,  into the roman catholic family of an austrian civil servant ,  leopold johann nepomuk ritter von sacher ,  and charlotte von masoch ,  a ukrainian noblewoman . 
the term `` masochism '' was coined in 1886 by the austrian psychiatrist richard freiherr von krafft-ebing  -lrb-  1840–1902 -rrb- in his book `` psychopathia sexualis '':
the plate is affixed to a cylinder on a printing press . 
for offset lithography ,  which depends on photographic processes ,  flexible aluminum ,  polyester ,  mylar or paper printing plates are used instead of stone tablets . 
during printing ,  water adhered to the gum arabic surfaces and was repelled by the oily parts ,  while the oily ink used for printing did the opposite . 
the related term `` photolithography '' refers to when photographic images are used in lithographic printing ,  whether these images are printed directly from a stone or from a metal plate ,  as in offset printing . 
hydrophobic ink ,  which is repelled by the water and only adheres to the emulsion of the image area ,  is then applied by the inking rollers . 
this allows a flat print plate to be used ,  enabling much longer and more detailed print runs than the older physical methods of printing  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  intaglio printing ,  letterpress printing  -rrb-  . 
lithography  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a method of printing originally based on the immiscibility of oil and water . 
because the image is first transferred ,  or `` offset '' to the rubber blanket cylinder ,  this reproduction method is known as `` offset lithography '' or `` offset printing '' . 
lithography works because of the mutual repulsion of oil and water . 
the development of the digital platesetter during the late 20th century eliminated film negatives altogether by exposing printing plates directly from digital input ,  a process known as computer to plate printing . 
most libraries that store physical media like books ,  periodicals ,  film ,  and other objects adhere to some derivative of the dewey decimal system as their method for tagging ,  storing ,  and retrieving materials based on unique identifiers . 
the origins of the english longbow are disputed . 
the longbow was also used against the english by their welsh neighbours . 
a wide variety of arrows were shot from the english longbow . 
the english longbow was a powerful medieval type of longbow  -lrb-  a tall bow for archery  -rrb-  about long used by the english and welsh for hunting and as a weapon in medieval warfare . 
a modern longbow's draw is typically or less ,  and by modern convention measured at  . 
a typical military longbow archer would be provided with between 60 and 72 arrows at the time of battle . 
the draw length was used because that is the length allowed by the arrows commonly found on the `` mary rose '' . 
a tudor english author expects eight shots from a longbow in the same time as five from a musket . 
the longbows on the `` mary rose '' were in excellent finished condition . 
the preferred material to make the longbow was yew ,  although ash ,  elm and other woods were also used . 
the trade of yew wood to england for longbows was such that it depleted the stocks of yew over a huge area . 
today ,  there are few modern longbowmen capable of using bows accurately . 
although longbows were much faster and more accurate than the black-powder weapons which replaced them ,  longbowmen always took a long time to train because of the years of practice necessary before a war longbow could be used effectively  -lrb-  examples of longbows from the `` mary rose '' typically had draws greater than   -rrb-  . 
what is agreed ,  however ,  is that the english longbow as an effective weapon system evolved in the late 13th and early 14th centuries . 
it has been conjectured that yew trees were commonly planted in english churchyards to have readily available longbow wood . 
estimates for the draw of these bows varies considerably . 
gerald of wales commented on the power of the welsh longbow in the 12th century: against massed men in armour ,  massed longbows were murderously effective on many battlefields . 
the word may have been coined to distinguish the longbow from the crossbow . 
for example ,  between 1341 and 1359 the english crown is known to have obtained 51,350 sheaves  -lrb-  1,232,400 arrows  -rrb-  . 
modern tests and contemporary accounts agree therefore that well-made plate armour could protect against longbows . 
marvin decided to stay there . 
marvin studied violin when he was young . 
marvin was a democrat who opposed the vietnam war . 
marvin was born in new york city . 
in 1971, marvin was sued by michelle triola ,  his live-in girlfriend from 1965 to 1970, who legally changed her surname to `` marvin '' . 
marvin married pamela feeley in october 1970.
 ''the killers '' was also the first film in which marvin received top billing . 
lee marvin  -lrb-  february 19, 1924 – august 29, 1987 -rrb- was an american film and television actor . 
marvin returned to features with a prominent role in `` the comancheros ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- starring john wayne . 
one of marvin's most notable film projects was `` cat ballou ''  -lrb-  1965 -rrb- ,  a comedy western in which he played dual roles . 
marvin's last big role was in samuel fuller's `` the big red one ''  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- ,  a war film based on fuller's own war experiences . 
marvin received the role after guest-starring in a memorable `` dragnet '' episode as a serial killer . 
 ''paul ryker '' ,  which marvin shot for tv in 1963 was released theatrically as `` sergeant ryker '' . 
marvin was in `` the raid ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- ,  `` center stage '' ,  `` medic '' and `` tv reader's digest '' . 
marvin ,  who had selected boorman himself for the director's slot ,  had a central role in the film's development ,  plot line ,  and staging . 
in december 1986, marvin was hospitalized for more than two weeks because of a condition related to coccidioidomycosis . 
in the wake of these two films and after having received an oscar ,  marvin was a huge star ,  given enormous control over his next film `` point blank '' . 
marvin played robert mitchum's friend in `` not as a stranger ''  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- ,  a medical drama produced by kramer . 
in january 1936, lead belly returned to new york on his own ,  without john lomax ,  in an attempted comeback . 
lead belly failed to stir the enthusiasm of harlem audiences . 
though many releases credit him as `` leadbelly '' ,  he himself wrote it as `` lead belly '' ,  which is also the spelling on his tombstone and the spelling used by the lead belly foundation . 
further ,  the book about lead belly published by the lomaxes in the fall of the following year proved a commercial failure . 
lead belly was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame in 1988 and the louisiana music hall of fame in 2008.
lead belly's playing style was popularized by pete seeger ,  who adopted the twelve-string guitar in the 1950s and released an instructional lp and book using lead belly as an exemplar of technique . 
lead belly was the first american country blues musician to achieve success in europe . 
he was `` discovered '' there three years later during a visit by folklorists john lomax and his son alan lomax . 
the month of february was spent recording his repertoire and those of other african americans and interviews about his life with alan lomax for their forthcoming book ,  `` negro folk songs as sung by lead belly ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- . 
lead belly styled himself `` king of the twelve-string guitar , ``  and despite his use of other instruments like the accordion ,  the most enduring image of lead belly as a performer is wielding his unusually large stella twelve-string . 
lower saxony  -lrb-    -lrb-    -rrb- ;   -rrb-  is a german state  -lrb-  `` land ''  -rrb-  situated in northwestern germany . 
the first lower saxon parliament or `` landtag '' met on 9 december 1946.
this indicates that at that time the western administrations of the prussian province of hanover and the state of oldenburg were perceived as being `` lower saxon '' . 
the highest mountain in lower saxony is the wurmberg  -lrb-  971 m  -rrb-  in the harz . 
most of the state's territory was part of the historic kingdom of hanover; the state of lower saxony has adopted the coat of arms and other symbols of the former kingdom . 
with the exception of bremen and the areas that were ceded to the soviet occupation zone in 1945, all those areas allocated to the new state of lower saxony in 1946, had already been merged into the `` constituency association of lower saxony '' in 1920.
lower saxony is divided into 37 districts  -lrb-  `` landkreise '' or simply `` kreise ''  -rrb- :
it was created by the merger of the state of hanover with three smaller states on 1 november 1946.
the forerunners of today's state of lower saxony were lands that were geographically and ,  to some extent ,  institutionally interrelated from very early on . 
in fact only about 1.3 km² of west lower saxony was transferred to the netherlands ,  in 1949.
lower saxony borders on  -lrb-  from north and clockwise  -rrb-  the north sea ,  the states of schleswig-holstein ,  hamburg ,  mecklenburg-vorpommern ,  brandenburg ,  saxony-anhalt ,  thuringia ,  hesse and north rhine-westphalia ,  and the netherlands . 
lower saxony has a natural boundary in the north in the north sea and the lower and middle reaches of the river elbe ,  although parts of the city of hamburg lie south of the elbe . 
thus ,  lower saxony is the only `` bundesland '' that encompasses both maritime and mountainous areas . 
sometimes ,  overlaps and transition areas happen between the various regions of lower saxony . 
the close historical links between the domains of the lower saxon circle now in modern lower saxony survived for centuries especially from a dynastic point of view . 
he and his record label good looking are most associated with the jazzy ,  atmospheric side of drum and bass music . 
ltj bukem  -lrb-  born danny williamson september 20, 1967 -rrb- is a british drum and bass musician ,  producer and dj . 
anderson was also a significant british theatre director . 
gavin lambert's memoir ,  `` mainly about lindsay anderson '' ,  in which he wrote that anderson repressed his homosexuality ,  was seen as a betrayal by his other friends . 
lindsay gordon anderson  -lrb-  17 april 1923 – 30 august 1994 -rrb- was a british feature film ,  theatre and documentary director ,  film critic ,  and leading light of the free cinema movement and the british new wave . 
anderson's film met with mixed reviews at the time ,  and was not a commercial success . 
anderson developed an acquaintance from 1950 with john ford ,  which led to what has come to be regarded as one of the standard books on that director ,  anderson's `` about john ford ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- . 
lindsay gordon anderson was born in bangalore ,  south india ,  where his father had been stationed with the royal engineers ,  on the 17th of april 1923.
examples of sea lochs in scotland include loch long ,  loch fyne ,  loch linnhe ,  and loch eriboll . 
several are named as lochs ,  including south east loch ,  merry loch ,  east loch ,  middle loch and west loch . 
perhaps the most famous scottish loch is loch ness ,  although there are other large examples such as loch awe ,  loch lomond and loch tay . 
loch  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the irish ,  scottish gaelic and scots word for a lake or for a sea inlet . 
some lochs in southern scotland have a brythonic rather than goidelic etymology ,  such as loch ryan where the gaelic `` loch '' has replaced a cumbric equivalent of welsh `` llwch '' . 
as `` loch '' is a common gaelic word ,  it is found as the root of several manx place names . 
the life that i have  is all that i have  and the life that i have  is yours . 
the love that i have  of the life that i have  is yours and yours and yours . 
marks wrote that he had an inauspicious arrival at soe when it took him all day to decipher a code he had been expected to finish in 20 minutes ,  because ,  not atypically ,  soe had forgotten to supply the cipher key . 
in 1998, towards the end of his life ,  marks published a personal history of his experiences during the war ,  `` between silk and cyanide '' ,  which was critical of the leadership of soe . 
