orthodox judaism is not a centralized denomination . 
orthodox judaism is a collective term for the traditionalist branches of contemporary judaism . 
as in other aspects ,  orthodox positions reflect the mainstream of traditional rabbinic judaism through the ages . 
the earliest known mentioning of the term `` orthodox jews '' was made in the berlinische monatsschrift in 1795.
peterson was married four times . 
peterson taught piano and improvisation in canada ,  mainly in toronto . 
in 1950 peterson worked in a duo with double bassist ray brown . 
oscar emmanuel peterson ,   -lrb-  august 15, 1925 – december 23, 2007 -rrb- was a canadian jazz pianist and composer . 
in the 1970s peterson formed a trio with guitarist joe pass and bassist niels-henning ørsted pedersen . 
tatum and peterson became good friends ,  although peterson was always shy about being compared with tatum and rarely played the piano in tatum's presence . 
peterson was persistent at practising scales and classical études . 
at the age of nine peterson played piano with a degree of control that impressed professional musicians . 
orienteering is included in the programs of world sporting events including the world games  -lrb-  see orienteering at the world games  -rrb-  and world police and fire games . 
orienteering is a group of sports that requires navigational skills using a map and compass to navigate from point to point in diverse and usually unfamiliar terrain whilst moving at speed . 
the spring-mass system illustrates some common features of oscillation ,  namely the existence of an equilibrium and the presence of a restoring force which grows stronger the further the system deviates from equilibrium . 
some systems can be excited by energy transfer from the environment . 
all real-world oscillator systems are thermodynamically irreversible . 
the simplest mechanical oscillating system is a weight attached to a linear spring subject to only weight and tension . 
the harmonic oscillator and the systems it models have a single degree of freedom . 
as of the 2018 season ,  the oakland athletics have had 14 radio homes . 
the 2018 season was the club's 50th while based in oakland . 
the oakland athletics ,  often referred to as the a's ,  are an american professional baseball team based in oakland ,  california . 
then ,  in 1995, a deal was struck whereby the raiders would move back to oakland for the 1995 season . 
in 2018, as part of the franchise's 50th anniversary since the move to oakland ,  the a's wore a kelly green alternate uniform with `` oakland '' in white with gold trim ,  and was paired with an all-kelly green cap . 
one of the american league's eight charter franchises ,  the team was founded in philadelphia in 1901 as the philadelphia athletics . 
the athletics are the only remaining mlb team still sharing a stadium with an nfl team on a full-time basis . 
the new green alternates feature the piping ,  `` a's '' and lettering in white with gold trim . 
the athletics were unable to break their lease at the coliseum ,  and remained in oakland . 
in 2009, the city of san jose attempted to open negotiations with the team regarding a move to the city . 
hats displaying both teams on the cap are sold from vendors at the games ,  and once in a while the teams both dress in uniforms from an historic era of their franchises . 
since the mid-2000s the a's have been in talks with oakland and other northern california cities about building a new baseball-only stadium . 
eventually ,  the city name came to be used for the team ,  as with the other major league clubs . 
on june 18, 2013, the city of san jose filed suit against selig ,  seeking the court's ruling that major league baseball may not prevent the oakland a's from moving to san jose . 
by 1987, however ,  the word returned ,  in script lettering ,  to the front of the team's jerseys . 
the series is also occasionally referred to as the `` bart series '' for the bay area rapid transit system that links oakland to san francisco . 
the a's are the only mlb team to wear white cleats ,  both at home and on the road ,  another tradition dating back to the finley ownership . 
furthermore ,  many lipophilic compounds such as metal acetylacetonates and metal alkoxides are called `` metalorganics . `` 
a naturally occurring transition metal alkyl complex is methylcobalamin  -lrb-  a form of vitamin b  -rrb-  ,  with a cobalt-methyl bond . 
organometallic chemistry is the study of organometallic compounds ,  chemical compounds containing at least one chemical bond between a carbon atom of an organic molecule and a metal ,  including alkaline ,  alkaline earth ,  and transition metals ,  and sometimes broadened to include metalloids like boron ,  silicon ,  and tin ,  as well . 
for instance ,  lithium enolates often contain only li-o bonds and are not organometallic ,  while zinc enolates  -lrb-  reformatsky reagents  -rrb-  contain both zn-o and zn-c bonds ,  and are organometallic in nature . 
 ''team os/2 '' was a grassroots organization conceived by an ibm employee and initially joined by other ibmers which quickly spread outside ibm . 
many have a deep and abiding interest in the use ,  design and construction of operating systems and an emotional investment in their favourite operating system . 
the `` guide to the windows newsgroups '' exhorts usenet posters not to `` get involved in arguments about windows vs .  os/2 vs .  macintosh vs .  nextstep `` except '' in the comp . os . ms-windows . advocacy group . `` 
operating system advocacy is the practice of attempting to increase the awareness and improve the perception of a computer operating system . 
like freebsd ,  the netbsd foundation hosts a mailing list especially for advocacy . 
although in the english language the term onomatopoeia means `` the imitation of a sound '' ,  the compound word `` onomatopoeia ''  -lrb-  ὀνοματοποιία  -rrb-  in the greek language means `` making or creating names '' . 
comic strips and comic books make extensive use of onomatopoeia . 
sometimes ,  things are named from the sounds they make . 
human sounds sometimes provide instances of onomatopoeia ,  as when `` mwah '' is used to represent a kiss . 
onomatopoeia  -lrb-  ; from the greek ὀνοματοποιία; ὄνομα for `` name '' and ποιέω for `` i make '' ,  adjectival form: `` onomatopoeic '' or `` onomatopoetic ''  -rrb-  is the process of creating a word that phonetically imitates ,  resembles ,  or suggests the sound that it describes . 
in the case of a frog croaking ,  the spelling may vary because different frog species around the world make different sounds: ancient greek `` brekekekex koax koax ''  -lrb-  only in aristophanes' comic play `` the frogs ''  -rrb-  probably for marsh frogs; english `` ribbit '' for species of frog found in north america; english verb `` croak '' for the common frog . 
odysseus is one of the most influential greek champions during the trojan war . 
the etymology of the name is unknown . 
in greek the name was used in various versions . 
odysseus  -lrb-  ;  ,  ``  ὀdysseús ''   -rrb-  ,  also known by the latin variant ulysses  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  is a legendary greek king of ithaca and the hero of homer's epic poem the `` odyssey '' . 
two stories in particular are well known:
it has also been suggested that the name is of non-greek origin ,  possibly not even indo-european ,  with an unknown etymology . 
perhaps odysseus' most famous contribution to the greek war effort is devising the strategem of the trojan horse ,  which allows the greek army to sneak into troy under cover of darkness . 
they land on the island of thrinacia . 
this epic describes his travails ,  which lasted for 10 years ,  as he tries to return home after the trojan war and reassert his place as rightful king of ithaca . 
odysseus is probably best known as the eponymous hero of the `` odyssey '' . 
however ,  the change between `` d '' and `` l '' is common also in some indo-european and greek names ,  and the latin form is supposed to be derived from the etruscan ``  ''  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  ,  which perhaps accounts for some of the phonetic innovations . 
he is most famous for his `` nostos '' or “homecoming” ,  which took him ten eventful years after the decade-long trojan war . 
odysseus also talks to his fallen war comrades and the mortal shade of heracles . 
following the 1967 six-day war and the capture of east jerusalem by israel ,  the hotel was closed and the building was mostly neglected . 
when ehud olmert was serving in his post as mayor of jerusalem ,  he led efforts to protest against the way orient house was functioning ,  refusing to meet with husseini and demanding that orient house pay 300,000 usd in municipal taxes . 
orient house  -lrb-  ; bayt ʾal-šarq ,    -rrb-  is a building located in east jerusalem that served as the headquarters of the palestine liberation organization  -lrb-  plo  -rrb-  in the 1980s and 1990s . 
in january 2010, at a meeting of the quartet on the middle east ,  representatives from the european union and russia suggested reopening orient house and other palestinian institutions in east jerusalem as a way of bringing the palestinian authority back to the negotiating table . 
the common ostrich belongs to the ratite order struthioniformes . 
common ostriches usually weigh from  ,  or as much as two adult humans . 
the common ostrich  -lrb-  `` struthio camelus ''  -rrb-  ,  or simply ostrich ,  is a species of large flightless bird native to africa . 
the common ostrich's sternum is flat ,  lacking the keel to which wing muscles attach in flying birds . 
the common ostrich shares the order struthioniformes with the kiwis ,  emus ,  rheas ,  and cassowaries . 
discussions of female orgasm are complicated by orgasms in women typically being divided into two categories: clitoral orgasm and vaginal  -lrb-  or g-spot  -rrb-  orgasm . 
an orgasm before functions to strengthen the filter . 
after the initial orgasm ,  subsequent orgasms for women may be stronger or more pleasurable as the stimulation accumulates . 
a person may experience multiple orgasms . 
the mechanics of male orgasm are similar in most male mammals . 
the inability to have orgasm ,  or regular difficulty reaching orgasm after ample sexual stimulation ,  is called anorgasmia or inorgasmia . 
orgasms may thus occur as the result of sexual assault or rape . 
males who experience dry orgasms can often produce multiple orgasms ,  as the refractory period is reduced . 
masters and johnson equated male orgasm and ejaculation and maintained the necessity for a refractory period between orgasms . 
orgasm has been widely described in literature over the centuries . 
women were more likely to reach orgasm in encounters including cunnilingus '' . 
orgasm in non-human animals has been studied significantly less than orgasm in humans ,  but research on the subject is ongoing . 
they may also experience an involuntary orgasm ,  such as in the case of rape or other sexual assault . 
there has been little scientific study of multiple orgasm in men . 
for women ,  stimulation of the breast area during sexual intercourse or foreplay ,  or solely having the breasts fondled ,  can create mild to intense orgasms ,  sometimes referred to as a `` breast orgasm '' or `` nipple orgasm '' . 
these effects impact cultural views of orgasm ,  such as the beliefs that orgasm and the frequency/consistency of it are either important or irrelevant for satisfaction in a sexual relationship ,  and theories about the biological and evolutionary functions of orgasm . 
for instance ,  delayed orgasm or the inability to achieve orgasm is a common side effect of many medications . 
in men ,  the most common way of achieving orgasm is by physical sexual stimulation of the penis . 
approximately 25% of women report difficulties with orgasm ,  10% of women have never had an orgasm ,  and 40% or 40–50% have either complained about sexual dissatisfaction or experienced difficulty becoming sexually aroused at some point in their lives . 
scientific literature focuses on the psychology of female orgasm significantly more than it does on the psychology of male orgasm ,  which `` appears to reflect the assumption that female orgasm is psychologically more complex than male orgasm , ``  but `` the limited empirical evidence available suggests that male and female orgasm may bear more similarities than differences . 
women's orgasms are preceded by erection of the clitoris and moistening of the opening of the vagina . 
a 2005 twin study found that one in three women reported never or seldom achieving orgasm during sexual intercourse ,  and only one in ten always orgasmed . 
the health effects surrounding the human orgasm are diverse . 
men may also achieve orgasm by stimulation of the prostate  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
lack of control over orgasms may be used as part of consensual bdsm play; this practice is known as forced orgasm . 
in addition to sexual dysfunction being a cause for women's inability to reach orgasm ,  or the amount of time for sexual arousal needed to reach orgasm being variable and longer in women than in men ,  other factors include a lack of communication between sexual partners about what is needed for the woman to reach orgasm ,  feelings of sexual inadequacy in either partner ,  a focus on only penetration  -lrb-  vaginal or otherwise  -rrb-  ,  and men generalizing women's trigger for orgasm based on their own sexual experiences with other women . 
they posited a role of female orgasm in sperm competition . 
kinsey's `` sexual behavior in the human female '' showed that ,  over the previous five years of sexual activity ,  78% of women had orgasms in 60% to 100% of sexual encounters with other women ,  compared with 55% for heterosexual sex . 
there are theories that the female orgasm might increase fertility . 
if orgasm is desired ,  anorgasmia may be attributed to an inability to relax . 
masters and johnson argued that all women are potentially multiply orgasmic ,  but that multiply orgasmic men are rare ,  and stated that `` the female is capable of rapid return to orgasm immediately following an orgasmic experience ,  if restimulated before tensions have dropped below plateau phase response levels '' . 
in other cases ,  the woman reports having an orgasm ,  but no pelvic contractions are measured at all . 
the traditional view of male orgasm is that there are two stages: emission following orgasm ,  almost instantly followed by a refractory period . 
one version of the pledges was written in the rhine franconian dialect of old high german . 
the image to the right is a scan of the original text . 
the oaths of strasbourg  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  were mutual pledges of allegiance between louis the german  -lrb-  †876 -rrb- ,  ruler of east francia ,  and his half-brother charles the bald  -lrb-  †877 -rrb- ,  ruler of west francia made on 12 february 842.
the preamble was also written in latin ,  as were sections to report the ceremonies . 
old english literature or anglo-saxon literature ,  encompasses literature written in old english ,  in anglo-saxon england from the 7th century to the decades after the norman conquest of 1066.
besides old english literature ,  anglo-saxons wrote a number of anglo-latin works . 
the poem `` beowulf '' ,  which often begins the traditional canon of english literature ,  is the most famous work of old english literature . 
the magnavox odyssey² ,  also known as philips odyssey² ,  is a second generation home video game console released in 1978.
by 1983 over one million odyssey² units were sold in the u . s .  alone . 
in 2009, the video game website ign named the odyssey² the 21st greatest video game console ,  out of its list of 25.
the original odyssey had a number of removable circuit cards that switched between the built-in games . 
odyssey² was one of the major three home consoles prior to the 1983 video game market crash ,  along with atari 2600 and intellivision . 
in brazil ,  the console was released as the philips odyssey; the magnavox odyssey was released in brazil by a company named `` planil comércio '' ,  not affiliated with philips or magnavox . 
obadiah  -lrb-  ; `` ʿovadyah '' or `` ʿovadyahu '' ,  or in modern hebrew `` ovadyah ''; `` slave of god ''  -rrb-  is a biblical theophorical name ,  meaning `` servant of god '' or `` worshiper of yahweh '' . 
the equivalent turkish name is abdil or abdi . 
obadiah's fear of god was one degree higher than that of abraham; and if the house of ahab had been capable of being blessed ,  it would have been blessed for obadiah's sake . 
according to the talmud ,  obadiah is said to have been a convert to judaism from edom ,  a descendant of eliphaz ,  the friend of job . 
lastly ,  case five was a 19 year old woman who had incomplete flaccid left facial palsy . 
patients seek treatment from an otorhinolaryngologist for diseases of the ear ,  nose ,  throat ,  base of the skull ,  and for the surgical management of cancers and benign tumors of the head and neck . 
otorhinolaryngology  -lrb-  also called otolaryngology and otolaryngology–head and neck surgery  -rrb-  is a surgical subspecialty within medicine that deals with conditions of the ear ,  nose ,  and throat  -lrb-  ent  -rrb-  and related structures of the head and neck . 
microvascular reconstruction repair is a common operation that is done on patients who see a otorhinolaryngologist . 
the first games held under the auspices of the ioc was hosted in the panathenaic stadium in athens in 1896.
the stadium hosted olympics in 1870 and 1875.
the ioc elected the greek writer demetrius vikelas as its first president . 
the second olympics was held in paris . 
the olympic games are held every four years ,  with the summer and winter games alternating by occurring every four years but two years apart . 
london 2012 had a cost overrun of 76% ,  sochi 2014 of 289% . 
this tradition was upheld until the 1992 games in albertville ,  france; after that ,  beginning with the 1994 games ,  the winter olympics were held every four years ,  two years after each summer olympics . 
between 1862 and 1867, liverpool held an annual grand olympic festival . 
the oxford olympics study 2016 found that sports-related costs for the summer games since 1960 are on average us$5.2 billion and for the winter games $3.1 billion . 
the winter olympics was created to feature snow and ice sports that were logistically impossible to hold during the summer games . 
their creation was inspired by the ancient olympic games ,  which were held in olympia ,  greece ,  from the 8th century bc to the 4th century ad . 
for london 2012, cost per athlete was $1.4 million; for sochi 2014, $7.9 million . 
compare the old prussian ``  '' ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and  . 
high prussian ,  also a germanic language  -rrb-  ,  preserved a number of baltic prussian words ,  such as ' ,  from the old prussian ' ,  for `` shoe '' in contrast to common low german '  -lrb-  standard german '  -rrb-  . 
old prussian contained loanwords from slavic languages  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  old prussian ' `` hound '' ,  like lithuanian ' and latvian ' ,  comes from slavic  -lrb-  compare  ,  ; ;   -rrb-   -rrb-  ,  as well as a few borrowings from germanic ,  including from gothic  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  old prussian ' `` awl '' as with lithuanian ' ,  latvian '  -rrb-  and from scandinavian languages . 
old prussian is an extinct baltic language once spoken by the old prussians ,  the baltic peoples of the prussia region  -lrb-  not to be confused with the later and much larger german state of prussia—after 1945 northeastern poland ,  the kaliningrad oblast of russia ,  and the southernmost part of lithuania  -rrb-  . 
a separate page lists both certified and non-certified osgi specification implementations ,  which include osgi frameworks and other osgi specifications . 
the osgi specification is developed by the members in an open process and made available to the public free of charge under the osgi specification license . 
estrogens are synthesized in all vertebrates as well as some insects . 
the four major naturally occurring estrogens in women are estrone  -lrb-  e1 -rrb- ,  estradiol  -lrb-  e2 -rrb- ,  estriol  -lrb-  e3 -rrb- ,  and estetrol  -lrb-  e4 -rrb- . 
androgens such as testosterone powerfully oppose estrogen action in the breasts ,  such as by reducing estrogen receptor expression in them . 
additionally ,  estrogens bind to and activate rapid-signaling membrane estrogen receptors  -lrb-  mers  -rrb-  ,  such as gper  -lrb-  gpr30 -rrb- . 
for these reasons ,  estrogens are required for female fertility . 
all pads were on the same midi channel . 
the second model ,  introduced in 1989, was the pad-80 octapad ii . 
in 1905 spengler suffered a nervous breakdown . 
oswald spengler was born in 1880 in blankenburg  -lrb-  the duchy of brunswick ,  the german reich  -rrb-  as the second child of bernhard  -lrb-  1844–1901 -rrb- and pauline  -lrb-  1840–1910 -rrb- spengler . 
on 13 october 1933 spengler became one of the 100 senators of the german academy . 
however ,  spengler did become a member of the german academy in the course of the year . 
this book contains the well-known spengler quote `` optimism is cowardice '' . 
oswald's paternal grandfather ,  theodor spengler  -lrb-  1806–76 -rrb- ,  was a metallurgical inspector  -lrb-  `` hütteninspektor ''  -rrb-  in altenbrak . 
despite voting for hitler over hindenburg in 1932, spengler found the führer vulgar . 
the attempt failed and spengler proved ineffective in practical politics . 
spengler's work became an important foundation for the social cycle theory . 
oswald arnold gottfried spengler  -lrb-  ; 29 may 1880 – 8 may 1936 -rrb- was a german historian and philosopher of history whose interests included mathematics ,  science ,  and art . 
the pythia was the mouthpiece of the oracles of the god apollo ,  and was also known as the oracle of delphi . 
the semi-hellenic countries around the greek world ,  such as lydia ,  caria ,  and even egypt also respected her and came to delphi as supplicants . 
the most important oracles of greek antiquity were pythia ,  priestess to apollo at delphi ,  and the oracle of dione and zeus at dodona in epirus . 
evans linked wadjet with the `` minoan snake goddess '' . 
in extended use ,  `` oracle '' may also refer to the `` site of the oracle '' ,  and to the oracular utterances themselves ,  called `` khrēsmē ''  -lrb-  χρησμοί  -rrb-  in greek . 
walter burkert observes that `` frenzied women from whose lips the god speaks '' are recorded in the near east as in mari in the second millennium bc and in assyria in the first millennium bc . 
due to the ban ,  many of the abbots that were worshippers of dorje shugden have been forced to go against the dalai lama . 
the dalai lama ,  who lives in exile in northern india ,  still consults an oracle known as the `` nechung oracle '' ,  which is considered the official state oracle of the government of tibet . 
in ancient india ,  the oracle was known as `` akashwani '' or `` ashareera vani ''  -lrb-  a person without body or unseen  -rrb-  or `` asariri ''  -lrb-  tamil  -rrb-  ,  literally meaning `` voice from the sky '' and was related to the message of a god . 
though the vast majority of igbos today are christian ,  many of them still use oracles . 
some scholars connect astarte with the minoan snake goddess ,  whose cult as aphrodite spread from creta to greece . 
in china ,  oracle bones were used for divination in the late shang dynasty ,   -lrb-  c .  1600–1046 bc  -rrb-  . 
larry ellison co-founded oracle corporation in 1977 with bob miner and ed oates under the name software development laboratories  -lrb-  sdl  -rrb-  . 
oracle secure enterprise search  -lrb-  ses  -rrb-  ,  oracle's enterprise-search offering ,  gives users the ability to search for content across multiple locations ,  including websites ,  xml files ,  file servers ,  content management systems ,  enterprise resource planning systems ,  customer relationship management systems ,  business intelligence systems ,  and databases . 
this eased porting to different operating systems  -lrb-  most of which support c  -rrb-  . 
many of the products have been added to oracle's portfolio through acquisitions . 
two others were important in the formation of the omrlp . 
in 1987, the omrlp won its first seat on ashburton town council in devon ,  as alan `` howling laud '' hope was elected unopposed . 
48th parliament 49th parliament 50th parliament 51st parliament 52nd parliament 53rd parliament 54th parliament 55th parliament 56th parliament 57th parliament the party has a number of parish councillors spread across several parishes . 
the running of the omrlp fell to alan `` howling laud '' hope and his late cat ,  catmando  -lrb-  killed 2002 -rrb- ,  who were the joint winners of the 1999 membership ballot for the replacement for sutch . 
although alan hope took over as party leader after sutch's death ,  the real day-to-day running of the party has always been done by other party members . 
overall the results were a disappointment for the omrlp after their success in the previous general election showed there was life after sutch; the only improvement was alan hope's increase of the vote to over 500, but all other candidates saw marked reductions—including owen ,  contesting the wokingham seat for the first time ,  haemorrhaging over 300 votes to the bnp . 
also tempest was known as one not to suffer fools gladly  -lrb-  there were a number of clashes between him and hope  -rrb-  . 
in march 2007, melodie `` boney maroney '' staniforth ,  the deputy leader resigned from the party ,  though she stood in the april 2007 kirklees council elections as an omrlp candidate . 
the omrlp fielded 15 candidates in the 2001 general election ,  at which they had their best general election results to date . 
a self-styled pragmatist ,  owen comes from the side of the omrlp that always took the fighting of elections seriously and is one of four raving loonies to have scored over 1000 votes in an election . 
sutch's death drew tributes from across the political spectrum . 
the response however from omrlp headquarters was for deputy leader boney maroney to promptly expel morris and spydaz from the party . 
sutch's funeral – organised by his lifetime friend ,  the session drummer carlo little – was attended by members of the omrlp and rlggp ,  including hughes ,  who with freddie zapp brought along a huge floral tribute shaped as an omrlp rosette; they provided a more dignified entourage than sutch's own relatives and romantic partners ,  who fought with one another at the graveside . 
just like any other party ,  the omrlp has long suffered from splits over policy; here ,  the policy differences are regarding just how silly it should be . 
at the bootle by-election in may 1990, the loony candidate  -lrb-  sutch  -rrb-  received more votes than the candidate for the continuing social democrats . 
the official monster raving loony party is a political party established in the united kingdom in 1983 by the musician david sutch ,  better known as `` screaming lord sutch ,  3rd earl of harrow '' or simply `` lord sutch '' . 
 ''top cat '' owen is the only member of the current omrlp line up ever to poll over 1,000 votes  -lrb-  he polled 2,859 votes in the 1994 european elections  -rrb-  ,  and his dip in fortunes despite a previously strong local following appears to have killed the last realistic chance the party ever had of seeing a saved deposit . 
beckett was forced to drop out of loony activities due to ill-health ,  prompting tempest to end his association with the omrlp because of work and soup run commitments . 
almost a year after bootle ,  the supposedly dead sdp finished fourth at neath ,  beating the omrlp to fifth place  -lrb-  see the continuing social democratic party  -rrb-  . 
the post-staniforth omrlp succeeded in standing in the two by-elections of 19 july 2007 in sedgefield and ealing southall ,  but again achieving derisory results: alan hope acquiring 129 votes  -lrb-  0.46%  -rrb-  and john cartwright taking 188  -lrb-  0.51%  -rrb-  ,  beating the english democrats but coming behind the christian party of the reverend george hargreaves and david braid . 
asking hope to become party president whilst she would become official party leader ,  hope refused ,  saying he was leader until death . 
omega−3 fatty acids ,  also called ω−3 fatty acids or `` n ''−3 fatty acids ,  are polyunsaturated fatty acids  -lrb-  pufas  -rrb-  characterized by a double bond three atoms away from the terminal methyl group . 
thus ,  α-linolenic acid is a polyunsaturated `` n−3 ''  -lrb-  omega-3 -rrb- fatty acid with lipid number ,  18:3  -lrb-  18 carbon atoms ,  3 double bonds  -rrb-  . 
in people with advanced cancer and cachexia ,  omega−3 fatty acids supplements may be of benefit ,  improving appetite ,  weight ,  and quality of life . 
an ore deposit is an accumulation of ore . 
the process of ore formation is called ore genesis . 
the blue light emitted by the brightener compensates for the diminishing blue of the treated material and changes the hue away from yellow or brown and toward white . 
excess brightener will often cause a greening effect as emissions start to show above the blue region in the visible spectrum . 
these additives are often used to enhance the appearance of color of fabric and paper ,  causing a `` whitening '' effect; they make intrinsically yellow/orange materials look less so ,  by compensating the deficit in blue and purple light reflected by the material ,  with the blue and purple optical emission of the fluorophore . 
optical brighteners ,  optical brightening agents  -lrb-  obas  -rrb-  ,  fluorescent brightening agents  -lrb-  fbas  -rrb-  ,  or fluorescent whitening agents  -lrb-  fwas  -rrb-  ,  are chemical compounds that absorb light in the ultraviolet and violet region  -lrb-  usually 340-370 nm  -rrb-  of the electromagnetic spectrum ,  and re-emit light in the blue region  -lrb-  typically 420-470 nm  -rrb-  by fluorescence . 
oil painting is the process of painting with pigments with a medium of drying oil as the binder . 
oil paint is made by mixing pigments of colors with an oil medium . 
standard sizes for oil paintings were set in france in the 19th century . 
in recent years ,  water miscible oil paint has become available . 
traditional oil painting techniques often begin with the artist sketching the subject onto the canvas with charcoal or thinned paint . 
although the history of tempera  -lrb-  pigment mixed with either egg whites or egg yolks ,  then painted on a plastered section  -rrb-  and related media in europe indicates that oil painting was discovered there independently ,  there is evidence that oil painting was used earlier in afghanistan . 
the transition began with early netherlandish painting in northern europe ,  and by the height of the renaissance oil painting techniques had almost completely replaced the use of tempera paints in the majority of europe . 
recent advances in chemistry have produced modern water miscible oil paints that can be used and cleaned up with water . 
the roland flag is 17 by 10 feet ,  while the peabody flag is smaller ,  12 by 6 feet . 
according to mary jane roland ,  one of driver's nashville-born daughters ,  driver gave her the flag as a gift on july 10, 1873, telling her: `` this is my old ship flag old glory . 
old glory is a nickname for the flag of the united states . 
the findings do not mean that the peabody flag is insignificant ,  however ,  since driver as a sea captain would have owned more than one flag . 
driver was deeply attached to the flag ,  writing: `` it has ever been my staunch companion and protection . 
the term originally referred to an american flag owned by driver ,  who was born on march 17, 1803, in salem ,  massachusetts . 
in response ,  roland wrote her own account of the flag ,  publishing `` old glory ,  the true story '' in 1918.
contreras and espinoza were convicted in chile in 1993.
the former chilean secret police chief ,  manuel contreras ,  who ,  was convicted for his role in the crime in 1993, later pointed the finger at his superiors ,  claiming that all relevant orders came from pinochet . 
his specific mission was to try to defend the chilean nationalization of copper against the previous private ownership favored by the us government . 
on september 10, 1976, he was deprived of his chilean nationality by decree . 
letelier was born in temuco ,  chile ,  the youngest child of orlando letelier ruiz and inés del solar . 
this was used to great effect in chile where general pinochet looked to remove a socialist economic system and replace it with a free market economy . 
when he was in the university ,  letelier became a student representative at the university of chile's student union . 
oscar wilde was born at 21 westland row ,  dublin  -lrb-  now home of the oscar wilde centre ,  trinity college  -rrb-  ,  the second of three children born to sir william wilde and jane wilde ,  two years behind william  -lrb-  `` willie ''  -rrb-  . 
wilde was baptised as an infant in st .  mark's church ,  dublin ,  the local church of ireland  -lrb-  anglican  -rrb-  church . 
sir william acknowledged paternity of his illegitimate children and provided for their education ,  but they were reared by his relatives rather than by his wife or with his legitimate children . 
until he was nine ,  oscar wilde was educated at home ,  where a french and a german governess taught him their languages . 
the last known ostracism was that of hyperbolos in circa 417 bc . 
ostracism was not in use throughout the whole period of athenian democracy  -lrb-  circa 506–322 bc  -rrb-  ,  but only occurred in the fifth century bc . 
similar but more controversial claims have been made about the ostracism of cimon in 461 bc . 
around twelve thousand political ostraka have been excavated in the athenian agora and in the kerameikos . 
similarly ,  cimon ,  ostracised in 461 bc ,  was recalled during an emergency . 
each year the athenians were asked in the assembly whether they wished to hold an ostracism . 
the first rash of people ostracised in the decade after the defeat of the first persian invasion at marathon in 490 bc were all related or connected to the tyrant peisistratos ,  who had controlled athens for 36 years up to 527 bc . 
other cities are known to have set up forms of ostracism on the athenian model ,  namely megara ,  miletos ,  argos and syracuse ,  sicily . 
ostracism was crucially different from athenian law at the time; there was no charge ,  and no defence could be mounted by the person expelled . 
ostracism  -lrb-   ,  `` ostrakismos ''  -rrb-  was a procedure under the athenian democracy in which any citizen could be expelled from the city-state of athens for ten years . 
the two-month gap between the first and second phases would have easily allowed for such a campaign . 
the person nominated had ten days to leave the city . 
qahr and ashti is a culture-specific iranian form of personal shunning ,  most frequently of another family member in iran . 
omega  -lrb-  capital: ω ,  lowercase: ω; greek ὦ ,  later ὦ μέγα ,  modern greek ωμέγα  -rrb-  is the 24th and last letter of the greek alphabet . 
in addition to the greek alphabet ,  omega was also adopted into the early cyrillic alphabet . 
ω was not part of the early  -lrb-  8th century bc  -rrb-  greek alphabets . 
the soviet union had some 23,000 tanks available of which only 14,700 were combat-ready . 
by the end of the war ,  58 percent of all soviet prisoners of war had died in german captivity . 
in the eyes of the nazis ,  the war against the soviet union would be a `` vernichtungskrieg ''  -lrb-  `` war of annihilation ''  -rrb-  . 
on 22 june ,  army group north attacked the soviet northwestern front and broke through its 8th and 11th armies . 
with the failure of the battle of moscow ,  all german plans for a quick defeat of the soviet union had to be revised . 
the soviets now had only 90,000 men and 150 tanks left for the defense of moscow . 
the germans destroyed the soviet 3rd and 10th armies while inflicting serious losses on the 4th ,  11th and 13th armies ,  and reported to have captured 324,000 soviet troops ,  3,300 tanks ,  1,800 artillery pieces . 
four weeks into the campaign ,  the germans realized they had grossly underestimated soviet strength . 
by 1943, soviet armaments production was fully operational and increasingly outproducing the german war economy . 
in autumn 1940, high-ranking german officials drafted a memorandum on the dangers of an invasion of the soviet union . 
many german troops viewed the war in nazi terms and regarded their soviet enemies as sub-human . 
during a night session on the same day the finnish parliament decided to go to war against the soviet union . 
the first blow took the soviets completely by surprise when the 2nd panzer group ,  returning from the south ,  took oryol ,  just south of the soviet first main defense line . 
the 4th panzer group pushed the soviet 16th army back ,  however ,  and succeeded in crossing the moscow canal in an attempt to encircle moscow . 
in the middle of 1940, following the rising tension between the soviet union and germany over territories in the balkans ,  an eventual invasion of the soviet union seemed to hitler to be the only solution . 
the germans had begun massing troops near the soviet border even before the campaign in the balkans had finished . 
stalin did not address the nation about the german invasion until 3 july ,  when he also called for a `` patriotic war  .  .  .  of the entire soviet people '' . 
in the soviet union ,  speaking to his generals in december 1940, stalin mentioned hitler's references to an attack on the soviet union in `` mein kampf '' and hitler's belief that the red army would need four years to ready itself . 
this became the basis for all subsequent soviet war plans and the deployment of their armed forces in preparation for the german invasion . 
during german-finnish negotiations finland had demanded to remain neutral unless the soviet union attacked them first . 
operation barbarossa  -lrb-  german: `` unternehmen barbarossa ''  -rrb-  was the code name for the axis invasion of the soviet union ,  which started on sunday ,  22 june 1941, during world war ii . 
on 2 july ,  the southern section of army group south – the romanian 3rd and 4th armies ,  alongside the german 11th army – invaded soviet moldavia ,  which was defended by the southern front . 
the germans ordered the 3rd and 4th panzer armies to break off their siege of leningrad and support army group center in its attack on moscow . 
for its final attack on leningrad ,  the 4th panzer group was reinforced by tanks from army group center . 
himmler believed the germanization process in eastern europe would be complete when `` in the east dwell only men with truly german ,  germanic blood '' . 
in august 1939, germany and the soviet union signed a non-aggression pact in moscow known as the molotov–ribbentrop pact . 
the two panzer armies now trapped four soviet armies and parts of two others . 
with the soviet forces cut in half ,  the attack on the karelian isthmus could commence . 
the initial momentum of the german ground and air attack completely destroyed the soviet organizational command and control within the first few hours ,  paralyzing every level of command from the infantry platoon to the soviet high command in moscow . 
on 9 july it began its attack towards the soviet defenses along the luga river in leningrad oblast . 
the german government now publicly predicted the imminent capture of moscow and convinced foreign correspondents of a pending soviet collapse . 
although the soviet high command was alarmed by this ,  stalin's belief that the third reich was unlikely to attack only two years after signing the molotov–ribbentrop pact resulted in a slow soviet preparation . 
albert speer said that oil had been a major factor in the decision to invade the soviet union . 
australasia comprises australia ,  new zealand ,  the island of new guinea ,  and neighbouring islands in the pacific ocean . 
the first settlers of australia ,  new guinea ,  and the large islands just to the east arrived between 50,000 and 30,000 years ago . 
oceania extends to new guinea in the west ,  the bonin islands in the northwest ,  the hawaiian islands in the northeast ,  rapa nui and sala y gómez island in the east ,  and macquarie island in the south . 
the largest and most populous country in oceania is australia ,  with sydney being the largest city of both oceania and australia . 
polynesia ,  stretching from hawaii in the north to new zealand in the south ,  also encompasses tuvalu ,  tokelau ,  samoa ,  tonga and the kermadec islands to the west ,  the cook islands ,  society islands and austral islands in the center ,  and the marquesas islands ,  tuamotu ,  mangareva islands ,  and easter island to the east . 
melanesia ,  to the southwest ,  includes new guinea ,  the world's second largest island after greenland and by far the largest of the pacific islands . 
among these are bougainville ,  hawaii ,  and solomon islands . 
one of the first land offensives in oceania was the occupation of german samoa in august 1914 by new zealand forces . 
he was the first known european explorer to reach these islands . 
the islands at the geographic extremes of oceania are the bonin islands ,  a politically integral part of japan; hawaii ,  a state of the united states; clipperton island ,  a possession of france; the juan fernández islands ,  belonging to chile; and the campbell islands ,  belonging to new zealand . 
the tuatara is a notable reptile endemic to new zealand . 
the tasman sea ,  and part of zealandia then locked together with australia to form the australian plate  -lrb-  40 ma  -rrb-  ,  and a new plate boundary was created between the australian plate and pacific plate . 
the other main melanesian groups from north to south are the bismarck archipelago ,  the solomon islands archipelago ,  santa cruz ,  vanuatu ,  fiji and new caledonia . 
migrating from south-east asia ,  they appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the solomon islands archipelago ,  including makira and possibly the smaller islands farther to the east . 
the first people of the northern mariana islands navigated to the islands at some period between 4000 bc to 2000 bc from south-east asia . 
particularly along the north coast of new guinea and in the islands north and east of new guinea ,  the austronesian people ,  who had migrated into the area somewhat more than 3,000 years ago ,  came into contact with these pre-existing populations of papuan-speaking peoples . 
most islands in the pacific are high islands  -lrb-  volcanic islands  -rrb-  ,  such as ,  easter island ,  american samoa and fiji ,  among others ,  having peaks up to 1300 m rising abruptly from the shore . 
in its periphery ,  oceania sprawls 28 degrees north to the bonin islands in the northern hemisphere ,  and 55 degrees south to macquarie island in the southern hemisphere . 
oceanian islands are of four basic types: continental islands ,  high islands ,  coral reefs and uplifted coral platforms . 
other religions in the region include islam ,  buddhism and hinduism ,  which are prominent minority religions in australia and new zealand . 
micronesia ,  which lies north of the equator and west of the international date line ,  includes the mariana islands in the northwest ,  the caroline islands in the center ,  the marshall islands to the west and the islands of kiribati in the southeast . 
it is extremely rare at sea level in the north island . 
the combined oral contraceptive pill  -lrb-  cocp  -rrb-  ,  often referred to as the birth control pill or colloquially as `` the pill '' ,  is a type of birth control that is designed to be taken orally by women . 
the pill was a catalyst for the sexual revolution . 
one third of women aged 16–49 in the united kingdom currently use either the combined pill or progestogen-only pill ,  compared with less than 3% of women in japan . 
in the united states ,  the organized crime control act  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- defines organized crime as `` the unlawful activities of  .  .  .  a highly organized ,  disciplined association  .  .  . ``  . 
bureaucratic/corporate organized crime groups are defined by the general rigidity of their internal structures . 
as it turned out ,  she hated it as much as victor and margaret did ,  and the waxwork ended up in the dustbin . 
such episodes include: victor ,  margaret and mrs warboys stuck in a traffic jam; victor and margaret in bed suffering insomnia; victor left alone in the house waiting to see if he has to take part in jury service; victor and margaret having a long wait in their solicitor's waiting room; and victor and margaret trying to cope during a power cut on the hottest night of the year . 
great aunt joyce and uncle dick - unseen characters ,  they are often mentioned by victor and margaret ,  as an aging and grim couple and victor and margaret dread having anything to do with them . 
amongst other witnesses to victor's wrath are tactless family friend jean warboys ,  and next-door couple patrick  -lrb-  victor's nemesis  -rrb-  and pippa trench . 
margaret meldrew  -lrb-  née pellow  -rrb-   -lrb-  annette crosbie  -rrb-  – victor's long-suffering ,  tolerant and kind-hearted wife . 
alfred meldrew  -lrb-  richard pearson  -rrb-  - victor's absent-minded brother ,  who lives in new zealand . 
when victor reminds her that the woman actually fell from a cliff ,  margaret retorts she only did so because `` she went to the seaside to convalesce '' . 
patrick trench  -lrb-  angus deayton  -rrb-  – patrick and his wife pippa live next door to victor ,  and often catches victor engrossed in seemingly preposterous situations ,  all of which in context are perfectly innocuous . 
victor subsequently invites the bemused pair to stay; this and later incidents cause patrick to suspect that victor is quite insane ,  possibly bordering on malicious . 
despite their animosity towards each other ,  victor ends up saving patrick's life in `` the wisdom of the witch '' . 
victor meldrew  -lrb-  richard wilson  -rrb-  – victor is the main protagonist of the sitcom and finds himself constantly battling against all that life throws at him as he becomes entangled in complicated misfortunes and farcical situations . 
the series features the exploits of victor meldrew ,  played by richard wilson ,  and his long-suffering wife ,  margaret ,  played by annette crosbie . 
however ,  patrick's rift with victor eventually transforms him into a rather cynical character  -lrb-  much like victor  -rrb-  ,  and he often responds to him in similarly vindictive ways as a means of trying to settle the score . 
the meldrews' neighbour on the other side ,  overly cheery charity worker nick swainey ,  also adds to victor's frustration . 
he is not seen again ,  but keeps in touch with the meldrews ,  as victor is seen looking at some photographs alfred had sent over in `` the trial '' . 
nick swainey  -lrb-  owen brenman  -rrb-  – the excessively cheerful and often oblivious mr swainey appeared in the first episode ,  encouraging victor to join his oaps' trip to eastbourne ,  and being greeted with victor's trademark abuse . 
jean warboys  -lrb-  doreen mantle  -rrb-  – mrs warboys is a friend of margaret  -lrb-  and a rather annoying one in victor's eyes  -rrb-  who attached herself to the meldrews ,  accompanying them on many of their exploits . 
in the episode `` the secret of the seven sorcerers '' ,  patrick is heard talking to her on the radio ,  seeking her advice on how to cope when victor and margaret invite him and pippa around to dinner . 
not all ottomans were muslims and not all ottoman muslims were turks ,  but by 1923, the majority of people living within the borders of the new turkish republic identified as turks . 
the ottoman turks  -lrb-  or osmanlı turks ,    -rrb-  were the turkish-speaking population of the ottoman empire who formed the base of the state's military and ruling classes . 
the `` ottomans '' became first known to the west in the 14th century when they migrated westward into the seljuk empire ,  in anatolia . 
ottoman poetry included epic length verse ,  but is better known for shorter forms such as the gazel . 
in 2011 omg formed the cloud standards customer council . 
of the many standards maintained by the omg ,  11 have been ratified as iso standards . 
in 2007 the business motivation model  -lrb-  bmm  -rrb-  was adopted as a standard by the omg . 
these standards are: omg offers a number of professional certifications:
in 2006 the business process model and notation  -lrb-  bpmn  -rrb-  was adopted as a standard by omg . 
omg provides only specifications ,  and does not provide implementations . 
in september 2011, the omg board of directors unanimously voted to adopt the vector signal and image processing library  -lrb-  vsipl  -rrb-  as the latest omg specification . 
in 1998 the `` new oxford dictionary of english ''  -lrb-  `` node ''  -rrb-  was published . 
the `` oxford english dictionary 2 '' was printed in 20 volumes . 
it was first published in 1924.
version 2  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- included the `` oxford english dictionary '' `` additions '' of 1993 and 1997.
the oxford english dictionary  -lrb-  oed  -rrb-  is the principal historical dictionary of the english language ,  published by oxford university press . 
by the time the new supplement was completed ,  it was clear that the full text of the dictionary would need to be computerized . 
in 1896, bradley moved to oxford university . 
the `` concise oxford dictionary '' is a different work ,  which aims to cover current english only ,  without the historical focus . 
later the same year ,  the society agreed to the project in principle ,  with the title `` a new english dictionary on historical principles ''  -lrb-  `` ned ''  -rrb-  . 
a new approach was called for ,  and for this reason it was decided to embark on a new ,  complete revision of the dictionary . 
work began on the dictionary in 1857, but it was only in 1884 that it began to be published in unbound fascicles as work continued on the project ,  under the name of `` a new english dictionary on historical principles; founded mainly on the materials collected by the philological society '' . 
the new system has also simplified the use of the quotations database ,  and enabled staff in new york to work directly on the dictionary in the same way as their oxford-based counterparts . 
on 14 march 2000, the `` oxford english dictionary online ''  -lrb-  `` oed online ''  -rrb-  became available to subscribers . 
the society ultimately realized that the number of unlisted words would be far more than the number of words in the english dictionaries of the 19th century ,  and shifted their idea from covering only words that were not already in english dictionaries to a larger project . 
once `` node '' was published ,  a similarly brand-new edition of the `` concise oxford dictionary '' followed ,  this time based on an abridgement of `` node '' rather than the `` oed ''; `` node ''  -lrb-  under the new title of the `` oxford dictionary of english '' ,  or `` ode ''  -rrb-  continues to be principal source for oxford's product line of current-english dictionaries ,  including the `` new oxford american dictionary '' ,  with the `` oed '' now only serving as the basis for scholarly historical dictionaries . 
the first electronic version of the dictionary was made available in 1988.
the `` taffety tarts '' word entered the oed for the first time . 
if the editors felt that the dictionary would have to grow larger ,  it would; it was an important work ,  and worth the time and money to properly finish . 
as a historical dictionary ,  the `` oxford english dictionary '' explains words by showing their development rather than merely their present-day usages . 
in 1987, the second supplement was published as a third volume to the `` compact edition '' . 
john simpson was the first chief editor of the `` oed3 '' . 
the oup chose a middle approach: combining the new material with the existing supplement to form a larger replacement supplement . 
however ,  `` -ze '' is also sometimes treated as an americanism insofar as the `` -ze '' suffix has crept into words where it did not originally belong ,  as with `` analyse ''  -lrb-  british english  -rrb-  ,  which is spelt `` analyze '' in american english . 
a completely new edition was produced from the `` oed2 '' and published in 1993, with revisions in 2002 and 2007.
this influenced later volumes of this and other lexicographical works . 
otto ii died in 983 at the age of 28 after a ten-year reign . 
moreover ,  in 983 otto ii experienced a great slav rising against his rule . 
upon otto's death in 912, his son henry the fowler succeeded him as duke of saxony . 
otto i ,  duke of saxony upon the death of his father in 936, was elected king within a few weeks . 
the ottonian dynasty  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a saxon dynasty of german monarchs  -lrb-  919–1024 -rrb- ,  named after three of its kings and holy roman emperors named otto ,  especially its first emperor otto i . 
the mainland is the largest island of orkney . 
the norse knew mainland ,  orkney as ' `` mainland '' or as ' `` horse island '' . 
inter-island ferry services connect all the inhabited islands to orkney mainland ,  and are operated by orkney ferries ,  a company owned by orkney islands council . 
the orkney movement ,  a political party that supported devolution for orkney from the rest of scotland ,  contested the 1987 general election as the orkney and shetland movement  -lrb-  a coalition of the orkney movement and its equivalent for shetland  -rrb-  . 
orkney is within the highlands and islands electoral region . 
orkney  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the orkney islands ,  is an archipelago in the northern isles of scotland ,  situated off the north coast of the isle of great britain . 
ferries serve both to link orkney to the rest of scotland ,  and also to link together the various islands of the orkney archipelago . 
ferry services operate between orkney and the scottish mainland and shetland on the following routes:
the other islands in the group are classified as north or south of the mainland . 
highland and islands airports operates the main airport in orkney ,  kirkwall airport . 
however the money was never paid ,  and orkney was annexed by the kingdom of scotland in 1472.
this comes mainly from wind turbines situated across orkney . 
the local council is orkney islands council ,  one of only three councils in scotland with a majority of elected members who are independents . 
orkney contains some of the oldest and best-preserved neolithic sites in europe ,  and the `` heart of neolithic orkney '' is a designated unesco world heritage site . 
orkney was invaded and forcibly annexed by norway in 875 and settled by the norse . 
in the 2014 scottish independence referendum 67.2% of voters in orkney voted no to the question `` should scotland be an independent country ? `` 
orkney is separated from the mainland of scotland by the pentland firth ,  a wide seaway between brough ness on the island of south ronaldsay and duncansby head in caithness . 
lamprophyre dykes of late permian age are found throughout orkney . 
during the 18th century jacobite risings ,  orkney was largely jacobite in its sympathies . 
orkney is represented in the house of commons as part of the orkney and shetland constituency ,  which elects one member of parliament  -lrb-  mp  -rrb-  ,  the current incumbent being alistair carmichael . 
according to the `` historia norwegiæ '' ,  orkney was named after an earl called orkan . 
the pentland skerries lie further south ,  closer to the scottish mainland . 
orkney islands council consists of 21 members ,  20 of whom are independent ,  that is they do not stand as representatives of a political party . 
both orkney and shetland saw a significant influx of norwegian settlers during the late 8th and early 9th centuries . 
within orkney ,  the council operates airfields on most of the larger islands including stronsay ,  eday ,  north ronaldsay ,  westray ,  papa westray ,  and sanday . 
hoy  -lrb-  from norse `` háey '' meaning `` high island ''  -rrb-  is an island in orkney ,  scotland ,  measuring — ranked largest in the archipelago after mainland . 
the ferry links the islands of rousay ,  egilsay ,  and wyre with each other ,  and with the mainland of orkney . 
with an area of  ,  it is the fifth largest of the orkney islands . 
his publications about rousay include `` from my rousay schoolbag ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ; `` rousay roots ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb-; `` in dreams we moor ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb-  . 
rousay  -lrb-   meaning rolf's island  -rrb-  is a small ,  hilly island about north of mainland ,  the largest island in the orkney islands of scotland ,  and has been nicknamed `` the egypt of the north '' ,  due to its archaeological diversity and importance . 
the poet pauline stainer spent several years on the island ,  and in 1999 published a collection of her poems about rousay ,  `` parable island '' . 
in the 2001 census ,  rousay had a population of 212 people . 
the hilliest orkney island after hoy ,  it offers good views of neighbouring islands from blotchnifiold  ,  and keirfea or knitchen  -lrb-  both over   -rrb-  . 
human observations are biased toward confirming the observer's conscious and unconscious expectations and view of the world; we ``  ''see what we expect to see '' '' . 
observation in philosophical terms is the process of filtering sensory information through the thought process . 
computerized instruments often keep a copy of the `` raw data '' from sensors before processing ,  which is the ultimate defense against processing bias ,  and similarly scientific standards require preservation of the original unenhanced `` raw '' versions of images used as research data . 
one problem encountered throughout scientific fields is that the observation may affect the process being observed ,  resulting in a different outcome than if the process was unobserved . 
considered as a physical process itself ,  all forms of observation  -lrb-  human or instrumental  -rrb-  involve amplification and are thus thermodynamically irreversible processes ,  increasing entropy . 
measurement reduces an observation to a number which can be recorded ,  and two observations which result in the same number are equal within the resolution of the process . 
the `` ohio ''-class boats are the largest submarines ever built for the u . s .  navy . 
the `` ohio '' class was designed in the 1970s to carry the concurrently-designed trident submarine-launched ballistic missile . 
all the `` ohio ''-class submarines ,  except for  ,  are named for u . s .  states ,  which u . s .  navy tradition had previously reserved for battleships and cruisers . 
thus ,  the total cost to refit the four boats is just under $700 million per vessel . 
note: boats based at naval base kitsap ,  washington are operated by the u . s .  pacific fleet ,  while boats based at naval submarine base kings bay ,  georgia are operated by u . s .  fleet forces command ,   -lrb-  formerly the u . s .  atlantic fleet  -rrb-  . 
in 1994, the nuclear posture review study determined that ,  of the 18 `` ohio '' ssbns the u . s .  navy would be operating in total ,  14 would be sufficient for the strategic needs of the u . s . 
