peterborough has a population of  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
peterborough's population grew by 45.4% between 1971 and 1991.
in 2018 peterborough bandy club was founded . 
peterborough is twinned with the following municipalities:
peterborough has one independent boarding school: the peterborough school at westwood house ,  founded in 1895.
the city has two colleges of further and higher education ,  peterborough regional college  -lrb-  established in 1946 as peterborough technical college  -rrb-  and city college peterborough  -lrb-  known as peterborough college of adult education until 2010 -rrb- . 
the norwich and peterborough  -lrb-  n&p  -rrb-  was formed by the merger of the norwich building society and the peterborough building society in 1986.
peterborough  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a cathedral city in cambridgeshire ,  england ,  with a population of 196,640 in 2015.
peterborough town cricket club and the city of peterborough hockey club compete at their shared ground in westwood . 
university centre peterborough opened to the first 850 students in 2009.
peterborough sports fc play at lincoln road and compete one division above peterborough northern star in the northern premier league . 
bretton – dogsthorpe – eastfield – eastgate – fengate – fletton – gunthorpe – the hamptons – longthorpe – millfield – netherton – newark – new england – the ortons – parnwell – paston – ravensthorpe – stanground – walton – werrington – west town – westwood – woodston
the anglican diocese of peterborough covers roughly 1,200 square miles  -lrb-  3,100 km²  -rrb-  ,  including the whole of northamptonshire ,  rutland and the soke of peterborough . 
peterborough has been used as a location for various television programmes and films . 
peterborough phantoms are the city's ice hockey team ,  playing in the nihl at planet ice peterborough ,  located on mallard way in bretton . 
peterborough trades council ,  formed in 1898, is affiliated to the trades union congress . 
ailsworth – bainton – barnack – borough fen – castor – deeping gate – etton – eye – eye green – glinton – helpston – marholm – maxey – newborough – northborough – peakirk – southorpe – st .  martin's without – sutton – thorney – thornhaugh – ufford – upton – wansford – wittering – wothorpe
these are salaam fm ,  catering for the local muslim population ,  which started broadcasting on 106.2 mhz in 2016 and peterborough community radio  -lrb-  pcr fm  -rrb-  ,  a station formed as a result of a merger between former internet stations peterborough fm and radio peterborough ,  which started broadcasting on 103.2 mhz in 2017.
railworld is a railway museum located beside peterborough nene valley railway station . 
peterborough museum and art gallery ,  built in 1816, housed the city's first infirmary from 1857 to 1928.
 ,  peterborough offered classes in italian ,  urdu and punjabi in its primary schools . 
peterborough united football club ,  known as `` the posh '' ,  has been the local football team since 1934.
the local topography is flat ,  and in some places the land lies below sea level ,  for example in parts of the fens to the east of peterborough . 
the nene park ,  which opened in 1978, covers a site long ,  from slightly west of castor to the centre of peterborough . 
as part of the government's m11 corridor ,  peterborough is committed to creating 17,500 jobs with the population growing to 200,000 by 2020.
in march 2017 the first bandy session in england for over a century was held in peterborough ,  in the form of rink bandy . 
peterborough is covered by six local radio stations and one regional station ,  though only two community stations broadcast from the city . 
peterborough enjoys a wide range of events including the annual east of england show ,  peterborough festival and camra beer festival ,  which takes place on the river embankment in late august . 
the contrasting form `` gildenburgh '' is also found in the 12th century history of the abbey ,  the peterborough version of the `` anglo-saxon chronicle ''  -lrb-  see peterborough chronicle below  -rrb-  and in a history of the abbey by the monk hugh candidus . 
the city is currently without a university ,  after loughborough university closed its peterborough campus in 2003.
christianity has the largest following in peterborough ,  in particular the church of england ,  with a significant number of parish churches and a cathedral . 
peterborough museum also holds regular temporary exhibitions ,  weekend events and guided tours . 
the anglo-saxon period saw the establishment of a monastery ,  medeshamstede ,  which later became peterborough cathedral . 
figures plotting growth from 1995 to 2004, revealed that peterborough had become the most successful economy among unitary authorities in the east of england . 
peterborough formed its first territorial army unit ,  the 6th northamptonshire rifle volunteer corps ,  in 1860.
a number of ships and english steam locomotives have also been named after the giant . 
here he is supposed to have composed `` the cyclops '' ,  with the tyrant cast in the role of the giant ,  while the successful lovers are the poet and his galatea . 
galatea admits that she does not love polyphemus but is pleased to have been chosen by him in preference to all her companions . 
later in the century joseph haydn composed `` acide e galatea ''  -lrb-  1763 -rrb- as his first opera while in vienna . 
some later classical writers link his name with the nymph galatea and present him in a different light . 
next morning ,  the giant kills and eats two more and leaves the cave to graze his sheep . 
the visionary interpretation of the story also finds its echo in odilon redon's 1913 painting `` the cyclops '' in which the giant towers over the slope on which galatea sleeps . 
there were also two other lovers ,  dorinda and lisia ,  with orgonte lisia's rival for dorinda's love . 
after the giant returns in the evening and eats two more of the men ,  odysseus offers polyphemus some strong and undiluted wine given to him earlier on his journey . 
paintings that include polyphemus in the story of acis and galatea can be grouped according to their themes . 
there have also been two spanish musical items that reference polyphemus' name . 
polyphemus  -lrb-  ; `` polyphēmos ''  -rrb-  is the giant son of poseidon and thoosa in greek mythology ,  one of the cyclopes described in homer's `` odyssey '' . 
in the world . 
it is also the most spoken language in south america and the second-most spoken in latin america after spanish ,  one of the 10 most spoken languages in africa and is an official language of the european union ,  mercosur ,  oas ,  ecowas and the african union . 
in the second period of old portuguese ,  in the 15th and 16th centuries ,  with the portuguese discoveries ,  the language was taken to many regions of africa ,  asia ,  and the americas . 
conjugation of has three different forms in brazil  -lrb-  verb `` to see '':  ,  in the traditional second person ,   ,  in the third person ,  and  ,  in the innovative second person  -rrb-  ,  the conjugation used in the brazilian states of pará ,  santa catarina and maranhão being generally traditional second person ,  the kind that is used in other portuguese-speaking countries and learned in brazilian schools . 
in the first part of the galician-portuguese period  -lrb-  from the 12th to the 14th century  -rrb-  ,  the language was increasingly used for documents and other written forms . 
portuguese is a globalized language spoken officially on five continents ,  and as a second language by millions worldwide . 
informal speech employs `` tu '' followed by second person verbs ,  formal language retains the formal  ,  followed by the third person conjugation . 
most literate portuguese speakers were also literate in latin; and thus they easily adopted latin words into their writing – and eventually speech – in portuguese . 
by the mid-16th century ,  portuguese had become a `` lingua franca '' in asia and africa ,  used not only for colonial administration and trade but also for communication between local officials and europeans of all nationalities . 
in some parts of former portuguese india ,  namely goa and daman and diu ,  the language is still spoken by about 10,000 people . 
when the romans arrived at the iberian peninsula in 216 bc ,  they brought the latin language with them ,  from which all romance languages descend . 
in 2010, he starred on broadway in `` the pee-wee herman show '' . 
in january 2009, reubens hinted that negotiations were under way for his stage show to come back ,  and in august the return of `` the pee-wee herman show '' was announced . 
the success of `` the pee-wee herman show '' prompted warner bros .  to hire reubens to write a script for a full-length pee-wee herman film . 
the opening credits of the show were sung by cyndi lauper . 
with the help of other groundlings like john paragon ,  phil hartman and lynne marie stewart ,  pee-wee acquired a small group of followers and reubens took his show to the roxy theatre where ``  ''the pee-wee herman show '' '' ran for five sellout months ,  doing midnight shows for adults and weekly matinees for children ,  moving into the mainstream when hbo aired `` the pee-wee herman show '' in 1981 as part of their series `` on location '' . 
a twitter account ,  a facebook account and a new website were made for pee-wee after the show changed venues . 
paul reubens  -lrb-  ; né rubenfeld; born august 27, 1952 -rrb- is an american actor ,  writer ,  film producer ,  game show host ,  and comedian ,  best known for his character pee-wee herman . 
both psas were praised for showing the dangers of drugs in a manner kids could understand . 
the show was originally scheduled to begin november 8 and continue until the 29th at the music box theater in hollywood . 
 -lrb-  reubens would later voice lock for the video game ``  '' in 2004.  -rrb- 
reubens had not always thought of his character as one for children ,  but sometime during the mid-1980s ,  he started forming pee-wee into the best role model he possibly could ,  making of his show a morally positive show that cared about issues like racial diversity . 
in 2016, reubens helped write and starred in the netflix original film `` pee-wee's big holiday '' ,  reprising his role as pee-wee herman . 
reubens was so angry and bitter that he decided he would borrow money and start his own show in los angeles using the character he had been developing during the last few years ,  `` pee-wee herman '' . 
on november 11, 2010, the show relocated to new york for a limited run at the stephen sondheim theatre ,  selling over $3 million in advance tickets . 
by 1999, reubens had given several interviews as himself and made public appearances while promoting the movie `` mystery men '' ,  the first being on `` the tonight show with jay leno '' in 1999.
 ''playhouse '' was designed as an educational yet entertaining and artistic show for children and ,  despite being greatly influenced by 1950s shows reubens watched as a child like `` the rocky and bullwinkle show '' ,  `` the mickey mouse club '' ,  `` captain kangaroo '' and `` howdy doody '' ,  it quickly acquired a dual audience of kids and grownups . 
at the time of release in 1985, the film received mixed reviews ,  but `` pee-wee's big adventure '' developed into a cult film . 
during the mid-1980s ,  reubens traveled the united states with a whole new `` the pee-wee herman show '' ,  playing notably at the guthrie theater in minneapolis ,  caroline's in new york city and ,  in 1984, in front of a full carnegie hall . 
in 1987, reubens provided the voice of rex ,  the main robot in the george lucas produced disneyland attraction ,  star tours ,  and reprised the role of pee-wee herman in cameo appearances in the film `` back to the beach '' and tv show `` sesame street '' ,  the latter of which made a cameo in `` playhouse '' . 
in geometry ,  a prismatoid is a polyhedron whose vertices all lie in two parallel planes . 
a phantom kangaroo is a report of kangaroos ,  wallabies ,  or their accompanying footprints in areas where there is no native population . 
in 2013 in oklahoma a kangaroo was reportedly recorded by hunters in a field . 
also in 2013, the ridgefield press reported that a motorist in north salem ,  new york captured on video what he thought was a kangaroo ,  and published the video on their website . 
in 1978 in menomonee falls ,  wisconsin ,  two men photographed a large kangaroo beside the highway . 
between 2003 and 2010, there was a series of phantom kangaroo sightings in the mayama mountain district of ōsaki ,  miyagi city in miyagi prefecture
the main campus sits on about in princeton . 
princeton university is a private ivy league research university in princeton ,  new jersey . 
in 1969, princeton university first admitted women as undergraduates . 
about 90 faculty members at princeton university are affiliated with it . 
forbes is located on the site of the historic princeton inn ,  a gracious hotel overlooking the princeton golf course . 
in 2003, princeton broke ground for a sixth college named whitman college after its principal sponsor ,  meg whitman ,  who graduated from princeton in 1977.
with an endowment of $22.15 billion ,  princeton university is among the wealthiest universities in the world . 
buried in the ground at the center of the lawn south of nassau hall is the `` big cannon , ``  which was left in princeton by british troops as they fled following the battle of princeton . 
they were considered regular students for their year on campus ,  but were not candidates for a princeton degree . 
in years when the princeton football team beats the teams of both harvard university and yale university in the same season ,  princeton celebrates with a bonfire on cannon green . 
princeton university has several apartment facilities for graduate students and their dependents . 
today ,  princeton university and princeton theological seminary maintain separate institutions with ties that include services such as cross-registration and mutual library access . 
its home in princeton was nassau hall ,  named for the royal house of orange-nassau of william iii of england . 
the princeton university chapel is located on the north side of campus ,  near nassau street . 
it was removed to the campus under cover of night by princeton students in 1838 and buried in its current location in 1840.
the tony-award-winning mccarter theatre was built by the princeton triangle club ,  a student performance group ,  using club profits and a gift from princeton university alumnus thomas mccarter . 
in 1896, the college officially changed its name from the college of new jersey to princeton university to honor the town in which it resides . 
in `` princeton review '''s rankings of `` softer '' aspects of students' college experience ,  princeton university was ranked first in `` students happy with financial aid '' and third in `` happiest students '' ,  behind clemson and brown . 
the trustees of princeton university ,  a 40-member board ,  is responsible for the overall direction of the university . 
the shea rowing center on the lake's shore continues to serve as the headquarters for princeton rowing . 
construction finished in 2007, and whitman college was inaugurated as princeton's sixth residential college that same year . 
from 2001 to 2018, princeton university was ranked either first or second among national universities by `` u . s .  news & world report '' ,  holding the top spot for 16 of those 18 years . 
the princeton environmental institute  -lrb-  pei  -rrb-  is an `` interdisciplinary center of environmental research ,  education ,  and outreach '' at the university . 
the institution moved to newark in 1747, then to the current site nine years later ,  and renamed itself princeton university in 1896.
the passenger pigeon was a member of the pigeon and dove family ,  columbidae . 
the passenger pigeon or wild pigeon  -lrb-  `` ectopistes migratorius ''  -rrb-  is an extinct species of pigeon that was endemic to north america . 
the leg bones were similar to those of other pigeons . 
the passenger pigeon was one of the most social of all land birds . 
it is undocumented how long a wild pigeon lived . 
two parasites have been recorded on passenger pigeons . 
the passenger pigeon was sexually dimorphic in size and coloration . 
the passenger pigeon was sexually dimorphic in size and coloration . 
in a 2012 study ,  the nuclear dna of the passenger pigeon was analyzed for the first time ,  and its relationship with the `` patagioenas '' pigeons was confirmed . 
the pigeon could eat and digest of acorns per day . 
the passenger pigeon was supposedly descended from `` zenaida '' pigeons that had adapted to the woodlands on the plains of central north america . 
the passenger pigeon was an important source of food for the people of north america . 
furthermore ,  the parent pigeons that would raise the cloned passenger pigeons would belong to a different species ,  with a different way of rearing young . 
though the western forests were ecologically similar to those in the east ,  these were occupied by band-tailed pigeons ,  which may have kept out the passenger pigeons through competitive exclusion . 
the internal anatomy of the passenger pigeon has rarely been described . 
there is no record of a wild pigeon dying of either disease or parasites . 
the pigeon was considered so numerous that 30,000 birds had to be killed to claim the prize in one competition . 
instead ,  passenger pigeons may have spread seeds by regurgitation ,  or after dying . 
the pigeon was awkward when on the ground ,  and moved around with jerky ,  alert steps . 
in modern french ,  the bird is known as `` tourte voyageuse '' or `` pigeon migrateur '' ,  among other names . 
the seneca developed a pigeon dance as a way of showing their gratitude . 
in 1909, martha and her two male companions at the cincinnati zoo became the only known surviving passenger pigeons . 
chief simon pokagon of the potawatomi stated that his people called the pigeon `` o-me-me-wog '' ,  and that the europeans did not adopt native names for the bird ,  as it reminded them of their domesticated pigeons ,  instead calling them `` wild '' pigeons ,  as they called the native peoples `` wild '' men . 
the passenger pigeon was nomadic ,  constantly migrating in search of food ,  shelter ,  or nesting grounds . 
after feeding ,  the pigeons perched on branches and digested the food stored in their crop overnight . 
by the mid-19th century ,  railroads had opened new opportunities for pigeon hunters . 
brisson's description was later shown to have been based on a female passenger pigeon . 
generally ,  the eggs were laid during the first two weeks of april across the pigeon's range . 
there were a wide variety of other methods used to capture and kill passenger pigeons . 
burzi no longer owns the php-nuke site . 
php-nuke was originally a fork of the thatware news portal system by david norman . 
some palaces of former heads of state ,  such english and spanish royal governors and the hawaiian royal family still exist . 
after the 2006 revolution ,  this royal palace is turned into a public museum . 
bhaktapur durbar square is the plaza in front of the royal palace of the old bhaktapur kingdom . 
it is also a unesco world heritage site . 
kathmandu durbar square  -lrb-  basantapur darbar kshetra  -rrb-  in front of the old royal palace of the former kathmandu kingdom is one of three durbar  -lrb-  royal palace  -rrb-  squares in the kathmandu valley in nepal ,  all of which are unesco world heritage sites . 
one of its attraction is the ancient royal palace where the malla kings of lalitpur resided . 
previously ,  it had been known as walkfares ,  but like several other palaces ,  the name stuck even once the royal connection ended . 
the royal palace was originally at dattaraya square and was later moved to durbar square . 
the bhaktapur durbar square is located in the current town of bhaktapur ,  also known as bhadgaon ,  which lies 13 km east of kathmandu . 
in sweden the large stockholm palace was built in 1760, and remains the official royal residence ,  but at the current time is only used for official purposes while the swedish royal family resides in the more modest drottningholm palace . 
due to its relatively small geography ,  most of portugal's palaces are former royal residences . 
many german castles after the middle ages were mainly built as royal or ducal palaces rather than as a fortified building . 
blenheim palace was built ,  on a different site ,  in the grounds of the disused royal palace of woodstock ,  and the name was also part of the extraordinary honour when the house was given by a grateful nation to a great general ,  the duke of marlborough . 
in italy ,  any urban building built as a grand residence is a `` palazzo ''; these are often no larger than a victorian townhouse . 
the first capital of the khanate was the bayat castle built in 1748
this palace consists of 55 windows so it is also known as '55 windowed palace' . 
the collection ranges from the 15th to the 19th century . 
there are other palaces built by the nobility ,  such as ,  most notably palazzo parisio in valletta and palazzo dragonara in st julians . 
there are various other temples and structures in and around patan durbar square built by the newa people . 
the palace is the largest palace in europe with over 2,800 rooms but at the current time is of use for only governmental business while the royal family resides in the smaller palacio de la zarzuela . 
a palace is a grand residence ,  especially a royal residence ,  or the home of a head of state or some other high-ranking dignitary ,  such as a bishop or archbishop . 
the first palaces in russia were built about a thousand years ago for the grand dukes of kiev . 
it was said to have been built of wood until it had to be rebuilt after a fire that burned down the entire palace complex . 
the most prominent and official palaces are the stari dvor and the novi dvor  -lrb-  old and new court ,  respectively  -rrb-  in the center of belgrade and the royal compound which includes the beli dvor and kraljevski dvor  -lrb-  royal palace  -rrb-  in the belgrade suburb ,  dedinje . 
it is not just a romantic longing for a royal experience ,  but also the search for the truly authentic indian experience that brings thousands of heritage lovers to india's palaces . 
the people in the southern part of philippines ,  built the same wooden palaces such as `` langgal '' of tausug . 
when the order began to build a new capital valletta in 1566, a new grandmaster's palace and a series of new auberges were built . 
the most important royal `` palazzi '' in italy are those in caserta ,  naples ,  palermo ,  turin ,  as well as the quirinale palace in rome . 
other palaces include the crețulescu palace in bucharest ,  built for the crețulescu family ,  peles palace ,  built by king carol i of romania and the palace of culture from iași . 
during the renaissance palaces were built in lebanon ,  especially in the chouf region of mount lebanon . 
the largest in the world is the palace of the parliament in bucharest ,  romania . 
there are also several palaces resembling castles or medieval gothic residences ,  most notably moszna castle ,  książ castle and the warsaw royal castle . 
currently ,  the royal family and prime minister live in the more modest palace of zarzuela and palace of moncloa respectively . 
in indonesia ,  palaces are known as `` istana ''  -lrb-  malay and indonesian  -rrb-  ,  or `` kraton ''  -lrb-  javanese and sundanese  -rrb-  . 
the earliest known palaces were the royal residences of the egyptian pharaohs at thebes ,  featuring an outer wall enclosing labyrinthine buildings and courtyards . 
white wrote the screenplay for the film . 
in 1961, white published `` riders in the chariot '' . 
that became white's first love affair . 
a portrait of white by louis kahan won the 1962 archibald prize . 
in 1968, white wrote `` the vivisector '' ,  a searing character portrait of an artist . 
white was also the inaugural recipient of the miles franklin award . 
white was born in knightsbridge ,  london ,  to victor martindale white and ruth withycombe ,  both australians ,  in their apartment overlooking hyde park ,  london on 28 may 1912.
director jim sharman introduced himself to white while walking down a sydney street ,  sharman asking white if he could make a film of `` the night the prowler '' . 
white and lascaris lived together in cairo for six years before moving to a small farm purchased by white at castle hill ,  near sydney ,  in 1948.
white struggled to adjust to his new surroundings at cheltenham college ,  england . 
soon after ,  white announced that he had written his last novel ,  and from then on ,  he would write only for radio or the stage . 
in 1986 white released one last novel ,  `` memoirs of many in one '' ,  but it was published under the pen name `` alex xenophon demirjian gray '' with white named as editor . 
martin i was the last constantinopolitan `` apocrisiarius '' to be elected pope . 
he is considered a saint and martyr by the catholic church and the eastern orthodox church . 
pope martin i  -lrb-  ; born between 590 and 600, died 16 september 655 -rrb- reigned from 21 july 649 to his death in 655.
martin was very energetic in publishing the decrees of the lateran council of 649 in an encyclical ,  and constans replied by enjoining his exarch  -lrb-  governor  -rrb-  in italy to arrest the pope should he persist in this line of conduct and send martin as a prisoner from rome to constantinople . 
pope martin iv  -lrb-  ; c .  1210/1220 – 28 march 1285 -rrb- ,  born simon de brion ,  was pope from 22 february 1281 to his death in 1285.
pope john xxi was in contact with cardinal simon . 
he was the last french pope to have held court in rome; all subsequent french popes held court in avignon  -lrb-  the avignon papacy  -rrb-  . 
eventually ,  though ,  by 19 october 1279, pope nicholas recalled cardinal simon de brion . 
simon de brion's appointment as legate in france ,  made by pope gregory on 1 august 1274 continued throughout 1276.
but on 30 april 1281, pope martin handed the senatorial power over to king charles for the rest of his reign . 
cardinal simon therefore returned to france as papal legate for urban iv and also for his successor pope clement iv in 1264–1268.
on december 17, 1261, the new french pope ,  urban iv  -lrb-  jacques pantaléon  -rrb-  ,  made chancellor de brion cardinal-priest ,  with the `` titulus '' of the church of st .  cecilia . 
popes martin iv–v were actually the second and third popes by that name . 
martin declared two crusades in 1420.
the seventeenth council then met as the `` council of basel '' in february 1431 shortly before martin's death . 
martin v died in rome of a stroke on 20 february 1431 at the age of 62.
when the second pope to take the name martin was elected in 1281, there was confusion over how many popes had taken the name before . 
pope martin v  -lrb-  ; january/february 1369 – 20 february 1431 -rrb- ,  born otto  -lrb-  or oddone  -rrb-  colonna ,  was pope from 11 november 1417 to his death in 1431.
according to burton ,  pope martin authorized a crusade against africa in 1418 in relation to the slave trade . 
on 1 march 1420, pope martin v issued a bull inviting all christians to unite in a crusade against the wycliffites ,  hussites ,  and other heretics . 
the main concern of martin's pontificate from 1423 was the resumed war against braccio da montone . 
on may 14, 2011, perl 5.14 was released . 
on may 20, 2012, perl 5.16 was released . 
on may 18, 2013, perl 5.18 was released . 
on may 27, 2014, perl 5.20 was released . 
perl 5.001 was released on march 13, 1995.
perl 5.6 was released on march 22, 2000.
on april 12, 2010, perl 5.12.0 was released . 
on december 18, 2007, the 20th anniversary of perl 1.0, perl 5.10.0 was released . 
perl 5.000 was released on october 17, 1994.
perl 5.005 was released on july 22, 1998.
it is often said that `` only perl can parse perl , ``  meaning that only the perl interpreter  -lrb-  `` codice_8 ''  -rrb-  can parse the perl language  -lrb-  `` perl ''  -rrb-  ,  but even this is not ,  in general ,  true . 
in perl 5, database interfaces are implemented by perl dbi modules . 
perl 4 went through a series of maintenance releases ,  culminating in perl 4.036 in 1993.
no written specification or standard for the perl language exists for perl versions through perl 5, and there are no plans to create one for the current version of perl . 
perl is a family of two high-level ,  general-purpose ,  interpreted ,  dynamic programming languages ,  perl 5 and perl 6.
perl was originally named `` pearl '' . 
some observers credit the release of perl 5.10 with the start of the modern perl movement . 
perl 5 has been in active development since then . 
as of november 2009, rakudo perl has had regular monthly releases and now is the most complete implementation of perl 6.
the talks were aimed at being more perl 5 community centric ,  in a period where perl 6 was a hot topic . 
according to wall ,  perl has two slogans . 
o'reilly also provides `` programming republic of perl '' logos for non-commercial sites and `` powered by perl '' buttons for any site that uses perl . 
wall later stated that `` the whole intent of perl 5's module system was to encourage the growth of perl culture rather than the perl core . `` 
at this point ,  perl 6 existed only as a description of a language . 
perl 5.003 was released june 25, 1996, as a security release . 
perl 5.16 also updates the core to support unicode 6.1.
cpan is also the source for publicly available perl modules that are not part of the core perl distribution . 
perl is distributed with over 250,000 functional tests for core perl language and over 250,000 functional tests for core modules . 
perl also takes features from shell programming . 
most of what happens in perl's compile phase is compilation ,  and most of what happens in perl's run phase is execution ,  but there are significant exceptions . 
ponie is an acronym for perl on new internal engine . 
perl favors language constructs that are concise and natural for humans to write ,  even where they complicate the perl interpreter . 
languages with sov word order have a strong tendency to have other word orders in common ,  such as:
merritt ruhlen has been using the term `` proto-sapiens '' . 
in a 2011 paper ,  murray gell-mann and merritt ruhlen argued that the ancestral language had subject–object–verb  -lrb-  sov  -rrb-  word order . 
according to murray gell-mann and merritt ruhlen  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  the ancestral language would have had a basic order of subject  -lrb-  s  -rrb-  - object  -lrb-  o  -rrb-  - verb  -lrb-  v  -rrb-  or sov . 
based on these correspondences ,  ruhlen  -lrb-  1994b:105 -rrb- lists these roots for the ancestor language:
a few linguists ,  such as merritt ruhlen ,  have suggested the application of mass comparison and internal reconstruction  -lrb-  cf . 
the following table ,  adapted from ruhlen  -lrb-  1994b  -rrb-  ,  lists a selection of these forms:
for example ,  instead of saying `` the man goes to the wide river '' ,  as in english ,  ruhlen's proto-human speakers would have said `` man wide river to goes '' . 
the majority  -lrb-  56%  -rrb-  of palestinian christians live in the palestinian diaspora . 
palestinian christians  -lrb-    -rrb-  are christian citizens of the state of palestine . 
as of 2013, only 113 out of 968 of these christian schools students were in fact christians . 
there have been reports of attacks on palestinian christians in gaza from muslim extremist groups . 
christian arabs are one of the most educated groups in israel . 
there are around 1,300 christians in the gaza strip and the number of christians is steadily declining . 
in his last novel ,  the palestinian christian writer emile habibi has a character affirm that: `` there is no difference between christian and muslim: we are all palestinian in our predicament . `` 
in 2009, there were an estimated 50,000 christians in the palestinian territories ,  mostly in the west bank ,  with about 3,000 in the gaza strip . 
around 50% of palestinian christians belong to the greek orthodox church of jerusalem ,  one of the 15 churches of eastern orthodoxy . 
the british authorities in the mandate of palestine had difficulty understanding the commitment of the palestinian christians to palestinian nationalism . 
hcef advocates for solidarity on the part of western christians with christians in the holy land . 
the share of christians in the population has also decreased due to the fact that muslim palestinians generally have much higher birth rates than the christians . 
there are also many palestinian christians who are descendants of palestinian refugees from the post-1948 era who fled to christian-majority countries and formed large diasporan christian communities . 
palestinian christian owned falastin was founded in 1911 in the then arab-majority city of jaffa . 
christians within the palestinian authority constituted around one in seventy-five residents . 
most palestinian christians nowadays see themselves as culturally and linguistically arab christians with ancestors dating back to the first followers of christ . 
 ,  palestinian christians comprise approximately 1–2.5% of the population of the west bank ,  and less than 1% in the gaza strip . 
the holy land christian ecumenical foundation  -lrb-  hcef  -rrb-  was founded in 1999 by an ecumenical group of american christians to preserve the christian presence in the holy land . 
in west jerusalem ,  over 50% of christian palestinians lost their homes to the israelis ,  according to the historian sami hadawi . 
the census recorded over 200 localities with a christian population . 
today ,  chile houses the largest palestinian christian community in the world outside of the levant . 
pope marinus i  -lrb-  ; also martin ii; died 15 may 884 -rrb- was pope from 16 december 882 until his death in 884.
thus ,  when the new pope in 1281 took the name martin ,  he became pope martin iv . 
pope marinus ii  -lrb-  ; or martin iii; d .  may 946 -rrb- was pope from 30 october 942 to his death in 946.
thus ,  when the new pope in 1281 took the name martin ,  he became pope martin iv ,  when in fact he should've taken the name `` martin ii '' . 
pope marcellus i  -lrb-  6 january 255–16 january 309 -rrb- was the bishop of rome or pope from may or june 308 to his death in 309.
the work of the pope was ,  however ,  quickly interrupted by the controversies to which the question of the readmittance of the lapsi into the church gave rise . 
at the beginning of the 7th century ,  there were probably twenty-five titular churches in rome; even granting that ,  perhaps ,  the compiler of the `` liber pontificalis '' referred this number to the time of marcellus ,  there is still a clear historical tradition in support of his declaration that the ecclesiastical administration in rome was reorganized by this pope after the great persecution . 
he succeeded pope julius iii . 
in 1534, after farnese had become pope pope paul iii ,  cervini was appointed a papal secretary  -lrb-  1534–49 -rrb- and served as a close advisor to the pope's nephew alessandro farnese . 
the new pope chose to retain his birth name ,  the most recent pope to do so ,  reigning as marcellus ii . 
cervini was ordained a priest in 1535.
pope marcellus ii  -lrb-  6 may 1501 – 1 may 1555 -rrb- ,  born marcello cervini degli spannochi ,  was head of the catholic church and ruler of the papal states from 9 april 1555 until his death 22 days later on 1 may 1555.
after his death ,  it would be 423 years before another pope would choose a name with an ordinal number less than iv  -lrb-  john paul i  -rrb-  . 
his successor was giampietro carafa ,  dean of the sacred college of cardinals ,  who reigned as pope paul iv  -lrb-  1555–59 -rrb- . 
pope miltiades  -lrb-   ,  `` miltiádēs ''; d .  10 january 314 -rrb- ,  also known as melchiades the african  -lrb-   `` melkhiádēs ho aphrikanós ''  -rrb-  ,  was pope of the catholic church from 311 to his death in 314.
the lateran council was held for three days from 2–4 october 313.
being the first pope under constantine ,  his pontificate coincided with the peace constantine gave to the church . 
he later presented the pope with the palace of empress fausta ,  where the lateran palace ,  the papal residence and seat of central church administration ,  would be built . 
the donatists again appealed to the emperor ,  who responded by convening the council of arles in 314 but it too ruled against the donatists . 
such methods are often ambiguous and lack explicit criteria for evaluating alternative hypotheses . 
in biology ,  phylogenetics  -lrb-  greek: φυλή ,  φῦλον – `` phylé '' ,  `` phylon '' = tribe ,  clan ,  race + γενετικός – `` genetikós '' = origin ,  source ,  birth  -rrb-  is the study of the evolutionary history and relationships among individuals or groups of organisms  -lrb-  e . g . 
all these depend upon an implicit or explicit mathematical model describing the evolution of characters observed . 
however ,  the requirement that taxa be monophyletic – rather than paraphyletic as in the case of the corvida – is itself part of the cladistic view of taxonomy ,  not necessarily followed to an absolute degree by other schools . 
the history of pheneticism and cladism as rival taxonomic systems is analysed in david hull's 1988 book `` science as a process '' . 
indeed ,  due to the effects of horizontal gene transfer ,  polyploid complexes and other peculiarities of plant genomics ,  phenetic techniques in botany – though less informative altogether – may ,  in these special cases ,  be less prone to errors compared with cladistic analysis of dna sequences . 
the two methodologies are not mutually exclusive . 
the method can be traced back to 1763 and michel adanson  -lrb-  in his `` familles des plantes ''  -rrb-  because of two shared basic principles — overall similarity and equal weighting — and modern pheneticists are sometimes called neo-adansonians . 
it primarily competed with the nintendo 64 and the sega saturn as part of the fifth generation of video game consoles . 
in addition to playing games ,  select playstation models are equipped to play audio cds; further ,  asian model scph-5903 can also play video cds . 
at the close of 1996, approximately 400 games were being developed for the playstation ,  compared to approximately 200 and 60 games being developed for the saturn and the nintendo 64 respectively . 
by the end of 1992, sony and nintendo reached a deal whereby the `` play station '' would still have a port for snes games ,  but nintendo would own the rights and receive the bulk of the profits from the games ,  and the snes would continue to use the sony-designed audio chip . 
sony computer entertainment was an upstart in the video game industry in late 1994, as the early 1990s were dominated by nintendo and sega . 
this was also to be the format used in snes-cds ,  giving a large degree of control to sony despite nintendo's leading position in the video gaming market . 
if the cd lid is closed with a game inside at any time while in the menu ,  the game will start . 
the psp is capable of playing playstation games downloaded via sony's online store ,  and can also play any playstation game by using the playstation 3's remote play feature while the disc is in the playstation 3.
nintendo was very public about its scepticism toward using cd's and dvds to store games ,  citing longer load times and durability issues . 
industry hype for the console spread quickly ,  and in early 1994 `` gamepro '' reported that `` many video game companies feel that in the near future ,  the video game platforms to contend with will be from nintendo ,  sega .  .  .  and `` sony '' . `` 
sony also planned to develop a super nes-compatible ,  sony-branded console ,  but one which would be more of a home entertainment system playing both super nes cartridges and a new cd format which sony would design . 
the installation of an unofficial modchip allowed the playstation to play cd-r copies of games . 
the playstation portable ,  or psp ,  is a handheld game console first released in late 2004.
while playstation 3 games are not region-locked ,  playstation and playstation 2 games are only playable on playstation 3 consoles from the same region . 
the inception of what would become the released playstation dates back to 1986 with a joint venture between nintendo and sony . 
ohga kept kutaragi on at sony ,  and it was not until nintendo cancelled the project that sony decided to develop its own console . 
initially ,  in the united states ,  playstation games were packaged in long cardboard boxes ,  similar to non-japanese 3do and saturn games . 
the `` ok '' and `` cancel '' buttons in most of the japanese playstation games are reversed in their north american and european releases . 
the pdp-1  -lrb-  `` programmed data processor-1 ''  -rrb-  is the first computer in digital equipment corporation's pdp series and was first produced in 1959.
the pdp-1 uses 2,700 transistors and 3,000 diodes . 
pili are antigenic . 
some pili ,  called type iv pili  -lrb-  t4p  -rrb-  ,  generate motile forces . 
conjugative pili allow for the transfer of dna between bacteria ,  in the process of bacterial conjugation . 
not all bacteria can make conjugative pili ,  but conjugation can occur between bacteria of different species . 
some bacteria ,  viruses or bacteriophages attach to receptors on pili at the start of their reproductive cycle . 
in the 1982 model year ,  two special models were available for different markets . 
the `` weissach edition '' option was also available for the us market 911 for the 1980 model year and 924 for the 1981 model year . 
porsche introduced a refreshed 928 s into the european market in 1980 model year ,  although it was summer of 1982 and my 1983 before the model reached north america . 
the automatic transmission was not available for this model . 
the finished car debuted at the 1977 geneva motor show before going on sale later that year as a 1978 model . 
the s4 and gt variants halted production at the end of the 1991 model year ,  making way for the final version of the 928.
for the 1989 model year ,  a visible change inside was digital trip computer in the dashboard . 
the 928 has the distinction of being the company's first production v8 powered model and the only coupé powered by a front-mounted v8 engine . 
as the faster european model was not available in the united states and canada during the first three years of its existence ,  a `` competition group '' option was created to allow north american customers to have an s model lookalike with front and rear spoilers ,  16-inch flat disc wheels ,  sport seats ,  sport springs and bilstein shock absorbers . 
141 special `` 50th jubilee '' 928 s models were available outside the u . s .  and canada to celebrate the company's 50-year existence as a car manufacturer . 
styling was the same in both 1978 and 1979, with the body lacking both front and rear spoilers . 
plasmids may be classified in a number of ways . 
some plasmids ,  however ,  have no observable effect on the phenotype of the host cell or its benefit to the host cells cannot be determined ,  and these plasmids are called cryptic plasmids . 
in the laboratory ,  plasmids may be introduced into a cell via transformation . 
plasmids may be present in an individual cell in varying number ,  ranging from one to several hundreds . 
a plasmid is a small dna molecule within a cell that is physically separated from a chromosomal dna and can replicate independently . 
three equivalent definitions of `` parallelepiped '' are the rectangular cuboid  -lrb-  six rectangular faces  -rrb-  ,  cube  -lrb-  six square faces  -rrb-  ,  and the rhombohedron  -lrb-  six rhombus faces  -rrb-  are all specific cases of parallelepiped . 
plant cells are eukaryotic cells present in green plants ,  photosynthetic eukaryotes of the kingdom plantae . 
glycogen is made primarily by the liver and the muscles ,  but can also be made by glycogenesis within the brain and stomach . 
the uterus also stores glycogen during pregnancy ,  to nourish the embryo . 
examples include storage polysaccharides such as starch and glycogen ,  and structural polysaccharides such as cellulose and chitin . 
glycogen is composed of a branched chain of glucose residues . 
glycogen is analogous to starch ,  a glucose polymer in plants ,  and is sometimes referred to as `` animal starch '' ,  having a similar structure to amylopectin but more extensively branched and compact than starch . 
chitin is one of many naturally occurring polymers . 
in the liver hepatocytes ,  glycogen can compose up to eight percent  -lrb-  100–120 g in an adult  -rrb-  of the fresh weight soon after a meal . 
they may also have beneficial effects on human health . 
chemically ,  chitin is closely related to chitosan  -lrb-  a more water-soluble derivative of chitin  -rrb-  . 
it is stored in liver and muscles . 
 ''ptolemaeus ''  -lrb-   `` ptolemaios ''  -rrb-  is a greek name . 
see also ancient greek units of measurement and history of geodesy . 
this is sometimes known as the `` apotelesmatika ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  but more commonly known as the `` tetrabiblos '' from the greek  -lrb-    -rrb-  meaning `` four books '' or by the latin `` quadripartitum '' . 
all male pharaohs after him ,  until egypt became a roman province in 30 bc ,  were also ptolemies . 
ptolemy also wrote an influential work ,  `` harmonics '' ,  on music theory and the mathematics of music . 
ptolemy's other main work is his `` geography ''  -lrb-  also called the `` geographia ''  -rrb-  ,  a compilation of geographical coordinates of the part of the world known to the roman empire during his time . 
the work is also important for the early history of perception . 
the name `` claudius '' is a roman `` nomen ''; the fact that ptolemy bore it indicates he lived under the roman rule of egypt with the privileges and political rights of roman citizenship . 
ptolemy wrote in koine greek and can be shown to have utilized babylonian astronomical data . 
located around 650 light-years distant ,  it shines with a luminosity approximately 45 times that of the sun . 
the closest star to earth in the constellation is gliese 318, a white dwarf of spectral class da5 and magnitude 11.85.
the brighter star is deformed into an egg shape . 
discovered in 1995, the pyxis globular cluster is a 13.3 ± 1.3 billion year-old globular cluster situated around 130,000 light-years distant from earth and around 133,000 light-years distant from the centre of the milky way—a region not previously thought to contain globular clusters . 
with an apparent magnitude of 3.68, alpha pyxidis is the brightest star in the constellation . 
it is an orange giant of spectral type k3iii that has cooled and swollen to 3.7 times the diameter of the sun after exhausting its core hydrogen . 
ak pyxidis is a red giant of spectral type m5iii and semi-regular variable that varies between magnitudes 6.09 and 6.51.
parasitic computing is programming technique where a program in normal authorized interactions with another program manages to get the other program to perform computations of a complex nature . 
the proof-of-concept is obviously extremely inefficient as the amount of computation necessary to merely send the packets in the first place easily exceeds the computations leeched from the other program; and the 3-sat problem would be solved much more quickly if just analyzed locally . 
pegasus was caught by the greek hero bellerophon ,  near the fountain peirene ,  with the help of athena and poseidon . 
pegasus aided the hero bellerophon in his fight against the chimera . 
helicon . 
there are several versions of the birth of the winged stallion and his brother chrysaor in the far distant place at the edge of earth ,  hesiod's `` springs of oceanus ,  which encircles the inhabited earth ,  where perseus found medusa:
one is that they sprang from the blood issuing from medusa's neck as perseus was beheading her ,  similar to the manner in which athena was born from the head of zeus . 
the next morning ,  still clutching the bridle ,  bellerophon found pegasus drinking at the pierian spring ,  caught him and eventually tamed him . 
hypotheses have been proposed regarding the relationship between pegasus and the muses ,  the gods athena ,  poseidon ,  zeus ,  apollo ,  and the hero perseus . 
the order in which a party's list candidates get elected may be pre-determined by some method internal to the party or the candidates  -lrb-  a closed list system  -rrb-  or it may be determined by the voters at large  -lrb-  an open list system  -rrb-  or by districts  -lrb-  a local list system  -rrb-  . 
argument for an open list is that it replaces a primary and the regular voters should have the right to influence exactly who on the list should come first to take the allotted seats . 
some use semi open list where there is a threshold of how many voters has to modify the order on their ballot before it's counted . 
the cluster's stars ,  numbering between 50 and 100, have a moderate range in brightness . 
as the milky way runs through puppis ,  there are a large number of open clusters in the constellation . 
fomalhaut traditionally represents the mouth of the fish . 
its only star brighter than 4th magnitude is fomalhaut ,  which is a 1st-magnitude star and is the 18th-brightest star in the night sky . 
in egyptian mythology ,  this fish saved the life of the egyptian goddess isis ,  so she placed this fish and its descendants into the heavens as constellations of stars . 
delta piscis austrini is a double star with components of magnitude 4.2 and 9.2.
they were the last dynasty of ancient egypt . 
ptolemy's family ruled egypt until the roman conquest of 30 bc . 
women guests may wear cocktail dresses; men may wear blazers . 
while the birthday cake is being brought to the table ,  the song `` happy birthday to you '' or some other birthday song is sung by the guests . 
after formally receiving each guest in this fashion ,  the hosts may mingle with the guests . 
a birthday party is a celebration of the anniversary of the birth of the person who is being honored . 
some food is often served ,  as in academic gatherings . 
at less formal dinner parties ,  a buffet is provided . 
these gatherings may be accompanied by a sit-down dinner ,  or more commonly ,  a stand-up informal buffet meal . 
often ,  a friend in on the surprise will lead the honored person to the location of the party without letting on anything . 
a surprise party is a party that is not made known beforehand to the person in whose honor it is being held . 
multi-party systems are systems in which more than two parties are represented and elected to public office . 
in one-party systems ,  one political party is legally allowed to hold effective power . 
the one-party system is thus often equated with dictatorships and tyranny . 
the smaller or `` third '' parties may hold the balance of power in a parliamentary system ,  and thus may be invited to form a part of a coalition government together with one of the larger parties ,  or may provide a supply and confidence agreement to the government; or may instead act independently from the dominant parties . 
unless there are legal prohibitions against political parties ,  factions within nonpartisan systems often evolve into political parties . 
it was now that a genuine two-party system began to emerge ,  with pitt leading the new tories against a reconstituted `` whig '' party led by fox . 
there are also numerous other parties that hold or have held a number of seats in parliament . 
a coalition including the rockingham whigs ,  led by the earl of shelburne ,  took power in 1782, only to collapse after rockingham's death . 
when they lost power ,  the old whig leadership dissolved into a decade of factional chaos with distinct `` grenvillite '' ,  `` bedfordite '' ,  `` rockinghamite '' ,  and `` chathamite '' factions successively in power ,  and all referring to themselves as `` whigs '' . 
the leader of the whigs was robert walpole ,  who maintained control of the government in the period 1721–1742; his protégé was henry pelham  -lrb-  1743–1754 -rrb- . 
the uk political system ,  while technically a multi-party system ,  has functioned generally as a two-party  -lrb-  sometimes called a `` two-and-a-half party ''  -rrb-  system; since the 1920s the two largest political parties have been the conservative party and the labour party . 
a political party is an organized group of people ,  often with common views ,  who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government . 
in dominant-party systems ,  opposition parties are allowed ,  and there may be even a deeply established democratic tradition ,  but other parties are widely considered to have no real chance of gaining power . 
as opposed to the instability of the earlier factions ,  which were often tied to a particular leader and could disintegrate if removed from power ,  the party was centred around a set of core principles and remained out of power as a united opposition to government . 
civic platform  -lrb-   ,  po  -rrb-  is a liberal-conservative and christian democratic political party in poland . 
in 2005, po led all opinion polls with 26% to 30% of public support . 
in the 2015 presidential election ,  po endorsed bronisław komorowski ,  a former member of po from 2001 till 2010.
the civic platform was founded in 2001 as a split from existing parties . 
in the 2018 local elections ,  po achieved 26.97% of the votes ,  coming second after pis . 
civic platform is a member of the european people's party  -lrb-  epp  -rrb-  . 
today ,  civic platform enjoys support amongst higher class constituencies . 
the current eiffel tower replica is at least the second one; an earlier replica was constructed of wood and later destroyed by a tornado . 
present-day lamar county was part of red river county during the republic of texas . 
after the fire ,  scott brought the architect wees back to paris to redesign the historic downtown area . 
today ,  the station is used by the lamar county chamber of commerce and serves as the research library for the lamar county genealogical society . 
the feedstock for paraffin is slack wax ,  which is a mixture of oil and wax ,  a byproduct from the refining of lubricating oil . 
the first step in making paraffin wax is to remove the oil  -lrb-  de-oiling or de-waxing  -rrb-  from the slack wax . 
paraffin wax is sold in either liquid or solid form . 
paraffin wax is an excellent electrical insulator ,  with a resistivity of between 10 and 10 ohm metre . 
the tissue is then placed in paraffin wax for a number of hours and then set in a mold with wax to cool and solidify; sections are then cut on a microtome . 
in the absence of an official definition for the pearl from the black oyster ,  these pearls are usually referred to as `` black pearls '' . 
cultured pearls can be distinguished from natural pearls by x-ray examination . 
freshwater pearls ,  tahitian pearls ,  and south sea pearls all measure to a full millimeter when considered uniform . 
before the days of cultured pearls ,  black pearls were rare and highly valued for the simple reason that white pearl oysters rarely produced naturally black pearls ,  and black pearl oysters rarely produced any natural pearls at all . 
black cultured pearls from the black pearl oyster – `` pinctada margaritifera '' – are not south sea pearls ,  although they are often mistakenly described as black south sea pearls . 
natural and cultured pearls can be distinguished from imitation pearls using a microscope . 
the introduction and advance of the cultured pearl hit the pearl industry hard . 
south sea pearls are the largest and rarest of the cultured pearls – making them the most valuable . 
in general ,  cultured pearls are less valuable than natural pearls ,  whereas imitation pearls have almost no value . 
in 1914, pearl farmers began growing cultured freshwater pearls using the pearl mussels native to lake biwa . 
the correct definition of a south sea pearl – as described by cibjo and gia – is a pearl produced by the `` pinctada maxima '' pearl oyster . 
after a couple of years ,  a pearl forms and the shell may be found by a lucky pearl fisher . 
before the beginning of the 20th century ,  pearl hunting was the most common way of harvesting pearls . 
teardrop-shaped pearls are often used in pendants . 
the second largest pearl known was found in the philippines in 1934 and is known as the `` pearl of lao tzu '' . 
circled pearls are characterized by concentric ridges ,  or rings ,  around the body of the pearl . 
for many cultured pearl dealers and wholesalers ,  the preferred weight measure used for loose pearls and pearl strands is the momme . 
saltwater pearls grow within pearl oysters ,  family pteriidae ,  which live in oceans . 
today many `` keshi '' pearls are actually intentional ,  with post-harvest shells returned to the water to regenerate a pearl in the existing pearl sac . 
drop and pear shaped pearls are sometimes referred to as teardrop pearls and are most often seen in earrings ,  pendants ,  or as a center pearl in a necklace . 
the very best pearls have a metallic mirror-like luster . 
mitsubishi commenced pearl culture with the south sea pearl oyster in 1916, as soon as the technology patent was commercialized . 
most beadless cultured pearls are mantle-grown in freshwater shells in china ,  and are known as freshwater cultured pearls . 
in 2010, china overtook japan in akoya pearl production . 
a few species produce pearls that can be of interest as gemstones . 
cultured pearls are formed in pearl farms ,  using human intervention as well as natural processes . 
a well-equipped gem testing laboratory can distinguish natural pearls from cultured pearls by using gemological x-ray equipment to examine the center of a pearl . 
the differentiation of natural pearls from non-beaded cultured pearls can be very difficult without the use of this x-ray technique . 
cultured pearls are the response of the shell to a tissue implant . 
tahitian pearls ,  frequently referred to as black pearls ,  are highly valued because of their rarity; the culturing process for them dictates a smaller volume output and they can never be mass-produced because ,  in common with most sea pearls ,  the oyster can only be nucleated with one pearl at a time ,  while freshwater mussels are capable of multiple pearl implants . 
pope benedict i  -lrb-  ; d .  30 july 579 -rrb- was pope from 2 june 575 to his death in 579.
there have been fifteen popes named benedict  -lrb-  not including benedict x  -rrb-  ,  as well as at least three antipopes by that name . 
benedict was born in rome . 
pope benedict ii  -lrb-    -rrb-  was pope from 26 june 684 to his death in 685.
pope benedict iii  -lrb-  ; died 17 april 858 -rrb- was pope from 29 september 855 to his death in 858.
little is known of benedict's life before his papacy . 
pope benedict v  -lrb-  ; died 4 july 965 -rrb- was pope from 22 may to 23 june 964, in opposition to pope leo viii . 
the romans swore an oath to benedict that they would not abandon him and would protect him against otto . 
he was also a notarius and had taken part in the deposition of pope john xii and the subsequent election of pope leo viii . 
pope benedict vi  -lrb-  ; d .  june 974 -rrb- was pope from 19 january 973 to his death in 974.
benedict was succeeded ,  after the overthrow of the antipope boniface vii ,  by pope benedict vii . 
record of benedict’s reign as pope is scant . 
pope benedict vii  -lrb-  ; d .  october 983 -rrb- was pope from october 974 to his death in 983.
benedict vii died in the year 984, and was interred at santa croce in gerusalemme . 
pope benedict viii  -lrb-  ; ca . 
benedict viii was opposed by an antipope ,  gregory vi ,  who compelled him to flee rome . 
while benedict ix has an execrable reputation as pope ,  r . l . 
benedict was the son of alberic iii ,  count of tusculum ,  and was a nephew of pope benedict viii and pope john xix . 
benedict was the nephew of his immediate predecessor ,  pope john xix . 
benedict ix had not attended the council and did not accept his deposition . 
pope benedict ix  -lrb-  ; c .  1012 – c .  1056 -rrb- ,  born theophylactus of tusculum in rome ,  was pope on three occasions between october 1032 and july 1048.
benedict ix refused to appear on charges of simony in 1049 and was excommunicated . 
pope benedict xi  -lrb-  ; 1240 – 7 july 1304 -rrb- ,  born nicola boccasini ,   -lrb-  niccolò of treviso  -rrb-  was pope from 22 october 1303 to his death on 7 july ,  1304.
popes benedict xi-benedict xvi are ,  from an official point of view ,  the tenth through fifteenth popes by that name . 
pope benedict xi also celebrated two consistories for the purpose of creating new cardinals . 
he is a patron of treviso . 
a note on the numbering: pope benedict x  -lrb-  1058–1059 -rrb- is now considered an antipope by the catholic church . 
cardinal caesar baronius  -lrb-  1538–1607 -rrb- wrote that ,  on the monday of easter week in 1304, pope benedict xi was celebrating mass ,  but a pilgrim interrupted it ,  because he wanted the pope to hear his confession . 
after one ballot in a conclave that lasted a day ,  boccasini was elected as pope . 
fournier succeeded pope john xxii as pope ,  after being elected in the conclave of 1334.
pope benedict xii  -lrb-  ; 1285 – 25 april 1342 -rrb- ,  born jacques fornier ,  was pope from 30 december 1334 to his death in april 1342.
benedict xii was a reforming pope who did not carry out the policies of his predecessor . 
at first ,  he called himself benedict xiv ,  but afterwards altered the title to benedict xiii  -lrb-  the previous benedict xiii having been considered an antipope  -rrb-  . 
he chose the regnal name of `` benedict xiii '' in honour of pope blessed benedict xi because he was also of the dominican order . 
through the process of equipollent canonization ,  benedict xiii canonized pope gregory vii on 24 may 1728.
benedict xiii elevated 29 new cardinals into the cardinalate in a total of 12 consistories; one such new cardinal was prospero lambertini ,  who later became pope benedict xiv . 
the process for his beatification was opened in tortona in 1755 under pope benedict xiv but it did not at all advance and so was stalled . 
pope benedict xiv would later say of benedict xiii: `` we respectfully love that pontiff who backed his carriage rather than dispute the passage with a cartman . `` 
pope benedict xiii  -lrb-  ; 2 february 1649 – 21 february 1730 -rrb- ,  born pietro francesco orsini and later called vincenzo maria orsini ,  was head of the catholic church and ruler of the papal states from 29 may 1724 to his death in 1730.
on the other hand ,  this anonymous satirical comment on benedict xiii's death was posted at the pasquino:
after the next papal election elevated pope clement xii to the pontificate ,  clement excommunicated benedict xiii's corrupt deputy ,  cardinal coscia . 
on 5 may 1749, pope benedict xiv declared a holy year . 
in 1725, he served as the canonist at the roman synod of pope benedict xiii . 
pope benedict xiv  -lrb-  ; 31 march 1675 – 3 may 1758 -rrb- ,  born prospero lorenzo lambertini ,  was head of the catholic church from 17 august 1740 to his death in 1758.
benedict xiv had suffered from kidney problems for years . 
on 12 june 1724, only two weeks after his election ,  pope benedict xiii appointed lambertini titular bishop of theodosia . 
on 30 april 1731 cardinal lambertini was appointed archbishop of bologna by pope clement xii . 
benedict xiv created 64 cardinals in seven consistories; chief among the new cardinals he elevated into the cardinalate was the noted henry benedict stuart  -lrb-  1747 -rrb- . 
after the death of pope clement xii on 6 february 1740, cardinal lambertini attended the papal conclave to choose a successor . 
benedict xiv was also responsible ,  along with cardinal passionei ,  for beginning the catalogue of the oriental manuscripts in the vatican library . 
later that year the pope banned card games . 
lambertini became an assistant to msgr . 
he continued in the office of archbishop of bologna even after he became pope ,  not finally resigning until 14 january 1754.
lambertini was born into a noble family of bologna ,  the third of five children of marcello lambertini and lucrezia bulgarini . 
no known language distinguishes all of the places described here so less precision is needed to distinguish the sounds of a particular language . 
physical therapists also practise in the non-patient care roles such as health policy ,  health insurance ,  health care administration and as health care executives . 
physical therapist assistants may deliver treatment and physical interventions for patients and clients under a care plan established by and under the supervision of a physical therapist . 
in order to use the title 'physiotherapist' ,  a student must register with the health and care professions council ,  a uk wide regulatory body ,  on qualifying . 
in the province of quebec ,  physical rehabilitation therapists are health care professionals who are required to complete a three-year college diploma program in physical rehabilitation therapy and be member of the `` ordre professionnel de la physiothérapie du québec ''  -lrb-  oppq  -rrb-  in order to practise legally in the country . 
it is performed by physical therapists  -lrb-  known as physiotherapists in many countries  -rrb-  . 
the université de montréal ,  the université laval and the université de sherbrooke are among the québécois universities that admit physical rehabilitation therapists in their programs of study related to health sciences and rehabilitation in order to credit courses that were completed in college . 
in the province of quebec ,  prospective physiotherapists are required to have completed a college diploma in either health sciences ,  which lasts on average two years ,  or physical rehabilitation technology ,  which lasts at least three years ,  to apply to a physiotherapy program or program in university . 
 -lrb-  updated capte statistics list that for 2015–2016, there were 30,419 students enrolled in 233 accredited pt programs in the united states .   -rrb- 
functional movement is central to what it means to be healthy . 
physical therapy  -lrb-  pt  -rrb-  ,  also known as physiotherapy ,  is one of the allied health professions that ,  by using mechanical force and movements  -lrb-  bio-mechanics or kinesiology  -rrb-  ,  manual therapy ,  exercise therapy ,  and electrotherapy ,  remediates impairments and promotes mobility and function . 
the original wife  -lrb-  or legal wife  -rrb-  was referred to as the 正室 zhèngshì /정실  -lrb-  main room  -rrb-  both in china ,  japan and korea . 
scholars have argued that in farming systems where men do most of the agriculture work ,  a second wife can be an economic burden rather than an asset . 
he criticizes the ruling élite for speaking out against the practice while taking more than one wife themselves . 
the common terms referring to the second woman ,  and the act of having the second woman respectively ,  are 二奶  -lrb-  `` èrnǎi ''  -rrb-  ,  literally `` the second wife '' . 
most of those second and third wives were older women who had not yet married . 
polygynous societies have a higher concentration of men investing into methods of mating with women ,  whereas monogamous men invest more into their families and other related institutions . 
the status of a mistress is not that of a wife ,  and any children born of such relationships were and some still are considered illegitimate and subject to legal disadvantage . 
polygyny has been criticized by feminists such as professor john o .  ifediora ,  who believes that women should be equal to men and not subject to them in marriage . 
customary law ,  one of the three legal systems in operation in nigeria  -lrb-  the other two being nigerian common law and sharia law  -rrb-  allows for the legal marriage of more than one woman by a single man . 
the top cleric ,  the mufti of novi pazar ,  muamer zukorlić ,  has taken a second wife . 
in some cases ,  the economic role of the additional wife enables the husband to enjoy more leisure . 
in some countries where polygamy is illegal ,  and sometimes even when legal ,  at times it is known for men to have one or more mistresses ,  whom they do not marry . 
professor ifediora also believes that polygyny is a `` hindrance to social and economic development '' in the continent of africa due to women's lack of financial control . 
today ,  polygyny is more widespread in africa than in any other continent . 
polygyny  -lrb-  ; from neoclassical greek πολυγυνία from - `` poly- '' `` many '' ,  and `` gyne '' `` woman '' or `` wife ''  -rrb-  is the most common and accepted form of polygamy ,  entailing the marriage of a man with several women . 
although far less popular there ,  it is nonetheless also legal in nigeria's east and south . 
a study has also shown that ,  after controlling for other factors ,  african children in polygynous families were more likely to die young . 
numerous methods are available to study proteins ,  sets of proteins ,  or the whole proteome . 
the proteome is the entire set of proteins that is ,  or can be ,  expressed by a genome ,  cell ,  tissue ,  or organism at a certain time . 
only a few examples are given below . 
protein fragment complementation assays are often used to detect protein–protein interactions . 
on 15 december 1958, luciani was appointed bishop of vittorio veneto by pope john xxiii . 
luciani was summoned to rome for the conclave to elect the new pope . 
pope paul vi created luciani the cardinal-priest of san marco in the consistory on 5 march 1973.
john paul i remains the most recent italian-born pope ,  the last in a succession of such popes that started with clement vii in 1523.
the new pope immediately came over and prayed for him . 
in 1975, luciani travelled to germany in may . 
john paul i impressed people with his personal warmth . 
pope john paul i  -lrb-  ; ; born albino luciani; ; 17 october 191228 september 1978 -rrb- was head of the catholic church and sovereign of the vatican city from 26 august 1978 to his death 33 days later . 
pope paul vi died on 6 august 1978, ending a reign of fifteen years . 
john paul i was regarded as a skilled communicator and writer . 
the electors did not want a curial figure ,  as paul vi had been ,  but a warm and pastoral figure like pope john xxiii . 
furthermore ,  he was the first pope to add the regnal number `` i '' ,  designating himself `` the first '' . 
in 1976, luciani sold a gold cross and pectoral gold chain that pope john xxiii had given to him  -lrb-  which once belonged to pope pius xii before him  -rrb-  to raise money for disabled children . 
during his brief pontificate ,  john paul i spoke three times on the concept of god's mercy . 
the pope concluded that `` the church too must be good; good to everyone '' in its own outreach to the faithful . 
on 15 december 1969, he was appointed as the new patriarch of venice by pope paul vi and he took possession of his new archdiocese on 3 february 1970.
during the days following the conclave ,  the cardinals were generally elated at the reaction to pope john paul i ,  some of them happily saying that they had elected `` god's candidate '' . 
after his election ,  john paul i quickly made several decisions that would `` humanise '' the office of pope ,  admitting publicly he had turned scarlet when paul vi placed his stole on luciani's shoulders while the pontiff visited venice on 16 september 1972.
luciani had attended all sessions of the second vatican council  -lrb-  1962–65 -rrb- while he was the bishop of vittorio veneto . 
 -lrb-  pope francis ,  elected in 2013, also took a previously-unused papal name but chose not to be called `` the first '' .   -rrb- 
he was declared a servant of god by his successor ,  john paul ii ,  on 23 november 2003, the first step on the road to sainthood . 
in his first address to the people of his new diocese ,  luciani stated: `` i would like to be a bishop who is a teacher and a servant '' . 
montini took the name `` paul '' in honour of saint paul . 
pope paul vi became the first pope to visit six continents . 
pope francis canonised paul vi on 14 october 2018.
upon his election to the papacy ,  montini took the name paul vi . 
montini was elected pope on the sixth ballot of the papal conclave on 21 june and he took the name of `` paul vi '' . 
pope paul vi knew the roman curia well ,  having worked there for a generation from 1922 to 1954.
in the final session of the council ,  paul vi announced that he would open the canonisation processes of his immediate predecessors: pope pius xii and pope john xxiii . 
after angelo roncalli became pope john xxiii ,  he made montini a cardinal in december 1958.
montini was generally seen as the most likely successor to pope john xxiii because of his closeness to both popes pius xii and john xxiii ,  his pastoral and administrative background ,  and his insight and determination . 
paul vi decided to continue vatican ii  -lrb-  canon law dictates that a council is suspended at the death of a pope  -rrb-  ,  and brought it to completion in 1965.
as pope in 1971, montini turned the pontificia commissione di assistenza into `` caritas italiana '' . 
after his election as bishop of rome ,  paul vi first met with the priests in his new diocese . 
pope paul vi made extensive contributions to mariology  -lrb-  theological teaching and devotions  -rrb-  during his pontificate . 
paul vi did away with much of the regal splendor of the papacy . 
when pope paul was asked towards the end of his papacy whether he would retire at age 80, he replied `` kings can abdicate ,  popes cannot . `` 
of the papacy ,  paul vi wrote in his journal: `` the position is unique . 
pope paul vi sent one of 73 apollo 11 goodwill messages to nasa for the historic first lunar landing . 
pope saint paul vi  -lrb-  ; ; born giovanni battista enrico antonio maria montini  -lrb-    -rrb- ; 26 september 1897 – 6 august 1978 -rrb- was head of the catholic church and sovereign of the vatican city state from 21 june 1963 to his death in 1978.
john xxiii elevated him to the college of cardinals in 1958, and after the death of john xxiii ,  montini was considered one of his most likely successors . 
