in 1986, l .  ron hubbard died at age 74.
born in tilden ,  nebraska in 1911, hubbard spent much of his childhood in helena ,  montana . 
thereafter hubbard oversaw the growth of the church of scientology into a worldwide organization . 
hubbard was cited by `` smithsonian '' magazine as one of the 100 most significant americans of all time . 
act 1788.
the british government sought to suppress the luddite movement with a mass trial at york in january 1813, following the attack on cartwrights mill at rawfolds near cleckheaton . 
mill and factory owners took to shooting protesters and eventually the movement was suppressed with legal and military force . 
mellor fired the fatal shot to horsfall's groin ,  and all three men were arrested . 
 ''the instrument of labour ,  when it takes the form of a machine ,  immediately becomes a competitor of the workman himself . `` 
the luddite movement emerged during the harsh economic climate of the napoleonic wars ,  which saw a rise of difficult working conditions in the new textile factories . 
in 1817, an unemployed nottingham stockinger and probably ex-luddite ,  named jeremiah brandreth led the pentrich rising . 
anarchist communism as an anarchist philosophy is against hierarchy in all its forms . 
currently alongside the previously mentioned federations ,  the international of anarchist federations includes the argentine libertarian federation ,  the anarchist federation of belarus ,  the federation of anarchists in bulgaria ,  the czech-slovak anarchist federation ,  the federation of german speaking anarchists in germany and switzerland ,  and the anarchist federation in the united kingdom and ireland . 
a group of exiled russian anarchists attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement's failures during the russian revolution . 
in italy the italian anarchist federation was founded in 1945 in carrara . 
in summation ,  kropotkin described an anarchist communist economy as functioning like this:
an early anarchist communist was joseph déjacque ,  the first person to describe himself as `` libertarian '' . 
in this sense ,  anarchist communism is a profoundly egalitarian philosophy . 
the synthesist italian anarchist federation and the platformist federation of anarchist communists continue existing today in italy but insurrectionary anarchism continues to be relevant as the recent establishment of the informal anarchist federation shows . 
the abolition of money ,  prices ,  and wage labor is central to anarchist communism . 
the international of anarchist federations  -lrb-  iaf/ifa  -rrb-  was founded during an international anarchist conference in carrara in 1968 by the three existing european anarchist federations of france  -lrb-  fédération anarchiste  -rrb-  ,  italy  -lrb-  federazione anarchica italiana  -rrb-  and spain  -lrb-  federación anarquista ibérica  -rrb-  as well as the bulgarian federation in french exile . 
some anarcho-communists  -lrb-  and collectivist anarchists as well  -rrb-  reject `` individualism '' and `` collectivism '' as illusory concepts . 
the french anarchist journalist sébastien faure ,  later founder and editor of the four-volume `` anarchist encyclopedia , ``  started the weekly paper `` le libertaire ''  -lrb-  `` the libertarian ''  -rrb-  in 1895.
according to anarchist historian max nettlau ,  the first use of the term `` libertarian communism '' was in november 1880, when a french anarchist congress employed it to more clearly identify its doctrines . 
the federation of anarchist communists  -lrb-  federazione dei comunisti anarchici  -rrb-  ,  or fdca ,  was established in 1985 in italy from the fusion of the `` organizzazione rivoluzionaria anarchica ''  -lrb-  `` revolutionary anarchist organisation ''  -rrb-  and the `` unione dei comunisti anarchici della toscana ''  -lrb-  `` tuscan union of anarchist communists ''  -rrb-  . 
an important difference between anarchist communism and marxist communism is who the product of the worker's labor belongs to . 
anarchist communists reject the claim that wage labor is necessary because people are lazy and selfish by `` human nature '' . 
stalinist-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident marxists and anarchists . 
the french anarchist journalist sébastien faure started the weekly paper `` le libertaire ''  -lrb-  `` the libertarian ''  -rrb-  in 1895.
anarchist communist currents appeared during the english civil war and the french revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries ,  respectively . 
greater london is governed by the mayor of london and the london assembly . 
until 1889, the name `` london '' applied to the city of london ,  but since then it has also referred to the county of london and greater london . 
london was the world's most populous city from 1831 to 1925.
london was the focus of the peasants' revolt in 1381.
 ''london '' is sometimes written informally as `` ldn '' . 
london  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the capital and largest city of the united kingdom . 
at its height in the 2nd century ,  roman london had a population of around 60,000.
by the 11th century ,  london was beyond all comparison the largest town in england . 
london then grew slowly until about 950, after which activity increased dramatically . 
evliya çelebi also wrote of lagari's brother ,  hezârfen ahmed çelebi ,  making a flight by glider a year earlier . 
lagâri hasan çelebi was an ottoman aviator who ,  according to a sole account written by traveller evliya çelebi ,  made a successful manned rocket flight . 
letterboxing is the practice of transferring film shot in a widescreen aspect ratio to standard-width video formats while preserving the film's original aspect ratio . 
on a widescreen television set ,  a 1.78:1 image fills the screen; however ,  2.39:1 aspect ratio films are letterboxed with narrow mattes . 
letterboxing was developed for use in 4:3 television displays before widescreen television screens were available ,  but it is also necessary to represent on a 16:9 widescreen display the unaltered original composition of a film with a wider aspect ratio ,  such as panavision's 2.35:1 ratio . 
some titles that were previously released in full screen only on vhs and dvd are now being issued in their original widescreen ratio on recent dvds and blu-rays . 
current high-definition television  -lrb-  hdtv  -rrb-  systems use video displays with a wider aspect ratio than older television sets ,  making it easier to accurately display widescreen films . 
letterboxing is used as an alternative to a full-screen ,  pan-and-scan transfer of a widescreen film image to videotape or videodisc . 
usually ,  such matting of 1.85:1 film is eliminated to match the 1.78:1 aspect ratio in the dvd and hd image transference . 
digital broadcasting allows 1.78:1  -lrb-  16:9 -rrb- widescreen format transmissions without losing resolution ,  and thus widescreen is becoming the television norm . 
ligaments are viscoelastic . 
cruciate ligaments are paired ligaments in the form of a cross . 
other ligaments in the body include the:
one of the most often torn ligaments in the body is the anterior cruciate ligament  -lrb-  acl  -rrb-  . 
in scottish folklore ,  the loch ness monster or nessie is a creature said to inhabit loch ness in the scottish highlands . 
laser science predates the invention of the laser itself . 
laser science or laser physics is a branch of optics that describes the theory and practice of lasers . 
lincoln is also home to lincoln united fc ,  lincoln moorlands railway fc and lincoln griffins ladies fc . 
the airport is around 29 miles north of lincoln . 
by 1150, lincoln was among the wealthiest towns in england . 
the closure of lincoln st marks in 1985 left the city with one main station: lincoln central . 
the mute swan is an iconic species for lincoln . 
the city is home to the university of lincoln and bishop grosseteste university ,  and to lincoln city football club . 
lincoln itself had four single-sex grammar schools until september 1974.
itv news also hold a newsroom in lincoln . 
lincoln drill hall in broadgate also opened in 1890.
in the two world wars ,  lincoln switched to war production . 
the motto is civitas lincolnia  -lrb-  latin for city of lincoln  -rrb-  . 
further education courses in lincoln are provided by lincoln college ,  which is the largest education institution in lincolnshire ,  with 18,500 students ,  of whom 2,300 are full-time . 
lincoln lies in a gap in the lincoln cliff north of london ,  at an elevation of above sea level by the river witham ,  stretching up to above sea level in the uphill area around the cathedral . 
the lincoln lions rugby union team has been playing since 1902.
this settlement was built by a deep pool  -lrb-  the modern brayford pool  -rrb-  in the river witham at the foot of a large hill  -lrb-  on which the normans later built lincoln cathedral and lincoln castle  -rrb-  . 
lincoln's second largest private employer is james dawson and son ,  a belting and hose manufacturer founded in lincoln in the late 19th century . 
for many years the only two main roads through lincoln were the a46 and a15 and they both passed along the high street . 
when magna carta was drawn up in 1215, one of the witnesses was hugh of wells ,  bishop of lincoln . 
lincoln is a cathedral city and the county town of lincolnshire in the east midlands of england . 
lincoln has a professional football team ,  lincoln city fc ,  nicknamed `` the imps '' ,  which plays at the sincil bank stadium on the southern edge of the city . 
east midlands airport is the main international airport serving lincoln and the rest of the county . 
other areas near lincoln ,  such as north hykeham north kesteven school ,  branston and cherry willingham ,  also have comprehensive schools . 
several invasive species of plants and animals have recently reached lincoln . 
local listeners can also tune into siren fm ,  which broadcasts on 107.3fm from the university of lincoln . 
the bishops of lincoln were among the magnates of medieval england: the diocese of lincoln ,  the largest in england ,  had more monasteries than the rest of england put together ,  and the diocese was supported by large estates . 
doncaster sheffield airport is the second biggest airport after east midlands airport to serve lincoln . 
the strength of a bomber `` geschwader '' was about 80–90 aircraft . 
german day and night fighter pilots claimed more than 70,000 aerial victories during world war ii . 
when world war ii began ,  the `` luftwaffe '' was one of the most technologically advanced air forces in the world . 
another prominent figure in german air power construction this time was helmuth wilberg . 
in newly introduced doctrine ,  `` the conduct of the aerial air war '' in 1935, wever rejected the theory of douhet and outlined five key points to air strategy:
the premature death of wever ,  one of the `` luftwaffe ''s finest officers ,  left the `` luftwaffe '' without a strategic air force during world war ii ,  which eventually proved fatal to the german war effort . 
 ''geschwader '' strength was usually 120 – 125 aircraft . 
the luftwaffe  -lrb-    -rrb-  was the aerial warfare branch of the combined german wehrmacht military forces during world war ii . 
with an effective tactical-operational concept ,  the german air power theorists needed a strategic doctrine and organisation . 
the `` luftwaffe ''s condor legion experimented with new doctrine and aircraft during the spanish civil war . 
during the interwar period ,  german pilots were trained secretly in violation of the treaty at lipetsk air base . 
at the start of the war the `` luftwaffe '' had four `` luftflotten ''  -lrb-  `` air fleets ''  -rrb-  ,  each responsible for roughly a quarter of germany . 
flying in reinforcements and winning air superiority ,  the `` luftwaffe '' contributed decisively to the german conquest . 
since the treaty of versailles forbade germany to have an air force ,  german pilots trained in secret . 
this led to udet championing the dive bomber ,  particularly the junkers ju 87.
wilberg remained in the air staff ,  and under walther wever helped draw up the luftwaffe's principle doctrinal texts ,  `` the conduct of the aerial war '' and `` regulation 16 '' . 
it is the aircraft which the spanish revolution has to thank for its victory . `` 
it mattered little ,  as war was avoided by the munich agreement ,  and the need for long-range aircraft did not arise . 
germany's military air arms during world war i ,  the `` luftstreitkräfte '' of the army and the `` marine-fliegerabteilung '' of the navy ,  had been disbanded in may 1920 as a result of the terms of the treaty of versailles which stated that germany was forbidden to have any air force . 
at the end of the war ,  with berlin surrounded by the red army ,  göring suggested to hitler that he take over leadership of the reich . 
lafora disease is distinguished by the presence of inclusions called `` lafora bodies '' within the cytoplasm of cells . 
for glycogen to be soluble ,  there must be short chains and a high frequency of branching points ,  but this is not found in the glycogen in lafora patients . 
in a laforin mutation ,  glycogen would be hyperphosphorylated; this has been confirmed in laforin knock-out mice . 
laforin is essential for making the normal structure of glycogen . 
other researchers are looking into the ways in which lafora bodies are being regulated at the level of gene expression . 
lafora disease is an autosomal recessive disorder ,  caused by loss of function mutations in either laforin glycogen phosphatase gene  -lrb-  epm2a  -rrb-  or malin e3 ubiquitin ligase gene  -lrb-  nhlrc1 -rrb- . 
the disease is named after gonzalo rodríguez lafora  -lrb-  1886–1971 -rrb- ,  a spanish neuropathologist who first recognized small inclusion bodies in lafora patients . 
glycogen in lafora disease patients has abnormal chain lengths ,  which causes them to be insoluble ,  accumulate ,  and have a neurotoxic effect . 
lassa fever ,  also known as lassa hemorrhagic fever  -lrb-  lhf  -rrb-  ,  is a type of viral hemorrhagic fever caused by the lassa virus . 
lassa fever virus can also be found in cerebrospinal fluid . 
as of 2013, the spread of lassa outside of west africa had been very limited . 
an outbreak of lassa fever occurred in nigeria during 2018 and spread to 18 of the country's states; it was the largest outbreak of lassa recorded . 
about 15–20% of hospitalized lassa fever patients will die from the illness . 
following delivery ,  women should receive the same treatment as other lassa fever patients . 
lassa high risk areas are near the western and eastern extremes of west africa . 
lassa virus is a member of the arenaviridae ,  a family of negative-sense ,  single-stranded rna viruses . 
the study of the epidemiology of lassa fever is complicated by a lengthy incubation period ,  which may be up to three weeks . 
the lassa virus is one of several viruses identified by who as a likely cause of a future epidemic . 
they had two daughters ,  zinaida  -lrb-  1901 – 5 january 1933 -rrb- and nina  -lrb-  1902 – 9 june 1928 -rrb- ,  both born in siberia . 
leon trotsky  -lrb-  ; born lev davidovich bronstein; – 21 august 1940 -rrb- was a russian revolutionary ,  marxist theorist ,  and soviet politician whose particular strain of marxist thought is known as trotskyism . 
until this point in his life ,  trotsky had used his birth name: lev  -lrb-  leon  -rrb-  bronstein . 
he became a major figure in the bolshevik victory in the russian civil war  -lrb-  1918–1922 -rrb- . 
while in the prison in moscow ,  in the summer of 1899, trotsky married aleksandra sokolovskaya  -lrb-  1872–1938 -rrb- ,  a fellow marxist . 
their mother aleksandra disappeared in 1935 during the great purges in the soviet union under stalin ,  and was murdered by stalinist forces three years later . 
under the pen name `` pero ''  -lrb-  `` feather '' or `` pen '' in russian  -rrb-  ,  trotsky soon became one of the paper's leading writers . 
during the early days of the russian soviet federative socialist republic  -lrb-  rsfsr  -rrb-  and the soviet union ,  he served first as people's commissar for foreign affairs and later as the founder and commander of the red army ,  with the title of people's commissar of military and naval affairs . 
library users can consult the staff at the reference desk for help in finding information . 
the services that are provided at a reference desk may vary depending on the type of library ,  its purpose ,  its resources ,  and its staff . 
for example ,  the years 1700, 1800, and 1900 are not leap years ,  but the year 2000 is . 
the year 1700 was a leap year in the julian calendar ,  but not in the gregorian calendar . 
a year that is not a leap year is called a common year . 
it has a leap year every four years . 
in the gregorian calendar ,  the standard calendar in most of the world ,  most years that are multiples of 4 are leap years . 
years consisting of 12 months have between 353 and 355 days . 
<poem> if  -lrb-  `` year '' is not divisible by 4 -rrb- then  -lrb-  it is a common year  -rrb-  else if  -lrb-  `` year '' is not divisible by 100 -rrb- then  -lrb-  it is a leap year  -rrb-  else if  -lrb-  `` year '' is not divisible by 400 -rrb- then  -lrb-  it is a common year  -rrb-  else  -lrb-  it is a leap year  -rrb-  </poem>
the first year that dates in the revised julian calendar will not agree with those in the gregorian calendar will be 2800, because it will be a leap year in the gregorian calendar but not in the revised julian calendar . 
the following pseudocode determines whether a year is a `` leap year '' or a `` common year '' in the gregorian calendar  -lrb-  and in the proleptic gregorian calendar before 1582 -rrb- . 
the bahá'í calendar is a solar calendar composed of 19 months of 19 days each  -lrb-  361 days  -rrb-  . 
a leap year  -lrb-  also known as an intercalary year or bissextile year  -rrb-  is a calendar year containing one additional day  -lrb-  or ,  in the case of lunisolar calendars ,  a month  -rrb-  added to keep the calendar year synchronized with the astronomical or seasonal year . 
the algorithm applies to proleptic gregorian calendar years before 1, but only if the year is expressed with astronomical year numbering . 
for example ,  in the gregorian calendar ,  each leap year has 366 days instead of 365, by extending february to 29 days rather than the common 28.
the coptic calendar and ethiopian calendar also add an extra day to the end of the year once every four years before a julian 29-day february . 
the iranian calendar is an observational calendar that starts on the spring equinox and adds a single intercalated day to the last month  -lrb-  esfand  -rrb-  once every four or five years; the first leap year occurs as the fifth year of the typical 33-year cycle and the remaining leap years occur every four years through the remainder of the 33-year cycle . 
between 1946 and 1951, mies van der rohe designed and built the farnsworth house ,  a weekend retreat outside chicago for an independent professional woman ,  dr .  edith farnsworth . 
he built very little in these years  -lrb-  one built commission was philip johnson's new york apartment  -rrb- ; the nazis rejected his style as not `` german '' in character . 
the ludwig mies van der rohe archive ,  an administratively independent section of the museum of modern art's department of architecture and design ,  was established in 1968 by the museum's trustees . 
he also built a residence for john m .  van beuren on a family estate near morristown ,  new jersey . 
mies van der rohe died on august 17, 1969.
mies sought to establish a new architectural style that could represent modern times just as classical and gothic did for their own eras . 
mies was a director of the bauhaus ,  a seminal school in modern architecture . 
some historians argue that this new approach is an expression of the american spirit and the boundless open space of the frontier ,  which german culture so admired . 
he also built homes for wealthy clients . 
mies designed a series of four middle-income high-rise apartment buildings for developer herbert greenwald: the 860–880  -lrb-  which was built between 1949 and 1951 -rrb- and 900–910 lake shore drive towers on chicago's lakefront . 
archival materials are also held by the ryerson & burnham libraries at the art institute of chicago . 
mies's last work was the neue nationalgalerie art museum ,  the new national gallery for the berlin national gallery . 
mies worked from his studio in downtown chicago for his entire 31-year period in america . 
the ludwig mies van der rohe metropolitan structures collection ,  1961–1969, includes scrapbooks and photographs documenting chicago projects . 
ludwig mies van der rohe  -lrb-   ; ; born maria ludwig michael mies; march 27, 1886 – august 17, 1969 -rrb- was a german-american architect . 
the failure of his followers to meet his high standard may have contributed to demise of modernism and the rise of new competing design theories following his death . 
mies served as the last director of berlin's bauhaus ,  and then headed the department of architecture ,  illinois institute of technology in chicago ,  where he developed the second chicago school . 
mies also admired his ideas about the nobility that could be found in the anonymity of modern life . 
le corbusier was an avowed atheist . 
le corbusier had submitted his plan for the secretariat ,  called plan 23 of the 58 submitted . 
in 1935, le corbusier made his first visit to the united states . 
this was his first public commission ,  and was a major breakthrough for le corbusier . 
now called the centre le corbusier ,  it is one of his last finished works . 
le corbusier defined the principles of his new architecture in `` les cinq points de l'architecture moderne '' ,  published in 1927, and co-authored by his cousin ,  pierre jeanneret . 
le corbusier's death had a strong impact on the cultural and political world . 
the fondation le corbusier  -lrb-  flc  -rrb-  functions as his official estate . 
his apartment and studio are owned today by the fondation le corbusier ,  and can be visited . 
le corbusier had to appeal to the ministry of fine arts ,  which ordered that fence be taken down . 
during the war and the german occupation of france ,  le corbusier did his best to promote his architectural projects . 
niemeyer agreed with le corbusier's suggestion ,  and the headquarters was built ,  with minor modifications ,  according to their joint plan . 
on 17 july 2016, seventeen projects by le corbusier in seven countries were inscribed in the list of unesco world heritage sites as the architectural work of le corbusier ,  an outstanding contribution to the modern movement . 
he spoke of what he saw during this trip in many of his books ,  and it was the subject of his last book ,  `` le voyage d'orient '' . 
le corbusier prepared the master plan for the city of chandigarh in india ,  and contributed specific designs for several buildings there . 
le corbusier used raw concrete to construct the convent ,  which is placed on the side of a hill . 
the pavilion was ridiculed by many critics ,  but le corbusier ,  undaunted ,  wrote: `` right now one thing is sure . 
between 1918 and 1922, le corbusier did not build anything ,  concentrating his efforts on purist theory and painting . 
le corbusier took great pride in the house ,  and reproduced pictures in several of his books . 
as the global great depression enveloped europe ,  le corbusier devoted more and more time to his ideas for urban design and planned cities . 
in early 1947 le corbusier submitted a design for the headquarters of the united nations ,  which was to be built beside the east river in new york . 
in 1922 and 1923, le corbusier devoted himself to advocating his new concepts of architecture and urban planning in a series of polemical articles published in `` l'esprit nouveau '' . 
ozenfant and le corbusier began writing for a new journal ,  ``  '' ,  and promoted with energy and imagination his ideas of architecture . 
le corbusier was quite rhapsodic when describing the house in `` précisions '' in 1930: `` the plan is pure ,  exactly made for the needs of the house . 
the us copyright representative for the fondation le corbusier is the artists rights society . 
in 1918, le corbusier met the cubist painter amédée ozenfant ,  in whom he recognised a kindred spirit . 
between 1928 and 1934, as le corbusier's reputation grew ,  he received commissions to construct a wide variety of buildings . 
as no doubt le corbusier expected ,  no one hurried to implement the plan voisin ,  but he continued working on variations of the idea and recruiting followers . 
ariosto uses it throughout his works . 
shortly after this ,  ariosto's father died . 
orlando furioso ,  canto xlii . 
ariosto was born in reggio nell’emilia ,  where his father niccolò ariosto was commander of the citadel . 
ludovico ariosto  -lrb-  ; 8 september 1474 – 6 july 1533 -rrb- was an italian poet . 
ariosto and d'este got into a heated argument ,  and ariosto was promptly dismissed from service . 
euler later won this annual prize twelve times . 
a statement attributed to pierre-simon laplace expresses euler's influence on mathematics: `` read euler ,  read euler ,  he is the master of us all . `` 
euler succeeded him as the head of the mathematics department . 
this suggests that the eulers may have had a susceptibility to eye problems . 
euler's name is associated with a large number of topics . 
euler's eyesight worsened throughout his mathematical career . 
euler is the only mathematician to have `` two '' numbers named after him: the important euler's number in calculus ,  `` e '' ,  approximately equal to 2.71828, and the euler–mascheroni constant γ  -lrb-  gamma  -rrb-  sometimes referred to as just `` euler's constant '' ,  approximately equal to 0.57721.
frederick also expressed disappointment with euler's practical engineering abilities:
leonhard euler was born on 15 april 1707, in basel ,  switzerland to paul iii euler ,  a pastor of the reformed church ,  and marguerite brucker ,  a pastor's daughter . 
euler introduced the use of the exponential function and logarithms in analytic proofs . 
an example of a linear time series model is an autoregressive moving average model . 
there are some other instances where `` nonlinear model '' is used to contrast with a linearly structured model ,  although the term `` linear model '' is not usually applied . 
note that here the `` linear '' part of the term `` linear model '' is not referring to the coefficients `` φ '' and `` θ '' ,  as it would be in the case of a regression model ,  which looks structurally similar . 
a probability mass function . 
because of plant's injuries ,  led zeppelin did not tour in 1976.
led zeppelin's music was rooted in the blues . 
led zeppelin were an english rock band formed in london in 1968.
led zeppelin released their fourth album on 8 november 1971.
the statement was signed simply `` led zeppelin '' . 
led zeppelin remain one of the most bootlegged artists in the history of rock music . 
led zeppelin also made a significant cultural impact . 
page stated that he wanted led zeppelin to produce music that had `` light and shade '' . 
many have considered led zeppelin to be one of the most successful ,  innovative ,  and influential bands in the history of rock music . 
led zeppelin have been widely viewed as a hard rock band ,  although christgau regarded them as art rock as well . 
following the release of their second album ,  led zeppelin completed several more us tours . 
by this time ,  led zeppelin were the world's number one rock attraction ,  having outsold most bands of the time ,  including the rolling stones . 
in 1975, led zeppelin's double album `` physical graffiti '' was their first release on the swan song label . 
page wrote most of led zeppelin's music ,  particularly early in their career ,  while plant generally supplied the lyrics . 
many critics consider led zeppelin to be one of the most successful ,  innovative ,  and influential rock groups in history . 
in 1970, page and plant retired to bron-yr-aur ,  a remote cottage in wales ,  to commence work on their third album ,  `` led zeppelin iii '' . 
steve waksman has suggested that `` led zeppelin ii '' was `` the musical starting point for heavy metal '' . 
the album's track `` jim's blues '' ,  with plant on harmonica ,  was the first studio track to feature all four future members of led zeppelin . 
led zeppelin have collected many honours and awards throughout the course of their career . 
in 1974, led zeppelin took a break from touring and launched their own record label ,  swan song ,  named after an unreleased song . 
in addition to listing five of their albums among `` the 500 greatest albums of all time '' ,  `` rolling stone '' named led zeppelin the 14th-greatest artist of all time in 2004.
the dunsanys were socially active in both dublin and london ,  and travelled between their homes in meath ,  london and kent ,  other than during world wars i and ii ,  and the irish war of independence . 
he was president of both the irish chess union and the kent county chess association for some years ,  and of sevenoaks chess club for 54 years . 
he also supported the amateur drama group ,  the shoreham players . 
launching another phase of his work ,  dunsany's first novel ,  ``  '' ,  was published in 1922.
after `` the book of wonder , ``  dunsany began to write plays – many of which were even more successful ,  at the time ,  than his early story collections – while also continuing to write short stories . 
edward plunkett  -lrb-  `` dunsany ''  -rrb-  ,  known to his family as `` eddie , ``  was the first son of john william plunkett ,  17th baron of dunsany  -lrb-  1853–1899 -rrb- ,  and his wife ,  ernle elizabeth louisa maria grosvenor ernle-erle-drax ,  ernle elizabeth louisa maria grosvenor burton  -lrb-  1855–1916 -rrb- . 
he was also related to the prominent anglo-irish unionist ,  and later nationalist / home rule politician sir horace plunkett ,  and george count plunkett ,  papal count and republican politician ,  father of joseph plunkett ,  executed for his part in the 1916 rising . 
in that year he was also confirmed as an elector for the representative peers for ireland in the house of lords . 
he volunteered in the first world war ,  and was appointed captain in the royal inniskilling fusiliers . 
edward john moreton drax plunkett ,  18th baron of dunsany  -lrb-  ; 24 july 1878 – 25 october 1957 -rrb- ,  was an anglo-irish writer and dramatist; his work ,  mostly in the fantasy genre ,  was published under the name lord dunsany . 
he enjoyed cricket ,  provided the local cricket ground situated near dunsany crossroads ,  and later played for and presided at shoreham cricket club in kent . 
from the naïve fantasy of his earliest writings ,  through his early short story work in 1904–1908, he turned to the self-conscious fantasy of `` the book of wonder '' in 1912, in which he almost seems to be parodying his lofty early style . 
during the second world war ,  dunsany signed up for the irish army reserve and the british home guard ,  the two countries' local defence forces ,  and was especially active in shoreham ,  kent ,  the most-bombed village in england during the battle of britain . 
the billiards room includes the crests of all the lords dunsany up to the 18th . 
beethoven's first music teacher was his father . 
beethoven was born of this marriage in bonn . 
beethoven composed his first six string quartets  -lrb-  op . 
in december 1786, beethoven travelled to vienna ,  at his employer's expense ,  for the first time ,  apparently in the hope of studying with mozart . 
by the end of 1800, beethoven and his music were already much in demand from patrons and publishers . 
some time after 1779, beethoven began his studies with his most important teacher in bonn ,  christian gottlob neefe ,  who was appointed the court's organist in that year . 
beethoven was the grandson of ludwig van beethoven  -lrb-  1712–1773 -rrb- ,  a musician from the town of mechelen in the austrian duchy of brabant  -lrb-  in what is now the flemish region of belgium  -rrb-  who had moved to bonn the age of 21.
beethoven was born in bonn ,  then the capital of the electorate of cologne and part of the holy roman empire . 
ludwig van beethoven  -lrb-  ; ; baptised 17 december 177026 march 1827 -rrb- was a german composer and pianist . 
czerny went on to become a renowned music teacher himself ,  instructing franz liszt ,  and on 11 february 1812 gave the vienna premiere of beethoven's fifth piano concerto  -lrb-  the `` emperor ''  -rrb-  . 
a year and a half later ,  they met in bonn on haydn's return trip from london to vienna in july 1792, and it is likely that arrangements were made at that time for beethoven to study with the old master . 
hewitt commenced his professional career in 1998.
hewitt was born in adelaide ,  south australia . 
lleyton glynn hewitt  -lrb-  born 24 february 1981 -rrb- is an australian professional tennis player and former world no . 
the film was in competition at the 2011 cannes film festival . 
the film premiered at the cannes film festival . 
von trier has said that `` a film should be like a stone in your shoe '' . 
in 2006 von trier released a danish-language comedy film ,  `` the boss of it all '' . 
he studied film theory at the university of copenhagen and film direction at the national film school of denmark . 
von trier has denied the accusations made against him . 
von trier has occasionally referred to his films as falling into thematic and stylistic trilogies . 
von trier is heavily influenced by the work of carl theodor dreyer and the film `` the night porter '' . 
following `` the boss of it all '' ,  von trier scripted an autobiographical film ,  ``  '' in 2007, which went on to be directed by jacob thuesen . 
while all three films are sometimes associated with the dogme 95 movement ,  only `` the idiots '' is a certified dogme95 film . 
von trier has a known penchant for working with actors and production members more than once . 
von trier's mother considered herself a communist ,  while his father was a social democrat . 
following `` melancholia '' ,  von trier began the production of `` nymphomaniac '' ,  a film about the sexual awakening of a woman played by charlotte gainsbourg . 
lars von trier  -lrb-  born lars trier; 30 april 1956 -rrb- is a danish film director and screenwriter with a prolific and controversial career spanning almost four decades . 
von trier is the founder and shareholder of the international film production company zentropa films ,  which has sold more than 350million tickets and garnered seven academy award nominations over the past 25years . 
in 2015, von trier started to work on a new feature film `` the house that jack built '' ,  which was originally planned as an eight-part television series . 
von trier has occasionally courted controversy by his treatment of his leading ladies . 
in 2000 von trier premiered a musical featuring icelandic musician björk ,  `` dancer in the dark '' . 
von trier achieved his greatest international success with his `` golden heart '' trilogy . 
von trier directed `` medea ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- for television ,  which won him the jean d'arcy prize in france . 
one of the most controversial scenes was the film's ending: brian's crucifixion . 
johnson became friendly with the pythons during the filming of `` life of brian '' and his notes and memories of the behind-the-scenes filming and make-up . 
a dvd of the film was also released that year . 
released on 8 november 1979 in the uk ,  the film was the fourth highest-grossing film in britain in 1979.
the only scene with otto that remains in the film is during the crucifixion sequence . 
the film was a box office success ,  the fourth-highest-grossing film in the united kingdom in 1979, and highest grossing of any british film in the united states that year . 
an album was also released by monty python in 1979 in conjunction with the film . 
there are various stories about the origins of `` life of brian '' . 
muggeridge's verdict on the film was that it was `` such a tenth-rate film that it couldn't possibly destroy anyone's genuine faith . `` 
the bfi declared `` life of brian '' to be the 28th best british film of all time ,  in their equivalent of the original afi's 100 years .  .  . 100 movies list . 
monty python's life of brian ,  also known as life of brian ,  is a 1979 british comedy film starring and written by the comedy group monty python  -lrb-  graham chapman ,  john cleese ,  terry gilliam ,  eric idle ,  terry jones and michael palin  -rrb-  . 
 ''life of brian '' has regularly been cited as a significant contender for the title `` greatest comedy film of all time '' ,  and has been named as such in polls conducted by `` total film '' magazine in 2000, the british tv network channel 4 in 2006 and `` the guardian '' newspaper in 2007.
julian doyle ,  the film's editor ,  wrote `` the life of brian/jesus '' ,  a book which not only describes the filmmaking and editing process but argues that it is the most accurate biblical film ever made . 
and `` i'm brian and so's my wife ''  -rrb-  in the top 10.
over the next few months `` life of brian '' was re-edited and re-screened a number of times for different preview audiences ,  losing a number of entire filmed sequences . 
during the film's theatrical run in finland ,  a text explaining that the film was a parody of hollywood historical epics was added to the opening credits . 
an album of the songs sung in `` monty python's life of brian '' was released on the disky label . 
the film pokes fun at revolutionary groups and 1970s british left-wing politics . 
he disappeared again in the afternoon before he could be included in any of the close-up or publicity shots for the film . 
in a later interview ,  jones said the film `` isn't blasphemous because it doesn’t touch on belief at all . 
following the withdrawal of funding by emi films just days before production was scheduled to begin ,  long-time monty python fan and former member of the beatles ,  george harrison ,  arranged financing for `` life of brian '' through the formation of his company handmade films . 
in 2012 the lc-a+ camera was re-released as a special edition . 
since the introduction of the original lomo lc-a ,  lomography has produced a line of their own film cameras . 
the lomography name is inspired by the former state-run optics manufacturer lomo plc of saint petersburg ,  russia that created and produced the 35 mm lomo lc-a compact automat camera ,  now central to lomography . 
thus `` le matma pa vedma '' means `` the mother sold  -lrb-  something  -rrb- ``  ,  while `` le vedma pa matma '' means `` the seller was a mother  -lrb-  of someone  -rrb- ``  . 
thus `` le matma go sadji ''  -lrb-  the mother who is wise  -rrb-  means the same as `` le sadji matma ''  -lrb-  the wise mother  -rrb-  . 
not all arguments need be present; for example `` s pa vedma t b '' means `` s sold t to b '' ,  `` s pa vedma t '' means `` s sold t '' ,  and `` s pa vedma '' simply means `` s sold  -lrb-  something  -rrb- ``  . 
the sentence `` la kim matma e sadji vedma '' would mean `` kim is a mother and wisely sells . `` 
thus `` b pa fu vedma t s '' = `` b bought t from s '' and `` p pa ju vedma t b '' = `` p was paid to buy t by b '' . 
 ''la adam pa vedma le negda la greg i de gacpi '' would mean `` adam sold the egg to greg; it  -lrb-  the egg  -rrb-  was happy . `` 
loglan has three types of words: `` predicates ''  -lrb-  also called `` content words ''  -rrb-  ,  `` structure words ''  -lrb-  also called `` little words ''  -rrb-  ,  and `` names '' . 
so `` le matma ga vedma '' means `` the mother sells  -lrb-  at some unspecified time in the past ,  present or future  -rrb- ``  . 
a name can be used as an argument by preceding it with the structure word `` la '' . 
fragments and doxographical reports about leucippus were collected by hermann diels  -lrb-  1848–1922 -rrb- ,  firstly in `` doxographi graeci ''  -lrb-  berlin ,  1879, reprint berlin: de gruyter ,  1929 -rrb- and then in `` die fragmente der vorsokratiker '' ,  berlin ,  1903, 6th ed .  ,  rev . 
the matter must remain moot unless more information is forthcoming from the record . 
some sources claim that around 440 or 430 bce leucippus founded a school at abdera ,  with which his pupil ,  democritus ,  was closely associated . 
within two weeks of the start of the war ,  feminists began to mobilise against the war . 
in the midst of the war ,  wilson refused . 
the onset of the second world war demonstrated that the league had failed in its primary purpose ,  the prevention of another world war . 
the settlement produced peace in the area until the beginning of the second world war . 
in the course of the diplomatic efforts surrounding world war i ,  both sides had to clarify their long-term war aims . 
at the start of the first world war the first schemes for international organisation to prevent future wars began to gain considerable public support ,  particularly in great britain and the united states . 
after the first world war ,  poland and lithuania both regained their independence but soon became immersed in territorial disputes . 
in january 1920, when the league was born ,  germany was not permitted to join because it was seen as having been the aggressor in the first world war . 
the b mandates were applied to the former german colonies that the league took responsibility for after the first world war . 
this was one of the league's final acts before it practically ceased functioning due to the second world war . 
japan itself withdrew . 
when the british cabinet discussed the concept of the league during the first world war ,  maurice hankey ,  the cabinet secretary ,  circulated a memorandum on the subject . 
the origins of the league as an organisation created by the allied powers as part of the peace settlement to end the first world war led to it being viewed as a `` league of victors '' . 
the aftermath of the first world war left many issues to be settled ,  including the exact position of national boundaries and which country particular regions would join . 
the headquarters of the league ,  the palace of nations ,  remained unoccupied for nearly six years until the second world war ended . 
after a request for assistance from lithuania ,  the league council called for poland's withdrawal from the area . 
at the end of the first world war ,  the allied powers were confronted with the question of the disposal of the former german colonies in africa and the pacific ,  and the several arabic-speaking provinces of the ottoman empire . 
the first non-permanent members were belgium ,  brazil ,  greece ,  and spain . 
the composition of the council was changed several times . 
decisions of the security council are binding on all members of the un ,  and unanimous decisions are not required ,  unlike in the league council . 
iraq ,  which joined in 1932, was the first member that had previously been a league of nations mandate . 
the fabians were the first to argue for a `` council '' of states ,  necessarily the great powers ,  who would adjudicate world affairs ,  and for the creation of a permanent secretariat to enhance international co-operation across a range of activities . 
one proposed remedy was the creation of an international organisation whose aim was to prevent future war through disarmament ,  open diplomacy ,  international co-operation ,  restrictions on the right to wage war ,  and penalties that made war unattractive . 
the league failed to prevent the 1932 war between bolivia and paraguay over the arid gran chaco region . 
the relations between the assembly and the council and the competencies of each were for the most part not explicitly defined . 
its structure was designed as a council headed by a president ,  which would later be reflected in the structure of the league . 
three of these institutions were transferred to the united nations after the second world war: the international labour organization ,  the permanent court of international justice  -lrb-  as the international court of justice  -rrb-  ,  and the health organisation  -lrb-  restructured as the world health organization  -rrb-  . 
on 28 june 1919, 44 states signed the covenant ,  including 31 states which had taken part in the war on the side of the triple entente or joined it during the conflict . 
the league would be made up of a general assembly  -lrb-  representing all member states  -rrb-  ,  an executive council  -lrb-  with membership limited to major powers  -rrb-  ,  and a permanent secretariat . 
the league of nations  -lrb-  abbreviated as ln or lon in english ,  ``  '' abbreviated as ' or ' in french  -rrb-  was an intergovernmental organisation founded on 10 january 1920 as a result of the paris peace conference that ended the first world war . 
the principal allies in the second world war  -lrb-  the uk ,  the ussr ,  france ,  the u . s .  ,  and the republic of china  -rrb-  became permanent members of the united nations security council in 1946; in 1971, the people's republic of china replaced the republic of china  -lrb-  then only in control of taiwan  -rrb-  as permanent member of the un security council ,  and in 1991 the russian federation assumed the seat of the dissolved ussr . 
the court was open to all the nations of the world under certain broad conditions . 
the league lasted for 26 years; the united nations  -lrb-  un  -rrb-  replaced it after the end of the second world war and inherited several agencies and organisations founded by the league . 
the executive council would create a permanent court of international justice to make judgements on the disputes . 
permanent members of the security council can wield a veto to protect their vital interests . 
the committee for the study of the legal status of women sought to inquire into the status of women all over the world . 
the league had accepted germany ,  also as a permanent member of the council ,  in 1926, deeming it a `` peace-loving country '' ,  but adolf hitler pulled germany out when he came to power in 1933.
the world disarmament conference was convened by the league of nations in geneva in 1932, with representatives from 60 states . 
logic programming is a type of programming paradigm which is largely based on formal logic . 
lake tana has a number of islands ,  whose number varies depending on the level of the lake . 
about 70% of the fish species in the lake are endemic . 
lake tana  -lrb-  also spelled t'ana ,   ,  ' ,  '; an older variant is tsana ,  ge'ez: ጻና `` ṣānā ''; sometimes called `` dembiya '' after the region to the north of the lake  -rrb-  is the source of the blue nile and is the largest lake in ethiopia . 
there is also zege peninsula on the southwest portion of the lake . 
the lake was originally much larger than it is today . 
she worked in radio for most of her career . 
