the first version ,  dubbed microsoft internet explorer ,  made its debut on august 16, 1995.
on march 17, 2015, microsoft announced that microsoft edge would replace internet explorer as the default browser on its windows 10 devices . 
internet explorer  -lrb-  formerly microsoft internet explorer and windows internet explorer ,  commonly referred to as explorer and abbreviated ie or msie  -rrb-  is a series of graphical web browsers developed by microsoft and included in the microsoft windows line of operating systems ,  starting in 1995.
the intel 80188 microprocessor was a variant of the intel 80186.
along with hundreds of other processor models ,  intel discontinued the 80188 processor 30 march 2006, after a life of about 24 years . 
the two 8-bit fields dsap and ssap allow to multiplex various upper layer protocols above llc . 
ethernet  -lrb-  ieee 802.3 -rrb- networks are an exception; the ieee 802.3x-1997 standard explicitly allowed using of the ethernet ii framing ,  where the 16-bit field after the mac addresses does not carry the length of the frame followed by the ieee 802.2 llc header ,  but the ethertype value followed by the upper layer data . 
the ipx protocol used by novell netware networks supports an additional ethernet frame type ,  802.3 raw ,  ultimately supporting four frame types on ethernet  -lrb-  802.3 raw ,  802.2 llc ,  802.2 snap ,  and ethernet ii  -rrb-  and two frame types on fddi and other  -lrb-  non-ethernet  -rrb-  ieee 802 networks  -lrb-  802.2 llc and 802.2 snap  -rrb-  . 
ieee 802.2 is the original name of the iso/iec 8802-2 standard which defines logical link control  -lrb-  llc  -rrb-  as the upper portion of the data link layer of the osi model . 
llc may offer three types of services:
the ieee 802.2 sublayer adds some control information to the message created by the upper layer and passed to the llc for transmission to another node on the same data link . 
the llc header consist of `` dsap ''  -lrb-  `` destination service access point ''  -rrb-  ,  `` ssap ''  -lrb-  `` source service access point ''  -rrb-  and the `` control '' field . 
there is also typically a digestive chamber with one or two openings to the exterior . 
the term `` invertebrates '' is not always precise among non-biologists since it does not accurately describe a taxon in the same way that arthropoda ,  vertebrata or manidae do . 
many invertebrate taxa have a greater number and variety of species than the entire subphylum of vertebrata . 
despite this ,  the concept of `` invertebrates '' as a taxon of animals has persisted for over a century among the laity ,  and within the zoological community and in its literature it remains in use as a term of convenience for animals that are not members of the vertebrata . 
invertebrates are animals that neither possess nor develop a vertebral column  -lrb-  commonly known as a `` backbone '' or `` spine ''  -rrb-  ,  derived from the notochord . 
the word `` invertebrate '' comes from the latin word `` vertebra '' ,  which means a joint in general ,  and sometimes specifically a joint from the spinal column of a vertebrate . 
the majority of animal species are invertebrates; one estimate puts the figure at 97% . 
ivar andreas aasen  -lrb-  ; 5 august 1813 – 23 september 1896 -rrb- was a norwegian philologist ,  lexicographer ,  playwright ,  and poet . 
he is best known for having assembled from dialects one of the two official written versions of the norwegian language ,  nynorsk . 
aasen was born at åsen in ørsta  -lrb-  then ørsten  -rrb-  ,  in the district of sunnmøre ,  on the west coast of norway . 
the nation state of israel was established in 1948.
this is most notable in the conflict in the jammu and kashmir state ,  a muslim majority state in india . 
the region of kashmir in north india has been the issue of a territorial dispute between india and pakistan since 1947, the kashmir conflict . 
greater albania or `` ethnic albania '' as called by the albanian nationalists themselves ,  is an irredentist concept of lands outside the borders of albania which are considered part of a greater national homeland by most albanians ,  based on claims on the present-day or historical presence of albanian populations in those areas . 
the term was later used by germans referring to greater germany ,  a state consisting of pre–world war i germany ,  austria and the sudetenland . 
the irish free state achieved independence from the united kingdom in 1922.
after the kosovo war  -lrb-  1998–99 -rrb- ,  kosovo became a un protectorate ,  still `` de jure '' part of serbia . 
japan also claims the south korean-administered liancourt rocks ,  which are known as takeshima in japan and have been claimed since the end of the second world war . 
all of the european colonies on the indian subcontinent which were not part of the british raj have been annexed by india since it gained its independence from the british empire . 
all modern indian political parties support the return of the entirety of kashmir to india ,  and all official maps of india show the entire jammu and kashmir state  -lrb-  including parts under pakistani or chinese administration after 1947 -rrb- as an integral part of india . 
the most ambitious claims include all parts of manchuria that the goguryeo kingdom controlled . 
serbian irredentism is manifested in `` greater serbia '' . 
the use of `` greater '' does not always convey an irredentistic meaning . 
south asia too is another region in which armed irredentist movements have been active for almost a century ,  in north-east india ,  burma and bangladesh . 
in north africa ,  the prime examples of irredentism are the concepts of greater morocco and greater mauritania . 
the afghan border with pakistan ,  known as the durand line ,  was agreed to by afghanistan and british india in 1893.
the preamble to the constitution of the people's republic of china states ,  `` taiwan is part of the sacred territory of the people's republic of china  -lrb-  prc  -rrb-  . 
macedonia was divided between serbia and greece after the balkan wars . 
south korea's constitution also claims jurisdiction over the entire korean peninsula . 
the areas claimed include parts of modern saudi arabia and oman . 
the conflict erupted further south with the ethnic albanian majority in kosovo seeking to switch allegiance to the adjoining state of albania . 
it also held portuguese timor  -lrb-  modern east timor  -rrb-  from 1975 to 2002 based on irredentist claims . 
the idea of a greater finland first gained popularity and influence in 1917, but lost support after world war ii . 
it is alleged that illegal immigration is actively encouraged by some political groups in bangladesh as well as the state of bangladesh to convert large parts of india's northeastern states and west bengal into muslim-majority areas that would subsequently seek to separate from india and join muslim-majority bangladesh . 
in the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo  -lrb-  1848 -rrb- following the mexican–american war  -lrb-  1845–48 -rrb- ,  mexico ceded claims to what is now the western and southwestern united states to the united states  -lrb-  see mexican cession  -rrb-  . 
the syrian social nationalist party ,  which operates in lebanon and syria ,  works for the unification of most modern states of the levant and beyond in a single state referred to as greater syria . 
the restoration of the borders of hungary to their state prior to world war i ,  in order to unite all ethnic hungarians within the same country once again . 
the two states also settled the long-running dispute concerning their respective names: `` ireland '' and the `` united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland '' ,  with both governments agreeing to use those names . 
ireland's constitution was altered by referendum and its territorial claim to northern ireland was removed . 
gibraltar was captured in 1704, during the war of the spanish succession  -lrb-  1701–1714 -rrb- . 
since their founding ,  both korean states have disputed the legitimacy of the other . 
the kingdom of norway maintains some claim to territories lost at the dissolution of the denmark–norway union . 
japan claims the two southernmost islands of the russian-administered kuril islands ,  the island chain north of hokkaido ,  annexed by the soviet union following world war ii . 
pakistani irredentism involves the incorporations of muslim majority lands of british india under pakistan . 
the proposed greater lebanese country includes lebanon ,  mediterranean coast of syria ,  and northern israel . 
the language of the inuit is an eskimo–aleut language . 
these two countries count the bulk of speakers of inuit language variants ,  although about 7,500 alaskans speak varieties of inuit out of a population of over 13,000 inuit . 
the inuit languages have a few hundred speakers in russia . 
the yupik and inuit languages are very similar syntactically and morphologically . 
furthermore ,  canadians – both inuit and non-inuit – sometimes use the word `` inuktitut '' to refer to `` all '' inuit language variants ,  including those of alaska and greenland . 
the only exceptions are at the extreme edges of the inuit world: parts of greenland ,  and in western alaska . 
inuit may have any number of names ,  given by parents and other community members . 
a popular belief exists that the inuit have an unusually large number of words for snow . 
the inuit languages can form very long words by adding more and more descriptive affixes to words . 
greenland counts approximately 50,000 speakers of the inuit languages ,  of whom over 90% speak west greenlandic dialects at home . 
this sort of word construction is pervasive in the inuit languages and makes it very unlike english . 
in greenland the official form of inuit language ,  and the official language of the state ,  is called `` kalaallisut '' . 
the `` fact '' that there are many inuit words for snow has been put forward so often that it has become a journalistic cliché . 
parts of speech work very differently in the inuit language than in english ,  so these definitions are somewhat misleading . 
once more ibn battuta returned to tangier ,  but only stayed for a short while . 
little is known about ibn battuta's life after completion of his `` rihla '' in 1355.
after returning to quanzhou in 1346, ibn battuta began his journey back to morocco . 
ibn battuta travelled from beijing to hangzhou ,  and then proceeded to fuzhou . 
ibn battuta and his party reached the indus river on 12 september 1333.
when ibn battuta arrived in 1331, mogadishu stood at the zenith of its prosperity . 
it is uncertain by which route ibn battuta entered the indian subcontinent . 
ibn battuta also mentions locals who worship the solar deity . 
from kaylukari ,  ibn battuta finally reached quanzhou in fujian province ,  china . 
al-bushri accompanied ibn battuta northwards to hangzhou and paid for the gifts that ibn battuta would present to the mongolian emperor togon-temür of the yuan dynasty . 
ibn battuta recorded that while in bolghar he wanted to travel further north into the land of darkness . 
there is no indication that ibn battuta made any notes or had any journal during his twenty-nine years of travelling . 
from aden ,  ibn battuta embarked on a ship heading for zeila on the coast of somalia . 
in 1348, ibn battuta arrived in damascus with the intention of retracing the route of his first `` hajj '' . 
in the year 1345 ibn battuta arrived at quanzhou in china's fujian province ,  then under the rule of the mongols . 
it is unlikely that the 3rd caliph uthman ibn affan had someone with the exact identical name in china who was encountered by ibn battuta . 
ibn battuta talked his way into this expedition ,  which would be his first beyond the boundaries of the islamic world . 
after spending a month in gao ,  ibn battuta set off with a large caravan for the oasis of takedda . 
ibn battuta recorded his visit to the kilwa sultanate in 1330, and commented favorably on the humility and religion of its ruler ,  sultan al-hasan ibn sulaiman ,  a descendant of the legendary ali ibn al-hassan shirazi . 
ibn battuta remained in mecca for some time  -lrb-  the `` rihla '' suggests about three years ,  from september 1327 until autumn 1330 -rrb- . 
ibn battuta first sailed to malacca on the malay peninsula which he called `` mul jawi '' . 
ibn battuta returned to cairo and took a second side trip ,  this time to mamluk-controlled damascus . 
ibn battuta went further north into assam ,  then turned around and continued with his original plan . 
maliki muslims requested ibn battuta serve as their religious judge as he was from an area where it was practised . 
historians believe that ibn battuta visited a number of towns in central anatolia ,  but not in the order that he describes . 
then ,  instead of continuing on to baghdad with the caravan ,  ibn battuta started a six-month detour that took him into persia . 
ibn battuta then sailed to a state called kaylukari in the land of tawalisi ,  where he met urduja ,  a local princess . 
the isdn standards define several kinds of access interfaces ,  such as basic rate interface  -lrb-  bri  -rrb-  ,  primary rate interface  -lrb-  pri  -rrb-  ,  narrowband isdn  -lrb-  n-isdn  -rrb-  ,  and broadband isdn  -lrb-  b-isdn  -rrb-  . 
isdn is employed as the network ,  data-link and physical layers in the context of the osi model . 
channel bonding can achieve a greater data rate; typically the isdn b-channels of three or four bris  -lrb-  six to eight 64 kbit/s channels  -rrb-  are bonded . 
as of 2014, there are about 150 imprinted genes known in the mouse and about half that in humans . 
it has also been postulated that if the retrotransposed gene is inserted close to another imprinted gene ,  it may just acquire this imprint . 
appropriate imprinting of certain genes is important for normal development . 
this region contains the paternally expressed genes snrpn and ndn and the maternally expressed gene ube3a . 
hybrid offspring of two species may exhibit unusual growth due to the novel combination of imprinted genes . 
various methods have been used to identify imprinted genes . 
the majority of imprinted genes in mammals have been found to have roles in the control of embryonic growth and development ,  including development of the placenta . 
paternally expressed 3  -lrb-  peg3 -rrb- is a gene for which this hypothesis may apply . 
the researchers were able to succeed by using one egg from an immature parent ,  thus reducing maternal imprinting ,  and modifying it to express the gene igf2, which is normally only expressed by the paternal copy of the gene . 
imprinting is a dynamic process . 
other imprinted genes are involved in post-natal development ,  with roles affecting suckling and metabolism . 
icann also maintains registries of internet protocol identifiers . 
this document gave the doc oversight over some of the icann operations . 
on october 1, 2016, icann was freed from u . s .  government oversight . 
on march 10, 2016, icann and the doc signed a historic ,  culminating agreement to finally remove icann and iana from the control and oversight of the doc . 
on may 17, 2004, icann published a proposed budget for the year 2004–05.
on june 20, 2011, the icann board voted to end most restrictions on the names of generic top-level domains  -lrb-  gtld  -rrb-  . 
at the meeting of icann in rome ,  which took place from march 2 to 6, 2004, icann agreed to ask approval of the u . s .  department of commerce for the waiting list service of verisign . 
on september 30, 2009, icann signed an agreement with the doc  -lrb-  known as the `` affirmation of commitments ''  -rrb-  that confirmed icann's commitment to a multistakeholder governance model ,  but did not remove it from doc oversight and control . 
this external review was an assistance of the work of icann's accountability and transparency review team . 
icann managed the internet assigned numbers authority  -lrb-  iana  -rrb-  under contract to the united states department of commerce  -lrb-  doc  -rrb-  and pursuant to an agreement with the ietf . 
during february 2007, icann began procedures to end accreditation of one of their registrars ,  registerfly amid charges and lawsuits involving fraud ,  and criticism of icann's management of the situation . 
on june 26, 2008, the icann board started a new process of tld naming policy to take a `` significant step forward on the introduction of new generic top-level domains . `` 
the basic iterative methods work by a splitting up the matrix formula_13 into and here the matrix formula_15 should be easily invertible . 
an `` iterative method '' is defined by and for a given linear system formula_3 with exact solution formula_4 the `` error '' by an iterative method is called `` linear '' if there exists a matrix formula_6 such that and this matrix is called `` iteration matrix '' . 
basic examples of stationary iterative methods use a splitting of the matrix formula_13 such as where formula_20 is only the diagonal part of formula_13, and formula_22 is the strict lower triangular part of formula_13.
linear stationary iterative methods are also called relaxation methods . 
an iterative method with a given iteration matrix formula_8 is called `` convergent '' if the following holds
in the case of a system of linear equations ,  the two main classes of iterative methods are the stationary iterative methods ,  and the more general krylov subspace methods . 
quasi-judicial institutions ,  by contrast ,  make rulings on cases ,  but these rulings are not in themselves legally binding; the main example is the individual complaints mechanisms available under the various un human rights treaties . 
as a result ,  the court never came into existence . 
the international prize court was an international court proposed at the beginning of the 20th century ,  to hear prize cases . 
ifr flights in controlled airspace require an atc `` clearance '' for each part of the flight . 
it is also a term used by pilots and controllers to indicate the type of flight plan an aircraft is flying ,  such as an ifr or vfr flight plan . 
it is essential to differentiate between flight plan type  -lrb-  vfr or ifr  -rrb-  and weather conditions  -lrb-  vmc or imc  -rrb-  . 
when operation of an aircraft under vfr is not safe ,  because the visual cues outside the aircraft are obscured by weather ,  instrument flight rules must be used instead . 
to put instrument flight rules into context ,  a brief overview of visual flight rules  -lrb-  vfr  -rrb-  is necessary . 
instrument flight rules  -lrb-  ifr  -rrb-  is one of two sets of regulations governing all aspects of civil aviation aircraft operations; the other is visual flight rules  -lrb-  vfr  -rrb-  . 
in the us ,  weather conditions are forecast broadly as vfr ,  mvfr  -lrb-  marginal visual flight rules  -rrb-  ,  ifr ,  or lifr  -lrb-  low instrument flight rules  -rrb-  . 
after returning to herat ,  ismail khan quickly consolidated his control over the region . 
khan was born in or about 1946 in the shindand district of herat province in afghanistan . 
in 1992, two years after the soviet withdrawal from afghanistan ,  the mujahideen captured herat and ismail khan became governor . 
ismail khan was forced to flee to neighboring iran with 8,000 men and the taliban took over herat province . 
the color of indigo dye is a different color from either spectrum indigo or pigment indigo . 
the color `` electric indigo '' is a bright and saturated color between the traditional indigo and violet . 
the color `` pigment indigo '' is equivalent to the web color indigo and approximates the color indigo that is usually reproduced in pigments and colored pencils . 
the web color `` blue violet '' or `` deep indigo '' is a tone of indigo brighter than pigment indigo ,  but not as bright as electric indigo . 
this is the brightest color indigo that can be approximated on a computer screen; it is a color located between the  -lrb-  primary  -rrb-  blue and the color violet of the rgb color wheel . 
the color indigo is named after the indigo dye derived from the plant `` indigofera tinctoria '' and related species . 
indigo is a deep and rich color close to the color wheel blue  -lrb-  a primary color in the rgb color space  -rrb-  ,  as well as to some variants of ultramarine . 
some entities that are not themselves imf members also contribute statistical data to the systems:
imf conditionality is a set of policies or conditions that the imf requires in exchange for financial resources . 
the imf provides alternate sources of financing . 
the quotas are increased periodically as a means of boosting the imf's resources . 
the imf's role was fundamentally altered by the floating exchange rates post-1971.
in 1995 the international monetary fund began work on data dissemination standards with the view of guiding imf member countries to disseminate their economic and financial data to the public . 
these are duncuan island ,  eilean ardgaddan ,  eilean a' bhuic ,  eilean aoghainn ,  eilean a' chomhraig ,  eilean an dúnain ,  eilean buidhe  -lrb-  ardmarnock  -rrb-  ,  eilean buidhe  -lrb-  portavadie  -rrb-  ,  eilean fraoch ,  eilean math-ghamhna ,  eilean mór ,  glas eilean ,  heather island ,  inverneil island ,  kilbride island and liath eilean . 
neither loch goil nor loch long ,  which are fjord-like arms of the firth to the north ,  contain islands . 
the following are places along that shores of the firth of clyde that are not islands and have misleading names ,  `` eilean '' being gaelic for `` island '': eilean na beithe ,  portavadie; eilean beag ,  cove; eilean dubh ,  dalchenna ,  loch fyne; eilean nan gabhar ,  melldalloch ,  kyles of bute; barmore island ,  just north of tarbert ,  kintyre; eilean aoidh ,  south of portavadie; eilean leathan ,  kilbrannan sound just south of torrisdale bay; island muller ,  kilbrannan sound north of campbeltown . 
from the mid-thirteenth century to the present day all of the islands of the clyde have remained part of scotland . 
the islands of the clyde historically formed the border zone between the norse `` suðreyjar '' and scotland . 
arran also has three rare endemic species of tree ,  the arran whitebeams . 
the majority of the islands at one time made up the traditional county of bute . 
the islands of the firth of clyde are the fifth largest of the major scottish island groups after the inner and outer hebrides ,  orkney and shetland . 
the firth of clyde ,  in which these island lie ,  is north of the irish sea and has numerous branching inlets ,  some of them substantial features in their own right . 
the kilbrannan sound ,  which lies between arran and the kintyre peninsula ,  contains several islets: an struthlag ,  cour island ,  eilean carrach  -lrb-  carradale  -rrb-  ,  eilean carrach  -lrb-  skipness  -rrb-  ,  eilean grianain ,  eilean sunadale ,  gull isle ,  island ross and thorn isle . 
loch fyne ,  which extends inland from the sound of bute is the longest of scotland's sea lochs and contains several islets and skerries . 
as such many of these islands fell under norse hegemony between the 9th and 13th centuries . 
the official iban registrar under iso 13616-2:2007 is swift . 
before iban ,  differing national standards for bank account identification  -lrb-  i . e . 
an `` infinitive phrase '' is a verb phrase constructed with the verb in infinitive form . 
being a verb ,  an infinitive may take objects and other complements and modifiers to form a verb phrase  -lrb-  called an infinitive phrase  -rrb-  . 
regarding english ,  the term `` infinitive '' is traditionally applied to the unmarked form of the verb  -lrb-  the `` plain form ''  -rrb-  when it forms a non-finite verb ,  whether or not introduced by the particle `` to '' . 
certain auxiliary verbs are defective in that they do not have infinitives  -lrb-  or any other non-finite forms  -rrb-  . 
the other non-finite verb forms in english are the gerund or present participle  -lrb-  the `` -ing '' form  -rrb-  ,  and the past participle – these are not considered infinitives . 
infinitive  -lrb-  abbreviated   -rrb-  is a grammatical term referring to certain verb forms existing in many languages ,  most often used as non-finite verbs . 
this may be done by inflection ,  like with the latin perfect and passive infinitives ,  or by periphrasis  -lrb-  with the use of auxiliary verbs  -rrb-  ,  like with the latin future infinitives or the english perfect and progressive infinitives . 
 -lrb-  for some irregular verbs the form of the infinitive coincides additionally with that of the past tense and/or past participle ,  like in the case of `` put '' .   -rrb- 
the defined dogma of the immaculate conception states: the definition concerns original sin only ,  and it makes no declaration about the church's belief that the blessed virgin was sinless in the sense of freedom from actual or personal sin . 
he believed that mary was completely free from sin ,  but that she was not given this grace at the instant of her conception . 
since the second council of orange against semi-pelagianism ,  the catholic church has taught that even had man never sinned in the garden of eden and was sinless ,  he would still require god's grace to remain sinless . 
part of that earlier mass was revived in the mass that pope pius ix ordered to be used on the feast and that is still in use . 
martin luther ,  who initiated the protestant reformation ,  said: `` mother mary ,  like us ,  was born in sin of sinful parents ,  but the holy spirit covered her ,  sanctified and purified her so that this child was born of flesh and blood ,  but not with sinful flesh and blood . 
the doctrine of the immaculate conception  -lrb-  mary being conceived free from original sin  -rrb-  is not to be confused with the virginal conception of her son jesus . 
a feast of the conception of the most holy and all pure mother of god was celebrated in syria on 8 december perhaps as early as the 5th century . 
in christian theology ,  the immaculate conception is the conception of the virgin mary free from original sin by virtue of the merits of her son jesus . 
the formal pronouncement of mary's immaculate conception by the catholic church in 1854 further alienated some protestant churches largely due to its implication that not all have sinned . 
the encyclical `` mystici corporis '' from pope pius xii  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- in addition holds that mary was also sinless personally ,  `` free from all sin ,  original or personal '' . 
the doctrine teaches that from her conception mary ,  being always free from original sin ,  received the sanctifying grace that would normally come with baptism after birth . 
the catholic church teaches that god acted upon mary in the first moment of her conception ,  keeping her `` immaculate '' . 
the papal definition of the dogma declares with absolute certainty and authority that mary possessed sanctifying grace from the first instant of her existence and was free from the lack of grace caused by the original sin at the beginning of human history . 
the dogma was defined in accordance with the conditions of papal infallibility ,  which would be defined in 1870 by the first vatican council . 
writers such as sarah jane boss interpret the existence of the feast as a strong indication of the church's traditional belief in the immaculate conception . 
on 6 december 1708, pope clement xi made the feast of the conception of mary ,  at that time still with the nativity of mary formula for the mass ,  a holy day of obligation . 
pope pius ix would later appoint spada master of the sacred palace in 1867.
the feast of the annunciation  -lrb-  which commemorates the virginal conception and the incarnation of jesus  -rrb-  is celebrated on 25 march ,  nine months before christmas day . 
ave maris stella is the vesper hymn of the feast of the immaculate conception . 
one feature of this name is that iona has the same spelling as the island of iona which is off the coast of scotland but with which irish people have strong cultural associations . 
the neologism has been criticised on the grounds that it excludes most of the islands in the north atlantic ,  and also that the only island referred to by the term that is actually in the north atlantic ocean is ireland . 
intel produced inteldx4s with two clock speed steppings: a 75 mhz version  -lrb-  3× 25 mhz multiplier  -rrb-  ,  and a 100 mhz version  -lrb-  3× 33.3 mhz  -rrb-  . 
the inteldx4 was an oem-only product ,  but the dx4 overdrive could be purchased at a retail store . 
the interactive fiction competition  -lrb-  also known as ifcomp  -rrb-  is one of several annual competitions for works of interactive fiction . 
the competition has been described as the `` super bowl '' of interactive fiction . 
the registrar must report a death where:
often the documents themselves are not kept or stored directly in the ir system ,  but are instead represented in the system by document surrogates or metadata . 
web search engines are the most visible ir applications . 
information retrieval is the science of searching for information in a document ,  searching for documents themselves ,  and also searching for metadata that describe data ,  and for databases of texts ,  images or sounds . 
the introduction of web search engines has boosted the need for very large scale retrieval systems even further . 
his predecessors were antonio cassese of italy  -lrb-  1993–1997 -rrb- ,  gabrielle kirk mcdonald of the united states  -lrb-  1997–1999 -rrb- ,  claude jorda of france  -lrb-  1999–2002 -rrb- ,  theodor meron of the united states  -lrb-  2002–2005 -rrb- ,  fausto pocar of italy  -lrb-  2005–2008 -rrb- ,  patrick robinson of jamaica  -lrb-  2008–2011 -rrb- ,  and theodor meron  -lrb-  2011–2015 -rrb- . 
the prosecutor was appointed by the un security council upon nomination by the un secretary-general . 
1993–1994: in the first year of its existence ,  the tribunal laid the foundations for its existence as a judicial organ . 
however after the first year the first icty judges had drafted and adopted all the rules for court proceedings . 
1995–1996: between june 1995 and june 1996, 10 public indictments had been confirmed against a total of 33 individuals . 
the final icty trial to be completed in the first instance was that of ratko mladić ,  who was convicted on 22 november 2017.
the last prosecutor was serge brammertz . 
the court was established by resolution 827 of the united nations security council ,  which was passed on 25 may 1993.
the tribunal was an ad hoc court located in the hague ,  netherlands . 
other `` high level '' indictees included milan babić ,  former president of the republika srpska krajina; ramush haradinaj ,  former prime minister of kosovo; radovan karadžić ,  former president of the republika srpska; ratko mladić ,  former commander of the bosnian serb army; and ante gotovina ,  former general of the croatian army . 
un member and observer states could each submit up to two nominees of different nationalities to the un secretary-general . 
each iso paper size is one half of the area of the next larger size in the same series . 
the iso system of paper sizes exploits these properties of the aspect ratio . 
then ,  the size of a5 paper is half of a4, as 148 x 210 mm  -lrb-  5.8 x 8.3 in  -rrb-  . 
all iso 216, iso 217 and iso 269 paper sizes  -lrb-  except some envelopes  -rrb-  have the same aspect ratio ,  :1, within rounding to millimetres . 
by comparison ,  the lengths of iso b series paper are ≈ 1.19 times those of a-series paper . 
two supplementary standards ,  iso 217 and iso 269, define related paper sizes; the iso 269 `` c '' series is commonly listed alongside the a and b sizes . 
the ietf also organizes hackathons during the ietf meetings . 
in december 2005 the ietf trust was established to manage the copyrighted materials produced by the ietf . 
since that time all ietf meetings have been open to the public . 
the location for ietf meetings vary greatly . 
the area directors ,  together with the ietf chair ,  form the internet engineering steering group  -lrb-  iesg  -rrb-  ,  which is responsible for the overall operation of the ietf . 
the iab also manages the internet research task force  -lrb-  irtf  -rrb-  ,  with which the ietf has a number of cross-group relations . 
the ism bands are defined by the itu radio regulations  -lrb-  article 5 -rrb- in footnotes 5.138, 5.150, and 5.280 of the radio regulations . 
type a  -lrb-  footnote 5.138 -rrb- = frequency bands are designated for `` ism applications '' . 
the ism bands are also widely used for radio-frequency identification  -lrb-  rfid  -rrb-  applications with the most commonly used band being the 13.56 mhz band used by systems compliant with iso/iec 14443 including those used by biometric passports and contactless smart cards . 
the original ism specifications envisioned that the bands would be used primarily for noncommunication purposes ,  such as heating . 
in europe ,  the etsi is responsible for regulating the use of short range devices ,  some of which operate in ism bands . 
type b  -lrb-  footnote 5.150 -rrb- = frequency bands are also designated for ism applications . 
the industrial ,  scientific and medical  -lrb-  ism  -rrb-  radio bands are radio bands  -lrb-  portions of the radio spectrum  -rrb-  reserved internationally for the use of radio frequency  -lrb-  rf  -rrb-  energy for industrial ,  scientific and medical purposes other than telecommunications . 
radio frequencies in the ism bands have been used for communication purposes ,  although such devices may experience interference from non-communication sources . 
when the limit of partial sums exists ,  it is called the value  -lrb-  or sum  -rrb-  of the series
a series is said to converge or to `` be convergent '' when the sequence of partial sums has a finite limit . 
the value of this limit ,  if it exists ,  is then the value of the series . 
generally ,  the terms of a series come from a ring ,  often the field formula_7 of the real numbers or the field formula_8 of the complex numbers . 
if an abelian group `` a '' of terms has a concept of limit  -lrb-  for example ,  if it is a metric space  -rrb-  ,  then some series ,  the convergent series ,  can be interpreted as having a value in `` a '' ,  called the `` sum of the series '' . 
each interrupt has its own interrupt handler . 
there are two types of interrupts: hardware interrupts and software interrupts . 
the act of initiating a hardware interrupt is referred to as an interrupt request  -lrb-  irq  -rrb-  . 
thus ,  2000 was a leap year; 1700, 1800, and 1900 were not . 
the solar or tropical year does not have a whole number of days  -lrb-  it is about 365.24 days  -rrb-  ,  but a calendar year must have a whole number of days . 
in solar calendars ,  this is done by adding to a common year of 365 days ,  an extra day  -lrb-  `` leap day '' or `` intercalary day ''  -rrb-  about every four years ,  causing a leap year to have 366 days  -lrb-  julian ,  gregorian and indian national calendars  -rrb-  . 
the solar year does not have a whole number of lunar months  -lrb-  it is about 12.37 lunations  -rrb-  ,  so a lunisolar calendar must have a variable number of months in a year . 
epagomenal days are days within a solar calendar that are outside any regular month . 
the components of inks serve many purposes; the ink's carrier ,  colorants ,  and other additives affect the flow and thickness of the ink and its dry appearance . 
several buddhist and jain sutras in india were compiled in ink . 
about 1,600 years ago ,  a popular ink recipe was created . 
the history of chinese inks can be traced to the 23rd century bc ,  with the utilization of natural plant  -lrb-  plant dyes  -rrb-  ,  animal ,  and mineral inks based on such materials as graphite that were ground with water and applied with ink brushes . 
the process of making india ink was known in china as early as the middle of the 3rd millennium bc ,  during neolithic china . 
however ,  rawalpindi was eventually excluded from the islamabad master plan in the 1980s . 
asserting the need for a designer of complexity also raises the question `` what designed the designer ? `` 
the argument from design ,  the teleological argument or `` argument from intelligent design '' ,  has been advanced in theology for centuries . 
although arguments for intelligent design by the intelligent design movement are formulated in secular terms and intentionally avoid positing the identity of the designer ,  the majority of principal intelligent design advocates are publicly religious christians who have stated that ,  in their view ,  the designer proposed in intelligent design is the christian conception of god . 
the intelligent design movement is a direct outgrowth of the creationism of the 1980s . 
leading intelligent design proponents have made conflicting statements regarding intelligent design . 
not all creationist organizations have embraced the intelligent design movement . 
intelligent design proponents such as paul nelson avoid the problem of poor design in nature by insisting that we have simply failed to understand the perfection of the design . 
the strategy of deliberately disguising the religious intent of intelligent design has been described by william a .  dembski in `` the design inference '' . 
intelligent design proponents seek to explain the problem of poor design in nature by insisting that we have simply failed to understand the perfection of the design  -lrb-  for example ,  proposing that vestigial organs have unknown purposes  -rrb-  ,  or by proposing that designers do not necessarily produce the best design they can ,  and may have unknowable motives for their actions . 
 ''of pandas and people '' was published in 1989, and in addition to including all the current arguments for id ,  was the first book to make systematic use of the terms `` intelligent design '' and `` design proponents '' as well as the phrase `` design theory '' ,  defining the term `` intelligent design '' in a glossary and representing it as not being creationism . 
coyne responds that in light of the evidence ,  `` either life resulted not from intelligent design ,  but from evolution; or the intelligent designer is a cosmic prankster who designed everything to make it look as though it had evolved . `` 
intelligent design has also been characterized as a god-of-the-gaps argument ,  which has the following form:
while intelligent design proponents have pointed out past examples of the phrase `` intelligent design '' that they said were not creationist and faith-based ,  they have failed to show that these usages had any influence on those who introduced the label in the intelligent design movement . 
richard dawkins ,  another critic of intelligent design ,  argues in `` the god delusion ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- that allowing for an intelligent designer to account for unlikely complexity only postpones the problem ,  as such a designer would need to be at least as complex . 
intelligent design proponents ,  they say ,  are proposing both searching for a designer without knowing anything about that designer's abilities ,  parameters ,  or intentions  -lrb-  which scientists do know when searching for the results of human intelligence  -rrb-  ,  as well as denying the very distinction between natural/artificial design that allows scientists to compare complex designed artifacts against the background of the sorts of complexity found in nature . 
intelligent design avoids identifying or naming the intelligent designer—it merely states that one  -lrb-  or more  -rrb-  must exist—but leaders of the movement have said the designer is the christian god . 
this frequently invoked the argument from design to explain complexity in nature as demonstrating the existence of god . 
since the middle ages ,  discussion of the religious `` argument from design '' or `` teleological argument '' in theology ,  with its concept of `` intelligent design '' ,  has persistently referred to the theistic creator god . 
advocates of intelligent design seek to keep god and the bible out of the discussion ,  and present intelligent design in the language of science as though it were a scientific hypothesis . 
though the phrase `` intelligent design '' had featured previously in theological discussions of the design argument ,  the first publication of the term `` intelligent design '' in its present use as an alternative term for creationism was in `` of pandas and people '' ,  a 1989 creationist textbook intended for high school biology classes . 
both johnson and dembski cite the bible's gospel of john as the foundation of intelligent design . 
id proponents then conclude by analogy that the complex features ,  as defined by id ,  are evidence of design . 
the leading proponents have made statements to their supporters that they believe the designer to be the christian god ,  to the exclusion of all other religions . 
if such a designer does not intervene to alleviate suffering even though capable of intervening for other reasons ,  some imply the designer is not omnibenevolent  -lrb-  see problem of evil and related theodicy  -rrb-  . 
phillip e .  johnson stated that the goal of intelligent design is to cast creationism as a scientific concept . 
in this work ,  dembski lists a god or an `` alien life force '' as two possible options for the identity of the designer; however ,  in his book `` intelligent design: the bridge between science and theology ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- ,  dembski states:
intelligent design proponents often insist that their claims do not require a religious component . 
intelligent design  -lrb-  id  -rrb-  is a pseudoscientific argument for the existence of god ,  presented by its proponents as `` an evidence-based scientific theory about life's origins '' . 
stephen c .  meyer was at the conference ,  and later recalled that `` the term `` intelligent design '' came up .  .  . `` 
in 2011, the international society for krishna consciousness  -lrb-  iskcon  -rrb-  bhaktivedanta book trust published an intelligent design book titled `` rethinking darwin: a vedic study of darwinism and intelligent design '' . 
integrins are obligate heterodimers ,  meaning that they have two subunits: α  -lrb-  alpha  -rrb-  and β  -lrb-  beta  -rrb-  . 
through different combinations of the α and β subunits ,  around 24 unique integrins are generated . 
those integrins that don't carry this inserted domain also have an a-domain in their ligand binding site ,  but `` this '' a-domain is found on the β subunit . 
integrins are found in all animals while integrin-like receptors are found in plant cells . 
integrin subunits span the cell membrane and have short cytoplasmic domains of 40–70 amino acids . 
the cations in the β subunits are more interesting: they are directly involved in coordinating at least some of the ligands that integrins bind . 
ion channels are pore-forming membrane proteins that allow ions to pass through the channel pore . 
ion channels may be classified by gating ,  i . e . 
there are over 300 types of ion channels just in the cells of the inner ear . 
in the search for new drugs ,  ion channels are a frequent target . 
ion channels may be classified by the nature of their gating ,  the species of ions passing through those gates ,  the number of gates  -lrb-  pores  -rrb-  and localization of proteins . 
one of the first ides with a plug-in concept was softbench . 
while most modern ides are graphical ,  text-based ides such as turbo pascal were in popular use before the widespread availability of windowing systems like microsoft windows and the x window system  -lrb-  x11 -rrb- . 
allowing developers to debug code much faster and easier with an ide . 
however ,  there are many multiple-language ides . 
mckellen is an atheist . 
in 2017, mckellen appeared in the documentary mckellen: playing the part ,  directed by director joe stephenson . 
sir ian murray mckellen  -lrb-  born 25 may 1939 -rrb- is an english actor . 
the documentary explores sir ian mckellen's life and career as and actor . 
mckellen has continued to be very active in lgbt rights efforts . 
in 2001, ian mckellen received the artist citizen of the world award  -lrb-  france  -rrb-  . 
mckellen was awarded an honorary doctorate of letters by cambridge university on 18 june 2014.
during this period mckellen had already been directed by peter hall ,  john barton and dadie rylands ,  all of whom would have a huge impact on mckellen's future career . 
mckellen was born on 25 may 1939 in burnley ,  lancashire ,  the son of margery lois  -lrb-  née sutcliffe  -rrb-  and denis murray mckellen ,  a civil engineer . 
later in 1993, mckellen appeared in the television film `` and the band played on '' about the discovery of the aids virus for which mckellen won a cableace award for supporting actor in a movie or miniseries and was nominated for the emmy award for outstanding supporting actor in a miniseries or a movie . 
mckellen and his first partner ,  brian taylor ,  a history teacher from bolton ,  began their relationship in 1964.
while filming the first `` x-men '' film in 1999, mckellen was cast as the wizard gandalf in peter jackson's three-film adaptation of `` the lord of the rings ''  -lrb-  consisting of ``  ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- ,  and ``  ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb-   -rrb-  . 
mckellen's father was a civil engineer and lay preacher ,  and was of protestant irish and scottish descent . 
it remained mattel's only video game console until the release of the hyperscan in 2006.
the intellivision is a home video game console released by mattel electronics in 1979.
mattel electronics would become a subsidiary in 1981.
the intellivision was developed at mattel in hawthorne ,  california along with their mattel electronics line of handheld electronic games . 
graphics were designed by a group of artists at mattel led by dave james . 
in 2009, video game website ign named the intellivision the no . 
world war ii had weakened britain's position in the world ,  especially financially . 
by the treaty of versailles ,  all german colonies were lost after world war i . 
france controlled nearly 1/10th of the earth's land area ,  with a population of 110 million people on the eve of world war ii  -lrb-  5% of the world's population at the time  -rrb-  . 
the zulus in southern africa during the anglo-zulu war of 1879 -rrb- . 
at the start of world war ii ,  president franklin d .  roosevelt was opposed to european colonialism ,  especially in india . 
ancient china has been one of the world's oldest empires that still exist . 
by the early 1900s ,  japan was a naval power that could hold its own against an established european power like russia . 
in the 19th and 20th centuries ,  the french colonial empire was the second-largest colonial empire in the world behind the british empire ,  extending over 12,347,000 km  -lrb-  4,767,000 sq . 
france took control of algeria in 1830 but began in earnest to rebuild its worldwide empire after 1850, concentrating chiefly in north and west africa  -lrb-  french north africa ,  french west africa ,  french equatorial africa  -rrb-  ,  as well as south-east asia  -lrb-  french indochina  -rrb-  ,  with other conquests in the south pacific  -lrb-  new caledonia ,  french polynesia  -rrb-  . 
it is different from new imperialism ,  as the term `` imperialism '' is usually applied to the colonization of the americas between the 15th and 19th centuries ,  as opposed to the expansion of western powers and japan during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
during the 16th century ,  the french colonization of the americas began with the creation of new france . 
for over 200 years ,  japan remained isolated from the rest of the world ,  staying in a feudal system . 
19th century episodes included the `` scramble for africa . `` 
european expansion greatly accelerated in the 19th century . 
however ,  with the united states and soviet union emerging from world war ii as the sole superpowers ,  britain's role as a worldwide power declined significantly . 
because of the resources made available by imperialism ,  the world's economy grew significantly and became much more interconnected in the decades before world war i ,  making the many imperial powers rich and prosperous . 
in congruence with the colonialist activities of competing european imperial powers throughout the 15th – 19th centuries ,  the spanish were equally engrossed in extending geopolitical power . 
a resurgence came in the late 19th century with the scramble for africa and major additions in asia and the middle east . 
in world war ii ,  charles de gaulle and the free french used the overseas colonies as bases from which they fought to liberate france . 
after the first boer war ,  the south african republic and orange free state were recognized by britain but eventually re-annexed after the second boer war . 
in the early 19th century ,  the industrial revolution began to transform britain; by the time of the great exhibition in 1851 the country was described as the `` workshop of the world '' . 
with constantinople as its capital and control of lands around the mediterranean basin ,  the ottoman empire was at the center of interactions between the eastern and western worlds for six centuries . 
by the 18th century ,  the russian empire extended its control to the pacific ,  forming a common border with the qing empire . 
the western world forgets during this process of converting the other that enlightenment and democracy are concepts that not all will agree upon '' . 
the age of imperialism ,  a time period beginning around 1760, saw european industrializing nations ,  engaging in the process of colonizing ,  influencing ,  and annexing other parts of the world . 
trotsky ,  and others ,  believed that the revolution could only succeed in russia as part of a world revolution . 
german participation in imperialism was negligible until the late 19th century . 
internet protocol version 4  -lrb-  ipv4 -rrb- is the fourth version of the internet protocol  -lrb-  ip  -rrb-  . 
the packet header in ipv6 is simpler than the ipv4 header . 
the main advantage of ipv6 over ipv4 is its larger address space . 
direct communication between the ipv4 and ipv6 network protocols is not possible . 
like ipv4, ipv6 supports globally unique ip addresses . 
however ,  several ipv6 transition mechanisms have been devised to permit communication between ipv4 and ipv6 hosts . 
in addition to offering more addresses ,  ipv6 also implements features not present in ipv4.
it is widely expected that the internet will use ipv4 alongside ipv6 for the foreseeable future . 
unlike mobile ipv4, mobile ipv6 avoids triangular routing and is therefore as efficient as native ipv6.
internet protocol version 4  -lrb-  ipv4 -rrb- was the first publicly used version of the internet protocol . 
moreover ,  an ipv6 header does not include a checksum . 
ipv6 routers do not perform ip fragmentation . 
the incas considered their king ,  the sapa inca ,  to be the `` son of the sun . `` 
the inca empire  -lrb-   ,   `` the four regions ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the incan empire and the inka empire ,  was the largest empire in pre-columbian america . 
the first major version of ip ,  internet protocol version 4  -lrb-  ipv4 -rrb- ,  is the dominant protocol of the internet . 
the successor to ipv4 is ipv6.
the internet protocol  -lrb-  ip  -rrb-  is the principal communications protocol in the internet protocol suite for relaying datagrams across network boundaries . 
version 5 was used by the internet stream protocol ,  an experimental streaming protocol . 
ipv4 is described in  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- . 
the dominant internetworking protocol in the internet layer in use today is ipv4; the number 4 is the protocol version number carried in every ip datagram . 
the following internet experiment note  -lrb-  ien  -rrb-  documents describe versions of the internet protocol prior to the modern version of ipv4:
the internet protocol suite is therefore often referred to as tcp/ip . 
its successor ,  internet protocol version 6  -lrb-  ipv6 -rrb- ,  has been growing in adoption for the last years ,  reaching almost 25% of the internet traffic as of october ,  2018.
in cases of impeachment ,  an appointed court  -lrb-  riksrett  -rrb-  takes effect . 
members of the liechtenstein government can be impeached before the state court for breaches of the constitution or of other laws . 
he was the first european head of state to have been impeached . 
the president can be impeached by parliament and is then suspended . 
the president ,  judges including chief justice of supreme court and high courts can be impeached by the parliament before the expiry of the term for violation of the constitution . 
parliament has held the power of impeachment since medieval times . 
this case was dismissed by the court reasoning that his mandate has expired . 
in april ,  gutierrez resigned prior to the senate's convening as an impeachment court . 
park geun-hye in 2016 was impeached by the national assembly ,  and the impeachment was confirmed by the constitutional court on march 10, 2017.
the house of commons holds the power to impeach . 
palmerston survived the vote in the commons; the lords did not hear the case . 
the election court has some of the powers associated with impeachment cases in other countries ,  and can remove elected officials from office in the case of electoral fraud . 
in the united states ,  for example ,  impeachment at the federal level is limited to those who may have committed `` high crimes and misdemeanors '' . 
the house of lords hears the case . 
impeachment was first used in the british political system . 
the accused may defend by counsel . 
the constitution defines impeachment at the federal level and limits impeachment to `` the president ,  vice president ,  and all civil officers of the united states '' who may be impeached and removed only for `` treason ,  bribery ,  or other high crimes and misdemeanors '' . 
in polish law there is no impeachment procedure defined ,  as it is present in the other countries . 
the austrian federal president can be impeached by the federal assembly  -lrb-  `` bundesversammlung ''  -rrb-  before the constitutional court . 
the president of russia can be impeached if both the state duma  -lrb-  which initiates the impeachment process through the formation of a special investigation committee  -rrb-  and the federation council of russia vote by a two-thirds majority in favor of impeachment and ,  additionally ,  the supreme court finds the president guilty of treason or a similarly heavy crime against the nation and the constitutional court confirms that the constitutional procedure of the impeachment process was correctly observed . 
in the united kingdom anybody may be prosecuted and tried by the two houses of parliament for any crime . 
the chief executive of hong kong can be impeached by the legislative council . 
if the council find the evidence sufficient to substantiate the charges ,  it may pass a motion of impeachment by a two-thirds majority . 
according to the article 65 clause 1 of constitution of south korea ,  if president ,  prime minister ,  or other state council members including supreme court and constitutional court members ,  violate the constitution or other laws of official duty ,  the national assembly can impeach them . 
at the federal level ,  the impeachment process is a two-step procedure . 
if an impeachment attempt is unsuccessful or the official is acquitted ,  no new cases can be filed against that impeachable official for at least one full year . 
the ibizan hound  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a lean ,  agile dog of the hound family . 
ibizan hounds are sweet ,  but they are very stubborn and independent . 
it is believed the ibizan hound evolves from the `` tesem '' ,  the ancient egyptian hunting dog . 
ibizan hounds are intelligent ,  active ,  and engaging by nature . 
the ibizan hound is typical of the hound group in that it rarely suffers from hereditary illness . 
the ibizan hound is the largest of these breeds ,  classified by the fédération cynologique internationale as primitive types . 
the irish wolfhound can be an imposing sight due to their formidable size . 
the irish wolfhound  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a breed of domestic dog  -lrb-  `` canis lupus familiaris ''  -rrb-  ,  specifically a very large sighthound from ireland . 
during the english conquest of ireland ,  only the nobility were allowed to own irish wolfhounds ,  the numbers permitted depending on position . 
the wolfhound was historically a dog that only nobles could own and was taken up by the british during their rule in ireland . 
the italian greyhound should resemble a small greyhound ,  or rather a sloughi . 
the italian greyhound has a median lifespan of 13.5 in a 2004 uk kennel club survey . 
the italian greyhound  -lrb-  in italian: `` piccolo levriero italiano ''  -rrb-  is a small breed of dog; of the sighthound type ,  sometimes called the italian for short ,  and nicknamed the `` ig '' or `` iggy '' . 
the breed has been popular with royalty . 
the italian greyhound makes a good companion dog and enjoys the company of people . 
the modern italian greyhound's appearance is a result of breeders throughout europe ,  particularly austrian ,  german ,  italian ,  french and british ,  making great contributions to the forming of this breed . 
the baker ,  little red ,  and cinderella await the return of the baker's wife when the witch drags in jack ,  whom she found weeping over the baker's wife's body . 
the baker's wife and cinderella meet again ,  and the baker's wife makes a desperate grab for her shoes ,  almost succeeding before cinderella flees . 
the baker ,  his wife ,  and little red ridinghood get lost in the woods and find cinderella's family and the steward ,  who reveal that the castle was set upon by the giant . 
as the giantess leaves to search for jack ,  rapunzel runs into her path and is trampled ,  to the horror of the witch  -lrb-  `` witch's lament ''  -rrb-  . 
the baker and cinderella explain to jack and little red that everyone is connected ,  and choices have consequences  -lrb-  `` no one is alone ''  -rrb-  . 
meanwhile ,  the mysterious man returns milky white to the baker . 
the narrator introduces four characters who each have a wish: cinderella wishes to attend the king's festival; jack ,  a simple poor boy ,  wishes that his cow ,  milky white ,  would give milk; a baker and his wife wish they could have a child; little red ridinghood wishes for bread from the baker to take to her grandmother's house . 
cinderella visits her mother's grave and receives a beautiful gown and golden slippers from her mother's spirit  -lrb-  `` cinderella at the grave ''  -rrb-  . 
jack's weary mother nags him into selling the cow ,  and cinderella's stepmother and stepsisters ,  florinda and lucinda ,  tease cinderella about wanting to attend the king's festival . 
the baker's neighbor ,  an ugly old witch ,  reveals that the source of the couple's infertility is a curse she placed on the baker's line after catching his father stealing her vegetables ,  including six magic beans . 
 -lrb-  `` last midnight ''  -rrb-  . 
the royal family continue on their way ,  fleeing despite the baker's pleas for them to stay and fight the giant . 
all begin their journeys into the woods—jack goes to market to sell his beloved milky white ,  cinderella's family rides to the festival while cinderella goes to her mother's grave to ask for guidance ,  little red goes to her grandmother's house ,  and the baker ,  refusing his wife's help ,  goes to find the ingredients  -lrb-  `` prologue ''  -rrb-  . 
the musical is tied together by a story involving a childless baker and his wife and their quest to begin a family  -lrb-  the original beginning of the grimm brothers' `` rapunzel ''  -rrb-  ,  their interaction with a witch who has placed a curse on them ,  and their interaction with other storybook characters during their journey . 
the baker flees ,  but is visited by his father's spirit who convinces him to face his responsibilities  -lrb-  `` no more ''  -rrb-  . 
other changes ,  apart from numerous small dialogue changes ,  included the addition of the song `` our little world , ``  a duet for the witch and rapunzel written for the first london production ,  the addition of a second wolf in the song `` hello little girl '' who competes for little red's attention with the first wolf ,  the portrayal of jack's cow by a live performer  -lrb-  chad kimball  -rrb-  in an intricate costume and new lyrics were written for `` the last midnight , ``  now sung by the witch as a menacing lullaby to the baker's baby . 
his experiences in the war are described in his book `` the anguish and the ecstasy of a jewish chaplain '' . 
this understanding of traditional preservation of the law through its continuous interpretation lies at the heart of klein's extensive study of jewish law . 
one of the outstanding halakhists of the movement ,  he served as a leading member of the committee on jewish law and standards from 1948 until his death in 1979.
in 1979 he assembled this into `` a guide to jewish religious practice '' ,  which is used widely by laypeople and rabbis within conservative judaism . 
nuclear pre-mrna introns  -lrb-  spliceosomal introns  -rrb-  are characterized by specific intron sequences located at the boundaries between introns and exons . 
they appear to be related to group ii introns ,  and possibly to spliceosomal introns . 
for group ii intron insertion ,  the retrohoming of a group ii intron into a nuclear gene was proposed to cause recent spliceosomal intron gain . 
intron transfer has been hypothesized to result in intron gain when a paralog or pseudogene gains an intron and then transfers this intron via recombination to an intron-absent location in its sister paralog . 
the biological origins of introns are obscure . 
an intron is any nucleotide sequence within a gene that is removed by rna splicing during maturation of the final rna product . 
note that self-splicing introns are also sometimes found within trna genes . 
introns were first discovered in protein-coding genes of adenovirus ,  and were subsequently identified in genes encoding transfer rna and ribosomal rna genes . 
the only hypothesized mechanism of recent intron gain lacking any direct evidence is that of group ii intron insertion ,  which when demonstrated in vivo ,  abolishes gene expression . 
according to a new law which went into effect on 15 march 2007, ipn was to be mandated to carry out lustration procedures prescribed by polish law . 
ipn was created by special legislation on 18 december 1998.
intuitively ,  the quantum state of the system should be
there are two main categories of identical particles: bosons ,  which can share quantum states ,  and fermions ,  which do not share quantum states as described by the pauli exclusion principle . 
there are two methods for distinguishing between particles . 
to see this ,  imagine a two identical particle system . 
