conversely ,  active directed panspermia has been proposed to secure and expand life in space . 
one of the scientists suggested that these complex organic compounds may have been related to the development of life on earth and said that ,  `` if this is the case ,  life on earth may have had an easier time getting started as these organics can serve as basic ingredients for life . `` 
directed panspermia concerns the deliberate transport of microorganisms in space ,  sent to earth to start life here ,  or sent from earth to seed new planetary systems with life by introduced species of microorganisms on lifeless planets . 
until the 1970s ,  life was thought to depend on its access to sunlight . 
these young targets ,  where local life would not have formed yet ,  avoid any interference with local life . 
panspermia studies concentrate not on how life began ,  but on the methods that may cause its distribution in the universe . 
these results demonstrate that many organic compounds which are components of life on earth were already present in the early solar system and may have played a key role in life's origin . 
in 1903, svante arrhenius published in his article `` the distribution of life in space '' ,  the hypothesis now called radiopanspermia ,  that microscopic forms of life can be propagated in space ,  driven by the radiation pressure from stars . 
alternatively ,  the wild land and marine bacteria as well as the iss bacteria may all have an ultimate space origin . `` 
distribution may have occurred between galaxies ,  and so may not be restricted to the limited scale of solar systems . 
in an origins symposium presentation on april 7, 2009, physicist stephen hawking stated his opinion about what humans may find when venturing into space ,  such as the possibility of alien life through the theory of panspermia: `` life could spread from planet to planet or from stellar system to stellar system ,  carried on meteors . `` 
panspermia hypotheses propose  -lrb-  for example  -rrb-  that microscopic life-forms that can survive the effects of space  -lrb-  such as extremophiles  -rrb-  can become trapped in debris ejected into space after collisions between planets and small solar system bodies that harbor life . 
pseudo-panspermia  -lrb-  sometimes called ``  ''soft panspermia '' '' or ``  ''molecular panspermia '' ''  -rrb-  argues that the pre-biotic organic building-blocks of life originated in space ,  became incorporated in the solar nebula from which planets condensed ,  and were further—and continuously—distributed to planetary surfaces where life then emerged  -lrb-  abiogenesis  -rrb-  . 
according to one researcher ,  `` if life arose relatively quickly on earth … then it could be common in the universe . `` 
pseudo-panspermia  -lrb-  sometimes called soft panspermia ,  molecular panspermia or quasi-panspermia  -rrb-  proposes that the organic molecules used for life originated in space and were incorporated in the solar nebula ,  from which the planets condensed and were further —and continuously— distributed to planetary surfaces where life then emerged  -lrb-  abiogenesis  -rrb-  . 
panspermia  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the hypothesis that life exists throughout the universe ,  distributed by space dust ,  meteoroids ,  asteroids ,  comets ,  planetoids ,  and also by spacecraft carrying unintended contamination by microorganisms . 
in order to test some of these organisms' potential resilience in outer space ,  plant seeds and spores of bacteria ,  fungi and ferns have been exposed to the harsh space environment . 
lithopanspermia ,  the transfer of organisms in rocks from one planet to another either through interplanetary or interstellar space ,  remains speculative . 
directed panspermia to secure and expand life in space is becoming possible because of developments in solar sails ,  precise astrometry ,  extrasolar planets ,  extremophiles and microbial genetic engineering . 
panspermia is often criticized because it does not answer the question of the origin of life but merely places it on another celestial body . 
this ,  plus the detection of phosphorus ,  is consistent with the hypothesis that comets played a crucial role in the emergence of life on earth . 
also in toumey's references are videotapes of that second talk . 
at the meeting feynman concluded his talk with two challenges ,  and he offered a prize of $1000 for the first individuals to solve each one . 
these and other developments hint that the retroactive rediscovery of feynman's `` plenty of room '' gave nanotechnology a packaged history that provided an early date of december 1959, plus a connection to the charisma and genius of richard feynman . 
feynman considered a number of interesting ramifications of a general ability to manipulate matter on an atomic scale . 
k .  eric drexler later took the feynman concept of a billion tiny factories and added the idea that they could make more copies of themselves ,  via computer control instead of control by a human operator ,  in his 1986 book `` engines of creation: the coming era of nanotechnology '' . 
other common tools include stamp catalogues ,  stamp stock books and stamp hinges . 
for instance ,  the stamps being studied may be very rare ,  or reside only in museums . 
traditional philately is the study of the technical aspects of stamp production and stamp identification ,  including:
the term `` puget sound '' is used not just for the body of water but also the puget sound region centered on the sound . 
sometimes the terms `` puget sound '' and `` puget sound and adjacent waters '' are used for not only puget sound proper but also for waters to the north ,  such as bellingham bay and the san juan islands region . 
kruckeberg uses the term `` puget sound and adjacent waters '' . 
the usgs defines puget sound as all the waters south of three entrances from the strait of juan de fuca . 
continental ice sheets have repeatedly advanced and retreated from the puget sound region . 
puget sound is a sound along the northwestern coast of the u . s .  state of washington ,  an inlet of the pacific ocean ,  and part of the salish sea . 
water flow through deception pass is approximately equal to 2% of the total tidal exchange between puget sound and the strait of juan de fuca . 
the puget sound system consists of four deep basins connected by shallower sills . 
see:
for example ,  it is not perjury to lie about one's age except if age is a fact material to influencing the legal result ,  such as eligibility for old age retirement benefits or whether a person was of an age to have legal capacity . 
the rules for perjury also apply when a person has made a statement `` under penalty of perjury '' even if the person has not been sworn or affirmed as a witness before an appropriate official . 
the phosphate ion is a polyatomic ion with the empirical formula and a molar mass of 94.97 g/mol . 
a phosphate salt forms when a positively charged ion attaches to the negatively charged oxygen atoms of the ion ,  forming an ionic compound . 
the prime number theorem is equivalent to the statement that the th prime number satisfies
let be the prime-counting function that gives the number of primes less than or equal to  ,  for any real number  . 
in number theory ,  the prime number theorem  -lrb-  pnt  -rrb-  describes the asymptotic distribution of the prime numbers among the positive integers . 
known as the asymptotic law of distribution of prime numbers . 
the prime number theorem is also equivalent to where and are the first and the second chebyshev functions respectively . 
conflict of laws concerns relations across different legal jurisdictions between natural persons ,  companies ,  corporations and other legal entities ,  their legal obligations and the appropriate forum and procedure for resolving disputes between them . 
the calendar year has 13 months with 28 days each ,  divided into exactly 4 weeks  -lrb-  13 × 28 = 364 -rrb- . 
the international fixed calendar inserts the extra day in leap year as june 29 - between saturday june 28 and sunday sol 1.
because the work done is independent of the path taken ,  then this expression is true for any trajectory ,  `` c '' ,  from a to b . 
this means the work integral does not depend on the path between `` a '' and `` b '' and is said to be independent of the path . 
potential energy `` u ''=-φ -lrb-  x  -rrb-  is traditionally defined as the negative of this scalar field so that work by the force field decreases potential energy ,  that is
in this section the relationship between work and potential energy is presented in more detail . 
given a force field f -lrb-  x  -rrb-  ,  evaluation of the work integral using the gradient theorem can be used to find the scalar function associated with potential energy . 
in this case ,  the application of the del operator to the work function yields ,  and the force f is said to be `` derivable from a potential . `` 
it remains the tallest pyramid . 
pyramids were still being built in sudan as late as 200 ad . 
civilizations in many parts of the world have built pyramids . 
the largest pyramid by volume is the great pyramid of cholula ,  in the mexican state of puebla . 
smaller pyramids were also built by the nubians who ruled egypt in the late period ,  though their pyramids had steeper sides . 
mesoamerican pyramids were usually stepped ,  with temples on top ,  more similar to the mesopotamian ziggurat than the egyptian pyramid . 
the mesopotamians built the earliest pyramidal structures ,  called `` ziggurats '' . 
in güímar itself there were nine pyramids ,  only six of which survive . 
the age of the pyramids reached its zenith at giza in 2575–2150 bc . 
early kings such as snefru built several pyramids ,  with subsequent kings adding to the number of pyramids until the end of the middle kingdom . 
the most famous pyramids are the egyptian — huge structures built of brick or stone ,  some of which are among the world's largest constructions . 
though ockham taught that god predestines based on people's foreseen works ,  he maintained that god's will was not constrained to do this . 
aquinas held that in permitting evil ,  god does not will it to be done or not to be done . 
he believed god's predestination was based on god's foreknowledge of every individual's merits ,  whether in their current life or a previous life . 
corporate election is thus consistent with the open view's position on god's omniscience ,  which states that god's foreknowledge does not determine the outcomes of individual free will . 
he wrote that god's predestination should be equated with his foreknowledge of people's choices . 
instead ,  wright asserts ,  paul is saying that god's will works through that of humans to accomplish salvation . 
god also has particular consciousness of those who are passed over by his selection ,  who are without excuse for their rebellion against him ,  and will be judged for their sins . 
damascene teaches that people's good actions are done in cooperation with god ,  but are not caused by him . 
conditional election is the belief that god chooses for eternal salvation those whom he foresees will have faith in christ . 
arminians hold that god does not predetermine ,  but instead infallibly knows who will believe and perseveringly be saved . 
later in the fourth and fifth centuries ,  augustine of hippo  -lrb-  354–430 -rrb- also taught that god orders all things while preserving human freedom . 
john calvin rejected the idea that god permits rather than actively decrees the damnation of sinners ,  as well as other evil . 
some calvinists decline to describe the eternal decree of god in terms of a sequence of events or thoughts ,  and many caution against the simplifications involved in describing any action of god in speculative terms . 
john calvin thought people who were saved could never lose their salvation and the `` elect ''  -lrb-  those god saved  -rrb-  would know they were saved because of their actions . 
proponents also typically emphasize the grace and mercy of god toward all men ,  although teaching also that only some are predestined for salvation . 
most continuing anglican churches do not ordain women to the priesthood . 
in hebrew the word for `` priesthood '' is `` kehunnah '' . 
in these traditions ,  only men who meet certain requirements may become priests . 
their office or position is the priesthood ,  a term which also may apply to such persons collectively . 
in some religions ,  being a priest or priestess is by human election or human choice . 
the word `` priest '' ,  is ultimately derived from greek via latin `` presbyter '' ,  the term for `` elder '' ,  especially elders of jewish or christian communities in late antiquity . 
in some lutheran churches ,  ordained clergy are called priests as in sweden and finland ,  while in others the term pastor is preferred . 
however ,  nowhere in the new testament is a christian pastor  -lrb-  besides christ  -rrb-  titled `` hiereus '' ,  the distinctive greek word for `` priest '' ,  and thus its rendering into english is seen as an etymological corruption of the greek word `` presbuteros '' ,  which means `` elder '' ,  and which is the word for the lead category of christian leaders in the new testament church ,  under the lord jesus christ ,  the great high priest  -lrb-  archiereus  -rrb-  . 
it was the only public priesthood attainable by roman matrons and was held in great honor . 
the general priesthood or the priesthood of all believers ,  is a christian doctrine derived from several passages of the new testament . 
the latin `` presbyter '' ultimately represents greek `` presbúteros '' ,  the regular latin word for `` priest '' being `` sacerdos '' ,  corresponding to `` hiereús '' . 
the role of a priest in the anglican communion is largely the same as within the roman catholic church and eastern christianity ,  except that canon law in almost every anglican province restricts the administration of confirmation to the bishop ,  just as with ordination . 
ibm took npl as a starting point and completed the design to a level that the first compiler could be written: the npl definition was incomplete in scope and in detail . 
this led in turn to one of the first large scale formal methods for development ,  vdm . 
</poem>
</poem>
the same marks could be used in the margin to mark off quotations . 
in the late 8th century a different system emerged in france under the carolingian dynasty . 
most texts were still written in `` scriptura continua '' ,  that is without any separation between words . 
diples were used ,  but by the late period these often degenerated into comma-shaped marks . 
punctuation is historically an aid to reading aloud . 
the oldest known document using punctuation is the mesha stele  -lrb-  9th century bc  -rrb-  . 
john horton conway proposed an alternate labeling scheme for pentominoes ,  using o instead of i ,  q instead of l ,  r instead of f ,  and s instead of n .  the resemblance to the letters is more strained ,  especially for the o pentomino ,  but this scheme has the advantage of using 12 consecutive letters of the alphabet . 
each chiral pentomino can tile the plane without being reflected . 
this results in 5×8 + 5×4 + 2 + 1 = 63 `` fixed '' pentominoes . 
is often prefixed to these titles ,  and those who work in a web environment often prefix their titles with `` web '' . 
programmers may contribute to user guides and online help ,  or they may work with technical writers to do such work . 
one who practices or professes a formal approach to programming may also be known as a programmer analyst . 
programmers' work varies widely depending on the type of business for which they are writing programs . 
in some organizations ,  particularly small ones ,  people commonly known as `` programmer analysts '' are responsible for both the systems analysis and the actual programming work . 
programming editors ,  also known as source code editors ,  are text editors that are specifically designed for programmers or developers for writing the source code of an application or a program . 
dos ,  microsoft's first operating system product ,  was the dominant operating system at the time . 
it had also been an unofficial international holiday before that . 
in addition ,  the rise of the internet has made web development a huge part of the programming field . 
a programmer's primary computer language  -lrb-  assembly ,  cobol ,  c ,  c++ ,  c# ,  java ,  lisp ,  python ,  etc .   -rrb- 
as `` java programmers '' ,  or by the type of function they perform or environment in which they work: for example ,  `` database programmers '' ,  `` mainframe programmers '' ,  or web developers . 
the tables below show lanthanum and actinium as group 3 elements ,  as this is the more common form in the literature . 
singer later wrote a biography on oppenheim . 
singer has experienced the complexities of some of these questions in his own life . 
singer was a speaker at the 2012 global atheist convention . 
singer's ideas have contributed to the rise of effective altruism . 
singer classifies euthanasia as voluntary ,  involuntary ,  or non-voluntary . 
in sum ,  singer argues that a fetus lacks personhood . 
singer is a cofounder of animals australia and the founder of the life you can save . 
in 1989 and 1990, peter singer's work was the subject of a number of protests in germany . 
renata singer is a novelist and author and she also has collaborated on publications with her husband . 
eventually ,  the symposium was cancelled and singer's invitation consequently withdrawn . 
singer describes himself as not anti-capitalist ,  stating in a 2010 interview with the new left project:
singer is an atheist ,  and was raised in a prosperous ,  happy ,  non-religious family . 
michael specter wrote that singer is among the most influential of contemporary philosophers . 
singer's `` practical ethics ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- analyzes why and how living beings' interests should be weighed . 
singer was inducted into the united states animal rights hall of fame in 2000.
peter albert david singer ,  ac  -lrb-  born 6 july 1946 -rrb- is an australian moral philosopher . 
this model also explains the priority that singer attaches to `` interests '' over trivial desires and pleasures . 
since 1968 he has been married to renata singer; they have three children: ruth ,  marion ,  and esther . 
poznań is among the oldest and largest cities in poland . 
poznań  -lrb-   ,   ,  ; ; known also by other historical names  -rrb-  is a city on the warta river in west-central poland ,  in the greater poland region and is the fifth-largest city in poland . 
the name poznań probably comes from a personal name ,  `` poznan '' ,   -lrb-  from the polish participle `` poznan -lrb-  y  -rrb- ``  – `` one who is known/recognized ''  -rrb-  ,  and would mean `` poznan's town '' . 
the official patron saints of poznań are saint peter and paul of tarsus ,  the patrons of the cathedral . 
the film turned out to be falk's breakout role . 
falk won four emmys for his role as columbo . 
falk grew up in ossining ,  new york . 
i love show business ,  and i love peter falk . `` 
in 1972, falk appeared in broadway's `` the prisoner of second avenue '' . 
in 2007, falk appeared with nicolas cage in the thriller `` next '' . 
falk tries to analyze the character and notes the correlation between his own personality and columbo's: with `` general amazement '' ,  falk notes: `` the show is all over the world . 
shera danese falk was appointed as her husband's conservator . 
in december 2008 it was reported that falk had been diagnosed with alzheimer's disease . 
director william friedkin said of falk's role in his film `` the brink's job ''  -lrb-  1978 -rrb-: `` peter has a great range from comedy to drama . 
for the remainder of the 1960s ,  falk had mainly supporting movie roles and tv guest-starring appearances . 
in 1971, pierre cossette produced the first grammy awards show on television with some help from falk . 
falk's first television series was in the title role of the drama `` the trials of o'brien '' ,  in which he played a lawyer . 
in 1998, falk returned to the new york stage to star in an off-broadway production of arthur miller's `` mr .  peters' connections '' . 
lovering is a fan of the band rush . 
on june 14, 2013, the pixies announced that deal had left the band . 
the pair formed a band in january 1986.
santiago played lead guitar on a number of frank black albums ,  as well as on other artists' albums . 
the band continued to tour and released `` trompe le monde '' in 1991, their final album before their break-up . 
in june 2004, the band released a new song ,  `` bam thwok '' exclusively on the itunes music store . 
the pixies are an american alternative rock band formed in 1986 in boston ,  massachusetts . 
she also formed the amps ,  who released one album . 
also in 1990, the pixies released a cover of the paul butterfield blues band's `` born in chicago '' on the compilation album ``  '' . 
 ''come on pilgrim '' was followed by the pixies' first full-length album ,  `` surfer rosa '' . 
by `` bossanova '' ,  the band had developed a severe aversion to recording music videos ,  and francis refused to lip-sync to them . 
on july 6, 2016, the pixies announced that lenchantin was now a permanent member of the band . 
their debut album ,  `` pod '' ,  was released in 1990.
i've heard it said about the velvet underground that while not a lot of people bought their albums ,  everyone who did started a band . 
lovering drummed with the band cracker ,  as well as on one of tanya donelly's solo albums ,  and on the martinis' song `` free '' ,  which appeared on the `` empire records '' soundtrack . 
after `` doolittle '' ,  tensions between deal and francis came to a head  -lrb-  for example ,  francis threw a guitar at deal during a concert in stuttgart  -rrb-  ,  and deal was almost fired from the band when she refused to play at a concert in frankfurt . 
although the pixies produced relatively few albums ,  whose sales were modest ,  they influenced a number of bands associated with the alternative rock boom of the 1990s . 
two forms of plasma ashing are typically performed on wafers . 
in semiconductor manufacturing plasma ashing is the process of removing the photoresist  -lrb-  light sensitive coating  -rrb-  from an etched wafer . 
physiological computing systems all contain an element that may be termed as an adaptive controller that may be used to represent the player . 
continuing the comparison between a psychophysiologist and a physiological psychologist ,  a psychophysiologist may look at how exposure to a stressful situation will produce a result in the cardiovascular system such as a change in heart rate  -lrb-  hr  -rrb-  ,  vasodilation/vasoconstriction ,  myocardial contractility ,  or stroke volume . 
historically ,  most psychophysiologists tended to examine the physiological responses and organ systems innervated by the autonomic nervous system . 
the physiological computer game may wish to incorporate both positive and negative loops into the adaptive controller . 
psychophysiology is also related to the medical discipline known as psychosomatics . 
physiological sensors have been used to detect emotions in schools and intelligent tutoring systems . 
the term middle ages also derives from petrarch . 
but perhaps the most widely discussed periodization scheme of the middle ages was the six ages of the world ,  where every age was a thousand years counting from adam to the present ,  with the present time  -lrb-  in the middle ages  -rrb-  being the sixth and final stage . 
other periods are named from influential or talismanic individuals  -lrb-  `` the victorian era '' ,  `` the edwardian era '' ,  `` the napoleonic era ''  -rrb-  . 
the division of history into `` ages '' or periods is very old ,  and recorded practically as early as the first development of writing . 
eric hobsbawm has also argued for what he calls `` the short twentieth century '' ,  encompassing the period from the first world war through to the end of the cold war . 
this results in descriptive abstractions that provide convenient terms for periods of time with relatively stable characteristics . 
it was premiered on petrarch's 687th birthday . 
petrarch was born in the tuscan city of arezzo in 1304.
petrarch is a world apart from dante and his `` divina commedia '' . 
when the tomb was opened ,  the skull was discovered in fragments and a dna test revealed that the skull was not petrarch's ,  prompting calls for the return of petrarch's skull . 
petrarch would be later endorsed as a model for italian style by the accademia della crusca . 
petrarch spent his early childhood in the village of incisa ,  near florence . 
petrarch spent the later part of his life journeying through northern italy as an international scholar and poet-diplomat . 
petrarch was a prolific letter writer and counted boccaccio among his notable friends to whom he wrote often . 
as the book fell open ,  petrarch's eyes were immediately drawn to the following words: petrarch's response was to turn from the outer world of nature to the inner world of `` soul '':
petrarch is traditionally called the father of humanism and considered by many to be the `` father of the renaissance . `` 
while petrarch's poetry was set to music frequently after his death ,  especially by italian madrigal composers of the renaissance in the 16th century ,  only one musical setting composed during petrarch's lifetime survives . 
the principle employed in using a screw propeller is used in sculling . 
by 1827, czech-austrian inventor josef ressel had invented a screw propeller which had multiple blades fastened around a conical base . 
in 1661, toogood and hays proposed using screws for waterjet propulsion ,  though not as a propeller . 
in 1835, two inventors in britain ,  john ericsson and francis pettit smith ,  began working separately on the problem . 
 ''archimedes '' had considerable influence on ship development ,  encouraging the adoption of screw propulsion by the royal navy ,  in addition to her influence on commercial vessels . 
in the 1970s ,  duesberg won international acclaim for his groundbreaking work on cancer . 
a 2008 feature story on duesberg in `` discover '' addresses duesberg's role in anti-hiv drug-preventable deaths in south africa . 
duesberg received acclaim early in his career for research on oncogenes and cancer . 
in the article ,  duesberg questioned research reporting that drugs policies implemented by the south african government on the advice of duesberg ,  rasnick and others had led to excess aids deaths . 
in addition ,  duesberg wrote that neither he nor his co-authors had financial conflicts of interest . 
duesberg rejects the importance of mutations ,  oncogenes ,  and anti-oncogenes entirely . 
in 2000, duesberg was the most prominent aids denialist to sit on a 44-member presidential advisory panel on hiv and aids convened by then-president thabo mbeki of south africa . 
duesberg grew up during world war ii ,  raised as a catholic in germany . 
the term was first used by organic chemist ludwig brieger  -lrb-  1849–1919 -rrb- . 
toxins vary greatly in their toxicity ,  ranging from usually minor  -lrb-  such as a bee sting  -rrb-  to almost immediately deadly  -lrb-  such as botulinum toxin  -rrb-  . 
toxins are often distinguished from other chemical agents by their method of production—the word toxin does not specify method of delivery  -lrb-  compare with venom and the broader meaning of poison—all substances that can also cause disturbances to organisms  -rrb-  . 
during the 2013 season ,  the team struggled again ,  and was unable to consistently play well for the majority of the season . 
of the 15 players who have hit four home runs in one game ,  three were phillies at the time  -lrb-  more than any other team  -rrb-  . 
the current team colors ,  uniform ,  and logo date to 1992.
in 2001, the phillies had their first winning season in eight years under new manager larry bowa ,  and their season record would not dip below  . 500 again from the 2003 season onward . 
the 1993 phillies started the season by going 17–5 in april and finishing with a 97–65 season . 
five phillies have won mvp awards during their career with the team . 
the 2013 phillies ended up with a record of 73-89, their first losing season since 2002.
the 2012 phillies experienced an up and down season . 
from 1883  -lrb-  the founding year  -rrb-  to 2018, the team's win-loss record is 9744-10919  -lrb-  a winning percentage of 0.472 -rrb- . 
since 2004, the team's home has been citizens bank park ,  located in south philadelphia . 
the philadelphia phillies are an american professional baseball team based in philadelphia ,  pennsylvania . 
with only 3 games left ,  mackannin would go on to finish managing the team until october 1, 2017.
after being founded in 1883 as the `` quakers '' ,  the team changed its name to the `` philadelphias '' ,  after the convention of the times . 
thus ,  the phillies became the last of the 16 teams that made up the major leagues from 1901 to 1961 to win a world series . 
over the next three seasons the phillies would continue to miss the playoffs and finished dead last in the majors for the 1992 season . 
as part of the deal selling that team to the johnson brothers ,  the phillies bought shibe park ,  where both teams had played since 1938.
after lumber baron william b .  cox purchased the team in 1943, the phillies rose out of last place for the first time in five years . 
one highlight of the season occurred on father's day ,  when jim bunning pitched a perfect game against the new york mets ,  the first in phillies history . 
in 1989 mike schmidt retired from the phillies and thus the last member of the 1980 championship team was gone . 
the game was the first occasion of the use of a designated hitter in a national league ballpark in a regular-season game; ryan howard was the first player to fill the role . 
in 1983, rather than inducting a player into the wall of fame ,  the phillies selected their centennial team ,  commemorating the best players of the first 100 years in franchise history . 
facing the kansas city royals in the 1980 world series ,  the phillies won their first world series championship ever in six games thanks to the timely hitting of mike schmidt and pete rose . 
a different blue cap was introduced in 2008 as part of the alternate home uniform for day games ,  a throwback to the late 1940s . 
the triassic ranges from 252 million to 201 million years ago . 
the late triassic spans from 237 million to 201 million years ago . 
the carboniferous spans from 359 million to 299 million years ago . 
the neogene spans from 23.03 million to 2.58 million years ago . 
the mesozoic ranges from 252 million to 66 million years ago . 
the oligocene epoch spans from 34 million to 23 million years ago . 
the eocene epoch ranged from 56 million to 34 million years ago . 
the middle triassic spans from 247 million to 237 million years ago . 
the late jurassic epoch spans from 163 million to 145 million years ago . 
the late cretaceous epoch spans from 100 million to 66 million years ago . 
the devonian spans from 419 million years to 359 million years ago . 
the ordovician spans from 485 million years to 444 million years ago . 
the early jurassic epoch spans from 201 million to 174 million years ago . 
the middle jurassic epoch spans from 174 million to 163 million years ago . 
 ''pokémon '' ,  also known as `` pokémon the series '' ,  is an anime television series based on the `` pokémon '' video game series . 
the pokémon trading card game  -lrb-  tcg  -rrb-  is a collectible card game with a goal similar to a pokémon battle in the video game series . 
all of the licensed `` pokémon '' properties overseen by the pokémon company international are divided roughly by generation . 
 ''pokémon pocket monsters '' and `` pokémon adventures '' are the two manga in production since the first generation . 
works within the franchise are set in the pokémon universe . 
the name `` pokémon '' is the romanized contraction of the japanese brand  . 
paul's extant works are edited in `` patrologia latina '' vol . 
after adelperga had married arichis ii ,  duke of benevento ,  paul at her request wrote his continuation of eutropius . 
cognate with this work is paul's `` historia romana '' ,  a continuation of the `` breviarium '' of eutropius . 
while in francia ,  paul was requested by charlemagne to compile a collection of homilies . 
the wafer is covered with photoresist by spin coating . 
after prebaking ,  the photoresist is exposed to a pattern of intense light . 
a contact printer ,  the simplest exposure system ,  puts a photomask in direct contact with the wafer and exposes it to a uniform light . 
in both cases ,  the mask covers the entire wafer ,  and simultaneously patterns every die . 
the photo resist-coated wafer is then prebaked to drive off excess photoresist solvent ,  typically at 90 to 100 °c for 30 to 60 seconds on a hotplate . 
exposure systems may be classified by the optics that transfer the image from the mask to the wafer . 
exposure systems typically produce an image on the wafer using a photomask . 
the resulting wafer is then `` hard-baked '' if a non-chemically amplified resist was used ,  typically at 120 to 180 °c for 20 to 30 minutes . 
as modern processes use increasingly large wafers ,  these conditions become increasingly difficult . 
after a photoresist is no longer needed ,  it must be removed from the substrate . 
in captivity ,  platypuses have survived to 17 years of age ,  and wild specimens have been recaptured when 11 years old . 
molecular clock and fossil dating suggest platypuses split from echidnas around 19–48 million years ago . 
platypuses have been heard to emit a low growl when disturbed and a range of other vocalisations have been reported in captive specimens . 
while both male and female platypuses are born with ankle spurs ,  only the male's spurs deliver venom ,  composed largely of defensin-like proteins  -lrb-  dlps  -rrb-  ,  three of which are unique to the platypus . 
platypuses generally suffer from few diseases in the wild; however ,  public concern in tasmania is widespread about the potential impacts of a disease caused by the fungus `` mucor amphibiorum '' . 
the biodiversity conservation branch at the department of primary industries and water are collaborating with nrm north and university of tasmania researchers to determine the impacts of the disease on tasmanian platypuses ,  as well as the mechanism of transmission and current spread of the disease . 
modern platypus young have three teeth in each of the maxillae  -lrb-  one premolar and two molars  -rrb-  and dentaries  -lrb-  three molars  -rrb-  ,  which they lose before or just after leaving the breeding burrow; adults have heavily keratinised pads in their place . 
it may have a range of up to  ,  with a male's home range overlapping those of three or four females . 
that is ,  monotremes lay eggs ,  and the eggs are similar to those of reptiles in that only part of the egg divides as it develops . 
during the second phase ,  the digits develop ,  and in the last phase ,  the egg tooth appears . 
although the platypus's eyes are small and not used under water ,  several features indicate that vision played an important role in its ancestors . 
except for its loss from the state of south australia ,  the platypus occupies the same general distribution as it did prior to european settlement of australia . 
outside the mating season ,  the platypus lives in a simple ground burrow ,  the entrance of which is about above the water level . 
the platypus is an excellent swimmer and spends much of its time in the water foraging for food . 
more than 80% of the platypus's genes are common to the other mammals whose genomes have been sequenced . 
the oldest discovered fossil of the modern platypus dates back to about 100,000 years ago ,  during the quaternary period . 
paramagnetism is a form of magnetism whereby certain materials are weakly attracted by an externally applied magnetic field ,  and form internal ,  induced magnetic fields in the direction of the applied magnetic field . 
constituent atoms or molecules of paramagnetic materials have permanent magnetic moments  -lrb-  dipoles  -rrb-  ,  even in the absence of an applied field . 
unlike ferromagnets ,  paramagnets do not retain any magnetization in the absence of an externally applied magnetic field because thermal motion randomizes the spin orientations . 
this effect is a weak form of paramagnetism known as `` pauli paramagnetism '' . 
generally ,  strong delocalization in a solid due to large overlap with neighboring wave functions means that there will be a large fermi velocity; this means that the number of electrons in a band is less sensitive to shifts in that band's energy ,  implying a weak magnetism . 
there have been instances of fraud in the history of parapsychology research . 
there is no known mechanism for psi . 
the society for psychical research  -lrb-  spr  -rrb-  was founded in london in 1882.
the existence of parapsychological phenomena and the scientific validity of parapsychological research is disputed by independent evaluators and researchers . 
parapsychological research has also included other sub-disciplines of psychology . 
after 28 years of research ,  princeton engineering anomalies research laboratory  -lrb-  pear  -rrb-  ,  which studied psychokinesis ,  closed in 2007.
morris and his research associates and phd students pursued research on topics related to parapsychology . 
research and professional organizations include the parapsychological association; the society for psychical research ,  publisher of the `` journal of society for psychical research ''; the american society for psychical research ,  publisher of the `` journal of the american society for psychical research ''  -lrb-  last published in 2004 -rrb-; the rhine research center and institute for parapsychology ,  publisher of the `` journal of parapsychology ''; the parapsychology foundation ,  which published the `` international journal of parapsychology ''  -lrb-  between 1959 and 1968 and 2000–2001 -rrb- and the australian institute of parapsychological research ,  publisher of the `` australian journal of parapsychology '' . 
his research used dice ,  with subjects 'willing' them to fall a certain way . 
parapsychological work was also conducted at the stanford research institute  -lrb-  sri  -rrb-  during this time . 
michael shermer in an article `` psychic drift: why most scientists do not believe in esp and psi phenomena '' for `` scientific american '' wrote `` the reason for skepticism is that we need replicable data and a viable theory ,  both of which are missing in psi research . `` 
there is also an issue of non-falsifiability associated with psi . 
in 1957, rhine and joseph gaither pratt wrote ``  '' . 
a researcher from tarkio college in missouri ,  james d .  macfarland ,  was suspected of falsifying data to achieve positive psi results . 
since the 1980s ,  contemporary parapsychological research has waned considerably in the united states . 
journals dealing with parapsychology include the `` journal of parapsychology '' ,  `` journal of near-death studies '' ,  `` journal of consciousness studies '' ,  `` journal of the society for psychical research '' ,  and `` journal of scientific exploration '' . 
because of the flaws ,  honorton agreed with hyman the 42 ganzfeld studies could not support the claim for the existence of psi . 
2013 -rrb- discovered methodological weaknesses that could account for the reported psi effects . 
in the 1920s ,  magician and escapologist harry houdini said that researchers and observers had not created experimental procedures which absolutely preclude fraud . 
there was also reason to suspect that the research managers had adjusted their project reports to fit the known background cues . 
research has also shown that people's desire to believe in paranormal phenomena causes them to discount strong evidence that it does not exist . 
john sladek wrote:
beginning in the early 1950s ,  the cia started extensive research into behavioral engineering . 
the findings from these experiments led to the formation of the stargate project ,  which handled esp research for the u . s .  federal government . 
the scientific consensus is that there is insufficient evidence to support the existence of psi phenomena . 
today ,  the rhine research center is a parapsychology research unit ,  stating that it `` aims to improve the human condition by creating a scientific understanding of those abilities and sensitivities that appear to transcend the ordinary limits of space and time '' . 
george albert smith and douglas blackburn were claimed to be genuine psychics by the society for psychical research but blackburn confessed to fraud:
on this subject terence hines has written:
as a consequence of the esp experiments at duke ,  standard laboratory procedures for the testing of esp developed and came to be adopted by interested researchers throughout the world . 
some instances of fraud amongst spiritualist mediums were exposed by early psychical researchers such as richard hodgson and harry price . 
some researchers have become skeptical of parapsychology such as susan blackmore and john taylor after years of study and no progress in demonstrating the existence of psi by the scientific method . 
most damning of all ,  rhine admitted publicly that he had uncovered at least twelve instances of dishonesty among his researchers in a single decade ,  from 1940 to 1950.
the popularity of meta-analysis in parapsychology has been criticized by numerous researchers ,  and is often seen as troublesome even within parapsychology itself . 
as there is no repeatable evidence for psi ,  the field is often regarded as a pseudoscience . 
the surge in paranormal research continued into the 1980s: the parapsychological association reported members working in more than 30 countries . 
massimo pigliucci has written:
a typical measure of psi phenomena is statistical deviation from chance expectation . 
mario bunge has written that research in parapsychology for over a hundred years has produced no single firm finding and no testable predictions . 
as of 2007, parapsychology research is represented in some 30 different countries and a number of universities worldwide continue academic parapsychology programs . 
richard wiseman has criticized the parapsychological community for widespread errors in research methods including cherry-picking new procedures which may produce preferred results ,  explaining away unsuccessful attempted replications with claims of an `` experimenter effect '' ,  data mining ,  and retrospective data selection . 
the publication of j . 
researcher j .  e .  kennedy has said that concerns over the use of meta-analysis in science and medicine apply as well to problems present in parapsychological meta-analysis . 
richard land has written that from what is known about human biology it is highly unlikely that evolution has provided humans with esp as research has shown the recognized five senses are adequate for the evolution and survival of the species . 
this states that every number is either even or odd . 
the axioms include a schema of induction . 
the purdue research park was ranked first by the association of university research parks in 2004.
the first classes were held on september 16, 1874, with six instructors and 39 students . 
the dauch alumni center acts as a showcase for the university's alumni . 
purdue university operates seventeen separate residence halls for its undergraduate and graduate students ,  including cary quadrangle ,  earhart hall ,  first street towers ,  harrison hall ,  hawkins hall ,  hillenbrand hall ,  hilltop apartments ,  honors college and residences ,  mccutcheon hall ,  owen hall ,  purdue village ,  shreve hall ,  tarkington hall ,  third street suites ,  wiley hall ,  and the 5 windsor halls: duhme ,  shealy ,  warren ,  wood ,  and vawter . 
southwest of the stadium mall is the edward c .  elliott hall of music ,  one of the largest proscenium theaters in the world . 
there are also a few campus radio stations on campus . 
several campus-wide programs are planned by the purdue alumni student experience  -lrb-  part of the alumni association  -rrb-  ,  purdue student union board ,  purdue student government  -lrb-  psg  -rrb-  ,  or the purdue graduate student government  -lrb-  pgsg  -rrb-  . 
purdue is a member of the big ten conference and enrolls the second largest student body of any university in indiana ,  as well as the fourth largest foreign student population of any university in the united states . 
purdue issued its first degree ,  a bachelor of science in chemistry ,  in 1875 and admitted its first female students that fall . 
students at purdue participate in more than 900 student organizations that cover a variety of interests . 
it is a destination and gathering area for the purdue alumni association's 69,000 members and more than 410,000 living alumni . 
the program is also notable for being one of only two universities – the other being the university of alabama – to produce three super bowl-winning quarterbacks . 
purdue is organized into ten colleges and schools . 
currently ,  three radio stations operate from residence halls ,  broadcasting via internet only; wccr from cary quadrangle  -lrb-  not to be confused with the current wccr fm or wccr-lp stations in other states  -rrb-  ,  wily from wiley hall ,  and whhr from harrison hall . 
purdue has one of the few college athletic programs not funded by student fees or subsidized by the university . 
of the residence halls ,  cary and tarkington are male-only while windsor and meredith hall are female-only; the remainder are coed . 
purdue university is a public research university in west lafayette ,  indiana ,  and the flagship campus of the purdue university system . 
wbaa is a npr member station . 
purdue was also ranked 9th for its undergraduate engineering program and ranked 23rd for its undergraduate business program . 
the event has been raising money for student scholarships since it began in 1958.
purdue university's nanotechnology research program ,  built around the new birck nanotechnology center in discovery park ,  ranks among the best in the nation . 
in recent years ,  purdue's leaders have continued to support high-tech research and international programs . 
the programs in liberal arts and education ,  formerly administered by the school of science ,  were soon split into their own school . 
purdue men's basketball has an all-time winning record against all big ten schools except ohio state . 
pseudo-dionysius the areopagite  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as pseudo-denys ,  was a christian theologian and philosopher of the late 5th to early 6th century ,  who wrote a set of works known as the `` corpus areopagiticum '' or `` corpus dionysiacum '' . 
john chrysostom wrote ,  `` this linus ,  some say ,  was second bishop of the church of rome after peter '' ,  while the `` liberian catalogue '' presents peter as the first bishop of rome and linus as his successor in the same office . 
linus  -lrb-  ; died c .  ad 76 -rrb- was the second bishop of rome ,  and is listed by the catholic church as the second pope . 
cletus is considered linus's successor by irenaeus ,  and the others cited above ,  who present linus either as the first bishop of rome or ,  if they give peter as the first ,  as the second . 
jerome classified clement as `` the fourth bishop of rome after peter ''  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  fourth in a series that included peter  -rrb-  ,  adding that ,  `` most of the latins think that clement was second after the apostle . `` 
the `` apostolic constitutions '' denote that linus ,  who was consecrated by paul ,  was the first bishop of rome and was succeeded by clement ,  who was ordained and consecrated by peter . 
bahá'u'lláh decreed pilgrimage to two places in the kitáb-i-aqdas: the house of bahá'u'lláh in baghdad ,  iraq ,  and the house of the báb in shiraz ,  iran . 
a pilgrimage is a journey or search of moral or spiritual significance . 
paul john keating  -lrb-  born 18 january 1944 -rrb- is a former australian politician who served as the 24th prime minister of australia ,  in office from 1991 to 1996 as leader of the labor party . 
at the 1996 election ,  labor suffered a landslide defeat to john howard's liberal–national coalition . 
following labor's victory in the 1983 election ,  keating was appointed treasurer of australia by prime minister bob hawke; he succeeded john howard in the position . 
such was the expectation that labor would lose ,  many senior labor figures openly told keating that his job was to save as many seats as possible ,  so that their time in opposition would be short . 
 -lrb-  thus ``  -lrb-  the  -rrb-  recession australia had to have '' is the last recession australia has ever had  -lrb-  as at dec 2018 -rrb- . 
after labor won the 1983 election ,  keating became one of the most influential figures in the new government . 
through his contacts in the unions and the nsw young labor council ,  keating met future senior labor figures such as laurie brereton ,  graham richardson and bob carr . 
he came to be seen as the leader of the labor right faction in new south wales ,  and developed a reputation as a talented parliamentary performer . 
in may 2007, keating suggested that sydney ,  rather than canberra ,  should be the capital of australia ,  saying that ,  `` john howard has already effectively moved the parliament there . 
hawke led labor to a third consecutive victory in the 1987 election ,  but by his fifth anniversary as prime minister a year later ,  he had begun to suffer from poor opinion polling . 
evaluations of his overall prime ministership have been more mixed . 
in 1989, the hawke labor government gradually began re-introducing fees for university study . 
on 20 december 1991, following his successful leadership challenge ,  keating was sworn in as the 24th prime minister of australia by the governor-general . 
hawke was elected to replace him ,  and he subsequently led labor to a landslide victory in the election just six weeks later . 
he tendered his resignation as prime minister on 11 march ,  13 years to the day after bob hawke had first taken office ,  and stepped down from parliament just over a month later on 23 april 1996.
he held a series of positions as organist and `` maestro di cappella ''  -lrb-  choirmaster  -rrb-  between 1607 and 1626, when he succeeded vincenzo ugolini as `` maestro '' of the cappella giulia's choir in st .  peter's basilica . 
urysohn's sister ,  lina neiman ,  wrote a memoir about his life and childhood . 
born in 1898 in odessa ,  urysohn studied at moscow university from 1915 to 1921.
both names `` plumcot '' and `` apriplum '' have been used for trees derived from a plum seed parent ,  and are therefore equivalent . 
natural plumcots  -lrb-  also called apriplums  -rrb-  have been known for hundreds of years from regions of the world that grow both plums and apricots from seed . 
the object pascal extensions were added to turbo pascal with the release of version 5.5 in 1989.
in 1986, anders ported turbo pascal to the macintosh and incorporated apple's object pascal extensions into turbo pascal . 
for example ,  for many pascal compilers:
pascal was developed on the pattern of the algol 60 language . 
in 1985 larry tesler ,  in consultation with niklaus wirth ,  defined object pascal and these extensions were incorporated in both the lisa pascal and mac pascal compilers . 
letter case is ignored in pascal source . 
however ,  it only accepts a subset of the pascal language . 
pascal programs start with the program keyword with a list of external file descriptors as parameters<ref name= ''iso/iec 7185:1990 6.10 ''>pascal iso 7185:1990 6.10</ref>  -lrb-  not required in turbo pascal etc . 
newer pascal compilers exist which are widely used . 
some of the pascal-sc language extensions have been adopted by gnu pascal . 
other languages that influenced pascal's development were simula 67 and wirth's own algol w . 
free pascal is an open source ,  cross-platform alternative . 
it is the only such implementation that is also compatible with the original pascal implementation ,  which is standardized as iso 7185.
the gnu pascal compiler is one notable exception ,  being written in c . 
in contrast with other programming languages from its time ,  pascal supports a set type:
the binder is the film-forming component of paint . 
paints that dry by solvent evaporation and contain the solid binder dissolved in a solvent are known as lacquers . 
most paints used either oil or water as a base  -lrb-  the diluent ,  solvent or vehicle for the pigment  -rrb-  . 
the general term of latex paint is usually used in the united states ,  while the term emulsion paint is used for the same products in the uk and the term latex paint is not used at all . 
the vehicle is composed of the binder; or ,  if it is necessary to thin the binder with a diluent like solvent or water ,  it is the combination of binder and diluent . 
the type of thinner ,  if present ,  varies with the binder . 
the main purposes of the diluent are to dissolve the polymer and adjust the viscosity of the paint . 
binders can be categorized according to the mechanisms for film formation . 
thermosetting mechanisms: paints that cure by polymerization are generally one- or two-package coatings that polymerize by way of a chemical reaction ,  and cure into a crosslinked film . 
a `` negative photoresist '' is a type of photoresist in which the portion of the photoresist that is exposed to light becomes insoluble to the photoresist developer . 
the unexposed portion of the photoresist is dissolved by the photoresist developer . 
photocrosslinking photoresist are usually used for negative photoresist . 
gall's list of the `` brain organs '' was specific . 
it was gall's collaborator johann gaspar spurzheim who would popularize the term `` phrenology '' . 
phrenologists believe that the human mind has a set of various mental faculties ,  each one represented in a different area of the brain . 
phrenology was one of the first to bring about the idea of rehabilitation of criminals instead of vindictive punishments that would not stop criminals ,  only with the reorganizing a disorganized brain would bring about change . 
as such ,  phrenology as a brain science waned but developed into the popular psychology of the 19th century . 
johann spurzheim was gall's most important collaborator . 
from absolute and relative sizes of the skull the phrenologist would assess the character and temperament of the patient . 
this belief was supported by the greek physician galen ,  who concluded that mental activity occurred in the brain rather than the heart ,  contending that the brain ,  a cold ,  moist organ formed of sperm ,  was the seat of the animal soul—one of three `` souls '' found in the body ,  each associated with a principal organ . 
for example ,  if the organ of self-esteem was touched ,  the subject would take on a haughty expression . 
it was believed that the cranial skull—like a glove on the hand—accommodates to the different sizes of these areas of the brain ,  so that a person's capacity for a given personality trait could be determined simply by measuring the area of the skull that overlies the corresponding area of the brain . 
the american brothers lorenzo niles fowler  -lrb-  1811–1896 -rrb- and orson squire fowler  -lrb-  1809–1887 -rrb- were leading phrenologists of their time . 
through careful observation and extensive experimentation ,  gall believed he had established a relationship between aspects of character ,  called `` faculties '' ,  with precise `` organs '' in the brain . 
george combe would become the chief promoter of phrenology throughout the english-speaking world after he viewed a brain dissection by spurzheim ,  convincing him of phrenology's merits . 
phrenology arrived in ireland in 1815, through spurzheim . 
pope alexander iv  -lrb-  1199 or 1185 – 25 may 1261 -rrb- was pope from 12 december 1254 to his death in 1261.
on the death of pope innocent iv in 1254 he was elected pope at naples on 12 december 1254.
on 14 may 1254, shortly before his death ,  innocent iv had granted sicily ,  a papal fiefdom ,  to edmund ,  second son of king henry iii of england . 
pope innocent x  -lrb-  1644–1655 -rrb- recalled chigi to rome . 
pope alexander vii  -lrb-  13 february 159922 may 1667 -rrb- ,  born fabio chigi ,  was pope from 7 april 1655 to his death in 1667.
the palazzo chigi in rome is not to be confused with the palazzo chigi in s .  quirico d'orcia in tuscany ,  or the palazzo chigi di formello . 
he was succeeded by pope clement ix  -lrb-  1667–69 -rrb- . 
chigi was ordained a priest in december 1634.
bishop chigi was named nuncio in cologne  -lrb-  1639–1651 -rrb- on 11 june 1639.
when innocent x died on 1 january 1655, cardinal chigi was elected pope after eighty days in the conclave ,  on 7 april 1655, taking the name of alexander vii . 
pope innocent x made him secretary of state in 1651, and in 1652, he was appointed as a cardinal . 
alexander vii favoured the jesuits . 
pius x cites alexander vii's bull in his footnote 11.
born in siena ,  a member of the illustrious banking family of chigi and a great-nephew of pope paul v  -lrb-  1605–1621 -rrb- ,  fabio chigi was privately tutored and eventually received doctorates of philosophy ,  law ,  and theology from the university of siena . 
pope alexander viii  -lrb-  22 april 1610 – 1 february 1691 -rrb- ,  born pietro vito ottoboni ,  was pope from 6 october 1689 to his death in 1691.
pope innocent x appointed him to the cardinalate and in 1652 at the request of the venetian government and he was made the cardinal-priest of san salvatore in lauro . 
pietro vito ottoboni was born in 1610 of a noble venetian family ,  and was the youngest of nine children of vittoria tornielli and marco ottoboni ,  grand chancellor of the republic of venice . 
ottoboni was also the vice-dean of the college of cardinals from 1687 to his pontifical election . 
alexander viii died on 1 february 1691.
pope alexander vi ,  born rodrigo de borja  -lrb-    ,  ; 1 january 1431 – 18 august 1503 -rrb- ,  was pope from 11 august 1492 until his death . 
other later popes ,  such as pope paul iii in `` sublimis deus ''  -lrb-  1537 -rrb- ,  pope benedict xiv in `` immensa pastorium ''  -lrb-  1741 -rrb- ,  and pope gregory xvi in his letter `` in supremo apostolatus ''  -lrb-  1839 -rrb- ,  continued to condemn slavery . 
pope alexander vi made many alliances to secure his position . 
saturday ,  the 12th of august ,  1503, the pope fell ill in the morning . 
alessandro farnese  -lrb-  later pope paul iii  -rrb-  ,  the brother of one of the pope's mistresses ,  giulia farnese ,  was also among the newly created cardinals . 
when his uncle alonso de borja  -lrb-  bishop of valencia  -rrb-  was elected pope callixtus iii ,  he `` inherited '' the post of bishop of valencia . 
burchard's `` diary '' provides a few details of the pope's final illness and death at age 72.:
virginio orsini ,  who had been captured by the spanish ,  died a prisoner at naples ,  and the pope confiscated his property . 
as for his true faults ,  known only to his confessor ,  pope alexander vi apparently died genuinely repentant . 
before the death of alexander vi ,  rome was filled with political instability . 
borgia was elected on 11 august 1492, assuming the name of alexander vi  -lrb-  due to confusion about the status of pope alexander v elected by the council of pisa  -rrb-  . 
two of alexander's successors ,  sixtus v and urban viii ,  described him as one of the most outstanding popes since saint peter . 
alexander vi also ,  in 1501, approved the university of valencia . 
when at last the pope was suffering from a very severe sickness ,  he spontaneously requested ,  one after another ,  each of the last sacraments . 
for a period of time ,  before legitimizing his children after becoming pope ,  rodrigo pretended that his four children with vannozza were his niece and nephews and that they were fathered by vannozza's husbands . 
the third and the fourth archbishops of valencia were juan de borja and pedro luis de borja ,  grand-nephews of alexander vi . 
rodrigo de borja was born on 1 january 1431, in the town of xativa near valencia ,  one of the component realms of the crown of aragon ,  in what is now spain . 
having served in the roman curia under five popes – his uncle calixtus iii ,  pius ii ,  paul ii ,  sixtus iv and innocent viii – rodrigo borgia acquired considerable administrative experience ,  influence and wealth . 
on the death of pope innocent viii on 25 july 1492, the three likely candidates for the papacy were the sixty-one-year-old borgia ,  seen as an independent candidate ,  ascanio sforza for the milanese ,  and giuliano della rovere ,  seen as a pro-french candidate . 
the ambassador of ferrara wrote to duke ercole that it was no wonder the pope and the duke were sick because nearly everyone in rome was ill because of bad air  -lrb-  `` per la mala condictione de aere ''  -rrb-  . 
in contrast to the preceding pontificate ,  pope alexander vi adhered initially to strict administration of justice and orderly government . 
the emperor named anselm bishop of lucca . 
pope alexander ii  -lrb-  1010/1015 – 21 april 1073 -rrb- ,  born anselm of baggio  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was pope from 30 september 1061 to his death in 1073.
in the papal election of 1061 following the death of pope nicholas ii ,  anselmo de baggio of lucca was elected as pope alexander ii . 
in order to silence a vocal critic ,  bishop guido sent anselm to the imperial court . 
anselm was born in baggio ,  a town near milan from 1923 district of the city ,  of a noble family . 
pope alexander iii was born in siena . 
pope alexander iii  -lrb-  c .  1100/1105 – 3 august 1181 -rrb- ,  born roland of siena ,  was pope from 7 september 1159 to his death in 1181.
this synod marked the summit of alexander iii's power . 
in 1181, alexander iii excommunicated king william i of scotland and put the kingdom under an interdict . 
pope alexander i  -lrb-  died c .  115 -rrb- was the bishop of rome from c .  107 to his death c .  115.
some believe he suffered martyrdom under the roman emperor trajan or hadrian ,  but this is improbable . 
some editions of the roman missal identified with pope alexander i the saint alexander that they give as commemorated ,  together with saints eventius and theodulus  -lrb-  who were supposed to be priests of his  -rrb-  ,  on 3 may . 
in the same paper ,  poincaré wondered whether a 3-manifold with the homology of a 3-sphere and also trivial fundamental group had to be a 3-sphere . 
 ,  the poincaré conjecture is the only solved millennium problem . 
in mathematics ,  the poincaré conjecture  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a theorem about the characterization of the 3-sphere ,  which is the hypersphere that bounds the unit ball in four-dimensional space . 
