for socrates ,  the only way the ship will reach its destination – the good – is if the navigator takes charge . 
some versions of the theory assert that god must be obeyed because of the nature of his relationship with humanity ,  others assert that god must be obeyed because he is goodness itself ,  and thus doing what he says would be best for everyone . 
advocates of divine command theory argue that justice ,  and indeed the whole of morality ,  is the authoritative command of god . 
a meditation on the divine command theory by plato can be found in his dialogue ,  euthyphro . 
abbott had four sons and they are benjamin vaughan abbott ,  edward abbott ,  austin abbott and lyman abbott . 
abbott was tutor in 1824–1825.
his sons ,  benjamin vaughan abbott ,  austin abbott ,  both eminent lawyers ,  lyman abbott ,  and edward abbott ,  a clergyman ,  were also well-known authors . 
abbott graduated from bowdoin college in 1820.
abbott's grandson ,  willis abbott ,  was a christian scientist and an editor of the `` christian science monitor '' . 
john stevens cabot abbott died at fair haven ,  connecticut . 
john stevens cabot abbott  -lrb-  september 19, 1805 – june 17, 1877 -rrb- ,  an american historian ,  pastor ,  and pedagogical writer ,  was born in brunswick ,  maine to jacob and betsey abbott . 
jeffry d .  wert wrote about stuart:
the gettysburg campaign was the most controversial of stuart's career . 
stuart's command crossed the potomac river at 3 a . m .  on june 28.
stuart's leadership capabilities were soon recognized . 
a statue of stuart by sculptor frederick moynihan was dedicated on richmond's monument avenue at stuart circle in 1907.
 .  .  .  lee trusted him and gave him discretion ,  but stuart acted injudiciously . `` 
huff's bullet struck stuart in the left side . 
modern scholarship remains divided on stuart's culpability . 
stuart and his three brigades departed salem depot at 1 a . m .  on june 25.
upon learning of stuart's death ,  general lee is reported to have said that he could hardly keep from weeping at the mere mention of stuart's name and that stuart had never given him a bad piece of information . 
on march 17, 1863, stuart's cavalry clashed with a union raiding party at kelly's ford . 
stuart's men harassed the retreating union columns until the campaign ended at the battle of chantilly . 
the british army named two models of american-made world war ii tanks ,  the m3 and m5, the stuart tank in general stuart's honor . 
stuart returned in september to fort leavenworth and was reunited with his wife . 
stuart was commissioned as a lieutenant colonel of virginia infantry in the confederate army on may 10, 1861.
gen .  george armstrong custer at the battle of hunterstown before joining stuart at gettysburg . 
stuart headed next for carlisle ,  hoping to find ewell . 
during the maryland campaign of september 1862, stuart's cavalry screened the army's movement north . 
stuart birthplace preservation trust ,  inc .  ,  in 1992 to preserve and interpret it . 
stuart reported to flora the next day that he had been shot through his fur collar but was unhurt . 
during the summer of 1848, stuart attempted to enlist in the u . s .  army ,  but was rejected as underaged . 
on june 18, 2018, the school board for richmond public schools in richmond ,  virginia voted 6 - 1 to rename j . e . b stuart elementary school to barack obama elementary school . 
on november 5, 1781, congress elected hanson as its president . 
in the 1970s ,  a descendant of hanson ,  john hanson briscoe ,  served as speaker of the maryland house of delegates ,  which passed `` a measure establishing april 14 as john hanson day . `` 
john hanson briscoe was also a director until his death in 2014.
when hanson was elected to congress ,  maryland was holding up the ratification of the articles of confederation . 
hanson retired from public office after his one-year term as president of congress . 
john hanson  -lrb-   – november 15, 1783 -rrb- was a merchant and public official from maryland during the era of the american revolution . 
a highlight of hanson's term was when george washington presented cornwallis's sword to congress . 
the idea that hanson was the forgotten first president of the united states was further promoted in a 1932 biography of hanson by journalist seymour wemyss smith . 
they are elected to lead the jedi . 
to showcase the failures of the jedi they created statues of the fallen jedi . 
the jedi code was a set of rules that governed the behavior of the jedi order . 
jedi master is a term of respect used by beings who respect the jedi . 
as the most common rank ,  it is interchangeably referred to as `` jedi '' ,  `` jedi knight '' and `` master jedi ''  -lrb-  although the latter are honorifics used only by younglings and padawans when addressing jedi knights or above  -rrb-  . 
the jedi academies were established to train force-sensitive beings accepted into the jedi order in the ways of the force . 
the jedi are the main protagonists in the `` star wars '' universe . 
the jedi high council is the main ecclesiastical leadership of the jedi order ,  which is a spiritual ,  philosophical and paramilitary organization . 
the most notable instrument wielded by a jedi is the lightsaber . 
while not technically a jedi master ,  he is a member of the old jedi council ,  and trains a padawan of his own ,  ahsoka tano during the clone wars . 
while other jedi respect him highly ,  they are frequently puzzled by his unorthodox beliefs and ultimately deny him a seat on the jedi council ,  despite him being among the wisest and most powerful of the jedi . 
in novels set after the events of the film series ,  luke skywalker re-established the jedi high council as part of his new jedi order . 
the jedi archives ,  known as the great library of ossus or the great library of the jedi ,  contained the galaxy's most priceless and ancient of texts sacred to jedi scholars and archaeologists . 
the starfighter in the `` revenge of the sith '' is called a jedi interceptor starfighter . 
within the expanded universe ,  `` the new jedi order '' indicates that the jedi temple on coruscant is no longer standing but it is rebuilt as a gift to jedi for their services and achievements during the yuuzhan vong invasion . 
younglings were portrayed training under jedi master yoda in a scene on `` attack of the clones '' and hiding during the assault on the jedi temple in `` revenge of the sith '' . 
not every `` dark side ''-user is a sith; nor is every `` light side ''-user a jedi . 
the lost twenty was the name given to a group of jedi masters—numbering twenty in total—who left the jedi order throughout its history . 
initiation is the first part of jedi training; they are mentored by jedi masters in rudimentary control over the force and basic self-defense techniques . 
in novels set after the events of the `` original ''-trilogy film series ,  the new jedi order was the restored and reformed jedi organization ,  in the wake of the great jedi purge and subsequent fall of the galactic empire . 
eta-2 actis jedi interceptors first appeared in `` revenge of the sith '' . 
he believed all jedi should be both teachers and students; that they should both learn from and mentor each other ,  and not just from one master . 
the council of reassignment administered the jedi service corps and each of its branch councils . 
tobin was born on march 5, 1918, in champaign ,  illinois . 
in 1957 tobin was appointed sterling professor of economics at yale . 
in 1950 tobin moved to yale university ,  where he remained for the rest of his career . 
outside academia ,  tobin was widely known for his suggestion of a tax on foreign exchange transactions ,  now known as the `` tobin tax '' . 
lennon was excluded from his father's will . 
julian lennon was born on 8 april 1963 in liverpool . 
lennon founded the white feather foundation in 2009.
john lennon married ono on 20 march 1969, and julian has a younger half-brother ,  sean lennon ,  and a stepsister ,  kyoko chan cox . 
lennon left the music business for several years in the 1990s . 
john charles julian lennon  -lrb-  born 8 april 1963 -rrb- is an english musician and photographer ,  son of beatles rockstar john lennon and his first wife cynthia . 
in commemoration of john lennon's 70th birthday and as a statement for peace ,  lennon and his mother ,  cynthia ,  unveiled the john lennon peace monument in his home town of liverpool ,  on 9 october 2010.
shortly after the death of his father ,  lennon began collecting beatles memorabilia . 
lennon enjoyed immediate success with his debut album ,  `` valotte '' ,  released in 1984.
in may 1998, lennon released the album `` photograph smile '' to little commercial success . 
after the album's release ,  paul mccartney sent lennon a telegram wishing him good luck . 
a replacement trophy was commissioned by fifa for the 1974 world cup . 
the world cup is a gold trophy that is awarded to the winners of the fifa world cup association football tournament . 
the jules rimet trophy was the original prize for winning the fifa world cup . 
since the advent of the world cup in 1930, two trophies have been used: the jules rimet trophy from 1930 to 1970, and the fifa world cup trophy from 1974 to the present day . 
his widow later remarried and is now judith belushi pisano . 
in 1979, belushi left `` saturday night live '' with aykroyd to pursue a film career . 
 ''belushi was the 'live' in `` saturday night live '' '' ,  they wrote ,  `` the one who made the show happen on the edge  .  .  .  nobody embodied the highs and lows of `` snl '' like belushi . `` 
in 2015, belushi was ranked by `` rolling stone '' as the greatest `` snl '' cast member of all time . 
in 1975, belushi was recommended to `` snl '' creator/showrunner lorne michaels by chevy chase and michael o'donoghue ,  who accepted belushi as a new cast member of the show after an audition . 
belushi's life was detailed in the 1984 biography `` wired: the short life and fast times of john belushi '' by bob woodward and 1990's `` samurai widow '' by his wife judith . 
since then ,  slimer has been described as `` the ghost of john belushi '' by dan aykroyd in many interviews . 
cocker himself joined belushi in 1976 to sing `` feeling alright '' together . 
belushi's mother ,  agnes demetri  -lrb-  samaras  -rrb-  ,  was the daughter of albanian immigrants ,  and his father ,  adam anastos belushi ,  was an albanian emigrant from qytezë . 
michaels was initially undecided ,  as he was not sure if belushi's physical humor would fit with what he was envisioning ,  but he changed his mind after giving belushi an audition . 
jacklin became an associate producer for the show ,  and she and belushi were married on december 31, 1976.
john adam belushi  -lrb-  january 24, 1949 – march 5, 1982 -rrb- was an american comedian ,  actor ,  and singer . 
brillstein complied ,  reluctant to rebuke belushi in front of another person . 
johann philipp abelin was a german chronicler whose career straddled the 16th and 17th centuries . 
he wrote numerous histories under the pseudonyms of abeleus ,  philipp arlanibäus ,  johann ludwig gottfried and gotofredus . 
jacob abendana  -lrb-  1630 – 12 september 1685 -rrb- was `` hakham '' of london from 1680 until his death . 
jacob was the eldest son of joseph abendana and brother to isaac abendana . 
jacob abendana died childless in london in 1685 and was buried in the portuguese cemetery at mile end . 
he was the eldest son of claud hamilton ,  1st lord paisley  -lrb-  4th son of james hamilton ,  2nd earl of arran  -rrb-  ,  and of margaret ,  daughter of george seton ,  7th lord seton . 
james hamilton ,  1st earl of abercorn pc  -lrb-  12 august 1575 – 23 march 1618 -rrb- was a scottish peer . 
a java virtual machine  -lrb-  jvm  -rrb-  is a virtual machine that enables a computer to run java programs as well as programs written in other languages that are also compiled to java bytecode . 
any java application can be run only inside some concrete implementation of the abstract specification of the java virtual machine . 
he was the official physician to heriot's hospital and physician to the king for scotland . 
a bust of abercrombie by john steell is held at the royal college of physicians of edinburgh . 
an elder of the church of scotland ,  he also wrote `` the man of faith: or the harmony of christian faith and christian character ''  -lrb-  1835 -rrb- ,  which he pretended to distribute freely . 
john abercrombie  -lrb-  10 october 1780 – 14 november 1844 -rrb- was a scottish physician and philosopher . 
three goddesses claimed the apple: hera ,  athena and aphrodite . 
the judgement of paris is featured in the 2003 tv miniseries `` helen of troy '' . 
the judgement of paris was burlesqued in the 1954 musical `` the golden apple '' . 
the judgement of paris is a story from greek mythology ,  which was one of the events that led up to the trojan war and  -lrb-  in slightly later versions of the story  -rrb-  to the foundation of rome . 
the greeks' expedition to retrieve helen from paris in troy is the mythological basis of the trojan war . 
kallistēi is the word of the ancient greek language inscribed on the golden apple of discord by eris . 
its meaning can be rendered `` to the fairest one '' . 
the subject became popular in art from the late middle ages onwards . 
the court has jurisdiction to apply federal law . 
this concerns the relationships both between courts in different jurisdictions ,  and between courts within the same jurisdiction . 
several formerly important franchise courts were not officially abolished until courts act of 1971.
certain courts ,  particularly the united states supreme court and most state supreme courts ,  have discretionary jurisdiction ,  meaning that they can choose which cases to hear from among all the cases presented on appeal . 
the u . s .  supreme court ,  in turn ,  has appellate jurisdiction  -lrb-  of a discretionary nature  -rrb-  over the courts of appeals ,  as well as the state supreme courts ,  by means of writ of certiorari . 
this reduces the risk of wasting the court's time . 
a court whose subject matter is not limited to certain types of controversy is referred to as a `` court of general jurisdiction '' . 
as a practical example of court jurisdiction ,  as of 2013 utah has five types of courts ,  each for different legal matters and different physical territories . 
the fact that international organizations ,  courts and tribunals have been created raises the difficult question of how to co-ordinate their activities with those of national courts . 
the united states district courts may hear only cases arising under federal law and treaties ,  cases involving ambassadors ,  admiralty cases ,  controversies between states or between a state and citizens of another state ,  lawsuits involving citizens of different states ,  and against foreign states and citizens . 
though these courts have discretion to deny cases they otherwise could adjudicate ,  no court has the discretion to hear a case that falls outside of its subject matter jurisdiction . 
john abernethy frs  -lrb-  3 april 1764 – 20 april 1831 -rrb- was an english surgeon . 
on pott's resignation of the office of surgeon of st bartholomew's ,  sir charles blicke ,  who was assistant-surgeon ,  succeeded him ,  and abernethy was elected assistant-surgeon in 1787.
a biography ,  `` memoirs of john abernethy '' ,  by george macilwain  -lrb-  1797–1882 -rrb- ,  appeared in 1853.
as well as judaism and christianity . 
two notable books addressed the relations between contemporary judaism and christianity ,  abba hillel silver's `` where judaism differs '' and leo baeck's `` judaism and christianity '' ,  both motivated by an impulse to clarify judaism's distinctiveness `` in a world where the term judeo-christian had obscured critical differences between the two faiths . `` 
most importantly the belief of the judeo-christian tradition insidiously obscures the real and significant differences between judaism and christianity . 
judeo-christian is a term that groups judaism and christianity ,  either in reference to christianity's derivation from judaism ,  both religions' common use of the torah ,  or due to perceived parallels or commonalities shared values between those two religions ,  which has contained as part of western culture . 
christianity inherits the notion of a `` covenant '' from second temple judaism ,  in the form of the old testament . 
response of jews towards the `` judeo-christian '' concept has been mixed . 
maroger medium  -lrb-  or any other painting medium ,  for that matter  -rrb-  should never be used as a final picture varnish ,  as maroger requires reaction by admixture with oil paint in order to dry . 
his book ,  `` the secret formulas and techniques of the masters '' ,  has been criticized by some modern writers on painting who say that the painting medium maroger promoted is unsound . 
the primary form of `` maroger medium '' known today is black oil  -lrb-  `` giorgione's '' medium  -rrb-  and mastic varnish combined in approximately equal parts to form a gel . 
while maroger medium is usually mixed directly with oil paints ,  its proportion should be kept to no more than 20% of the mixture . 
it dries very fast so that he can paint on the same areas the very next day ,  which speeds up painting . 
these products produce effects similar to ,  but not the same as those of real maroger medium ,  which depends on specific chemical reactions between leaded oil ,  mastic resin ,  and turpentine  -lrb-  the mastic varnish vehicle  -rrb-  . 
white lead when cooked into linseed oil acts as a drying agent ,  accelerating the polymerization of the oil film . 
joseph harold greenberg  -lrb-  may 28, 1915 – may 7, 2001 -rrb- was an american linguist ,  known mainly for his work concerning linguistic typology and the genetic classification of languages . 
jan van goyen was famously influential on the landscape painters of his century . 
jan josephszoon van goyen  -lrb-  ; 13 january 1596 – 27 april 1656 -rrb- was a dutch landscape painter . 
jan van goyen would begin a painting using a support primarily of thin oak wood . 
jan van goyen was the son of a shoemaker and started as an apprentice in leiden ,  the town of his birth . 
epiphanius and st jerome mention justin . 
the martyrdom of justin preserves the court record of the trial . 
he was martyred ,  alongside some of his students ,  and is considered a saint by the roman catholic church ,  the anglican church ,  the eastern orthodox church ,  and the oriental orthodox churches . 
the earliest mention of justin is found in the `` oratio ad graecos '' by tatian who ,  after calling him `` the most admirable justin '' ,  quotes a saying of his and says that the cynic crescens laid snares for him . 
tetzel died in leipzig in 1519.
the nobleman did so and received thereupon letter and seal from tetzel . 
johann tetzel  -lrb-  1465 – 11 august 1519 -rrb- was a german dominican friar and preacher . 
tetzel was also condemned  -lrb-  though later pardoned  -rrb-  for immorality . 
at the time of his death ,  tetzel had fallen into disrepute and was shunned by the public . 
tetzel was born in pirna ,  saxony ,  and studied theology and philosophy at leipzig university . 
from 1974 to 1977 she also used the pen name raccoona sheldon . 
to remind audiences of the role gender plays in both reading and writing ,  the award was named in sheldon's honor at the suggestion of karen joy fowler . 
in 2011, the science fiction research association gave its 2011 `` thomas d .  clareson award for distinguished service '' to the tiptree motherboard . 
in addition to the award itself ,  the judges publish a `` tiptree award honor list '' that they describe as `` a strong part of the award's identity and  -lrb-   .  .  .   -rrb-  used by many readers as a recommended reading list . `` 
during the rest of the decade ,  the club won the league just once more in 1966–67.
juventus' heaviest championship defeats came during the 1911–12 and 1912–13 seasons: they were against milan in 1912  -lrb-  1–8 -rrb- and torino in 1913  -lrb-  0–8 -rrb- . 
the club has earned the distinction of being allowed to wear three golden stars  -lrb-    -rrb-  on its shirts representing its league victories ,  the tenth of which was achieved during the 1957–58 season ,  the 20th in the 1981–82 season and the 30th in the 2013–14 season . 
juventus have been proclaimed world's club team of the year twice  -lrb-  1993 and 1996 -rrb- and was ranked in 3rd place—the highest ranking of any italian club—in the all-time club world ranking  -lrb-  1991–2009 period  -rrb-  by the iffhs . 
boniperti retired in 1961 as the all-time top scorer at the club ,  with 182 goals in all competitions ,  a club record which stood for 45 years . 
juventus have significant rivalries with two main clubs . 
this was achieved by omar sívori in a game against internazionale in the 1960–61 season . 
during the 1980s ,  the club emblem was the blurred silhouette of a zebra ,  alongside the two golden stars with the club's name forming an arc above . 
juventus football club s . p . a .   -lrb-  from  ,  `` youth '';   -rrb-  ,  colloquially known as juve  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is an italian professional football club in turin ,  piedmont . 
the club is one of the founders of the european club association  -lrb-  eca  -rrb-  ,  which was formed after the dissolution of the g-14, an international group of europe's most elite clubs of which juventus were also a founding member . 
on 17 may 2017, juventus won their 12th coppa italia title in a 2–0 win over lazio  -lrb-  the first team to win three consecutive championships  -rrb-  . 
the club is also ranked ninth on forbes' list of the most valuable football clubs in the world with an estimate value of us$850 million  -lrb-  €654 million  -rrb-  ,  making them the second richest association football club in italy . 
in the 2015–16 season ,  juventus won the coppa italia for the 11th time and their second-straight title ,  becoming the first team in italy's history to complete serie a and coppa italia doubles in back-to-back seasons; juventus would go on to win another two consecutive doubles in 2016–17 and 2017–18.
overall ,  juventus have won 66 official competitions ,  more than any other italian club: 55 domestic trophies  -lrb-  which is also a record  -rrb-  and 11 official international competitions ,  making them ,  in the latter case ,  the second most successful italian club in european competition . 
overall ,  juventus are the club that has contributed the most players to the italy national team in history ,  being the only italian club that has contributed players to every italy national team since the 2nd fifa world cup . 
along with lazio and roma ,  juventus is one of only three italian clubs quoted on borsa italiana  -lrb-  italian stock exchange  -rrb-  . 
there was a split at the club in 1906, after some of the staff considered moving juve out of turin . 
on 10 july 2018, cristiano ronaldo became the highest ever transfer for an italian club with his €100 million transfer from real madrid . 
juventus was also the first italian club to achieve the title in the european super cup ,  having won the competition in 1984 and the first european club to win the intercontinental cup in 1985, since it was restructured by union of european football associations  -lrb-  uefa  -rrb-  and confederación sudamericana de fútbol  -lrb-  conmebol  -rrb- 's organizing committee five years beforehand . 
długosz was a canon at kraków ,  educated in the university of krakow . 
długosz stayed until 1452 and while there ,  founded the canonical monastery . 
in 1434, długosz's uncle ,  the first pastor at kłobuck ,  appointed him to take over his position as canon of st .  martin church there . 
he is considered poland's first historian . 
jadwiga was venerated in poland soon after her death . 
the two best-known are those of `` jadwiga's cross '' and `` jadwiga's foot '':
jadwiga was crowned `` king '' in poland's capital ,  kraków ,  on 16 october 1384.
the pope went on to canonize jadwiga in kraków on 8 june 1997.
however ,  lesser poland's nobility opposed him and persuaded queen elizabeth to send jadwiga to poland . 
kings of poland are colored blue . 
jadwiga was present at her father's death bed . 
jogaila ,  now in polish styled władysław jagiełło ,  was crowned king of poland on 4 march 1386.
the polish lords did not want to accept jadwiga's fourteen-year-old fiancé ,  william of habsburg ,  as their sovereign . 
jadwiga was born in buda ,  the capital of the kingdom of hungary . 
according to halecki ,  the lords of lesser poland were the first to suggest that jadwiga should marry the pagan duke jogaila of lithuania . 
the polish lords' envoys informed jogaila that they would obey him if he married jadwiga on 11 january 1386.
louis agreed to give jadwiga in marriage to william of austria on 4 march 1375.
jadwiga's brother-in-law ,  sigismund ,  who had been crowned king of hungary ,  started negotiations with the teutonic knights about partitioning poland in early 1392.
on william's demand ,  pope urban vi initiated a new investigation about the marriage of jadwiga and władysław-jogaila . 
the interregnum that followed louis's death and caused such internal strife came to an end with jadwiga's arrival in poland . 
długosz states that jadwiga and william would only be able to meet in the nearby franciscan convent . 
jadwiga  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as hedwig  -lrb-  ; 1373/4 – 17 july 1399 -rrb- ,  was the first female monarch of the kingdom of poland ,  reigning from 16 october 1384 until her death . 
there is no doubt ,  however ,  that william of austria was forced to leave poland . 
from 1970–1972, the apollo program concluded at ksc with the launches of missions 13 through 17.
nasa also funded ccafs launch pad maintenance and launch vehicle improvements . 
on october 28, 2009, the ares i-x launch from pad 39b was the first unmanned launch from ksc since the skylab workshop in 1973.
the john f .  kennedy space center  -lrb-  ksc ,  originally known as the nasa launch operations center  -rrb-  is one of ten national aeronautics and space administration field centers . 
on may 14, 1973, the last saturn v launch put the skylab space station in orbit from pad 39a . 
in 1998, the launch services program  -lrb-  lsp  -rrb-  formed at ksc ,  pulling together programs  -lrb-  and personnel  -rrb-  that already existed at ksc ,  grc ,  goddard space flight center ,  and more to manage the launch of nasa and noaa robotic missions . 
all this changed with the commercial space launch act of 1984, after which nasa only coordinated its own and national oceanic and atmospheric administration  -lrb-  noaa  -rrb-  elv launches . 
as the international space station modules design began in the early 1990s ,  ksc began to work with other nasa centers and international partners to prepare for processing prior to launch on board the space shuttles . 
from 1967 through 1973, there were 13 saturn v launches ,  including the ten remaining apollo missions after apollo 7.
the shuttle was retired from service in july 2011 after 135 launches . 
starting with the fourth gemini mission ,  the nasa launch control center in florida  -lrb-  mercury control center ,  later the launch control center  -rrb-  began handing off control of the vehicle to the mission control center shortly after liftoff; in prior missions it held control throughout the entire mission . 
throughout the first half of 1990, mitchell recorded songs that appeared on her next album . 
for a year and a half ,  mitchell worked on the tracks for her next album . 
mitchell stated at the time that `` travelogue '' would be her final album . 
mitchell's fifth album ,  `` for the roses '' ,  was released in 1972.
in mid-1977, mitchell began work on new recordings that became her first double studio album . 
during the next few years ,  the only albums mitchell released were compilations of her earlier work . 
mitchell is the sole producer credited on most of her albums ,  including all her work in the 1970s . 
in 2017, npr ranked `` blue '' number 1 on a list of greatest albums made by women . 
this album was also mitchell's first since geffen records was sold to mca inc .  ,  meaning that `` night ride home '' was her first album not to be initially distributed by wea  -lrb-  now warner music group  -rrb-  . 
the album won two grammy awards ,  including best pop album ,  and it coincided with a much-publicized resurgence in interest in mitchell's work by a younger generation of singer-songwriters . 
mitchell decided to return to the live stage after the great success of `` blue '' ,  and she presented new songs on tour which appeared on her next album ,  her fifth ,  `` for the roses '' . 
 ''blue '' was an almost instant critical and commercial success ,  peaking in the top 20 in the billboard album charts in september and also hitting the british top 3.
lang recorded two of mitchell's songs  -lrb-  `` a case of you '' and `` jericho ''  -rrb-  for her 2004 album `` hymns of the 49th parallel '' which is composed entirely of songs written by canadian artists . 
she resolved to write her own songs . 
17 on the billboard album charts—a higher placement than `` don juan's reckless daughter ''— ''mingus '' still fell short of gold status ,  making it her first album since the 1960s to not sell at least a half-million copies . 
i learned every song off of it ,  and i don't think there is another album anywhere—including my own—on which i know every note and word of every song . `` 
the experience remained private for most of her career ,  but she made allusions to it in several songs ,  for example `` little green , ``  which she performed in the 1960s and recorded eventually for the 1971 album `` blue '' . 
at this time ,  country music began to eclipse rock ,  and mitchell wanted to play the guitar . 
several other songs reference joni mitchell . 
 ''shine '' was released by the label on september 25, 2007, debuting at number 14 on the billboard 200 album chart ,  her highest chart position in the united states since the release of `` hejira '' in 1976, over thirty years previously ,  and at number 36 on the united kingdom albums chart . 
<nowiki>*</nowiki>although officially a herbie hancock release ,  mitchell also received a grammy due to her vocal contribution to the album . 
on her 1968 debut album `` song to a seagull '' ,  mitchell used both quartal and quintal harmony in `` dawntreader '' and quintal harmony in `` seagull '' . 
at the same ceremony mitchell won a grammy for best instrumental pop performance for the opening track ,  `` one week last summer '' ,  from her album `` shine '' . 
in 1996, mitchell agreed to release a greatest `` hits '' collection when label reprise also allowed her a second album ,  called `` misses '' ,  to include some of the lesser known songs from her career . 
crosby convinced reprise to let mitchell record a solo acoustic album without the folk-rock overdubs in vogue at that time ,  and his clout earned him a producer's credit in march 1968, when reprise released her debut album ,  known either as `` joni mitchell '' or `` song to a seagull '' . 
the singer's next two albums featured no new songs and ,  mitchell has said ,  were recorded to `` fulfill contractual obligations '' ,  but on both she attempted to make use of her new vocal range in interpreting familiar material . 
the song contains the lyric `` joni wrote `` blue '' in a house by the sea '' . 
in 2006 she said ,  `` i suppose a lot of people could have written a lot of my other songs ,  but i feel the songs on `` hejira '' could only have come from me . `` 
she later sang about her small-town upbringing in several of her songs ,  including `` song for sharon '' . 
the album that resulted ,  `` dog eat dog '' ,  released in october 1985, turned out to be only a moderate seller ,  peaking at no . 
although the letter has not survived ,  bede quoted from parts of it . 
the second group included mellitus ,  who later became bishop of london and archbishop of canterbury . 
justus was a member of the gregorian mission sent to england by pope gregory i . 
in 614, justus attended the council of paris ,  held by the frankish king ,  chlothar ii . 
following the death of king æthelberht of kent in 616, justus was forced to flee to gaul ,  but was reinstated in his diocese the following year . 
justus consecrated paulinus as the first bishop of york ,  before the latter accompanied æthelburg of kent to northumbria for her marriage to king edwin of northumbria . 
on the other hand ,  ipsps could subtract from this sum of epsps ,  preventing the motor neuron from firing . 
he won the australian of the year award in 1963, the same year he won the nobel prize . 
in the early 1950s ,  eccles and his colleagues performed the research that would lead to his receiving the nobel prize . 
scarlett was born in jamaica ,  where his father ,  robert scarlett ,  had property . 
james scarlett ,  1st baron abinger ,  pc  -lrb-  13 december 176917 april 1844 -rrb- was an english lawyer ,  politician and judge . 
in a note prefixed to the `` collected edition '' of his wife's poems ,  robert browning tells us that `` on the early death of his father ,  he  -lrb-  edward moulton  -rrb-  was brought from jamaica to england when a very young child ,  as ward to the late chief baron lord abinger ,  then mr .  scarlett ,  whom he frequently accompanied in his post-chaise when on pursuit . `` 
the husband ,  too ,  is indirectly implied to have responsibilities to his wife . 
the talmud argues that a husband is responsible for the protection of his wife's body . 
the rights of the husband and wife are described in tractate ketubot in the talmud ,  which explains how the rabbis balanced the two sets of rights of the wife and the husband . 
traditionally ,  the obligations of the husband include providing for his wife . 
the talmud sets a minimum provision which a husband must provide to his wife:
if the wife had young twin children ,  the talmud made her husband responsible for caring for one of them . 
in this case ,  the wife may or may not be entitled to a payment . 
if the husband and wife were both taken captive ,  the historic jewish view was that the rabbinic courts should first pay the ransom for the wife ,  selling some of the husband's property in order to raise the funds . 
most jewish religious authorities held that a husband must allow his wife to eat at the same table as him ,  even if he gave his wife enough money to provide for herself . 
as for the wife ,  the greatest praise the talmudic rabbis offered to any woman was that given to a wife who fulfils the wishes of her husband; to this end ,  an early midrash states that a wife should not leave the home `` too frequently '' . 
according to the non-traditional view ,  in the bible the wife is treated as a possession owned by her husband ,  but later judaism imposed several obligations on the husband ,  effectively giving the wife several rights and freedoms; indeed ,  being a jewish wife was often a more favourable situation than being a wife in many other cultures . 
it was said of a wife that `` god counts her tears '' . 
by contrast ,  if a husband mistreated his wife ,  or lived in a disreputable neighbourhood ,  the jewish religious authorities would permit the wife to move to another home elsewhere ,  and would compel the husband to finance her life there . 
according to prominent jewish writers of the middle ages ,  if a man is absent from his wife for a long period ,  the wife should be allowed to sell her husband's property ,  if necessary to sustain herself . 
in order to offset the husband's duty to support his wife ,  she was required by the talmud to surrender all her earnings to her husband ,  together with any profit she makes by accident ,  and the right of usufruct on her property; the wife was not required to do this if she wished to support herself . 
orthodox judaism does not have a jewish legal construct of same-gender marriage . 
halakha  -lrb-  jewish law  -rrb-  allows for divorce . 
similarly ,  they argued that if a wife had to take out a loan to pay for her sustenance during such absence ,  her husband had to pay the debt on his return . 
the talmud elaborates on the biblical requirement of the husband to provide his wife with clothing ,  by insisting that each year he must provide each wife with 50 zuzim's-worth of clothing ,  including garments appropriate to each season of the year . 
the husband was also expected by the classical rabbis to provide his wife with jewellery and perfumes if he lived in an area where this was customary . 
if the wife dies ,  even if not due to illness ,  the talmud's stipulations require the husband to arrange ,  and pay for ,  her burial; the burial must ,  in the opinion of the talmud ,  be one conducted in a manner befitting the husband's social status ,  and in accordance with the local custom . 
if the wife was captured ,  the husband was required by the talmud and later writers to pay the ransom demanded for her release; there is some debate whether the husband was required only to pay up to the wife's market value as a slave ,  or whether he must pay any ransom ,  even to the point of having to sell his possessions to raise the funds . 
the polish science fiction fandom award was named after him: the janusz a .  zajdel award . 
janusz zajdel was born 15 august 1938 in warsaw ,  poland . 
he won the award posthumously in 1985, shortly after his death ,  at which time it was decided to rename the award after him ,  and it became known as the janusz a .  zajdel award . 
zajdel also received the golden sepulka award two times: for `` limes inferior ''  -lrb-  1982 novel; 1983 award  -rrb-  and `` wyjście z cienia ''  -lrb-  `` out of the shadow ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  1983 novel; 1984 award  -rrb-  . 
he is recognized as an originator of the social science fiction genre in polish science fiction ,  known in poland as the sociological speculative fiction  -lrb-  `` fantastyka socjologiczna ''  -rrb-  . 
zajdel has been described as the second science fiction writer in popularity in poland after stanisław lem . 
janusz andrzej zajdel  -lrb-  15 august 1938 – 19 july 1985 -rrb- was a polish science fiction author ,  second in popularity in poland to stanisław lem . 
hussam implored rumi to write more . 
he is most commonly called `` rumi '' in english . 
jalal al-din who is also known as rumi ,  was a philosopher and mystic of islam . 
from an accomplished teacher and jurist ,  rumi was transformed into an ascetic . 
rumi's father was :ru:баха ад-дин валад|bahā ud-dīn walad ,  a theologian ,  jurist and a mysticism|mystic from balkh ,  who was also known by the followers of rumi as sultan al-ulama or `` sultan of the scholars '' . 
during this period ,  rumi also travelled to damascus and is said to have spent four years there . 
in other verses in the `` masnavi '' ,  rumi describes in detail the universal message of love:
georgian queen gürcü hatun was a close friend of rumi . 
rumi was born to native persian-speaking parents ,  originally from the balkh ,  in present-day afghanistan . 
only two players have won both the norris and hart memorial trophy for the league most valuable player in the same season: bobby orr ,  who won both trophies in the 1969–70, 1970–71 and 1971–72 seasons ,  and chris pronger ,  who won the hart and norris in the 1999–2000 nhl season . 
the trophy was first awarded at the conclusion of the 1953–54 nhl season . 
at the end of each season ,  members of the professional hockey writers' association vote to determine the player who was the best defenseman during the regular season . 
as of 2014 the following regional networks are connected to janet:
the janet network is implemented through 18 regions which connect universities ,  colleges and schools to the janet network . 
today janet is primarily a high-speed ip network . 
the janet network is operated by jisc services limited ,  part of jisc . 
janet developed out of a number of local and research networks dating back to the 1970s . 
the name was originally a contraction of joint academic network but it is now known as janet in its own right . 
superjanet4 also saw an increase in the userbase of the janet network ,  with the inclusion of the further education community and the use of the superjanet4 backbone to interconnect schools' networks . 
it took harrison five years to build his first sea clock  -lrb-  or h1 -rrb- . 
harrison began working on his second 'sea watch'  -lrb-  h5 -rrb- while testing was conducted on the first ,  which harrison felt was being held hostage by the board . 
in 1998, british composer harrison birtwistle wrote the piano piece `` harrison's clocks '' that contains musical depictions of harrison's various clocks . 
harrison's first `` sea watch ''  -lrb-  now known as h4 -rrb- is housed in silver pair cases some in diameter . 
in total ,  harrison received £23,065 for his work on chronometers . 
the corpus clock in cambridge ,  unveiled in 2008, is a homage by the designer to harrison's work but is of an electromechanical design . 
but when longitude at sea is lost ,  it cannot be found again by any watch '' . 
this is the clock's defining feature . 
it was this that led him to adopt circular balances in the third sea clock  -lrb-  h3 -rrb- . 
today the restored h1, h2, h3 and h4 timepieces can be seen on display in the royal observatory at greenwich . 
harrison set out to solve the problem directly ,  by producing a reliable clock that could keep the time of the reference place . 
in the meantime harrison's watch would have to be turned over to the astronomer royal for long-term on-land testing . 
harrison was a man of many skills and he used these to systematically improve the performance of the pendulum clock . 
in 1730, harrison designed a marine clock to compete for the longitude prize and travelled to london ,  seeking financial assistance . 
consequently ,  this first marine watch of harrison's failed the needs of the board despite the fact that it had succeeded in two previous trials . 
during harrison's second trial of his 'sea watch'  -lrb-  h4 -rrb- the reverend nevil maskelyne was asked to accompany hms `` tartar '' and test the lunar distances system . 
the d shaped pallets of harrison's escapement are both made of diamond ,  a considerable feat of manufacture at the time . 
harrison spent seventeen years working on this third 'sea clock' ,  but despite every effort it did not perform exactly as he would have wished . 
in the 1970s and 1980s ,  she was the star of numerous television programs ,  including `` julia child & company '' ,  `` julia child & more company '' and `` dinner at julia's '' . 
julia child had a large impact on american households and housewives . 
despite child's popularity with professional cooks and the american public ,  some writers have criticized child's work . 
child grew up with a cook who served her family . 
the book recounts child's life with her husband ,  paul cushing child ,  in post-world war ii france . 
in 1995, julia child established the julia child foundation for gastronomy and culinary arts ,  a private charitable foundation to make grants to further her life's work . 
child starred in four more series in the 1990s that featured guest chefs: `` cooking with master chefs '' ,  `` in julia's kitchen with master chefs '' ,  `` baking with julia '' ,  and `` julia child & jacques pépin cooking at home '' . 
the julia child rose ,  known in the uk as the `` absolutely fabulous '' rose ,  is a golden butter/gold floribunda rose named after child . 
child's fourth book ,  `` from julia child's kitchen , ``  was illustrated with her husband's photographs and documented the color series of `` the french chef , ``  as well as provided an extensive library of kitchen notes compiled by child during the course of the show . 
all of child's books during this time stemmed from the television series of the same names . 
child's second book ,  `` the french chef cookbook , ``  was a collection of the recipes she had demonstrated on the show . 
julia child summed up beard's personal life: beard was the quintessential american cook . 
james andrews beard was born in portland ,  oregon ,  in 1903 to elizabeth and john beard . 
in 1986, the james beard foundation was established in beard's honor to provide scholarships to aspiring food professionals and champion the american culinary tradition which beard helped create . 
the annual james beard foundation awards celebrate fine cuisine around beard's birthday . 
after training as a singer and actor ,  beard moved to new york city in 1937.
beard briefly attended reed college in portland ,  oregon . 
the james beard papers are housed in the fales library at new york university . 
in 1972, mcpherson was awarded a guggenheim fellowship . 
at the time of his death ,  mcpherson was a professor emeritus of fiction at the iowa writers' workshop . 
james alan mcpherson  -lrb-  september 16, 1943 – july 27, 2016 -rrb- was an american essayist and short-story writer . 
mcpherson was born in savannah ,  georgia ,  on september 16, 1943, the second of four children . 
while at harvard ,  mcpherson studied fiction writing with alan lebowitz in 1967 and worked on his stories when he found some spare time . 
mcpherson died in hospice on july 27, 2016, in iowa city ,  iowa ,  due to complications of pneumonia . 
in 1898, a short stay in germany inspired `` three men on the bummel '' ,  the sequel to `` three men in a boat '' ,  reintroducing the same characters in the setting of a foreign bicycle tour . 
jerome sat down to write `` three men in a boat '' as soon as the couple returned from their honeymoon . 
jerome klapka jerome  -lrb-  2 may 1859 – 14 june 1927 -rrb- was an english writer and humorist ,  best known for the comic travelogue `` three men in a boat ''  -lrb-  1889 -rrb- . 
other works include the essay collections `` idle thoughts of an idle fellow ''  -lrb-  1886 -rrb- and `` second thoughts of an idle fellow ''; `` three men on the bummel '' ,  a sequel to `` three men in a boat '' ,  and several other novels . 
the honeymoon took place on the thames `` in a little boat , ``  a fact that was to have a significant influence on his next and most important work ,  `` three men in a boat '' . 
he learned english as a child from a dutch family in nagasaki and so always spoke english with a dutch accent . 
neusner wrote a number of works exploring the relationship of judaism to other religions . 
neusner's research centered on rabbinic judaism of the mishnaic and talmudic eras . 
neusner composed numerous textbooks and general trade books on judaism . 
neusner's enterprise was aimed at a humanistic and academic reading of classics of judaism . 
neusner was born in hartford ,  connecticut to reform jewish parents . 
in 1994, neusner began teaching at bard college ,  working there until 2014.
neusner studied farsi and middle persian to do so . 
jacob neusner  -lrb-  july 28, 1932 – october 8, 2016 -rrb- was an american academic scholar of judaism . 
neusner saw judaism as `` not particular but exemplary ,  and jews not as special but  -lrb-  merely  -rrb-  interesting . `` 
a patron of learning ,  joachim nestor established the viadrina university of frankfurt  -lrb-  oder  -rrb-  in 1506.
the neighbouring electorate of saxony also bid for the see of mainz ,  but failed to secure it . 
in the course of hohenzollern power politics joachim nestor and his brother managed to get the latter ,  albert of mainz ,  first onto the sees of magdeburg and then its suffragan of halberstadt ,  both prince-bishoprics also comprising princely territories . 
joachim i nestor  -lrb-  21 february 1484 – 11 july 1535 -rrb- was a prince-elector of the margraviate of brandenburg  -lrb-  1499–1535 -rrb- ,  the fifth member of the house of hohenzollern . 
john keats  -lrb-  ; 31 october 1795 – 23 february 1821 -rrb- was an english romantic poet . 
it would come to be recognised as one of the most important poetic works ever published . 
in october 1816, clarke introduced keats to the influential leigh hunt ,  a close friend of byron and shelley . 
he composed five of his six great odes at wentworth place in april and may and ,  although it is debated in which order they were written ,  `` ode to psyche '' opened the published series . 
john keats moved to the newly built wentworth place ,  owned by his friend charles armitage brown . 
in spite of the bad reviews of `` poems '' ,  hunt published the essay `` three young poets ''  -lrb-  shelley ,  keats ,  and reynolds  -rrb-  and the sonnet `` on first looking into chapman's homer , ``  foreseeing great things to come . 
 ''ode on a grecian urn '' and `` ode on melancholy '' were inspired by sonnet forms and probably written after `` ode to a nightingale '' . 
some of the most acclaimed works of keats are `` ode to a nightingale '' ,  `` sleep and poetry '' ,  and the famous sonnet `` on first looking into chapman's homer '' . 
elderly jews were being harassed and mugged ,  storeowners were held up and jewish teachers were assaulted while jewish synagogues were defaced and jewish cemeteries desecrated . 
after discussing the matter with a few congregants ,  kahane put out an ad in the jewish press on may 24, 1968, which read: `` we are talking of jewish survival ! 
the first jewish defense league demonstration took place august 5, 1968, at new york university with some 15 members chanting: `` no nazis at nyu ,  jewish rights are precious too . `` 
the jewish defense league  -lrb-  jdl  -rrb-  is a jewish far-right religious-political organization in the united states ,  whose stated goal is to `` protect jews from antisemitism by whatever means necessary '' . 
jpl was early to employ female mathematicians . 
founded in the 1930s ,  the jpl is currently owned by nasa and managed by the nearby california institute of technology  -lrb-  caltech  -rrb-  for nasa . 
jpl was transferred to nasa in december 1958, becoming the agency's primary planetary spacecraft center . 
jpl is a federally funded research and development center  -lrb-  ffrdc  -rrb-  managed and operated by caltech under a contract from nasa . 
jpl also works with the department of homeland security science and technology directorate  -lrb-  dhsstd  -rrb-  . 
starting from 2016, jpl replaced the annual open house with `` ticket to explore jpl '' ,  which features the same exhibits but requires tickets and advance reservation . 
it is also responsible for operating nasa's deep space network . 
the jpl's space flight operations facility and twenty-five-foot space simulator are designated national historic landmarks . 
in august 2013, jpl was named one of `` the 10 most awesome college labs of 2013 '' by popular science ,  which noted that about 100 students who intern at the laboratory are considered for permanent jobs at jpl after they graduate . 
in 2005 lifeson said that he had not seen rutsey since around 1990.
the band's name `` rush '' was suggested by rutsey's brother ,  bill ,  during a band meeting in rutsey's basement . 
in 1963, rutsey met lifeson ,  while attending st .  paschals school . 
after rutsey's death ,  lee and lifeson released this statement: `` our memories of the early years of rush when john was in the band are very fond to us . 
lee and lifeson have each acknowledged that during the writing and recording sessions for the band's debut album ,  rutsey was given the role of chief lyricist . 
lindh accepted this offer . 
after being detained ,  lindh first said that he was irish . 
in 1997, at the age of 16, lindh formally converted to islam . 
pelton repeatedly asked lindh if he wanted to call his parents or have the journalist do so ,  but lindh declined . 
lindh was born in washington ,  d . c .  ,  to marilyn walker and frank r .  lindh ,  as the middle of three children in the family . 
frank lindh said he and marilyn had been in effect separated since 1997.
northern alliance soldiers bound lindh's elbows behind his back . 
some activists and academics have called for lindh to eventually tell his story . 
lindh returned to yemen in february 2000 and left for pakistan to study at a `` madrassa '' . 
during the initial questioning ,  lindh was not advised of his rights and his request for a lawyer was denied . 
on february 5, 2002, lindh was indicted by a federal grand jury on ten charges:
other jet streams also exist . 
the term `` jet stream '' in these contexts thus usually implies the northern polar jet stream . 
the strongest jet streams are the polar jets ,  at above sea level ,  and the higher altitude and somewhat weaker subtropical jets at  . 
jet streams can split into two when they encounter an upper-level low ,  that diverts a portion of the jet stream under its base ,  while the remainder of the jet moves by to its north . 
the location of the jet stream is extremely important for aviation . 
the jet stream moves from west to east bringing changes of weather . 
meteorologists use the location of some of the jet streams as an aid in weather forecasting . 
associated with jet streams is a phenomenon known as clear-air turbulence  -lrb-  cat  -rrb-  ,  caused by vertical and horizontal wind shear caused by jet streams . 
polar jet streams are typically located near the 250 hpa  -lrb-  about 1/4 atmosphere  -rrb-  pressure level ,  or above sea level ,  while the weaker subtropical jet streams are much higher ,  between  . 
the polar jet stream forms near the interface of the polar and ferrel circulation cells; the subtropical jet forms near the boundary of the ferrel and hadley circulation cells . 
scientists are investigating ways to harness the wind energy within the jet stream . 
jet streams are typically continuous over long distances ,  but discontinuities are common . 
there are wind maxima at lower levels of the atmosphere that are also referred to as jets . 
on earth ,  the northern polar jet stream is the most important one for aviation and weather forecasting ,  as it is much stronger and at a much lower altitude than the subtropical jet streams and also covers many countries in the northern hemisphere ,  while the southern polar jet stream mostly circles antarctica and sometimes the southern tip of south america . 
while ashcroft was in office:
ashcroft has been a proponent of the war on drugs . 
in may 2005, ashcroft laid the groundwork for a strategic consulting firm ,  the ashcroft group ,  llc . 
ashcroft went to local schools in springfield . 
ashcroft is a member of the assemblies of god church . 
following these developments ,  ashcroft resumed campaigning . 
ashcroft also held daily prayer meetings . 
the firm also has a law firm under its umbrella ,  called the ashcroft law firm . 
he had argued that ashcroft ,  who is not an accountant ,  was not qualified to be the state auditor . 
in 1980, ashcroft was re-elected with 64.5 percent of the vote ,  winning 96 of missouri's 114 counties . 
ashcroft was born in chicago ,  illinois ,  the son of grace p .   -lrb-  née larsen  -rrb-  and james robert ashcroft . 
in the republican primary ,  ashcroft defeated marc perkel . 
ashcroft had long enjoyed inspirational music and singing . 
 -lrb-  in 2001, thomas administered ashcroft's oath of office as u . s .  attorney general .   -rrb- 
in 1994 ashcroft was elected to the u . s .  senate from missouri ,  again succeeding john danforth ,  who retired from the position . 
he later founded the ashcroft group ,  a washington d . c .  lobbying firm . 
in the general election ,  ashcroft faced a challenge from governor mel carnahan . 
in 1976, danforth was elected to the u . s .  senate ,  and ashcroft was elected to replace him as state attorney general . 
his son ,  jay ashcroft ,  is also a politician ,  currently serving as secretary of state of missouri . 
during his second term ,  ashcroft served as chairman of the national governors association  -lrb-  1991–92 -rrb- . 
in march 2006, `` the new york times '' reported that ashcroft had positioned himself as an `` anti-abramoff . `` 
however ,  genesis 10:14 identifies their ancestor as ham rather than japheth . 
japheth first appears in the book of genesis as one of the three sons of noah ,  saved through the ark . 
the link between japheth and the europeans stems from genesis 10:5, which states:
japheth is not mentioned by name in the qur'an but is referred to indirectly in the narrative of noah  -lrb-  7:64, 10:73, 11:40, 23:27, 26:119 -rrb- . 
according to that book ,  japheth and his two brothers formed the three major races:
ham sees noah drunk and naked in his tent and tells his brothers ,  who then cover their father with a cloak while avoiding the sight; when noah awakes he curses canaan ,  the son of ham ,  and blesses shem and japheth: `` blessed be the lord god of shem and may canaan be his slave; and may god enlarge japheth and may he dwell in the tents of shem ,  and may canaan be his slave ! ”  -lrb-  genesis 9:20-27 -rrb- . 
alexander has had an active career on stage ,  appearing in several broadway musicals including `` jerome robbins' broadway '' in 1989, for which he won the tony award as best leading actor in a musical . 
jay scott greenspan  -lrb-  born september 23, 1959 -rrb- ,  known by his stage name jason alexander ,  is an american actor ,  voice actor ,  singer ,  comedian ,  and director . 
he is a frequent guest and panelist on: bill maher's `` politically incorrect '' and `` real time '' shows; `` hollywood squares ''; the `` late late show '' ,  with both craig kilborn and craig ferguson; and the `` late show with david letterman '' . 
alexander is best known as one of the key cast members of the award-winning television sitcom `` seinfeld ''  -lrb-  1989–1998 -rrb- ,  in which he played the bumbling-but-lovable george costanza  -lrb-  seinfeld's character's best friend since childhood  -rrb-  . 
broadway's best in los angeles '' ,  where he has directed several musicals . 
alexander is best known for his role as george costanza in the television series `` seinfeld '' . 
alexander made cameo appearances in the second season of `` curb your enthusiasm '' ,  playing himself and appeared in the seventh season of `` curb your enthusiasm '' ,  along with the other three principal `` seinfeld '' cast members . 
he played cosmo ,  one of timmy turner's fairies . 
alexander began his acting career on the new york stage and is an accomplished singer and dancer . 
alexander starred in ``  '' as cosmo . 
there is one universal church ,  and outside of it there is no salvation . 
wycliffe is honoured in the church of england on 31 december ,  and in the anglican church of canada and in the liturgical calendar of the episcopal church  -lrb-  usa  -rrb-  on 30 october . 
in 1374 his name appears second ,  after a bishop ,  on a commission which the english government sent to bruges to discuss with the representatives of gregory xi a number of points in dispute between the king and the pope . 
most of the english clergy were irritated by this encounter ,  and attacks upon wycliffe began . 
he published his great confession upon the subject and also a second writing in english intended for the common people . 
in 1374, he received the crown living of st mary's church ,  lutterworth in leicestershire ,  which he retained until his death . 
this book ,  like those that preceded and followed ,  was concerned with the reform of the church ,  in which the temporal arm was to have an influential part . 
wycliffe was 64 years old . 
on 17 november 1382, wycliffe was summoned before a synod at oxford . 
theologically ,  his preaching expressed a strong belief in predestination that enabled him to declare an `` invisible church of the elect '' ,  made up of those predestined to be saved ,  rather than in the `` visible '' catholic church . 
this view cost him the support of john of gaunt and many others . 
even in wycliffe's time the `` lollards '' had reached wide circles in england and preached `` god's law ,  without which no one could be justified . `` 
before any further steps could be taken at rome ,  gregory xi died in 1378.
the first `` heresy '' which `` he cast forth into the world '' rests as much upon philosophical as upon theological grounds . 
he argued that criminals who had taken sanctuary in churches might lawfully be dragged out of sanctuary . 
wycliffe would have been at oxford during the st scholastica day riot in which sixty-three students and a number of townspeople were killed . 
as long as wycliffe limited his attacks to abuses and the wealth of the church ,  he could rely on the support of part of the clergy and aristocracy ,  but once he dismissed the traditional doctrine of transubstantiation ,  his theses could not be defended any more . 
the attacks on pope gregory xi grow ever more extreme . 
the incident was typical of the ongoing rivalry between monks and secular clergy at oxford at this time . 
many of the japhs below are his . 
just another perl hacker ,  or japh ,  typically refers to a perl program which prints `` just another perl hacker , ``   -lrb-  the comma is canonical but is occasionally omitted  -rrb-  . 
orton was born at causeway lane maternity hospital ,  leicester ,  to william a .  orton and elsie m .  orton  -lrb-  nėe bentley  -rrb-  . 
john kingsley orton  -lrb-  1 january 1933 – 9 august 1967 -rrb- ,  known under the pen name of joe orton ,  was an english playwright ,  author and diarist . 
confident of their `` specialness , ``  orton and halliwell refused to work for long periods . 
orton and halliwell felt that that sentence was unduly harsh `` because we were queers '' . 
more than 30 years later ,  jaynes's book is still in print . 
julian jaynes  -lrb-  february 27, 1920 – november 21, 1997 -rrb- was an american psychologist ,  best known for his book `` the origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  in which he argued that ancient peoples were not conscious . 
jaynes's theory has been cited in thousands of both scientific and popular books and articles . 
 ''the origin of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind '' was a successful work of popular science ,  selling out the first print run before a second could replace it . 
the selection pressure for jaynesian consciousness as a means for cognitive control is due ,  in part ,  to chaotic social disorganizations and the development of new methods of behavioral control such as writing . `` 
she is prominent in structuralist and poststructuralist thought . 
the difference between the pythagorean major third and the 5-limit major third – sometimes referred to as the ptolemaic major third – is known as the syntonic comma and has the ratio of 81:80  -lrb-  21.51 cents  -rrb-  . 
in pythagorean tuning ,  the most consonant intervals are the perfect fifth and its inversion ,  the perfect fourth . 
for example ,  the major third has three standard tunings in 7-limit just intonation – 9:7  -lrb-  435.08 cents  -rrb-  ,  81:64  -lrb-  407.82 cents  -rrb-  ,  and 5:4  -lrb-  386.31 cents  -rrb-  . 
5-limit diatonic major scale on c  -lrb-  ptolemy's intense diatonic scale  -rrb- : for a justly tuned melodic minor scale ,  the mediant is tuned 6:5 and the submediant is tuned 8:5.
he outlines jewish history beginning with the creation ,  as passed down through jewish historical tradition . 
he initially fought against the romans during the first jewish–roman war as head of jewish forces in galilee ,  until surrendering in 67 ce to roman forces led by vespasian after the six-week siege of jotapata . 
his first work in rome was an account of the jewish war ,  addressed to certain `` upper barbarians ''—usually thought to be the jewish community in mesopotamia—in his `` paternal tongue ''  -lrb-  `` war '' i . 3 -rrb- ,  arguably the western aramaic language . 
josephus recorded jewish history ,  with special emphasis on the first century ce and the first jewish–roman war  -lrb-  66-70 ce  -rrb-  ,  including the siege of masada . 
the works of josephus are major sources of our understanding of jewish life and history during the first century . 
vespasian arranged for josephus to marry a captured jewish woman ,  whom he later divorced . 
in terms of some of his sources for the project ,  josephus says that he drew from and `` interpreted out of the hebrew scriptures '' and that he was an eyewitness to the wars between the jews and the romans ,  which were earlier recounted in `` jewish wars '' . 
flavius josephus fully defected to the roman side and was granted roman citizenship . 
after the jewish garrison of yodfat fell under siege ,  the romans invaded ,  killing thousands; the survivors committed suicide . 
in the preface to `` jewish wars '' ,  josephus criticizes historians who misrepresent the events of the jewish–roman war ,  writing that `` they have a mind to demonstrate the greatness of the romans ,  while they still diminish and lessen the actions of the jews . `` 
born into one of jerusalem's elite families ,  josephus introduces himself in greek as '' iōsēpos ''  -lrb-  ιώσηπος  -rrb-  ,  son of matthias ,  an ethnic jewish priest . 
in his early twenties ,  he traveled to negotiate with emperor nero for the release of 12 jewish priests . 
the film version of blume's 1981 novel `` tiger eyes '' was directed by the author's son ,  lawrence blume . 
blume's books have sold over 82 million copies and they've been translated into 32 languages . 
several of blume's books appear on the list of top all-time bestselling children's books . 
judy blume  -lrb-  born judith sussman; february 12, 1938 -rrb- is an american writer of children's and young adult  -lrb-  ya  -rrb-  fiction . 
despite her critics ,  blume's books have sold over 82 million copies and they've been translated into 32 languages . 
on august 15, 1959, in the summer of her senior year of college ,  she married john m .  blume ,  whom she had met while a student at new york university . 
former posts include principal oboe with the new york city ballet ,  the american ballet theatre ,  the bolshoi ballet ,  the royal ballet ,  the royal swedish ballet ,  and the royal danish ballet . 
marangella has served as principal oboist for numerous ballet orchestras throughout his career . 
pople was born in burnham-on-sea ,  somerset ,  and attended the bristol grammar school . 
liberty christian academy  -lrb-  lca ,  founded as lynchburg christian academy  -rrb-  is a christian school in lynchburg which was described in 1966 by the `` lynchburg news '' as `` a private school for white students . `` 
the lynchburg christian academy later opened in 1967 by falwell as a segregation academy and as a ministry of thomas road baptist church . 
he founded lynchburg christian academy  -lrb-  now liberty christian academy  -rrb-  in 1967 and liberty university in 1971 and co-founded the moral majority in 1979.
in 1956, aged 22, falwell founded the thomas road baptist church . 
the liberty christian academy is today recognized as an educational facility by the commonwealth of virginia through the virginia state board of education ,  southern association of colleges and schools ,  and the association of christian schools international . 
 ''in some states it's easier to open a massage parlor than to open a christian school '' ,  falwell complained . 
he graduated from brookville high school in lynchburg ,  and from the then-unaccredited baptist bible college in springfield ,  missouri in 1956.
leno is dyslexic . 
since 2014, leno has hosted `` jay leno's garage '' . 
 ''the tonight show '' at 12:05 simply isn't `` the tonight show . ``  ''
jay leno's new show ,  titled `` the jay leno show '' ,  debuted on september 14, 2009.
leno sang the `` tonight '''s parody of `` tonight show '' with fallon . 
after `` the jay leno show '' was canceled in january 2010 amid a host controversy ,  leno returned to host `` the tonight show with jay leno '' on march 1, 2010.
leno has claimed that he has not spent any of the money that he earned from `` the tonight show '' . 
in 2004, leno signed a contract extension with nbc which would keep him as host of `` the tonight show '' until 2009.
starting in 1986, leno was a regular substitute host for johnny carson on `` the tonight show '' . 
leno returned as host of `` the tonight show '' following the 2010 winter olympics on march 1, 2010.
leno continued to perform as a stand-up comedian throughout his tenure on `` the tonight show '' . 
leno left `` the tonight show '' on friday ,  may 29, 2009, and conan o'brien took over on june 1, 2009.
 ''late night '' host conan o'brien was his successor on `` the tonight show '' . 
beginning in september 2009, leno started a primetime talk show ,  titled `` the jay leno show '' ,  which aired weeknights at 10:00pm et ,  also on nbc . 
leno made his first appearance on `` the tonight show '' on march 2, 1977, performing a comedy routine . 
later in 2004, conan o'brien signed a contract with nbc under which o'brien would become the host of `` the tonight show '' in 2009, replacing leno at that time . 
a major earthquake had occurred in israel c .  760 bc ,  which may have been during the time of jeroboam ii ,  towards the end of his rule . 
william f .  albright has dated his reign to 786–746 bc ,  while e .  r .  thiele says he was coregent with jehoash 793 to 782 bc and sole ruler 782 to 753 bc . 
in all other passages it is jeroboam i ,  the son of nebat that is meant . 
jeroboam ii  -lrb-   `` yarov‘am ''; ;   -rrb-  was the son and successor of jehoash  -lrb-  alternatively spelled joash  -rrb-  and the thirteenth king of the ancient kingdom of israel ,  over which he ruled for forty-one years in the eighth century bc . 
the epicenter of this earthquake may have been 200–300 km north of present-day israel . 
world war i songs include `` joan of arc ,  they are calling you '' ,  and `` joan of arc's answer song '' . 
joan was imprisoned by the burgundians at beaurevoir castle . 
joan of arc gained favor in the court of king charles vii ,  who accepted her as sane . 
joan referred the court to the poitiers inquiry when questioned on the matter . 
the english moved joan to the city of rouen ,  which served as their main headquarters in france . 
the duke of alençon accepted joan's advice concerning strategy . 
boyd described joan's trial as so `` unfair '' that the trial transcripts were later used as evidence for canonizing her in the 20th century . 
joan's first meeting with charles took place at the royal court at chinon in 1429, when she was aged 17 and he 26.
at chinon and poitiers ,  joan had declared that she would provide a sign at orléans . 
at her trial ,  joan stated that she was about 19 years old ,  which implies she thought she was born around 1412.
the standard accounts of the life of joan of arc have been challenged by revisionist authors . 
on 23 may 1430, she was captured at compiègne by the burgundian faction ,  a group of french nobles allied with the english . 
joan of arc became a symbol of the catholic league during the 16th century . 
joan of arc became a semi-legendary figure for the four centuries after her death . 
joan of arc's religious visions have remained an ongoing topic of interest . 
the french king at the time of joan's birth ,  charles vi ,  suffered from bouts of <nowiki>insanity</nowiki> and was often unable to rule . 
joan of arc is one of the nine secondary patron saints of france ,  along with saint denis ,  saint martin of tours ,  saint louis ,  saint michael ,  saint rémi ,  saint petronilla ,  saint radegund and saint thérèse of lisieux . 
the french civic  ,  set in 1920, is the second sunday of may . 
upon joan's arrival at chinon the royal counselor jacques gélu cautioned , 
the ring was reportedly first passed to cardinal henry beaufort ,  who attended joan's trial and execution in 1431.
kelly devries argues that joan of arc's aggressive use of artillery and frontal assaults influenced french tactics for the rest of the war . 
claims include: that joan of arc was not actually burned at the stake; that she was secretly the half sister of king charles vii; that she was not a true christian but a member of a pagan cult; and that most of the story of joan of arc is actually a myth . 
