the intendencies took the new name of `` states '' . 
because the country was effectively controlled by american fruit corporations ,  it was the original inspiration for the term `` banana republic '' . 
by request of parliament ,  the president of the regency agustín de iturbide was proclaimed emperor of new spain but the parliament also decided to rename new spain to mexico . 
through these two railroad companies ,  united fruit dominated the banana trade in honduras . 
a new constitution was approved in 1982 and the plh government of roberto suazo assumed power . 
in 1823, a revolution in mexico ousted emperor agustín de iturbide ,  and a new mexican congress voted to allow the central american intendencies to decide their own fate . 
in 1537 francisco de montejo was appointed governor . 
restoring central american unity remained the officially stated chief aim of honduran foreign policy until after world war i . 
american elites noticed: it was in their interests to contain zelaya ,  protect the region of the new panama canal ,  and defend the increasingly important banana trade . 
labor troubles in the banana trade however were far from over . 
under the bourbons ,  the spanish government made several efforts to regain control of the caribbean coast . 
bonilla proved to be an even better friend to the banana companies than sierra . 
by the end of 1909, an agreement had been reached providing for a reduction in the debt and the issuance of new 5% bonds: the bankers would control the honduran railroad ,  and the united states government would guarantee continued honduran independence and would take control of custom revenue . 
after the declaration of independence it was the intention of the new spain parliament to establish a commonwealth whereby the king of spain ,  ferdinand vii ,  would also be emperor of new spain ,  and in which both countries were to be governed by separate laws and with their own legislative offices . 
in the decades of 1840 and 1850 honduras participated in several failed attempts to restore central american unity ,  such as the confederation of central america  -lrb-  1842–1845 -rrb- ,  the covenant of guatemala  -lrb-  1842 -rrb- ,  the diet of sonsonate  -lrb-   1846 -rrb- ,  the diet of nacaome  -lrb-  1847 -rrb- and national representation in central america  -lrb-  1849–1852 -rrb- . 
ferdinand vii ,  did not recognize the independence and said that spain would not allow any other european prince to take the throne of new spain . 
an injunction against holding the referendum was issued by the honduran supreme court . 
the result was an enclave economy centered on the settlements and activities of the three major companies ,  cuyamel fruit company ,  standard fruit and particularly united fruit after it absorbed cuyamel in 1930.
bertrand ,  in turn ,  sought support from el salvador . 
the connection between the wealth of the banana trade and the influence of outsiders ,  particularly north americans ,  led o .  henry ,  the american writer who took temporary refuge in honduras in 1896–97, to coin the term `` banana republic '' to describe a fictional nation he modeled on honduras . 
the two companies' wealth and powerful connections allowed them to gain extraordinary influence in the honduran government . 
through a peace settlement arranged by the us chargé d'affaires in tegucigalpa ,  bonilla stepped down and the war with nicaragua came to an end . 
on 16 november 1932, carías took office ,  beginning what was to be the longest period of continuous time in power by any individual in honduran history . 
on 27 november 2005 the plh candidate manuel zelaya beat the pnh candidate and current head of congress porfirio `` pepe '' lobo ,  and became the new president on 27 january 2006.
in 1850, honduras attempted to build ,  with foreign assistance ,  an inter-oceanic railroad from trujillo to tegucigalpa and then on to the pacific coast . 
even more surprising was carías's public acceptance of defeat and his urging of his supporters to accept the new government . 
in 1549, the capital was moved to antigua ,  guatemala ,  and honduras and remained a new province within the captaincy general of guatemala until 1821.
in the early 19th century ,  napoleon's occupation of spain led to the outbreak of revolts all across spanish america . 
in 1899, vaccaro brothers and company  -lrb-  later known as standard fruit  -rrb-  , a new orleans-based fruit corporation ,  came to honduras in 1899 to buy coconuts ,  oranges and bananas on roatán . 
the congress saw this as abuse of power and ordered his capture . 
the territory of the mexican empire included the continental intendencies and provinces of new spain proper  -lrb-  including those of the former captaincy general of guatemala  -rrb-   -lrb-  see: history of central america  -rrb-  . 
british colonization was particularly strong in the bay islands ,  and alliances between the british and miskito as well as more local supporters made this an area the spanish could not easily control ,  and a haven for pirates . 
however ,  sierra made efforts to stay in office and refused to step down when a new president was elected in 1902, and was overthrown by manuel bonilla in 1903.
the october 1923 honduran presidential elections and subsequent political and military conflicts provided the first real tests of these new treaty arrangements . 
the uprising near gracias a dios was led by lempira ,  who is honored today by the name of the honduran currency . 
nicaragua's president josé santos zelaya saw this friendship pact as an alliance to counter nicaragua and began to undermine bonilla . 
from 1919 to 1924, the honduran government expended us$7.2 million beyond the amount covered by the regular budgets for military operations . 
during this time ,  honduras also assisted the contra guerillas . 
honduras broke away from the central american federation in october 1838 and became independent and sovereign state . 
revolutionary intrigues also continued throughout the period ,  accompanied by constant rumors that one faction or another was being supported by one of the banana companies . 
other gold deposits were found near san pedro sula and the port of trujillo . 
in the west there are two land borders: with el salvador as and with guatemala as  . 
to the east ,  near the nicaraguan border ,  the caribbean lowlands broaden to an extensive area known as la mosquitia . 
one of the most prominent features of the interior highlands is a depression that runs from the caribbean sea to the gulf of fonseca . 
the larger caribbean lowlands in the north and the pacific lowlands bordering the gulf of fonseca are characterized by alluvial plains . 
the choluteca river runs south from tegucigalpa through choluteca and out at the gulf of fonseca . 
the central part of the caribbean lowlands ,  east of la ceiba ,  is a narrow coastal plain only a few kilometers wide . 
rain falls year round in the caribbean lowlands but is seasonal throughout the rest of the country . 
the interior highlands range from tierra templada to tierra fría . 
farther out in the caribbean are the islas santanillas ,  formerly known as swan islands . 
passing first through comayagua and then through narrow passes south of the city ,  the depression widens again as it runs along the border of el salvador into the gulf of fonseca . 
this area of river valleys and coastal plains ,  which most honduras call `` the north coast , ``  or simply `` the coast , ``  has traditionally been honduras's most exploited region . 
to the east and west of this section the caribbean lowlands widen and in places extend inland a considerable distance along broad river valleys . 
the judiciary includes a supreme court of justice - the supreme court of honduras ,  courts of appeal ,  and several courts of original jurisdiction – such as labor ,  tax ,  and criminal courts . 
a judiciary is appointed by the national congress . 
the judges of the supreme court of justice or corte suprema de justicia ,  are elected for seven-year terms by the national congress . 
the 1993 deficit expanded to 10.6 percent of the gdp . 
sugar has also been an important honduran crop . 
by 1993, 50 to 60 percent of the honduran labor force was estimated to be either underemployed or unemployed . 
construction contributed 6.0 percent to the gdp in 1992.
by 1991-92, beef exports accounted for only 2.9 percent of the value of total exports . 
the country's manufacturing sector was small ,  contributing only 15 percent to the total gdp in 1992.
fuelwood and biomass have traditionally met about 67 percent of the country's total energy demand; petroleum ,  29 percent; and electricity ,  4 percent . 
nontraditional agricultural crops represented 4.8 percent of the value of total exports in 1990, compared to 2.8 percent in 1983.
the honduran financial sector is small in comparison to the banking systems of its neighbors . 
in 1993 only about 9 to 13 percent of the honduran labor force was engaged in the country's tiny manufacturing sector—one of the smallest in central america . 
about one-third of the honduran labor force was estimated to be working in the service or `` other '' sector in 1993.
the honduran government and two banana companies—chiquita brands international and dole food company—owned approximately 60 percent of honduras's cultivable land in 1993.
honduran dairy herds fared about the same as beef cattle ,  and honduran milk yields were also among the lowest in central america . 
total exports of goods and services by honduras in 1992 were us$843 million ,  of which about 52 percent went to the united states . 
the government also pledged to return to peasants land that had been confiscated by the honduran military in 1983.
hondurans working in the u . s .  send more than us$2 billion each year to their families in honduras; these remittances account for 28.2% of honduras's gdp  -lrb-  2007 information
the government of honduras projected that overall tax revenues would increase from 13.2 percent of gdp in 1989 to about 15.7 percent in 1991.
only one of ten honduran workers was securely employed in the formal sector in 1991.
throughout the 1980s ,  the honduran government was heavily financed by foreign assistance . 
the total land area of honduras is 11.2 million hectares ,  of which a scant 1.7 million hectares  -lrb-  about 15 percent  -rrb-  are well suited for agriculture . 
foreign aid between 1985 and 1989 represented about 4.6 percent of the gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  . 
the honduran government nominally began to address inequitable land ownership in the early 1960s . 
honduran electrification is low and uneven relative to other countries in latin america . 
between 1980 and 1983, 20 percent of the work force was unemployed—double the percentage of the late 1970s . 
traditionally ,  honduran economic hopes have been pinned on land and agricultural commodities . 
the current account deficit ,  however ,  continues to rise ,  from us$264 million in 1992 to an estimated us$370 million deficit in 1993.
chiquita brands international and dole food company now account for most honduran banana production and exports . 
as for the informal sector ,  research has shown that evidence of child labor has been observed mostly in the honduran agricultural sector . 
the total public-sector deficit actually grew to 8.6 percent of the gdp ,  or nearly l1 billion ,  in 1991.
nevertheless ,  the honduran economy has always depended almost exclusively on agriculture ,  and in 1992 agriculture was still the largest sector of the economy ,  contributing 28 percent to the gdp . 
a honduran stock exchange was established in august 1990 with transactions confined to trading debt . 
honduran agricultural production overall has tended to be low because the amount of crop yielded by a given amount of land has been low . 
the honduran land reform process under president callejas between 1989 and 1992 was directed primarily at large agricultural landowners . 
mining's contribution to the gdp steadily declined during the 1980s ,  to account for a 2 percent contribution in 1992.
the small honduran firms could not begin to compete with the assembly industry for labor because of the maquiladoras' relatively high wage scale of close to us$4 per day . 
food processing consumed about 50 percent of industrial sector energy ,  followed by petroleum and chemical manufacturing . 
honduran governments have set minimum wages since 1974, but enforcement has generally been lax . 
membership in the honduran association of small and medium industry  -lrb-  asociación hondureña de empresas pequeñas y medianas  -rrb-  declined by 70 percent by 1991, compared to pre-maquiladora days ,  foreshadowing the likely demise of most of the small shops . 
another major blow to honduran agriculture came from hurricane mitch and its aftermath in 1998 and 1999.
although honduran banana production is dominated by multinational giants ,  such is not the case with coffee ,  which is grown by about 55,000 mostly small producers . 
in 1993 honduras had three major labor confederations: the confederation of honduran workers  -lrb-  confederación de trabajadores de honduras—cth  -rrb-  ,  claiming a membership of about 160,000 workers; the general workers central  -lrb-  central general de trabajadores—cgt  -rrb-  ,  claiming to represent 120,000 members; and the unitary confederation of honduran workers  -lrb-  confederación unitaria de trabajadores de honduras—cuth  -rrb-  ,  a new confederation formed in may 1992, with an estimated membership of about 30,000.
these `` golden '' exports were supported by more than us$40 million of specialized banana company investment in the honduran infrastructure and were safeguarded by united states pressure on the national government when the companies felt threatened . 
in the agricultural sector  -lrb-  which in 1993 still accounted for approximately 60 percent of the labor force  -rrb-  ,  unemployment has been estimated to be far worse than the figures for the total labor force . 
in the early 1980s ,  the cattle industry appeared to have the potential to be an important part of the honduran economy . 
in 1993 average annual per capita income remained depressingly low at about us$580, and 75 percent of the population was poor by internationally defined standards . 
the first radio station in honduras was tropical radio ,  which started operations in 1928.
all major media have an internet presence . 
the first tv station in honduras was canal 5, which started operations in 1959.
the armed forces of honduras  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  consists of the honduran army ,  honduran navy and honduran air force . 
the military's chief lawyer ,  colonel herberth bayardo inestroza membreño ,  made public statements regarding the removal of zelaya . 
the resolution of the civil wars in el salvador and nicaragua ,  and across-the-board budget cuts made in all ministries ,  has brought reduced funding for the honduran armed forces . 
during the twentieth century ,  honduran military leaders frequently became presidents ,  either through elections or by coups d'état . 
honduras is a member of the united nations ,  the world trade organization  -lrb-  wto  -rrb-  ,  the central american parliament  -lrb-  parlacen  -rrb-  ,  the central american integration system  -lrb-  sica  -rrb-  ,  and the central american security commission  -lrb-  casq  -rrb-  . 
president flores consulted frequently with the other central american presidents on issues of mutual interest . 
hong kong was transferred to china on 1 july 1997, after 156 years of british rule . 
hong kong became a colony of the british empire after qing china ceded hong kong island at the end of the first opium war in 1842.
hong kong  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the hong kong special administrative region of the people's republic of china ,  is a special administrative region on the eastern side of the pearl river estuary in southern china . 
immediately after the transfer ,  hong kong was severely affected by several crises . 
with over 7.4 million people of various nationalities in a territory ,  hong kong is the world's fourth-most-densely-populated region . 
the simplified name `` hong kong '' was frequently used by 1810, also written as a single word . 
a significant amount of land in hong kong ,  especially on the hong kong island and the kowloon peninsula ,  is reclaimed . 
hong kong has 263 islands over 500 m ,  including hong kong island ,  lantau island ,  cheung chau ,  lamma island ,  peng chau and tsing yi island . 
the geography of hong kong primarily consists of three main territories: hong kong island ,  kowloon peninsula ,  and the new territories . 
the kowloon peninsula to the south of boundary street and the new territories to the north of hong kong island were added to colonial hong kong in 1860 and 1898 respectively . 
hong kong recorded 8.2 births per 1,000 people in 2005–2010.
for hakka and hoklo ,  they have both indigenous and non-indigenous people in hong kong . 
the following census data is available for hong kong between the years 1841–2011.
see british nationality law and hong kong for details . 
hong kong residents who were born in hong kong in the british-administered era could acquire the british dependent territories citizenship . 
after reunification ,  all prc citizens with the right of abode in hong kong  -lrb-  holding hong kong permanent identity cards  -rrb-  are eligible to apply for the hksar passport issued by the hong kong immigration department . 
hong kong issues the hksar passport through its immigration department to all prc citizens who are permanent residents of hong kong fitting the right of abode rule . 
british national  -lrb-  overseas  -rrb-  status was given effect by the hong kong  -lrb-  british nationality  -rrb-  order 1986.
the united kingdom made provision to grant citizenship to 50,000 families whose presence was important to the future of hong kong under the british nationality act  -lrb-  hong kong  -rrb-  1990.
all people of chinese descent ,  who were born in hong kong on or before 30 june 1997, had access to only british nationality . 
while hong kong retains the common law system ,  the standing committee of the national people's congress of china has the power of final interpretation of national laws affecting hong kong ,  including the basic law ,  and its opinions are therefore binding on hong kong courts on a prospective basis . 
hong kong residents who were not born in hong kong  -lrb-  and had not naturalised as a bdtc  -rrb-  could only apply for the certificate of identity  -lrb-  ci  -rrb-  from the colonial government as travel document . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated hong kong as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
the npcsc interpretation and decision were regarded as obstacles to the democratic development of hong kong by the democratic camp ,  and were criticised for lack of consultation with hong kong residents . 
for instance ,  the international olympic committee recognises hong kong as a participating dependency under the name ,  `` hong kong ,  china '' ,  separate from the delegation from the people's republic of china . 
on 1 july 1997, sovereignty of hong kong was transferred to china  -lrb-  prc  -rrb-  ,  ending over one and a half centuries of british rule . 
naturalisation as a prc citizen is common among ethnic chinese people in hong kong who are not prc citizens . 
the politics of hong kong takes place in a framework of a political system dominated by its quasi-constitutional document ,  the hong kong basic law ,  its own legislature ,  the chief executive as the head of government and of the special administrative region and of a multi-party system . 
born in mainland china or macau  -rrb-  and are permanent residents of hong kong are now eligible for the hksar passports ,  making the hksar passports more popular . 
before and after the handover ,  the people's republic of china has recognised ethnic chinese people in hong kong as its citizens . 
therefore ,  citizenships rights enjoyed by residents of mainland china and residents hong kong are differentiated even though both hold the same citizenship . 
on 29 january 1999, the court of final appeal ,  the highest judicial authority in hong kong interpreted several articles of the basic law ,  in such a way that the government estimated would allow 1.6 million mainland china immigrants to enter hong kong within ten years . 
in 2013, hong kong was the third largest recipient of fdi in the world . 
prices and wages in hong kong are relatively flexible ,  depending on the performance and stability of the economy of hong kong . 
hong kong's gross domestic product has grown 180 times between 1961 and 1997.
the hong kong stock exchange is the sixth largest in the world ,  with a market capitalisation of about us$3.732 trillion . 
hong kong is the only economy to have scored 90 points or above on the 100-point scale ,  achieved in 2014 and 2018.
the hong kong stock exchange is the sixth largest in the world ,  with a market capitalisation of about us$3.732 trillion as of mid-2017.
hong kong's terrestrial commercial tv networks can also be seen in macau ,  via cable . 
there are a total of nine terrestrial television channels in hong kong ,  owned by three television networks ,  one of which is a public broadcaster . 
communications in hong kong includes a wide-ranging and sophisticated network of radio ,  television ,  telephone ,  internet ,  and related online services ,  reflecting hong kong's thriving commerce and international importance . 
hong kong has an extensive railway network ,  and the hong kong government has long established that the public transit system has `` railway as its backbone '' . 
hong kong has a highly developed and sophisticated transport network ,  encompassing both public and private transport . 
the peak tram connects central ,  hong kong's central business district ,  with victoria peak . 
the royal hong kong regiment  -lrb-  the volunteers  -rrb-  was disbanded in 1995 prior to the handover in 1997.
hong kong is a special administrative region of china ,  and formerly a british crown colony . 
hong kong was under british rule before 1 july 1997.
hong kong has its own immigration policy and administration . 
many foreign dignitaries visit hong kong each year . 
when hong kong was under british rule ,  most commonwealth member states ,  unlike other countries ,  were represented in hong kong by commissions . 
most countries maintain consulates-general or consulates in hong kong . 
guano islands act of 1856.
guano islands act of 1856.
howland island was uninhabited when the united states took possession of it under the guano islands act of 1856.
similar colonization projects were started on nearby baker island ,  jarvis island and two other islands . 
the american guano company established claims in respect to baker island and jarvis island which was recognised under the u . s . 
since howland island is uninhabited ,  no time zone is specified . 
howland island national wildlife refuge consists of the entire island and the surrounding of submerged land . 
howland island  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an uninhabited coral island located just north of the equator in the central pacific ocean ,  about southwest of honolulu . 
public entry to the island is only by special use permit from the u . s . 
in 1935, colonists from the american equatorial islands colonization project arrived on the island to establish a permanent u . s .  presence in the central pacific . 
john t .  arundel and company ,  a british firm using laborers from the cook islands and niue ,  occupied the island from 1886 to 1891.
the hungarian word is `` bor '' . 
the most important agricultural zones are the little hungarian plain  -lrb-  it has the highest quality fertile soil in average  -rrb-  ,  transdanubia ,  and the great hungarian plain . 
the north hungarian mountains lie north of budapest and run in a northeasterly direction south of the border with slovakia . 
19% of the country is covered by forests .  these are mainly mountainous areas ,  such as the north hungarian and the transdanubian mountains ,  and the alpokalja . 
poppy seed is part of the traditional hungarian cuisine . 
mecsek is the southernmost hungarian mountain range ,  located north from pécs - its highest point is the zengő with 682 metres . 
the little alföld or little hungarian plain is a plain  -lrb-  tectonic basin  -rrb-  of approximately 8,000 km in northwestern hungary ,  southwestern slovakia and eastern austria ,  along the lower course of the rába river ,  with high quality fertile soils . 
hungary has three major geographic regions  -lrb-  which are subdivided to seven smaller ones  -rrb- : the great alföld ,  lying east of the danube river; the transdanubia ,  a hilly region lying west of the danube and extending to the austrian foothills of the alps; and the north hungarian mountains ,  which is a mountainous and hilly country beyond the northern boundary of the great hungarian plain . 
the great alföld contains the basin of the tisza river and its branches . 
the total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman . 
major territorial changes made hungary ethnically homogeneous after world war i .  nowadays ,  more than nine-tenths of the population is ethnically hungarian and speaks hungarian as the mother tongue . 
the president of the supreme court of hungary and the hungarian civil and penal legal system he leads is fully independent of the executive branch . 
members are elected for a term of twelve years . 
the central bank ,  the hungarian national bank was fully self-governing between 1990–2004, but new legislation gave certain appointment rights to the executive branch in november 2004 which is disputed before the constitutional court . 
the prime minister is the head of government of a pluriform multi-party system ,  while the president is the head of state and holds a largely ceremonial position . 
hungary is a member of the abeda ,  australia group ,  bis ,  ce ,  cei ,  cern ,  cepi eapc ,  ebrd ,  ece ,  eu  -lrb-  member ,  as by 1 may 2004 -rrb- ,  fao ,  g-9, iaea ,  ibrd ,  icao ,  icc ,  icrm ,  ida ,  iea ,  ifc ,  ifrcs ,  ilo ,  imf ,  imo ,  inmarsat ,  intelsat ,  interpol ,  ioc ,  iom ,  iso ,  itu ,  ituc ,  nam  -lrb-  guest  -rrb-  ,  nato ,  nea ,  nsg ,  oas  -lrb-  observer  -rrb-  ,  oecd ,  opcw ,  osce ,  pca ,  pfp ,  seci ,  un ,  unctad ,  unesco ,  unficyp ,  unhcr ,  unido ,  unikom ,  unmibh ,  unmik ,  unomig ,  unu ,  upu ,  wco ,  weu  -lrb-  associate  -rrb-  ,  wftu ,  visegrád group ,  who ,  wipo ,  wmo ,  wtoo ,  wtro ,  and the zangger committee . 
in 2006, the hungarian railroad system was 7685 km long ,  2791 km of it electrified . 
with the stabilization of the new market economy ,  hungary has experienced growth in foreign investment with a `` cumulative foreign direct investment totaling more than $60 billion since 1989. ''
hungary's total land area is 93,030 km along with 690 km of water surface area which altogether makes up 1% of europe's area . 
hungary has 31 058 km of roads and motorways of 1118 km . 
though most banks were sold to foreign investors ,  the largest bank ,  national savings bank  -lrb-  otp  -rrb-  ,  remained hungarian-owned . 
large hungarian companies are included in the bux ,  the hungarian stock market index listed on budapest stock exchange . 
by the end of 1997 the consolidated public sector deficit decreased to 4.6% of gdp—with public sector spending falling from 62% of gdp to below 50%—the current account deficit was reduced to 2% of gdp ,  and government debt was paid down to 94% of annual export earnings . 
with about $18 billion in foreign direct investment  -lrb-  fdi  -rrb-  since 1989, hungary has attracted over one-third of all fdi in central and eastern europe ,  including the former soviet union . 
the antall government of 1990–94 began market reforms with price and trade liberation measures ,  a revamped tax system ,  and a nascent market-based banking system . 
the two flat plains that take up three quarters of hungary's area are the great hungarian plain and the little hungarian plain . 
hungary maintains its own currency ,  the hungarian forint  -lrb-  huf  -rrb-  ,  although the economy fulfills the maastricht criteria with the exception of public debt ,  but the ratio of public debt to gdp is significantly below the eu average at 75.3% in 2015.
hungary continues to be one of the leading nations in central and eastern europe for attracting foreign direct investment: the inward fdi in the country was $119.8 billion in 2015, while hungary invests more than $50 billion abroad . 
the economy showed signs of recovery in 2011 with decreasing tax rates and a moderate 1.7 percent gdp growth . 
after hungary's gdp declined about 18% from 1990 to 1993 and grew only 1%–1.5% up to 1996, strong export performance has propelled gdp growth to 4.4% in 1997, with other macroeconomic indicators similarly improving . 
the government privatization program ended on schedule in 1998: 80% of gdp is now produced by the private sector ,  and foreign owners control 70% of financial institutions ,  66% of industry ,  90% of telecommunications ,  and 50% of the trading sector . 
reaching 1995, hungary's fiscal indices deteriorated: foreign investment fell as well as judgement of foreign analysts on economic outlook . 
transport in hungary relies on several main modes ,  including transport by road ,  rail ,  air and water . 
the two branches of the defense forces - the hungarian air force and hungarian ground forces have now only administrative functions . 
since 2007, the hungarian defence force has been under a unified command structure with all operational units falling under the hungarian defense forces combat command . 
hungarian defence forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the national defence force of hungary . 
after 1989, hungary oriented more towards the west ,  joined nato in 1999 and the european union in 2004.
the law aroused criticism in the european union as possibly `` a direct threat to democracy '' . 
hungary became a member of nato in 1999, and a member of the eu in 2004.
hungary has been a member of the united nations since december 1955 and member of european union ,  the nato ,  the oecd ,  the visegrád group ,  the wto ,  the world bank ,  the aiib and the imf . 
a number of hungarian anthropologists and linguists have long had an interest in the turkic peoples ,  fueled by the eastern origin of the hungarians' ancestors . 
these changes have been criticized by the council of europe ,  the european union and human rights watch as possibly undermining the rule of law and human rights protection . 
in april 1879 sienkiewicz returned to polish soil . 
the trilogy established sienkiewicz as the most popular contemporary polish writer . 
on 24 march 1878 sienkiewicz left the u . s .  for europe . 
in 1892 sienkiewicz signed an agreement for another novel ,  rodzina połanieckich  -lrb-  children of the soil  -rrb-  ,  which was serialized in `` the polish gazette '' from 1893 and came out in book form in 1894.
later ,  in the early 1900s ,  he fell into mutual hostility with the young poland movement in polish literature . 
sienkiewicz often carried out substantial historic research for his novels ,  but he was selective in the findings that made it into the novels . 
after the outbreak of world war i ,  sienkiewicz was visited at oblęgorek by a polish legions cavalry unit under bolesław wieniawa-długoszowski . 
henryk adam aleksander pius sienkiewicz  -lrb-  ; also known by the pseudonym `` litwos '' ; 5 may 1846 – 15 november 1916 -rrb- was a polish journalist ,  novelist and nobel prize laureate . 
during the revolution in the kingdom of poland ,  he advocated broader polish autonomy within the russian empire . 
sienkiewicz was born on 5 may 1846 in wola okrzejska ,  now a village in the central part of eastern polish region of lubelskie ,  then part of the russian empire . 
the book quickly became another sienkiewicz bestseller in poland ,  and was received by critics better than his trilogy had been; it was also applauded by the polish right-wing ,  anti-german national democracy political movement ,  and became part of the polish school curriculum after poland regained independence in 1918.
his ``  ''latarnik '' ''  -lrb-  `` the lighthouse keeper '' ,  1881 -rrb- has been described as one of the best polish short stories . 
in 1924, after poland had regained her independence ,  sienkiewicz's remains were repatriated to warsaw ,  poland ,  and placed in the crypt of st .  john's cathedral . 
thus ,  for example ,  he prioritized polish military victories over defeats . 
hydrology  -lrb-  from greek: ὕδωρ ,  `` hýdōr '' meaning `` water ''; and λόγος ,  `` lógos '' meaning `` study ''  -rrb-  is the scientific study of the movement ,  distribution ,  and quality of water on earth and other planets ,  including the water cycle ,  water resources and environmental watershed sustainability . 
domains of hydrology include hydrometeorology ,  surface hydrology ,  hydrogeology ,  drainage-basin management and water quality ,  where water plays the central role . 
in 1937, himmler declared:
himmler urged:
bernadotte asked himmler to put his proposal in writing ,  and himmler obliged . 
hitler called himmler's mystical and pseudoreligious interests `` nonsense '' . 
on hitler's behalf ,  himmler formed the `` einsatzgruppen '' and built extermination camps . 
hedwig and margarete both remained loyal to himmler . 
in early 1945, the german war effort was on the verge of collapse and himmler's relationship with hitler had deteriorated . 
despite having direct access to hitler ,  heydrich's loyalty to himmler remained firm . 
as second in command of the ss and then reichsführer-ss ,  himmler was in regular contact with hitler to arrange for ss men as bodyguards; himmler was not involved with nazi party policy-making decisions in the years leading up to the seizure of power . 
himmler met his future wife ,  margarete boden ,  in 1927.
himmler was interested in mysticism and the occult from an early age . 
by 1930 himmler had persuaded hitler to run the ss as a separate organisation ,  although it was officially still subordinate to the sa . 
with hitler's approval ,  himmler re-established the `` einsatzgruppen '' in the lead-up to the planned invasion of the soviet union . 
speer refused to accept himmler's offer of the high rank of ss-oberst-gruppenführer ,  as he felt to do so would put him in himmler's debt and obligate him to allow himmler a say in armaments production . 
few dared mention that by his own standards ,  himmler did not meet his own ideals . 
in contrast ,  himmler was honest in matters of money and business . 
convinced that himmler was the man for the job ,  hitler appointed him deputy `` reichsführer-ss '' ,  with the rank of `` ss-oberführer '' . 
the nazi party's rise to power provided himmler and the ss an unfettered opportunity to thrive . 
himmler's first name ,  heinrich ,  was that of his godfather ,  prince heinrich of bavaria ,  a member of the royal family of bavaria ,  who had been tutored by gebhard himmler . 
he stripped himmler of all of his party and state offices and expelled him from the nazi party . 
when hitler and his army chiefs asked for a pretext for the invasion of poland in 1939, himmler ,  heydrich ,  and heinrich müller masterminded and carried out a false flag project code-named operation himmler . 
by the end of 1934, himmler took control of the camps under the aegis of the ss ,  creating a separate division ,  the `` ss-totenkopfverbände '' . 
as a member of a reserve battalion during world war i ,  himmler did not see active service . 
himmler's racial groupings began with the `` volksliste '' ,  the classification of people deemed of german blood . 
himmler was one of the most powerful men in nazi germany and among those most directly responsible for the holocaust . 
heydrich ,  named chief of the gestapo by himmler on 22 april 1934, also continued as head of the sd . 
under himmler's leadership ,  the ss developed its own military branch ,  the `` ss-verfügungstruppe ''  -lrb-  ss-vt  -rrb-  ,  which later evolved into the waffen-ss . 
heydrich calculated the number of jews to be killed at 11 million ,  and told the attendees that hitler had placed himmler in charge of the plan . 
himmler joined the nazi party  -lrb-  nsdap  -rrb-  in august 1923, receiving party number 14,303.
in addition to his military ambitions ,  himmler established the beginnings of a parallel economy under the umbrella of the ss . 
himmler's organised ,  bookish intellect served him well as he began setting up different ss departments . 
http/1.1 is a revision of the original http  -lrb-  http/1.0 -rrb- . 
http is a stateless protocol . 
http/2 was published as in may 2015.
the first documented version of http was http v0.9  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
http was developed to facilitate hypertext and the world wide web . 
officially introduced and recognized http v1.0 in 1996.
version 1.1 of the protocol also made bandwidth optimization improvements to http/1.0.
http resources are identified and located on the network by uniform resource locators  -lrb-  urls  -rrb-  ,  using the uniform resource identifiers  -lrb-  uri's  -rrb-  schemes `` http '' and `` https '' . 
hertz's wife ,  elisabeth hertz doll  -lrb-  1864–1941 -rrb- ,  did not remarry . 
hertz's daughters never married and he has no descendants . 
during this time hertz conducted his landmark research into electromagnetic waves . 
in 1885, hertz became a full professor at the university of karlsruhe . 
hertz did not realize the practical importance of his radio wave experiments . 
in 1886–1889, hertz published two articles on what was to become known as the field of contact mechanics . 
the unit of frequencycycle per secondwas named the `` hertz '' in his honor . 
the hebrew alphabet has 22 letters . 
the `` meteg '' is only used in biblical hebrew ,  not modern hebrew . 
or   -rrb-  ,  except for hebrew words ,  which in yiddish are written in their hebrew spelling . 
the following table lists transliterations and transcriptions of hebrew letters used in modern hebrew . 
the arabic and hebrew alphabets have similarities because they are both derived from the aramaic alphabet . 
the yiddish alphabet ,  a modified version of the hebrew alphabet used to write yiddish ,  is a true alphabet ,  with all vowels rendered in the spelling ,  except in the case of inherited hebrew words ,  which typically retain their hebrew spellings . 
the hebrew alphabet  -lrb-   ,  '  -rrb-  ,  known variously by scholars as the jewish script ,  square script ,  and block script ,  is an abjad script used in the writing of the hebrew language . 
the apostrophe-looking symbol after the hebrew letter modifies the pronunciation of the letter and is called a `` geresh '' . 
historically ,  two separate abjad scripts have been used to write hebrew . 
israeli hebrew has five vowel phonemes ,   ,  but many more written symbols for them:
seseo in spanish  -rrb-  ,  but in modern israeli hebrew ,  it is simply pronounced /t/ . 
a `` geresh '' is also used to denote acronyms pronounced as a string of letters ,  and to denote a hebrew numeral . 
a distinct hebrew variant of the phoenician script ,  called by scholars the paleo-hebrew alphabet ,  emerged around 800 bce . 
in 1756 he wrote:
in late 1745 walpole and gray resumed their friendship . 
however he had died in debt ,  the total of which was in between £40,000 and £50,000.
he was the son of the first british prime minister ,  sir robert walpole . 
in 1744 walpole wrote in a letter to conway that these offices gave him nearly £2,000 per annum; after 1745 when he was appointed collectorship of customs ,  his total income from these offices was around £3,400 per annum . 
walpole went on the grand tour with gray ,  but as walpole recalled in later life: `` we had not got to calais before gray was dissatisfied ,  for i was a boy ,  and he ,  though infinitely more a man ,  was not enough to make allowances '' . 
walpole and gray returned to florence in july . 
walpole was born in london ,  the youngest son of british prime minister sir robert walpole and his wife catherine . 
he returned to england on 12 september 1741, reaching london on the 14th . 
horace oscar axel engdahl  -lrb-  born 30 december 1948 -rrb- is a swedish literary historian and critic ,  and has been a member of the swedish academy since 1997.
the bible does not use the term `` hebrew '' in reference to the language of the hebrew people . 
hebrew belongs to the canaanite group of languages . 
modern hebrew is the official language of the state of israel ,  while premodern hebrew is used for prayer or study in jewish communities around the world today . 
according to avraham ben-yosef ,  hebrew flourished as a spoken language in the kingdoms of israel and judah during about 1200 to 586 bce . 
hebrew  -lrb-  ; or   -rrb-  is a northwest semitic language native to israel ,  the modern version of which is spoken by over 9 million people worldwide . 
a horror film is a film that seeks to elicit fear . 
some sub-genres of horror film include low-budget horror ,  action horror ,  comedy horror ,  body horror ,  disaster horror ,  found footage ,  holiday horror ,  horror drama ,  psychological horror ,  science fiction horror ,  slasher ,  supernatural horror ,  gothic horror ,  natural horror ,  zombie horror ,  first-person horror ,  and teen horror . 
however ,  the film is now known as one of hollywood's most classic horror films . 
some pronounced trends have marked horror films . 
horror films of the 1960s used the supernatural premise to express the horror of the demonic . 
horror films' income expansion is only the first sign of the influences of horror flicks . 
another 2008 british horror film is `` eden lake '' . 
paramount pictures also made horror films in the 1940s ,  the most popular of which is `` the uninvited '' . 
monster horror was quite popular in the 1990s . 
in 1923, universal pictures started producing films with horror elements . 
yet ,  the macabre nature of its source material made the film synonymous with the horror film genre . 
in 1945, great britain contributed the anthology horror film `` dead of night '' . 
the evil and horror throughout the films come from where the movies are taking place . 
the british horror film `` the haunting ''  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- was directed and produced by robert wise . 
notable comedy horror films of the 1980s include `` re-animator ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- ,  and `` night of the creeps ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- . 
 ''the changeling '' is a 1980 canadian psychological horror film directed by peter medak . 
another successful horror film is `` audition '' ,  a 1999 japanese film based on the novel of the same name ,  directed by takashi miike . 
 ''the amityville horror '' is a 1979 supernatural horror film directed by stuart rosenberg ,  based on jay anson's 1977 book of the same name . 
while horror is only one genre of film ,  the influence it presents to the international community is large . 
several horror film adaptations from comic books and video games were produced . 
other british companies contributed to a boom in horror film production in the united kingdom in the 1960s and 1970s . 
 ''day of the dead '' is a 1985 horror film written and directed by george a .  romero and the third film in romero's `` night of the living dead '' series . 
many early horror films created great social and legal controversy . 
another influential american horror film of the 60s was george a .  romero's `` night of the living dead ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- . 
the horror anthology film became a behemoth franchise in the country in the next decade . 
two australian horror films that deal with teenagers are `` lake mungo ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- and `` the loved ones ''  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- . 
in the 1930s universal pictures continued making movies with horror elements as they began to churn in a successful film series based on gothic horror . 
 ''wolf '' is a 1994 romantic horror film following the transformation of a man  -lrb-  jack nicholson  -rrb-  into a werewolf . 
this psychological horror film has a variety of themes; `` evil children '' ,  alcoholism ,  telepathy ,  and insanity . 
meanwhile ,  ghosts were a dominant theme in japanese horror ,  in such films as `` kwaidan '' ,  `` onibaba ''  -lrb-  both 1964 -rrb- and `` kuroneko ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- . 
with advances in technology ,  the tone of horror films shifted from the gothic towards contemporary concerns . 
another notable film is `` the wicker man ''  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- ,  a british mystery horror film dealing with the practice of ancient pagan rituals in the modern era . 
distancing the era from earlier gothic trends ,  late 1960s films brought horror into everyday life . 
another natural adventure horror film is `` the ruins ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- ,  which is based on the novel of the same name by scott smith . 
the ideas of the 1960s began to influence horror films in the 70s ,  as the youth involved in the counterculture began exploring the medium . 
the visual interpretations of films can be lost in the translation of their elements from one culture to another ,  like in the adaptation of the japanese film ``  '' into the american film `` the grudge '' . 
 ''event horizon ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- is a british-american science fiction horror film directed by paul w .  s .  anderson . 
two main problems pushed horror backward during this period: firstly ,  the horror genre wore itself out with the proliferation of nonstop slasher and gore films in the eighties . 
on the release date of the album ,  everlast announced his departure from the group . 
house of pain was an american hip hop group who released three albums in the 1990s before lead rapper everlast left to pursue his solo career . 
everlast teamed up with dj lethal and high school friend danny boy in los angeles to form house of pain . 
founded by danny boy in early 2006, la coka nostra reunited him ,  everlast and dj lethal for the first time since house of pain's split . 
a head of state  -lrb-  or chief of state  -rrb-  is the public persona who officially represents the national unity and legitimacy of a sovereign state . 
the inheritance of acquired traits also formed a part of early lamarckian ideas on evolution . 
heritable traits are known to be passed from one generation to the next via dna ,  a molecule that encodes genetic information . 
inherited traits are controlled by genes and the complete set of genes within an organism's genome is called its genotype . 
if a mutation occurs within a gene ,  the new allele may affect the trait that the gene controls ,  altering the phenotype of the organism . 
the idea of particulate inheritance of genes can be attributed to the moravian monk gregor mendel who published his work on pea plants in 1865.
however ,  while this simple correspondence between an allele and a trait works in some cases ,  most traits are more complex and are controlled by multiple interacting genes within and among organisms . 
in humans ,  eye color is an example of an inherited characteristic: an individual might inherit the `` brown-eye trait '' from one of the parents . 
these three categories are part of every exact description of a mode of inheritance in the above order . 
aeschylus ,  in 458 bc ,  proposed the male as the parent ,  with the female as a `` nurse for the young life sown within her '' . 
he referred to the era between the two world wars as `` the age of frustration '' . 
this would be the beginning of wells's venture into literature . 
wells visited russia three times: 1914, 1920 and 1934.
some of his early novels ,  called `` scientific romances '' ,  invented several themes now classic in science fiction in such works as `` the time machine '' ,  `` the island of doctor moreau '' ,  `` the invisible man '' ,  `` the war of the worlds '' ,  `` when the sleeper wakes '' ,  and `` the first men in the moon '' . 
wells wrote in his book `` god the invisible king ''  -lrb-  1917 -rrb- that his idea of god did not draw upon the traditional religions of the world: this book sets out as forcibly and exactly as possible the religious belief of the writer . 
in 1933, wells predicted in `` the shape of things to come '' that the world war he feared would begin in january 1940, a prediction which ultimately came true four months early ,  in september 1939, with the outbreak of world war ii . 
the school year 1886–87 was the last year of his studies . 
his first published work was a `` text-book of biology '' in two volumes  -lrb-  1893 -rrb- . 
jorge luis borges wrote many short pieces on wells in which he demonstrates a deep familiarity with much of wells's work . 
his short period in woking was perhaps the most creative and productive of his whole writing career ,  for while there he planned and wrote `` the war of the worlds '' and `` the time machine '' ,  completed `` the island of doctor moreau '' ,  wrote and published `` the wonderful visit '' and `` the wheels of chance '' ,  and began writing two other early books ,  `` when the sleeper wakes '' and `` love and mr lewisham '' . 
his success with these shorter pieces encouraged him to write book-length work ,  and he published his first novel ,  `` the time machine '' ,  in 1895.
wells contemplates the ideas of nature and nurture and questions humanity in books such as `` the island of doctor moreau '' . 
his bestselling two-volume work ,  `` the outline of history ''  -lrb-  1920 -rrb- ,  began a new era of popularised world history . 
according to james gunn ,  one of wells's major contributions to the science fiction genre was his approach ,  which he referred to as his `` new system of ideas '' . 
canadian author margaret atwood read wells' books ,  and he also inspired writers of european speculative fiction such as karel čapek and yevgeny zamyatin . 
seeking a more structured way to play war games ,  wells also wrote `` floor games ''  -lrb-  1911 -rrb- followed by `` little wars ''  -lrb-  1913 -rrb- ,  which set out rules for fighting battles with toy soldiers  -lrb-  miniatures  -rrb-  . 
below are four of the existing forms of hypertext:
among the top academic conferences for new research in hypertext is the annual acm conference on hypertext and hypermedia . 
there are various forms of hypertext ,  each of which are structured differently . 
as implemented on the web ,  hypertext enables the easy-to-use publication of information over the internet . 
the most famous implementation of hypertext is the world wide web ,  written in the final months of 1990 and released on the internet in 1991.
hypertext can be used to support very complex and dynamic systems of linking and cross-referencing . 
hyperties was used to create the july 1988 issue of the communications of the acm as a hypertext document and then the first commercial electronic book hypertext hands-on ! 
besides the already mentioned project xanadu ,  hypertext editing system ,  nls ,  hypercard ,  and world wide web ,  there are other noteworthy early implementations of hypertext ,  with different feature sets:
in 1980, tim berners-lee created enquire ,  an early hypertext database system somewhat like a wiki but without hypertext punctuation ,  which was not invented until 1987.
the term `` hypertext '' is often used where the term `` hypermedia '' might seem appropriate . 
on about october 10, 2014, ellison suffered a stroke . 
ellison had a reputation for being abrasive and argumentative . 
ellison won the world fantasy award for life achievement in 1993.
the 2004 film `` i ,  robot '' ,  starring will smith ,  has no connection to ellison's script . 
 ,  ellison is the only three-time winner of the nebula award for best short story . 
ellison was presented with a special committee award at the 2006 hugo awards ceremony . 
the bird moniker became a character in one of ellison's own stories . 
for a list of ellison's work—including his literary output ,  screenplays and teleplays ,  voiceover work ,  and other fields of endeavor—see harlan ellison bibliography . 
ellison was presented with the award at the skeptics convention in burbank ,  california ,  on june 22, 2002.
ellison alleged that james cameron's film `` the terminator '' drew from material from an episode of the original `` outer limits '' which ellison had scripted ,  `` soldier ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- . 
ellison won numerous awards ,  including multiple hugos ,  nebulas ,  and edgars . 
fleisher lost his libel suit against ellison and fantagraphics on december 9, 1986.
ellison's official website ,  harlanellison . com ,  was launched in 1995 as a fan page; for several years ,  ellison was a regular poster in its discussion forum . 
platt claims that ellison often publicly boasted about the incident . 
harlan ellison died at his home in los angeles in the morning of june 28, 2018.
ellison subsequently complained that willis refused to acknowledge his apology . 
ellison was born to a jewish family in cleveland ,  ohio ,  on may 27, 1934, the son of serita  -lrb-  née rosenthal  -rrb-  and louis laverne ellison ,  a dentist and jeweler . 
ellison was among those who in 1968 signed an anti-vietnam war advertisement in `` galaxy science fiction '' . 
other than evliyâ çelebi's report ,  there are no other contemporary references to the event . 
the title ``  ''hezârfen '' ''  -lrb-   ,  `` hazār '' +  ,  `` fann ''  -rrb-  given by evliyâ çelebi to ahmet çelebi ,  means `` a thousand sciences ''  -lrb-  polymath  -rrb-  . 
creutzfeldt was 54 years old when the second world war broke out . 
he died in 1964 in munich . 
hans gerhard creutzfeldt  -lrb-  june 2, 1885 – december 30, 1964 -rrb- was a german neurologist and neuropathologist . 
elemental holmium is a relatively soft and malleable silvery-white metal . 
holmium is a chemical element with symbol ho and atomic number 67.
holmium is quite electropositive and is generally trivalent . 
in pure form ,  holmium possesses a metallic ,  bright silvery luster . 
see hafnium controversy . 
hafnium is used in filaments and electrodes . 
in reality ,  since hafnium occurs with zirconium ,  hafnium can always be a byproduct of zirconium extraction to the extent that the low demand requires . 
hafnium is a chemical element with symbol hf and atomic number 72.
this process for differential purification of zirconium and hafnium is still in use today . 
some compounds of hafnium in lower oxidation states are known . 
hafnium is used in alloys with iron ,  titanium ,  niobium ,  tantalum ,  and other metals . 
several details contribute to the fact that there are only a few technical uses for hafnium: first ,  the close similarity between hafnium and zirconium makes it possible to use zirconium for most of the applications; second ,  hafnium was first available as pure metal after the use in the nuclear industry for hafnium-free zirconium in the late 1950s . 
in most geologic materials ,  zircon is the dominant host of hafnium  -lrb-  >10,000 ppm  -rrb-  and is often the focus of hafnium studies in geology . 
a notable physical difference between these metals is their density ,  with zirconium having about one-half the density of hafnium . 
most of the hafnium produced is used in the manufacture of control rods for nuclear reactors . 
the hafnium forms a solid coating at the tungsten filament ,  and the iodine can react with additional hafnium ,  resulting in a steady turn over . 
hafnium is named after `` hafnia '' ,  the latin name for copenhagen ,  where it was discovered . 
at least 34 isotopes of hafnium have been observed ,  ranging in mass number from 153 to 186.
hamburg has 54 hospitals . 
there are 32 public libraries in hamburg . 
356 people in hamburg were over the age of 100.
there were 915,319 women and 945,440 men in hamburg . 
hamburg is europe's third-largest port . 
in 834, hamburg was designated as the seat of a bishopric . 
the metropolitan area of the hamburg region  -lrb-  hamburg metropolitan region  -rrb-  is home to 5,107,429 living on  . 
the `` botanischer garten hamburg '' is a modern botanical garden maintained by the university of hamburg . 
hamburg is home to one of the oldest international schools in germany ,  the international school of hamburg . 
in nazi germany  -lrb-  1933–1945 -rrb- ,  hamburg was a `` gau '' from 1934 until 1945.
hamburger sv is a football team playing in the 2.
the `` bcj hamburg '' played in the basketball bundesliga from 1999 to 2001.
hamburg was destroyed and occupied several times . 
the hamburg freezers represented hamburg until 2016 in the del ,  the premier ice hockey league in germany . 
hamburg had the greatest concentration of jews in germany . 
hamburg has more than 40 theatres ,  60 museums and 100 music venues and clubs . 
the hamburg commonwealth war graves commission cemetery is in the greater ohlsdorf cemetery in the north of hamburg . 
since 1897, the seat of the government has been the hamburg rathaus  -lrb-  hamburg city hall  -rrb-  ,  with the office of the mayor ,  the meeting room for the senate and the floor for the hamburg parliament . 
it is the largest ongoing urban development project in hamburg . 
the international school of hamburg serves school children . 
the hamburg stock exchange is the oldest of its kind in germany . 
in 2016, the average visitor spent two nights in hamburg . 
public transport by rail ,  bus and ship is organised by the `` hamburger verkehrsverbund ''  -lrb-  `` hamburg transit authority ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  hvv  -rrb-  . 
hamburg borders the states of schleswig-holstein and lower saxony . 
hamburg state opera is a leading opera company . 
the inner german border – only east of hamburg – separated the city from most of its hinterland and reduced hamburg's global trade . 
on 31 december 2016, there were 1,860,759 people registered as living in hamburg in an area of  . 
hsv handball represented hamburg until 2016 in the german handball league . 
less than half of the residents of hamburg are members of a religion . 
there are also the hamburg dockers ,  an australian rules football club . 
the hamburg warriors are one of germany's top lacrosse clubs . 
hamburg is famous for an original kind of german alternative music called `` hamburger schule ''  -lrb-  `` hamburg school ''  -rrb-  ,  a term used for bands like tocotronic ,  blumfeld ,  tomte or kante . 
hamburg is noted for several festivals and regular events . 
hamburg airport is the oldest airport in germany still in operation . 
hamburg residents with a foreign citizenship as of 31 december 2016 is as follows like elsewhere in germany ,  standard german is spoken in hamburg ,  but as typical for northern germany ,  the original language of hamburg is low german ,  usually referred to as `` hamborger platt ''  -lrb-  german `` hamburger platt ''  -rrb-  or `` hamborgsch '' . 
the city of hamburg is one of 16 german states ,  therefore the mayor of hamburg's office corresponds more to the role of a minister-president than to the one of a city mayor . 
the islands of neuwerk ,  scharhörn ,  and nigehörn ,  away in the hamburg wadden sea national park ,  are also part of the city of hamburg . 
hamburg has architecturally significant buildings in a wide range of styles and no skyscrapers  -lrb-  see list of tallest buildings in hamburg  -rrb-  . 
some airlines market lübeck airport in lübeck as serving hamburg . 
hamburg is seat of one of the three bishops of the evangelical lutheran church in northern germany and seat of the roman catholic archdiocese of hamburg . 
both the former german chancellor and angela merkel ,  german chancellor since 2005, come from hamburg . 
hamburg has long been a centre of alternative music and counter-culture movements . 
 ''h '' was hamburg's prefix in the years between 1945 and 1947  -lrb-  used by hanover since 1956 -rrb-;
american and international english-speaking organisations include the american club of hamburg e . v .  ,  the american women's club of hamburg ,  the english speaking union ,  the german-american women's club ,  and the international women's club of hamburg e . v . 
hamburg is made up of seven boroughs  -lrb-  german: `` bezirke ''  -rrb-  and subdivided into 104 quarters  -lrb-  german: `` stadtteile ''  -rrb-  . 
hamburg experienced several great fires in the medieval period . 
this also ,  i saw ,  is from the hand of god .  .  . ``   -lrb-  ecclesiastes 2:24 -rrb-
he held the idea that pleasure is the highest good . 
hedonism is a school of thought that argues that the pursuit of pleasure and intrinsic goods are the primary or most important goals of human life . 
there are two somewhat basic schools of thought on hedonism:
it is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely and well and justly  -lrb-  agreeing `` neither to harm nor be harmed ''  -rrb-  ,  and it is impossible to live wisely and well and justly without living a pleasant life . 
in the epicurean view ,  the highest pleasure  -lrb-  tranquility and freedom from fear  -rrb-  was obtained by knowledge ,  friendship and living a virtuous and temperate life . 
although epicureanism is a form of hedonism ,  insofar as it declares pleasure as the sole intrinsic good ,  its conception of absence of pain as the greatest pleasure and its advocacy of a simple life make it different from `` hedonism '' as it is commonly understood . 
at least some are thought to have belonged to the epicurean philodemus . 
the concept of hedonism is also found in nastika  -lrb-  heterodox  -rrb-  philosophy such as the charvaka school . 
the school died out within a century ,  and was replaced by epicureanism . 
judaism believes that the world was created to serve god ,  and in order to do so properly ,  god in turn gives mankind the opportunity to experience pleasure in the process of serving him . 
for this he has `` written books on each of these facets of the same world view . `` 
it says that we all make a god out of what we take most pleasure in . ” piper states his term may describe the theology of jonathan edwards ,  who in 1812 referred to “a future enjoyment of him god in heaven . ” already in the 17th century ,  the atomist pierre gassendi had adapted epicureanism to the christian doctrine . 
the periods of the scheme include a few of the final pre-holocene oscillations of the last glacial period and then classify climates of more recent prehistory . 
it is considered by some to be an interglacial period within the pleistocene epoch . 
local names for the last glacial period include the wisconsinan in north america ,  the weichselian in europe ,  the devensian in britain ,  the llanquihue in chile and the otiran in new zealand . 
this was followed by the little ice age ,  from the 13th or 14th century to the mid-19th century ,  which was a period of cooling . 
the holocene climatic optimum  -lrb-  hco  -rrb-  was a period of warming in which the global climate became warmer . 
the equivalent event in north america was the rebound of hudson bay ,  as it shrank from its larger ,  immediate post-glacial tyrrell sea phase ,  to near its present boundaries . 
however ,  the time periods referenced by these terms vary with the emergence of those technologies in different parts of the world . 
it appears that this was influenced by the residual glacial ice remaining in the northern hemisphere until the later date . 
alexandria port in egypt is an example of a port with two harbors . 
harbors may be natural or artificial . 
artificial harbors are frequently built for use as ports . 
in french ,  the name of the letter is pronounced  . 
in the german language ,  the name of the letter is pronounced  . 
authorities disagree about the history of the letter's name . 
h  -lrb-  named `` aitch '' or ,  regionally ,  `` haitch ''  ,  plural `` aitches ''  -rrb-  is the eighth letter in the iso basic latin alphabet . 
for most english speakers ,  the name for the letter is pronounced as and spelled `` aitch '' or occasionally `` eitch '' . 
the pronunciation may be a hypercorrection formed by analogy with the names of the other letters of the alphabet ,  most of which include the sound they represent . 
when kept as a talisman ,  a horseshoe is said to bring good luck . 
however ,  there are also cases where shoes are glued . 
in a common design ,  a metal horseshoe holds a flat wooden shoe in place . 
existing references to the nailed shoe are relatively late ,  first known to have appeared around ad 900, but there may have been earlier uses given that some have been found in layers of dirt . 
a horseshoe is a fabricated product ,  normally made of metal ,  although sometimes made partially or wholly of modern synthetic materials ,  designed to protect a horse's hoof from wear . 
