by definition ,  the error in the measured value of the ipk's mass is exactly zero; the mass of the ipk `` is '' the kilogram . 
with this proposal ,  the kilogram would be defined as `` the mass equal to × atoms of c . `` 
the kilogram was originally defined as the mass of a litre  -lrb-  cubic decimetre  -rrb-  of water . 
other traditional units of weight and mass around the world are now also defined in terms of the kilogram ,  making the kilogram the primary standard for virtually all units of mass on earth . 
while major portions of the si system would still be based on the kilogram ,  the kilogram would in turn be based on invariant ,  universal constants of nature . 
because at any given point on earth the weight of an object is proportional to its mass ,  the mass of an object in kilograms is usually measured by comparing its weight to the weight of a standard mass ,  whose mass is known in kilograms ,  using a device called a weighing scale . 
the kilogram or kilogramme  -lrb-  symbol: kg  -rrb-  is the base unit of mass in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  . 
prior to the redefinition the kilogram ,  and several other si units based on the kilogram ,  were defined by a man-made metal `` artefact '': the `` kilogram des archives '' from 1799 to 1889, and the `` international prototype kilogram '' from 1889 onward . 
the kilogram is a unit of mass ,  a property corresponding to the common perception of how `` heavy '' an object is . 
the kilogram would then have been defined as `` the mass equal to that of precisely atoms of gold ''  -lrb-  precisely 3,057,443,620,887,933,963,384,315 atoms of gold or about fixed moles  -rrb-  . 
if the ipk's value were definitively proven to have changed ,  one solution would be to simply redefine the kilogram as being equal to the mass of the ipk plus an offset value ,  similarly to what is currently done with its replicas; e . g .  ,  `` the kilogram is equal to the mass of the  -lrb-  equivalent to 42μg  -rrb-  . 
the kilogram is the only named si unit with an si prefix  -lrb-  `` kilo ''  -rrb-  as part of its name . 
the final kilogram ,  manufactured as a prototype in 1799 and from which the international prototype kilogram  -lrb-  ipk  -rrb-  was derived in 1875, had a mass equal to the mass of 1 dm of water under atmospheric pressure and at the temperature of its maximum density ,  which is approximately 4 °c . 
since 1889 the magnitude of the kilogram has been defined as the mass of an object called the `` international prototype of the kilogram '' ,  often referred to in the professional metrology world as the `` ipk '' . 
all silicon-based approaches would fix the avogadro constant but vary in the details of the definition of the kilogram . 
the gram ,  1/1000 of a kilogram ,  was provisionally defined in 1795 as the mass of one cubic centimetre of water at the melting point of ice . 
effectively ,  this would define the kilogram as a derivative of the ampere rather than the present relationship ,  which defines the ampere as a derivative of the kilogram . 
conversely ,  an electronic `` definition '' of the kilogram  -lrb-  see ``  '' ,  below  -rrb-  ,  which would precisely fix the planck constant ,  would continue to allow moles of c to have a mass of precisely one kilogram but the number of atoms comprising a mole  -lrb-  the avogadro constant  -rrb-  would continue to be subject to future refinement . 
note that none of the replicas has a mass precisely equal to that of the ipk; their masses are calibrated and documented as offset values . 
that artefact ,  and the later ipk ,  have been the standard of the unit of mass for the metric system ever since . 
accordingly ,  a provisional mass standard was made as a single-piece ,  metallic artifact one thousand times as massive as the gram—the kilogram . 
during the 19th century ,  the standard system of metric units was the centimetre–gram–second system of units ,  treating the gram as the fundamental unit of mass and the `` kilogram '' simply as a derived unit . 
the cgs and mks systems co-existed during much of the early-to-mid 20th century ,  but as a result of the decision to adopt the `` giorgi system '' as the international system of units in 1960, the kilogram is now the si base unit for mass ,  while the definition of the gram is derived from that of the kilogram . 
with a gold-based definition of the kilogram for instance ,  the relative atomic mass of gold could have been fixed as precisely  ,  from the current value of  . 
as each row progresses ,  a newly created loop is pulled through one or more loops from the prior row ,  placed on the gaining needle ,  and the loops from the prior row are then pulled off the other needle . 
karl popper was born in vienna  -lrb-  then in austria-hungary  -rrb-  in 1902 to upper-middle-class parents . 
popper commented that this `` was perhaps a cowardly but in a way a right decision '' . 
popper and his wife had chosen not to have children because of the circumstances of war in the early years of their marriage . 
popper coined the term `` critical rationalism '' to describe his philosophy . 
sir karl raimund popper  -lrb-  28 july 1902 – 17 september 1994 -rrb- was an austrian-british philosopher and professor . 
popper also wrote extensively against the famous copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics . 
in `` of clocks and clouds ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  popper remarked that he wished he had known of peirce's work earlier . 
in popper's view ,  the advance of scientific knowledge is an `` evolutionary '' process characterised by his formula:
the manual was very detailed in how a pilot should attack . 
according to some accounts ,  two made suicide attacks ,  one of which hit  . 
several suicide attacks ,  carried out during the invasion of leyte by japanese pilots from units other than the special attack force ,  have been described as the first `` kamikaze '' attacks . 
on 20 march ,  the submarine survived a hit from an aircraft just off japan . 
twin-engine aircraft were occasionally used in planned `` kamikaze '' attacks . 
about 3,800 `` kamikaze '' pilots died during the war ,  and more than 7,000 naval personnel were killed by `` kamikaze '' attacks . 
on 19 june 1944, planes from the carrier approached a us task group . 
as a result ,  the special attack units are sometimes known in japan as `` kamikaze tokubetsu kōgeki tai '' . 
the australian official history of the war claimed that this was the first `` kamikaze '' attack on an allied ship ,  although other sources disagree because it was not a planned attack by a member of the special attack force ,  but was most likely to have been undertaken on the pilot's own initiative . 
the seafires' best day was 15 august 1945, shooting down eight attacking aircraft with a single loss . 
tetsuzo iwamoto refused to engage in a `` kamikaze '' attack because he thought the task of fighter pilots was to shoot down aircraft . 
in japanese ,  the formal term used for units carrying out suicide attacks during 1944–1945 is `` tokushu kōgeki yunitto ''  -lrb-  特別攻撃隊  -rrb-  ,  which literally means `` special attack unit '' . 
 ,  officially  ,  were a part of the japanese special attack units of military aviators who initiated suicide attacks for the empire of japan against allied naval vessels in the closing stages of the pacific campaign of world war ii ,  designed to destroy warships more effectively than possible with conventional air attacks . 
on 25 october 1944, during the battle of leyte gulf ,  the `` kamikaze '' special attack force carried out its first mission . 
during 1943–1944, u . s .  forces steadily advanced toward japan . 
pilots were given a manual that detailed how they were supposed to think ,  prepare and attack . 
the sinking of the ocean tug on 24 october is listed in some sources as the first ship lost to a `` kamikaze '' strike ,  but the attack occurred before 25 october ,  and the aircraft used ,  a mitsubishi g4m ,  was not flown by the original four special attack squadrons . 
so many destroyers were attacked that one ship's crew ,  considering the aircraft carriers to be more important targets ,  erected a large sign with an arrow that read `` that way to the carriers '' . 
the names of the four sub-units within the `` kamikaze '' special attack force were `` unit shikishima '' ,  `` unit yamato '' ,  `` unit asahi '' and `` unit yamazakura '' . 
vice admiral matome ugaki ,  the commander of the ijn 5th air fleet based in kyushu ,  participated in one of the final kamikaze attacks on american ships on 15 august 1945, hours after japan's announced surrender . 
u . s .  carriers ,  with their wooden flight decks ,  appeared to suffer more damage from `` kamikaze '' hits than the armored-decked carriers from the british pacific fleet . 
provide me with 300 planes and i will turn the tide of war . `` 
commander asaichi tamai asked a group of 23 talented student pilots ,  all of whom he had trained ,  to volunteer for the special attack force . 
being one of kde's most recognized projects ,  the plasma desktop is the default desktop environment on many linux distributions ,  such as opensuse ,  manjaro ,  mageia ,  openmandriva ,  chakra ,  kubuntu ,  and pclinuxos . 
in may 1955, west germany joined nato and in november a west german military ,  the `` bundeswehr '' ,  was founded . 
the west german government kept all proof under seal in order to prevent antisemitic responses from the german public . 
british foreign secretary anthony eden used the failure of the edc to advocate for independent west german rearmament and west german nato membership . 
additionally ,  adenauer promised that the west german military would be under the operational control of nato general staff ,  though ultimate control would rest with the west german government; and that above all he would never violate the strictly defensive nato charter and invade east germany to achieve german reunification . 
from the beginning of his chancellorship ,  adenauer had been pressing for german rearmament . 
adenauer's german policy was based upon `` politik der stärke ''  -lrb-  policy of strength  -rrb-  ,  and upon the so-called `` magnet theory '' ,  in which a prosperous ,  democratic west germany integrated with the west would act as a `` magnet '' that would eventually bring down the east german regime . 
during this time ,  adenauer came into conflict with the economics minister ludwig erhard over the depth of german integration to the west . 
during this period ,  the post-war division of germany was consolidated with the establishment of two separate german states ,  the federal republic of germany  -lrb-  west germany  -rrb-  and the german democratic republic  -lrb-  east germany  -rrb-  . 
1957 saw the reintegration of the saarland into west germany . 
when ,  in 1967, after his death at the age of 91, germans were asked what they admired most about adenauer ,  the majority responded that he had brought home the last german prisoners of war from the ussr ,  which had become known as the `` return of the 10,000 '' . 
adenauer deeply disliked the `` pleven plan '' ,  but was forced to support it when it became clear that this plan was the only way the french would agree to german rearmament . 
adenauer recognized the obligation of the west german government to compensate israel ,  as the main representative of the jewish people ,  for the holocaust . 
konrad hermann joseph adenauer  -lrb-  ; 5 january 1876 – 19 april 1967 -rrb- was a german statesman who served as the first chancellor of the federal republic of germany  -lrb-  west germany  -rrb-  from 1949 to 1963.
churchill said britain would not join the european coal and steel community because doing so would mean sacrificing relations with the u . s and commonwealth . 
adenauer reached an agreement for his `` nuclear ambitions '' with a nato military committee in december 1956 that stipulated west german forces were to be `` equipped for nuclear warfare '' . 
in 1961, adenauer had his concerns about both the status of berlin and us leadership confirmed ,  as the soviets and east germans built the berlin wall . 
the construction of the berlin wall in august 1961 and the sealing of borders by the east germans made adenauer's government look weak . 
in october 1950, adenauer received the so-called `` himmerod memorandum '' drafted by four former wehrmacht generals at the himmerod abbey that linked freedom for german war criminals as the price of german rearmament ,  along with public statements from the allies that the wehrmacht committed no war crimes in world war ii . 
during his years in power ,  west germany achieved democracy ,  stability ,  international respect and economic prosperity  -lrb-  ``  ''wirtschaftswunder '' '' ,  german for `` economic miracle ''  -rrb-  . 
in mid-october 1923, the chancellor gustav stresemann announced that berlin would cease all financial payments to the rhineland and that the new `` rentenmark '' ,  which had replaced the now worthless `` mark '' would not circulate in the rhineland . 
in 2003, adenauer was voted the 'greatest german of all time' in a contest called `` unsere besten '' run on german public-service television broadcaster zdf in which more than three million votes were cast . 
in 1954, he received the karlspreis  -lrb-  english: charlemagne award  -rrb-  ,  an award by the german city of aachen to people who contributed to the european idea ,  european cooperation and european peace . 
the german restitution laws  -lrb-  `` bundesentschädigungsgesetz ''  -rrb-  were passed in 1953 that allowed some victims of nazi prosecution to claim restitution . 
in the following debate in parliament adenauer stated: the opposition leader kurt schumacher responded by labeling adenauer `` chancellor of the allies '' ,  accusing adenauer of putting good relations with the west for the sake of the cold war ahead of german national interests . 
in august 1954, the pleven plan died when an alliance of conservatives and communists in the national assembly joined forces to reject the edc treaty under the grounds that west german rearmament in any form was an unacceptable danger to france . 
adenauer was appalled that the americans had come out against the attack on egypt alongside the soviets ,  which led adenauer to fear that the united states and soviet union would `` carve up the world '' with no thought for european interests . 
one of adenauer's reasons for not pursuing the presidency was his fear that ludwig erhard ,  whom adenauer thought little of ,  would become the new chancellor . 
khazar university and khazar islands in baku ,  azerbaijan  -rrb-  . 
the conversion of khazars to judaism is reported by external sources and in the khazar correspondence ,  though doubts persist . 
after one more conflict with these polovtsi in 1106, the khazars fade from history . 
it was this that ,  according to ibn al-athîr ,  led the jewish king of khazar to convert to islam . 
though anachronistic in retrodating the khazars to this period ,  the legend ,  in placing the khazar qağan on a throne with equal status to kings of the other two superpowers ,  bears witness to the reputation won by the khazars from early times . 
the arab georgian martyr st abo ,  who converted to christianity within the khazar kingdom around 779-80, describes local khazars as irreligious . 
the khazar state was not the only jewish state to rise between the fall of the second temple  -lrb-  67–70 ce  -rrb-  and the establishment of israel  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- . 
many karaim deny israelite origins and consider themselves to be descendants of the khazars ,  while specialists in khazar history also question the connection . 
during the 7th and 8th centuries ,  the khazars fought a series of wars against the umayyad caliphate and its abbasid successor . 
while the khazar language went extinct centuries ago ,  modern turkic languages still refer to the caspian sea as the `` khazar sea ''  -lrb-  cf . 
turteltaub's `` justinian '' ,  marek halter's `` book of abraham '' and `` wind of the khazars '' ,  and michael chabon's `` gentlemen of the road '' allude to or feature elements of khazar history or create fictional khazar characters . 
the ruling elite of the khazars was said by judah halevi and abraham ibn daud to have converted to rabbinic judaism in the 8th century ,  but the scope of the conversion within the khazar khanate remains uncertain . 
though connections are made to the khazars ,  the link is based merely on a common attribution of judaism . 
some scholars suppose that the khazar settlement of sambat on the dnieper refers to the later kiev . 
once the khazars emerged as a power ,  the byzantines also began to form alliances with them ,  dynastic and military . 
between 965 and 969, the kievan rus' ruler sviatoslav i of kiev conquered the capital atil and destroyed the khazar state . 
the rus' warlords launched several wars against the khazar qağanate ,  and raided down to the caspian sea . 
in the russian chronicle the vanquishing of the khazar traditions is associated with vladimir's conversion in 986.
whatever the impact of marwan's campaigns ,  warfare between the khazars and the arabs ceased for more than two decades after 737.
this has been taken as an indication of hopes by jews that the khazars might succeed in destroying the caliphate . 
the word khazar ,  as an ethnonym ,  was last used in the 13th century by a people in the north caucasus believed to practice judaism . 
in 758, the abbasid caliph al-mansur attempted to strengthen diplomatic ties with the khazars ,  ordering yazid ibn usayd al-sulami ,  one of his nobles and the military governor of armenia ,  to take a royal khazar bride . 
despite their success ,  the arabs had not yet defeated the khazar army ,  and they retreated south of the caucasus . 
one thesis ,  held that the khazar jewish population went into a northern diaspora and had a significant impact on the rise of ashkenazi jews . 
there is evidence from the account of al-tabari that the khazars formed a united front with the remnants of the göktürks in transoxiana . 
the lack of khazar dna samples that might allow verification also presents difficulties . 
one method for tracing their origins consists in analysis of the possible etymologies behind the ethnonym `` khazar '' . 
d .  m .  dunlop tried to link the chinese term for `` khazars '' to one of the tribal names of the uyğur toquz oğuz ,  namely the `` gésà '' . 
scholarship is likewise sceptical of claims that the tatar-speaking krymchak jews of the crimea descend from khazars . 
frost also appeared in a cameo role in snoop dogg's `` vato '' music video ,  as well as b-real that same year . 
arturo molina ,  jr .   -lrb-  born may 31, 1964 -rrb- ,  better known as frost  -lrb-  originally kid frost  -rrb-  ,  is an american rapper ,  songwriter and record producer . 
ice-t ,  scoop ,  o . g . enius and domino also appeared as guest rappers . 
in 2005 `` welcome to frost angeles '' was released on thump records ,  which was produced almost entirely by frost and his son scoop deville . 
he performed as an actor and in music coordination in several feature films including leon kennedy’s ” ''knights of the city” '' and the hip hop film ” ''krush groove” . `` 
the committee is dedicated to the facilitation of the universal hip hop museum . 
in 2016 kurtis was unanimously elected as chairman of the universal hip hop museum . 
beginning in 1996, kurtis blow was featured in a hip hop display at the rock and roll hall of fame . 
kazakhstan is divided into fourteen regions  -lrb-   ,  ;  ,    -rrb-  . 
kazakhstan has been inhabited since the paleolithic . 
on 26 april 2015, the 5th presidential election was held in kazakhstan . 
kazakhstan was the last of the soviet republics to declare independence during the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991.
kazakhstan  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of kazakhstan  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  is the world's largest landlocked country ,  and the ninth largest in the world ,  with an area of  . 
these eventually came under the rule of the emergent kazakh khanate  -lrb-  kazakhstan  -rrb-  . 
in 1936, it was made the kazakh soviet socialist republic ,  part of the soviet union . 
kazakhstan also possesses large deposits of phosphorite . 
municipalities exist at each level of administrative division in kazakhstan . 
on 25 october 1990, kazakhstan declared its sovereignty on its territory as a republic within the soviet union . 
kazakhstan is a unitary republic; its only president to date  -lrb-  2018 -rrb- is nursultan nazarbayev . 
by 2006, kazakhstan generated 60% of the gdp of central asia ,  primarily through its oil industry . 
the government moved the capital in 1997, from almaty ,  kazakhstan's largest city ,  where it had been established under the soviet union ,  to astana . 
kazakhstan's communist-era leader ,  nursultan nazarbayev ,  became the country's first president . 
most of kazakhstan's military was inherited from the soviet armed forces' turkestan military district . 
kazakhstan was elected a member of the un human rights council for the first time on 12 november 2012.
the tsars effectively ruled over most of the territory belonging to what is now the republic of kazakhstan . 
kazakhstan's 131 ethnicities include kazakhs  -lrb-  63% of the population  -rrb-  ,  russians ,  uzbeks ,  ukrainians ,  germans ,  tatars ,  and uyghurs . 
 ,  kazakhstan was reported on the democracy index by `` the economist '' as an authoritarian regime . 
kazakhstan's national security committee  -lrb-  uqk  -rrb-  was established on 13 june 1992.
the anti-nuclear movement in kazakhstan became a major political force in the late 1980s . 
kazakhstan's human rights situation is described as poor by independent observers . 
are appointed by regional `` akim ''s .  kazakhstan's government relocated its capital from almaty ,  established under the soviet union ,  to astana on 10 december 1997.
while it was part of the soviet union ,  kazakhstan lost some of its territory to china's xinjiang autonomous region and some to uzbekistan's karakalpakstan autonomous republic . 
in 2014, kazakhstan gave ukraine humanitarian aid during the conflict with russian-backed rebels . 
in 1999, kazakhstan had applied for observer status at the council of europe parliamentary assembly . 
with an area of  ,  the kazakh ssr was the second-largest republic in the soviet union . 
the modern republic of kazakhstan became a political entity during the 1930s soviet subdivision of russian turkestan . 
forced westward ,  the kazakhs were caught between the kalmyks and the russians . 
the kazakh khanate was founded in 1465 in the zhetysu region of southeastern kazakhstan by janybek khan and kerey khan . 
the russian empire started to integrate the kazakh steppe . 
in june 1990 moscow declared the sovereignty of the central government over kazakhstan ,  forcing kazakhstan to make its own statement of sovereignty . 
the future kazakhstan was absorbed into the turkic kaganate and successor states
many kazakhs and russians fought the communist takeover ,  and resisted its control until 1920.
in the second millennium bce ,  ore mining developed in central kazakhstan . 
the administrator for turkestan  -lrb-  current kazakhstan  -rrb-  ,  vasile balabanov ,  was responsible for russian resettlement at this time . 
at the same time ,  nazarbayev began preparing kazakhstan for greater freedom or outright independence . 
kazakhstan also maintains good relations with the united states . 
kazakhs started to invest more in human capital because they observed that russians were successful in that area . 
the kirghiz autonomous socialist soviet republic ,  established in 1920, was renamed the kazakh autonomous socialist soviet republic in 1925 when the kazakhs were officially distinguished from the kyrgyz . 
the final disruption of nomadism began in the 1890s ,  when many russian settlers were introduced into the fertile lands of northern and eastern kazakhstan . 
prominent kazakh khans included haknazar khan ,  esim khan ,  tauke khan ,  and ablai khan . 
the large central desert of kazakhstan is still called dashti-kipchak ,  or the kipchak steppe . 
by the beginning of the 6th century ,  the proto-mongolian rouran khaganate had annexed areas that were later part of the east kazakhstan . 
by the 1970s the kazakh ssr was the only soviet republic in which the eponymous nationality was a minority ,  due to immigration and the decimation of the nomadic kazakh population . 
the climate in kazakhstan is continental . 
kazakhstan is located in central asia and eastern europe at  . 
the three largest bodies of water are lake balkhash ,  a partially fresh ,  partially saline lake in the east ,  near almaty ,  the caspian sea ,  and the aral sea ,  all of which lie partially within kazakhstan . 
there is considerable topographical variation within kazakhstan . 
the country borders turkmenistan ,  uzbekistan ,  and kyrgyzstan to the south; russia to the north; russia and the caspian sea to the west; and china's xinjiang uygur autonomous region to the east . 
the environment of kazakhstan has been badly damaged by human activity . 
some use the word kazakh to refer to the kazakh ethnic group and language  -lrb-  autochthonous to kazakhstan as well as parts of russia ,  china and mongolia  -rrb-  and kazakhstani to refer to kazakhstan and its citizens regardless of ethnicity ,  but it is common to use kazakh in both senses . 
as of 2003, there were discrepancies between western sources regarding the population of kazakhstan . 
the first census in kazakhstan was conducted under russian imperial rule in 1897, which estimated population at round 4 million people . 
there are 44 judges on the supreme court of kazakhstan . 
there are local and oblast  -lrb-  regional  -rrb-  level courts ,  and a national-level supreme court . 
the supreme court hears appeals from the oblast courts . 
the legislature ,  known as the parliament  -lrb-  parliament  -rrb-  ,  has two chambers . 
in 1999, kazakhstan applied for observer status at the council of europe parliamentary assembly . 
taitra has an office in almaty ,  kazakhstan . 
as of the beginning of 2016, the world bank invested over $6.8 billion in kazakhstan since 1992.
according to the agency of statistics of the republic of kazakhstan the kazakhstan's gdp growth in the first quarter of 2014 was 3.8% . 
8,691 foreign companies operating in the kazakhstan are small businesses . 
summarizing 2016, kazakhstan's foreign minister erlan idrissov noted that kazakhstan attracted $20 billion of foreign direct investment during the year . 
in the first quarter of 2016, kazakhstan attracted $2.7 billion in foreign direct investment . 
china is kazakhstan's important trade partner . 
as of september 30, 2014, total foreign investment in kazakhstan reached usd 211.5 billion . 
kazakhstan's real gdp growth was projected to reach 4.3% in 2014, the main driving force of the economy in kazakhstan in 2014 is the consumer sector; the consumption in kazakhstan is mainly boosted by the retail lending . 
kazakhstan has the potential to be a world-class oil exporter in the medium term . 
the gdp per capita in current usd in kazakhstan declined by about 40% between 2013 compared and 2017.
muller also talked about kazakhstan's improved positioning in the world bank's doing business report 2017, where kazakhstan ranked 35th out of 190 countries worldwide . 
kazakhstan's gdp grew 4.1% in real terms during the period from january to september 2014.
in 2016 the number of kazakhstan's telecom start-ups increased by 10% compared to 2015.
a new program to support small businesses was launched in kazakhstan in february 2015.
kazakhstan was ranked 36th in the ease of doing business report released by the world bank group in 2018.
kazakhstan fell from 32nd to the 38th place in the 2018 imd world competitiveness ranking . 
in december 2015, kazakhstan government approved new privatization plan for 2016 - 2020.
in recent years a trade route has been established between kazakhstan and the united states . 
this article provides an overview of the communications infrastructure of the country of kazakhstan . 
the vast territory of kazakhstan spans across  . 
therefore ,  the need for efficient transportation in kazakhstan is great . 
the 69th tank division and the 10th fortified area were both disbanded in 1992.
immediately prior to its dissolution ,  the 40th army consisted of the 78th tank division  -lrb-  ayaguz  -rrb- ; the 5202nd base for storage of weapons and equipment at semipalatinsk  -lrb-  prior to 1989 – the 71st motor rifle division  -rrb- ; the 5203rd bkhvt ust-kamenogorsk  -lrb-  prior to 1989, the 155th motor rifle division  -rrb- ; the 5204th bkhvt at karaganda  -lrb-  prior to 1989 – the 203rd zaporozhye khingan motor rifle division  -rrb-  ,  taken over by kazakhstan on 7 may 1992, the 69th tank division  -lrb-  mobilisation  -rrb-   -lrb-  ust-kamenogorsk  -rrb-  ,  and the 10th fortified area . 
the armed forces of kazakhstan act under the authority of the kazakhstan ministry of defence . 
kazakhstan is a founding member of csto and sco . 
kazakhstan has a `` multi-vector '' foreign policy ,  i . e . 
in 1944 thuku founded and was first chairman of the multi-tribal kenya african study union  -lrb-  kasu  -rrb-  ,  which in 1946 became the kenya african union  -lrb-  kau  -rrb-  . 
the british empire established the east africa protectorate in 1895, from 1920 known as the kenya colony . 
the independent republic of kenya was formed in 1964.
kenya thereby became a one-party state under kanu . 
the british government bought out the white settlers and they mostly left kenya . 
thuku was one of the first kikuyu to win a coffee licence ,  and in 1959 he became the first african board member of the kenya planters coffee union . 
at a conference held in 1960 in london ,  agreement was reached between the african members and the british settlers of the new kenya group ,  led by michael blundell . 
as a result ,  120,000 of the 176,000 indians kept their old british passports rather than become citizens of an independent kenya; large numbers left kenya ,  most of them headed to britain . 
the arrival of the southern nilotes in kenya occurred shortly before the introduction of iron to east africa . 
kenya became a military base for the british in the first world war  -lrb-  1914–1918 -rrb- ,  as efforts to subdue the german colony to the south were frustrated . 
later in the century ,  british interest in east africa would be stimulated by german competition . 
british officials sought to modernise kikuyu farming in the murang'a district 1920–45.
as a reaction to their exclusion from political representation ,  the kikuyu people ,  the most subject to pressure by the settlers ,  founded in 1921 kenya's first african political protest movement ,  the young kikuyu association ,  led by harry thuku . 
the bantu expansion is thought to have reached western kenya around 1000 bce . 
before the war ,  african political focus was diffuse . 
after the young kikuyu association was banned by the government ,  it was replaced by the kikuyu central association in 1924.
by 1000 bce and even earlier ,  pastoralism had spread into central kenya and northern tanzania . 
in 1895 the british government took over and claimed the interior as far west as lake naivasha; it set up the east africa protectorate . 
in the second world war  -lrb-  1939–45 -rrb- kenya became an important british military base for successful campaigns against italy in the italian somaliland and ethiopia . 
following severe financial difficulties of the british east africa company ,  the british government on 1 july 1895 established direct rule through the east african protectorate ,  subsequently opening  -lrb-  1902 -rrb- the fertile highlands to white settlers . 
after the suppression of the mau mau rising ,  the british provided for the election of the six african members to the legislative council under a weighted franchise based on education . 
the first inhabitants of present-day kenya were hunter-gatherer groups ,  akin to the modern khoisan speakers . 
most political activity between the wars was local ,  and this succeeded most among the luo of kenya ,  where progressive young leaders became senior chiefs . 
the kikuyu claimed some of the land reserved for europeans and continued to feel that they had been deprived of their inheritance . 
kenya became a focus of resettlement of young ,  upper class british officers after the war ,  giving a strong aristocratic tone to the white settlers . 
by the time the railway was built ,  military resistance by the african population to the original british takeover had petered out . 
with the borders of the modern state at the crossroads of the bantu ,  nilo-saharan and afro-asiatic ethno-linguistic areas of africa ,  kenya is a truly multi-ethnic state . 
central and western kenya is characterised by the kenyan rift valley and central province home to the highest mountain ,  mount kenya and mount elgon on the border between kenya and uganda . 
kenya's largest ethnic group is the kikuyu . 
most bantu are farmers . 
bantus are the single largest population division in kenya . 
the demography of kenya is monitored by the kenyan national bureau of statistics . 
this devolved into ethnic violence in the 2007–2008 kenyan crisis . 
arabs form a small but historically important minority ethnic group in kenya . 
kenya's population was reported as 38.6 million during the 2009 census compared to 28.7 million inhabitants in 1999, 21.4 million in 1989, and 15.3 million in 1979.
nilotes are the second-largest group of peoples in kenya . 
there is also a senate with 67 members . 
in december 2002, kenya held democratic and open elections and elected mwai kibaki as their new president . 
between 2008 and 2013 kenya was governed by a grand coalition ,  established by a power sharing agreement ,  signed by then president mwai kibaki and prime minister raila odinga of the orange democratic movement . 
kenyan parliament building
there was significant and widespread violence in kenya – 2007–2008 kenyan crisis – following the unprecedented announcement of kibaki as the winner of the 2007 presidential elections . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated kenya as `` hybrid regime '' in 2016.
as of the 2013 march general election ,  the constitution of kenya has two requirements for any candidate to be declared winner:
in 2011, there was a slight rise to 19 percent of kenya's overall gdp . 
in 1963,kenya's total gdp was us$926.6 million with a population of 8.9 million and a per capita of us$104.
in 2005, 60 percent of women and 70 percent of men were in the labour force ,  and in 2010, 61 percent of women and 72 percent of men were a part of the labour force . 
in 1990, it accounted for 51 percent ,  in 2000 it stayed constant at 51 percent ,  and in 2011, the services sector accounted for 58 percent of kenya's overall gdp . 
kenya's services sector ,  which contributes about 63 percent of gdp ,  is dominated by tourism . 
from 1994 to 1996, kenya's real gdp growth rate averaged just over 4% a year . 
the men make up 1.4 million workers ,  and the women 1.3 million . 
gdp composition by sector ,  according to 2018 estimates ,  is as follows: agriculture ,  25.7 percent; manufacturing ,  14.0 percent; trade ,  restaurants ,  and hotels ,  13.8 percent; transport and communications ,  6.9 percent; government services ,  15.6 percent; and other ,  24.0 percent . 
with gdp growth averaging 4.2% per year in the 1980s and 2.2% a year in the 1990s . 
in 1990, the value agriculture added to gdp was 30 percent ,  in 2000, it increased to 32 percent ,  and in 2011, and the value agriculture added to overall gdp fell to 23 percent . 
the kenya banking system is supervised by the central bank of kenya  -lrb-  cbk  -rrb-  . 
per capita gdp was estimated at $1,991.
the country's real gdp growth averaged 5.7 percent in the first quarter of 2018 and nearly 6.3 percent in the second quarter of 2018, compared with 4.7 percent in the first quarter of 2017.
in 2006 tourism generated us$803 million ,  up from us$699 million the previous year . 
more than half of family farm workers in kenya are women ,  3.8 million ,  compared to men who make up 2.7 million . 
in 2006 kenya's labour force was estimated to include about 12 million workers ,  almost 75 percent in agriculture . 
by the last year of president jomo kenyatta government in 1978, the total gdp of kenya was us$5.3 billion with a population of 15.08 million and a per capita of us$351.
telecommunications in kenya include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
transport in kenya refers to the transportation structure in kenya . 
the kenya defence forces are the armed forces of the republic of kenya . 
on the dawn of independence the kenya national assembly passed a bill  -lrb-  kenya bills 1963 -rrb- to amend the status of the military forces in kenya  . 
the president of kenya is the commander-in-chief of all the armed forces . 
army training deployments have continued up until 2015, as of 2015 supervised by british army training unit kenya . 
the transformation of king's african rifles to kenya military forces on the midnight of 12 december 1963 was a major milestone in the foundation of today's kenya army units . 
after questions were raised about control of weapons and potential settler threats to the kenya government in 1936, the force was disbanded and replaced by the kenya regiment ,  formed 1 june 1937.
in the aftermath of the mutiny and following courts-martial ,  the 11th kenya rifles was disbanded . 
between 1963 and 1967, kenya fought the shifta war against somali residents who sought union with their kin in the somali republic to the north . 
kenya is also a member of the un and hosts the un office in nairobi ,  which is the un headquarters in africa . 
kenya has been a member state of the commonwealth of nations since 1963, when it became independent . 
on september 1, 2000, the navy relinquished its control over kingman reef to the u . s . 
on december 29, 1934, the us navy assumed jurisdiction over kingman reef . 
kingman reef supports a vast variety of marine life . 
in january 2009, kingman reef was designated a marine national monument . 
the reef encloses a lagoon up to deep in its western part . 
kingman reef is a largely submerged ,  uninhabited triangular-shaped reef ,  east-west and north-south ,  located in the north pacific ocean ,  roughly halfway between the hawaiian islands and american samoa at  . 
there are a total of 21 inhabited islands in kiribati . 
kiribati received canton island ,  enderbury island ,  birnie island ,  mckean island ,  rawaki ,  manra ,  orona ,  and nikumaroro from the phoenix islands; and teraina ,  tabuaeran ,  kiritimati ,  malden island ,  starbuck island ,  caroline islands ,  vostok islands and flint island from the line islands . 
the name `` kiribati '' was adopted at independence . 
the gilbert islands gained independence as the republic of kiribati on 12 july 1979.
kiribati gained un membership in 1999.
kiribati  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of kiribati  -lrb-  gilbertese: `` ribaberiki kiribati ''  -rrb-  ,  is a sovereign state in micronesia in the central pacific ocean . 
kiribati's easternmost islands ,  the southern line islands ,  south of hawaii ,  have the most advanced time on earth: hours . 
the islands became the crown colony of the gilbert and ellice islands in 1916.
since independence ,  kiribati is no longer divided into districts  -lrb-  see subdivisions of kiribati  -rrb-  . 
law enforcement in kiribati is carried out by the kiribati police service which is responsible for all law enforcement and paramilitary duties for the island nation . 
kiribati has no military and relies on both australia and new zealand for its defence . 
in june 2008, kiribati officials asked australia and new zealand to accept kiribati citizens as permanent refugees . 
kiribati became independent from the united kingdom in 1979.
although the indigenous gilbertese language name for the gilbert islands proper is `` tungaru '' ,  the new state chose the name `` kiribati '' ,  the i-kiribati enunciation of `` gilberts '' ,  as an equivalent of the former colony to acknowledge the inclusion of banaba ,  the line islands ,  and the phoenix islands . 
in 1788 captain thomas gilbert in and captain john marshall in  . 
the islands became a crown colony on 12 january 1916 by the gilbert and ellice islands order in council ,  1915.
in 1820, the islands were named the gilbert islands or `` îles gilbert ''  -lrb-  in french  -rrb-  by adam johann von krusenstern ,  a russian admiral of the czar after the british captain thomas gilbert ,  who crossed the archipelago in 1788.
in the same year ,  fanning island and washington island were included in it together with the islands of the tokelau or union islands . 
in an effort to restore a measure of order ,  the gilbert islands and the neighboring ellice islands  -lrb-  now tuvalu  -rrb-  were declared as the british protectorate by captain davis of on 27 may 1892.
the phoenix islands were added in 1937 and the five islands of the central and southern line islands were added in 1972.
japan seized part of the islands during world war ii to form part of their island defenses . 
although the indigenous gilbertese language name for the gilbert islands proper is `` tungaru '' ,  the new state chose the name `` kiribati , ``  the gilbertese rendition of `` gilberts , ``  as an equivalent of the former colony to acknowledge the inclusion of islands which were never considered part of the gilberts chain . 
the total land area mass total  . 
the amount of arable land is at 2.5% . 
the coastline of the islands total 1,143 km  -lrb-  710 mi  -rrb-  in length . 
kiribati includes kiritimati  -lrb-  christmas atoll; in the line islands  -rrb-  ,  the largest coral atoll  -lrb-  in terms of land area ,  not dimensions  -rrb-  in the world ,  and banaba  -lrb-  ocean island  -rrb-  ,  one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the pacific . 
the attorney general of kiribati is also a member of cabinet . 
the judicial system consists of magistrates' courts ,  the high court and the court of appeal . 
in 2015, the role of the people's lawyer changed in that it was now filled by a kiribati citizen: raweita beniata  -lrb-  male lawyer; 2015-   -rrb-  . 
kiribati tabomoa party  -lrb-  `` national progressive party ''  -rrb-  and christian democratic party merged into maneaban te mauri  -lrb-  mmp ,  `` protect the maneaba ''  -rrb-  in 2003, which later merged with kiribati independent party into karikirakean te i-kiribati  -lrb-  ktk ,  `` united coalition party ''  -rrb-  in 2010, which later merged with maurin kiribati party  -lrb-  mkp  -rrb-  to form tobwaan kiribati party  -lrb-  tkp  -rrb-  ,  the only one facing `` boutokaan te koaua ''  -lrb-  btk ,  `` pillars of truth ''  -rrb-  . 
kiribati is the only developing nation in the pacific never to have been a member of the group of 77.
kiribati is a full member of the commonwealth ,  the imf and the world bank ,  and became a full member of the united nations in 1999.
kiribati was admitted to the commonwealth of nations in 1979 and to the united nations in 1999.
in 1521, kuwait was under portuguese control . 
in 2012, 80,000 palestinians resided in kuwait . 
in 1613, the town of kuwait was founded in the present-day location of kuwait city . 
kuwaiti merchants had the most power in kuwait before oil . 
in the 1960s and 1970s ,  kuwait was the most developed country in the region . 
kuwait was known for its religious tolerance . 
during the iran–iraq war ,  kuwait supported iraq . 
kuwait is a country in the arabian peninsula ,  surrounding the gulf of kuwait at the head of the persian gulf . 
al sabah became kuwait's monarchy in 1938.
as a result ,  kuwait's maritime commerce boomed . 
at kuwait university ,  mini-skirts were more common than the hijab . 
a palestinian exodus from kuwait took place during and after the gulf war . 
at the time of the discovery of oil in 1937, most of kuwait's inhabitants were impoverished . 
in the 1960s and 1970s ,  kuwait's press was described as one of the freest in the world . 
in 224 ad ,  kuwait became part of the sassanid empire . 
in 4000 bc until 2000 bc ,  the bay of kuwait was home to the dilmun civilization . 
the invasion of kuwait and annexation by iraq took place on 2 august 1990.
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries ,  kuwait was a prosperous trade port . 
kuwait's theatre industry was renowned throughout the arab world . 
kuwait has an arid climate . 
kuwait is situated in southwest asia ,  bordering the persian gulf ,  between iraq and saudi arabia . 
as previously mentioned ,  kuwait borders the persian gulf with of coast . 
kuwait is located at the far northwestern corner of the persian gulf . 
kuwait's area consists mostly of desert . 
the constitutional court can invalidate the emir's decree dissolving the parliament . 
the prime minister chooses the cabinet  -lrb-  government  -rrb-  . 
he won the majority of the votes in the parliament and then became the 15th emir of the state . 
in january 2006, the kuwaiti parliament voted to remove the ailing emir saad al-sabah from power . 
kuwait is a constitutional emirate with a semi-democratic political system . 
the current cabinet has two elected members of the assembly . 
there are two airports in kuwait . 
kuwait has about of recoverable oil reserves . 
kuwait is a small ,  petroleum-based economy . 
kuwait plans to increase its capacity to by 2005.
the kuwait investment authority  -lrb-  kia  -rrb-  is kuwait's sovereign wealth fund specializing in foreign investment . 
kuwait has an extensive and modern network of highways . 
between 2010 and 2016, kuwait registered the highest growth in patents in the arab world . 
kuwait has one of the largest shipping industries in the region . 
the historical preeminence of kuwait  -lrb-  among the gulf monarchies  -rrb-  in finance dates back to the founding of the national bank of kuwait in 1952.
in 1934, the emir of kuwait granted an oil concession to the kuwait oil co .   -lrb-  koc  -rrb-  ,  jointly owned by the anglo-persian oil company  -lrb-  later british petroleum company  -rrb-  and gulf oil corporation in 1976, the kuwaiti government nationalized koc . 
kuwait lies on the persian gulf and ports include: ash shu'aybah ,  ash shuwaykh ,  kuwait ,  mina' 'abd allah ,  mina' al ahmadi ,  mina' su'ud
as a nation with one car per 2.25 people ,  kuwait relies heavily on its road network for transportation . 
the kuwait metropolitan rapid transit system project is a planned four-line metro network which will total 160 km with 69 stations . 
the three main military arms of kuwait are the kuwait land force  ,  the kuwait air force and the kuwait naval force ,  which includes the kuwait commando marine units . 
the kuwait land border force of the interior is a border component of the kuwait police . 
the kuwait emiri guard is an independent combat authority in the kuwait armed forces . 
during 1975, kuwait defense authorities enacted the establishment of the first kuwait naval base . 
also in 1962, the kuwait police became an integral component of the kuwait ministry of interior . 
the kuwait commando marine units are independent commando combat units part of the kuwait navy in the kuwait armed forces . 
there was an exodus of palestinian from kuwait during and after the gulf war . 
in 1978, the kuwait navy was created and designated as the sea-based component of the kuwait armed forces . 
during the same year ,  the kuwait armed forces signed on the procurement of naval warships for the kuwait navy . 
on 2 august 1990, iraqi forces invaded kuwait . 
in 1988, the kuwait land force was officially designated as the land component of the kuwait armed forces . 
the navy includes the kuwait marine corps and units of the kuwait commando marine units . 
in 1966, the headquarters of the kuwait military hospital was opened . 
in 1959 the kuwait army set up its first mechanized combat brigade ,  the kuwait 6th mechanized brigade ,  known later as the kuwait 6th liberation mechanized brigade ,  following the liberation of kuwait during the gulf war . 
after 62 years as a british protectorate ,  kuwait declared independence in 1961.
ancillary formations include the kuwait military police and the kuwait military fire service directorate . 
the kuwait national guard ,  considered a combat formation ,  is independent of the kuwait armed forces  -lrb-  and the kuwait ministry of interior ,  which maintains several formations of its own ,  including the kuwait land border force and the kuwait coast guard  -rrb-  and is the main internal and border protection security force . 
in 1976, the kuwait armed forces took delivery of dassault mirage f1s to be operated by the kuwait air force . 
during the same year ,  kuwait armed forces introduced the aérospatiale gazelle and puma series helicopters to the kuwait air force . 
the palestinians who fled kuwait were jordanians naturalized citizens . 
in 1953 abdullah mubarak al-sabah established the first kuwait flying club . 
during the same year ,  the kuwait air force retired the bell 206 and bell 204/205 from service . 
in 1962 the kuwait army enacted the kuwait 35th shaheed armored brigade and the kuwait 15th mubarak armored brigade which were considered the second and third functioning armored brigades in service . 
in 1997, the kuwait armed forces entered into service the mim-104 patriot surface-to-air missile  -lrb-  sam  -rrb-  system with the kuwait air force . 
in 1968, kuwaiti military authorities established the kuwait military academy . 
on 2 august 1990, iraq invaded and occupied kuwait . 
kuwait also has good relations with iran . 
kuwait ,  is a member of the cooperation council for the arab states of the gulf ,  which includes ,  saudi arabia ,  bahrain ,  qatar ,  the united arab emirates ,  and oman . 
kuwait is also a major ally of asean ,  and a regional ally of china . 
a new constitution was passed by the parliament in may 1993 and the republic of kyrgyzstan was renamed the kyrgyz republic . 
kirghizia was the only one of the five states of soviet central asia that voted their established communist leadership out of power in 1990.
kyrgyz was announced as the state language in september 1991.
absamat masaliyev the communist leader was voted by the new parliament as chairman of the supreme soviet of kirghizia on 10 april 1990.
for russian expansion into central asia see russian conquest of turkestan . 
the history of the kyrgyz people and the land now called kyrgyzstan goes back more than 2,000 years . 
the first turks to form a state in the territory of central asia  -lrb-  including kyrgyzstan  -rrb-  were göktürks or kök-türks . 
this was followed by the supreme soviet vote declaring independence from the soviet union on 31 august 1991, becoming the first of the five republics of soviet central asia to break away . 
on 15 december 1990, the supreme soviet voted to change the republic's name to the republic of kyrgyzstan . 
on august 19, 1991, when the state emergency committee assumed power in moscow ,  there was an attempt to depose akayev in kyrgyzstan . 
on december 21, 1991, kyrgyzstan formally entered the new commonwealth of independent states  -lrb-  cis  -rrb-  . 
on 11 march 1985 mikhail gorbachev was chosen by the politburo as the new general secretary of the communist party of the soviet union . 
typical kyrgyz families vary in their devotion to islam . 
during the 1920s ,  kyrgyzstan saw considerable cultural ,  educational ,  and social change . 
russian and kyrgyz cultures differ in respect to family ,  religious identity ,  and social structure . 
almazbek atambayev ran in 2011 to succeed roza otunbayeva as president of kyrgyzstan . 
kyrgyzstan is bordered on the east and southeast by china ,  on the north by kazakhstan ,  on the west by uzbekistan and on the south by tajikistan . 
kyrgyzstan is a landlocked nation in central asia ,  west of the people's republic of china . 
precipitation varies from per year in the mountains above the fergana valley to less than per year on the west bank of ysyk-köl . 
the terrain of kyrgyzstan is dominated by the tian shan and pamir mountain systems ,  which together occupy about 65% of the national territory . 
kyrgyzstan's population increased from 2.1 million to 4.8 million between the censuses of 1959 and 1999.
the percentage of ethnic kyrgyz increased from around 50% in 1979 to nearly 70% in 2007, while the percentage of european ethnic groups  -lrb-  russians ,  ukrainians and germans  -rrb-  dropped from 35% to about 10% . 
the nation's largest ethnic group are the kyrgyz ,  a turkic people ,  which comprise 70.9% of the population  -lrb-  2009 census  -rrb-  . 
a new constitution was passed by the parliament in may 1993.
the prime minister is chosen by the parliament . 
by june 2003, the lower house of parliament announced that president akayev and two other leaders of kyrgyzstan ,  from the soviet era ,  would be given lifetime immunity from prosecution ,  raising the prospect of akayev finally stepping down . 
akayev scheduled an october 1994 referendum ,  overwhelmingly approved by voters ,  that proposed two amendments to the constitution ,  one that would allow the constitution to be amended by means of a referendum ,  and the other creating a new bicameral parliament called the `` jogorku keņesh '' . 
as of 00:45 local time in kyrgyzstan on 25 july 2009  -lrb-  with 2058 of 2330 polling districts reporting  -rrb-  ,  bakiyev had won the election with 83.8% of the vote . 
since that time ,  parliament has demonstrated real independence from the executive branch . 
in the first years of kyrgyzstan's full independence ,  president askar akayev appeared wholeheartedly committed to the reform process . 
only 4 percent of kyrgyzstan is classified as forested . 
current gdp per capita of kyrgyzstan shrank by 54% in the 1990s . 
kyrgyzstan does not have a significant fishing industry . 
these reforms led to kyrgyzstan's accession to the wto on december 20, 1998.
kyrgyzstan is a mountainous country with a dominant agricultural sector . 
the stock market capitalisation of listed companies in kyrgyzstan was valued at $42 million in 2005 by the world bank . 
on october 2012, international reserves and foreign currency liquidity of kyrgyzstan national bank have reached us $1.96 bln ,  8.6% of which is in gold . 
completion of this project might affect broadband internet prices in kyrgyzstan . 
telecommunications in kyrgyzstan include fixed and mobile telephones and the internet . 
in the early 2000s ,  internet use has expanded rapidly . 
liberalization of the telecommunications market in kyrgyzstan has made the internet affordable for the majority of the population . 
for transport in the soviet union ,  see transport in the soviet union . 
two groups of forces ,  the southern ,  and more recently the northern ,  have been active during kyrgyzstan's history . 
the army of kyrgyzstan includes the 1st motor rifle brigade  -lrb-  mountain  -rrb-  at osh ,  a brigade at koy-tash ,  in the bishkek area ,  the 25th special forces brigade ,  independent battalions at karakol and naryn ,  a brigade at balykchi ,  and other units . 
kyrgyzstan also has contributed to the cis peacekeeping forces in tajikistan . 
kyrgyzstan is a member of the osce ,  the cis ,  and the united nations . 
thornton followed the `` dr .  octagonecologyst '' album with `` sex style '' in 1997, under the name kool keith . 
on july 25, 2000, thornton released the album `` matthew '' . 
on april 25, 2006, thornton released the album `` nogatco rd . `` 
in 2018, keith collaborated once again with dan the automator and dj qbert for another dr .  octagon album .  ``  ''
in august ,  thornton performed under the dr .  octagon billing ,  but did not acknowledge the release of the ocd album . 
on june 5, 2001, thornton released the album `` spankmaster '' on gothom records . 
it peaked at #16 on the `` billboard '' heatseekers chart ,  #11 on the top independent albums chart and #48 on the top r&b/hip-hop albums chart . 
cobain's family had a musical background . 
grohl said that the news of cobain's death was:
stipe was chosen as the godfather of cobain and courtney love's daughter ,  frances bean cobain . 
cobain often drew during school classes . 
cobain has been described as a `` generation x icon '' . 
cobain was interviewed by two gay magazines ,  out and the advocate . 
cobain's body had been lying there for days; the coroner's report estimated cobain to have died on april 5, 1994 at the age of 27.
these interactions were the last time cobain saw his daughter . 
cobain's parents both found new partners after the divorce . 
cobain began developing an interest in music at a young age . 
love later stated that the incident was cobain's first suicide attempt . 
love arranged an intervention regarding cobain's drug use on march 25, 1994.
when cobain was nine years old ,  his parents divorced . 
she did not become aware that cobain wrote `` about a girl '' about her until years after his death . 
cobain was already aware of love through her role in the 1987 film `` straight to hell '' . 
cobain has been remembered as one of the most iconic rock musicians in the history of alternative music . 
cobain struggled to reconcile the massive success of nirvana with his underground roots . 
during his second year in high school ,  cobain began living with his mother in aberdeen . 
grohl stated that cobain believed that music comes first and lyrics second . 
this enthusiasm was encouraged by his grandmother ,  iris cobain ,  who was a professional artist . 
cobain is remembered as one of the most iconic and influential rock musicians in the history of alternative music . 
 ''yeah ,  he talked a lot about what direction he was heading in '' ,  cobain's friend ,  r . e . m . 
in 1996 beck was hired to work on the chrysler comprehensive compensation system . 
beck attended the university of oregon between 1979 and 1987, receiving b . s . 
beck popularized crc cards with ward cunningham ,  the inventor of the wiki . 
gold 5-krona coins were added in 1881.
in 1962, cupronickel replaced silver in the 10-öre ,  25-öre and 50-öre coins . 
in 1971, the 1- and 2-öre ,  as well as the 2-krona coins ceased production . 
a new design of 2-krona coins will be issued in 2016.
in 1991, aluminium-brass  -lrb-  `` nordic gold ''  -rrb-  10-krona coins were introduced . 
an archaic name for both the skagerrak and kattegat was the `` norwegian sea '' or `` jutland sea ''  -lrb-  knýtlinga saga mentions the name `` jótlandshaf ''  -rrb-  . 
until the completion of the eider canal in 1784, the kattegat was the only sea route into and out of the baltic region . 
the sea area is a continuation of the skagerrak and may be seen as a bay of the baltic sea or the north sea or ,  as in traditional scandinavian usage ,  neither of these . 
in the kattegat ,  the salinity has a pronounced two-layer structure . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the `` kattegat ,  sound and belts ''  -lrb-  that is ,  the kattegat ,  øresund ,  great belt ,  and little belt  -rrb-  as follows:
due to the very heavy sea traffic and many large coastal settlements ,  the kattegat has been designated as a sulphur emission control area as part of the baltic sea since 2006.
the kolmogorov–smirnov test can be modified to serve as a goodness of fit test . 
in statistics ,  the kolmogorov–smirnov test  -lrb-  k–s test or ks test  -rrb-  is a nonparametric test of the equality of continuous ,  one-dimensional probability distributions that can be used to compare a sample with a reference probability distribution  -lrb-  one-sample k–s test  -rrb-  ,  or to compare two samples  -lrb-  two-sample k–s test  -rrb-  . 
where formula_2 is the indicator function ,  equal to 1 if formula_3 and equal to 0 otherwise . 
