nigeria achieved independence in 1960.
that spelled doom to federalism in nigeria . 
goodluck jonathan served as nigeria's president until 16 april 2011, when a new presidential election in nigeria was conducted . 
nigeria regained democracy in 1999 when it elected olusegun obasanjo ,  the former military head of state ,  as the new president of nigeria . 
nigeria is officially a democratic secular country . 
for instance ,  northern nigeria did not outlaw slavery until 1936 whilst in other parts of nigeria slavery was abolished soon after colonialism . 
when elections were held in 1965, the nigerian national democratic party came to power in nigeria's western region . 
nigeria has been home to a number of ancient and indigenous kingdoms and states over the millennia . 
nigeria used egyptian pilots for their air force . 
for centuries ,  various peoples in modern-day nigeria traded overland with traders from north africa . 
the federation of nigeria gained independence from the united kingdom on 1 october 1960, while retaining the british monarch ,  elizabeth ii ,  as nominal head of state and queen of nigeria . 
the yoruba kingdoms of ife and oyo in southwestern nigeria became prominent in the 12th and 14th centuries ,  respectively . 
the federal republic of nigeria ,  commonly referred to as nigeria  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a federal republic in west africa ,  bordering niger in the north ,  chad in the northeast ,  cameroon in the southeast ,  and benin in the west . 
nigeria is a federal republic modelled after the united states ,  with executive power exercised by the president . 
in 2012, nigeria was estimated to have lost over $400 billion to corruption since independence . 
oyo ,  at its territorial zenith in the late 17th to early 18th centuries ,  extended its influence from western nigeria to modern-day togo . 
the kingdom of nri is considered to be the foundation of igbo culture ,  and the oldest kingdom in nigeria . 
during the 1950s prior to independence ,  oil was discovered off the coast of nigeria . 
 ''nigeria's economy came through the war in better shape than expected . `` 
in 1914, the area was formally united as the colony and protectorate of nigeria . 
the benin empire  -lrb-  1440–1897; called `` bini '' by locals  -rrb-  was a pre-colonial african state in what is now modern nigeria . 
the history of nigeria can be traced to prehistoric settlers  -lrb-  nigerians  -rrb-  living in the area as early as 1100 bc . 
throughout the 16th-century much of northern nigeria paid homage to songhai in the west or to borno ,  a rival empire in the east . 
the early independent kingdoms and states that make up present-day british colonialized nigeria are  -lrb-  in alphabetical order  -rrb- :
on 27 october 1958 britain agreed that nigeria would become an independent state on 1 october 1960.
the emergence of democracy in nigeria on may 1999 ended 16 years of consecutive military rule . 
the civil war that disrupted kanem in the second half of the 14th century resulted in the independence of borno . 
on 1 january 1901, nigeria became a british protectorate ,  part of the british empire ,  the foremost world power at the time . 
by then a string of dynastic states ,  including the earliest hausa states ,  stretched across western and central sudan . 
the kingdom of nri was a religio-polity ,  a sort of theocratic state ,  that developed in the central heartland of the igbo region . 
in october 1963 nigeria proclaimed itself the federal republic of nigeria ,  and former governor general nnamdi azikiwe became the country's first president . 
following the napoleonic wars ,  the british expanded trade with the nigerian interior . 
trade is the key to the emergence of organized communities in the sahelian portions of nigeria . 
by these same routes ,  islam made its way south into west africa after the 9th century . 
the hausa kingdoms were a collection of states started by the hausa people ,  situated between the niger river and lake chad . 
with the decline of nri kingdom in the 15th to 17th centuries ,  several states once under their influence ,  became powerful economic oracular oligarchies and large commercial states that dominated igboland . 
ghana declined in the 11th century but was succeeded by the mali empire which consolidated much of western sudan in the 13th century . 
the main ethnic group taken out of calabar as slaves were the igbo ,  although they were not the main ethnicity in the area . 
all of this meant that by 1979, nigeria was the sixth largest producer of oil in the world with revenues from oil of $24 billion per year . 
the yorubaland now consists of different tribes from different states which are located in the southwestern part of the country ,  states like oyo state ,  ondo state ,  ekiti state ,  ogun state ,  among others . 
nigeria first became a republic in 1963, but succumbed to military rule three years later after a bloody coup d'état . 
however ,  the cross river igbo state like the aro had the greatest influence in igboland and adjacent areas after the decline of nri . 
colonization lasted until 1960, when an independence movement succeeded in gaining nigeria its independence . 
in the 1980s nigerian scholarship ,  in general ,  began to decline ,  and the ibadan school was much affected . 
the earliest known example of a fossil human skeleton found anywhere in west africa ,  which is 13,000 years old ,  was found at iwo-eleru in isarun ,  western nigeria and attests to the antiquity of habitation in the region . 
however ,  bello chose to remain as premier of the north and as party boss of the npc ,  selected sir abubakar tafawa balewa ,  a hausa ,  to become nigeria's first prime minister . 
the states included only kingdoms inhabited by hausa-speakers:
the u . s .  analysts said that ``  .  .  . nigeria is still very much a tribal society .  .  . ``  where local and tribal alliances count more than `` national attachment . 
nigeria is a country in west africa . 
nigeria's seasons are determined by rainfall with rainy season and dry season being the major seasons in nigeria . 
the niger delta is located in the southern part of nigeria . 
the dry season of nigeria is a period of little cloud cover in the southern part of nigeria to virtually no cloud cover in the northern part of nigeria . 
nigeria ,  like the rest of west africa and other tropical lands ,  has only two seasons . 
nigeria is affected by four climate types; these climate types are distinguishable ,  as one moves from the southern part of nigeria to the northern part of nigeria through nigeria's middle belt . 
the tropical maritime airmass  -lrb-  mt  -rrb-  is responsible for nigeria's rainy season . 
nigeria is found in the tropics ,  where the climate is seasonally damp and very humid . 
the southern part of nigeria experiences heavy and abundant rainfall . 
these two major wind systems in nigeria are known as the trade winds . 
temperate weather conditions occur on the highlands along the nigeria cameroon border ,  in the eastern part of nigeria . 
temperatures in the northern part of nigeria can go as high as in cities like maiduguri . 
the tropical continental airmass  -lrb-  ct  -rrb-  locally known as the harmattan ,  is a wind originating from north africa which crosses the sahara desert into west africa to nigeria . 
the nigerian government has said that it wants to help curb a rapid growth in population . 
nigeria is one of the most densely populated countries in africa ,  with approximately 196 million people in an area of  ,  and is also the country with the largest population in africa and the seventh largest population in the world . 
there is a large population momentum ,  with 3.2 percent growth rate leading to the projected population . 
he also stated that the population `` grew substantially from 17.3 in 1967 to 49.4 per cent in 2017. ''
the constitutional framework for the legal system is provided by the constitution of nigeria . 
the law of nigeria is based on the rule of law ,  the independence of the judiciary ,  and british common law  -lrb-  due to the long history of british colonial influence  -rrb-  . 
in 2005 nigeria's inflation rate was an estimated 15.6% . 
the u . s .  remains nigeria's largest buyer of crude oil ,  accounting for 40% of the country's total oil exports; nigeria provides about 10% of overall u . s .  oil imports and ranks as the fifth-largest source for u . s .  imported oil . 
although oil revenues contribute 2/3 of state revenues ,  oil only contributes about 9% to the gdp . 
nigeria's proven oil reserves are estimated to be ; natural gas reserves are well over  . 
in 2012, the gdp was composed of the following sectors: agriculture: 40%; services: 30%; manufacturing: 15%; oil: 14% . 
by 2015, the gdp was composed of the following sectors: agriculture: 18%; services: 55%; manufacturing: 16%; oil: 8%
current gdp per capita of nigeria expanded 132% in the sixties reaching a peak growth of 283% in the seventies . 
according to a citigroup report published in february 2011, nigeria will have the highest average gdp growth in the world between 2010 and 2050.
nigeria is one of two countries from africa among 11 global growth generators countries . 
the united kingdom is nigeria's largest trading partner followed by the united states . 
by 2012, expenditures stood at $31.61 billion ,  while revenues was $54.48 billion . 
telecommunications in nigeria include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
nigeria has 8,600 km of inland waterways . 
nigeria has the largest road network in west africa and the second largest south of the sahara ,  with roughly 108,000 km of surfaced roads in 1990.
railways in nigeria are operated by the nigerian railway corporation . 
the nigerian navy  -lrb-  nn  -rrb-  is the sea branch of the nigerian armed forces . 
section 217-220 of the 1999 constitution of nigeria addresses the nigerian armed forces:
the nigerian armed forces are the armed forces of the federal republic of nigeria . 
in 1956 the nigeria regiment of the royal west african frontier force  -lrb-  rwaff  -rrb-  was renamed the nigerian military forces ,  rwaff ,  and in april 1958 the colonial government of nigeria took over from the british war office control of the nigerian military forces . 
the nigerian army  -lrb-  na  -rrb-  is the land branch of the nigerian armed forces and the largest among the armed forces . 
the nigerian air force was formally established in january 1964 with technical assistance from west germany . 
nigeria also nationalised the british petroleum  -lrb-  bp  -rrb-  for supplying oil to south africa . 
nigeria also has provided the bulk of troops for ecomog forces in sierra leone . 
in december 1983, the new major general muhammadu buhari regime announced that nigeria could no longer afford an apartheid government in africa . 
nigeria extended diplomatic support to another cause ,  sam nujoma's southwest africa people's organization in namibia ,  to stall the apartheid south african-installed government there . 
niue continues to use new zealand currency ,  but issues its own postage stamps  -lrb-  new zealand stamps are not valid for postage in niue ,  nor niuean stamps in new zealand  -rrb-  . 
niueans continue to be new zealand citizens ,  and use standard new zealand passports . 
in response ,  cook named niue the `` savage island '' . 
niue gained its autonomy in 1974 in free association with new zealand ,  which handles the island's military and foreign affairs . 
the population of the island continues to drop  -lrb-  from a peak of 5,200 in 1966 to 2,100 in 2000 -rrb- ,  with substantial emigration to new zealand . 
soon afterwards ,  niue premier young vivian categorically rejected the possibility of altering the existing relationship with new zealand . 
150 niuean men ,  4% of the island's population ,  served as soldiers in the new zealand armed forces during world war i . 
niueans in niue and new zealand ,  king koroki mahuta  -lrb-  the maori king  -rrb-  ,  as well as churches ,  unions ,  and other groups ,  began to petition the government for clemency from late 1953.
niue is south of american samoa . 
niue is a small island in the south pacific ocean ,  to the east of tonga . 
niue has signed but not ratified the law of the sea agreement . 
the monarch is hereditary; her representative in relation to niue  -lrb-  the governor-general of new zealand  -rrb-  is appointed by the monarch . 
the cabinet is chosen by the premier and appointed by the speaker of the niue assembly and collectively responsible to parliament . 
the flight from niue departs on friday . 
niue international airport in the west ,  south of alofi ,  is the only airfield . 
communications in niue include postal ,  telephone ,  internet ,  press and radio . 
the northern mariana islands ,  together with guam to the south ,  compose the mariana islands archipelago . 
the northern mariana islands ,  officially the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands  -lrb-  cnmi; ; refaluwasch or carolinian: `` commonwealth téél falúw kka efáng llól marianas ''  -rrb-  ,  is an insular area and commonwealth of the united states consisting of 14 islands in the northwestern pacific ocean . 
early in world war i ,  japan declared war on germany and invaded the northern marianas . 
the northern mariana islands have a multiparty presidential representative democratic system . 
some galleons sunk in guam remain . 
the northern marianas experienced an influx of immigration from the carolines during the 19th century . 
following its loss during the spanish–american war of 1898, spain ceded guam to the united states and sold the remainder of the marianas  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  the northern marianas  -rrb-  ,  along with the caroline islands ,  to germany under the german–spanish treaty of 1899.
the commonwealth has no representation in the u . s .  senate . 
anatahan volcano is a small volcanic island north of saipan . 
replicating the separation of powers elsewhere in the united states ,  the executive branch is headed by the governor of the northern mariana islands; legislative power is vested in the bicameral northern mariana islands commonwealth legislature and the judicial power is vested in the cnmi supreme court and the trial courts inferior to it . 
the northern mariana islands commonwealth legislature has two chambers . 
the constitution of the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands became effective on january 1, 1978.
from the island was abandoned . 
the evergreen norfolk island pine is a symbol of the island and is pictured on its flag . 
in 1979, norfolk island was granted limited self-government by australia ,  under which the island elected a government that ran most of the island's affairs . 
norfolk island was settled by east polynesian seafarers either from the kermadec islands north of new zealand or from the north island of new zealand . 
in 1920 the mission was relocated from norfolk island to the solomon islands to be closer to the focus of population . 
norfolk island was the subject of several experiments in administration during the century . 
in 1914 the uk handed norfolk island over to australia to administer as an external territory . 
norfolk island  -lrb-   ,  ; norfuk: `` norf'k ailen ''  -rrb-  is a small island in the pacific ocean located between australia ,  new zealand ,  and new caledonia ,  directly east of mainland australia's evans head ,  and about from lord howe island . 
norfolk island was first settled by east polynesian seafarers either from the kermadec islands north of new zealand or from the north island of new zealand . 
james cook said that ,  “except for new zealand ,  in no other island in the south sea was wood and mast-timber so ready to hand” . 
during the first year of the settlement ,  which was also called `` sydney '' like its parent ,  more convicts and soldiers were sent to the island from new south wales . 
in 1786 the british government included norfolk island as an auxiliary settlement ,  as proposed by john call ,  in its plan for colonization of new south wales . 
la pérouse did attempt to visit norfolk island ,  but only to investigate ,  not to take possession . 
norfolk island was thereby brought officially within the bounds of the projected colony . 
norfolk island in 1793 was described by josef espinosa y tello ,  an officer of the spanish expedition led by alessandro malaspina that visited new south wales . 
though unaware of the british intention to settle norfolk island ,  which was not announced until 5 december 1786, forster referred to “the nearness of new zealand; the excellent flax plant  -lrb-  `` phormium ''  -rrb-  that grows so abundantly there; its incomparable shipbuilding timber” ,  as among the advantages of the new colony . 
the alternative source of norfolk island for these ,   -lrb-  or in the case of flax and hemp ,  similar  -rrb-  supplies is argued by some historians ,  notably geoffrey blainey in ``  '' ,  as being a major reason for the founding of the convict settlement of new south wales by the first fleet in 1788.
england will speedily be enabled to draw from her colony of new south wales ,  the staple of russia ,  hemp and flax . ”
an article in `` the daily universal register ''  -lrb-  the forerunner of `` the times ''  -rrb-  of 23 december 1786 revealed the plan for a dual colonization of norfolk island and botany bay: “the ships for botany bay are not to leave all the convicts there; some of them are to be taken to norfolk island ,  which is about eight hundred miles east of botany bay ,  and about four hundred miles short of new zealand” . 
the norfolk island act 1979, passed by the parliament of australia in 1979, is the act under which the island is governed . 
this council would be headed by the administrator of norfolk island . 
some residents on norfolk island advocate independence from australia . 
controversy exists as to the exact status of norfolk island . 
the norfolk island legislation amendment bill 2015 passed the australian parliament on 14 may 2015  -lrb-  assented on 26 may 2015 -rrb- abolishing self-government on norfolk island and transferring norfolk island into a council as part of new south wales law . 
once local council is set up on norfolk island ,  residents are required to enrol to vote also . 
the new testament  -lrb-   ,  trans . 
it is similar ,  but not identical ,  to the modern new testament canon . 
the process of canonization of the new testament was complex and lengthy . 
the canon of the new testament is the collection of books that most christians regard as divinely inspired and constituting the new testament of the christian biblical canon . 
it will vary slightly depending on whether the focus is on the old testament ,  the letters of the new testament ,  or the canonical gospels . 
this was the beginning of modern new testament textual criticism ,  which over subsequent centuries would increasingly incorporate more and more manuscripts ,  in more languages  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  versions of the new testament  -rrb-  ,  as well as citations of the new testament by ancient authors and the new testament text in lectionaries in order to reconstruct the earliest recoverable form of the new testament text and the history of changes to it . 
some of the more important manuscripts containing an early text of books of the new testament are:
the final book of the new testament is the book of revelation ,  also known as the apocalypse of john . 
most of the influence of the new testament upon the arts has come from the gospels and the book of revelation . 
collected editions of these works were then referred to as the `` new testament apocrypha '' . 
adolf harnack in `` origin of the new testament ''  -lrb-  1914 -rrb- observed that the church gradually formulated its new testament canon in response to the challenge posed by marcion . 
these four gospels that were eventually included in the new testament were only a few among many other early christian gospels . 
they generally call the new testament the `` christian greek scriptures '' ,  and see only the `` covenants '' as `` old '' or `` new '' ,  but not any part of the actual scriptures themselves . 
in addition ,  there are so many quotes from the new testament in early church documents and commentaries that the entire new testament could also be assembled from these alone . 
he describes them as some basic presuppositions ,  tenets ,  and concerns common among the new testament writers ,  giving to the new testament its `` unity in diversity '':
however ,  the twenty-seven-book canon of the new testament ,  at least since late antiquity ,  has been almost universally recognized within christianity  -lrb-  see development of the new testament canon  -rrb-  . 
the earliest works that became part of the new testament are the letters of the apostle paul . 
john robinson also notes that each book of the new testament had to be written prior to the destruction of the temple . 
therefore ,  some of the books of the new testament must have been in circulation by the end of the first century . 
toward these ends ,  the `` spirit '' of the new testament ,  more than the letter ,  is infallible and authoritative . 
but all scripture is divided into two testaments . 
the slavonic ,  armenian and ethiopian traditions have different new testament book orders . 
the pauline epistles are the thirteen new testament books that present paul the apostle as their author . 
the order in which the books of the new testament appear differs between some collections and ecclesiastical traditions . 
the majority view is that all of the books that would eventually form the new testament were written in the koine greek language . 
each of the four gospels in the new testament narrates the life ,  death ,  and resurrection of jesus of nazareth . 
the last four pauline letters in the new testament are addressed to individual persons . 
according to the `` catholic encyclopedia '' article on the canon of the new testament: `` the idea of a complete and clear-cut canon of the new testament existing from the beginning ,  that is from apostolic times ,  has no foundation in history . 
no old syriac manuscripts of other portions of the new testament survive ,  though old syriac readings ,  e . g . 
for this reason ,  the bohairic translation can be helpful in the reconstruction of the early greek text of the new testament . 
the new testament canon as it is now was first listed by st .  athanasius ,  bishop of alexandria ,  in 367, in a letter written to his churches in egypt ,  festal letter 39.
messianic judaism generally holds the same view of new testament authority as evangelical protestants . 
though all christian churches accept the new testament as scripture ,  they differ in their understanding of the nature ,  extent ,  and relevance of its authority . 
these councils also provided the canon of the old testament ,  which included the apocryphal books . 
studies from many theologians considering the `` unity in diversity '' to be found in the new testament  -lrb-  and the bible as a whole  -rrb-  have been collected and summarized by new testament theologian frank stagg . 
the books that eventually found a permanent place in the new testament were not the only works of christian literature produced in the earliest christian centuries . 
the 16th century saw the rise of protestantism and an explosion of translations of the new  -lrb-  and old  -rrb-  testament into the vernacular . 
although these councils did include statements about the canon ,  when it came to the new testament they were only reaffirming the existing canon ,  including the antilegomena . 
in almost all christian traditions today ,  the new testament consists of 27 books: the four gospels ,  acts ,  twenty-one epistles ,  and revelation . 
although not considered to be inspired by god ,  these `` apocryphal '' works may be helpful in the study of the new testament in that they were produced in the same ancient context and often using the same language as those books that would eventually form the new testament . 
 .  .  .  for that which he said above ,  that he would make a new testament to the house of judah ,  shows that the old testament which was given by moses was not perfect; but that which was to be given by christ would be complete . 
despite the wide variety among christian liturgies ,  texts from the new testament play a role in almost all forms of christian worship . 
in addition to the old and new testaments ,  the  ,  the doctrine and covenants and the pearl of great price are considered part of their scriptural canon . 
by the 4th century ,  textual `` families '' or types of text become discernible among new testament manuscripts . 
origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information regarding the texts that became the new testament . 
even if the original greek versions were lost ,  the entire new testament could still be assembled from the translations . 
historically ,  throughout the christian world and in the context of christian missionary activity ,  the new testament  -lrb-  or portions thereof  -rrb-  has been that part of the christian bible first translated into the vernacular . 
the first translations  -lrb-  usually called `` versions ''  -rrb-  of the new testament were made beginning already at the end of 2nd century . 
use of the term `` new testament '' to describe a collection of first and second-century christian greek scriptures can be traced back to tertullian  -lrb-  in `` against praxeas '' 15 -rrb- . 
members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  believe that the new testament ,  as part of the christian biblical canon ,  is accurate `` as far as it is translated correctly '' . 
the divine word ,  who is doubly edged with the two testaments of the law and the gospel . 
the books of the new testament were all or nearly all written by jewish christians—that is ,  jewish disciples of christ ,  who lived in the roman empire ,  and under roman occupation . 
in attempting to determine the original text of the new testament books ,  some modern textual critics have identified sections as additions of material ,  centuries after the gospel was written . 
thus ,  while there was a good measure of debate in the early church over the new testament canon ,  the major writings are claimed to have been accepted by almost all christians by the middle of the 3rd century . 
eusebius ,  `` circa '' 300, gave a detailed list of new testament writings in his `` ecclesiastical history '' book 3, chapter xxv:
books that later formed the new testament ,  like other christian literature of the period ,  originated in a literary context that reveals relationships not only to other christian writings ,  but also to graeco-roman and jewish works . 
in the central nervous system ,  the analogous structures are known as tracts . 
within a nerve ,  each axon is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue called the endoneurium . 
each axon within the nerve is an extension of an individual neuron ,  along with other supportive cells such as schwann cells that coat the axons in myelin . 
if the axons of a neuron are damaged ,  as long as the cell body of the neuron is not damaged ,  the axons would regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells . 
someone who suffers loss caused by another's negligence may be able to sue for damages to compensate for their harm . 
the core concept of negligence is that people should exercise reasonable care in their actions ,  by taking account of the potential harm that they might foreseeably cause to other people or property . 
the niger river  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  is the principal river of west africa ,  extending about  . 
the water in the niger river basin is partially regulated through dams . 
this strange geography apparently came about because the niger river is two ancient rivers joined together . 
its main tributary is the benue river . 
over time upstream erosion by the lower niger resulted in stream capture of the upper niger by the lower niger . 
the northern part of the river ,  known as the `` niger bend '' ,  is an important area because it is the major river and source of water in that part of the sahara desert . 
the origin of the river's name remains unclear . 
the niger river is a relatively `` clear '' river ,  carrying only a tenth as much sediment as the nile because the niger's headwaters lie in ancient rocks that provide little silt . 
the fao estimates the irrigation potential of all countries in the niger river basin at 2.8 million hectares . 
in the philosophy of mind ,  neutral monism is the view that the mental and the physical are two ways of organizing or describing the same elements ,  which are themselves `` neutral '' ,  that is ,  neither physical nor mental . 
rather ,  neutral monism claims the universe consists of only one kind of stuff ,  in the form of neutral elements that are in themselves neither mental nor physical . 
in 1927, lovecraft wrote a brief pseudo-history of the `` necronomicon '' that was published in 1938, after his death ,  as `` history of the `` necronomicon '' '' . 
the simon `` necronomicon '' in particular has been criticized for this . 
with the success of the simon `` necronomicon '' the controversy surrounding the actual existence of the `` necronomicon '' was such that a detailed book ,  `` the necronomicon files '' ,  was published in 1998 attempting to prove once and for all the book was pure fiction . 
the `` necronomicon '' passage in question states:
according to lovecraft's `` history of the `` necronomicon '' '' ,  copies of the original `` necronomicon '' were held by only five institutions worldwide:
although lovecraft insisted that the book was pure invention  -lrb-  and other writers invented passages from the book for their own works  -rrb-  ,  there are accounts of some people actually believing the `` necronomicon '' to be a real book . 
that is why it’s more fun to invent mythical works like the `` necronomicon '' and `` book of eibon '' . 
the `` necronomicon ''s appearance and physical dimensions are not clearly stated in lovecraft's work . 
three additional volumes have since been published — `` the necronomicon spellbook '' ,  a book of pathworkings with the 50 names of marduk; `` dead names: the dark history of the necronomicon '' ,  a history of the book itself and of the late 1970s new york occult scene; and `` the gates of the necronomicon '' ,  instructions on pathworking with the simon `` necronomicon '' . 
in his story `` history of the `` necronomicon '' '' ,  lovecraft states that it is rumored that artist r . u . 
 -lrb-  the connection between dee and the `` necronomicon '' was suggested by lovecraft's friend frank belknap long .   -rrb- 
how lovecraft conceived the name `` necronomicon '' is not clear—lovecraft said that the title came to him in a dream . 
grant's ideas on lovecraft were featured heavily in the introduction to the simon `` necronomicon '' and also have been backed by tyson . 
lovecraft was often asked about the veracity of the `` necronomicon '' ,  and always answered that it was completely his invention . 
stephenson's novel `` reamde '' was released on september 20, 2011.
his novels have been categorized as science fiction ,  historical fiction ,  cyberpunk ,  postcyberpunk ,  and baroque . 
neal town stephenson  -lrb-  born october 31, 1959 -rrb- is an american writer known for his works of speculative fiction . 
following this ,  stephenson published a novel titled `` anathem ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- ,  a very long and detailed work ,  perhaps best described as speculative fiction . 
in may 2010, the subutai corporation ,  of which stephenson was named chairman ,  announced the production of an experimental multimedia fiction project called `` the mongoliad '' ,  which centered around a narrative written by stephenson and other speculative fiction authors . 
neither novel attracted much critical attention on first publication ,  but showcased concerns that stephenson would further develop in his later work . 
in 2014, stephenson was hired as chief futurist by the florida-based company magic leap . 
on august 7, 2012, stephenson released a collection of essays and other previously published fiction entitled `` some remarks : essays and other writing '' . 
machiavelli married marietta corsini in 1502.
however ,  machiavelli's success did not last . 
between 1503 and 1506, machiavelli was responsible for the florentine militia . 
machiavelli was taught grammar ,  rhetoric ,  and latin . 
machiavelli was born in florence ,  italy ,  the third child and first son of attorney bernardo di niccolò machiavelli and his wife ,  bartolomea di stefano nelli . 
november meteor showers include the andromedids; which occurs from september 25 to december 6 and generally peak around november 9–14, the leonids; which occur from november 15–20, the alpha monocerotids; which occur from november 15–25 with the peak on november 21–22, the northern taurids; which occur from october 20 to december 10, and the southern taurids which occur from september 10 – november 20, and the phoenicids; which occur from november 29 to december 9 with the peak occurring on december 5–6.
the western zodiac signs for the month of november are scorpio  -lrb-  october 24 – november 22 -rrb- and sagittarius  -lrb-  november 23 – december 21 -rrb- . 
chamberlain noted , 
chamberlain returned to london in triumph . 
chamberlain once again returned to the ministry of health . 
chamberlain presented his first budget in april 1932.
after initial anger ,  chamberlain determined to fight . 
neville chamberlain spent six years there but the plantation was a failure ,  and joseph chamberlain lost £50,000.
chamberlain was made chairman of the town planning committee . 
chamberlain spent much of 9 may in meetings with his cabinet colleagues . 
in a resignation broadcast that evening ,  chamberlain told the nation , 
chamberlain flew back to london ,  saying `` it is up to the czechs now . `` 
chamberlain spoke emotionally ,  laying the blame for the conflict on hitler . 
before leaving the ``  ''führerbau '' '' ,  chamberlain requested a private conference with hitler . 
chamberlain died of bowel cancer on 9 november 1940 at the age of 71.
if war seemed inevitable ,  chamberlain would fly to germany to negotiate directly with hitler . 
between 1932 and 1938, chamberlain halved the percentage of the budget devoted to interest on the war debt . 
chamberlain flew to munich and then travelled by rail to hitler's retreat at berchtesgaden . 
chamberlain is believed to have had a significant role in the 1936 abdication crisis . 
hitler's proposals met with resistance not only from the french and czechoslovaks ,  but also from some members of chamberlain's cabinet . 
chamberlain appointed lord halifax as foreign secretary in eden's place . 
the relationship between chamberlain and lloyd george would thenceforth be one of hatred . 
that evening ,  chamberlain told lord halifax that the `` meeting with herr hitler had been most unsatisfactory '' . 
chamberlain and daladier returned to their hotel and informed the czechoslovaks of the agreement . 
in august 1923, baldwin promoted chamberlain to the position of chancellor of the exchequer . 
when stanley baldwin retired in may 1937, chamberlain took his place as prime minister . 
chamberlain died of cancer six months after leaving the premiership . 
nonetheless ,  chamberlain is still unfavourably ranked amongst british prime ministers . 
at 11:15 am ,  chamberlain addressed the nation by radio ,  stating that the united kingdom was at war with germany:
defence spending had been heavily cut in chamberlain's early budgets . 
chamberlain flew back to germany ,  meeting hitler in bad godesberg on 22 september . 
chamberlain instituted a war cabinet and invited the labour and liberal parties to join his government ,  but they declined . 
churchill eulogised chamberlain in the house of commons three days after his death:
after working in business and local government ,  and after a short spell as director of national service in 1916 and 1917, chamberlain followed his father ,  joseph chamberlain ,  and older half-brother ,  austen chamberlain ,  in becoming a member of parliament in the 1918 general election at the age of 49.
soon after attaining the premiership ,  chamberlain obtained passage of the factories act 1937.
chamberlain hoped that a cancellation of the war debt owed to the united states could be negotiated . 
his sister ,  violeta parra ,  was a folk singer ,  as was his brother roberto parra sandoval . 
parra died on 23 january 2018, at 7:00 am ,  in la reina in santiago de chile ,  at the age of 103.
parra ,  the son of a schoolteacher ,  was born in 1914 in san fabián de alico ,  near chillán ,  in chile . 
macmillan was born on september 15, 1921, in vancouver ,  british columbia ,  canada ,  and began her career there as a stage actress . 
after she and her husband moved to new york ,  macmillan lent her voice talents to numerous roles; as `` casper the friendly ghost '' on `` the new casper cartoon show '' ,  as `` gumby '' on `` the gumby show '' ,  as `` sweet polly purebred '' in the `` underdog '' cartoons ,  and as `` davey '' on the claymation series `` davey and goliath '' among others . 
norma macmillan  -lrb-  september 15, 1921 – march 16, 2001 -rrb- was a canadian actress and voice actress ,  best known for voicing numerous animation and claymation children's characters ,  including casper the friendly ghost on `` the new casper cartoon show '' ,  gumby on `` the gumby show '' and davey on `` davey and goliath '' . 
the medal features a profile of nevanlinna ,  the text `` rolf nevanlinna prize '' ,  and very small characters `` rh 83 '' on its obverse . 
the appropriateness of the naming of the prize had been questioned due to nevanlinna's involvement with the nazis . 
 -lrb-  p .  xxvii social systems 1995 -rrb-
luhmann's systems theory is not without its critics; his definitions of `` autopoietic '' and `` social system '' differ from others . 
both social systems and psychic systems  -lrb-  see below for an explanation of this distinction  -rrb-  operate by processing meaning . 
are described as social subsystems which have `` outdifferentiated '' from the social system and achieved their own operational closure and autopoiesis . 
luhmann's systems theory focuses on three topics ,  which are interconnected in his entire work . 
niklas luhmann  -lrb-  ; ; december 8, 1927 – november 6, 1998 -rrb- was a german sociologist ,  philosopher of social science ,  and a prominent thinker in systems theory ,  who is considered one of the most important social theorists of the 20th century . 
luhmann is probably best known to north americans for his debate with the critical theorist jürgen habermas over the potential of social systems theory . 
natacha atlas  -lrb-  ; born 20 march 1964 -rrb- is an egyptian-british singer known for her fusion of arabic and western music ,  particularly hip-hop . 
some states use the royal anthem as the national anthem ,  such as the anthem of jordan . 
most nation-states have anthems ,  defined as `` a song ,  as of praise ,  devotion ,  or patriotism ''; most anthems are either marches or hymns in style . 
in 1873, tesla returned to smiljan . 
in the same year ,  he patented his tesla coil . 
tesla was the fourth of five children . 
there has been a resurgence in popular interest in tesla since the 1990s . 
they believed that tesla's patents gave them patent priority over other ac systems . 
tesla's progenitors were from western serbia ,  near montenegro . 
after 1890, tesla experimented with transmitting power by inductive and capacitive coupling using high ac voltages generated with his tesla coil . 
during his second year ,  tesla came into conflict with professor poeschl over the gramme dynamo ,  when tesla suggested that commutators were not necessary . 
tesla and his hired staff would conduct some of his most significant work in these workshops . 
tesla claimed that he worked from 3 a . m .  to 11 p . m .  ,  no sundays or holidays excepted . 
two years after signing the tesla contract ,  westinghouse electric was in trouble . 
soon after leaving the edison company ,  tesla was working on patenting an arc lighting system ,  possibly the same one he had developed at edison . 
tesla had been working at the machine works for a total of six months when he quit . 
during that year ,  tesla worked in pittsburgh ,  helping to create an alternating current system to power the city's streetcars . 
the set of natural numbers is an infinite set . 
some greek mathematicians treated the number 1 differently than larger numbers ,  sometimes even not as a number at all . 
this is also expressed by saying that the cardinal number of the set is aleph-naught  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
properties of the natural numbers ,  such as divisibility and the distribution of prime numbers ,  are studied in number theory . 
therefore ,  this formalism was modified so that a natural number is defined as a particular set ,  and any set that can be put into one-to-one correspondence with that set is said to have that number of elements . 
mathematicians use n or  -lrb-  an n in blackboard bold  -rrb-  to refer to the set of all natural numbers . 
one can recursively define an addition operator on the natural numbers by setting and for all  ,   . 
these chains of extensions make the natural numbers canonically embedded  -lrb-  identified  -rrb-  in the other number systems . 
like all logarithms ,  the natural logarithm maps multiplication into addition:
logarithms can be defined to any positive base other than 1, not only `` e '' . 
the natural logarithm of a number is its logarithm to the base of the mathematical constant `` e '' ,  where `` e '' is an irrational and transcendental number approximately equal to  . 
the neogene  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  informally upper tertiary or late tertiary  -rrb-  is a geologic period and system that spans 20.45 million years from the end of the paleogene period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  to the beginning of the present quaternary period mya . 
a notary public  -lrb-  or notary or public notary  -rrb-  of the common law is a public officer constituted by law to serve the public in non-contentious matters usually concerned with estates ,  deeds ,  powers-of-attorney ,  and foreign and international business . 
therefore ,  despite their name ,  `` notaries public '' in these jurisdictions are in effect civil law notaries . 
in all australian states and territories  -lrb-  except queensland  -rrb-  notaries public are appointed by the supreme court of the relevant state or territory . 
a notary ,  in almost all common law jurisdictions other than most of north america ,  is a practitioner trained in the drafting and execution of legal documents . 
therefore ,  at common law ,  notarial service is distinctly different from the practice of law ,  and giving legal advice and preparing legal instruments is forbidden to lay notaries such as those appointed throughout most of the united states of america . 
in bi-juridical jurisdictions ,  such as south africa or louisiana ,  the office of notary public is a legal profession with educational requirements similar to those for attorneys . 
in 1919, nairobi was declared to be a municipality . 
in 1921, nairobi had 24,000 residents ,  of which 12,000 were native africans . 
nairobi  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital and the largest city of kenya . 
nairobi is found within the greater nairobi metropolitan region ,  which consists of 5 out of 47 counties in kenya ,  which generates about 60% of the entire nation's gdp . 
nairobi is the 10th-largest city in africa ,  including the population of its suburbs . 
nairobi was founded in 1899 by the colonial authorities in british east africa ,  as a rail depot on the uganda railway . 
quinary systems are based on the number 5.
octal counting systems are based on the number 8.
5 is a common `` auxiliary base '' ,  or `` sub-base '' ,  where 6 is 'five and one' ,  7 'five and two' ,  etc . 
aztec was a vigesimal  -lrb-  base-20 -rrb- system with sub-base 5.
numerals may be attributive ,  as in `` two dogs '' ,  or pronominal ,  as in `` i saw two  -lrb-  of them  -rrb- ``  . 
not all languages have numeral systems . 
most languages with both numerals and counting use base 8, 10, 12, or 20.
weak interactions create neutrinos in one of three leptonic flavors: electron neutrinos muon neutrinos  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or tau neutrinos  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  in association with the corresponding charged lepton . 
there are three known types  -lrb-  `` flavors ''  -rrb-  of neutrinos: electron neutrino  ,  muon neutrino and tau neutrino  ,  named after their partner leptons in the standard model  -lrb-  see table at right  -rrb-  . 
more formally ,  neutrino flavor eigenstates are not the same as the neutrino mass eigenstates  -lrb-  simply labelled 1, 2, 3 -rrb- . 
weak interactions create neutrinos in one of three leptonic flavors: electron neutrinos  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  muon neutrinos  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or tau neutrinos  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  in association with the corresponding electron ,  muon ,  and tau charged leptons ,  respectively . 
cosmic ray neutrino experiments detect neutrinos from space to study both the nature of neutrinos and the cosmic sources producing them . 
these indicate that the summed masses of the three neutrinos must be less than  . 
other efforts search for evidence of a sterile neutrino – a fourth neutrino flavor that does not interact with matter like the three known neutrino flavors . 
neutrinos oscillate between different flavors in flight . 
colgate and white's theory of supernova neutrino production was confirmed in 1987, when neutrinos from supernova 1987a were detected . 
such a setup is generally known as a `` neutrino factory '' . 
although neutrinos were long believed to be massless ,  it is now known that there are also three discrete neutrino masses ,  but they do not correspond uniquely to the three flavors . 
for example ,  an electron neutrino produced in a beta decay reaction may interact in a distant detector as a muon or tau neutrino . 
thus ,  there exists at least one neutrino mass eigenstate with a mass of at least  . 
a more recent proposal involves mass differences between neutrino mass eigenstates . 
the existence of a neutrino mass allows the possibility of a tiny neutrino magnetic moment ,  in which case neutrinos could interact electromagnetically as well; no such interaction has been discovered . 
nuclear reactors are the major source of human-generated neutrinos . 
to conserve total lepton number ,  in nuclear beta decay ,  electron neutrinos appear together with only positrons  -lrb-  anti-electrons  -rrb-  or electron-antineutrinos ,  and electron antineutrinos with electrons or electron neutrinos . 
so far ,  all measurements of neutrino speed have been consistent with the speed of light . 
neutrinos can also be used for tomography of the interior of the earth . 
the sun sends enormous numbers of neutrinos in all directions . 
although individual experiments ,  such as the set of solar neutrino experiments ,  are consistent with non-oscillatory mechanisms of neutrino flavor conversion ,  taken altogether ,  neutrino experiments imply the existence of neutrino oscillations . 
international scientific collaborations install large neutrino detectors near nuclear reactors or in neutrino beams from particle accelerators to better constrain the neutrino masses and the values for the magnitude and rates of oscillations between neutrino flavors . 
the cosmic neutrino background is also a probe of whether neutrinos are majorana particles ,  since there should be a different number of cosmic neutrinos detected in either the dirac or majorana case . 
on 31 may 2010, opera researchers observed the first tau neutrino candidate event in a muon neutrino beam ,  the first time this transformation in neutrinos had been observed ,  providing further evidence that they have mass . 
the existence of nonzero neutrino masses somewhat complicates the situation . 
sn 1987a represents the only verified detection of neutrinos from a supernova . 
there are other possibilities in which neutrino could oscillate even if they were massless . 
because antineutrinos and neutrinos are neutral particles ,  it is possible that they are the same particle . 
the antineutrino discovered by cowan and reines is the antiparticle of the electron neutrino . 
the number of neutrinos counted was also consistent with a total neutrino energy of  ,  which was estimated to be nearly all of the total energy of the supernova . 
this resolved the solar neutrino problem: the electron neutrinos produced in the sun had partly changed into other flavors which the experiments could not detect . 
molecular nanotechnology ,  sometimes called molecular manufacturing ,  describes engineered nanosystems  -lrb-  nanoscale machines  -rrb-  operating on the molecular scale . 
nanotechnology is the engineering of functional systems at the molecular scale . 
nanotechnology  -lrb-  `` nanotech ''  -rrb-  is manipulation of matter on an atomic ,  molecular ,  and supramolecular scale . 
to put that scale in another context ,  the comparative size of a nanometer to a meter is the same as that of a marble to the size of the earth . 
nanotechnology as defined by size is naturally very broad ,  including fields of science as diverse as surface science ,  organic chemistry ,  molecular biology ,  semiconductor physics ,  energy storage ,  microfabrication ,  molecular engineering ,  etc . 
the associated research and applications are equally diverse ,  ranging from extensions of conventional device physics to completely new approaches based upon molecular self-assembly ,  from developing new materials with dimensions on the nanoscale to direct control of matter on the atomic scale . 
these approaches utilize the concepts of molecular self-assembly and/or supramolecular chemistry to automatically arrange themselves into some useful conformation through a bottom-up approach . 
the premise was that molecular scale biological analogies of traditional machine components demonstrated molecular machines were possible: by the countless examples found in biology ,  it is known that sophisticated ,  stochastically optimised biological machines can be produced . 
one nanometer  -lrb-  nm  -rrb-  is one billionth ,  or 10, of a meter . 
challenges were raised regarding the feasibility of applications envisioned by advocates of molecular nanotechnology ,  which culminated in a public debate between drexler and smalley in 2001 and 2003.
an experiment indicating that positional molecular assembly is possible was performed by ho and lee at cornell university in 1999.
the game sporadically saves a level on which a character has died and then integrates that level into a later game . 
nethack is a single-player roguelike video game originally released in 1987 with ascii graphics . 
as in many other roguelike games ,  all items in `` nethack '' are either `` blessed '' ,  `` uncursed '' ,  or `` cursed '' . 
the first version of `` nethack '' was released by mike stephenson on july 28, 1987.
 ''nethack '''s dungeon spans about 50 primary levels ,  of which most are randomly generated when the player character first encounters them . 
starting a new game will scramble the items' descriptions again ,  so the 'silver ring' that is a ring of levitation in one game might be a ring of hunger in another . 
although `` nethack '' can be completed by new or intermediate players without any artificial limitations ,  experienced players can attempt `` conducts '' for an additional challenge . 
some `` special '' levels are of fixed design in every game session . 
for 12 years ,  the last version to include new gameplay features was `` nethack '' 3.4.3, released in december 2003.
before starting a game ,  players are asked to choose their character's race ,  role ,  gender ,  and alignment ,  or allow the game to assign the attributes randomly . 
parts of the level are still unexplored  -lrb-  probably accessible through the door to the west  -lrb-  the '+' sign  -rrb-   -rrb-  and the player has yet to find the downstairs  -lrb-  a '>' sign  -rrb-  to the next level . 
in 2000, `` salon '' described it as `` one of the finest gaming experiences the computing world has to offer . `` 
