the fishermen sound the horn and then net those fish that respond . 
if the algae are toxic ,  fish are killed and shellfish contaminated . 
in seawater pond mariculture ,  fish are raised in ponds which receive water from the sea . 
such ‘new’ diseases would be devastating for those wild populations because they would have no immunity to them . 
commonly identified environmental impacts from marine farms are:
the largest deep water open ocean farm in the world is raising cobia 12 km off the northern coast of panama in highly exposed sites . 
shellfish can also be used in multi-species cultivation techniques ,  where shellfish can utilize waste generated by higher trophic level organisms . 
the abalone feed on seaweed that has grown naturally on the abitats; with the ecosystem enrichment of the bay also resulting in growing numbers of dhufish ,  pink snapper ,  wrasse ,  samson fish among other species . 
roger scruton has been critical of the meme as an idea . 
ben cullen ,  in his book `` contagious ideas '' ,  brought the idea of the meme into the discipline of archaeology . 
it has been proposed that just as memes are analogous to genes ,  memetics is analogous to genetics . 
the term meme was coined in richard dawkins' 1976 book `` the selfish gene , ``  but dawkins later distanced himself from the resulting field of study . 
henry jenkins ,  joshua green ,  and sam ford ,  in their book `` spreadable media ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  criticize dawkins' idea of the meme ,  writing that `` while the idea of the meme is a compelling one ,  it may not adequately account for how content circulates through participatory culture . `` 
however ,  in contrast to those two positions ,  blackmore does not reject either concept of external or internal memes . 
archaeological memetics could assist the application of the meme concept to material culture in particular . 
dawkins  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- proposed that the meme is a unit of information residing in the brain and is the mutating replicator in human cultural evolution . 
another definition ,  given by hokky situngkir ,  tried to offer a more rigorous formalism for the meme ,  `` memeplexes '' ,  and the `` deme '' ,  seeing the meme as a cultural unit in a cultural complex system . 
the term `` meme '' derives from the ancient greek μιμητής  -lrb-  `` mimētḗs ''  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` imitator ,  pretender '' . 
another criticism comes from semiotics ,   -lrb-  e . g .  ,  deacon ,  kull  -rrb-  stating that the concept of meme is a primitivized concept of sign . 
in his book `` the selfish gene ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  the evolutionary biologist richard dawkins used the term `` meme '' to describe a unit of human cultural transmission analogous to the gene ,  arguing that replication also happens in culture ,  albeit in a different sense . 
this type of meme tends not to evolve ,  and to experience profound mutations in the rare event that it does . 
velikovsky  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- proposed the `` holon '' as the structure of the meme ,  synthesizing the major theories on memes of richard dawkins ,  mihaly csikszentmihalyi ,  e .  o .  wilson ,  frederick turner  -lrb-  poet  -rrb-  and arthur koestler . 
michigan only has islands in lake michigan in the northern portion of the lake . 
lake huron is the second largest of the great lakes  -lrb-  after lake superior  -rrb-  with a surface area of  . 
lake st .  clair connects lake huron and lake erie through the st .  clair river in the north and the detroit river in the south . 
michigan has numerous inland lakes and rivers that also contain their own islands . 
grand lake contains 14 islands ,  of which grand island is by far the largest . 
as of  ,  there are five living former governors of michigan . 
the state's living former governors are:
prior to becoming its own territory ,  parts of michigan were administered by the governors of the northwest territory ,  the governors of the indiana territory and the governors of the illinois territory . 
there was no term limit on governors until a constitutional amendment effective in 1993 limited governors to two terms . 
amyraut had left the choice to the synod . 
amyraut soon gave to french protestantism a new direction . 
the university of saumur became the university of french protestantism . 
there were a number of theologians who defended calvinistic orthodoxy against amyraut and saumur ,  including friedrich spanheim  -lrb-  1600–1649 -rrb- and francis turretin  -lrb-  1623–1687 -rrb- . 
the murray river  -lrb-  or river murray  -rrb-   -lrb-  ngarrindjeri: `` millewa '' ,  yorta yorta: `` tongala ''  -rrb-  is australia's longest river ,  at in length . 
the murray river also supports fringing corridors and forests of the river red gum . 
the murray river flowed to the north around the cadell fault ,  creating the channel of the edward river which exists today and through which much of the murray river's waters still flow . 
as of 2010, the murray river system receives 58 percent of its natural flow . 
the murray river  -lrb-  and associated tributaries  -rrb-  support a variety of river life adapted to its vagaries . 
in some segments of the murray river ,  carp have become the only species found . 
the murray river has been a significant barrier to land-based travel and trade . 
today ,  most traffic on the river is recreational . 
then the natural dam on the goulburn river failed ,  the lake drained ,  and the murray river avulsed to the south and started to flow through the smaller goulburn river channel ,  creating `` the barmah choke '' and `` the narrows ''  -lrb-  where the river channel is unusually narrow  -rrb-  ,  before entering into the proper murray river channel again . 
past this point ,  the murray river is entirely within the state of south australia . 
the murray river makes up most of the border between the australian states of victoria and new south wales . 
in 1830 captain charles sturt reached the river after travelling down its tributary the murrumbidgee river and named it the `` murray river '' in honour of the then british secretary of state for war and the colonies ,  sir george murray ,  not realising it was the same river that hume and hovell had encountered further upstream . 
sturt continued down the remaining length of the murray to finally reach lake alexandrina and the river's mouth . 
between 2.5 and 0.5 million years ago the murray river terminated in a vast freshwater lake called lake bungunnia . 
the barmah choke and the narrows mean the amount of water that can travel down this part of the murray river is restricted . 
from here ,  75,000 people watched the first american orbital flight being launched in 1962.
the mercury spacecraft design was modified three times by nasa between 1958 and 1959.
the space race began with the 1957 launch of the soviet satellite sputnik 1.
shepard became the first american in space by making a suborbital flight in may 1961.
mcdonnell also built the spacecraft simulators used by the astronauts during training . 
the spacecraft was cone shaped ,  with a neck at the narrow end . 
today the mercury program is commemorated as the first manned american space program . 
on april 12, 1961 the soviet cosmonaut yuri gagarin became the first person in space on an orbital flight . 
in space ,  pilots would require pressurized chambers or space suits to supply fresh air . 
the recovery procedure would be the same as an orbital mission . 
the rocket by itself stood high; total height of the atlas-mercury space vehicle at launch was  . 
the astronauts were collectively known as the `` mercury seven '' ,  and each spacecraft was given a name ending with a `` 7 '' by its pilot . 
the spacecraft that flew ,  together with some that did not are on display in the united states . 
the mercury-redstone launch vehicle ,  an tall  -lrb-  with capsule and escape system  -rrb-  single-stage launch vehicle used for suborbital  -lrb-  ballistic  -rrb-  flights . 
the temperature around the heat shield rose to and at the same time ,  there was a two-minute radio blackout due to ionization of the air around the spacecraft . 
then came the main countdown which for orbital flights started 6½ hours before launch  -lrb-  t – 390 min  -rrb-  ,  counted backwards to launch  -lrb-  t = 0 -rrb- and then forward until orbital insertion  -lrb-  t + 5 min  -rrb-  . 
once in orbit ,  it was not possible for the spacecraft to change its trajectory except by initiating reentry . 
the 20 unmanned flights used little joe ,  redstone ,  and atlas launch vehicles . 
all of the six manned mercury flights were successful ,  though some planned flights were canceled during the project  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
it has fallen to the lot of no other patron of literature to have his name associated with works of such lasting interest as the `` georgics '' of virgil ,  the first three books of horace's `` odes , ``  and the first book of his `` epistles . `` 
gaius cilnius maecenas  -lrb-  ; circa 70 bc – 8 bc  -rrb-  was an ally ,  friend and political advisor to octavian  -lrb-  who was to become the first emperor of rome as caesar augustus  -rrb-  as well as an important patron for the new generation of augustan poets ,  including both horace and virgil . 
maecenas died in 8 bc ,  leaving the emperor sole heir to his wealth . 
his great wealth may have been in part hereditary ,  but he owed his position and influence to his close connection with the emperor augustus . 
his name has become a byword for a wealthy ,  generous and enlightened patron of the arts . 
his name has become a byword in many languages for a well-connected and wealthy patron . 
maecenas also wrote literature himself in both prose and verse . 
crowley describes this process in his `` magick ,  book 4 '':
there are several ways to view what magick is . 
crowley defined magick as `` the science and art of causing change to occur in conformity with will . `` 
tacitus  -lrb-  ; ; c .  200 – june 276 -rrb- was roman emperor from 275 to 276.
next he moved against the barbarian mercenaries that had been gathered by aurelian to supplement roman forces for his eastern campaign . 
he immediately asked the senate to deify aurelian ,  before arresting and executing aurelian's murderers . 
at the time of the incident ,  `` tampa '' carried cargo worth  ,  and 27 crew . 
in october 2006, mv `` tampa '' was one of two wilhelmsen ships involved in a cocaine-smuggling operation intercepted by the new zealand customs service and the australian federal police . 
the number 429 would be written as one dot above one dot above four dots and a bar ,  or  -lrb-  1×20 -rrb- +  -lrb-  1×20 -rrb- + 9 = 429.
the mayan numeral system was the system to represent numbers and calendar dates in the maya civilization . 
the `` long count '' portion of the maya calendar uses a variation on the strictly vigesimal numbering . 
if four or more bars result ,  four bars are removed and a dot is added to the next higher row . 
after 1970, labour moved to the left and wilson came to an accommodation with foot . 
he was the uncle of campaigning journalist paul foot  -lrb-  1937–2004 -rrb- and charity worker oliver foot  -lrb-  1946–2008 -rrb- . 
elected as a compromise candidate ,  foot served as the leader of the labour party ,  and leader of the opposition ,  from 1980 to 1983.
the labour left was still strong . 
michael foot was the brother of sir dingle foot mp  -lrb-  1905–78 -rrb- ,  a liberal and subsequently labour mp; hugh foot ,  baron caradon  -lrb-  1907–90 -rrb- ,  governor of cyprus  -lrb-  1957–60 -rrb- and representative of the united kingdom at the united nations from 1964–70; liberal politician john foot ,  baron foot  -lrb-  1909–99 -rrb-; margaret elizabeth foot  -lrb-  1911–65 -rrb- ,  jennifer mackintosh highet  -lrb-  born 1916 -rrb- and christopher isaac foot  -lrb-  1917–84 -rrb- . 
through late 1982 and early 1983, there was constant speculation that labour mps would replace foot with healey as leader . 
when ,  in 1974, labour returned to office under wilson ,  foot became secretary of state for employment . 
foot challenged james callaghan for the post of treasurer of the labour party in 1967, but failed . 
foot served as a member of parliament  -lrb-  mp  -rrb-  from 1945 to 1955 and again from 1960 until he retired in 1992.
he was also deputy leader of the labour party under callaghan from 1976 to 1980.
when he became leader ,  foot was already 67 years old; and frail . 
critically ,  labour held on in a subsequent by-election in darlington ,  and foot remained leader for the 1983 general election . 
foot left the `` standard '' in 1945 to join the `` daily herald '' as a columnist . 
in a 1955 interview ,  foot ideologically identified as a libertarian socialist . 
max and moritz became the forerunners to the comic strip . 
 ''max und moritz '' was adapted into a ballet by richard mohaupt and alfredo bortuluzzi . 
in 1956 norbert schultze adapted it into a straightforward children's film ,  `` max und moritz ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb- . 
max and moritz: a story of seven boyish pranks  -lrb-  original: max und moritz – eine bubengeschichte in sieben streichen  -rrb-  is a german language illustrated story in verse . 
during world war 1, the red baron ,  manfred von richthofen ,  named his dog moritz ,  giving the name max to another animal given to his friend . 
but o dear ,  o dear ,  o deary , <br> when the end comes sad and dreary ! <br> 'tis a dreadful thing to tell<br> that on max and moritz fell ! <br> all they did this book rehearses , <br> both in pictures and in verses . 
may day is a public holiday usually celebrated on 1 may . 
may day was not established as a public holiday until 1933.
international workers' day can also be referred to as `` may day '' ,  but it is a different celebration from the traditional may day . 
may day has been celebrated in scotland for centuries . 
the spring bank holiday on the first monday in may was created in 1978; may day itself may 1 is not a public holiday in england  -lrb-  unless it falls on a monday  -rrb-  . 
may day or `` spring day ''  -lrb-  `` kevadpüha ''  -rrb-  is a national holiday in estonia celebrating the arrival of spring . 
in wales the first day of may is known as `` calan mai '' or `` calan haf '' ,  and parallels the festival of beltane and other may day traditions in europe . 
traditional english may day rites and celebrations include crowning a may queen and celebrations involving a maypole . 
while 1 february is the first day of spring ,  1 may is the first day of summer; hence ,  the summer solstice on 25 june  -lrb-  now 21 june  -rrb-  is midsummer . 
kingsbury episcopi ,  somerset ,  has seen its yearly may day festival celebrations on the may bank holiday monday burgeon in popularity in the recent years . 
may day has been celebrated in ireland since pagan times as the feast of beltane  -lrb-  bealtaine  -rrb-  and in latter times as mary's day . 
kingsand ,  cawsand and millbrook in cornwall celebrate flower boat ritual on the may day bank holiday . 
motto: `` tanz in den mai ''  -lrb-  ``  ''dance into may '' ''  -rrb-  . 
if this direction is formula_28, then one has  which can be obtained by integrating the three-dimensional form given above over formula_18 and formula_19.
where formula_14 is the particle mass and formula_15 is the product of boltzmann's constant and thermodynamic temperature . 
recognizing the symmetry of formula_25, one can integrate over solid angle and write a probability distribution of speeds as the function
this probability density function gives the probability ,  per unit speed ,  of finding the particle with a speed near formula_11.
thatcher became prime minister on 4 may 1979.
as prime minister ,  she implemented policies known as thatcherism . 
heath was never reconciled to thatcher's leadership of the party . 
the policy of privatisation has been called `` a crucial ingredient of thatcherism '' . 
thatcher's first foreign policy crisis came with the 1979 soviet invasion of afghanistan . 
margaret hilda thatcher ,  baroness thatcher ,   -lrb-  ; 13 october 19258 april 2013 -rrb- was a british stateswoman who served as prime minister of the united kingdom from 1979 to 1990 and leader of the conservative party from 1975 to 1990.
thatcher believed that the trade unions were harmful to both ordinary trade unionists and the public . 
thatcher was leader of the opposition and prime minister at a time of increased racial tension in britain . 
the election saw thatcher re-elected for a third successive term . 
the conservatives won a 44-seat majority in the house of commons and thatcher became the first female british prime minister . 
in office throughout the 1980s ,  thatcher was frequently described as the most powerful woman in the world . 
during her premiership thatcher had the second-lowest average approval rating  -lrb-  40%  -rrb-  of any post-war prime minister . 
the miners' strike of 1984–85 was the biggest and most devastating confrontation between the unions and the government under thatcher . 
thatcher was one of the first western leaders to respond warmly to reformist soviet leader mikhail gorbachev . 
when asked about bray in later life ,  thatcher prevaricated but acknowledged the circumstances between herself and bray . 
states:
in 1979 up until thatcher's final year in office ,  trade union membership also fell ,  from 13.5 million in 1979 to fewer than 10 million . 
thatcher was in the us on a state visit when iraqi leader saddam hussein invaded neighbouring kuwait in august 1990.
some heathite conservatives in the cabinet ,  the so-called `` wets '' ,  expressed doubt over thatcher's policies . 
in 1976, thatcher gave her `` britain awake '' foreign policy speech which lambasted the soviet union for seeking world dominance . 
thatcher's job approval rating fell to 23% by december 1980, lower than recorded for any previous prime minister . 
in november 1989, thatcher hailed the fall of the berlin wall as `` a great day for freedom '' . 
it was later disclosed that thatcher suggested threatening saddam with chemical weapons after the invasion of kuwait . 
thatcher became conservative party leader and leader of the opposition on 11 february 1975; she appointed whitelaw as her deputy . 
thatcher reflected on the end of the strike by saying that `` if anyone has won '' it was `` the miners who stayed at work '' and all those `` that have kept britain going '' . 
in a 1991 interview for `` today '' ,  thatcher stated that she thought powell had `` made a valid argument ,  if in sometimes regrettable terms '' . 
thatcher supported lord rothschild's 1971 proposal for market forces to affect government funding of research . 
thatcher appointed lord carrington ,  a senior member of the party and former minister of defence ,  as foreign minister in 1979.
in domestic affairs ,  thatcher opposed scottish devolution  -lrb-  home rule  -rrb-  and the creation of a scottish assembly . 
thatcher and her government backed the khmer rouge keeping their seat in the un after they were ousted from power in cambodia by the cambodian–vietnamese war . 
in 1954, thatcher was defeated when she sought selection to be the conservative party candidate for the orpington by-election of january 1955.
in physics ,  metastability is a stable state of a dynamical system other than the system's state of least energy . 
during a metastable state of finite lifetime ,  all state-describing parameters reach and hold stationary values . 
wollstonecraft was born on 27 april 1759 in spitalfields ,  london . 
two friendships shaped wollstonecraft's early life . 
seeking imlay ,  wollstonecraft returned to london in april 1795, but he rejected her . 
on 30 august 1797, wollstonecraft gave birth to her second daughter ,  mary . 
to protect wollstonecraft ,  imlay registered her as his wife in 1793, even though they were not married . 
by 1898, wollstonecraft was the subject of a first doctoral thesis and its resulting book . 
blood's death devastated wollstonecraft and was part of the inspiration for her first novel ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1788 -rrb- . 
with the emergence of feminist criticism in academia in the 1960s and 1970s ,  wollstonecraft's works returned to prominence . 
wollstonecraft's work was exhumed with the rise of the movement to give women a political voice . 
wollstonecraft's children's tales were adapted by charlotte mary yonge in 1870.
wollstonecraft's work has also had an effect on feminism outside the academy in recent years . 
some of wollstonecraft's french friends lost their heads to the guillotine as the jacobins set out to annihilate all of their enemies . 
some of wollstonecraft's experiences during this year would make their way into her only children's book ,  `` original stories from real life ''  -lrb-  1788 -rrb- . 
relative molecular mass or molecular weight is the mass of a molecule . 
c h h can also be observed with molecular mass of 17.
in mass spectrometry ,  the molecular mass of a small molecule is usually reported as the monoisotopic mass ,  that is ,  the mass of the molecule containing only the most common isotope of each element . 
otherwise ,  metallic bonding can be very strong ,  even in molten metals ,  such as gallium . 
metallic bonding is not the only type of chemical bonding a metal can exhibit ,  even as a pure substance . 
metallic radius is defined as one-half of the distance between the two adjacent metal ions in the metallic structure . 
this is why it is not correct to speak of a single 'metallic bond' . 
metallic bonding is a type of chemical bonding that rises from the electrostatic attractive force between conduction electrons  -lrb-  in the form of an electron cloud of delocalized electrons  -rrb-  and positively charged metal ions . 
the atoms in metals have a strong attractive force between them . 
the strong bonding of metals in the liquid form demonstrates that the energy of a metallic bond is not a strong function of the direction of the metallic bond; this lack of bond directionality is a direct consequence of electron delocalization ,  and is best understood in contrast to the directional bonding of covalent bonds . 
silver ,  a very good metal with high conductivity is one of the whitest . 
graphene is an example of two-dimensional metallic bonding . 
the delocalization is most pronounced for - and -electrons . 
with the advent of quantum mechanics ,  this picture was given more formal interpretation in the form of the free electron model and its further extension ,  the nearly free electron model . 
the latter could be called electron deficiency . 
the combination of two phenomena gives rise to metallic bonding: delocalization of electrons and the availability of a far larger number of delocalized energy states than of delocalized electrons . 
certain methyl groups can be deprotonated . 
the methyl radical has the formula ch . 
a methyl group may rotate around the r—c-axis . 
the reactivity of a methyl group depends on the adjacent substituents . 
similarly ,  methyl iodide and methyl triflate are viewed as the equivalent of the methyl cation because they readily undergo s2 reactions by weak nucleophiles . 
the oxidation of a methyl group occurs widely in nature and industry . 
mild ales are generally based on mild malt or pale malt . 
some notable examples of milds are: bank's mild ,  cain's dark mild ,  highgate dark mild ,  brain's dark ,  moorehouse blackcat ,  rudgate ruby mild ,  and theakston traditional mild
until the 1960s mild was the most popular beer style in england . 
some dark milds are created by the addition of caramel to a pale beer . 
ak  -lrb-  a very common beer name in the 19th century  -rrb-  was often referred to as a `` mild bitter beer '' ,  interpreting `` mild '' as `` unaged '' . 
light mild is generally similar ,  but paler in colour . 
the mars society is an american worldwide volunteer-driven space-advocacy non-profit organization dedicated to promoting the human exploration and settlement of the planet mars . 
mars society ,  inc .  was formally established in september 1997 under the colorado non-profit corporation act . 
as `` minerva medica '' ,  she was the goddess of medicine and physicians . 
minerva  -lrb-  ; ; etruscan: `` menrva ''  -rrb-  was the roman goddess of wisdom and strategic warfare and the sponsor of arts ,  trade ,  and strategy . 
minerva is featured on the coinage of different roman emperors . 
she was also worshipped at the temple of minerva medica ,  and at the `` delubrum minervae '' ,  a temple founded around 50 bc by pompey on the site now occupied by the church of `` santa maria sopra minerva '' . 
as a patron goddess of wisdom ,  minerva frequently features in statuary ,  as an image on seals ,  and in other forms at educational institutions . 
minerva was worshipped at several locations in rome ,  most prominently as part of the capitoline triad . 
while working at martin marietta designing interplanetary mission architectures ,  robert zubrin perceived a fundamental flaw in the sei program . 
in a speech on the steps of the national air and space museum he described long-term plans which would culminate in a manned mission to the surface of mars . 
when the nazis came to power in 1933, planck was 74.
planck was gifted when it came to music . 
planck endured these losses stoically . 
at this meeting einstein was able to convince planck . 
later in life ,  planck's views on god were that of a deist . 
this is how planck first came in contact with the field of physics . 
where is planck's constant ,  also known as planck's action quantum  -lrb-  introduced already in 1899 -rrb- ,  and is the frequency of the radiation . 
planck came from a traditional ,  intellectual family . 
planck was a member of the lutheran church in germany . 
nonetheless ,  planck refrained from the extremes of nationalism . 
in 1894 planck turned his attention to the problem of black-body radiation . 
as a professor at the friedrich-wilhelms-universität in berlin ,  planck joined the local physical society . 
planck regarded the scientist as a man of imagination and christian faith . 
after the apartment in berlin ,  the planck family lived in a villa in berlin-grunewald ,  wangenheimstrasse 21.
planck did not establish an actual `` school ''; the number of his graduate students was only about 20, among them:
subsequently ,  planck tried to grasp the meaning of energy quanta ,  but to no avail . 
planck also held leading positions at berlin university ,  the prussian academy of sciences ,  the german physical society and the kaiser wilhelm society  -lrb-  which in 1948 became the max planck society  -rrb-  . 
in april 1885 the university of kiel appointed planck as associate professor of theoretical physics . 
by the year 1880, planck obtained two highest academic degrees offered in europe . 
in 1992, dixit featured in the film `` beta '' opposite anil kapoor . 
dixit is a native of mumbai ,  india . 
in 2011, dixit was felicitated with the filmfare special award for completing 25 years in the film industry . 
both films earned her nominations for the filmfare best actress award . 
dixit's performance earned her the fourth nomination for the filmfare best actress award . 
dixit made her film debut in `` abodh ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- and received wider public recognition with `` tezaab ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- . 
dixit received her first nomination for the filmfare best actress award for her work in `` tezaab '' . 
the film earned her the fourteenth nomination for filmfare award for best actress . 
he made a series of paintings of her ,  and in 2000 made a film named `` gaja gamini '' starring her ,  which was intended as a tribute to dixit herself . 
in 1986, dixit starred in two movies ,  `` swati '' and `` manav hatya '' but both films flopped at the box office . 
dixit's career went into a slump during 1996 as films like `` prem granth '' and `` rajkumar '' flopped at the box office . 
dixit has been the muse for the indian painter m .  f .  husain . 
madhuri dixit  -lrb-  born 15 may 1967 -rrb- ,  also known by her married name madhuri dixit nene ,  is an indian actress and television personality known for her work in hindi cinema . 
in 2006, dixit returned to india with her family ,  and acted in cinematographer anil mehta's dance film `` aaja nachle ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
in 2000, dixit starred in rajkumar santoshi's `` pukar '' opposite anil kapoor . 
1995 saw dixit star in the hit `` raja '' opposite sanjay kapoor . 
pal filed a case against the film claiming that the makers did not take permission to make a film on her life ,  but the court later lifted the stay from the film . 
in 2001 dixit won on kaun banega crorepati ,  a game show then in its first season on the air . 
in 1994, topps re-released the cards as the expanded `` mars attacks archives '' ,  with the original 55 cards and 45 `` new visions '' cards . 
four new trading cards were made with the mini-comics ,  with a fifth one announced on the back of the fourth card which was never released . 
norman saunders painted the 55-card set . 
a second series of 81 trading cards ,  `` mars attacks: occupation '' ,  also featuring a second new story that picked up where `` mars attacks: invasion '' left off  -lrb-  `` mars attacks: occupation ''  -lrb-  cards #1-45 -rrb- with new artwork cards  -lrb-  divided into `` art of mars attacks ''  -lrb-  cards #46-63 -rrb- ,  `` factions ''  -lrb-  cards #64-72 -rrb- ,  `` occupation profiles ''  -lrb-  cards #73-78 -rrb- and `` the kickstarter video ''  -lrb-  cards #79-81 -rrb-  -rrb-  and included six new subsets  -lrb-  `` mars attacks superstars '' ,  mars attacks: then and now ! 
in 2013, topps issued `` mars attacks: invasion '' ,  a reboot series of 95 trading cards featuring a new story  -lrb-  `` mars attacks: invasion ''  -lrb-  cards #1-58, plus a #0 promo card from the 2013 san diego comic-con  -rrb-   -rrb-  with new artwork cards  -lrb-  divided into `` mars invades idw ''  -lrb-  cards #59-77 and #91-92 -rrb- and `` art of mars attacks ''  -lrb-  cards #78-90 and #93-95 -rrb-  -rrb-  and including four new subsets  -lrb-  `` mars attacks: early missions ''  -lrb-  with six cards  -rrb-  ,  `` mars attacks masterpieces ''  -lrb-  with five cards  -rrb-  ,  `` join the fight ! `` 
in 1995, one year after the `` archives '' series ,  screamin' productions and topps released a tie-in set of eight `` mars attacks '' vinyl model kits with an accompanying series of eight new trading cards ,  each one inside one of the kits . 
some ozone-depleting substances  -lrb-  odss  -rrb-  are not yet controlled by the montreal protocol ,  including nitrous oxide  -lrb-  n2o  -rrb-  for a table of ozone-depleting substances controlled by the montreal protocol see:
the montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer  -lrb-  a protocol to the vienna convention for the protection of the ozone layer  -rrb-  is an international treaty designed to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the production of numerous substances that are responsible for ozone depletion . 
the population of moncton is 71,889  -lrb-  2016 census  -rrb-  . 
moncton is a bilingual city . 
the greater moncton area contains nine of new brunswick's 49 provincial electoral districts: moncton centre ,  moncton east ,  moncton south ,  moncton southwest ,  moncton northwest ,  dieppe ,  shediac bay-dieppe ,  riverview and albert . 
the metro moncton area is served by codiac transpo ,  which is operated by the city of moncton . 
moncton is in the federal riding of moncton—riverview—dieppe . 
moncton  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the largest city in the canadian province of new brunswick . 
moncton is served by the greater moncton roméo leblanc international airport  -lrb-  yqm  -rrb-  . 
there is also a growing korean community in moncton . 
with the closure of cfb moncton in the early 1990s ,  the military presence in moncton has been significantly reduced . 
greater moncton has many golfing facilities . 
there are many natural attractions near moncton . 
the first mayor of moncton was the shipbuilder joseph salter . 
there are two major regional referral and teaching hospitals in moncton . 
moncton has hosted many large sporting events . 
the highest temperature ever recorded in moncton was on august 18 & 19, 1935.
moncton generally remains a `` low rise '' city . 
although the moncton area was first settled in 1733, moncton is considered to have been officially founded in 1766 with the arrival of pennsylvania dutch immigrants from philadelphia . 
moncton has garnered national attention because of the strength of its economy . 
moncton also hosted the 2010 iaaf world junior championships in athletics . 
in the 2006 census ,  moncton was designated a census metropolitan area and became the largest metropolitan area in the province of new brunswick . 
freight rail transportation in moncton is provided by canadian national railway . 
moncton lies in southeastern new brunswick ,  at the geographic centre of the maritime provinces . 
moncton's economic depression did not last long and a second era of prosperity came to the area in 1871 when moncton was selected to be the headquarters of the intercolonial railway of canada  -lrb-  icr  -rrb-  . 
the city's two main museums are the moncton museum at resurgo place on mountain road and the musée acadien at université de moncton . 
it operates 40 buses on 19 routes throughout moncton ,  dieppe ,  and riverview . 
all other major centres in new brunswick ,  as well as charlottetown ,  halifax ,  and truro are served out of the moncton terminal . 
in 1871, the intercolonial railway of canada had chosen moncton to be its headquarters ,  and moncton remained a railway town for well over a century until the closure of the canadian national railway  -lrb-  cnr  -rrb-  locomotive shops in the late 1980s . 
there are 2,990 aboriginal people living in moncton ,  who make up 4.3% of the city's population . 
informally ,  model theory can be divided into classical model theory ,  model theory applied to groups and fields ,  and geometric model theory . 
a more general notion is that of model companions . 
finite model theory is the area of model theory which has the closest ties to universal algebra . 
a theory `` t '' is called model-complete if every substructure of a model of `` t '' which is itself a model of `` t '' is an elementary substructure . 
the logics employed in finite model theory are often substantially more expressive than first-order logic ,  the standard logic for model theory of infinite structures . 
nevertheless ,  model theory can be seen as an extension of universal algebra . 
a first-order formula is built out of atomic formulas such as `` r '' -lrb-  `` f '' -lrb-  `` x '' , `` y ''  -rrb-  , `` z ''  -rrb-  or `` y '' = `` x '' + 1 by means of the boolean connectives formula_4 and prefixing of quantifiers formula_5 or formula_6.
the most prominent professional organization in the field of model theory is the association for symbolic logic . 
examples of early theorems from classical model theory include gödel's completeness theorem ,  the upward and downward löwenheim–skolem theorems ,  vaught's two-cardinal theorem ,  scott's isomorphism theorem ,  the omitting types theorem ,  and the ryll-nardzewski theorem . 
in mathematics ,  model theory is the study of classes of mathematical structures  -lrb-  e . g . 
therefore ,  model theorists often use `` consistent '' as a synonym for `` satisfiable '' . 
moby-dick; or ,  the whale is an 1851 novel by american writer herman melville . 
the book was out of print ,  and rare . 
although he was the most famous ,  mocha dick was not the only white whale in the sea ,  nor the only whale to attack hunters . 
what a book melville has written ! 
on the first day of the chase ,  ahab smells the whale ,  climbs the mast ,  and sights moby dick . 
buell sees a double quest in the book: ahab's is to hunt moby dick ,  ishmael's is `` to understand what to make of both whale and hunt '' . 
bryant and springer find that the book is structured around the two consciousnesses of ahab and ishmael ,  with ahab as a force of linearity and ishmael a force of digression . 
american songwriter bob dylan elaborated on the book in his nobel prize acceptance speech of 2017, citing the book as one of the three books that influenced him most . 
the whale carcass still lies in the water . 
melville found the bulk of his data on whales and whaling in five books ,  the most important of which was by the english ship's surgeon thomas beale ,  `` natural history of the sperm whale ''  -lrb-  1839 -rrb- ,  a book of reputed authority which melville bought on july 10, 1850.
when ahab finally appears on the quarterdeck ,  he announces he is out for revenge on the white whale which took one leg from the knee down and left him with a prosthesis fashioned from a whale's jawbone . 
the point is not that ahab would discover the whale as an object ,  but that he would perceive it as a symbol of his making . 
one of the most distinctive features of the book is the variety of genres . 
his 1921 study ,  `` the american novel '' ,  called `` moby-dick '' a pinnacle of american romanticism . 
the first american printing of 2,915 copies was almost the same as the first of `` mardi '' ,  but the first printing of melville's other three harper books had been a thousand copies more . 
the third book was the one melville reviewed for the `` literary world '' in 1847, j .  ross browne's `` etchings of a whaling cruise ''  -lrb-  1846 -rrb- ,  which may have given melville the first thought for a whaling book ,  and in any case contains passages embarrassingly similar to passages in `` moby-dick '' . 
starbuck begs ahab to desist ,  but ahab vows to slay the white whale ,  even if he would have to dive through the globe itself to get his revenge . 
the basis for the work is melville's 1841 whaling voyage aboard the `` acushnet '' . 
some `` ten or more '' of the chapters on whale killings ,  beginning at two-fifths of the book ,  are developed enough to be called `` events '' . 
he published the book less than four weeks later . 
bentley . `` 
on 18 october ,  the english edition ,  `` the whale '' ,  was published in a printing of only 500 copies ,  fewer than melville's previous books . 
the reception of `` the whale '' in britain and of `` moby-dick '' in the united states differed in two ways ,  according to parker . 
 ''moby-dick '' is based on melville's experience on the whaler `` acushnet '' ,  however even the book's most factual accounts of whaling are not straight autobiography . 
the captain resembles ahab and suggests a similar symbolism and single-minded motivation in hunting this whale ,  in that when his crew first encounters mocha dick and cowers from him ,  the captain rallies them:
ishmael digresses on pictures of whales ,  brit  -lrb-  microscopic sea creatures on which whales feed  -rrb-  ,  squid and — after four boats lowered in vain because daggoo mistook a giant squid for the white whale — whale-lines . 
on one of those nights in the whaleboat ,  fedallah prophesies that neither hearse nor coffin can be ahab's ,  that before he dies ,  ahab must see two hearses — one not made by mortal hands and the other made of american wood — that fedallah will precede his captain in death ,  and finally that only hemp can kill ahab . 
the narrator now discusses the subjects of  -lrb-  1 -rrb- whalers supply;  -lrb-  2 -rrb- a glen in tranque in the arsacides islands full of carved whale bones ,  fossil whales ,  whale skeleton measurements;  -lrb-  3 -rrb- the chance that the magnitude of the whale will diminish and that the leviathan might perish . 
the second most important whaling book is frederick debell bennett ,  `` a whaling voyage round the globe ,  from the year 1833 to 1836 ''  -lrb-  1840 -rrb- ,  from which melville also took the chapter organization ,  but in a lesser degree than he learned from beale . 
melville's earnings from the book add up to $1,260: the ₤150 advance from bentley was equivalent to $703, and the american printings earned him $556, which was $100 less than he earned from any of his five previous books . 
biographer hershel parker suggests that the reason for the change was that harper's had two years earlier published a book with a similar title ,  `` the whale and his captors '' . 
the `` morning post '' found it `` one of the cleverest ,  wittiest ,  and most amusing of modern books '' ,  and predicted that it was a book `` which will do great things for the literary reputation of its author '' . 
probably to accommodate melville ,  bentley inserted a half-title page in the first volume only ,  which reads `` the whale; or ,  moby dick '' . 
as the `` pequod '' approaches the equator ,  ahab scolds his quadrant for telling him only where he is and not where he will be . 
the influence of shakespeare on the book has been analyzed by f . o . 
she also contrasts ishmael and ahab's attitudes toward life ,  with ishmael's open-minded and meditative ,  `` polypositional stance '' as antithetical to ahab's monomania ,  adhering to dogmatic rigidity . 
ishmael discusses cetology  -lrb-  the zoological classification and natural history of the whale  -rrb-  ,  and describes the crew members . 
ishmael travels in december from manhattan island to new bedford ,  massachusetts with plans to sign up for a whaling voyage . 
two concluding chapters set forth the whale's evolution as a species and claim its eternal nature . 
twenty-one reviews appeared in london ,  and later one in dublin . 
the bolivian river dolphin ,  variously considered a subspecies of the amazon river dolphin or a separate species ,  is restricted to the upper madeira river system . 
the madeira river  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a major waterway in south america ,  approximately long . 
on the further course towards the amazon ,  the mean discharge of the madeira increases up to  . 
the total tonnage shipped in 2012 on the madeira accounted to 5,076,014.
the upper marañon river has seen a number of descents . 
although historically ,  the term `` marañon river '' often was applied to the river all the way to the atlantic ocean ,  nowadays the marañon river is generally thought to end at the confluence with the ucayali river ,  after which most cartographers label the ensuing waterway the amazon river . 
residents have launched efforts to halt the dams along the river with conservation groups such as sierrarios and international rivers . 
the marañon river was considered the source of the amazon river starting with the 1707 map published by padre samuel fritz ,  who indicated the great river “has its source on the southern shore of a lake that is called lauricocha ,  near huánuco . `` 
sebastian snow was an adventurer who journeyed down most of the river by trekking to chiriaco river starting at the source near lake niñacocha . 
the family moved to dulwich in 1903, and newman attended goodrich road school ,  then city of london school from 1908.
maxwell herman alexander newman ,  frs ,   -lrb-  7 february 1897 – 22 february 1984 -rrb- ,  generally known as max newman ,  was a british mathematician and codebreaker . 
in september 1937, newman and his family accepted an invitation to work for six months at princeton . 
max newman was born maxwell herman alexander neumann in chelsea ,  london ,  england ,  to a jewish family ,  on 7 february 1897.
the subway system has three heavy rail rapid transit lines  -lrb-  the red ,  orange and blue lines  -rrb-  ,  and two light rail lines  -lrb-  the green line and the ashmont–mattapan high speed line ,  the latter designated an extension of the red line  -rrb-  . 
 ,  all subway trips  -lrb-  green line ,  blue line ,  orange line ,  red line ,  ashmont-mattapan line ,  and the waterfront section of the silver line  -rrb-  cost $2.25 for charliecard holders and $2.75 for charlieticket or cash payers . 
the mbta assigned colors to its four rapid transit lines in 1965, and lettered the branches of the green line from north to south . 
in fy2005, there were on average 628,400 weekday boardings on the rapid transit and light rail lines  -lrb-  including the silver line bus rapid transit  -rrb-  ,  or 55.0% of the mbta system . 
in 2018, the mbta and massdot opened a new silver line route to chelsea via east boston and the airport blue line station . 
each commuter rail line has up to eleven fare zones ,  numbered 1a and 1 through 10.
in april 2018, the mbta silver line began operating a route from chelsea to south station . 
the system has been expanded since ,  with four lines restored  -lrb-  fairmount line in 1979, old colony lines in 1997, and greenbush line in 2007 -rrb- ,  six extended .  ,  and a number of stations added and rebuilt . 
the mbta commuter rail system is a regional rail network that reaches from boston into the suburbs of eastern massachusetts . 
the urban ring would have a higher collective ridership than the orange line ,  blue line ,  or the entire commuter rail system . 
in 1958 the mta purchased the highland branch from the boston and albany railroad ,  reopening a year later as rapid transit line  -lrb-  now the green line `` d '' branch  -rrb-  . 
a planned silver line phase iii would have connected the two halves of the silver line via an underground busway from boylston station on the green line to south station . 
in 2014, the mbta announce it would purchase diesel multiple unit  -lrb-  dmu  -rrb-  self-propelled rail cars for the fairmount line with eventual expansion to five other lines to be known as the indigo line . 
in addition ,  the mbta has committed to designing an extension of the line's southern terminus westward to charles/mgh ,  where it would connect with the red line . 
there are no direct track connections between lines ,  except between the red line and ashmont-mattapan high speed line ,  but all except the blue line have little-used connections to the national rail network ,  which have been used for deliveries of railcars and supplies . 
there are several proposed extensions to current commuter rail lines . 
the four transit lines all use standard rail gauge ,  but are otherwise incompatible; trains of one line would have to be modified to run on another . 
the mbta advisory board represents the cities and towns in the mbta service district . 
this marked the beginning of the development of american intercity railroads ,  which in massachusetts would later become the mbta commuter rail system and the green line `` d '' branch . 
a new station on the fairmount line ,  the talbot avenue station ,  opened in november 2012.
special mbta trains are run over the franklin line and the providence/stoughton line to foxborough station for new england patriots home games and other events at gillette stadium . 
in fy2005, there were on average 363,500 weekday boardings of mbta-operated buses and trackless trolleys  -lrb-  not including the silver line  -rrb-  ,  or 31.8% of the mbta system . 
on january 29, 2014, the mbta completed a countdown clock display system ,  alerting passengers to arriving trains ,  at all 53 heavy rail subway stations  -lrb-  the red ,  blue and orange lines  -rrb-  . 
in 2016, the system averaged 1,277,200 passengers per weekday ,  of which heavy rail averaged 552,500 and the light-rail lines 226,500, making it the fourth-busiest subway system and the busiest light rail system in the united states . 
the extended hours program has not been implemented on the mbta commuter rail operations . 
until 2007, not all subway fares were identical - passengers were not charged for boarding outbound green line trains at surface stops ,  while double fares were charged for the outer ends of the green line `` d '' branch and the red line braintree branch . 
charlietickets are available from ticket vending machines in mbta rapid transit stations . 
the mbta and philadelphia's southeastern pennsylvania transportation authority  -lrb-  septa  -rrb-  are the only u . s .  transit agencies that operate all five major types of terrestrial mass transit vehicles: light rail vehicles  -lrb-  the ashmont–mattapan high speed and green lines  -rrb- ; heavy rail trains  -lrb-  the blue ,  orange ,  and red lines  -rrb- ; regional rail trains  -lrb-  the commuter rail  -rrb- ; electric trolleybuses  -lrb-  the silver line  -rrb- ; and motor buses  -lrb-  mbta bus  -rrb-  . 
streetcar congestion in downtown boston led to the subways in 1897 and elevated rail in 1901.
the mbta commuter rail network was the first in the nation to offer free on-board wi-fi . 
in many cases ,  their buses serve as feeders to the mbta commuter rail . 
the red line has two branches in the south—ashmont and braintree ,  named after their terminal stations . 
one company the mbta selected was zipcar; the mbta provides zipcar with a limited number of parking spaces at various subway stations throughout the system . 
the silver line is the mbta's first service designated as bus rapid transit  -lrb-  brt  -rrb-  ,  even though it lacks many of the characteristics of bus rapid transit . 
in february 2015, there was record breaking snowfall in boston from the 2014–15 north american winter causing severe delays on all mbta subway lines . 
conventional bicycles are generally allowed on mbta commuter rail ,  commuter boat ,  and rapid transit lines during off-peak hours and all day on weekends and holidays . 
the mbta boat system comprises several ferry routes via boston harbor . 
the mbta now had to live within this `` forward funding '' budget . 
the mbta's ferries and paratransit accounted for the remaining 1% of rides . 
the first commuter rail service in the united states was operated over what is now the framingham/worcester line beginning in 1834.
during fiscal year 2013, the entire mbta system had a typical weekday passenger ridership of 1,297,650.
because mesons are made of one quark and one antiquark ,  they can be found in triplet and singlet spin states . 
if then ,  the meson is `` g even ''  -lrb-  g = +1 -rrb- . 
for example ,  the charm quark was first seen in the j/psi meson  -lrb-    -rrb-  in 1974, and the bottom quark in the upsilon meson  -lrb-    -rrb-  in 1977.
on the other hand ,  if then the meson is `` c odd ''  -lrb-  c = −1 -rrb- . 
on the other hand ,  if then the meson is `` g odd ''  -lrb-  g = −1 -rrb- . 
the mathematics of isospin was modeled after that of spin . 
quarks are fermions—specifically in this case ,  particles having spin  -lrb-  `` s '' =   -rrb-  . 
because mesons are composed of quarks ,  they participate in both the weak and strong interactions . 
how to distinguish between the `` s '' = 1, `` l '' = 0 and `` s '' = 0, `` l '' = 1 mesons is an active area of research in meson spectroscopy . 
for example ,  a positive pion  -lrb-    -rrb-  is made of one up quark and one down antiquark; and its corresponding antiparticle ,  the negative pion  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is made of one up antiquark and one down quark . 
some experiments show evidence of exotic mesons ,  which do not have the conventional valence quark content of one quark and one antiquark . 
both use the same game system . 
in 2003, after the gaming license had reverted to marvel comics ,  the `` marvel universe roleplaying game '' was published by marvel comics . 
marvel super heroes  -lrb-  mshrpg  -rrb-  is a role playing game set in the marvel universe ,  first published by tsr as ``  '' under license from marvel comics in 1984.
before losing the msh license back to marvel comics ,  tsr published a different game using their saga system game engine ,  called the `` marvel super heroes adventure game '' . 
the game was intended to be played using existing marvel characters as the heroes . 
marvel superheroes was driven by two primary game mechanics: column shifts and colored results . 
the original marvel super heroes game received extensive support from tsr ,  covering a wide variety of marvel comics characters and settings ,  including a `` gamer's handbook of the marvel universe '' patterned after marvel's `` official handbook of the marvel universe '' . 
the game also features a simple skill system ,  referred to as talents . 
players sometimes refer to this set of attributes ,  or the game system as a whole ,  by the acronym `` faserip '' . 
allen varney reviewed `` marvel super heroes '' in `` space gamer '' no . 
the basic game was designed to let players assume the roles of superheroes from marvel comics ,  such as spider-man ,  daredevil ,  hulk ,  captain america ,  the fantastic four ,  the x-men ,  and  others . 
in august 2011, margaret weis productions acquired the licence to publish an rpg based on marvel superheroes ,  and `` marvel heroic roleplaying '' was released beginning in 2012.
let be a set and a -algebra over  . 
one may require that at least one set has finite measure . 
a probability space is a measure space with a probability measure . 
technically ,  a measure is a function that assigns a non-negative real number or to  -lrb-  certain  -rrb-  subsets of a set  -lrb-  `` see '' definition below  -rrb-  . 
there are three major types of motorcycle: street ,  off-road ,  and dual purpose . 
dual purpose machines like the dual-sport style are made to go off-road but include features to make them legal and comfortable on the street as well . 
there is often a racing counterpart to each type ,  such as road racing and street bikes ,  or motocross and dirt bikes . 
road maps are perhaps the most widely used maps today ,  and form a subset of navigational maps ,  which also include aeronautical and nautical charts ,  railroad network maps ,  and hiking and bicycling maps . 
the orientation of a map is the relationship between the directions on the map and the corresponding compass directions in reality . 
the most common cartographic convention is that north is at the top of a map . 
in smaller organizations ,  an individual manager may have a much wider scope . 
the term `` management '' may also refer to those people who manage an organization . 
the crystal structure is the arrangement of atoms in a crystal . 
if the mineral is well crystallized ,  it will also have a distinctive crystal habit  -lrb-  for example ,  hexagonal ,  columnar ,  botryoidal  -rrb-  that reflects the crystal structure or internal arrangement of atoms . 
many crystals are polymorphic ,  having more than one possible crystal structure depending on factors such as pressure and temperature . 
when an isotropic crystal is viewed ,  it appears dark because it does not change the polarization of the light . 
when light passes from air or a vacuum into a transparent crystal ,  some of it is reflected at the surface and some refracted . 
all other crystals are `` anisotropic '': light passing through them is broken up into two plane polarized rays that travel at different speeds and refract at different angles . 
nicholas steno first observed the law of constancy of interfacial angles  -lrb-  also known as the first law of crystallography  -rrb-  in quartz crystals in 1669.
most geology departments have x-ray powder diffraction equipment to analyze the crystal structures of minerals . 
imitation syrups are generally cheaper than maple syrup ,  with less natural flavour . 
in canada ,  maple syrup must be made entirely from maple sap ,  and syrup must have a density of 66° on the brix scale to be marketed as maple syrup . 
as of 2003, vermont produced about 5.5 percent of the global syrup supply . 
 ''maple-flavoured '' syrups include maple syrup ,  but may contain additional ingredients . 
the higher the sugar content of the sap ,  the smaller the volume of sap is needed to obtain the same amount of syrup . 
in 2011, there were 82 maple syrup producers in british columbia . 
this is followed by new brunswick ,  with 191 maple syrup producers; and nova scotia ,  with 152 maple syrup producers . 
maple syrup was divided into two major grades:
maple syrup is a syrup usually made from the xylem sap of sugar maple ,  red maple ,  or black maple trees ,  although it can also be made from other maple species . 
in these syrups ,  the primary ingredient is most often high-fructose corn syrup flavoured with sotolon; they have little genuine maple content ,  and are usually thickened above the viscosity of maple syrup . 
until the 1930s ,  the united states produced most of the world's maple syrup . 
new compounds have been identified in maple syrup ,  one of which is quebecol ,  a natural phenolic compound created when the maple sap is boiled to create syrup . 
a typical year's yield for a maple syrup producer will be about 25 to 30 percent of each of the #1 colours ,  10 percent #2 amber ,  and 2 percent #3 dark . 
boiling the syrup is a tightly controlled process ,  which ensures appropriate sugar content . 
in 2015, quebec accounts for 90.83 percent of maple syrup produced in canada ,  followed by new brunswick at 4.83 percent ,  ontario at 4.14 percent ,  and nova scotia at 0.2 percent . 
labeling laws prohibit imitation syrups from having `` maple '' in their names unless the finished product contains 10 percent or more of natural maple syrup . 
the basic ingredient in maple syrup is the sap from the xylem of sugar maple or various other species of maple trees . 
as of 2016, quebec had some 7,300 producers working with 13,500 farmers ,  collectively making over of syrup . 
a maple syrup production farm is called a `` sugarbush '' or `` sugarwood '' . 
maple syrup can also be used as a replacement for honey in wine  -lrb-  mead  -rrb-  . 
following an effort from the international maple syrup institute  -lrb-  imsi  -rrb-  and many maple syrup producer associations ,  both canada and the united states have altered their laws regarding the classification of maple syrup to be uniform . 
the following languages or transliteration systems use the macron to mark long vowels:
a macron  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a diacritical mark: it is a straight bar placed above a letter ,  usually a vowel . 
leadership at prayer falls into three categories ,  depending on the type of prayer: five daily prayers ,  friday prayer ,  or optional prayers . 
nevertheless ,  women prayer leaders are allowed to lead prayer in front of all-female congregations . 
all muslim authorities hold the consensus opinion that only men may lead prayer for men . 
usually opposite the entrance to the prayer hall is the `` qiblah '' wall ,  the visually emphasized area inside the prayer hall . 
before the five required daily prayers ,  a `` mu’adhdhin ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  calls the worshippers to prayer from the minaret . 
an imam appointed to lead friday prayers may also lead at the five daily prayers; muslim scholars agree to the leader appointed for five daily services may lead the friday service as well . 
the domes ,  often placed directly above the main prayer hall ,  may signify the vaults of the heaven and sky . 
the prayer hall ,  also known as the `` muṣallá ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  rarely has furniture; chairs and pews are generally absent from the prayer hall so as to allow as many worshipers as possible to line the room . 
many mosques have elaborate domes ,  minarets ,  and prayer halls ,  in varying styles of architecture . 
following the last obligatory daily prayer  -lrb-  `` ‘ishâ’ ''  -lrb-    -rrb-   -rrb-  special ,  optional `` ṫarâwîḥ ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  prayers are offered in larger mosques . 
a mosque  -lrb-  ; from   -rrb-  is a place of worship for muslims . 
as mosques are places of worship ,  those within the mosque are required to remain respectful to those in prayer . 
appointment of a prayer leader is considered desirable ,  but not always obligatory . 
when it comes to mosque attendance ,  data shows that american muslim women and american muslim men attend the mosque at similar rates  -lrb-  45% for men and 35% for women  -rrb-  . 
the mihrab serves as the location where the imam leads the five daily prayers on a regular basis . 
 ''mihrab ''s should not be confused with the `` minbar ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which is the raised platform from which an imam  -lrb-  leader of prayer  -rrb-  addresses the congregation . 
mosques ,  especially those in countries where muslims are the majority ,  will also host eid prayers outside in courtyards ,  town squares or on the outskirts of town in an `` eidgah '' . 
in modern-day saudi arabia ,  the grand mosque and all of mecca are open only to muslims . 
before the holiday of `` eid ul-fitr '' ,  mosques also collect a special `` zakat '' that is supposed to assist in helping poor muslims attend the prayers and celebrations associated with the holiday . 
many muslims ,  regardless of their ethnic background ,  wear middle eastern clothing associated with arabic islam to special occasions and prayers at mosques . 
there are two holidays  -lrb-  `` eids ''  -rrb-  in the islamic calendar: `` ʻīd al-fiṭr ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  and `` ʿīd al-aḍḥā ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  during which there are special prayers held at mosques in the morning . 
in many mosques ,  even the carpeted prayer area has no designs ,  its plainness helping worshippers to focus . 
as ritual purification precedes all prayers ,  mosques often have ablution fountains or other facilities for washing in their entryways or courtyards . 
saudi citizens have also contributed significantly to mosques in the islamic world ,  especially in countries where they see muslims as poor and oppressed . 
however ,  there are also many other places in the west as well as the islamic world where non-muslims are welcome to enter mosques . 
a vast assemblage of molecular gas with a mass of approximately 10 to 10 times the mass of the sun is called a giant molecular cloud  -lrb-  gmc  -rrb-  . 
the densest parts of small molecular clouds are equivalent to the molecular cores found in gmcs and are often included in the same studies . 
the formation of stars occurs exclusively within molecular clouds . 
the physics of molecular clouds is poorly understood and much debated . 
molecular clouds ,  and especially gmcs ,  are often the home of astronomical masers . 
yamasaki was born in seattle ,  washington ,  the son of john tsunejiro yamasaki and hana yamasaki ,  japanese descendants . 
minoru yamasaki  -lrb-  december 1, 1912february 6, 1986 -rrb- was an american architect ,  best known for designing the original world trade center in new york city and several other large-scale projects . 
the island of madeira is wet in the northwest ,  but dry in the southeast . 
their investigation revealed it to be the larger island they called madeira . 
the capital of madeira is funchal ,  which is located on the main island's south coast . 
funchal is the capital and principal city of the autonomous region of madeira ,  located along the southern coast of the island of madeira . 
madeira  -lrb-    ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the autonomous region of madeira  -lrb-  `` região autónoma da madeira ''  -rrb-  ,  is one of the two autonomous regions of portugal  -lrb-  along with the azores  -rrb-  . 
in most winters snowfall occurs in the mountains of madeira . 
the wildfires threatened funchal and other administrative regions of madeira ,  such as calheta . 
in july 2012 madeira was suffering again from severe drought . 
knowledge of some atlantic islands ,  such as madeira ,  existed before their formal discovery and settlement ,  as the islands were shown on maps as early as 1339.
in 2019 madeira island will celebrate six centuries since its formal discovery by the portuguese . 
on 1 july 1976, following the democratic revolution of 1974, portugal granted political autonomy to madeira ,  celebrated on madeira day . 
in 1846, when a famine struck madeira over 6,000 of the inhabitants migrated to british guiana . 
on 20 february 2010 at least 42 people died and 100 were injured by the 2010 madeira floods and mudslides that affected the island . 
the archipelago is just under north of tenerife ,  canary islands . 
the region has a total population of just under 270,000, the majority of whom live on the main island of madeira where the population density is ; meanwhile only around 5,000 live on the porto santo island where the population density is  . 
batteries on madeira returned fire and eventually forced `` u-38 '' to withdraw . 
with his battalion's 350 m16s and 700 m4s . 
the u . s .  army has been so impressed with the new m855a1 epr round that they developed a 7.62 nato m80a1 epr variant . 
the nato 5.56×45mm standard ammunition produced for u . s .  forces is designated m855.
in 1983, the u . s .  marine corps adopted the m16a2 rifle and the u . s .  army adopted it in 1986.
the u . s .  marine corps uses the acog rifle combat optic and the u . s .  navy uses eotech holographic weapon sight . 
in march 1970, the u . s .  recommended that all nato forces adopt the 5.56×45mm cartridge . 
in tests conducted in 2005 and 2006 the army found that on average ,  the new m4s and m16s fired approximately 5,000 rounds between stoppages . 
the 5.56×45mm cartridge had several advantages over the 7.62×51mm nato round used in the m14 rifle . 
the original m16 was a 5.56mm automatic rifle with a 20-round magazine . 
the u . s .  army xm16e1 was essentially the same weapon as the m16 with the addition of a forward assist and corresponding notches in the bolt carrier . 
a number of suppressor manufacturers have designed `` direct-connect '' sound suppressors which can be installed over an existing m16's flash suppressor as opposed to using the barrel's threads . 
the m16 is 44.25 inches  -lrb-  1124 mm  -rrb-  long with an m7 bayonet attached . 
this was the first m16 variant adopted operationally ,  originally by the u . s .  air force . 
the u . s .  military does not generally use rifle grenades; however ,  they are used by other nations . 
the fn m16a4, using safe/semi/burst selective fire ,  became standard issue for the u . s .  marine corps . 
for these reasons ,  the u . s .  military declared the a2 flash suppressor as a compensator or a muzzle brake; but it is more commonly known as the `` gi '' or `` a2 '' flash suppressor . 
the u . s .  air force continued to use the armalite ar-15 marked rifles in various configurations into the 1990s . 
it is also lighter when compared to the akm's with a loaded 30-round magazine . 
in the end the u . s .  army chose the t44 now named m14 rifle which was an improved m1 garand with a 20-round magazine and automatic fire capability . 
the m16's receivers are made of 7075 aluminum alloy ,  its barrel ,  bolt ,  and bolt carrier of steel ,  and its handguards ,  pistol grip ,  and buttstock of plastics . 
early model m16 barrels had a rifling twist of 4 grooves ,  right hand twist ,  1 turn in 14 inches  -lrb-  1:355.6 mm  -rrb-  bore – as it was the same rifling used by the  . 222 remington sporting round . 
the m16a1 was especially lightweight at with a loaded 30-round magazine . 
in 2003, the u . s .  army contended that the lack of lethality of the 5.56×45mm was more a matter of perception than fact . 
all current m16 type rifles are designed to fire stanag 22 mm rifle grenades from their integral flash hiders without the use of an adapter . 
the u . s .  military has largely replaced the m16 in combat units with a shorter and lighter version ,  the m4 carbine . 
the m16a2 weighs loaded with a 30-round magazine ,  because of the adoption of a thicker barrel profile . 
