after nylon's nationwide release in 1940, production was increased . 
the 428 °f  -lrb-  220 °c  -rrb-  melting point of nylon 6 is lower than the 509 °f  -lrb-  265 °c  -rrb-  melting point of nylon 66.
wallace carothers at dupont patented nylon 66 using amides . 
nylons can also be synthesized from dinitriles using acid catalysis . 
dupont's experience with rayon was an important precursor to its development and marketing of nylon . 
an important part of nylon's popularity stems from dupont's marketing strategy . 
nylon was the first commercially successful synthetic thermoplastic polymer . 
the solution found to problems with pure nylon fabric was to blend nylon with other existing fibers or polymers such as cotton ,  polyester ,  and spandex . 
nylon 510, made from pentamethylene diamine and sebacic acid ,  was studied by carothers even before nylon 66 and has superior properties ,  but is more expensive to make . 
however ,  the early excitement over nylon also caused problems . 
once the war ended ,  the return of nylon was awaited with great anticipation . 
for example ,  a popular demonstration of interfacial polymerization  -lrb-  the `` nylon rope trick ''  -rrb-  is the synthesis of nylon 66 from adipoyl chloride and hexamethylene diamine . 
nylon was first used commercially in a nylon-bristled toothbrush in 1938, followed more famously in women's stockings or `` nylons '' which were shown at the 1939 new york world's fair and first sold commercially in 1940.
the general reaction is: two molecules of water are given off and the nylon is formed . 
wartime uses of nylon and other plastics greatly increased the market for the new materials . 
johannes grenzfurthner ,  researcher ,  self-proclaimed nerd and director of nerd documentary `` traceroute '' ,  reflects on the emergence of nerds and nerd culture: in the 1984 film `` revenge of the nerds '' robert carradine worked to embody the nerd stereotype; in doing so ,  he helped create a definitive image of nerds . 
because of the nerd stereotype ,  many smart people are often thought of as nerdy . 
originally derogatory ,  the term `` nerd '' was a stereotype ,  but as with other pejoratives ,  it has been reclaimed and redefined by some as a term of pride and group identity . 
the term was popularized in the 1970s by its heavy use in the sitcom `` happy days '' . 
a nerd is a person seen as overly intellectual ,  obsessive ,  introverted or lacking social skills . 
the first documented appearance of the word `` nerd '' is as the name of a creature in dr .  seuss's book `` if i ran the zoo ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- ,  in which the narrator gerald mcgrew claims that he would collect `` a nerkle ,  a nerd ,  and a seersucker too '' for his imaginary zoo . 
nucleic acids are the most important of all biomolecules . 
artificial nucleic acid analogues have been designed and synthesized by chemists ,  and include peptide nucleic acid ,  morpholino- and locked nucleic acid ,  glycol nucleic acid ,  and threose nucleic acid . 
also ,  the nucleobases found in the two nucleic acid types are different: adenine ,  cytosine ,  and guanine are found in both rna and dna ,  while thymine occurs in dna and uracil occurs in rna . 
the term `` nucleic acid '' is the overall name for dna and rna ,  members of a family of biopolymers ,  and is synonymous with `` polynucleotide '' . 
nucleic acids are generally very large molecules . 
nucleic acids are linear polymers  -lrb-  chains  -rrb-  of nucleotides . 
non-standard nucleosides are also found in both rna and dna and usually arise from modification of the standard nucleosides within the dna molecule or the primary  -lrb-  initial  -rrb-  rna transcript . 
like the isoelectronic carbonate ion ,  the nitrate ion can be represented by resonance structures:
nitrate is a polyatomic ion with the molecular formula and a molecular mass of 62.0049 u .  organic compounds that contain the nitrate ester as a functional group  -lrb-  rono  -rrb-  are also called `` nitrates '' . 
 -lrb-  1 -rrb- of the constitution states: `` the nevis island legislature may provide that the island of nevis shall cease to be federated with the island of saint christopher and accordingly that this constitution shall no longer have effect in the island of nevis . `` 
the island was named `` oualie ''  -lrb-  `` land of beautiful waters ''  -rrb-  by the caribs and `` dulcina ''  -lrb-  `` sweet island ''  -rrb-  by the early british settlers . 
in 1498, christopher columbus gave the island the name `` san martín ''  -lrb-  saint martin  -rrb-  . 
nevis is a small island in the caribbean sea that forms part of the inner arc of the leeward islands chain of the west indies . 
however ,  the confusion of numerous poorly-charted small islands in the leeward island chain meant that this name ended up being accidentally transferred to another island ,  which is still known as saint-martin/sint maarten . 
nevis was part of the spanish claim to the caribbean islands ,  a claim pursued until the treaty of madrid  -lrb-  1670 -rrb- ,  even though there were no spanish settlements on the island . 
during the last ice age ,  when the sea level was 60 m lower ,  the three islands of saint kitts ,  nevis and sint eustatius  -lrb-  also known as statia  -rrb-  were connected as one island . 
the federal government in saint kitts fills both functions today and saint kitts does not have an equivalent to the nevis island administration . 
the southernmost point on the island is dogwood point which is also the southernmost point of the federation of saint kitts and nevis . 
nevis has its own premier and its own government ,  the nevis island administration . 
the island of nevis is divided into five administrative subdivisions called parishes ,  each of which has an elected representative in the nevis island assembly . 
the structure of the island carib language has been linguistically identified as arawakan . 
the problematic political arrangement between the two islands therefore continues to date . 
no single model of the island's geological evolution can therefore be ascertained . 
the island remained poorer than saint kitts until 1991, when the fiscal performance of nevis edged ahead of the fiscal performance of saint kitts for the first time since the french invasion . 
the formation of the island began in mid-pliocene times ,  approximately 3.45 million years ago . 
the committee recommended constitutional reform and the establishment of an island administration for saint kitts ,  separate from the federal government . 
the list included the federation of saint kitts and nevis ,  as well as liechtenstein ,  monaco ,  luxembourg ,  the british channel islands ,  israel ,  and russia . 
the parishes have double names ,  for example saint george gingerland . 
nevis was first sighted by columbus in 1493; the island had been settled for more than two thousand years by amerindian people . 
the economic and infrastructural development of the two smaller islands was not a priority to the colonial federal government . 
this intense land exploitation by the sugar and cotton industry lasted almost 300 years ,  and greatly changed the island's ecosystem . 
with modern development ,  the existing freshwater springs are no longer enough to supply water to the whole island . 
before 1967, the local government of saint kitts was also the government of nevis and anguilla . 
on nevis ,  the english built fort charles and a series of smaller fortifications to aid in defending the island . 
the ccm won three of the five seats in the nevis island assembly ,  while the incumbent party ,  the nevis reformation party  -lrb-  nrp  -rrb-  ,  won two . 
nonetheless ,  once the sugar industry was finally abandoned ,  vegetation on the leeward side of the island regrew reasonably well ,  as scrub and secondary forest . 
kidman has a younger sister ,  antonia kidman ,  a journalist and tv presenter . 
kidman also appeared in the family film `` paddington ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- as a villain . 
it is kidman's american debut and was among the highest-grossing films of the year . 
kidman began her acting career in australia with the 1983 film `` bush christmas '' . 
following her oscar win ,  kidman appeared in three very different films in 2003.
in conjunction with her success in the film industry ,  kidman became the face of the `` chanel no . 
nicole mary kidman  -lrb-  born 20 june 1967 -rrb- is an australian actress and producer . 
in 1988, kidman appeared in `` emerald city '' ,  based on the play of the same name . 
kidman was named the world's most beautiful person by people magazine
the film garnered several award nominations and wins for its actors; kidman received her sixth golden globe nomination at the 61st golden globe awards for best actress . 
 -lrb-  2001 -rrb- and the writer virginia woolf in the drama film `` the hours ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb-; she won the award for the latter ,  and received golden globes for both films . 
in 1983, aged 16, kidman made her film debut in a remake of the australian holiday season favourite `` bush christmas '' . 
kidman's ancestry includes irish ,  scottish and english heritage . 
nucleic acids then are polymeric macromolecules assembled from nucleotides ,  the monomer-units of nucleic acids . 
a nucleoside is a nitrogenous base and a 5-carbon sugar . 
unlike in nucleic acid nucleotides ,  singular cyclic nucleotides are formed when the phosphate group is bound twice to the same sugar molecule ,  i . e .  ,  at the corners of the sugar hydroxyl groups . 
the net reaction is:
nucleotides are the building blocks of nucleic acids; they are composed of three subunit molecules: a nitrogenous base ,  a five-carbon sugar  -lrb-  ribose or deoxyribose  -rrb-  ,  and at least one phosphate group . 
nucleotides are organic molecules that serve as the monomer units for forming the nucleic acid polymers deoxyribonucleic acid  -lrb-  dna  -rrb-  and ribonucleic acid  -lrb-  rna  -rrb-  ,  both of which are essential biomolecules within all life-forms on earth . 
these individual nucleotides function in cell metabolism rather than the nucleic acid structures of long-chain molecules . 
a famous method in linear programming is the simplex method . 
iterative methods are more common than direct methods in numerical analysis . 
one of the simplest problems is the evaluation of a function at a given point . 
hence ,  the babylonian method is numerically stable ,  while method x is numerically unstable . 
direct methods compute the solution to a problem in a finite number of steps . 
in contrast to direct methods ,  iterative methods are not expected to terminate in a finite number of steps . 
interpolation solves the following problem: given the value of some unknown function at a number of points ,  what value does that function have at some other point between the given points ? 
optimization problems ask for the point at which a given function is maximized  -lrb-  or minimized  -rrb-  . 
the method of lagrange multipliers can be used to reduce optimization problems with constraints to unconstrained optimization problems . 
in computational matrix algebra ,  iterative methods are generally needed for large problems . 
observe that the babylonian method converges quickly regardless of the initial guess ,  whereas method x converges extremely slowly with initial guess `` x '' = 1.4 and diverges for initial guess `` x '' = 1.42.
general iterative methods can be developed using a matrix splitting . 
for these methods the number of steps needed to obtain the exact solution is so large that an approximation is accepted in the same manner as for an iterative method . 
to the contrary ,  if a problem is `` ill-conditioned '' ,  then any small error in the data will grow to be a large error . 
much effort has been put in the development of methods for solving systems of linear equations . 
the noosphere  -lrb-  ; sometimes noösphere  -rrb-  is the sphere of human thought . 
citing the work of teilhard's biographer—rene cuenot—sampson and pitt stated that although the concept was jointly developed by all three men  -lrb-  vernadsky ,  leroy ,  and teilhard  -rrb-  ,  teilhard believed that he actually invented the word: `` i believe ,  so far as one can ever tell ,  that the word 'noosphere' was my invention: but it was he le roy who launched it . `` 
paganini's efforts earned gratitude from rossini . 
in 1836, paganini returned to paris to set up a casino . 
paganini was in possession of a number of fine string instruments . 
paganini assumed the sacrament was premature ,  and refused . 
paganini gave berlioz a guitar ,  which they both signed on its sound box . 
another aspect of paganini's violin techniques concerned his flexibility . 
the paganini competition  -lrb-  `` premio paganini ''  -rrb-  is an international violin competition created in 1954 in his home city of genoa and named in his honour . 
notable examples include brahms's `` variations on a theme of paganini '' and rachmaninoff's `` rhapsody on a theme of paganini '' . 
paganini was also the inspiration of many prominent composers . 
in september 1834, paganini put an end to his concert career and returned to genoa . 
paganini met berlioz in paris ,  and was a frequent correspondent as a penfriend . 
niccolò paganini was born in genoa ,  then capital of the republic of genoa ,  the third of the six children of antonio and teresa  -lrb-  née bocciardo  -rrb-  paganini . 
driven by the global thermohaline circulation ,  the north atlantic current is part of the wind-driven gulf stream ,  which goes further east and north from the north american coast across the atlantic and into the arctic ocean . 
the north atlantic current  -lrb-  nac  -rrb-  ,  also known as north atlantic drift and north atlantic sea movement ,  is a powerful warm western boundary current within the atlantic ocean that extends the gulf stream northeastward . 
north atlantic deep water  -lrb-  nadw  -rrb-  is a deep water mass formed in the north atlantic ocean . 
water flowing into the barent sea feeds isow . 
dsow is the coldest ,  densest ,  and freshest water mass of nadw . 
the overflows are a combination of dense arctic ocean water  -lrb-  18%  -rrb-  ,  modified atlantic water  -lrb-  32%  -rrb-  ,  and intermediate water from the nordic seas  -lrb-  20%  -rrb-  ,  that entrain and mix with other water masses  -lrb-  contributing 30%  -rrb-  as they flow over the greenland-iceland-scotland ridge . 
another component of lsw is the upper labrador sea water  -lrb-  ulsw  -rrb-  . 
the lower waters mass of nadw form from overflow of the greenland-iceland-scotland ridge . 
the formation of both of these waters involves the conversion of warm salty northward flowing surface waters to cold dense deep waters behind the greenland-iceland-scotland ridge . 
the efficacy of drug delivery through nanomedicine is largely based upon: a  -rrb-  efficient encapsulation of the drugs ,  b  -rrb-  successful delivery of drug to the targeted region of the body ,  and c  -rrb-  successful release of the drug . 
drug delivery systems ,  lipid- or polymer-based nanoparticles ,  can be designed to improve the pharmacokinetics and biodistribution of the drug . 
some nanotechnology-based drugs that are commercially available or in human clinical trials include:
more generally ,  on a given measure space formula_2 a null set is a set formula_3 such that formula_4.
between 2009 and 2012, recurrent neural networks and deep feedforward neural networks developed in schmidhuber's research group won eight international competitions in pattern recognition and machine learning . 
neural network research stagnated after machine learning research by minsky and papert  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- ,  who discovered two key issues with the computational machines that processed neural networks . 
artificial neural networks  -lrb-  ann  -rrb-  or connectionist systems are computing systems vaguely inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains . 
signals travel from the first layer  -lrb-  the input layer  -rrb-  ,  to the last layer  -lrb-  the output layer  -rrb-  ,  possibly after traversing the layers multiple times . 
rumelhart and mcclelland  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- described the use of connectionism to simulate neural processes . 
researchers demonstrated  -lrb-  2010 -rrb- that deep neural networks interfaced to a hidden markov model with context-dependent states that define the neural network output layer can drastically reduce errors in large-vocabulary speech recognition tasks such as voice search . 
however ,  using neural networks transformed some domains ,  such as the prediction of protein structures . 
the vanishing gradient problem affects many-layered feedforward networks that used backpropagation and also recurrent neural networks  -lrb-  rnns  -rrb-  . 
an artificial neuron mimics the working of a biophysical neuron with inputs and outputs ,  but is not a biological neuron model . 
an `` artificial neural network '' is a network of simple elements called `` artificial neurons '' ,  which receive input ,  change their internal state  -lrb-  `` activation ''  -rrb-  according to that input ,  and produce output depending on the input and activation . 
the macronutrients are carbohydrates ,  fiber ,  fats ,  protein ,  and water . 
a `` complete '' protein source contains all the essential amino acids; an `` incomplete '' protein source lacks one or more of the essential amino acids . 
vitamins ,  minerals ,  fiber ,  and water do not provide energy ,  but are required for other reasons . 
excess amino acids from protein can be converted into glucose and used for fuel through a process called gluconeogenesis . 
the vitamins were studied in the first half of the 20th century . 
in the 1930s ,  william cumming rose identified essential amino acids ,  necessary protein components that the body cannot synthesize . 
proteins are structural materials in much of the animal body  -lrb-  e . g . 
fatty acids such as conjugated linoleic acid ,  catalpic acid ,  eleostearic acid and punicic acid ,  in addition to providing energy ,  represent potent immune modulatory molecules . 
the diet of an organism is what it eats ,  which is largely determined by the availability and palatability of foods . 
in industrialized societies ,  people typically consume large amounts of processed vegetable oils ,  which have reduced amounts of the essential fatty acids along with too much of omega-6 fatty acids relative to omega-3 fatty acids . 
it is possible with protein combinations of two incomplete protein sources  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  rice and beans  -rrb-  to make a complete protein source ,  and characteristic combinations are the basis of distinct cultural cooking traditions . 
in 1816, françois magendie discovered that dogs fed only carbohydrates  -lrb-  sugar  -rrb-  ,  fat  -lrb-  olive oil  -rrb-  ,  and water died evidently of starvation ,  but dogs also fed protein survived ,  identifying protein as an essential dietary component . 
over two decades later ,  nutritionists learned that the outer rice bran contains vitamin b1, also known as thiamine . 
scurvy ,  later found to be a vitamin c deficiency ,  was first described in 1500 bc in the ebers papyrus . 
this replaced the four food groups  -lrb-  1956-1992 -rrb- and was superseded by the concept of myplate  -lrb-  2011–present  -rrb-  . 
while square numbers ,  cubic numbers ,  etc .  ,  are seen now as more natural than triangular numbers ,  pentagonal numbers ,  etc .  ,  the study of the sums of triangular and pentagonal numbers would prove fruitful in the early modern period  -lrb-  17th to early 19th century  -rrb-  . 
the older term for number theory is `` arithmetic '' . 
the pythagorean tradition spoke also of so-called polygonal or figurate numbers . 
euclid ix 21–34 is very probably pythagorean; it is very simple material  -lrb-  `` odd times even is even '' ,  `` if an odd number measures = divides an even number ,  then it also measures = divides half of it ''  -rrb-  ,  but it is all that is needed to prove that formula_5 is irrational . 
one may also study real numbers in relation to rational numbers ,  for example ,  as approximated by the latter  -lrb-  diophantine approximation  -rrb-  . 
nitroglycerin and any diluents can certainly deflagrate  -lrb-  burn  -rrb-  . 
nitroglycerin was also used as an ingredient in military propellants for use in firearms . 
nitroglycerin can be produced by acid-catalyzed nitration of glycerol  -lrb-  glycerin  -rrb-  . 
the main use of nitroglycerin ,  by tonnage ,  is in explosives such as dynamite and in propellants . 
a serious problem in the use of nitroglycerin results from its high freezing point of  . 
alfred nobel then developed ballistite ,  by combining nitroglycerin and guncotton . 
nitroglycerin is available in sublingual tablets ,  sprays ,  and patches . 
alfred nobel developed the use of nitroglycerin as a blasting explosive by mixing nitroglycerin with inert absorbents ,  particularly ``  ''kieselguhr '' '' ,  or diatomaceous earth . 
nitroglycerin is a major component in double-based smokeless gunpowders used by reloaders . 
early in its history ,  liquid nitroglycerin was found to be `` desensitized '' by cooling it to about  . 
at levels of 75 mg/m ,  nitroglycerin is immediately dangerous to life and health . 
for example ,  a mixture of nitroglycerin and ethylene glycol dinitrate freezes at  . 
nitroglycerin was the first practical explosive produced that was stronger than black powder . 
naval aviation forces primarily perform naval roles at sea . 
world war ii also saw the united states become by far the largest naval power in the world . 
an important tradition on board naval vessels of some nations has been the ship's bell . 
by the end of world war ii ,  the carrier had become the dominant force of naval warfare . 
navy ships can operate independently or with a group ,  which may be a small squadron of comparable ships ,  or a larger naval fleet of various specialized ships . 
see ship prefix . 
a navy typically operates from one or more naval bases . 
the prefix on a ship's name indicates that it is a commissioned ship . 
they also perform other tasks ,  including land warfare ,  separate from naval operations . 
naval infantry ,  commonly known as marines ,  are a category of infantry that form part of a state's naval forces and perform roles on land and at sea ,  including amphibious operations ,  as well as other ,  naval roles . 
a further step change in naval firepower occurred when the united kingdom launched in 1906, but naval tactics still emphasized the line of battle . 
naval warfare developed when humans first fought from water-borne vessels . 
naval forces are typically arranged into units based on the number of ships included ,  a single ship being the smallest operational unit . 
england emerged as a major naval power in the mid-17th century in the first anglo-dutch war with a technical victory . 
naval ship names are typically prefixed by an abbreviation indicating the national navy in which they serve . 
a major paradigm shift in naval warfare occurred with the introduction of the aircraft carrier . 
a normed vector space is a pair formula_7 where formula_8 is a vector space and formula_9 a norm on formula_8.
a seminormed vector space is a pair formula_11 where formula_8 is a vector space and formula_13 a seminorm on formula_8.
on the basis of evidence both internal and external to the text ,  it has been argued that this creed originated not as an editing of the original creed proposed at nicaea in 325, but as an independent creed  -lrb-  probably an older baptismal creed  -rrb-  modified to make it more like the nicene creed . 
it is generally agreed that the niceno-constantinopolitan creed is not simply an expansion of the creed of nicaea ,  and was probably based on another traditional creed independent of the one from nicaea . 
the original nicene creed was first adopted in 325 at the first council of nicaea . 
the creed was originally written in greek ,  owing to the location of the two councils . 
 -lrb-  the apostles' and athanasian creeds are not as widely accepted .   -rrb- 
the eusebian creed may thus have been either a second or one of many nominations for the nicene creed . 
what is known as the `` niceno-constantinopolitan creed '' or the `` nicene-constantinopolitan creed '' received this name because of a belief that it was adopted at the second ecumenical council held in constantinople in 381 as a modification of the original nicene creed of 325.
the roman missal now refers to it jointly with the apostles' creed as `` the symbol or profession of faith or creed '' ,  describing the second as `` the baptismal symbol of the roman church ,  known as the apostles' creed '' . 
the earlier apostles' creed is also used in the latin west ,  but not in the eastern liturgies . 
the nicene creed  -lrb-  greek: or ,   ,  latin:   -rrb-  is a statement of belief widely used in christian liturgy . 
it differs in a number of respects ,  both by addition and omission ,  from the creed adopted at the first council of nicaea . 
in nuclear chemistry ,  nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two or more atomic nuclei are combined to form one or more different atomic nuclei and subatomic particles  -lrb-  neutrons or protons  -rrb-  . 
an important fusion process is the stellar nucleosynthesis that powers stars and the sun . 
thus ,  energy is not released with the fusion of such nuclei; instead ,  energy is required as input for such processes . 
research into using fusion for the production of electricity has been pursued for over 60 years . 
nuclear fusion on a large scale in an explosion was first carried out on november 1, 1952, in the ivy mike hydrogen bomb test . 
national geographic maintains a museum for the public in its washington ,  d . c .  ,  headquarters . 
national geographic has retail stores in washington ,  d . c .  ,  london ,  sydney ,  and panama . 
in partnership with 21st century fox ,  the society operates the magazine ,  tv channels ,  a website ,  worldwide events ,  and other media operations . 
the national geographic society also awards ,  rarely ,  the alexander graham bell medal ,  for exceptional contributions to geographic research . 
on september 9, 2015, the society announced that it would re-organize its media properties and publications into a new company known as national geographic partners ,  which would be majority-owned by 21st century fox with a 73% stake . 
its committee for research and exploration has awarded more than 11,000 grants for scientific research and exploration . 
gardiner greene hubbard became its first president and his son-in-law ,  alexander graham bell ,  succeeded him in 1897.
national geographic channel ,  launched in january 2001, is a joint venture of national geographic and fox cable networks . 
the society operates the national geographic museum ,  located at 1145 17th street ,  nw  -lrb-  17th and m  -rrb-  ,  in washington ,  d . c . 
on december 14, 2017, in a historic deal valued at over $52 billion ,  the walt disney company announced it will buy the majority of 21st century fox . 
in 2004, the national geographic society headquarters in washington ,  d . c .  ,  was one of the first buildings to receive a `` green '' certification from global green usa . 
the hubbard medal has been presented 44 times  ,  the most recent award going to peter h .  raven . 
in snorri sturluson's interpretation of the `` völuspá '' ,  urðr  -lrb-  wyrd  -rrb-  ,  verðandi and skuld ,  the three most important of the norns ,  come out from a hall standing at the well of urðr or well of fate . 
the name `` urðr ''  -lrb-  old english wyrd ,  weird  -rrb-  means `` fate '' . 
the `` völuspá '' contains the names of the three main norns referring to them as maidens like `` vafþrúðnismál '' probably does:
it also suggests that the three main norns were giantesses  -lrb-  female jotuns  -rrb-  . 
the poetic edda is valuable in representing older material in poetry from which snorri tapped information in the `` prose edda '' . 
they explain to gylfi that there are three main norns ,  but also many others of various races ,  æsir ,  elves and dwarves:
 ''fáfnismál '' contains a discussion between the hero sigurd and the dragon fafnir who is dying from a mortal wound from sigurd . 
gylfi learns from odin  -lrb-  as `` jafnhárr ''  -rrb-  that niflheimr was the first world to be created after muspelheim:
niflheim or niflheimr  -lrb-  `` world of mist '' ,  literally `` home of mist ''  -rrb-  is one of the nine worlds and is a location in norse mythology which sometimes overlaps with the notions of niflhel and hel . 
odin  -lrb-  as `` þriði ''  -rrb-  further tells gylfi that it was when the ice from niflheimr met the flames from muspelheimr that creation began and ymir was formed: in relation to the world tree yggdrasill ,  `` jafnhárr ''  -lrb-  odin  -rrb-  tells gylfi that jötunheimr is located under the second root ,  where ginnungagap  -lrb-  `` yawning void ''  -rrb-  once was: gylfi is furthermore informed that when loki had engendered hel ,  she was cast into niflheimr by odin:
the nasdaq stock market  -lrb-   ,  also known as nasdaq  -rrb-  is an american stock exchange . 
in 2006, the status of the nasdaq stock market was changed from a stock market to a licensed national securities exchange . 
in 1992, the nasdaq stock market joined with the london stock exchange to form the first intercontinental linkage of securities markets . 
over the years ,  the nasdaq stock market became more of a stock market by adding trade and volume reporting and automated trading systems . 
the exchange platform is owned by nasdaq ,  inc .  ,  which also owns the nasdaq nordic  -lrb-  formerly known as omx  -rrb-  and nasdaq baltic stock market network and several u . s .  stock and options exchanges
previously ,  it was part of nyse euronext  -lrb-  nyx  -rrb-  ,  which was formed by the nyse's 2007 merger with euronext . 
the nyse was only 5 blocks from ground zero . 
the nyse averages about 253 trading days per year . 
in october 2008 nyse euronext completed acquisition of the american stock exchange  -lrb-  amex  -rrb-  for $260 million in stock . 
the new york stock exchange  -lrb-  nyse ,  nicknamed `` the big board ''  -rrb-  is an american stock exchange located at 11 wall street ,  lower manhattan ,  new york city ,  new york . 
the nyse's opening and closing bells mark the beginning and the end of each trading day . 
prior to the acquisition of nyse euronext by the ice in 2013, marsh carter was the chairman of the nyse and the ceo was duncan niederauer . 
the nyse is owned by intercontinental exchange ,  an american holding company that it also lists  -lrb-  nyse: ice  -rrb-  . 
a little over one year later ,  on april 4, 2007, the nyse group completed its merger with euronext ,  the european combined stock market ,  thus forming nyse euronext ,  the first transatlantic stock exchange . 
as of january 24, 2007, all nyse stocks can be traded via its electronic hybrid market  -lrb-  except for a small group of very high-priced stocks  -rrb-  . 
in december 2012, ice had proposed to buy nyse euronext in a stock swap with a valuation of $8 billion . 
on february 2, 2012, nyse euronext and deutsche börse agreed to scrap the merger . 
in the mid-1960s ,  the nyse composite index  -lrb-  nyse: nya  -rrb-  was created ,  with a base value of 50 points equal to the 1965 yearly close . 
the nyse trades in a continuous auction format ,  where traders can execute stock transactions on behalf of investors . 
on february 15, 2011, nyse and deutsche börse announced their merger to form a new company ,  as yet unnamed ,  wherein deutsche börse shareholders will have 60% ownership of the new entity ,  and nyse euronext shareholders will have 40% . 
the bank of north america along with the first bank of the united states and the bank of new york were the first shares traded on the new york stock exchange . 
the first nanoengineering program was started at the university of toronto within the engineering science program as one of the options of study in the final years . 
in 2013, wayne state university began offering a nanoengineering undergraduate certificate program ,  which is funded by a nanoengineering undergraduate education  -lrb-  nue  -rrb-  grant from the national science foundation . 
np is the set of decision problems for which the problem instances ,  where the answer is `` yes '' ,  have proofs verifiable in polynomial time . 
it is easy to see that the complexity class p  -lrb-  all problems solvable ,  deterministically ,  in polynomial time  -rrb-  is contained in np  -lrb-  problems where solutions can be verified in polynomial time  -rrb-  . 
his far-reaching criticisms of u . s .  foreign policy and the legitimacy of u . s .  power have raised controversy . 
chomsky has been a prominent critic of u . s .  imperialism . 
in late 2015, chomsky announced his support for vermont u . s . 
the u . s .  has been interfering with ,  and undermining ,  elections all over the world for decades and is proud of it . `` 
chomsky also criticized the u . s . 's close ties with saudi arabia and u . s .  involvement in saudi arabian-led intervention in yemen ,  highlighting that saudi has `` one of the most grotesque human rights records in the world '' . 
the propaganda model of media criticism that he and herman developed has been widely accepted in radical media critiques and adopted to some level in mainstream criticism of the media ,  also exerting a significant influence on the growth of alternative media ,  including radio ,  publishers ,  and the internet ,  which in turn have helped to disseminate his work . 
a supporter of the world social forum ,  he attended their conferences in brazil in both 2002 and 2003, also attending the forum event in india . 
in 1988, chomsky and herman published `` manufacturing consent: the political economy of the mass media '' ,  in which they outlined their propaganda model for understanding the mainstream media . 
 ''requiem for the american dream '' was published as a book in 2017 by seven stories press . 
an mit press release found that chomsky was cited within the arts and humanities citation index more often than any other living scholar from 1980 to 1992.
chomsky first involved himself in active political protest against u . s .  involvement in the vietnam war in 1962, speaking on the subject at small gatherings in churches and homes . 
he has also received the rabindranath tagore centenary award from the asiatic society . 
he also developed his interest in philosophy while at university ,  in particular under the tutelage of nelson goodman . 
in 2016, he was awarded the int'l courage of conscience award by the peace abbey: this award was bestowed at mit `` for his unrelenting critique of u . s .  foreign policy ,  capitalism and the globalization of systems and structures of profit and greed '' . 
one of chomsky's students who also worked on this project ,  barbara partee ,  says that this research was justified to the military on the basis that `` in the event of a nuclear war ,  the generals would be underground with some computers trying to manage things ,  and that it would probably be easier to teach computers to understand english than to teach the generals to program . `` 
chomsky retired from full-time teaching ,  although as an emeritus he nevertheless continued to conduct research and seminars at mit . 
in 2017 he was one of three recipients awarded the seán macbride peace prize `` for his tireless commitment to peace ,  his strong critiques to u . s .  foreign policy ,  and his anti-imperialism '' . 
the election of republican ronald reagan to the u . s .  presidency in 1980 began a period of increased military intervention in central america . 
chomsky has been critical of u . s .  involvement in the israeli–palestinian conflict ,  arguing that it has consistently blocked a peaceful settlement . 
during this period ,  mit's various departments were researching helicopters ,  smart bombs and counterinsurgency techniques for the war in vietnam and ,  as chomsky says ,  `` a good deal of nuclear missile guidance technology was developed right on the mit campus '' . 
chomsky has also been active in a number of philosophical fields ,  including the philosophy of mind ,  the philosophy of language ,  and the philosophy of science . 
prominent examples he regularly cites are the actions of the british empire in india and africa and the actions of the u . s .  in vietnam ,  the philippines ,  latin america ,  and the middle east . 
he was also greatly interested in the marlenite ideas of the leninist league ,  an anti-stalinist marxist–leninist group ,  sharing their views that the second world war was orchestrated by western capitalists and the soviet union's `` state capitalists '' to crush europe's proletariat . 
also in 2011, chomsky was inducted into ieee intelligent systems' ai's hall of fame for `` significant contributions to the field of ai and intelligent systems . `` 
chomsky's approach to academic freedom has led him to give support to mit academics whose actions he deplores . 
in 2004 chomsky received the carl-von-ossietzky prize from the city of oldenburg ,  germany ,  to acknowledge his body of work as a political analyst and media critic . 
although `` the new york review of books '' did publish contributions from chomsky and other leftists from 1967 to 1973, when an editorial change put a stop to it ,  he was virtually ignored by the rest of the mainstream press throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s . 
in addition ,  his work in automata theory and the chomsky hierarchy has become well known in computer science ,  and he is much cited within the field of computational linguistics . 
along with his writings ,  chomsky also became actively involved in left-wing activism . 
noam was the chomsky family's first child . 
together they authored ``  '' ,  a book that criticized u . s .  military involvement in southeast asia and highlighted how mainstream media neglected to cover it; the publisher warner modular accepted it ,  and it was published in 1973, but warner modular's parent company ,  warner communications ,  disapproved of the book's contents and ordered all copies destroyed . 
along with halle ,  he also edited the `` studies in language '' series of books for harper and row ,  and extended the theory of generative grammar to phonology in `` the sound pattern of english ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- . 
nial  -lrb-  from `` nested interactive array language ''  -rrb-  is a high-level array programming language developed from about 1981 by mike jenkins of queen's university ,  kingston ,  ontario ,  canada . 
sugar and aluminium are produced in nag hammadi . 
nag hammadi  -lrb-   ; ``  ''  -rrb-  is a city in upper egypt . 
abel graduated in 1822.
in 2002, the abel prize was established in his memory . 
while in paris ,  abel contracted tuberculosis . 
from berlin abel also followed his friends to the alps . 
abel contributed seven articles to it in its first year . 
niels henrik abel's father ,  søren georg abel ,  had a degree in theology and philosophy and served as pastor at finnøy . 
in 1815, niels abel entered the cathedral school at the age of 13.
niels henrik abel was born in nedstrand ,  norway ,  as the second child of the pastor søren georg abel and anne marie simonsen . 
when abel entered the university in 1821, he was already the most knowledgeable mathematician in norway . 
on 6 april 1929, four norwegian stamps were issued for the centenary of abel's death . 
crelle wrote to abel to tell him ,  but the good news came too late . 
nicolaus von amsdorf  -lrb-  german: nikolaus von amsdorf ,  3 december 1483 – 14 may 1565 -rrb- was a german lutheran theologian and an early protestant reformer . 
what these rights and duties are varies from state to state . 
nationality is a legal relationship between an individual person and a state . 
however ,  in most modern countries all nationals are citizens of the state ,  and full citizens are always nationals of the state . 
although this person may have an emotional national identity ,  he or she may not legally be the national of any state . 
national identity is a person's subjective sense of belonging to one state or to one nation . 
dual nationality is when a single person has a formal relationship with two separate ,  sovereign states . 
by custom and international conventions ,  it is the right of each state to determine who its nationals are . 
statelessness is the condition in which an individual has no formal or protective relationship with any state . 
in greek mythology ,  nereus  -lrb-  ; ancient greek: νηρεύς  -rrb-  was the eldest son of pontus  -lrb-  the sea  -rrb-  and gaia  -lrb-  the earth  -rrb-  ,  who with doris fathered the nereids and nerites ,  with whom nereus lived in the aegean sea . 
in greek mythology ,  the nereids  -lrb-   ; `` nereides '' ,  sg . 
nereids are particularly associated with the aegean sea ,  where they dwelt with their father nereus in the depths within a golden palace . 
the shape of nereid is unknown . 
nereid is the third-largest moon of neptune . 
halimede ,  which has similar colours ,  may be a fragment of nereid that was broken off during a collision . 
nereid is third-largest of neptune's satellites ,  and has an average radius of about  . 
spectrally ,  nereid appears neutral in colour and water ice has been detected on its surface . 
this version is played in australia ,  new zealand ,  south africa and england . 
netball is a ball sport played by two teams of seven players . 
a six-per-side version of the sport is also played in new zealand . 
each team is allowed seven players on the court . 
games are played on a rectangular court with raised goal rings at each end . 
the anz championship was a trans-tasman competition held between 2008 and 2016 that was broadcast on television in both new zealand and australia . 
the objective of a game is to score more goals than the opposition . 
in 1963, the first international tournament was held in eastbourne ,  england . 
if the ball is held in two hands and either dropped or a shot at goal is missed ,  the same player cannot be the first to touch it unless it first rebounds off the goal . 
most players under 11 play this version at netball clubs . 
the world netball series was held annually in england from 2009 to 2011.
the competition was replaced by new leagues in 2017, the suncorp super netball  -lrb-  australia  -rrb-  and anz premiership  -lrb-  new zealand  -rrb-  . 
representatives from england ,  australia ,  new zealand ,  south africa ,  and the west indies were part of a 1960 meeting in sri lanka that standardised the rules for the game . 
the net prevents the ball from leaving the court ,  permitting faster play by reducing playing stoppages . 
the goal posts are high ,  and a smaller ball is used . 
in stanza 35, njörðr responds that:
further in the poem ,  njörðr is again mentioned as the father of freyr in stanzas 38, 39, and 41.
after loki has an exchange with the goddess freyja ,  in stanza 33 njörðr states:
in stanza 16 of the poem `` grímnismál '' ,  njörðr is described as having a hall in nóatún made for himself . 
njörðr is referenced in stanza 22 of the poem `` þrymskviða '' ,  where he is referred to as the father of the goddess freyja . 
the name `` njörðr '' may be related to the name of the norse goddess njörun . 
there are two types of atr vowel harmony controllers in niger–congo . 
the core phylum of the niger–congo group are the atlantic–congo languages . 
all of the vowels following an opaque vowel will harmonize with the atr value of the opaque vowel instead of the atr vowel of the root . 
within niger–congo ,  the bantu languages alone account for 350 million people  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- ,  or half the total niger–congo speaking population . 
many niger–congo languages' vowel harmony is based on the atr  -lrb-  advanced tongue root  -rrb-  feature . 
the following is an overview of the language groups usually included in niger–congo . 
one of the characteristics common to most niger–congo languages  -lrb-  the atlantic–congo languages  -rrb-  is the use of a noun class system . 
the roots are then divided into +atr and −atr categories . 
 ''glottolog ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- accepts the core with noun-class systems ,  the atlantic–congo languages ,  apart from the recent inclusion of some of the kordofanian groups ,  but not niger–congo as a whole . 
ubangian was grouped with niger–congo by greenberg  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- ,  and later authorities concurred ,  but it was questioned by dimmendaal  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- . 
it otherwise accepts the family but not its inclusion within a broader niger–congo . 
niger–congo languages have a clear preference for open syllables of the type cv  -lrb-  consonant vowel  -rrb-  . 
it comprises more than 80% of the niger–congo speaking population ,  or close to 600 million people  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- . 
several branches of niger–congo have a regular phonological contrast between two classes of consonants . 
niger–congo as it is known today was only gradually recognized as a linguistic unit . 
benue–congo includes the southern bantoid group ,  which is dominated by the bantu languages ,  which account for 350 million people  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- ,  or half the total niger–congo speaking population . 
the napo river  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a tributary to the amazon river that rises in ecuador on the flanks of the east andean volcanoes of antisana ,  sinchulawa and cotopaxi . 
from the north it is joined by the coca river ,  having its sources in the gorges of cayambe volcano on the equator ,  and also a powerful river ,  the aguarico having its headwaters between cayambe and the colombia frontier . 
the nanay river is a river in northern peru . 
the object of the game is to legally pocket  -lrb-  or pot  -rrb-  the 9-ball . 
once a legal shot has been performed ,  any ball then sunk counts for that player; the winner is the player to first pocket the 9-ball after a legal shot . 
9-ball kiss  -lrb-  also carom nine  -rrb-  is played with the usual nine-ball rack ,  but breaking with the 1 ball ,  with the cue ball placed at the head of the rack  -lrb-  in the usual place of the 1 ball  -rrb-  . 
the object balls are placed in a diamond-shaped configuration ,  with the 1 ball positioned at the front  -lrb-  toward the position of the breaking player  -rrb-  on the  ,  and the 9 ball placed in the center . 
ten-ball is a more stringent variant of the game ,  using ten balls  -lrb-  racked in a triangle with the 10 ball ,  the in this case ,  in the center  -rrb-  ,  in which all pocketed balls must be and in which the money ball `` cannot '' be pocketed on the break for an instant win . 
seven-ball is a similar game ,  the primary differences being there are only seven object balls ,  racked in a hexagon ,  and the game is won by pocketing the 7 ball . 
in nine-ball ,  except when a push-out has been invoked ,  a legal shot consists of striking the cue ball into the lowest numbered object ball on the table and subsequently either pocketing an object ball ,  or driving any ball  -lrb-  including the cue ball  -rrb-  to any rail ,  otherwise the shot is a  . 
the racker rolls the balls forward farther; the balls remain in the same position in the rack  -rrb-  ,  which further thwarts pocketing a wing ball easily . 
winner of the game has break on the next game ,  player before winner racks the next game . 
the book was first published in 1555 and has rarely been out of print since his death . 
even the often-advanced suggestion that quatrain i . 35 had successfully prophesied king henry ii's death did not actually appear in print for the first time until 1614, 55 years after the event . 
the `` almanacs '' ,  by far the most popular of his works ,  were published annually from 1550 until his death . 
with the arrival of the year 2012, nostradamus's prophecies started to be co-opted  -lrb-  especially by the history channel  -rrb-  as evidence suggesting that the end of the world was imminent ,  notwithstanding the fact that his book never mentions the end of the world ,  let alone the year 2012.
at the time ,  he feared that he would be beheaded ,  but by the time of his death in 1566, queen catherine had made him counselor and physician-in-ordinary to her son ,  the young king charles ix of france . 
nostradamus's family was originally jewish ,  but had converted to catholicism before he was born . 
the same book also describes the preparation of cosmetics . 
he then began his project of writing a book of one thousand mainly french quatrains ,  which constitute the largely undated prophecies for which he is most famous today . 
this version contains one unrhymed and 941 rhymed quatrains ,  grouped into nine sets of 100 and one of 42, called `` centuries '' . 
many popular authors have retold apocryphal legends about his life . 
possibly the first of these books to become popular in english was henry c .  roberts' `` the complete prophecies of nostradamus '' of 1947, reprinted at least seven times during the next forty years ,  which contained both transcriptions and translations ,  with brief commentaries . 
as well as being the subject of hundreds of books  -lrb-  both fiction and nonfiction  -rrb-  ,  nostradamus's life has been depicted in several films and videos ,  and his life and writings continue to be a subject of media interest . 
by 1566, nostradamus's gout ,  which had plagued him painfully for many years and made movement very difficult ,  turned into edema ,  or dropsy . 
further material was gleaned from the `` de honesta disciplina '' of 1504 by petrus crinitus ,  which included extracts from michael psellos's `` de daemonibus '' ,  and the `` de mysteriis aegyptiorum ''  -lrb-  `` concerning the mysteries of egypt ''  -rrb-  ,  a book on chaldean and assyrian magic by iamblichus ,  a 4th-century neo-platonist . 
many of nostradamus's supporters believe his prophecies are genuine . 
in 1806, webster published his first dictionary ,   . 
this presupposition animated webster's `` speller '' and `` grammar '' . 
webster's `` speller '' was entirely secular by design . 
webster was elected a fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1799.
webster dedicated his `` speller '' and `` dictionary '' to providing an intellectual foundation for american nationalism . 
though it now has an honored place in the history of american english ,  webster's first dictionary only sold 2,500 copies . 
webster was by nature a revolutionary ,  seeking american independence from the cultural thralldom to britain . 
noah webster married rebecca greenleaf  -lrb-  1766–1847 -rrb- on october 26, 1789, new haven ,  connecticut . 
born in west hartford ,  connecticut ,  webster graduated from yale college in 1778.
american nationalism was superior to europe because american values were superior ,  he claimed . 
in 1806, webster published his first dictionary ,  `` a compendious dictionary of the english language '' . 
lepore  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- demonstrates webster's paradoxical ideas about language and politics and shows why webster's endeavors were at first so poorly received . 
as time went on ,  webster changed the spellings in the book to more phonetic ones . 
his father had mortgaged the farm to send webster to yale ,  but he was now on his own and had nothing more to do with his family . 
at the age of seventy ,  webster published his dictionary in 1828, registering the copyright on april 14.
the first near-earth objects to be observed by humans were comets . 
the first near-earth asteroid to be discovered was 433 eros in 1898.
a near-earth object  -lrb-  neo  -rrb-  is any small solar system body whose orbit brings it to proximity with earth . 
in has been said that lexell's comet of 1770 was the first discovered near-earth object . 
however ,  the term is also used more flexibly sometimes ,  for example for objects in orbit around the earth or for quasi-satellites ,  which have a more complex orbital relationship with the earth . 
most known phos and neos are asteroids ,  but a small fraction are comets . 
on march 23, 1989, the diameter apollo asteroid 4581 asclepius  -lrb-  1989 fc  -rrb-  missed the earth by  . 
belgium is a classic example of a state that is not a nation state . 
nation states have their own characteristics ,  differing from those of the pre-national states . 
walker connor discusses the impressions surrounding the characters of `` nation '' ,  ``  -lrb-  sovereign  -rrb-  state '' ,  `` nation state '' ,  and `` nationalism '' . 
the relationship between a nation  -lrb-  in the ethnic sense  -rrb-  and a state can be complex . 
ideally ,  the border of a nation state extends far enough to include all the members of the nation ,  and all of the national homeland . 
the westphalian system did not create the nation state ,  but the nation state meets the criteria for its component states  -lrb-  by assuming that there is no disputed territory  -rrb-  . 
some refer to it as a `` union state '' . 
the origins and early history of nation states are disputed . 
a nation state  -lrb-  or nation-state  -rrb-  is a state in which the great majority shares the same culture and is conscious of it . 
the most obvious impact of the nation state ,  as compared to its non-national predecessors ,  is the creation of a uniform national culture ,  through state policy . 
however ,  many nation states accept specific minorities as being part of the nation ,  and the term `` national minority '' is often used in this sense . 
the most noticeable characteristic is the degree to which nation states use the state as an instrument of national unity ,  in economic ,  social and cultural life . 
nation states are responsible for some of the worst historical examples of violence against minorities not considered part of the nation . 
examples of nation states where ethnic groups make up more than 85% of the population include the following:
a nation ,  in the sense of a common ethnicity ,  may include a diaspora or refugees who live outside the nation-state; some nations of this sense do not have a state where that ethnicity predominates . 
israel was founded as a jewish state in 1948.
of the thousands of ethnic and cultural minorities in nation states across the world ,  only a few have this level of acceptance and protection . 
historians hans kohn ,  liah greenfeld ,  philip white and others have classified nations such as germany or italy ,  where cultural unification preceded state unification ,  as `` ethnic nations '' or `` ethnic nationalities '' . 
the most obvious deviation from the ideal of `` one nation ,  one state '' is the presence of minorities ,  especially ethnic minorities ,  which are clearly not members of the majority nation . 
the nation state promoted economic unity ,  by abolishing internal customs and tolls . 
the idea of a nation state was and is associated with the rise of the modern system of states ,  often called the `` westphalian system '' in reference to the treaty of westphalia  -lrb-  1648 -rrb- . 
in these cases ,  the nationalist sentiment and the nationalist movement clearly precede the unification of the german and italian nation states . 
the schools also taught the national history ,  often in a propagandistic and mythologised version ,  and  -lrb-  especially during conflicts  -rrb-  some nation states still teach this kind of history . 
while at the cape ,  lacaille determined the radius of the earth in the southern hemisphere . 
he resumed his work at the mazarin college . 
abbé nicolas-louis de lacaille ,  formerly sometimes spelled de la caille ,   -lrb-  ; 15 march 1713 – 21 march 1762 -rrb- was a french astronomer . 
maclear's beacon was erected on the table mountain in cape town to help with the verification . 
he was also an honorary member of the academies of saint petersburg and berlin ,  the royal society of london and the royal society of göttingen ,  and the institute of bologna . 
mihdhar left hazmi in california for yemen in june 2000.
on september 10, 2001, hazmi ,  along with mihdhar and hanjour checked into a hotel in herndon ,  virginia . 
on september 11, hazmi boarded american airlines flight 77.
due to hazmi and mihdhar's poor english skills ,  they did not perform well during their flight lessons and their flight instructor regarded them as suspicious . 
mihdhar returned to yemen ,  which angered khalid sheikh mohammed ,  who did not want hazmi to be left alone in california . 
on april 4, 2000, hazmi took a one-hour introductory flight lesson at the national air college in san diego . 
at the end of may 2000, hazmi and mihdhar moved out of parkwood apartments ,  and moved to nearby lemon grove ,  california . 
hazmi met frequently with mohamed atta ,  the ringleader of the attacks ,  during the summer of 2001.
osama bin laden held hazmi and mihdhar in high respect ,  with their experience fighting during the 1990s in bosnia and elsewhere . 
a search for hazmi and other suspected terrorists commenced ,  but they were not located until after the attacks . 
after the meeting ,  mihdhar and hazmi traveled to bangkok in thailand on january 8, and left a week later on january 15 to travel to the united states . 
on july 12, 2000, hazmi filed for an extension of his visa ,  which was due to expire . 
hazmi and a longtime friend ,  khalid al-mihdhar ,  left their homes in saudi arabia in 1995 to fight for muslims in the bosnian war . 
before leaving for malaysia ,  khalid sheikh mohammed doctored hazmi's saudi passport in order to conceal his travel to pakistan and afghanistan ,  and make it appear that hazmi had come to malaysia from saudi arabia via dubai . 
hazmi arrived in los angeles ,  california ,  from bangkok ,  thailand ,  on january 15, 2000, with khalid al-mihdhar . 
nawaf al-hazmi returned to saudi arabia in early 1999.
hazmi's passport did have indicators of al-qaeda association ,  but immigration inspectors were not trained to look for those . 
nero's tutor ,  seneca ,  prepared nero's first speech before the senate . 
nero's father ,  domitius ,  died in 40.
scullard writes that nero's mother ,  agrippina ,  `` meant to rule through her son . `` 
in 62, nero's adviser burrus died . 
modern scholars believe that nero's reign had been going well in the years before agrippina's death . 
nero became emperor in 54  ,  aged sixteen years . 
nero ,  who was having an affair with acte ,  exiled agrippina from the palace when she began to cultivate a relationship with his wife octavia . 
nero  -lrb-  ; latin: `` nero claudius caesar augustus germanicus ''; 15 december 37 – 9 june 68 ad  -rrb-  was the last roman emperor of the julio-claudian dynasty . 
nero's rule is usually associated with tyranny and extravagance . 
see also general equilibrium . 
to those in the austrian school . 
factor demand incorporates the marginal-productivity relationship of that factor in the output market . 
market supply and demand are aggregated across firms and individuals . 
joan robinson's work on imperfect competition ,  at least ,  was a response to certain problems of marshallian partial equilibrium theory highlighted by piero sraffa . 
marshall explained price by the intersection of supply and demand curves . 
neoclassical economics is also often seen as relying too heavily on complex mathematical models ,  such as those used in general equilibrium theory ,  without enough regard to whether these actually describe the real economy . 
neoclassical economics is an approach to economics focusing on the determination of goods ,  outputs ,  and income distributions in markets through supply and demand . 
they also emphasized certain tools ,  such as the marginal revenue curve . 
these developments are reflected in neoclassical theory by the search for the occurrence in markets of the equilibrium conditions of pareto optimality and self-sustainability . 
utility maximization is the source for the neoclassical theory of consumption ,  the derivation of demand curves for consumer goods ,  and the derivation of labor supply curves and reservation demand . 
this classic approach included the work of adam smith and david ricardo . 
today it is usually used to refer to mainstream economics ,  although it has also been used as an umbrella term encompassing a number of other schools of thought ,  notably excluding institutional economics ,  various historical schools of economics ,  and marxian economics ,  in addition to various other heterodox approaches to economics . 
wolf and shipley divorced in 2005.
wolf was married to journalist david shipley . 
wolf first came to prominence in 1991 as the author of `` the beauty myth '' . 
wolf has spoken about the dress required of women living in muslim countries:
wolf was born in san francisco ,  to a jewish family . 
wolf also argues that women must reclaim the legitimacy of their own sexuality by shattering the polarization of women between virgin and whore . 
wolf's book was a bestseller ,  receiving polarized responses from the public and mainstream media ,  but winning praise from most feminists . 
in 1993 wolf published `` fire with fire '' on politics ,  female empowerment and women's sexual liberation . 
she wrote in 2007:
 ''the new york times '' published a harshly critical assessment of wolf's work by caryn james . 
characterizing wolf as a `` media star '' ,  walter wrote: `` she is particularly good ,  naturally ,  on the role of women in the media . `` 
new year is the time or day at which a new calendar year begins and the calendar's year count increments by one . 
in the gregorian calendar ,  the most widely used calendar system today ,  new year occurs on january 1  -lrb-  new year's day  -rrb-  . 
the northern territory  -lrb-  abbreviated nt  -rrb-  is an australian territory in the central and central northern regions of australia . 
for a brief time between 1927 and 1931 the northern territory was divided into north australia and central australia at the 20th parallel of south latitude . 
these rivers include: the alligator rivers ,  daly river ,  finke river ,  mcarthur river ,  roper river ,  todd river and victoria river . 
on 1 january 1911, a decade after federation ,  the northern territory was separated from south australia and transferred to federal control . 
in late 1912 there was growing sentiment that the name `` northern territory '' was unsatisfactory . 
residents of the northern territory are often known simply as `` territorians '' and fully as `` northern territorians '' ,  or more informally as `` top enders '' and `` centralians '' . 
under the administration of colonial south australia ,  the overland telegraph was constructed between 1870 and 1872.
low-alcohol beer is also known as light beer ,  non-alcoholic beer ,  small beer ,  small ale ,  or near-beer . 
in australia ,  the term `` light beer '' refers to any beer with less than 3.5% alcohol . 
light beer is beer with reduced alcohol content and/or calories compared to regular beer . 
in australia ,  regular beers have approximately 5% abv; reduced-alcohol beers have 2.2%–3.2% . 
led to the development of non-intoxicating beers . 
missouri also has a legal classification for low-point beer ,  which it calls `` nonintoxicating beer '' . 
low-point beer ,  which is often known in america as `` three-two beer '' or `` 3 point 2 brew '' ,  is beer that contains 3.2% alcohol by weight  -lrb-  equivalent to about 4% abv  -rrb-  . 
low-alcohol beer is beer with little or no alcohol content and aims to reproduce the taste of beer without the inebriating effects of standard alcoholic brews . 
beginning in the late 2000s ,  the term `` near beer '' has been revived to refer to modern non-alcoholic beer . 
a drink similar to `` near beer '' ,  `` bjórlíki '' was quite popular in iceland before alcoholic beer was made legal in 1989.
a popular illegal practice was to add alcohol to near beer . 
non alcoholic beer sales in india are relatively low . 
