maharashtra  -lrb-  ;  ,  abbr . 
maharashtra is the third largest state by area in india . 
maharashtra is the wealthiest state by all major economic parameters and also the most industrialized state in india . 
maharashtra is divided into five geographic regions . 
the economy of maharashtra is the largest state economy in india with in gdp and a per capita gdp of  . 
after india's independence ,  the deccan states ,  including kolhapur were integrated into bombay state ,  which was created from the former bombay presidency in 1950.
in 2012 the recorded thick forest area in the state was which was about 20.13% of the state's geographical area . these there are three main public forestry institutions  -lrb-  pfis  -rrb-  in the maharashtra state: the maharashtra forest department  -lrb-  mfd  -rrb-  ,  the forest development corporation of maharashtra  -lrb-  fdcm  -rrb-  and the directorate of social forestry  -lrb-  sfd  -rrb-  . 
flora of maharashtra is heterogeneous in composition . 
 ''mozzarella affumicata '' means smoked mozzarella . 
mozzarella di bufala is traditionally produced solely from the milk of the italian mediterranean buffalo . 
mozzarella  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  is a traditionally southern italian cheese made from italian buffalo's milk by the pasta filata method . 
when twisted to form a plait mozzarella is called  . 
mozzarella of sheep milk ,  sometimes called `` mozzarella pecorella '' ,  is typical of sardinia ,  abruzzo and lazio ,  where it is also called 'mozzapecora' . 
mozzarella of goat's milk is of recent origin and the producers are still few; among the reasons for this new production is the need to offer a kind of mozzarella to those who do not digest cow's milk ,  because goat's milk is more digestible . 
macrinus  -lrb-  ; ; – june 218 -rrb- was roman emperor from april 217 to 8 june 218.
for two or three days ,  rome remained without an emperor . 
caracalla's mother julia domna was initially left in peace when macrinus became emperor . 
he later conspired against caracalla and had him murdered in a bid to protect his own life ,  succeeding him as emperor . 
macrinus was at first occupied by the threat of the parthians ,  with whom rome had been at war since the reign of caracalla . 
macrinus remained in antioch instead of going to rome upon being declared emperor ,  a step which furthered his unpopularity in rome and contributed to his eventual downfall . 
the minotaur is commonly represented in classical art with the body of a man and the head and tail of a bull . 
the term minotaur derives from the ancient greek  ,  a compound of the name  -lrb-  minos  -rrb-  and the noun `` bull '' ,  translated as ``  -lrb-  the  -rrb-  bull of minos '' . 
the minotaur was eventually killed by the athenian hero theseus . 
the contest between theseus and the minotaur was frequently represented in greek art . 
in crete ,  the minotaur was known by the name asterion ,  a name shared with minos' foster-father . 
this ceremony was performed by a priest disguised with a bull head or mask ,  thus explaining the imagery of the minotaur . 
 ''minotaur '' was originally a proper noun in reference to this mythical figure . 
from classical times through the renaissance ,  the minotaur appears at the center of many depictions of the labyrinth . 
the memex would have features other than linking . 
in april 2015, it was announced parts of memex would be open sourced . 
the memex would become `` 'a sort of mechanized private file and library' . 
the coded symbols would enable the memex to index ,  search ,  and link content to create and follow associative trails . 
the vision of the memex predates ,  and is credited as the inspiration for ,  the first practical hypertext systems of the 1960s . 
in 1967, vannevar bush published a retrospective article entitled `` memex revisited '' in his book `` science is not enough '' . 
the erasable quality of the tape is of special significance ,  as this would allow for modification of information stored in the proposed memex . 
bush's idea for the memex extended far beyond a mechanism which might augment the research of one individual working in isolation . 
in their description of the program ,  darpa explains the program's name as a tribute to bush's original memex invention ,  which served as an inspiration . 
in digital modulation ,  an analog carrier signal is modulated by a discrete signal . 
according to one definition of digital signal ,  the modulated signal is a digital signal . 
the aim of analog modulation is to transfer an analog baseband  -lrb-  or lowpass  -rrb-  signal ,  for example an audio signal or tv signal ,  over an analog bandpass channel at a different frequency ,  for example over a limited radio frequency band or a cable tv network channel . 
in analog modulation ,  the modulation is applied continuously in response to the analog information signal . 
the consumer version of mac os x was launched in 2001 with mac os x 10.0.
mac os x 10.3 was marketed as `` panther '' ,  mac os x 10.4 as `` tiger '' ,  mac os x 10.5 as `` leopard '' ,  mac os x 10.6 as `` snow leopard '' ,  mac os x 10.7 as `` lion '' ,  os x 10.8 as `` mountain lion '' ,  and os x 10.9 as `` mavericks '' . 
in 2012, with the release of os x 10.8 mountain lion ,  the name of the system was shortened from mac os x to os x . 
mac os x 10.5 leopard was released on october 26, 2007.
mac os x 10.7 lion was released on july 20, 2011.
mac os x 10.4 tiger was released on april 29, 2005.
mac os x 10.6 snow leopard was released on august 28, 2009.
releases of mac os x from 1999 to 2005 can run only on the powerpc-based macs from that time period . 
it was the final version of mac os x to support the powerpc architecture . 
in 2006, the first intel macs released used a specialized version of mac os x 10.4 tiger . 
mac os x v10.3 panther was released on october 24, 2003.
the first version of mac os x ,  mac os x server 1.0, was a transitional product ,  featuring an interface resembling the classic mac os ,  though it was not compatible with software designed for the older system . 
os x 10.10 yosemite was released on october 16, 2014.
os x 10.8 mountain lion was released on july 25, 2012.
in 2007, mac os x 10.5 leopard was the sole release with universal binary components ,  allowing installation on both intel macs and select powerpc macs . 
cocoa was a descendant of apis inherited from openstep with no ancestry from the classic mac os ,  while carbon was an adaptation of classic mac os apis ,  allowing mac software to be minimally rewritten in order to run natively on mac os x . 
with the exception of mac os x server 1.0 and the original public beta ,  os x versions were named after big cats until os x 10.9 mavericks ,  when apple switched to using california locations . 
mac os x public beta expired and ceased to function in spring 2001.
os x 10.11 el capitan was released on september 30, 2015.
with its original introduction as mac os x ,  the system brought a number of new capabilities to provide a more stable and reliable platform than its predecessor ,  the classic mac os . 
on march 24, 2001, apple released mac os x 10.0  -lrb-  internally codenamed cheetah  -rrb-  . 
the project was first code named `` rhapsody '' and then officially named mac os x . 
as of os x 10.10.3, photos replaced iphoto and aperture . 
the happy mac which had appeared during the mac os startup sequence for almost 18 years was replaced with a large grey apple logo with the introduction of mac os x v10.2.
between 1999 and 2009, apple sold a separate series of operating systems called mac os x server . 
a heavily modified version of mac os x 10.4 tiger was used for the first-generation apple tv . 
beginning with mac os x 10.7 lion ,  the server functions were made available as a separate package on the mac app store . 
later that year on september 25, 2001, mac os x 10.1  -lrb-  internally codenamed puma  -rrb-  was released . 
in april 2002, eweek announced a rumor that apple had a version of mac os x code-named marklar ,  which ran on intel x86 processors . 
one of the major differences between the classic mac os and the current macos was the addition of aqua ,  a graphical user interface with water-like elements ,  in the first major release of mac os x . 
mattel creations is the content production division of mattel ,  inc . 
it was later transferred to mattel creations ,  itself a division of mattel ,  inc . 
mattel films  -lrb-  formerly mattel playground productions  -lrb-  pgp  -rrb-  ,  or commonly playground productions  -rrb-  is a division of mattel . 
ynon kreiz is now the new ceo of mattel . 
in october 2013, mattel playground productions was launched by mattel as its new in-house film studio to handle multi-media productions for mattel's brands . 
mattel electronics forced mattel to take a $394 million loss in 1983 and almost filed for bankruptcy . 
on february 28, 2014, mattel acquired mega brands . 
mattel sold the circus corporation by december 1973, despite its profit contributions ,  as mattel showed a $29.9 million loss in 1972.
on september 6, 2018, mattel announced the launch of a film division ,  mattel films ,  that will make movies based on the company's toy brands . 
mattel's prior incarnation of its film division ,  playground productions ,  was absorbed into mattel creations after its max steel movie that flopped . 
however ,  between the failure of the max steel movie and the announcement of mattel films in september 2018, playground productions was absorbed into mattel creations . 
on november 15, 2017, reuters reported that mattel rejected the offer . 
mattel purchased the ringling bros .  and barnum & bailey circus in 1971 for $40 million from the feld family ,  whom mattel kept as management . 
the medallions were an american doo-wop vocal group led by vernon green  -lrb-  1937–2000 -rrb- . 
since the death of vernon green in 2000, the group has been occasionally reconstituted by his brother jimmy green ,  billy foster ,  buddha carter ,  and jerome evans ,  who have performed as the new medallions . 
morphologically complex words are easier to comprehend when they include a base word . 
in linguistics ,  morphology  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the study of words ,  how they are formed ,  and their relationship to other words in the same language . 
while words ,  along with clitics ,  are generally accepted as being the smallest units of syntax ,  in most languages ,  if not all ,  many words can be related to other words by rules that collectively describe the grammar for that language . 
at the melting point ,  the ordering of ions or molecules in the solid breaks down to a less ordered state ,  and the solid melts to become a liquid . 
melting ,  or fusion ,  is a physical process that results in the phase transition of a substance from a solid to a liquid . 
some organic compounds melt through mesophases ,  states of partial order between solid and liquid . 
even below its melting point ,  quasi-liquid films can be observed on crystalline surfaces . 
from a thermodynamics point of view ,  at the melting point the change in gibbs free energy `` ∆g '' of the substances is zero ,  but there are non-zero changes in the enthalpy  -lrb-  `` h ''  -rrb-  and the entropy  -lrb-  `` s ''  -rrb-  ,  known respectively as the enthalpy of fusion  -lrb-  or latent heat of fusion  -rrb-  and the entropy of fusion . 
macroevolution includes changes occurring on geological time scales ,  in contrast to microevolution ,  which occurs on any time scale . 
molecular evolution occurs through small changes in the molecular or cellular level . 
macroevolution and microevolution describe fundamentally identical processes on different time scales . 
the process of speciation may fall within the purview of either ,  depending on the forces thought to drive it . 
in the seventh chapter of the `` cosmographiæ introduction '' ,  written by matthias ringmann ,  it is explained why the name america was proposed for the then new world ,  or the fourth part of the world:
and a fourth part of the world  -lrb-  which may be called `` amerige '' ,  as if meaning `` americus' land '' ,  or `` america ''  -rrb-  are situated in the ninth chapter of the same book the reasons for the name america are given in more detail:
 ''nunc vero et hæ partes sunt latius lustratæ et alia quarta pars per americum vesputium  -lrb-  ut in sequentibus audietur  -rrb-  inventa est ,  quam non video cur quis jure vetet ab americo inventore sagacis ingenii viro ,  amerigen quasi americi terram sive americam dicendam; cum et europa et asia a mulieribus sua sortita sunt nomina . `` 
in april ,  megadeth returned to the studio to work on its ninth studio album . 
megadeth is an american thrash metal band from los angeles ,  california . 
in may ,  megadeth finished recording its twelfth album ,  `` endgame '' . 
the album is set to release in 2019.
in mid-1985, on a bill with canadian speed metal band exciter ,  megadeth played its first north american tour: the killing for a living tour . 
in 1985, megadeth released its debut album ,  `` killing is my business .  .  .  and business is good ! 
after the extensive world tour in support of `` youthanasia '' ,  megadeth took time off late in 1995.
the band joined with scorpions for a co-headlining tour in the fall of 2017.
to support the album ,  megadeth embarked on a world tour ,  opening for dio in europe and then joining iron maiden's seventh tour of a seventh tour in the united states . 
during mid-1993, megadeth performed at a number of shows with metallica in europe . 
following the band's mainstream radio success with `` cryptic writings '' ,  megadeth again worked with dann huff on its eighth studio album . 
megadeth returned to its own vic's garage studio to record its thirteenth album ,  to be produced by johnny k ,  because andy sneap ,  the producer of megadeth's previous two albums ,  was unavailable . 
poland rejoined megadeth in october 1985, shortly before the group began recording its second album for combat . 
after 15 years with capitol records ,  megadeth left the label in july 2000.
the recording sessions for megadeth's fifth studio album began in january 1992 at enterprise studios in burbank ,  california . 
in may 2006, megadeth announced that its eleventh studio album ,  `` united abominations '' ,  was near completion . 
megadeth is considered one of the most musically influential groups that originated in the 1980s . 
in october 2015, megadeth streamed `` fatal illusion '' off the album `` dystopia '' ,  which was released in january 2016.
according to mustaine ,  megadeth was under pressure to deliver another successful album: `` that sophomore offering is the 'be-all or end-all' of any band . 
after seeing samuelson perform with megadeth as a trio ,  poland went backstage and suggested an impromptu audition as lead guitarist for the band; he joined megadeth in december 1984.
in july 2010, after the european `` big four '' shows ,  megadeth and slayer commenced the first leg of the american carnage tour ,  where megadeth played `` rust in peace '' in its entirety ,  while slayer performed its album `` seasons in the abyss '' ,  both of which were released in 1990.
mustaine remembered the film as a disappointment ,  as it aligned megadeth with `` a bunch of shit bands '' . 
with mustaine sober ,  megadeth continued searching for a new lead guitarist . 
a compilation album ,  ``  '' ,  was released in september 2008.
the album was produced on a $25,000 budget from combat records . 
according to nielsen soundscan ,  megadeth has sold 9.2 million copies of its albums in the united states between 1991 and 2014.
as a result ,  samuelson and poland were asked to leave megadeth in 1987, with behler becoming the band's full-time drummer . 
early in 1990, megadeth joined slayer ,  testament ,  and suicidal tendencies for the successful european clash of the titans tour ,  featuring several american thrash metal bands . 
mustaine announced that the album would be the band's last and would be followed by a farewell tour ,  after which he would focus on a solo career . 
in june 1988, megadeth appeared in penelope spheeris' documentary ``  '' . 
in september 2012, it was announced that megadeth would re-release `` countdown to extinction '' in honor of the album's 20th anniversary . 
after the lineup stabilized ,  megadeth released a number of platinum-selling albums ,  including `` rust in peace ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- and `` countdown to extinction ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- . 
after more than a year since the band's last concert ,  megadeth returned as a live act in june 1997, beginning a world tour with the misfits and touring in the united states with life of agony and coal chamber . 
in february 1987, megadeth was the opening act on alice cooper's constrictor tour ,  and the following month began its first headlining world tour in the united kingdom . 
 ''blue marlin '' and her sister ship comprise the `` marlin '' class of heavy lift ship . 
blue marlin is a semi-submersible heavy lift ship from dockwise shipping of the netherlands . 
the word `` moonie '' is derived from the name of sun myung moon ,  the founder and leader of the unification church . 
in the 1970s and early 1980s ,  the word `` moonie '' was used by unification church members both within the church and in public as a self-designation ,  and `` as a badge of honor '' . 
moonie is a pejorative term sometimes used to refer to members of the unification church . 
this is a label which members of the reverend sun myung moon's unification church find demeaning and offensive ,  and i'd like to apologize for its use . `` 
in 1984, `` the washington post '' noted ,  `` members of the unification church resent references to them as 'moonies' '' ,  and quoted one church member who said ,  `` even in quotation marks ,  it's derogatory '' . 
the word `` moonie '' is also a family name in the united kingdom . 
in 1989, the `` san francisco chronicle '' reported that church members preferred to be called `` unificationists . `` 
not wanting to have this intensity scale confused with the magnitude scale he had developed ,  he proposed calling it the `` modified mercalli scale of 1956 ''  -lrb-  mm56 -rrb- . 
this became known as the `` mercalli–cancani scale ,  formulated by sieberg '' ,  or the `` mercalli–cancani–sieberg scale '' ,  or simply `` mcs '' ,  and used extensively in europe . 
the modified mercalli intensity scale  -lrb-  mm or mmi  -rrb-  ,  descended from giuseppe mercalli's mercalli intensity scale of 1902, is a seismic intensity scale used for measuring the `` intensity of shaking '' produced by an earthquake . 
the higher numbers of the scale are based on observed structural damage . 
the italian volcanologist giuseppe mercalli formulated his first intensity scale in 1883.
the small table is a rough guide to the degrees of the modified mercalli intensity scale . 
in 1935, disney began to phase out the club . 
dallas johann ,  paul petersen ,  tim rooney ,  and mickey rooney ,  jr .  were all fired early in the first season . 
the show was revived three times after its initial 1955–1959 run on abc ,  first from 1977–1979 for first-run syndication as the new mickey mouse club ,  then from 1989–1996 as the all-new mickey mouse club  -lrb-  also known to fans as mmc from 1993–1996 -rrb- airing exclusively on cable television's the disney channel ,  and again in 2017 with the moniker club mickey mouse airing exclusively on internet social media . 
the mickey mouse club is an american variety television show that aired intermittently from 1955 to 1996 and returned in 2017 to social media . 
other mouseketeers that were red team members but not on the show for all three seasons included the following:
in greek mythology ,  minos  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` minōs ''  -rrb-  was the first king of crete ,  son of zeus and europa . 
the wife of this 'minos i' was said to be itone  -lrb-  daughter of lyctius  -rrb-  or crete  -lrb-  a nymph or daughter of his stepfather asterion  -rrb-  ,  and he had a single son named lycastus ,  his successor as king of crete . 
through deucalion ,  he was the grandfather of king idomeneus ,  who led the cretans to the trojan war . 
the minoan civilization of crete has been named after him by the archaeologist sir arthur evans . 
according to this view ,  the first king minos was the son of zeus and europa and brother of rhadamanthys and sarpedon . 
as well as founding the bipm and laying down the way in which the activities of the bipm should be financed and managed ,  the metre convention established a permanent organizational structure for member governments to act in common accord on all matters relating to units of measurement . 
this results in extending mac addresses  -lrb-  such as ieee 802 mac address  -rrb-  to modified eui-64 using only  -lrb-  and never   -rrb-  and with the u/l bit inverted . 
these are all examples of `` group addresses '' ,  as opposed to `` individual addresses ''; the least significant bit of the first octet of a mac address distinguishes individual addresses from group addresses . 
a mac may be referred to as the burned-in address  -lrb-  bia  -rrb-  . 
this is called multicast addressing . 
the original ieee 802 mac address comes from the original xerox network systems ethernet addressing scheme . 
addresses can either be `` universally administered addresses ''  -lrb-  uaa  -rrb-  or `` locally administered addresses ''  -lrb-  laa  -rrb-  . 
it may also be known as an ethernet hardware address  -lrb-  eha  -rrb-  ,  hardware address or `` physical address ''  -lrb-  not to be confused with a memory physical address  -rrb-  . 
 ''my neighbor totoro '' has received widespread acclaim from film critics . 
is a thirteen-minute sequel to `` my neighbor totoro '' ,  written and directed by miyazaki . 
 ''my neighbor totoro '' set its writer-director hayao miyazaki on the road to success . 
miyazaki has said that totoro is `` not a spirit: he's only an animal . 
 ''my neighbor totoro '' was voted the highest-ranking animated film on the 2012 `` sight & sound '' critics' poll of all-time greatest films . 
oga's work on `` my neighbor totoro '' led to his continued involvement with studio ghibli . 
 ''my neighbor totoro '' ranked 41st in `` empire '' magazine's `` the 100 best films of world cinema '' in 2010, and totoro was ranked 18th on empire's 50 best animated film characters list . 
after writing and filming `` nausicaä of the valley of the wind ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- and `` castle in the sky ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- ,  hayao miyazaki began directing `` my neighbor totoro '' for studio ghibli . 
a main-belt asteroid ,  discovered on december 31, 1994, was named 10160 totoro after the film's central character . 
the songs for the fox version of `` totoro '' were sung by cassie byram . 
in 1993, fox video released the streamline pictures dub of `` my neighbor totoro '' on vhs and laserdisc . 
art director kazuo oga was drawn to the film when hayao miyazaki showed him an original image of totoro standing in a satoyama . 
totoro was ranked 24th on ign's top 25 anime characters . 
maribor's handball club is rk maribor branik . 
the city of maribor divides into 11 districts  -lrb-    -rrb-  of the city municipality of maribor . 
over 2,600 people died in maribor during the war . 
on the drava river lies maribor island  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 2012, maribor saw the beginning of 2012–13 maribor protests which spread into 2012–2013 slovenian protests . 
it is also the seat of the city municipality of maribor . 
maribor is the hometown of the association football club nk maribor ,  playing in the slovenian prvaliga . 
they are followed by the national non-commercial radio maribor . 
many historical structures stand in maribor . 
by the end of the war ,  maribor was the most war-damaged major town of yugoslavia . 
the following year maribor was the european youth capital . 
jewish people living in maribor were first mentioned in 1277.
after 1918, most of maribor's austrian germans left the kingdom of slovenes ,  croats and serbs for austria . 
in addition ,  the renovation of maribor island  -lrb-    -rrb-  in the drava river has been planned . 
there are plans to renovate the maribor public library and town hall square  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
origen said the first gospel was written by matthew . 
the consensus is that papias does not describe the gospel of matthew as we know it ,  and it is generally accepted that matthew was written in greek ,  not in aramaic or hebrew . 
the gospel of matthew is anonymous: the author is not named within the text ,  and the superscription `` according to matthew '' was added some time in the second century . 
on the surface ,  this has been taken to imply that matthew's gospel itself was written in hebrew or aramaic by the apostle matthew and later translated into greek ,  but nowhere does the author claim to have been an eyewitness to events ,  and matthew's greek `` reveals none of the telltale marks of a translation '' . 
epiphanius does not make his own the claim about a gospel of the hebrews written by matthew ,  a claim that he merely attributes to the heretical ebionites . 
after his call ,  matthew invited jesus home for a feast . 
mehrgarh is one of the earliest sites with evidence of farming and herding in south asia . 
they wrote that `` the direct lineal descendents of the neolithic inhabitants of mehrgarh are to be found to the south and the east of mehrgarh ,  in northwestern india and the western edge of the deccan plateau , ``  with neolithic mehrgarh showing greater affinity with chalocolithic inamgaon ,  south of mehrgarh ,  than with chalcolithic mehrgarh . 
but given the originality of mehrgarh ,  jarrige concludes that mehrgarh has an earlier local background , ``  and is not a `` 'backwater' of the neolithic culture of the near east . `` 
this resulted from a keypad used for prototyping being different from the production keypad; the prototyping keypad had tactile feedback upon key pressing that the production units lacked . 
those that are still in existence are susceptible to three main problems: `` screen rot , ``  esd damage ,  and keypad destruction . 
the microvision unit had a twelve-button keypad ,  with the switches buried under a thick layer of flexible plastic . 
the queen mother ,  elizabeth ,  assumed regency . 
mary and her mother were imprisoned . 
her envoys absolved the poles from their 1382 oath of loyalty to mary on 28march ,  announcing that the queen mother would send her younger daughter ,  jadwiga ,  to poland . 
after the treaty was signed ,  the queens returned to buda and sigismund went to bohemia ,  suggesting that he was dissatisfied with the treaty . 
queen elizabeth replaced stephen lackfi with thomas szentgyörgyi ,  who used draconian measures to put an end to a conspiracy against the queens in zadar in may 1384.
noblemen from greater poland offered to pay homage to either mary or jadwiga at a meeting in radomsko on 25november ,  but they stipulated that the queen and her husband should live in poland . 
mary was restored to the throne ,  with her mother ruling in her name . 
mary's sister ,  jadwiga ,  claimed the crown ,  but sigismund retained it without much difficulty . 
mary's title and her rapid coronation in the absence of her fiancé ,  sigismund ,  show that her mother and her mother's supporters wanted to emphasize mary's role as monarch and to postpone or even hinder sigismund's coronation . 
the queen mother replaced nicholas garai with nicholas szécsi ,  and made stephen lackfi voivode of transylvania and nicholas zámbó master of the treasury . 
on april 29, 2016, rovi corporation announced that it had acquired tivo inc .  for $1.1 billion . 
in 2016, rovi acquired digital video recorder maker tivo inc .  ,  and renamed itself tivo corporation . 
on march 1, 2011, rovi announced its acquisition of online video guide sidereel . 
in april 2013, facebook began licensing rovi metadata for use within the service . 
the technology would be integrated into rovi's audience analysis services . 
on april 1, 2013, rovi acquired integral reach ,  a provider of predictive analysis services . 
during sgi's ownership of mips ,  the company introduced the r8000 in 1994 and the r10000 in 1996 and a follow up the r12000 in 1997.
the company licensed its 32- and 64-bit architectures as well as 32-bit cores . 
before the acquisition ,  the company had 125+ licensees who ship more than 500 million mips-based processors each year . 
by porting to android ,  mips processors power smartphones and tablets running on the android operating system . 
the sony playstation portable used two processors based on the mips32 4k processor . 
imagination had outbid ceva inc to buy mips with an offer of $100 million ,  and was investing to develop the architecture for the embedded processor market . 
in early 2008 mips laid-off 28 employees from its processor business group . 
within the networking segment ,  licensees include cavium networks and broadcom . 
to secure the supply of future generations of mips microprocessors  -lrb-  the 64-bit r4000 -rrb- ,  sgi acquired the company in 1992 for $333 million and renamed it as mips technologies inc .  ,  a wholly owned subsidiary of sgi . 
tcl corporation is using mips processors for the development of smartphones . 
however ,  the `` interpreter '' itself ,  which may be seen as an executor or processor ,  performing the instructions of the source code ,  typically consists of directly executable machine code  -lrb-  generated from assembly or high-level language source code  -rrb-  . 
a processor's instruction set may have all instructions of the same length ,  or it may have variable-length instructions . 
a good code optimizer can track implicit as well as explicit operands which may allow more frequent constant propagation ,  constant folding of registers  -lrb-  a register assigned the result of a constant expression freed up by replacing it by that constant  -rrb-  and other code enhancements . 
because a program normally relies on such factors ,  different systems will typically not run the same machine code ,  even when the same type of processor is used . 
machine code is by definition the lowest level of programming detail visible to the programmer ,  but internally many processors use microcode or optimise and transform machine code instructions into sequences of micro-ops ,  this is not generally considered to be a machine code per se . 
instructions per second  -lrb-  ips  -rrb-  is a measure of a computer's processor speed . 
in 2014, michael was the 20th most popular name in northern ireland ,  27th in canada and 42nd in australia . 
michael ranked as the eighth most popular name for boys in ireland in 2013.
michael  -lrb-  and its variants  -rrb-  is one of the most common given names for men in the world . 
the two major circulating metabolites of modafinil are modafinil acid  -lrb-  crl-40467 -rrb- and modafinil sulfone  -lrb-  crl-41056 -rrb- . 
modafinil is contraindicated in people with known hypersensitivity to modafinil ,  armodafinil ,  or inactive ingredients . 
in japan ,  modafinil is schedule i psychotropic drug . 
however ,  modafinil sulfone does appear to possess anticonvulsant effects ,  and this is a property that it shares with modafinil . 
the addiction and dependence liabilities of modafinil are very low . 
modafinil is not approved for use in children for any medical conditions . 
cephalon began to market the r-enantiomer armodafinil of modafinil in the u . s .  in 2007.
as of 2004, the fda is not aware of any fatal overdoses involving modafinil alone  -lrb-  as opposed to multiple drugs including modafinil  -rrb-  . 
the long term safety and effectiveness of modafinil have not been determined . 
modafinil may possess yet an additional mechanism of action . 
the following countries do not classify modafinil as a controlled substance:
there have been reported arrests of people who imported modafinil for personal use . 
reagent testing can be used to screen for the presence of modafinil in samples . 
modafinil was added to the world anti-doping agency `` prohibited list '' in 2004 as a prohibited stimulant  -lrb-  see modafinil legal status  -rrb-  . 
possession of few modafinil pills can lead to 3–10 years imprisonment . 
modafinil may have an adverse effect on hormonal contraceptives for up to a month after discontinuation . 
psychological dependence upon modafinil has only been noted in case reports involving daily overdoses on modafinil for an extended period of time . 
research found that modafinil elevates histamine levels in the hypothalamus in animals . 
modafinil and armodafinil have been studied as a complement to antipsychotic medications in the treatment of schizophrenia . 
a class that is not a set  -lrb-  informally in zermelo–fraenkel  -rrb-  is called a proper class ,  and a class that is a set is sometimes called a small class . 
every element of a class is a set . 
zf set theory does not formalize the notion of classes ,  so each formula with classes must be reduced syntactically to a formula without classes . 
for instance ,  the class of all ordinal numbers ,  and the class of all sets ,  are proper classes in many formal systems . 
for example ,  any set theory with a universal set has proper classes which are subclasses of sets . 
examples include the class of all sets ,  the class of all ordinal numbers ,  and the class of all cardinal numbers . 
several deep theorems ,  such as the hirzebruch–riemann–roch theorem ,  are special cases of the atiyah–singer index theorem . 
atiyah's work on index theory is reprinted in volumes 3 and 4 of his collected works . 
atiyah ,  bott and vijay k .  patodi gave a new proof of the index theorem using the heat equation . 
atiyah collaborated with many mathematicians . 
atiyah showed how to extend the index theorem to some non-compact manifolds ,  acted on by a discrete group with compact quotient . 
topological k-theory was discovered by atiyah and friedrich hirzebruch who were inspired by grothendieck's proof of the grothendieck–riemann–roch theorem and bott's work on the periodicity theorem . 
atiyah described some of these results in a survey talk . 
these papers seem to be the first time that atiyah has worked on exceptional lie groups . 
as an application of the equivariant index theorem ,  atiyah and hirzebruch showed that manifolds with effective circle actions have vanishing â-genus . 
the first announcement of the atiyah–singer theorem was their 1963 paper . 
in a series of papers with several authors ,  atiyah classified all instantons on 4-dimensional euclidean space . 
witten shortly after applied the duistermaat–heckman formula to loop spaces and showed that this formally gave the atiyah–singer index theorem for the dirac operator; this idea was lectured on by atiyah . 
atiyah was born on 22 april 1929 in hampstead ,  london ,  england ,  the son of jean  -lrb-  née levens  -rrb-  and edward atiyah . 
hirzebruch and borel had proved the integrality of the â genus of a spin manifold ,  and atiyah suggested that this integrality could be explained if it were the index of the dirac operator  -lrb-  which was rediscovered by atiyah and singer in 1961 -rrb- . 
 -lrb-  atiyah and hirzebruch used the case of k-theory ,  but their method works for all cohomology theories  -rrb-  . 
with elmer rees ,  atiyah studied the problem of the relation between topological and holomorphic vector bundles on projective space . 
the bott periodicity theorem was a central theme in atiyah's work on k-theory ,  and he repeatedly returned to it ,  reworking the proof several times to understand it better . 
atiyah's works on k-theory ,  including his book on k-theory are reprinted in volume 2 of his collected works . 
this subsection lists all books written by atiyah; it omits a few books that he edited . 
this led to considerable criticism of kaplan in the orthodox jewish press . 
kaplan was born in švenčionys ,  lithuania ,  to rabbi israel and haya  -lrb-  anna  -rrb-  kaplan . 
kaplan began his career as an orthodox rabbi at congregation kehilath jeshurun in new york city ,  assisted in the founding of the young israel movement of modern orthodox judaism in 1912, and was the first rabbi hired by the new  -lrb-  orthodox  -rrb-  jewish center in manhattan when it was founded in 1918.
he was the subject of a number of polemical articles published by rabbi leo jung  -lrb-  who became the rabbi of the jewish center in 1922 -rrb- in the orthodox jewish press . 
mordecai menahem kaplan  -lrb-  june 11, 1881 – november 8, 1983 -rrb- ,  was a rabbi ,  essayist and jewish educator and the co-founder of reconstructionist judaism along with his son-in-law ira eisenstein . 
from 1934 until 1970 kaplan wrote a series of books in which he expressed his reconstructionist ideology ,  which centred on the `` concept of judaism as a civilization '' . 
the resulting 6501 design was somewhat similar to the 6800, but by using several simplifications in the design ,  the 6501 would be up to 4 times faster . 
the 6502 would quickly go on to be one of the most popular chips of its day . 
this meant that not only were its designs faster ,  they cost much less as well . 
if a chip design with five design flaws results in a mask with ten flaws in total ,  there is no point in making another mask because it will have the same five design flaws plus some other set of five copying flaws . 
if too many of them are expressed ,  that particular chip will not work . 
most of the mos chips are named according to following rules ,  which shows used technology  -lrb-  logic gate design  -rrb- :
mos had previously designed a simple computer kit called the kim-1, primarily to `` show off '' the 6502 chip . 
in addition to a good design ,  mos had a secret weapon: the ability to `` fix '' its masks . 
sanger ,  a crater in the northern hemisphere of venus ,  takes its name from margaret sanger . 
sanger has been recognized with several honors . 
in february 1917, sanger began publishing the monthly periodical `` birth control review '' . 
sanger opposed censorship throughout her career . 
sanger opposed excessive sexual indulgence . 
sanger worked with african american leaders and professionals who saw a need for birth control in their communities . 
the first ,  `` my fight for birth control '' ,  was published in 1931 and the second ,  more promotional version ,  `` margaret sanger: an autobiography '' ,  was published in 1938.
in 1921, sanger founded the american birth control league ,  which later became the planned parenthood federation of america . 
sanger popularized the term `` birth control '' ,  opened the first birth control clinic in the united states ,  and established organizations that evolved into the planned parenthood federation of america . 
margaret higgins sanger  -lrb-  born margaret louise higgins ,  september 14, 1879september 6, 1966, also known as margaret sanger slee  -rrb-  was an american birth control activist ,  sex educator ,  writer ,  and nurse . 
sanger's work with minorities earned praise from martin luther king ,  jr .  ,  in his 1966 acceptance speech for the margaret sanger award . 
sanger's story also features in several biographies ,  including david kennedy's biography `` birth control in america: the career of margaret sanger ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- ,  which won the bancroft prize and the john gilmary shea prize . 
in 1928, conflict within the birth control movement leadership led sanger to resign as the president of the abcl and take full control of the crb ,  renaming it the birth control clinical research bureau  -lrb-  bccrb  -rrb-  ,  marking the beginning of a schism that would last until 1938.
in 1937, sanger became chairman of the newly formed birth control council of america ,  and attempted to resolve the schism between the abcl and the bccrb . 
sanger's writings are curated by two universities: new york university's history department maintains the `` margaret sanger papers project '' ,  and smith college's sophia smith collection maintains the `` margaret sanger papers '' collection . 
this 1936 contraception court victory was the culmination of sanger's birth control efforts ,  and she took the opportunity ,  now in her late 50s ,  to move to tucson ,  arizona ,  intending to play a less critical role in the birth control movement . 
sanger became estranged from her husband in 1913, and the couple's divorce was finalized in 1921.
in 1929, sanger formed the national committee on federal legislation for birth control in order to lobby for legislation to overturn restrictions on contraception . 
early in 1915, margaret sanger's estranged husband ,  william sanger ,  gave a copy of `` family limitation '' to a representative of anti-vice politician anthony comstock . 
due to her connection with planned parenthood ,  many who oppose abortion frequently condemn sanger by criticizing her views on birth control and eugenics . 
following the break-up of standard oil in 1911, the standard oil company of new york ,  or socony ,  was founded ,  along with 33 other successor companies . 
mobil ,  previously known as the sucsocony-vacuum oil company ,  is a major american oil company which merged with exxon in 1999 to form a parent company called exxonmobil . 
mary ii  -lrb-  30 april 1662 – 28 december 1694 -rrb- was queen of england ,  scotland ,  and ireland ,  co-reigning with her husband and first cousin ,  king william iii and ii ,  from 1689 until her death; popular histories usually refer to their joint reign as that of `` william and mary '' . 
from may 1684, king charles's illegitimate son ,  james scott ,  duke of monmouth ,  lived in the netherlands ,  where he was fêted by william and mary . 
last in the line of succession stood any children william iii might have had from any subsequent marriage . 
from 1690 onwards ,  william was often absent from england on campaign ,  each year generally from the spring until the autumn . 
william and a tearful mary were married in st james's palace by bishop henry compton on 4 november 1677.
mary wielded less power than william when he was in england ,  ceding most of her authority to him ,  though he heavily relied on her . 
to william's relief ,  monmouth was defeated ,  captured and executed ,  but both he and mary were dismayed by james's subsequent actions . 
the bishop of london ,  henry compton ,  crowned william and mary together at westminster abbey on 11 april 1689.
a week before her death ,  mary went through her papers ,  weeding out some which were burnt ,  but her journal survives ,  as do her letters to william and to frances apsley . 
william ,  however ,  did not consider him a viable alternative and correctly assumed that monmouth had insufficient support . 
william agreed to invade and issued a declaration which referred to james's newborn son as the `` pretended prince of wales '' . 
she did ,  however ,  act alone when william was engaged in military campaigns abroad ,  proving herself to be a powerful ,  firm ,  and effective ruler . 
both mary and philip were descended from john of gaunt ,  the duke of lancaster ,  a relationship that was used to portray philip as an english king . 
philip could not speak english ,  and so they spoke in a mixture of spanish ,  french ,  and latin . 
philip returned to england from march to july 1557 to persuade mary to support spain in a renewed war against france . 
in 1554, mary married philip of spain ,  becoming queen consort of habsburg spain on his accession in 1556.
when mary ascended the throne ,  she was proclaimed under the same official style as henry viii and edward vi: `` mary ,  by the grace of god ,  queen of england ,  france and ireland ,  defender of the faith ,  and of the church of england and of ireland on earth supreme head '' . 
philip persuaded his wife that elizabeth should marry his cousin emmanuel philibert ,  duke of savoy ,  to secure the catholic succession and preserve the habsburg interest in england ,  but elizabeth refused to comply and parliamentary consent was unlikely . 
mary i  -lrb-  18 february 1516 – 17 november 1558 -rrb- ,  also known as mary tudor ,  was the queen of england and ireland from july 1553 until her death . 
english coinage was debased under both henry viii and edward vi . 
mary was courted by duke philip of bavaria from late 1539, but he was lutheran and his suit for her hand was unsuccessful . 
this style ,  which had been in use since 1554, was replaced when philip inherited the spanish crown in 1556 with `` philip and mary ,  by the grace of god king and queen of england ,  spain ,  france ,  both the sicilies ,  jerusalem and ireland ,  defenders of the faith ,  archdukes of austria ,  dukes of burgundy ,  milan and brabant ,  counts of habsburg ,  flanders and tyrol '' . 
in 1536, queen anne fell from the king's favour and was beheaded . 
philip ,  who was in brussels ,  wrote to his sister joan: `` i felt a reasonable regret for her death . `` 
guided by john dudley ,  1st duke of northumberland ,  and perhaps others ,  edward excluded both from the line of succession in his will . 
under mary's marriage treaty with philip ,  the official joint style reflected not only mary's but also philip's dominions and claims: `` philip and mary ,  by the grace of god ,  king and queen of england ,  france ,  naples ,  jerusalem ,  and ireland ,  defenders of the faith ,  princes of spain and sicily ,  archdukes of austria ,  dukes of milan ,  burgundy and brabant ,  counts of habsburg ,  flanders and tyrol '' . 
according to giovanni michieli ,  the venetian ambassador ,  philip may have planned to marry elizabeth in the event of mary's death in childbirth ,  but in a letter to his brother-in-law ,  maximilian of austria ,  philip expressed uncertainty as to whether his wife was pregnant . 
she was the first woman to successfully claim the throne of england ,  despite competing claims and determined opposition ,  and enjoyed popular support and sympathy during the earliest parts of her reign ,  especially from the roman catholics of england . 
furthering the tudor conquest of ireland ,  under mary and philip's reign english colonists were settled in the irish midlands . 
for most of edward's reign ,  mary remained on her own estates and rarely attended court . 
mary was born on 18 february 1516 at the palace of placentia in greenwich ,  england . 
elizabeth remained at court until october ,  apparently restored to favour . 
marbury v .  madison ,  5 u . s .   -lrb-  1 cranch  -rrb-  137  -lrb-  1803 -rrb- ,  was a u . s .  supreme court case that established the principle of judicial review in the united states ,  meaning that american courts have the power to strike down laws ,  statutes ,  and some government actions that contravene the u . s .  constitution . 
this lawsuit resulted in the case of `` marbury v .  madison '' . 
in the fiercely contested u . s .  presidential election of 1800, the three major candidates were thomas jefferson ,  aaron burr ,  and john adams ,  who was the incumbent u . s .  president . 
because this meant the court had no jurisdiction over the case ,  it could not issue the writ that marbury had requested . 
the king was also encouraged to destroy all pagan shrines . 
mellitus  -lrb-  died 24 april 624 -rrb- was the first bishop of london in the saxon period ,  the third archbishop of canterbury ,  and a member of the gregorian mission sent to england to convert the anglo-saxons from their native paganism to christianity . 
mellitus was exiled from london by the pagan successors to his patron ,  king sæberht of essex ,  following the latter's death around 616.
exactly when mellitus and his party arrived in england is unknown ,  but he was certainly in the country by 604, when augustine consecrated him as bishop in the province of the east saxons ,  making mellitus the first bishop of london after the roman departure  -lrb-  london was the east saxons' capital  -rrb-  . 
both æthelberht and sæberht died around 616 or 618, causing a crisis for the mission . 
the principles expounded by this panel have come to be known as the `` m'naghten rules '' ,  though they have gained any status only by usage in the common law and m'naghten himself would have been found guilty if they had been applied at his trial . 
in `` r v arnold '' 1724 16 how st .  tr . 
the m'naghten rule  -lrb-  pronounced ,  and sometimes spelled ,  mcnaughton  -rrb-  is any variant of the 1840s jury instruction in a criminal case when there is a defense of insanity:  the rule was formulated as a reaction to the acquittal in 1843 of daniel m'naghten on the charge of murdering edward drummond ,  whom m'naghten had mistaken for british prime minister robert peel . 
the rules so formulated as `` m'naghten's case '' 1843 10 c & f 200 have been a standard test for criminal liability in relation to mentally disordered defendants in common law jurisdictions ever since ,  with some minor adjustments . 
the application of the new quantum theory to electromagnetism resulted in quantum field theory ,  which was developed starting around 1930.
the mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics are those mathematical formalisms that permit a rigorous description of quantum mechanics . 
finally ,  some of the originators of quantum theory  -lrb-  notably einstein and schrödinger  -rrb-  were unhappy with what they thought were the philosophical implications of quantum mechanics . 
these formulations of quantum mechanics continue to be used today . 
the mathematical status of quantum theory remained uncertain for some time . 
quantum field theory has driven the development of more sophisticated formulations of quantum mechanics ,  of which the ones presented here are simple special cases . 
in particular ,  quantization ,  namely the construction of a quantum theory whose classical limit is a given and known classical theory ,  becomes an important area of quantum physics in itself . 
sdi can be more useful in cases where users switch more often between separate applications than among the windows of one application . 
this contrasts with single document interfaces  -lrb-  sdi  -rrb-  where all windows are independent of each other . 
there are three basic types of laminar microlith . 
the `` adelaide point '' is found in australia . 
an average of between six and eighteen microliths may often have been used in one spear or harpoon ,  but only one or two in an arrow . 
in all these locations ,  the microliths found have been backed edge blades ,  tips and crude flakes . 
signs of much wear and tear have been found on some of these finds . 
regardless of type ,  microliths were used to form the points of hunting weapons ,  such as spears and  -lrb-  in later periods  -rrb-  arrows ,  and other artifacts and are found throughout africa ,  asia and europe . 
in france ,  one unusual find stands out: in the mesolithic cemetery of téviec ,  in morbihan ,  one of the skeletons that has been found has a geometric microlith lodged in one of its vertebra . 
laminar microliths date from at least the gravettian culture or possibly the start of the upper paleolithic era ,  and they are found all through the mesolithic and neolithic eras . 
two families of microliths are usually defined: laminar and geometric . 
not all the different types of laminar microliths had functions that are clearly understood . 
the microliths were used in spear points and arrowheads . 
there is no biblical mention of the fate of the menorah . 
in addition ,  many synagogues display either a menorah or an artistic representation of a menorah . 
the menorah symbolized the ideal of universal enlightenment . 
a menorah appears in the coat of arms of the state of israel ,  based on the depiction of the menorah on the arch of titus . 
this type of menorah is called a `` hanukiah '' in modern hebrew . 
the menorah also symbolizes the creation in seven days ,  with the center light representing the sabbath . 
the hebrew bible states that god revealed the design for the menorah to moses and describes the construction of the menorah as follows  -lrb-    -rrb- : make a lampstand of pure gold . 
this lamp represents the continually lit `` ner elohim '' of the menorah used in temple times . 
the symbol by which to remember this is that… the menorah was on the southern side of the temple . `` 
the menorah is also a symbol closely associated with the jewish holiday of hanukkah  -lrb-  also spelled chanukah  -rrb-  . 
the kinara is also ,  like the menorah ,  a seven candleholder which is associated with the african american festival of kwanzaa . 
then make its seven lamps and set them up on it so that they light the space in front of it . 
 ,  most programs do not support gestures other than the drag operation . 
multi-touch touchscreen gestures are predefined motions used to interact with multi-touch devices . 
related to gestures are touchpad hotspots ,  where a particular region of the touchpad has additional functionality . 
however ,  it was also argued that muscular tension resulting from holding down buttons could be exploited in user interface design as it gives constant feedback that the user is in a temporary state ,  or mode  -lrb-  buxton ,  1995 -rrb- . 
some implementations allow users to customize these factors . 
for example ,  a common hotspot feature is the far right side of the touchpad ,  which will scroll the active page if a finger is dragged down or up it . 
a monorail is a railway in which the track consists of a single rail . 
monorails do not use pantographs . 
under the monorail society's beam-width criterion ,  some ,  but not all ,  maglev systems are considered monorails ,  such as the transrapid and linimo . 
colloquially ,  the term `` monorail '' is often used to describe any form of elevated rail or people mover . 
unlike some trams and light rail systems ,  modern monorails are always separated from other traffic and pedestrians . 
halliday was born and raised in england . 
michael alexander kirkwood halliday  -lrb-  often m . a . k . 
the muslim brotherhood aimed to build a transnational organization . 
on the issue of women and gender the muslim brotherhood interprets islam conservatively . 
on 2 february 2015, an egyptian court sentenced another 183 members of the muslim brotherhood to death . 
today ,  the primary state backers of the muslim brotherhood are qatar and turkey . 
in november 1948, following several bombings and alleged assassination attempts by the brotherhood ,  the egyptian government arrested 32 leaders of the brotherhood's `` secret apparatus '' and banned the brotherhood . 
the brotherhood grew rapidly going from 800 members in 1936, to 200,000 by 1938 and over 2 million by 1948.
during the mubarak era ,  observers both defended and criticized the brotherhood . 
a deputy leader declared the brotherhood would seek dissolution of the treaty ,  while a brotherhood spokesman stated the brotherhood would respect the treaty as long as `` israel shows real progress on improving the lot of the palestinians '' . 
the society of the muslim brothers  -lrb-  ``  ``   -rrb-  ,  better known as the muslim brotherhood  -lrb-   ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  is a transnational sunni islamist organization founded in egypt by islamic scholar and schoolteacher hassan al-banna in 1928.
according to a spokesman on its english-language website ,  the muslim brotherhood believes in reform ,  democracy ,  freedom of assembly ,  press ,  etc . 
the muslim brotherhood's position on political participation varied according to the `` domestic situation '' of each branch ,  rather than ideology . 
internally ,  some leaders in the brotherhood disagreed on whether to adhere to egypt's 32-year peace treaty with israel . 
in the 2005 parliamentary elections ,  the brotherhood became `` in effect ,  the first opposition party of egypt's modern era '' . 
the brotherhood's stated goal is to instill the quran and the sunnah as the `` sole reference point for  .  .  .  ordering the life of the muslim family ,  individual ,  community  .  .  .  and state '' . 
he took over the empire in 1469 after the death of moctezuma . 
under itzcoatl ,  moctezuma and tlacaelel were generals in his army . 
tlacaelel ,  moctezuma's first successor ,  was succeeded by moctezuma's cousin or son axayacatl ,  who was 19 years old . 
after emperor huitzilihuitl's death ,  moctezuma's brother chimalpopoca was ruler for ten years until his assassination . 
this drought resulted in moctezuma's period of peace ending . 
moctezuma i  -lrb-  c .  1398-1469 -rrb- ,  also known as moteuczomatzin ilhuicamina  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  huehuemoteuczoma or montezuma i  -lrb-    ,    -rrb-  ,  was the second aztec emperor and fifth king of tenochtitlan . 
moctezuma then was elected to power in 1440 by this group of nobles ,  at the age of 42, after the death of his half-uncle itzcoatl . 
isabel moctezuma was by hernán cortés the mother of leonor cortés moctezuma ,  who was the mother of isabel de tolosa cortés de moctezuma . 
following the conquest ,  moctezuma's daughter ,  techichpotzin  -lrb-  or tecuichpoch  -rrb-  ,  became known as isabel moctezuma . 
the aztecs did not use regnal numbers; they were given retroactively by historians to more easily distinguish him from the first moctezuma ,  referred to as moctezuma i . 
he describes moctezuma's issue and counts that moctezuma had nineteen children – eleven sons and eight daughters . 
several lines of descendants exist in mexico and spain through moctezuma ii's son and daughters ,  notably tlacahuepan ihualicahuaca ,  or pedro moctezuma and tecuichpoch ixcaxochitzin ,  or isabel moctezuma . 
according to the codex ,  the bodies of moctezuma and itzquauhtzin were cast out of the palace by the spanish; the body of moctezuma was gathered up and cremated at copulco . 
in his first description of moctezuma ,  díaz del castillo writes:
the grandson of moctezuma ii ,  pedro's son ,  ihuitemotzin ,  baptized as diego luis de moctezuma ,  was brought to spain by king philip ii . 
at some time during that period ,  moctezuma became a prisoner in his own house . 
in the subsequent battles with the spaniards after cortés' return ,  moctezuma was killed . 
moctezuma had many wives and concubines by whom he fathered an enormous family . 
díaz alleges that the aztecs informed moctezuma that a relative of his had risen to the throne and ordered their attack to continue until all of the spanish were annihilated ,  but expressed remorse at moctezuma's captivity and stated that they intended to revere him even more if they could rescue him . 
moctezuma was then succeeded by his brother cuitláhuac ,  who died shortly after during a smallpox epidemic . 
some of the aztec stories about moctezuma describe him as being fearful of the spanish newcomers ,  and some sources ,  such as the florentine codex ,  comment that the aztecs believed the spaniards to be gods and cortés to be the returned god quetzalcoatl . 
moctezuma had many wives and concubines but only two women were his queens – tlapalizquixochtzin and teotlalco . 
in 2011 hart debuted a new version of the mickey hart band . 
hart is the only jewish member of the grateful dead . 
in june and july 2008, hart led the mickey hart band on a us concert tour . 
hart joined the grateful dead in september 1967.
hart dropped out of high school as a senior . 
olatunji later taught and collaborated with hart . 
hart's collaboration with the remaining members of the grateful dead has continued with the other ones ,  the dead and dead & company . 
in 2005, hart and the members of the band particle joined to create the hydra project . 
in 1994, mickey hart was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame as a member of the grateful dead . 
on october 11, 2011, smithsonian folkways released `` the mickey hart collection '' . 
in the 1996 furthur festival ,  mickey hart's mystery box played ,  as did bob weir's band ratdog . 
in august 2013, the mickey hart band embarked upon a tour with the tea leaf trio ,  which includes three members of the band tea leaf green ,  in support of the band's album `` superorganism . `` 
in august 2012, de icaza criticized the linux desktop as `` killed by apple '' . 
there ,  de icaza was vice president of developer platform . 
miguel de icaza  -lrb-  born november 23, 1972 -rrb- is a mexican-american programmer ,  best known for starting the gnome ,  mono ,  and xamarin projects . 
de icaza started the gnome project with federico mena in august 1997 to create a completely free desktop environment and component model for linux and other unix-like operating systems . 
in may 2011, de icaza started xamarin to replace monotouch and mono for android after novell was bought by attachmate and the projects were abandoned . 
de icaza was criticized by richard stallman on the software freedom day 2009, who labeled him as `` traitor to the free software community '' . 
the simplest major scale to write is c major ,  the only major scale not requiring sharps or flats:
montenegro  -lrb-  ; / `` crna gora ''   -rrb-  is a country in southeastern europe on the adriatic sea . 
the native name `` crna gora '' came to denote the majority of contemporary montenegro only in the 15th century . 
in 1972, crichton published two novels . 
in 1969, crichton published three novels . 
in 1990, crichton published the novel `` jurassic park '' . 
 ''odds on '' was crichton's first published novel . 
in 1967, crichton published `` scratch one '' . 
the other two books were not filmed . 
john michael crichton was born on october 23, 1942, in chicago ,  illinois ,  to john henderson crichton ,  a journalist ,  and zula miller crichton . 
in 1970, crichton again published three novels: `` drug of choice '' ,  `` grave descend '' and ``  '' with his younger brother douglas crichton . 
abc tv wanted to buy the film rights to crichton's novel `` binary '' . 
he wrote and directed the suspense film `` coma '' ,  adapted from a novel by robin cook ,  a friend of crichton's . 
crichton was hired to adapt his novel `` the terminal man '' into a script by warner bros . 
the novel earned him an edgar award in 1969.
crichton then wrote and directed an adaptation of his own book ,  `` the first great train robbery ''  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- . 
during the 1980s crichton came close to directing a film of `` congo '' with sean connery but the film did not happen . 
crichton then wrote and directed the 1973 science fiction western-thriller film `` westworld '' ,  which was his feature film directorial debut . 
in 1969, crichton also wrote a review for `` the new republic ''  -lrb-  as j .  michael crichton  -rrb-  ,  critiquing `` slaughterhouse five '' by kurt vonnegut . 
crichton then published `` the lost world '' in 1995 as the sequel to `` jurassic park '' . 
in 1983, crichton wrote `` electronic life '' ,  a book that introduces basic programming to its readers . 
the novel was adapted into the 1999 film `` the 13th warrior '' directed by john mctiernan ,  who was later removed with crichton himself taking over direction of reshoots . 
at the prose level ,  a crichton's trademark is the single-word paragraph . 
in 1988, crichton was a visiting writer at the massachusetts institute of technology . 
in 1976, crichton published `` eaters of the dead '' ,  a novel about a 10th-century muslim who travels with a group of vikings to their settlement . 
crichton believed ,  however ,  that his view of technology had been misunderstood as
in music theory ,  the term minor scale refers to three scale patterns – the natural minor scale  -lrb-  or aeolian mode  -rrb-  ,  the harmonic minor scale ,  and the melodic minor scale  -lrb-  ascending or descending  -rrb-  – rather than just one as with the major scale . 
