nirvana is one of the best-selling bands of all time ,  having sold over 75 million records worldwide . 
nirvana was an american rock band formed in aberdeen ,  washington ,  in 1987.
nirvana's contributions to music have also received recognition . 
in a late 1989 interview with john robb in `` sounds '' ,  cobain noted that the band's music was changing . 
in 2014, nirvana was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame; the members inducted were cobain ,  novoselic ,  and grohl . 
cobain described the sound of nirvana when it first started as `` a gang of four and scratch acid ripoff '' . 
just prior to the album's release ,  nirvana insisted on signing an extended contract with sub pop ,  making the band the first to do so with the label . 
grohl's drumming `` took nirvana's sound to a new level of intensity '' . 
in 1996, dgc finally issued a nirvana live album ,  `` from the muddy banks of the wishkah '' ,  which became the third nirvana release in a row to debut at the top of the `` billboard '' album chart . 
nirvana was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame in 2014, in its first year of eligibility . 
cobain usually wrote lyrics for songs minutes before recording them . 
 ''in utero '' debuted at number one on the `` billboard '' 200 album chart in september 1993.
in the late 1980s ,  nirvana established itself as part of the seattle grunge scene ,  releasing its first album ,  `` bleach '' ,  for the independent record label sub pop in 1989.
in early 1994, the band embarked on a european tour . 
since its breakup ,  nirvana has continued to receive acclaim . 
nirvana is an english pop rock band ,  formed in london ,  england in 1965.
in 1968, the duo recorded their second album ,  `` all of us '' ,  which featured a similar broad range of musical styles as their first album . 
in october 1967, they released their first album: a concept album produced by chris blackwell titled `` the story of simon simopath '' . 
sue & sunny also participated in the nirvana ensemble ,  providing vocals . 
island records launched nirvana's first album `` with a live show at the saville theatre ,  sharing a bill with fellow label acts traffic ,  spooky tooth ,  and jackie edwards . `` 
in 2018 a new album was released on the island label `` rainbow chaser: the 60s recordings  -lrb-  the island years  -rrb- ``  which featured the first 2 albums from this uk psychedelic group in a 2cd package ,  featuring 52 tracks with 27 previously unreleased outtakes ,  demos and alternative versions . 
music writer everett true has claimed that cobain's record label paid $100,000 to the original nirvana to permit cobain's band continued use of the name . 
in 1971 the duo amicably separated ,  with campbell-lyons the primary contributor to the next two nirvana albums ,  `` local anaesthetic '' 1971, and `` songs of love and praise '' 1972, the latter featuring the return of sylvia schuster . 
in indian religions ,  `` nirvana '' is synonymous with `` moksha '' and `` mukti '' . 
the first is called `` sopadhishesa-nirvana ''  -lrb-  nirvana with a remainder  -rrb-  ,  the second `` parinirvana '' or `` anupadhishesa-nirvana ''  -lrb-  nirvana without remainder ,  or final nirvana  -rrb-  . 
according to johnson the term `` nirvana '' is borrowed from the buddhists to confuse the buddhists ,  by linking the buddhist nirvana state to the pre-buddhist vedic tradition of metaphysical absolute called brahman . 
according to mahatma gandhi ,  the hindu and buddhist understanding of `` nirvana '' are different because the nirvana of the buddhists is shunyata ,  emptiness ,  but the nirvana of the gita means peace and that is why it is described as brahma-nirvana  -lrb-  oneness with brahman  -rrb-  . 
according to zaehner ,  johnson and other scholars ,  `` nirvana '' in the gita is a buddhist term adopted by the hindus . 
the terms `` moksa '' and `` nirvana '' are often used interchangeably in the jain texts . 
this basic scheme underlies hinduism ,  jainism and buddhism ,  where `` the ultimate aim is the timeless state of `` moksa '' ,  or ,  as the buddhists first seem to have called it ,  nirvana . `` 
nirvana  -lrb-  `` nibbana ''  -rrb-  literally means `` blowing out '' or `` quenching '' . 
however ,  buddhist texts have asserted since ancient times that nirvana is more than `` destruction of desire '' ,  it is `` the object of the knowledge '' of the buddhist path . 
the neva is the only river flowing from lake ladoga . 
the area of neva river was originally inhabited by finnic people . 
there is almost no aquatic vegetation in neva . 
neva is the main source of water  -lrb-  96 percent  -rrb-  of st .  petersburg and its suburbs . 
the mga river then flowed to the east ,  into lake ladoga ,  near the modern source of the neva river; the mga then was separated from the basin of the tosna . 
floods in st .  petersburg are usually caused by the overflow of the delta of neva and by surging water in the eastern part of neva bay . 
navigation season on the neva river runs from late april to november . 
the neva flows out of lake ladoga near shlisselburg ,  flows through the neva lowland and discharges into the baltic sea in the gulf of finland . 
neva has very few shoals and its banks are steep ,  making the river suited for navigation . 
the neva  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a river in northwestern russia flowing from lake ladoga through the western part of leningrad oblast  -lrb-  historical region of ingria  -rrb-  to the neva bay of the gulf of finland . 
in finnish  -lrb-  `` neva ''  -rrb-  it means poor fen ,  in karelian  -lrb-  `` neva ''  -rrb-  watercourse and in estonian  -lrb-  `` nõva ''  -rrb-  waterway . 
as a result of the great northern war of 1700–21, the valley of neva river became part of russian empire . 
the company traces its name to the nissan `` zaibatsu '' ,  now called nissan group . 
since 1999, nissan has been part of the renault–nissan–mitsubishi alliance ,  a partnership between nissan of japan ,  mitsubishi motors of japan and renault of france . 
the counties of norway are:
longyearbyen is the driest place in norway with  . 
numerous glaciers are found in norway . 
96 settlements have city status in norway . 
norway maintains embassies in 82 countries . 
the law is enforced in norway by the norwegian police service . 
norway has a total area of and a population of 5,312,300  -lrb-  as of august 2018 -rrb- . 
norway has often been ruled by minority governments . 
norway has one of the lowest crime rates in the world . 
still ,  norway remained a conservative society . 
at 20% ,  norway's re-conviction rate is among the lowest in the world . 
this is also evident in norway's low gini coefficient . 
king charles iii john ,  who came to the throne of norway and sweden in 1818, was the second king following norway's break from denmark and the union with sweden . 
the famine of 1695–1696 killed roughly 10% of norway's population . 
60 countries maintain an embassy in norway ,  all of them in the capital ,  oslo . 
of the 98 airports in norway ,  52 are public ,  and 46 are operated by the state-owned avinor . 
throughout the first world war ,  norway was in principle a neutral country . 
the anglo-saxons of britain also referred to the kingdom of norway in 880 as `` norðmanna land '' . 
norway has approximately of road network ,  of which are paved and are motorway . 
norway is also the world's second-largest exporter of fish  -lrb-  in value ,  after china  -rrb-  . 
norway is considered to be one of the most developed democracies and states of justice in the world . 
norway was a founding member of the european free trade association  -lrb-  efta  -rrb-  . 
until around 1800 inhabitants of western norway where referred to as `` nordmenn ''  -lrb-  northmen  -rrb-  while inhabitants of eastern norway where referred to as `` austmenn ''  -lrb-  eastmen  -rrb-  . 
norway uses a civil law system where laws are created and amended in parliament and the system regulated through the courts of justice of norway . 
the central gateway to norway by air is oslo airport ,  gardermoen . 
norwegian opposition to the great powers' decision to link norway with sweden caused the norwegian–swedish war to break out as sweden tried to subdue norway by military means . 
norway comprises the western and northernmost part of scandinavia in northern europe . 
norway took no part in the events which led to swedish independence from denmark in the 1520s . 
upon the death of haakon v  -lrb-  king of norway  -rrb-  in 1319, magnus erikson ,  at just three years old ,  inherited the throne as king magnus vii of norway . 
king harald v of the dano-german house of glücksburg is the current king of norway . 
attractive and dramatic scenery and landscape are found throughout norway . 
after sweden broke out of the kalmar union in 1521, norway tried to follow suit ,  but the subsequent rebellion was defeated ,  and norway remained in a union with denmark until 1814, a total of 434 years . 
norway abolished the death penalty for regular criminal acts in 1902.
because of norway's high latitude ,  there are large seasonal variations in daylight . 
the index notes over-exploitation of fisheries ,  but not norway's whaling or oil exports . 
feudalism never really developed in norway or sweden ,  as it did in the rest of europe . 
since 2010, norway has been classified as the world's most democratic country by the democracy index . 
from moster ,  olav sailed north to trondheim where he was proclaimed king of norway by the eyrathing in 995.
christian michelsen ,  a shipping magnate and statesman ,  and prime minister of norway from 1905 to 1907, played a central role in the peaceful separation of norway from sweden on 7 june 1905.
norway slipped ever more to the background under the oldenburg dynasty  -lrb-  established 1448 -rrb- . 
norway  -lrb-  norwegian:  -lrb-  bokmål  -rrb-  or  -lrb-  nynorsk  -rrb- ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the kingdom of norway ,  is a nordic country in northwestern europe whose territory comprises the western and northernmost portion of the scandinavian peninsula; the remote island of jan mayen and the archipelago of svalbard are also part of the kingdom of norway . 
norway has two official names: `` norge '' in bokmål and `` noreg '' in nynorsk . 
norway also lays claim to a section of antarctica known as queen maud land . 
margaret was working toward a union of sweden with denmark and norway by having olaf elected to the swedish throne . 
haakon ,  crown prince of norway ,  is the legal and rightful heir to the throne and the kingdom . 
norway's core territory comprises the western and northernmost portion of the scandinavian peninsula; the remote island of jan mayen and the archipelago of svalbard are also part of the kingdom of norway . 
norway has both administrative and political subdivisions on two levels: counties and municipalities . 
norway has the world's largest registered stock of plug-in electric vehicles per capita . 
king magnus vii ruled norway until 1350, when his son ,  haakon ,  was placed on the throne as haakon vi . 
norway has an extensive coastline ,  facing the north atlantic ocean and the barents sea . 
the league's monopolistic control over the economy of norway put pressure on all classes ,  especially the peasantry ,  to the degree that no real burgher class existed in norway . 
nokia networks is nokia corporation's largest division . 
in may 2018, hmd global announced refreshed models of its nokia smartphones; the nokia 2.1, 3.1, and 5.1.
his final appearance was at nokia world 2010 when the nokia e7 and other symbian^3 devices were introduced . 
after the sale of its mobile devices division ,  nokia focused on network equipment through nokia networks . 
meanwhile ,  in 2010 for nokia's linux ambitions ,  nokia collaborated with intel to form the meego project ,  after the merger of nokia's own maemo and intel's moblin . 
the purchased assets from nokia were eventually written-off by microsoft in 2015.
in july 2013, nokia bought siemens' stake in the nokia siemens networks joint venture for $2.2 billion ,  turning it into a wholly owned subsidiary called nokia solutions and networks ,  until being rebranded as nokia networks soon after . 
while nokia has no investment in the company ,  they do have some input in the new devices . 
on 28 june 2016 nokia demonstrated for the first time a 5g-ready network . 
in 2005 nokia developed a linux-based operating system called maemo ,  which shipped that year on the nokia 770 internet tablet . 
nokia last used three-digit names on analogue phones in the 1990s . 
as of 2018 nokia is the world's third largest network equipment manufacturer . 
qt was a central part of nokia's strategy until 2011, and it was eventually sold in 2012.
nokia contributed 1.6% to finland's gdp and accounted for about 16% of the country's exports in 2006.
between 1996 and 2001, nokia's turnover increased fivefold ,  from €6.5 billion to €31 billion . 
nokia partnered with arqiva and o2 to launch trials in the uk in september 2005.
nokia corporation  -lrb-  commonly referred to as nokia;  ,   ,    -rrb-  is a finnish multinational telecommunications ,  information technology ,  and consumer electronics company ,  founded in 1865.
nokia was the largest vendor at the time in all regions bar north america . 
after finland's trade agreement with the soviet union in the 1960s ,  nokia expanded into the soviet market . 
nokia's operating profit went from negative in 1991 to $1 billion in 1995 and almost $4 billion by 1999.
after the announcement of the microsoft partnership ,  nokia's market share deteriorated; this was due to demand for symbian dropping when consumers realized nokia's focus and attention would be elsewhere . 
in august 2007, nokia introduced ovi ,  an umbrella name for the company's new internet services which included the n-gage platform and the nokia music store . 
in 2000, bce spun out nortel ,  distributing its holdings of nortel to its shareholders . 
to improve its liquidity ,  in 2003 nortel arranged a us$750 million credit support facility with export development canada . 
nortel's 53.13% stake in turkish company nortel netaş was acquired by one equity partners  -lrb-  oep  -rrb-  and rhea investments for $68 million in december 2010.
the accounting scandal hurt both nortel's reputation and finances ,  as nortel spent an estimated us$400 million on outside auditors and management consultants to retrain staff . 
nortel also paid out us$575 million and 629 million common shares in 2006 to settle a class-action lawsuit that accused the company of misleading investors about the company's health . 
january 2014, a pact between u . s .  and european divisions of nortel networks is approved by a u . s .  court . 
nortel networks corporation  -lrb-  nortel  -rrb-  ,  formerly commonly known as northern electric and northern telecom ,  was a multinational telecommunications and data networking equipment manufacturer headquartered in mississauga ,  ontario ,  canada . 
as part of the reductions ,  nortel shut down its calgary campus in 2009.
the canadian government resisted characterizing its position on nortel as a bailout . 
nortel made telecommunications ,  computer network equipment and software . 
from the beginning of 1930 through the end of 1933, sales dropped from $34 million to $8.2 million ,  and the number of employees dropped from 6,100 to 2,400.
in february 2010, ernst & young ,  the court-appointed monitor of nortel's canadian bankruptcy proceedings ,  reported that the assets of nortel's health and welfare trust had a shortfall of $37 million in its net assets as of december 31, 2008.
nokia siemens networks made a stalking horse bid to purchase nortel's cdma and lte assets for $650 million . 
in 2009, nortel filed for bankruptcy protection in canada and the united states ,  triggering a 79% decline of its corporate stock . 
nortel also paid out $1.4 million to 10 former and current directors ,  and paid $140 million to lawyers ,  pension ,  human resources and financial experts helping to oversee the company's bankruptcy proceedings . 
in 1983, due to deregulation ,  bell canada enterprises  -lrb-  later shortened to bce  -rrb-  was formed as the parent company to bell canada and northern telecom . 
in october 2011, the administrators of nortel's british subsidiary lost their appeal to overturn a court order requiring them to pay £2.1 billion into nortel's underfunded pension plan . 
in 1949, an antitrust suit in the u . s .  forced at&t/western electric to sell its stake in northern electric to bell canada . 
the river nile has two major tributaries ,  the white nile and blue nile . 
the course of the nile in sudan is distinctive . 
below renk the white nile enters sudan ,  it flows north to khartoum and meets the blue nile . 
an anabranch river ,  the bahr el zeraf ,  flows out of the nile's bahr al jabal section and rejoins the white nile . 
there are two theories about the age of the integrated nile . 
as the nile was such an important factor in egyptian life ,  the ancient calendar was even based on the 3 cycles of the nile . 
the nile leaves lake nyanza  -lrb-  victoria  -rrb-  at ripon falls near jinja ,  uganda ,  as the victoria nile . 
during the dry season  -lrb-  january to june  -rrb-  the white nile contributes between 70 percent and 90 percent of the total discharge from the nile . 
the sobat river ,  which joins the nile a short distance below lake no ,  drains about half as much land ,   ,  but contributes annually to the nile . 
on an annual basis ,  the white nile upstream of malakal contributes about fifteen percent of the total outflow of the nile . 
the present nile is at least the fifth river that has flowed north from the ethiopian highlands . 
the blue nile  -lrb-   ,  `` ʿābay ''  -rrb-  springs from lake tana in the ethiopian highlands . 
in particular ,  the nile is the primary water source of egypt and sudan . 
the white nile system in bahr el arab and white nile rifts remained a closed lake until the connection of the victoria nile to the main system some 12,500 years ago during the african humid period . 
the nile river flows into south sudan just south of nimule ,  where it is known as the bahr al jabal  -lrb-  `` mountain river ''  -rrb-  . 
in vertebrates ,  the nervous system can be split into two parts ,  the central nervous system  -lrb-  which is defined as the brain and spinal cord  -rrb-  ,  and the peripheral nervous system . 
for example ,  the international brain research organization was founded in 1960, the international society for neurochemistry in 1963, the european brain and behaviour society in 1968, and the society for neuroscience in 1969.
the study of the nervous system is done at multiple levels ,  ranging from the molecular and cellular levels to the systems and cognitive levels . 
early views on the function of the brain regarded it to be a `` cranial stuffing '' of sorts . 
a nervous system emerges from the assemblage of neurons that are connected to each other . 
in parallel with this research ,  work with brain-damaged patients by paul broca suggested that certain regions of the brain were responsible for certain functions . 
the understanding of neurons and of nervous system function became increasingly precise and molecular during the 20th century . 
the earliest study of the nervous system dates to ancient egypt . 
neuroscience  -lrb-  or neurobiology  -rrb-  is the scientific study of the nervous system . 
manuscripts dating to 1700 bc indicate that the egyptians had some knowledge about symptoms of brain damage . 
armstrong prepared his famous epigram on his own . 
armstrong's authorized biography ,  ``  '' ,  was published in 2005.
in 1972, armstrong visited the town of langholm ,  scotland ,  the traditional seat of clan armstrong . 
on april 24, 1962, armstrong flew for the only time with chuck yeager . 
on may 21, 1962, armstrong was involved in the `` nellis affair '' . 
after his service with the navy ,  armstrong returned to purdue . 
shortly after apollo 11, armstrong announced that he did not plan to fly in space again . 
armstrong's family described him as a `` reluctant american hero '' . 
flags were flown at half-staff on the day of armstrong's funeral . 
armstrong was born on august 5, 1930, near wapakoneta ,  ohio ,  to stephen koenig armstrong and viola louise engel . 
at cincinnati ,  armstrong was university professor of aerospace engineering . 
historian andrew chaikin ,  who interviewed armstrong in 1988 for his book `` a man on the moon '' ,  disputed that armstrong claimed to have conceived the line during the mission . 
armstrong joined the nasa astronaut corps in the second group ,  which was selected in 1962.
after armstrong retired from nasa in 1971, he acted as a spokesman for several businesses . 
armstrong used to autograph everything except first day covers . 
armstrong and his first wife ,  janet ,  separated in 1990 and divorced in 1994, after 38 years of marriage . 
lovell took his place on the apollo 8 crew ,  and ,  when collins recovered ,  he joined armstrong's crew . 
recordings of armstrong's transmission do not provide evidence for the indefinite article `` a '' before `` man '' ,  though nasa and armstrong insisted for years that static obscured it . 
between 1991 and 1993, he hosted `` first flights with neil armstrong '' ,  an aviation history documentary series on a&e . 
president jimmy carter presented armstrong with the congressional space medal of honor in 1978, and armstrong and his former crewmates received a congressional gold medal in 2009.
armstrong guarded the use of his name ,  image ,  and famous quote . 
many of the test pilots at edwards praised armstrong's engineering ability . 
in all ,  armstrong flew 78 missions over korea for a total of 121 hours in the air ,  a third of them in january 1952, with the final mission on march 5, 1952.
after armstrong served as backup commander for apollo 8, slayton offered him the post of commander of apollo 11 on december 23, 1968, as apollo 8 orbited the moon . 
in 1970, after an explosion aboard apollo 13 aborted its lunar landing ,  armstrong was part of edgar cortright's investigation of the mission . 
following his graduation from purdue ,  armstrong became an experimental research test pilot . 
after he resigned from nasa in 1971, armstrong taught in the department of aerospace engineering at the university of cincinnati until 1979.
armstrong kept a low profile later in his life ,  leading to the belief that he was a recluse . 
north korea had a life expectancy of 69.8 years in 2013.
both north korea and south korea became members of the united nations in 1991.
north korea is ruled by the kim dynasty ,  which in north korea is referred to as the `` mount paektu bloodline '' . 
north korea shares the korean language with south korea ,  although some dialectal differences exist within both koreas . 
north korea's first appearance in the olympics came in 1964.
there are no known official statistics of religions in north korea . 
north korea connects with the trans-siberian railway through rajin . 
north korea's energy infrastructure is obsolete and in disrepair . 
the korean people's army  -lrb-  kpa  -rrb-  is north korea's military organization . 
north korea functions as a highly centralized ,  one-party state . 
after the division of the country into north and south korea ,  the two sides used different terms to refer to korea: `` chosun '' or `` joseon ''  -lrb-  조선  -rrb-  in north korea ,  and `` hanguk ''  -lrb-  한국  -rrb-  in south korea . 
the kidnapping of at least 13 japanese citizens by north korean agents in the 1970s and the 1980s has affected north korea's relationship with japan . 
kim jong-un of the kim dynasty is the current supreme leader or `` suryeong '' of north korea . 
 ,  north korea had diplomatic relations with 166 countries and embassies in 47 countries . 
tensions with south korea and the united states increased in 2010 with the sinking of the south korean warship `` cheonan '' and north korea's shelling of yeonpyeong island . 
north korean media are under some of the strictest government control in the world . 
north korea also strives to develop its own civilian nuclear program . 
it claims that the korean war was caused by the united states and south korea . 
there is no freedom of press in north korea as all the media is controlled and filtered through governmental censors . 
industry and services employ 65% of north korea's 12.6 million labor force . 
north korea possesses nuclear weapons ,  but the strength of its arsenal is uncertain . 
the military of north korea invaded the south on 25 june 1950, and swiftly overran most of the country . 
on 17 december 2011, the supreme leader of north korea kim jong-il died from a heart attack . 
north korea has the largest special forces and the largest submarine fleet in the world . 
north korea has maintained one of the most closed and centralized economies in the world since the 1940s . 
in 1910, korea was annexed by imperial japan . 
amnesty international has expressed concerns about religious persecution in north korea . 
building on nordpolitik ,  south korea began to engage with the north as part of its sunshine policy . 
on 9 october 2006, north korea announced it had conducted its first nuclear weapons test . 
as a result of the war ,  almost every substantial building in north korea was destroyed . 
one of the guerrilla leaders was the communist kim il-sung ,  who later became the first leader of north korea . 
the north korean won is the national currency ,  issued by the central bank of the democratic people's republic of korea . 
it began in 1995, lasted for three years and resulted in the deaths of between 240,000 and 420,000 north koreans . 
according to the constitution of north korea there are officially three main branches of government . 
north korea is widely accused of having perhaps the worst human rights record in the world . 
the international coalition to stop crimes against humanity in north korea  -lrb-  icnk  -rrb-  estimates that over 10,000 people die in north korean prison camps every year . 
until the 1960s ,  economic growth was higher than in south korea ,  and north korean gdp per capita was equal to that of its southern neighbor as late as 1976.
north koreans also listen to k-pop which spreads through illegal markets . 
western films like `` the interview '' ,  `` titanic '' ,  and `` charlie's angels '' are just a few films that have been smuggled across the borders of north korea ,  allowing for access to the north korean citizens . 
bias in reporting on north korea has occurred in international media as a result of the country's isolation . 
a 2013 study reported that communicable diseases and malnutrition are responsible for 29% of the total deaths in north korea . 
at the same time ,  north korea sought to build relations with developed free market countries . 
executive power is vested in the cabinet of north korea ,  which is headed by premier pak pong-ju . 
the korean demilitarized zone with south korea remains the most heavily fortified border in the world . 
north korea's most famous restaurant ,  okryu-gwan ,  located in pyongyang ,  is known for its `` raengmyeon '' cold noodles . 
in 2013, cardiovascular disease as a single disease group was reported as the largest cause of death in north korea . 
kim il-sung led north korea until his death in 1994.
by 1949, north korea was a full-fledged communist state . 
in 2010, the sinking of a south korean naval ship ,  the cheonan ,  allegedly by a north korean torpedo ,  and north korea's shelling of yeonpyeong island escalated tensions between north and south . 
north korea announced it would change its time zone to realign with the south . 
the history of north korea began at the end of world war ii in 1945.
out of the rubble north korea built an industrialized command economy . 
additionally ,  north korea was running a missile development program . 
on october 14, soviet authorities introduced kim to the north korean public as a guerrilla hero . 
in february 2018, north korea sent an unprecedented high-level delegation to the winter olympics in south korea ,  headed by kim yo-jong ,  sister of kim jong-un ,  and president kim yong-nam ,  which passed on an invitation to south korean president moon to visit the north . 
in 1949, the workers' party of north korea merged with its southern counterpart to become the workers' party of korea with kim as party chairman . 
in 1946, a sweeping series of laws transformed north korea on stalinist lines . 
the united nations condemned north korea's actions and approved an american-led intervention force to defend south korea . 
by some accounts ,  cho man-sik was the soviet government's first choice to lead north korea . 
in 1950 the korean war broke out . 
on the ruins left by the war ,  north korea had built an industrialized command economy . 
president kim dae-jung of south korea actively attempted to reduce tensions between the two koreas under the sunshine policy . 
on february 13, 2007, north korea signed into an agreement with south korea ,  the united states ,  russia ,  china ,  and japan ,  which stipulated north korea would shut down its yongbyon nuclear reactor in exchange for economic and energy assistance . 
on october 9, 2006, north korea announced that it had successfully detonated a nuclear bomb underground . 
with the fall of south vietnam to the north vietnamese on april 30, 1975, kim il-sung felt that the us had shown its weakness and that reunification of korea under his regime was possible . 
meanwhile ,  north korea emphasized its independent orientation by joining the non-aligned movement in 1975.
after khrushchev was replaced by leonid brezhnev as soviet leader in 1964, and with the incentive of soviet aid ,  north korea strengthened its ties with the ussr . 
in 2018, kim jong-un made a sudden peace overture towards south korea and the united states . 
many of these people reportedly returned to north korea after earning sufficient money . 
in september ,  south korean president moon visited pyongyang for a summit with kim . 
the yellow sea and the korea bay are off the west coast and the sea of japan  -lrb-  east sea of korea  -rrb-  is off the east coast . 
north korea has an area of 120,538 km² ,  of which 120,408 km² is land and 130 km² is water . 
north korea is located in east asia on the northern half of the korean peninsula . 
waters of the yellow sea are demarcated between north korea and south korea by the disputed northern limit line drawn by the united nations command  -lrb-  korea  -rrb-  in early 1950s and not officially recognized by north korea . 
it has of land boundaries; of these ,  are with china ,  are with south korea ,  and are with russia . 
the mountain ranges in the northern and eastern parts of north korea form the watershed for most of its rivers ,  which run in a westerly direction and empty into the yellow sea and korea bay . 
north korea shares a border with three countries; china along the amnok river ,  russia along the tumen river ,  and south korea along the korean demilitarized zone  -lrb-  dmz  -rrb-  . 
the southern stretch of its east coast forms the northern side of the east korea bay . 
cultivation ,  logging ,  and natural disasters have all put pressure on north korea's forests . 
korean is the official language of north korea . 
the demographics of north korea are known through national censuses and international estimates . 
during the north korean famine 1994-1998 somewhere between 240,000 and 3,500,000 north koreans died from starvation or hunger-related illnesses ,  with the deaths peaking in 1997.
the wpk is the ruling party of north korea . 
north korea's political system is built upon the principle of centralization . 
for much of its history ,  north korean politics have been dominated by its adversarial relationship with south korea . 
north korea has a strong relationship with cuba; in 2016, the north korean government declared three days of mourning period for fidel castro's death . 
all references to communism were removed from the north korean constitution in 2009.
after the death of kim il-sung in 1994, his son ,  kim jong-il reigned as the new leader ,  which marked the closure of one chapter of north korean politics . 
the constitution defines north korea as `` a dictatorship of people's democracy '' under the leadership of the workers' party of korea  -lrb-  wpk  -rrb-  ,  which is given legal supremacy over other political parties . 
it is estimated that north korea's gnp nearly halved between 1990 and 1999.
in 1965 south korea's rate of economic growth first exceeded north korea's in most industrial areas ,  though south korea's per capita gnp remained lower than north korea's . 
north and south korea both suffered from the massive destruction caused during the korean war . 
the same year ,  it published the following estimates of north korea's gdp growth:
the north korean population as of october 2008 was given as 24 million . 
south korea's gnp ,  by contrast ,  expanded by 9.3% and 8.4% ,  respectively ,  in 1990 and 1991.
north korea had a similar gdp per capita to its neighbor south korea from the aftermath of the korean war until the mid-1970s ,  but had a gdp per capita of less than $2,000 in the late 1990s and early 21st century . 
estimating gross national product in north korea is a difficult task because of a dearth of economic data and the problem of choosing an appropriate rate of exchange for the north korean won ,  the nonconvertible north korean currency . 
in 1979, north korea renegotiated much of its international debt ,  but in 1980 it defaulted on its loans except those from japan . 
largely because of these debt problems and because of a prolonged drought and mismanagement ,  north korea's industrial growth slowed ,  and per capita gnp fell below that of the south . 
telecommunications in north korea refers to the communication services available in north korea . 
in november 2002, mobile phones were introduced to north korea and by november 2003, 20,000 north koreans had bought mobile phones . 
north korea has an adequate telephone system ,  with 1.18 million fixed lines available in 2008.
north korea has not fully adopted mainstream internet technology due to its isolationist policies . 
travel to north korea is tightly controlled . 
as of 2016 there is of road which is 25% of south korea's road system in length . 
on december 8, 2018, a south korean bus crossed into north korea . 
the korean state railway is the only rail operator in north korea . 
road vehicles in north korea bear distance stars . 
north korea's international air connections are limited in frequency and numbers . 
transport in north korea is constrained by economic problems and government restrictions . 
as of 2013, the cia estimates that north korea has 82 usable airports ,  39 of which have permanent-surface runways . 
this number serves as 25% of the north korean population . 
after the korean war ,  north korea maintained a powerful ,  but smaller military force than that of south korea . 
it is the `` de facto '' army of north korea . 
north korea possesses a vast array of long range artillery in shelters just north of the korean demilitarized zone . 
north korea also went on to claim that it had developed a nuclear weapon in 2009.
it also named korea ryonbong as a supporter of north korea's military related sales . 
the korean people's army  -lrb-  kpa;  ,    -rrb-  is an institution of the workers' party of korea ,  and constitutes the `` de facto '' military forces of north korea . 
since the korean war  -lrb-  north korea: the korean war of liberation  -rrb-  ,  it has continued to play a role of concentrating infiltration of troops into the territory of the republic of south korea and conducting sabotage . 
on 9 october 2006, the north korean government announced that it had unsuccessfully attempted a nuclear test for the first time . 
the north korean songun  -lrb-  `` military first ''  -rrb-  policy elevates the kpa to the primary position in the government and society . 
since the 1980s ,  north korea has also been actively developing its own cyber warfare capabilities . 
two kpa anti-aircraft artillery regiments were sent to north vietnam as well . 
according to north korea's state news agency ,  military expenditures for 2010 made up 15.8 percent of the state budget . 
on september 3, 2017, the north korean leadership announced that it had conducted a nuclear test with what it claimed to be its first hydrogen bomb detonation . 
north korean instructors trained hezbollah fighters in guerrilla warfare tactics around 2004, prior to the second lebanon war . 
historically ,  north korea has assisted a vast number of revolutionary ,  insurgent and terrorist groups in more than 62 countries . 
in 2016, the dprk's kim yong-nam visited burundi . 
botswana had good relations with the dprk from 1974.
burundi and the dprk have good relations . 
during the korean war from 1950–53, china assisted the dprk ,  sending as many as 500,000 soldiers to support dprk forces . 
the prc is the dprk's largest trade partner ,  while the dprk ranked 82nd  -lrb-  in 2009 -rrb- in china's trade partners . 
the dprk had economic interests in the european union . 
bulgaria and the dprk generally have good relations . 
cambodia and the dprk generally have good relations . 
the dprk conducted further nuclear tests in 2009, 2013, january and september 2016, and 2017.
australia and the dprk maintain diplomatic relations . 
brazil did not establish diplomatic relations with the dprk until 2001.
the constitution of the dprk establishes the country's foreign policy . 
in 2006, north korea conducted its first nuclear test . 
diplomatic relations between canada and the dprk were established in february 2001.
on 25 may 2010, canada suspended diplomatic relations with the dprk . 
in 2011, angola purchased naval patrol boats from the dprk . 
in september 1991, the dprk became a member of the united nations . 
the democratic republic of the congo has friendly relations with the dprk . 
after the dprk conducted its first nuclear test in 2006, the chinese government stated that they were `` resolutely opposed to it '' and voted for united nations sanctions against the dprk . 
at the start of the cold war ,  the dprk only had diplomatic recognition by communist countries . 
after 1945, the soviet union supplied the economic and military aid that enabled the dprk to mount its invasion of south korea in 1950.
relations between burkina faso and the dprk have historically been relatively close . 
at their pyongyang summit in 2018, north korean leader kim jong-un gave two pungsan dogs to south korean president ,  moon jae-in . 
the dprk is often perceived as the `` hermit kingdom '' ,  completely isolated from the rest of the world ,  but the dprk maintains diplomatic relations with 164 independent states . 
in 2018, north korean leader kim jong-un made a sudden peace overture towards south korea and the united states . 
northern ireland was created in 1921, when ireland was partitioned between northern ireland and southern ireland by the government of ireland act 1920.
northern ireland has historically been the most industrialised region of ireland . 
protestants have a slight majority in northern ireland ,  according to the latest northern ireland census . 
the northern ireland office represents the uk government in northern ireland on reserved matters and represents northern ireland's interests within the uk government . 
since 1998, northern ireland has had devolved government within the united kingdom ,  presided over by the northern ireland assembly and a cross-community government  -lrb-  the northern ireland executive  -rrb-  . 
the body of statute law affecting northern ireland reflects the history of northern ireland ,  including acts of the parliament of the united kingdom ,  the northern ireland assembly ,  the former parliament of northern ireland and the parliament of ireland ,  along with some acts of the parliament of england and of the parliament of great britain that were extended to ireland under poynings' law between 1494 and 1782.
owing in part to the way in which the united kingdom ,  and northern ireland ,  came into being ,  there is no legally defined term to describe what northern ireland 'is' . 
many people inside and outside northern ireland use other names for northern ireland ,  depending on their point of view . 
the main political divide in northern ireland is between unionists ,  who wish to see northern ireland continue as part of the united kingdom ,  and nationalists ,  who wish to see northern ireland unified with the republic of ireland ,  independent from the united kingdom . 
northern ireland competes separately at the commonwealth games ,  and people from northern ireland may compete for either great britain or ireland at the olympic games . 
in the 2015 survey by northern ireland life and times ,  47% of northern irish catholics supported northern ireland remaining a part of the united kingdom ,  either by direct rule  -lrb-  6%  -rrb-  or devolved government  -lrb-  41%  -rrb-  . 
with regard to northern ireland's status ,  it said that the uk government's `` clearly-stated preference is to retain northern ireland’s current constitutional position: as part of the uk ,  but with strong links to ireland '' . 
northern ireland itself forms a single constituency for elections to the european parliament . 
northern ireland  -lrb-   ; ulster-scots: ``  ''  -rrb-  is a part of the united kingdom in the north-east of the island of ireland ,  variously described as a country ,  province or region . 
some authors have described the meaning of this term as being equivocal: referring to northern ireland as being a province both of the united kingdom and of the traditional country of ireland . 
the ireland act 1949 gave the first legal guarantee that the region would not cease to be part of the united kingdom without the consent of the parliament of northern ireland . 
another issue of post-war treatment has been the ongoing hamsun debate in norway . 
nasjonal samling  -lrb-   ,  ns; literally `` national union ''  -rrb-  was a norwegian far-right party active from 1933 to 1945.
the party never gained direct political influence ,  but it made its mark on norwegian politics nonetheless . 
the party celebrated its founding on 17 may ,  norway's national holiday ,  but was founded on 13 may 1933.
the oldest manuscript of nasreddin dates to 1571.
the alleged tomb of nasreddin is in akşehir and the ``  ''international nasreddin hodja festival '' '' is held annually in akşehir between 5–10 july . 
these give a neutron mass of:
free neutron beams are obtained from neutron sources by neutron transport . 
sources of neutrons for research . 
natural neutron background . 
the antineutron is the antiparticle of the neutron . 
the free neutron has a mass of 939,565,413.3 ev/c ,  or  ,  or  . 
14.1 mev neutrons can also produce neutrons by knocking them loose from nuclei . 
cold neutrons are particularly valuable for neutron scattering experiments . 
the neutron is essential to the production of nuclear power . 
d–he fusion produces no neutron . 
while a free neutron has a half life of about 10.2 min ,  most neutrons within nuclei are stable . 
the total electric charge of the neutron is  . 
14.1 mev neutrons have about 10 times as much energy as fission neutrons ,  and are very effective at fissioning even non-fissile heavy nuclei ,  and these high-energy fissions produce more neutrons on average than fissions by lower-energy neutrons . 
this is presumed to happen in neutron stars . 
one example of this decay is carbon-14  -lrb-  6 protons ,  8 neutrons  -rrb-  that decays to nitrogen-14  -lrb-  7 protons ,  7 neutrons  -rrb-  with a half-life of about 5,730 years . 
fast neutrons can be made into thermal neutrons via a process called moderation . 
a `` thermal neutron '' is a free neutron that is boltzmann distributed with kt=  -lrb-    -rrb-  at room temperature . 
 ''cold neutrons '' are thermal neutrons that have been equilibrated in a very cold substance such as liquid deuterium . 
even though the neutron is a neutral particle ,  the magnetic moment of a neutron is not zero . 
the neutron's magnetic moment has a negative value ,  because its orientation is opposite to the neutron's spin . 
dedicated neutron sources like neutron generators ,  research reactors and spallation sources produce free neutrons for use in irradiation and in neutron scattering experiments . 
neutrons in unstable nuclei can decay by beta decay as described above . 
as a fermion ,  the neutron is subject to the pauli exclusion principle; two neutrons cannot have the same quantum numbers . 
the intense neutron radiation can also be used to produce various radioisotopes through the process of neutron activation ,  which is a type of neutron capture . 
the extreme pressure inside a neutron star may deform the neutrons into a cubic symmetry ,  allowing tighter packing of neutrons . 
most fission reactors use a neutron moderator to slow down ,  or `` thermalize '' the neutrons that are emitted by nuclear fission so that they are more easily captured ,  causing further fission . 
beta decay of the neutron ,  described above ,  can be denoted by the radioactive decay:
within the nucleus ,  protons and neutrons are bound together through the nuclear force . 
a fission energy neutron that has slowed down but not yet reached thermal energies is called an epithermal neutron . 
the chemical and nuclear properties of the nucleus are determined by the number of protons ,  called the atomic number ,  and the number of neutrons ,  called the neutron number . 
atomic nuclei are formed by a number of protons ,  z the atomic number ,  and a number of neutrons ,  n the neutron number ,  bound together by the nuclear force . 
another method to determine the mass of a neutron starts from the beta decay of the neutron ,  when the momenta of the resulting proton and electron are measured . 
fast neutron therapy utilizes high-energy neutrons typically greater than 20 mev to treat cancer . 
driving neon's expense is the rarity of neon ,  which unlike helium ,  can only be obtained from air . 
neon is the second-lightest noble gas ,  after helium . 
neon is the second lightest inert gas . 
neon gives a distinct reddish-orange glow when used in low-voltage neon glow lamps ,  high-voltage discharge tubes and neon advertising signs . 
stable isotopes of neon are produced in stars . 
neon is a chemical element with symbol ne and atomic number 10.
neon ,  as liquid or gas ,  is relatively expensive – for small quantities ,  the price of liquid neon can be more than 55 times that of liquid helium . 
two quite different kinds of neon lighting are in common use . 
neon is often used in signs and produces an unmistakable bright reddish-orange light . 
neon is monatomic ,  making it lighter than the molecules of diatomic nitrogen and oxygen which form the bulk of earth's atmosphere; a balloon filled with neon will rise in air ,  albeit more slowly than a helium balloon . 
nickel is an essential nutrient for some microorganisms and plants that have enzymes with nickel as an active site . 
nickel belongs to the transition metals and is hard and ductile . 
nickel is a chemical element with symbol ni and atomic number 28.
nickel is a silvery-white metal with a slight golden tinge that takes a high polish . 
the claimed new elements `` pelopium '' ,  `` ilmenium '' ,  and `` dianium '' were in fact identical to niobium or mixtures of niobium and tantalum . 
niobium is used in various superconducting materials . 
niobium was identified by english chemist charles hatchett in 1801.
it was not until the early 20th century that niobium was first used commercially . 
niobium becomes a superconductor at cryogenic temperatures . 
niobium was officially adopted as the name of the element in 1949, but the name columbium remains in current use in metallurgy in the united states . 
niobium in the earth's crust comprises one stable isotope ,  nb . 
subsequently ,  there was considerable confusion over the difference between columbium  -lrb-  niobium  -rrb-  and the closely related tantalum . 
niobium is estimated to be the 34th most common element in the earth’s crust ,  with 20 ppm . 
most of the world's commercial neodymium is mined in china . 
neodymium ,  a rare-earth metal ,  was present in the classical mischmetal at a concentration of about 18% . 
neodymium is a chemical element with symbol nd and atomic number 60.
neptunium is a chemical element with symbol np and atomic number 93.
the most stable isotope of neptunium ,  neptunium-237, is a by-product of nuclear reactors and plutonium production . 
the isotopes of neptunium range in atomic weight from 219.032 u  -lrb-  np  -rrb-  to 244.068 u  -lrb-  np  -rrb-  . 
neptunium has also been used in detectors of high-energy neutrons . 
np is the predominant neptunium ion in solutions of ph 4–5.
np and np can easily be reduced and oxidized to each other ,  as can and  . 
trace amounts of the neptunium isotopes neptunium-237 and -239 are found naturally as decay products from transmutation reactions in uranium ores . 
neptunium is found in at least three allotropes . 
heavier isotopes of neptunium decay quickly ,  and lighter isotopes of neptunium cannot be produced by neutron capture ,  so chemical separation of neptunium from cooled spent nuclear fuel gives nearly pure np . 
23 neptunium radioisotopes have been characterized with the most stable being np with a half-life of 2.14 million years ,  np with a half-life of 154,000 years ,  and np with a half-life of 396.1 days . 
since all isotopes of neptunium have half-lives that are many times shorter than the age of the earth ,  any primordial neptunium should have decayed by now . 
the small-scale purification operations have the goals of preparing pure neptunium as a precursor of metallic neptunium and its compounds ,  and also to isolate and preconcentrate neptunium in samples for analysis . 
the isotopes neptunium-235, -236, and -237 are predicted to be fissile; only neptunium-237's fissionability has been experimentally shown ,  with the critical mass being about 60 kg ,  only about 10 kg more than that of the commonly used uranium-235.
it ,  and the isotope neptunium-239, are also found in trace amounts in uranium ores due to neutron capture reactions and beta decay . 
a neptunium atom has 93 electrons ,  arranged in the configuration <nowiki></nowiki>rn<nowiki></nowiki>5f6d7s . 
in 1952, np was identified and isolated from concentrates of uranium ore from the belgian congo: in these minerals ,  the ratio of neptunium-237 to uranium is less than or equal to about 10 to 1.
by weight ,  neptunium-237 discharges are about 5% as great as plutonium discharges and about 0.05% of spent nuclear fuel discharges . 
the berkeley team decided to adopt the proposed name of the swedish team ,  `` nobelium '' ,  for the element . 
nobelium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol no and atomic number 102.
the half-lives of nobelium isotopes increase smoothly from no to no . 
a nobelium atom has 102 electrons ,  of which three can act as valence electrons . 
given this ,  it is probable that no nobelium was actually produced in this experiment . 
twelve isotopes of nobelium are known ,  with mass numbers 250–260 and 262; all are radioactive . 
before nobelium's discovery ,  it was predicted that it would show a stable +2 oxidation state as well as the +3 state characteristic of the other actinides: these predictions were later confirmed ,  as the +2 state is much more stable than the +3 state in aqueous solution and it is difficult to keep nobelium in the +3 state . 
the dubna team later stated in 1970 and again in 1987 that these results were not conclusive . 
the isotopes of nobelium are mostly produced by bombarding actinide targets  -lrb-  uranium ,  plutonium ,  curium ,  californium ,  or einsteinium  -rrb-  ,  with the exception of nobelium-262, which is produced as the daughter of lawrencium-262.
in 1967, experiments were conducted to compare nobelium's chemical behavior to that of terbium ,  californium ,  and fermium . 
in the 1950s and 1960s ,  many claims of the discovery of nobelium were made from laboratories in sweden ,  the soviet union ,  and the united states . 
