 ''muppet magazine '' was published from 1983 to 1989.
the muppets continued their media presence in the 1990s with television series `` the jim henson hour ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- and `` muppets tonight ''  -lrb-  1996–98 -rrb- ,  both of which were similar in format to `` the muppet show '' ,  and three films: `` the muppet christmas carol ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  `` muppet treasure island ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  and `` muppets from space ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- . 
following disney's acquisition of the muppets ,  puppets created by the jim henson company are no longer referred to as muppets . 
the success of `` the muppet show '' allowed henson associates to diversify into theatrical films centered on the muppets; the first of these ,  `` the muppet movie '' ,  was released in 1979.
during the 1970s and 1980s ,  the muppets diversified into theatrical feature films ,  including `` the muppet movie ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb-; `` the great muppet caper ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb-; and `` the muppets take manhattan ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- . 
under disney ownership ,  albums featuring the muppets have been released by walt disney records ,  including `` best of the muppets: the muppets' wizard of oz ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  `` the muppets: original soundtrack ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  and `` muppets most wanted: original soundtrack ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- . 
following `` the muppet movie '' were `` the great muppet caper '' and `` the muppets take manhattan '' ,  released in 1981 and 1984, respectively . 
as well as `` the muppet show '' ,  muppet characters feature in such television series as `` the jimmy dean show '' ,  `` sesame street '' ,  `` fraggle rock '' ,  `` the jim henson hour '' ,  `` muppets tonight '' ,  `` bear in the big blue house '' ,  ``  '' ,  and `` the muppets '' . 
at the start of the muppets' formation ,  jim and jane henson were the group's only performers . 
the muppets appear at the walt disney parks and resorts ,  having first made appearances at walt disney world in 1990.
the muppets were created by puppeteer jim henson in the 1950s ,  beginning with kermit the frog ,  who would become henson's most recognizable character . 
the muppets also released ``  '' ,  with john denver in 1979.
under disney ,  the muppets achieved revitalized success ,  starring in two films - `` the muppets ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- and `` muppets most wanted ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- - as well as a short-lived primetime television series on abc and a reboot of the `` muppet babies '' animated series . 
in the late 1980s ,  henson entered discussions with michael eisner and the walt disney company ,  in which the latter would acquire jim henson productions and ,  in turn ,  the muppets . 
in 2010, the muppets were the face of the `` give a day ,  get a disney day '' charity campaign . 
disney has released numerous collector pins featuring the muppets since 2004.
fourteen years after initial negotiations began ,  disney acquired the muppets intellectual property from the jim henson company for $75 million on february 17, 2004.
two pilot specials ,  `` the muppets valentine show '' and ``  '' ,  aired on abc in 1974 and 1975, respectively . 
in the wake of the success of the `` muppet babies '' television show ,  star comics began releasing the `` muppet babies '' comic book title on a bi-monthly basis . 
in 2010, disney used the muppets to promote their volunteerism program at the company's theme parks . 
in chemistry ,  the mole fraction or molar fraction  -lrb-  x  -rrb-  is defined as the amount of a constituent  -lrb-  expressed in moles  -rrb-  ,  `` n '' ,  divided by the total amount of all constituents in a mixture  -lrb-  also expressed in moles  -rrb-  ,  `` n '':
the 1890s were cassatt's busiest and most creative time . 
cassatt also exhibited other paintings in the exposition . 
degas was forthright in his views ,  as was cassatt . 
degas had considerable influence on cassatt . 
cassatt and degas had a long period of collaboration . 
around 1884 degas made a portrait in oils of cassatt ,  `` mary cassatt seated ,  holding cards '' . 
cassatt and degas worked most closely together in the fall and winter of 1879–80 when cassatt was mastering her printmaking technique . 
degas introduced cassatt to pastel and engraving ,  both of which cassatt quickly mastered ,  while for her part cassatt was instrumental in helping degas sell his paintings and promoting his reputation in america . 
after 1886, cassatt no longer identified herself with any art movement and experimented with a variety of techniques . 
cassatt was born in allegheny city ,  pennsylvania ,  which is now part of pittsburgh . 
cassatt decided to end her studies: at that time ,  no degree was granted . 
mary cassatt depicted the `` new woman '' of the 19th century from the woman's perspective . 
cassatt also made several portraits of family members during that period ,  of which `` portrait of alexander cassatt and his son robert kelso ''  -lrb-  1885 -rrb- is one of her best regarded . 
mary stevenson cassatt  -lrb-  ; may 22, 1844june 14, 1926 -rrb- was an american painter and printmaker . 
within months of her return to europe in the autumn of 1871, cassatt's prospects had brightened . 
many are privately run institutions ,  though some are public and are run either by a public school system  -lrb-  such as the chicago public schools  -rrb-  or by a state . 
a military school teaches children  -lrb-  primarily boys  -rrb-  of various ages  -lrb-  elementary school ,  middle school or high school  -rrb-  in a military environment which includes training in military aspects ,  such as drill . 
a common misconception results because some states have chosen to house their juvenile criminal populations in higher-security boarding schools that are run in a manner similar to military boarding schools . 
however ,  their environment and target population are different from those of military schools . 
the royal military college ,  sandhurst ,  in england was the brainchild of john le marchant in 1801, who established schools for the military instruction of officers at high wycombe and great marlow ,  with a grant of £30,000 from parliament . 
miyazaki co-founded studio ghibli in 1985.
it is the highest-grossing film in japan . 
several of miyazaki's films feature anti-war themes . 
miyazaki resigned from telecom animation film in november 1982.
miyazaki claimed that `` princess mononoke '' would be his final film . 
in 1963, miyazaki was employed at toei animation . 
miyazaki's films often emphasize environmentalism and the earth's fragility . 
in january 2019, it has been reported that vincent maraval ,  a frequent collaborator of miyazaki ,  tweeted a hint that miyazaki may have plans for another film in the works . 
he oversees every frame of his films . 
following the release of `` the wind rises '' ,  miyazaki announced his retirement from feature films ,  though he returned to work on a new feature film in 2016.
upon miyazaki's viewing of the film ,  he wrote a message for his son: `` it was made honestly ,  so it was good '' . 
from march to may 1989, miyazaki's manga `` hikōtei jidai '' was published in the magazine ``  '' . 
miyazaki forgoes traditional screenplays in his productions ,  instead developing the film's narrative as he designs the storyboards . 
following the success of `` nausicaä of the valley of the wind '' ,  yasuyoshi tokuma ,  the founder of tokuma shoten ,  encouraged miyazaki to work on a film adaptation . 
in 2002, american film critic roger ebert suggested that miyazaki may be the best animation filmmaker in history ,  praising the depth and artistry of his films . 
most macrobiotic diets are not nutritionally sound . 
a macrobiotic diet  -lrb-  or macrobiotics  -rrb-  is a diet fixed on ideas about types of food drawn from zen buddhism . 
the macrobiotic diet is associated with zen buddhism and is based on the idea of balancing yin and yang . 
children may also be particularly prone to nutritional deficiencies resulting from a macrobiotic diet . 
cancer research uk states ,  `` there is no scientific evidence to prove that a macrobiotic diet can treat or cure cancer or any other disease '' . 
macrobiotics writers often claim that a macrobiotic diet is helpful for people with cancer and other chronic diseases ,  although there is no good evidence to support such recommendations ,  and the diet can be harmful . 
some general guidelines for the japanese-style macrobiotic diet are the following  -lrb-  it is also said that a macrobiotic diet varies greatly ,  depending on geographical and life circumstances  -rrb- :
motorola went public in 1943, and became motorola ,  inc .  in 1947.
the motorola brand name became so well known that galvin manufacturing corporation later changed its name to motorola ,  inc . 
motorola mobility was sold to google in 2012, and acquired by lenovo in 2014.
at that time motorola's main business was producing and selling televisions and radios . 
motorola's wireless telephone handset division was a pioneer in cellular telephones . 
on october 30, 2014, lenovo finalized its purchase of motorola mobility from google . 
the mx-5 has won awards including `` wheels magazine '' 's car of the year for 1989, 2005 and 2016; `` sports car international '''s `` best sports car of the 1990s '' and `` ten best sports cars of all time ''; 2005–2006 car of the year japan; and 2005 australian car of the year . 
the convertible is marketed as the mazda mx-5 miata in north america ,  where it is widely known as the `` miata '' ,  and as the or in japan . 
mx-5s weigh slightly over one tonne . 
the second generation ,   -lrb-  nb  -rrb-  ,  launched in 1998 for my 1999; followed by the third generation  -lrb-  nc  -rrb-  in 2005 for my 2006, and the fourth generation  -lrb-  nd  -rrb-  in 2015 for my 2016  -lrb-  along with `` nd2 '' being the designation for my 2019 -rrb- . 
the mackinac bridge  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a suspension bridge spanning the straits of mackinac to connect the upper and lower peninsulas of the u . s .  state of michigan . 
at the time ,  the straits of mackinac area was becoming a popular tourist destination ,  especially following the creation of mackinac national park on mackinac island in 1875.
the mackinac bridge is currently a toll bridge on interstate 75  -lrb-  i-75 -rrb- . 
g .  mennen williams was governor during the construction of the mackinac bridge . 
every labor day ,  the bridge is open to walkers for the mackinac bridge walk . 
but the long leadups to the anchorages on the mackinac make its total shoreline-to-shoreline length of  ,  longer than the akashi-kaikyo  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 1881 the three railroads that reached the straits ,  the michigan central ,  grand rapids & indiana ,  and the detroit ,  mackinac & marquette ,  jointly established the mackinac transportation company to operate a railroad car ferry service across the straits and connect the two peninsulas . 
senator prentiss m .  brown has been called the `` father of the mackinac bridge , ``  and was honored with a special memorial bridge token created by the mackinac bridge authority . 
at a july 1888 meeting of the board of directors of the grand hotel on mackinac island ,  cornelius vanderbilt ii proposed that a bridge be built across the straits ,  of a design similar to the one then under construction across the firth of forth in scotland . 
the mackinac bridge authority raised the toll in 2007 to fund a $300 million renovation program ,  which would include completely replacing the bridge deck . 
the length of the bridge's main span is  ,  which makes it the third-longest suspension span in the united states and 20th longest suspension span worldwide . 
the ec variety topped out at 40 mhz . 
the motorola 68030  -lrb-  ``  ''sixty-eight-oh-thirty '' ''  -rrb-  is a 32-bit microprocessor in the motorola 68000 family . 
there was also a small supply of qfp packaged ec variants . 
the `` 68lc040 '' is a `` low cost '' version of the motorola 68040 microprocessor with no fpu . 
the motorola 68040  -lrb-  ``  ''sixty-eight-oh-forty '' ''  -rrb-  is a 32-bit microprocessor from motorola ,  released in 1990.
the `` 68ec040 '' is a version of the motorola 68040 microprocessor ,  intended for embedded controllers  -lrb-  ec  -rrb-  . 
versions of the 68040 were created for specific market segments ,  including the 68lc040, which removed the fpu ,  and the 68ec040, which removed both the fpu and mmu . 
motorola produced several speed grades . 
the 68060 is the last 68000 family processor from motorola . 
the motorola vanguard 6560 multiprotocol router uses a 50 mhz 68ec060 processor . 
the motorola 68060  -lrb-  ``  ''sixty-eight-oh-sixty '' ''  -rrb-  is a 32-bit microprocessor from motorola released in 1994.
no 68050 or 68070 was ever produced by motorola . 
there is an lc  -lrb-  low-cost  -rrb-  version ,  without an fpu and ec  -lrb-  embedded controller  -rrb-  ,  without mmu and fpu . 
a few years later it was shrunk to 0.42 µm and clock speed raised to 66 mhz and 75 mhz . 
the motorola 6809  -lrb-  ``  ''sixty-eight-oh-nine '' ''  -rrb-  is an 8-bit microprocessor cpu with some 16-bit features from motorola . 
the 6809 design team believed that future system integrators would look to off-the-shelf code in roms to handle common tasks . 
the motorola 6809 was originally produced in 1 mhz ,  1.5 mhz  -lrb-  68a09 -rrb- and 2 mhz  -lrb-  68b09 -rrb- speed ratings . 
among the significant enhancements introduced in the 6809 were the use of two 8-bit accumulators  -lrb-  a and b ,  which could be combined into a single 16-bit register ,  d  -rrb-  ,  two 16-bit index registers  -lrb-  x ,  y  -rrb-  and two 16-bit stack pointers . 
just like the 6800 and 6502, the 6809 uses a two-phase clock to gate the latches . 
there were also variants such as the 68a09-lrb- e  -rrb-  and 68b09-lrb- e  -rrb- ; the internal letter indicates the processor's rated clock speed . 
motorola spun off its microprocessor division in 2004.
series ii of the fairlight cmi  -lrb-  computer musical instrument  -rrb-  used dual 6809 cpus and os9, and also used one 6809 cpu per voice card . 
these controllers were used as the central processors in many of motorola's trunked two-way radio communications systems . 
the freescale 68hc12 microcontroller family is an enhanced 16-bit version of the 68hc11.
the 68hc11  -lrb-  6811 or hc11 for short  -rrb-  is an 8-bit microcontroller  -lrb-  µc  -rrb-  family introduced by motorola in 1985.
the freescale 68hc16 microcontroller family is intended as a 16-bit mostly software compatible upgrade of the 68hc11.
during the final century of merovingian rule ,  the kings were increasingly pushed into a ceremonial role . 
the semi legendary merovech was supposed to have founded the merovingian dynasty ,  but it was his famous grandson clovis i  -lrb-  ruled c .  481–511 -rrb- who united all of gaul under merovingian rule . 
upon clovis's death in 511, the merovingian kingdom included all of gaul except burgundy and all of germania magna except saxony . 
however ,  in 751, pepin finally displaced the last merovingian and ,  with the support of the nobility and the blessing of pope zachary ,  became one of the frankish kings . 
the merovingian king redistributed conquered wealth among his followers ,  both material wealth and the land including its indentured peasantry ,  though these powers were not absolute . 
the few surviving merovingian edicts are almost entirely concerned with settling divisions of estates among heirs . 
it was now the sons of the mayor that divided the realm among each other under the rule of a single king . 
there is some disagreement over the meaning of the morrígan's name . 
the morrígan also appears in texts of the mythological cycle . 
the morrígan or mórrígan ,  also known as morrígu ,  is a figure from irish mythology . 
the morrígan is also associated with the land and animals ,  particularly livestock . 
the morrígan is mainly associated with war and fate ,  and is often interpreted as a `` war goddess '' . 
however ,  the morrígan can also appear alone ,  and her name is sometimes used interchangeably with badb . 
the morrígan is often described as a trio of individuals ,  all sisters ,  called 'the three morrígna' . 
the morrígan also appears in `` cath maige tuired '' `` battle of mag tuired '' . 
the morrígan is often considered a triple goddess ,  but this triple nature is ambiguous and inconsistent . 
age distribution was 16.8% under the age of 18, 25.9% from 18 to 24, 23.8% from 25 to 44, 19.7% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% who were 65 years of age or older . 
other parks include tourist park ,  founder's landing ,  labonte park ,  mattson lower harbor park ,  park cemetery ,  shiras park ,  williams park ,  harlow park ,  pocket park ,  spring street park and father marquette park . 
the median age in the city was 29.1 years . 
about 7.2% of families and 17.0% of the population were below the poverty line ,  including 12.3% of those under age 18 and 5.1% of those age 65 or over . 
for every 100 females age 18 and over ,  there were 92.4 males . 
spring is usually cooler than fall because the surrounding lake is slow to warm than the land while in fall ,  the lake releases heat ,  warming the area . 
the city is also known for fishing for deep water lake trout ,  whitefish ,  salmon and brown trout . 
cross country ski trails are also located at presque isle park and the fit strip . 
in the late 19th century ,  during the height of iron mining ,  marquette became nationally known as a summer haven . 
along with northern michigan university ,  the largest employers in marquette are the marquette area public schools ,  up health system-marquette  -lrb-  a regional medical center which is the only level 2 trauma center in the upper peninsula  -rrb-  ,  marquette branch prison ,  rti surgical ,  charter communications ,  and blue cross blue shield of michigan . 
these included operators similar to the += `` et alter '' in c and explicit register declarations for variables . 
similar to c ,  several language features appear to have existed to allow programmers to produce reasonably well optimised code ,  despite a quite primitive code generator in the compiler . 
the first confirmed ascent took place in the year 1456.
one of the first european mountains visited by many tourists was sněžka . 
this inaugurated what became known as the golden age of alpinism ,  with the first mountaineering club - the alpine club - being founded in 1857.
the beginning of mountaineering as a sport in the uk is generally dated to the ascent of the wetterhorn in 1854 by english mountaineer sir alfred wills ,  who made mountaineering fashionable in britain . 
it appears to be the first recorded climb of any technical difficulty ,  and has been said to mark the beginning of mountaineering . 
during the enlightenment ,  as a product of the new spirit of curiosity for the natural world ,  many mountain summits were surmounted for the first time .  . 
in the  -lrb-  second  -rrb-  peloponnesian war  -lrb-  c .  431 – 404 bc  -rrb-  ,  megara was an ally of sparta . 
the main town megara had 23,456 inhabitants at the 2011 census . 
megara is located in the westernmost part of attica ,  near the megara gulf ,  a bay of the saronic gulf . 
megara then fought a war of independence with corinth ,  and afterwards founded chalcedon in 685 bc ,  as well as byzantium  -lrb-  c .  667 bc  -rrb-  . 
in historical times ,  megara was an early dependency of corinth ,  in which capacity colonists from megara founded megara hyblaea ,  a small `` polis '' north of syracuse in sicily . 
megara  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  is a historic town and a municipality in west attica ,  greece . 
martin introduced a rudimentary parish system . 
saint martin of tours  -lrb-  ; 316 or 336 – 8 november 397 -rrb- was the third bishop of tours . 
in ad 371 martin was acclaimed bishop of tours ,  where he impressed the city with his demeanour . 
martin was born in ad 316 or 336 in savaria in the diocese of pannonia  -lrb-  now szombathely ,  hungary  -rrb-  . 
deeply grieved ,  martin refused to communicate with ithacius ,  until pressured by the emperor . 
in one instance ,  the pagans agreed to fell their sacred fir tree ,  if martin would stand directly in its path . 
although greatly opposed to the priscillianists ,  martin traveled to the imperial court of trier to remove them from the secular jurisdiction of the emperor . 
the meaning of life ,  or the answer to the question `` what is the meaning of life ? 
wong has proposed that whether life is meaningful depends not only on subjective feelings but ,  more importantly ,  on whether a person's goal-striving and life as a whole is meaningful according to some objective normative standard . 
he defined the meaning of life as the `` greatest happiness principle '' . 
the philosophical perspectives on the meaning of life are those ideologies which explain life in terms of ideals or abstractions defined by humans . 
though scientists have intensively studied life on earth ,  defining life in unequivocal terms is still a challenge . 
an alternative ,  humanistic approach poses the question ,  `` what is the meaning of `` my '' life ? `` 
the most common definitions of meaning in life involve three components . 
questions about the meaning of life have been expressed in a broad variety of ways ,  including the following:
antisthenes ,  a pupil of socrates ,  first outlined the themes of cynicism ,  stating that the purpose of life is living a life of virtue which agrees with nature . 
his theory on justice in the soul relates to the idea of happiness relevant to the question of the meaning of life . 
the epicurean meaning of life rejects immortality and mysticism; there is a soul ,  but it is as mortal as the body . 
in platonism ,  the meaning of life is in attaining the highest form of knowledge ,  which is the idea  -lrb-  form  -rrb-  of the good ,  from which all good and just things derive utility and value . 
this era is filled with theories that equate meaningful existence with the social order . 
the meaning of life is `` freedom from suffering '' through `` apatheia ''  -lrb-  gr: απαθεια  -rrb-  ,  that is ,  being objective and having `` clear judgement '' ,  `` not '' indifference . 
emerging research shows that meaning in life predicts better physical health outcomes . 
the ultimate fate of the universe ,  and implicitly humanity ,  is hypothesized as one in which biological life will eventually become unsustainable ,  such as through a big freeze ,  big rip ,  or big crunch . 
scientific inquiry facilitates this through nomological investigation into various aspects of life and reality ,  such as the big bang ,  the origin of life ,  and evolution ,  and by studying the objective factors which correlate with the subjective experience of meaning and happiness . 
margaret river is a town in the south west of western australia ,  located in the valley of the eponymous margaret river ,  south of perth ,  the state capital . 
in the early 1920s the busselton to margaret river railway was built and in 1925 the margaret river to flinders bay line opened . 
margaret river is located inland from the indian ocean at a point about halfway between cape naturaliste and cape leeuwin in western australia's south west region . 
in december 2014, construction of the margaret river perimeter road began . 
arte-tv produced an episode of `` nouveaux paradis '' about margaret river . 
the surrounding area is the margaret river wine region and is known for its wine production and tourism ,  attracting an estimated 500,000 visitors annually . 
margaret river is the foremost geographical indication wine region in the south west australia zone ,  with nearly under vine and over 138 wineries as at 2008.
french military experts extolled the line as a work of genius that would deter german aggression ,  because it would slow an invasion force long enough for french forces to mobilise and counterattack . 
constructed on the french side of its borders with italy ,  switzerland ,  germany ,  and luxembourg ,  the line did not extend to the english channel due to french strategy that envisioned a move into belgium to counter a german assault . 
metrication or metrification is conversion to the metric system of units of measurement . 
most other commonwealth countries adopted the metric system during the 1970s . 
denmark and iceland adopted the metric system in 1907.
the following year the cisalpine system of measure was replaced by the metric system . 
the metric system was officially introduced in france in december 1799.
the uk has only partially metricated . 
whilst most countries in the world are using the metric system as their official system of weights and measures ,  some countries have not committed to adopting it ,  or have adopted it as their official system but have not completed the process of full metrication . 
the netherlands first used the metric system and then ,  in 1812, the mesures usuelles when it was part of the first french empire . 
this act declares a national policy of coordinating the increasing use of the metric system in the us it established a us metric board whose functions as of 1 october 1982 were transferred to the dept of commerce ,  office of metric programs ,  to coordinate the voluntary conversion to the metric system . 
most countries have adopted the metric system officially over a transitional period where both units are used for a set period of time . 
the effect of this act was to standardise existing british units of measure rather than to align them with the metric system . 
this ,  combined with other excesses of the revolution and the high level of illiteracy made the metric system unpopular . 
although the zollverein collapsed after the austro-prussian war of 1866, the metric system became the official system of measurement in the newly formed german empire in 1872 and of austria in 1875.
in august 1814, portugal officially adopted the metric system but with the names of the units substituted by portuguese traditional ones . 
napoleon himself ridiculed the metric system ,  but as an able administrator ,  recognised the value of a sound basis for a system of measurement and under the `` décret impérial du 12 février 1812 ''  -lrb-  imperial decree of 12 february 1812 -rrb- ,  a new system of measure – the `` mesures usuelles '' or `` customary measures '' was introduced for use in small retail businesses – all government ,  legal and similar works still had to use the metric system and the metric system continued to be taught at all levels of education . 
there was considerable resistance to metrication in the united kingdom and in the united states ,  though once the united kingdom announced its metrication program in 1965, the commonwealth followed suit . 
the gregorian calendar ,  like the julian calendar before it ,  has twelve months:
a month is a unit of time ,  used with calendars ,  which is approximately as long as a natural period related to the motion of the moon; `` month '' and `` moon '' are cognates . 
the hellenic calendars ,  the hebrew lunisolar calendar and the islamic lunar calendar started the month with the first appearance of the thin crescent of the new moon . 
this calendar is cyclical and relies on the position and shape of the moon . 
louisiana is the only state in which the practice of psychology ,  including psychological testing ,  psychotherapy ,  diagnosis ,  and treatment for some psychologists  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  medical psychologists  -rrb-  is regulated by a medical board . 
a psychopharmacologist is very different than a medical psychologist ,  though one state uses confusing language in its laws . 
for the medical psychologist ,  the medical model of disease cannot in itself explain complex health concerns any more than a strict psychosocial  -lrb-  levine & orabona foster ,  2010 -rrb- explanation of mental and physical health can in itself be comprehensive . 
highly qualified and post graduate specialized doctors are trained for service in primary care centers ,  hospitals ,  residential care centers ,  and long-term care facilities and in multidisciplinary collaboration and team treatment . 
a specialty of medical psychology has established a specialty board certification ,  american board of medical psychology and an academy of medical psychology  -lrb-  www . amphome . org  -rrb-  requiring a doctorate degree in psychology and extensive post doctoral training in the specialty and the passage of an oral or written examination . 
music lessons are a type of formal instruction in playing a musical instrument or singing . 
most music lessons include some instruction in the history of the type of music that the student is learning . 
music lessons are part of both amateur music instruction and professional training . 
to fully understand music being played ,  the student must learn the basics of the underlying music theory . 
a varied repertoire increases the student's musical understanding and skill . 
some studies suggests that music lessons provide children with important developmental benefits beyond simply the knowledge or skill of playing a musical instrument . 
a large number of chemicals may interact directly with dna . 
different mutagens act on the dna differently . 
mutagens may be of physical ,  chemical or biological origin . 
the first mutagens to be identified were carcinogens ,  substances that were shown to be linked to cancer . 
sodium azide for example may be mutagenic  -lrb-  and highly toxic  -rrb-  ,  but it has not been shown to be carcinogenic . 
the new york press club instituted the rev . 
mychal judge heart of new york award ,  which is presented annually for the news story or series that is most complimentary of new york city . 
in 1992, judge was appointed a chaplain to the new york city fire department . 
the father mychal judge walk of remembrance takes place every year in new york on the sunday before the 9/11 anniversary . 
in 2015 a statue was dedicated to judge at st .  joseph's park in east rutherford ,  new jersey ,  across the street from st .  joseph's parish where he served for several years . 
in 2002, the city of new york renamed the portion of west 31st street on which the friary where he lived is located as `` father mychal f .  judge street '' ,  and christened a commuter ferry ,  the `` father mychal judge '' in his honor in 2002.
 '' ,  according to judge's biographer and `` new york daily news '' columnist michael daly . 
3,000 people attended judge's funeral mass on september 15, 2001, at st .  francis of assisi church ,  which was presided over by cardinal edward egan ,  the archbishop of new york . 
the new york medical examiner found that judge died of `` blunt force trauma to the head '' . 
mychal fallon judge ,  o . f . m . 
mychal judge was born robert emmett judge on may 11, 1933 in brooklyn ,  new york ,  the son of immigrants from county leitrim ,  ireland ,  and the firstborn of a pair of fraternal twins . 
a campaign has been started in east rutherford ,  new jersey to have a statue of judge erected in its memorial park . 
john and elzevir go to prison for life . 
john curses the merchant for his lies . 
but john and grace themselves do not leave their beloved moonfleet ever again . 
john arrives where he originally started ,  in the `` why not ? 
elzevir takes him in . 
once john's wound heals ,  he and block decide to recover the diamond from carisbrooke castle . 
while trying to reach the beach elzevir helps john to safety ,  but is himself dragged under by the surf and drowned . 
later john finds a large sinkhole has opened in the ground by a grave . 
the merchant ,  suffering a guilty conscience and in an attempt to make amends ,  had bequeathed the worth of the diamond to john . 
the merge algorithm plays a critical role in the merge sort algorithm ,  a comparison-based sorting algorithm . 
nebraska is also known as the `` cornhusker state '' in reference to the abundance of corn grown in the state . 
midwestern states also produce most of the country's wild rice . 
in illinois ,  this sandwich is also known as a `` loose hamburger sandwich '' . 
north omaha also has its own barbecue style . 
indy is also home to many local pubs . 
polish food is also prominent in the region ,  including popular dishes such as pierogi ,  borscht ,  and pączki . 
cooking with alcohol is also quite standard across the state . 
related cuisines from northeast africa can also be found throughout the twin cities metropolitan area . 
a confection popular in the state of ohio is the local variation of a peanut butter cup known as a 'buckeye' . 
 ''booyah '' is another very common and hearty wisconsin meal ,  found especially in the northeast region of the state . 
minnesota goulash ,  a combination of tomatoes ,  macaroni ,  ground beef and creamed corn is popular as well . 
the pork tenderloin sandwich ,  a sandwich of boneless pork loin that has been pounded flat ,  breaded ,  and fried ,  is a popular state food; huntington is the likely first appearance in 1913.
in iowa ,  the meat of a pork tenderloin sandwich is often far larger than the area of the bun . 
clam bakes are very popular in northeast ohio . 
missouri also leans heavily on beer and bratwurst ,  and st .  louis features the fried brain sandwich ,  the st .  paul sandwich ,  toasted ravioli ,  st .  louis-style pizza ,  gooey butter cake ,  the slinger ,  and many other dishes that are popular throughout the state . 
many restaurants will feature walleye on their friday night fish fry ,  which is popular at locales throughout the state . 
friday's  -lrb-  a division of carlson companies  -rrb-  are also well known chains headquartered in the twin cities . 
the capital and second-largest city in the state of wisconsin ,  madison has a diverse and cosmopolitan food scene . 
these dishes ,  while not all exclusive to the midwest ,  are typical of midwestern foods . 
the chipati's origination is claimed by both pizza bob's on s .  state st .  and by pizza house on church st . 
the cheese frenchee is also a local favorite and staple ,  originating from the original king's food host fast food restaurants . 
maull's is a popular brand of barbecue sauce in the st .  louis area . 
iowa is the leading pork producer in the united states . 
minnesota is known for its church potlucks ,  where hotdish is often served . 
mansfield is the home of two well-known food companies . 
iced tea is also rumored to have been invented at the world's fair ,  as well as the hot dog bun . 
springfield ,  illinois ,  and the surrounding area are known for the horseshoe sandwich . 
persimmon pudding is also a favorite indiana dessert very difficult to find outside of the hoosier state . 
wisconsin cuisine also features a large amount of sausage ,  or `` wurst ''  -lrb-  german for `` sausage ''  -rrb-  . 
a fast-growing immigrant population from places such as mexico and india is also beginning to influence the local food . 
fishing is a popular sport throughout the state ,  and many fish fry events feature catfish and large-mouthed bass . 
in 2014, local chefs and food writers organized the first annual cincinnati food & wine classic ,  which drew chefs and artisan food producers from the region . 
the columbus ,  ohio area is the home and birthplace of many well-known fast food chains ,  especially those known for hamburgers . 
omaha also has a thriving local pizza scene ,  with popular restaurants including zio's ,  la casa ,  mama's and valentino's . 
in the northeastern section of the state ,  in the region collectively known as the iron range ,  the mesabi range area is known for cornish pasties . 
most coney islands are open 24 hours and also a popular place to get a late or early coffee . 
pewaukee ,  wisconsin is also home to the alcoholic beverage rumchata ,  described as an `` horchata '' recipe containing the primary ingredients of rum and wisconsin cream . 
milwaukee also offers a diverse selection of other ethnic restaurants . 
some g cells have the ability to re-enter the cell cycle . 
mitosis occurs only in eukaryotic cells . 
the primary result of mitosis and cytokinesis is the transfer of a parent cell's genome into two daughter cells . 
mitosis and cytokinesis together define the mitotic  -lrb-  m  -rrb-  phase of an animal cell cycle—the division of the mother cell into two daughter cells genetically identical to each other . 
in cell biology ,  mitosis  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a part of the cell cycle when replicated chromosomes are separated into two new nuclei . 
there are many cells where mitosis and cytokinesis occur separately ,  forming single cells with multiple nuclei . 
in plant cells only ,  prophase is preceded by a pre-prophase stage . 
in animal cells ,  cell division with mitosis was discovered in frog ,  rabbit ,  and cat cornea cells in 1873 and described for the first time by the polish histologist wacław mayzel in 1875.
the mitotic phase is a relatively short period of the cell cycle . 
amino acid synthesis depends on the formation of the appropriate alpha-keto acid ,  which is then transaminated to form an amino acid . 
nucleotides are made from amino acids ,  carbon dioxide and formic acid in pathways that require large amounts of metabolic energy . 
amino acids are made into proteins by being joined together in a chain of peptide bonds . 
organisms vary in their ability to synthesize the 20 common amino acids . 
the glucogenic amino acids can also be converted into glucose ,  through gluconeogenesis  -lrb-  discussed below  -rrb-  . 
fatty acids are made by fatty acid synthases that polymerize and then reduce acetyl-coa units . 
amino acids are either used to synthesize proteins and other biomolecules ,  or oxidized to urea and carbon dioxide as a source of energy . 
the two nucleic acids ,  dna and rna ,  are polymers of nucleotides . 
amino acids also contribute to cellular energy metabolism by providing a carbon source for entry into the citric acid cycle  -lrb-  tricarboxylic acid cycle  -rrb-  ,  especially when a primary source of energy ,  such as glucose ,  is scarce ,  or when cells undergo metabolic stress . 
first ,  the production of precursors such as amino acids ,  monosaccharides ,  isoprenoids and nucleotides ,  secondly ,  their activation into reactive forms using energy from atp ,  and thirdly ,  the assembly of these precursors into complex molecules such as proteins ,  polysaccharides ,  lipids and nucleic acids . 
this aminoacyl-trna is then a substrate for the ribosome ,  which joins the amino acid onto the elongating protein chain ,  using the sequence information in a messenger rna . 
most of the structures that make up animals ,  plants and microbes are made from three basic classes of molecule: amino acids ,  carbohydrates and lipids  -lrb-  often called fats  -rrb-  . 
a vitamin is an organic compound needed in small quantities that cannot be made in cells . 
organic compounds  -lrb-  proteins ,  lipids and carbohydrates  -rrb-  contain the majority of the carbon and nitrogen; most of the oxygen and hydrogen is present as water . 
macromolecules such as starch ,  cellulose or proteins cannot be rapidly taken up by cells and must be broken into their smaller units before they can be used in cell metabolism . 
the nad/nadh form is more important in catabolic reactions ,  while nadp/nadph is used in anabolic reactions . 
the enzymes of fatty acid biosynthesis are divided into two groups: in animals and fungi ,  all these fatty acid synthase reactions are carried out by a single multifunctional type i protein ,  while in plant plastids and bacteria separate type ii enzymes perform each step in the pathway . 
the central pathways of metabolism described above ,  such as glycolysis and the citric acid cycle ,  are present in all three domains of living things and were present in the last universal common ancestor . 
fats are catabolised by hydrolysis to free fatty acids and glycerol . 
in oxidative phosphorylation ,  the electrons removed from organic molecules in areas such as the protagon acid cycle are transferred to oxygen and the energy released is used to make atp . 
these digestive enzymes include proteases that digest proteins into amino acids ,  as well as glycoside hydrolases that digest polysaccharides into simple sugars known as monosaccharides . 
in other organisms such as plants and bacteria ,  this metabolic problem is solved using the glyoxylate cycle ,  which bypasses the decarboxylation step in the citric acid cycle and allows the transformation of acetyl-coa to oxaloacetate ,  where it can be used for the production of glucose . 
it also serves as a carrier of phosphate groups in phosphorylation reactions . 
first ,  the townspeople would be gathered in a public place . 
these were the first inquisition movements of many that would follow . 
the inquisitorial trial generally favored the prosecution  -lrb-  the church  -rrb-  . 
as part of this bargain they would need to inform on other heretics . 
historian edward peters identifies a number of illegalities in joan's first trial in which she had been convicted . 
procedures began to be formalized by time of pope gregory ix . 
madden argues that while medieval secular leaders were trying to safeguard their kingdoms ,  the church was trying to save souls . 
like the inquisitorial process itself ,  torture was an ancient roman legal practice commonly used in secular courts . 
the trial was politically motivated . 
the inquisitor could keep a defendant in prison for years before the trial to obtain new information ,  and could return them to prison if he felt that the witness had not fully confessed . 
the complaints of the two main preaching orders of the period ,  the dominicans and the franciscans ,  against the moral corruption of the church ,  to some extent echoed those of the heretical movements ,  but they were doctrinally conventional ,  and were enlisted by pope innocent iii in the fight against heresy . 
the first medieval inquisition ,  the episcopal inquisition ,  was established in the year 1184 by a papal bull of pope lucius iii entitled `` ad abolendam '' ,  `` for the purpose of doing away with . `` 
the cathars were first noted in the 1140s in southern france ,  and the waldensians around 1170 in northern italy . 
they were also attacked in germany ,  the first attempt of the inquisition to operate in the area . 
a council in tours in 1164, presided over by pope alexander iii ,  ordered the confiscation of a heretic's goods . 
one reason for pope gregory ix's creation of the inquisition was to bring order and legality to the process of dealing with heresy ,  since there had been tendencies by mobs of townspeople to burn alleged heretics without much of a trial . 
because of their corruption ,  they were eventually forced by the pope to suspend their activities in 1302.
archaea differ from bacteria in both their genetics and biochemistry . 
bacteria like archaea are prokaryotic – unicellular ,  and having no cell nucleus or other membrane-bound organelle . 
archaea are prokaryotic unicellular organisms ,  and form the first domain of life ,  in carl woese's three-domain system . 
unicellular eukaryotes consist of a single cell throughout their life cycle . 
chloroplasts produce energy from light by photosynthesis ,  and were also originally symbiotic bacteria . 
bacteria use regulatory networks that allow them to adapt to almost every environmental niche on earth . 
single-celled microorganisms were the first forms of life to develop on earth ,  approximately 3–4 billion years ago . 
microorganisms can be found almost anywhere on earth . 
the combined domains of archaea and bacteria make up the most diverse and abundant group of organisms on earth and inhabit practically all environments where the temperature is below +140 °c . 
organic acids produced on a large industrial scale by microbial fermentation include acetic acid produced by acetic acid bacteria such as `` acetobacter aceti '' ,  butyric acid made by the bacterium `` clostridium butyricum '' ,  lactic acid made by `` lactobacillus '' and other lactic acid bacteria ,  and citric acid produced by the mould fungus `` aspergillus niger '' . 
in 1990 the microbiologist woese proposed the three-domain system that divided living things into bacteria ,  archaea and eukaryotes ,  and thereby split the prokaryote domain . 
these organisms are also common in soil and play a vital role in ammonia oxidation . 
under optimal conditions bacteria can grow extremely rapidly and their numbers can double as quickly as every 20 minutes . 
scientists are researching the use of algae to produce liquid fuels ,  and bacteria to convert various forms of agricultural and urban waste into usable fuels . 
scientists are also considering using microorganisms for living fuel cells ,  and as a solution for pollution . 
one way this can occur is in the nodules in the roots of legumes that contain symbiotic bacteria of the genera `` rhizobium '' ,  `` mesorhizobium '' ,  `` sinorhizobium '' ,  `` bradyrhizobium '' ,  and `` azorhizobium '' . 
a microorganism ,  or microbe ,  is a microscopic organism ,  which may exist in its single-celled form or in a colony of cells . 
this rapid evolution is important in medicine ,  as it has led to the development of multidrug resistant pathogenic bacteria ,  `` superbugs '' ,  that are resistant to antibiotics . 
the term 'micronation' literally means `` small nation '' . 
the term `` micronation '' to describe those entities dates at least to the 1970s . 
the term has since also come to be used retrospectively to refer to earlier unrecognized entities ,  some of which date to as far back as the 19th century . 
amongst supporters of micronations  -lrb-  `` micronationalists ''  -rrb-  the term `` macronation '' is in common use to refer to any internationally recognised sovereign nation-state . 
the largest underground mine is kiirunavaara mine in kiruna ,  sweden . 
highwall mining is another form of surface mining that evolved from auger mining . 
both types of ore deposit ,  placer or lode ,  are mined by both surface and underground methods . 
mining in europe has a very long history . 
meanwhile ,  australia experienced the australian gold rushes and by the 1850s was producing 40% of the world's gold ,  followed by the establishment of large mines such as the mount morgan mine ,  which ran for nearly a hundred years ,  broken hill ore deposit  -lrb-  one of the largest zinc-lead ore deposits  -rrb-  ,  and the iron ore mines at iron knob . 
mining operations usually create a negative environmental impact ,  both during the mining activity and after the mine has closed . 
safety has long been a concern in the mining business ,  especially in sub-surface mining . 
mining techniques can be divided into two common excavation types: surface mining and sub-surface  -lrb-  underground  -rrb-  mining . 
once all the ore that the mine can produce profitably is recovered ,  reclamation begins to make the land used by the mine suitable for future use . 
in 1762, the world's first mining academy was established in the same town there . 
mining exists in many countries . 
other methods include shrinkage stope mining ,  which is mining upward ,  creating a sloping underground room ,  long wall mining ,  which is grinding a long ore surface underground ,  and room and pillar mining ,  which is removing ore from rooms while leaving pillars in place to support the roof of the room . 
room and pillar mining often leads to retreat mining ,  in which supporting pillars are removed as miners retreat ,  allowing the room to cave in ,  thereby loosening more ore .  additional sub-surface mining methods include hard rock mining ,  which is mining of hard rock  -lrb-  igneous ,  metamorphic or sedimentary  -rrb-  materials ,  bore hole mining ,  drift and fill mining ,  long hole slope mining ,  sub level caving ,  and block caving . 
the deepest open-pit mine in the world is bingham canyon mine in bingham canyon ,  utah ,  united states ,  at over  . 
mining in the philippines began around 1000 bc . 
the romans used hydraulic mining methods on a large scale to prospect for the veins of ore ,  especially a now-obsolete form of mining known as hushing . 
this is when the mining company makes the decision whether to develop the mine or to walk away from the project . 
sub-surface mining consists of digging tunnels or shafts into the earth to reach buried ore deposits . 
mining in egypt occurred in the earliest dynasties . 
the miners crushed the ore and ground it to a fine powder before washing the powder for the gold dust . 
roman techniques were not limited to surface mining . 
in the early 20th century ,  the gold and silver rush to the western united states also stimulated mining for coal as well as base metals such as copper ,  lead ,  and iron . 
mining in the united states became prevalent in the 19th century ,  and the general mining act of 1872 was passed to encourage mining of federal lands . 
east rand mine in boksburg ,  south africa briefly held the record at  ,  and the first mine declared the deepest in the world was also tautona when it was at  . 
ancient egyptians mined malachite at maadi . 
coal mines had the highest hearing loss injury likelihood . 
he also captured gold mines in thrace for minting coinage ,  eventually producing 26 tons per year . 
as of 2008, the deepest mine in the world is tautona in carletonville ,  south africa ,  at  ,  replacing the neighboring savuka mine in the north west province of south africa at  . 
in 1992 the world bank began to push for privatization of government-owned mining companies with a new set of codes ,  beginning with its report `` the strategy for african mining '' . 
myanmar  -lrb-  also known as burma  -rrb-  is the northwestern-most country of mainland southeast asia . 
the lowest household sizes were observed in ayeyawady region ,  bago region ,  magway region and naypyidaw union territory ,  each at 4.1.
at the time of the 1983 census in burma ,  as of 31 march 1983, the population was 35,442,972.  ,  this was estimated by the `` cia world factbook '' to have increased to 60,584,650.
this is attributed to extreme delays in marriage  -lrb-  almost unparalleled in the region ,  with the exception of developed countries  -rrb-  ,  the prevalence of illegal abortions ,  and the high proportion of single ,  unmarried women of reproductive age  -lrb-  with 25.9% of women aged 30–34 and 33.1% of men and women aged 25–34 single  -rrb-  . 
the provisional census results indicated that there were 10,889,348 households in myanmar . 
burma  -lrb-  myanmar  -rrb-  was ruled as a british colony from 1824 until 1948.
burma's judicial system is limited . 
the geographical area burma encompasses today can be traced to the panglong agreement ,  which combined burma proper ,  which consisted of lower burma and upper burma ,  and the frontier areas ,  which had been administered separately by the british . 
the british colonized burma  -lrb-  myanmar  -rrb-  in the late 19th century ,  and it was part of british india until 1937.
myanmar  -lrb-  also known as burma  -rrb-  is a unitary parliamentary republic under its constitution of 2008.
wareru dhammathat or the manu dhammathat  -lrb-    -rrb-  was the earliest law-book in burma . 
burma is divided into seven regions  -lrb-  previously called divisions- ''taing ''  -rrb-  and seven states  -lrb-  `` pyi-nè ''  -rrb-  ,  classified by ethnic composition . 
in late 1946 aung san became deputy chairman of the executive council of burma ,  a transitional government . 
in 2001, the government permitted nld office branches to re-open throughout burma . 
myanmar ,  formerly called burma ,  was a monarchy ruled by various dynasties prior to the 19th century . 
the united states and european clothing and shoe industry became the target of free burma activists for buying from factories in burma that were wholly or partly owned by the government or the military . 
there is no independent judiciary in burma and the military government suppresses political activity . 
currently the state counsellor of myanmar is the de facto head of government . 
myanmar general elections were held on 8 november 2015.
in 2010, burma trafficked 1 billion tablets to neighbouring thailand . 
tourism is thus a growing sector of the economy of burma . 
historically ,  burma was the main trade route between india and china since 100 bc . 
for 2018 estimate ,  myanmar's gdp per capita will be $6,509 in ppp per capita and $1,490 in nominal per capita . 
burma  -lrb-  myanmar  -rrb-  is the largest producer of methamphetamines in the world ,  with the majority of `` ya ba '' found in thailand produced in burma ,  particularly in the golden triangle and northeastern shan state ,  which borders thailand ,  laos and china . 
burma is also the 2nd largest supplier of opium  -lrb-  following afghanistan  -rrb-  in the world ,  with 95% of opium grown in shan state . 
japan is not the largest investor in myanmar . 
 ''the economist ''s special report on burma points to increased economic activity resulting from burma's political transformation and influx of foreign direct investment from asian neighbours . 
for 2018 estimate ,  the country's per capita will be $6,509 in ppp per capita and $1,490 in nominal per capita . 
since 2012, burma has opened up to more tourism and foreign capital ,  synonymous with the country's transition to democracy . 
according to michael adas ,  ian brown ,  and other economic historians of burma ,  burma's pre-colonial economy in burma was essentially a subsistence economy ,  with the majority of the population involved in rice production and other forms of agriculture . 
myanmar  -lrb-  also known as burma  -rrb-  is an emerging economy with a nominal gdp of $69.322 billion in 2017 and an estimated purchasing power adjusted gdp of $327.629 billion billion in 2017 according to world bank . 
myanmar exported $1.6 billion worth of garment and textiles in 2016.
burma's gemstone industry is a cornerstone of the burmese economy with exports topping $1 billion . 
however ,  on 22 april the eu suspended economic and political sanctions against burma . 
the mon kingdom of lower burma served as important trading centre in the bay of bengal . 
before 2012, much of the country was completely off-limits to tourists ,  and the military very tightly controlled interactions between foreigners and the people of burma . 
japan wrote off us$3 billion ,  nations in the group of paris club wrote off us$2.2 billion and norway wrote off us$534 million . 
after burma was conquered by the british ,  it became the second wealthiest country in southeast asia ,  after the philippines . 
in 2011, myanmar's total milled rice production accounted for 10.26 million tons ,  an increase from the 1.8 per cent back in 2010.
in northern burma opium bans have ended a century old tradition of growing poppy . 
the government of myanmar  -lrb-  earlier known as burma  -rrb-  has two ministries controlling transportation:
from 1989, each service has had its own commander in chief and chief of staff . 
 -lrb-  9 -rrb- 1955 on 28 september 1955, the chief of staff became the commander in chief ,  the chief of army staff became the vice chief of staff  -lrb-  army  -rrb-  ,  the chief of naval staff become vice chief of staff  -lrb-  navy  -rrb-  and the chief of air staff became the vice chief of staff  -lrb-  air  -rrb-  . 
in 1985, the then lieutenant general saw maung ,  vice-chief of staff of tatmadaw reminded his commanders during his speech at the command and general staff college:
the navy and air force were separate services under the war office but under the chief of staff . 
according to the war establishment adopted on 14 april 1948, chief of staff was under the war office with the rank of major general . 
general ne win became the first chief of staff of the tatmadaw  -lrb-  myanmar armed forces  -rrb-  to command all three services - army ,  navy and air force - under a single unified command for the first time . 
signal corps and field engineering corps are also under the command of general staff office . 
the tatmadaw  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is the official name of the armed forces of myanmar  -lrb-  burma  -rrb-  . 
the navy and air force offices within the ministry were headed by the vice chiefs of staff for those services . 
bso-2 responsible for south eastern command  -lrb-  sec  -rrb-  ,  south western command  -lrb-  swc  -rrb-  ,  western command  -lrb-  wc  -rrb-  and central command  -lrb-  cc  -rrb-  . 
the most important position created is the joint chief of staff  -lrb-  army ,  navy ,  air force  -rrb-  that commands commanders-in-chief of the navy and the air force . 
brigadier general aung gyi was given the post of vice chief of staff  -lrb-  army  -rrb-  . 
directorate of signal and directorate field engineering are also under general staff office . 
as per war office order no . 
regional military commands  -lrb-  rmc  -rrb-  and light infantry divisions  -lrb-  lid  -rrb-  were also reorganised ,  and lids are now directly answerable to commander in chief of the army . 
brigadier general d .  a blake became commander of south burma subdistrict command  -lrb-  sbsd  -rrb-  and brigadier general kyaw zaw ,  a member of the thirty comrades ,  became commander of north burma subdistrict command  -lrb-  nbsd  -rrb-  . 
both ag and qmg office similar structure to the general staff office ,  but they only had three aso-iii and three qso-iii respectively . 
on 2 march 1962, the then chief of staff of armed forces ,  general ne win staged a coup d'état and formed the `` union revolutionary council '' . 
at the time of myanmar's independence in 1948, the tatmadaw was weak ,  small and disunited . 
in 1996, the eastern command in shan state was split into two rmcs ,  and south eastern command was divided to create a new rmc in country's far south coastal regions . 
in april 1968, the tatmadaw introduced special warfare training programmes at `` command training centres '' at various regional commands . 
the tatmadaw's organisational and command structure dramatically changed after the military coup in 1988.
a new command structure was introduced at the ministry of defence level in 2002.
overall command of tatmadaw  -lrb-  armed forces  -rrb-  rested with the country's highest-ranking military officer ,  a general ,  who acted concurrently as defence minister and chief of staff of defence services . 
for powerful enemy and foreign invaders ,  tatmadaw should engage in total people's war ,  with a special focus on guerrilla strategy . 
the joint staff within the ministry of defence consisted of three major branches ,  one each for army ,  navy and air force ,  along with a number of independent departments . 
at the beginning of world war i ,  the only indigenous military regiment in the british india army ,  the 70th burma rifles ,  consisted of three battalions ,  made up of karens ,  kachins and chins . 
a research team was also formed at general staff office within the war office to study defence capabilities and militia formations of neighbouring countries . 
the french oil company total s . a .  is able to operate the yadana natural gas pipeline from burma to thailand despite the european union's sanctions on burma . 
similarly ,  the european union has placed embargoes on burma ,  including an arms embargo ,  cessation of trade preferences ,  and suspension of all aid with the exception of humanitarian aid . 
the season was schumacher's first drivers' championship . 
in 1991, he competed in one race in the japanese formula 3000 championship ,  finishing second . 
he attended several grands prix during the season . 
schumacher finished the season with four points out of six races . 
with only one race left in the season ,  schumacher could only win the championship if he won the season finale and alonso scored no points . 
during this period schumacher won more races and championships than any other driver in the history of the sport . 
he placed 13th in the 2012 drivers' championship . 
he finished the season 9th with 72 points . 
this pair finished nine of the 17 races in the first two places . 
at the 1997 european grand prix at jerez ,  the last race of the season ,  schumacher led williams's jacques villeneuve by one point in the drivers' championship . 
he finished the season in fourth ,  with 52 points . 
going into the 1994 australian grand prix ,  the final race of the 1994 season ,  schumacher led damon hill by a single point in the drivers' championship . 
he later retired from seventh place in the race . 
schumacher finished the season in eighth place in the drivers' championship ,  with 76 points . 
schumacher and his younger brother ,  ralf ,  are the only siblings to win races in formula one ,  and they were the first brothers to finish 1st and 2nd in the same race ,  a feat they repeated in four subsequent races . 
their step-brother sebastian stahl has also been a racing driver . 
he focused on testing electronics and tyres for the 2008 formula one season . 
michael schumacher  -lrb-  ; ; born 3 january 1969 -rrb- is a retired german racing driver who raced in formula one for jordan grand prix ,  benetton and ferrari ,  where he spent most of his career ,  as well as for mercedes upon his return to the sport . 
while schumacher was on the podium after winning the 2006 italian grand prix ,  ferrari issued a press release stating that he would retire from racing at the end of the 2006 season . 
further records were set by schumacher in germany ,  where he set the fastest lap in a grand prix for the 77th time in his career ,  and in belgium where he became the second driver in history to race in 300 grands prix . 
ferrari had previously come close to the championship in 1982 and 1990.
by finishing the race in eighth place ,  schumacher took one point and assured his sixth world drivers' title ,  ending the season two points ahead of räikkönen . 
in 1988 he made his first step into single-seat car racing by participating in the german formula ford and formula könig series ,  winning the latter . 
schumacher finished third in the drivers' championship in 1996 and helped ferrari to second place in the constructors' championship ahead of his old team benetton . 
in  ,  schumacher used the ferrari f2002 to retain his drivers' championship . 
after his second pit-stop ,  however ,  schumacher came out ahead of häkkinen and went on to win the race and the championship . 
schumacher's younger brother ralf is also a racing driver ,  he competed in formula one for ten years ,  starting from 1997 until the end of 2007.
in  ,  schumacher joined ferrari ,  a team that had last won the drivers' championship in and the constructors' championship in  ,  for a salary of $60 million over 2 years . 
muonium is an exotic atom made up of an antimuon and an electron ,  which was discovered in 1960 by vernon w .  hughes
although muonium is short-lived ,  physical chemists study it using muon spin spectroscopy  -lrb-  μsr  -rrb-  ,  a magnetic resonance technique analogous to nuclear magnetic resonance  -lrb-  nmr  -rrb-  or electron spin resonance  -lrb-  esr  -rrb-  spectroscopy . 
the term `` medicine man/woman , ``  like the term `` shaman , ``  has been criticized by native americans ,  as well as other specialists in the fields of religion and anthropology . 
medicine men/women should not be confused with those who employ native american ethnobotany ,  a practice that is very common in a large number of native american and first nations households . 
as in all native american cultures ,  cherokee medicine people had to practice in secret from the post-contact era until 1978, when the american indian religious freedom act was passed . 
the malay peninsula  -lrb-  malay: `` semenanjung tanah melayu ''  -rrb-  is a peninsula in southeast asia . 
the malay term `` tanah melayu '' is derived from the word `` tanah ''  -lrb-  land  -rrb-  and `` melayu ''  -lrb-  malays  -rrb-  ,  thus it means `` the malay land '' . 
in the early 20th century ,  the term `` tanah melayu '' was generally used by the malays of the peninsula during the rise of malay nationalism to describe uniting all malay states on the peninsula under one malay nation ,  although this ambition was largely realised with the formation of `` persekutuan tanah melayu ''  -lrb-  malay for `` federation of malaya ''  -rrb-  in 1948.
