a possible amputation was carried out c .  4,900 bc in buthiers-bulancourt ,  france . 
although there is no record to establish when plants were first used for medicinal purposes  -lrb-  herbalism  -rrb-  ,  the use of plants as healing agents ,  as well as clays and soils is ancient . 
the hamoaze  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is an estuarine stretch of the tidal river tamar ,  between its confluence with the river lynher and plymouth sound ,  england . 
the hamoaze flows past devonport dockyard ,  which is one of three major bases of the royal navy today . 
before it became the capital of lower saxony in 1946, hanover was the capital of the principality of calenberg  -lrb-  1636–1692 -rrb- ,  the electorate of brunswick-lüneburg  -lrb-  1692–1814 -rrb- ,  the kingdom of hanover  -lrb-  1814–1866 -rrb- ,  the province of hanover of the kingdom of prussia  -lrb-  1868–1918 -rrb- ,  the province of hanover of the free state of prussia  -lrb-  1918–1946 -rrb- ,  and of the state of hanover  -lrb-  1946 -rrb- . 
hanover or hannover  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is the capital and largest city of the german state of lower saxony . 
three kings of great britain ,  or the united kingdom ,  were concurrently also electoral princes of hanover . 
in 1837, the personal union of the united kingdom and hanover ended because william iv's heir in the united kingdom was female  -lrb-  queen victoria  -rrb-  . 
after the war ,  the aegidienkirche was not rebuilt and its ruins were left as a war memorial . 
it is the fifth-largest city in the low german dialect area after hamburg ,  dortmund ,  essen ,  and bremen . 
from 1714 to 1837, hanover was by personal union the family seat of the hanoverian kings of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland ,  under their title of the dukes of brunswick-lüneburg  -lrb-  later described as the elector of hanover  -rrb-  . 
during the time of the personal union of the crowns of the united kingdom and hanover  -lrb-  1714–1837 -rrb- ,  the monarchs rarely visited the city . 
the result was the nintendo game boy . 
the game boy pocket is a redesigned version of the original game boy having the same features . 
the game boy color was a response to pressure from game developers for a new system ,  as they felt that the game boy ,  even in its latest incarnation ,  the game boy pocket ,  was insufficient . 
as of march 31, 2005, the game boy and game boy color combined to sell over 118 million units worldwide . 
as of march 31, 2005, the game boy and game boy color combined to sell 118.69 million units worldwide . 
the bitcorp gamate is the one of the first handheld game systems created in response to the nintendo game boy . 
the game boy pocket was not a new software platform and played the same software as the original game boy model . 
the origins of handheld game consoles are found in handheld and tabletop electronic game devices of the 1970s and early 1980s . 
the wonderswan color is a handheld game console designed by bandai . 
a handheld game console ,  or simply handheld console ,  is a small ,  portable self-contained video game console with a built-in screen ,  game controls ,  and speakers . 
nintendo released the game boy on april 21, 1989  -lrb-  september 1990 for the uk  -rrb-  . 
like the sega game gear ,  it was horizontal in orientation and like the game boy ,  required 4 aa batteries . 
it also had an infrared communications port for wireless linking which did not appear in later versions of the game boy ,  such as the game boy advance . 
in 2001, nintendo released the game boy advance  -lrb-  gba or agb  -rrb-  ,  which added two shoulder buttons ,  a larger screen ,  and more computing power than the game boy color . 
the watara supervision was released in 1992 in an attempt to compete with the nintendo game boy . 
the game boy color  -lrb-  also referred to as gbc or cgb  -rrb-  is nintendo's successor to the game boy and was released on october 21, 1998, in japan and in november of the same year in the united states . 
by this point ,  rechargeable battery technology had not yet matured and so the more advanced game consoles of the time such as the sega game gear and atari lynx did not have nearly as much success as the game boy . 
the original gp32 was released in 2001 by the south korean company game park a few months after the launch of the game boy advance . 
in 1831, abeken acquired a licenciate of theology . 
heinrich abeken  -lrb-  august 19, 1809august 8, 1872 -rrb- was a german theologian and prussian privy legation councillor in the ministry of foreign affairs in berlin . 
see `` heinrich abeken ,  ein schlichtes leben in bewegter zeit ''  -lrb-  berlin ,  1898 -rrb- ,  by his widow . 
john bruce's original family name was knight ,  but on coming of age in 1805 he assumed the name of bruce: his mother ,  through whom he inherited the duffryn estate ,  was the daughter of william bruce ,  high sheriff of glamorganshire . 
henry bruce was born at duffryn ,  aberdare ,  glamorganshire ,  the son of john bruce ,  a glamorganshire landowner ,  and his first wife sarah ,  daughter of reverend hugh williams austin . 
bruce was returned unopposed as mp for merthyr tydfil in december 1852, following the death of sir john guest . 
they had one son and three daughters . 
from 1847 to 1854 bruce was stipendiary magistrate for merthyr tydfil and aberdare ,  resigning the position in the latter year ,  after entering parliament as liberal member for merthyr tydfil . 
after losing his seat ,  bruce was elected for renfrewshire on 25 january 1869, he was made home secretary by william ewart gladstone . 
halophiles are organisms that thrive in high salt concentrations . 
 ''tetragenococcus halophilus '' is found in salted anchovies and soy sauce . 
halophiles can be found anywhere with a concentration of salt five times greater than the salt concentration of the ocean ,  such as the great salt lake in utah ,  owens lake in california ,  the dead sea ,  and in evaporation ponds . 
halophiles require sodium chloride  -lrb-  salt  -rrb-  for growth ,  in contrast to halotolerant organisms ,  which do not require salt but can grow under saline conditions . 
they have adapted to handle salt concentrations that would kill other breeds of sheep . 
of particular note are the extreme halophiles or haloarchaea  -lrb-  often known as halobacteria  -rrb-  ,  a group of archaea ,  which require at least a 2 m salt concentration and are usually found in saturated solutions  -lrb-  about 36% w/v salts  -rrb-  . 
simon called himself an atheist . 
from 1949 to 2001, simon was a faculty at carnegie mellon . 
simon married dorothea pye in 1938.
simon had a keen interest in the arts ,  as he was a pianist . 
herbert alexander simon was born in milwaukee ,  wisconsin ,  on june 15, 1916.
simon was educated in the milwaukee public school system ,  where he developed an interest in science . 
hematite is present in the waste tailings of iron mines . 
hematite is colored black to steel or silver-gray ,  brown to reddish brown ,  or red . 
hematite ,  also spelled as haematite ,  is the mineral form of iron -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  oxide  -lrb-  feo  -rrb-  ,  one of several iron oxides . 
the name hematite is derived from the greek word for blood αἷμα `` haima , ``  due to the red coloration found in some varieties of hematite . 
hematite can also occur without water ,  however ,  usually as the result of volcanic activity . 
human civilization was founded on and grew from agriculture . 
the holocene extinction is mainly caused by human activity . 
the ecosystems encountered by the first americans had not been exposed to human interaction ,  and may have been far less resilient to human made changes than the ecosystems encountered by industrial era humans . 
the holocene extinction is also known as the `` sixth extinction '' ,  as it is possibly the sixth mass extinct event ,  after the ordovician–silurian extinction events ,  the late devonian extinction ,  the permian–triassic extinction event ,  the triassic–jurassic extinction event ,  and the cretaceous–paleogene extinction event . 
the arrival of humans on different continents coincides with megafaunal extinction . 
the timing of south american megafaunal extinction appears to precede human arrival ,  although the possibility that human activity at the time impacted the global climate enough to cause such an extinction has been suggested . 
human arrival in the caribbean around 6,000 years ago is correlated with the extinction of many species . 
human consumption of food and water resources is also projected to double by this time . 
there is a correlation between megafaunal extinction and the arrival of humans ,  and human overpopulation and human population growth ,  along with overconsumption and consumption growth ,  most prominently in the past two centuries ,  are regarded as one of the underlying causes of extinction . 
the holocene extinction ,  otherwise referred to as the sixth extinction or anthropocene extinction ,  is the ongoing extinction event of species during the present holocene epoch ,  mainly as a result of human activity . 
recent extinctions are more directly attributable to human influences ,  whereas prehistoric extinctions can be attributed to other factors ,  such as global climate change . 
aside from humans ,  climate change may have been a driving factor in the megafaunal extinctions ,  especially at the end of the pleistocene . 
humans are thought to be the sole cause as other earlier migrations of animals into north america from eurasia did not cause extinctions . 
such disappearances might be the result of the proliferation of modern humans; some recent studies favor this theory . 
only during the most recent parts of the extinction have plants also suffered large losses . 
the current rate of extinction of species is estimated at 100 to 1,000 times higher than natural background rates . 
there has been a debate as to the extent to which the disappearance of megafauna at the end of the last glacial period can be attributed to human activities by hunting ,  or even by slaughter of prey populations . 
extinction has increased in hawaii over the last 200 years and is relatively well documented ,  with extinctions among native snails used as estimates for global extinction rates . 
the loss of species from ecological communities ,  defaunation ,  is primarily driven by human activity . 
some now postulate that a new geological epoch has begun ,  with the most abrupt and widespread extinction of species since the cretaceous–paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago . 
the amount of correlation between human arrival and megafauna extinction is still being debated: for example ,  in wrangel island in siberia the extinction of dwarf woolly mammoths  -lrb-  approximately 2000 bce  -rrb-  did not coincide with the arrival of humans ,  nor did megafaunal mass extinction on the south american continent ,  although it has been suggested climate changes induced by anthropogenic effects elsewhere in the world may have contributed . 
there is widespread consensus among scientists that human activity is accelerating the extinction of many animal species through the destruction of habitats ,  the consumption of animals as resources ,  and the elimination of species that humans view as threats or competitors . 
they were the first to call it `` hollywood style '' . 
hollywood-style lindy hop is a variety of lindy hop ,  an american vernacular dance . 
theodore roosevelt appointed dr .  hamilton wright as the first opium commissioner of the united states in 1908.
the harrison narcotics tax act  -lrb-  ch . 
u . s .  house bills and passed conjointly with house bill or the opium and coca leaves trade restrictions act . 
by 1914, forty-six states had regulations on cocaine and twenty-nine states had laws against opium ,  morphine ,  and heroin . 
on the other hand ,  as early as 1880 some states and localities had already passed laws against smoking opium ,  at least in public . 
halters have no bit . 
 ''english bridles '' have a `` cavesson '' style noseband and are seen in english riding . 
reins consist of leather straps or rope attached to the outer ends of a `` bit '' and extend to the rider's or driver's hands . 
some riders also like to use them in the winter to avoid putting a frozen metal bit into a horse's mouth . 
 ''double bridles '' are a type of english bridle that use two bits in the mouth at once ,  a snaffle and a curb . 
 ''western bridles '' used in western riding usually have no noseband ,  are made of thin bridle leather . 
stirrups are supports for the rider's feet that hang down on either side of the saddle . 
a rein may be attached to a halter to lead or guide the horse in a circle for training purposes or to lead a packhorse ,  but a simple lead rope is more often used for these purposes . 
some related styles of headgear that control a horse with a noseband rather than a bit are known as bitless bridles . 
native speakers of hausa ,  the hausa people ,  are mostly found in niger ,  in northern nigeria ,  and in chad . 
hausa  -lrb-  ; `` yaren hausa '' or `` harshen hausa ''  -rrb-  is the chadic language  -lrb-  a branch of the afroasiatic language family  -rrb-  with the largest number of speakers ,  spoken as a first language by some 44 million people ,  and as a second language by another 20 million . 
also ,  for the first time ,  the limits of mathematics were explored . 
he was also very influential in calendar reform . 
the most ancient mathematical texts available are from mesopotamia and egypt - `` plimpton 322 ''  -lrb-  babylonian c .  1900 bc  -rrb-  ,  the `` rhind mathematical papyrus ''  -lrb-  egyptian c .  2000–1800 bc  -rrb-  and the `` moscow mathematical papyrus ''  -lrb-  egyptian c .  1890 bc  -rrb-  . 
pāṇini  -lrb-  c .  5th century bc  -rrb-  formulated the rules for sanskrit grammar . 
predynastic egyptians of the 5th millennium bc pictorially represented geometric designs . 
plato  -lrb-  428/427 bc – 348/347 bc  -rrb-  is important in the history of mathematics for inspiring and guiding others . 
another significant egyptian mathematical text is the moscow papyrus ,  also from the middle kingdom period ,  dated to c .  1890 bc . 
the first woman mathematician recorded by history was hypatia of alexandria  -lrb-  ad 350–415 -rrb- . 
greek mathematics refers to the mathematics written in the greek language from the time of thales of miletus  -lrb-  ~600 bc  -rrb-  to the closure of the academy of athens in 529 ad . 
the creation of the roman calendar also necessitated basic mathematics . 
the oldest existent work on geometry in china comes from the philosophical mohist canon c .  330 bc ,  compiled by the followers of mozi  -lrb-  470–390 bc  -rrb-  . 
around the same time ,  eratosthenes of cyrene  -lrb-  c .  276–194 bc  -rrb-  devised the sieve of eratosthenes for finding prime numbers . 
the 19th century saw the beginning of a great deal of abstract algebra . 
greek mathematics is thought to have begun with thales of miletus  -lrb-  c .  624–c . 546 bc  -rrb-  and pythagoras of samos  -lrb-  c .  582–c . 
the chinese also made use of the complex combinatorial diagram known as the magic square and magic circles ,  described in ancient times and perfected by yang hui  -lrb-  ad 1238–1298 -rrb- . 
finally ,  the berlin papyrus 6619  -lrb-  c .  1800 bc  -rrb-  shows that ancient egyptians could solve a second-order algebraic equation . 
the most extensive egyptian mathematical text is the rhind papyrus  -lrb-  sometimes also called the ahmes papyrus after its author  -rrb-  ,  dated to c .  1650 bc but likely a copy of an older document from the middle kingdom of about 2000–1800 bc . 
the book also brought to europe what is now known as the fibonacci sequence  -lrb-  known to indian mathematicians for hundreds of years before that  -rrb-  which was used as an unremarkable example within the text . 
at roughly the same time ,  the han chinese and the romans both invented the wheeled odometer device for measuring distances traveled ,  the roman model first described by the roman civil engineer and architect vitruvius  -lrb-  c .  80 bc - c .  15 bc  -rrb-  . 
pingala's work also contains the basic ideas of fibonacci numbers  -lrb-  called `` mātrāmeru ''  -rrb-  . 
it also shows how to solve first order linear equations as well as arithmetic and geometric series . 
the most influential mathematician of the 18th century was arguably leonhard euler . 
the study of mathematics as a `` demonstrative discipline '' begins in the 6th century bc with the pythagoreans ,  who coined the term `` mathematics '' from the ancient greek `` μάθημα ''  -lrb-  `` mathema ''  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` subject of instruction '' . 
he also established a method which would later be called cavalieri's principle to find the volume of a sphere . 
simon stevin's book `` de thiende ''  -lrb-  'the art of tenths'  -rrb-  ,  first published in dutch in 1585, contained the first systematic treatment of decimal notation ,  which influenced all later work on the real number system . 
in the 12th century ,  bhāskara ii lived in southern india and wrote extensively on all then known branches of mathematics . 
in the 7th century ,  brahmagupta identified the brahmagupta theorem ,  brahmagupta's identity and brahmagupta's formula ,  and for the first time ,  in `` brahma-sphuta-siddhanta '' ,  he lucidly explained the use of zero as both a placeholder and decimal digit ,  and explained the hindu–arabic numeral system . 
throughout the 19th century mathematics became increasingly abstract . 
a hydrogen atom is an atom of the chemical element hydrogen . 
for example ,  a water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms ,  but does not contain atomic hydrogen  -lrb-  which would refer to isolated hydrogen atoms  -rrb-  . 
in everyday life on earth ,  isolated hydrogen atoms  -lrb-  called `` atomic hydrogen ''  -rrb-  are extremely rare . 
the most abundant isotope ,  hydrogen-1, protium ,  or light hydrogen ,  contains no neutrons and is simply a proton and an electron . 
atomic hydrogen constitutes about 75% of the baryonic mass of the universe . 
the relationships between julia maesa ,  julia soaemias ,  and elagabalus were strong at first . 
elagabalus  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as heliogabalus  -lrb-  ; 204 – 11 march 222 -rrb- ,  was roman emperor from 218 to 222.
the emperor complied and on 11 march 222 he publicly presented his cousin along with his own mother ,  julia soaemias . 
his first wife was julia cornelia paula; the second was the vestal virgin julia aquilia severa . 
his work largely overlaps with dio's own `` roman history '' ,  but the texts ,  written independently of each other ,  agree more often than not about the emperor and his short but eventful reign  . 
in 217, the emperor caracalla was assassinated and replaced by his praetorian prefect ,  marcus opellius macrinus . 
the assassination plot against elagabalus was devised by his grandmother ,  julia maesa ,  and carried out by disaffected members of the praetorian guard . 
the officers were killed and julianus' head was sent back to the emperor . 
indeed ,  they exercised great influence over the young emperor throughout his reign ,  and can be found on many coins and inscriptions—a rare honor for roman women . 
the senators responded by acknowledging elagabalus as emperor and accepting his claim to be the son of caracalla . 
the former commander of the third legion ,  comazon ,  was appointed commander of the praetorian guard . 
elagabalus's family held hereditary rights to the priesthood of the sun god elagabal ,  of whom elagabalus was the high priest at emesa  -lrb-  modern homs  -rrb-  in roman syria . 
some recent historians paint a more favorable picture of the emperor's rule . 
in response ,  members of the praetorian guard attacked elagabalus and his mother:
both consuls and other high-ranking members of rome's leadership condemned elagabalus ,  and the senate subsequently declared war on both elagabalus and julia maesa . 
when the emperor macrinus came to power ,  he suppressed the threat against his reign from the family of his assassinated predecessor ,  caracalla ,  by exiling them—julia maesa ,  her two daughters ,  and her eldest grandson elagabalus—to their estate at emesa in syria . 
he also demonetized the `` antoninianus '' during this period in rome . 
the cult of the deity spread to other parts of the roman empire in the 2nd century; a dedication has been found as far away as woerden  -lrb-  netherlands  -rrb-  ,  near the roman `` limes '' . 
these organizations report that no evidence exists that homeopathic treatment is effective ,  but that there is evidence that using these treatments produces harm and can bring indirect health risks by delaying conventional treatment . 
200ck is a 200c preparation made using the korsakovian method . 
health organizations such as the uk's national health service ,  the american medical association ,  the faseb ,  and the national health and medical research council of australia ,  have issued statements of their conclusion that there is `` no good-quality evidence that homeopathy is effective as a treatment for any health condition '' . 
the centesimal scale was favoured by hahnemann for most of his life . 
the american college of medical toxicology and the american academy of clinical toxicology recommend that no one use homeopathic treatment for disease or as a preventive health measure . 
hahnemann regularly used potencies up to 300c but opined that `` there must be a limit to the matter ,  it cannot go on indefinitely '' . 
the australian national health and medical research council completed a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of homeopathic preparations in 2015, in which it concluded that `` there were no health conditions for which there was reliable evidence that homeopathy was effective . 
this water may not be kept in glass as contaminants will leach out into the water . 
from these symptoms ,  the homeopath chooses how to treat the patient using `` materia medica '' and repertories . 
hahnemann advocated 30c dilutions for most purposes  -lrb-  that is ,  dilution by a factor of 10 -rrb- . 
in 2009, world health organization official mario raviglione criticized the use of homeopathy to treat tuberculosis; similarly ,  another who spokesperson argued there was no evidence homeopathy would be an effective treatment for diarrhoea . 
hahnemann began to test what effects substances produced in humans ,  a procedure that would later become known as `` homeopathic proving '' . 
homeopathic preparations are not effective for treating any condition; large-scale studies have found homeopathy to be no more effective than a placebo ,  indicating that any positive effects that follow treatment are not due to the treatment itself but instead to factors such as normal recovery from illness ,  or regression toward the mean . 
the idea of using homeopathy as a treatment for other animals termed `` veterinary homeopathy '' ,  dates back to the inception of homeopathy; hahnemann himself wrote and spoke of the use of homeopathy in animals other than humans . 
the term `` homeopathy '' was coined by hahnemann and first appeared in print in 1807.
there is no convincing scientific evidence for isopathy as an effective method of treatment . 
it seems ,  therefore ,  likely that our meta-analysis at least overestimated the effects of homeopathic treatments . 
no good-quality ,  well-designed studies with enough participants for a meaningful result reported either that homeopathy caused greater health improvements than placebo ,  or caused health improvements equal to those of another treatment . `` 
after the experiments were over ,  hahnemann made the volunteers take an oath swearing that what they reported in their journals was the truth ,  at which time he would interrogate them extensively concerning their symptoms . 
similarly ,  in the 16th century ,  paracelsus wrote `` similia similibus curantur ''  -lrb-  similar to the subjunctive form later used by hahnemann  -rrb-  ,  often translated as `` what makes a man ill also cures him '' . 
hahnemann's miasm theory remains disputed and controversial within homeopathy even in modern times . 
this works out to one part of the original substance in 10,000 parts of the solution . 
in march 2015, the national health and medical research council of australia issued the following conclusions and recommendations:
cfi proposed that the fda take these three steps:
pharmacological research has found instead that stronger effects of an active ingredient come from higher ,  not lower doses . 
a 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis found that ,  in homeopathic clinical trials ,  adverse effects were reported among the patients who received homeopathy about as often as they were reported among patients who received placebo or conventional medicine . 
patients who choose to use homeopathy rather than evidence-based medicine risk missing timely diagnosis and effective treatment of serious conditions such as cancer . 
 ''since the least amount of a substance in a solution is one molecule ,  a 30c solution would have to have at least one molecule of the original substance dissolved in a minimum of 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,<wbr>000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 or 10 molecules of water . 
during 19th-century epidemics of diseases such as cholera ,  death rates in homeopathic hospitals were often lower than in conventional hospitals ,  where the treatments used at the time were often harmful and did little or nothing to combat the diseases . 
at first hahnemann used undiluted doses for provings ,  but he later advocated provings with preparations at a 30c dilution ,  and most modern provings are carried out using ultra-dilute preparations in which it is highly unlikely that any of the original molecules remain . 
hahnemann coined the expression `` allopathic medicine '' ,  which was used to pejoratively refer to traditional western medicine . 
belladonna and ipecac `` would be indistinguishable from each other in a blind test '' . 
since hahnemann's time ,  other miasms have been proposed ,  some replacing one or more of psora's proposed functions ,  including tuberculosis and cancer miasms . 
hahnemann found that undiluted doses caused reactions ,  sometimes dangerous ones ,  so specified that preparations be given at the lowest possible dose . 
a 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis found that the most reliable evidence did not support the effectiveness of non-individualized homeopathy . 
on april 20–21, 2015, the fda held a hearing on homeopathic product regulation . 
the greatest dilution reasonably likely to contain even one molecule of the original substance is 12c . 
three main logarithmic potency scales are in regular use in homeopathy . 
on september 30, 2016 the fda issued a safety alert to consumers warning against the use of homeopathic teething gels and tablets following reports of adverse events after their use . 
the high dilutions characteristically used are often considered to be the most controversial and implausible aspect of homeopathy . 
the extreme dilutions used in homeopathic preparations usually leave not one molecule of the original substance in the final product . 
some homeopathic treatment is covered by the public health service of several european countries ,  including france ,  scotland ,  luxembourg and england  -lrb-  though the latter will cease in february 2019 -rrb- . 
the national center for complementary and alternative medicine of the united states' national institutes of health states:
the results of these reviews are generally negative or only weakly positive ,  and reviewers consistently report the poor quality of trials . 
a 2007 systematic review of high-dilution experiments found that none of the experiments with positive results could be reproduced by all investigators . 
repertories ,  in particular ,  may be very large . 
no individual homeopathic preparation has been unambiguously shown by research to be different from placebo . 
a hair pin or hairpin is a long device used to hold a person's hair in place . 
this was a predecessor of the hair clip . 
there has been much debate over freedom of speech ,  hate speech and hate speech legislation . 
the ecthr does not offer an accepted definition for `` hate speech '' but instead offers only parameters by which prosecutors can decide if the `` hate speech '' is entitled to the protection of freedom of speech . 
the council of europe sponsored `` no hate speech '' movement actively raises awareness about hate speech ,  in order to help combat the problem . 
in some countries ,  a victim of hate speech may seek redress under civil law ,  criminal law ,  or both . 
there has been considerable debate over the definition of `` hate speech ''  -lrb-  `` vihapuhe ''  -rrb-  in the finnish language . 
on 25 september 2013 a new organization ,  `` an international network overcoming hate speech and racism ''  -lrb-  norikoenet  -rrb-  ,  that is opposed to hate speech against ethnic koreans and other minorities in japan was launched . 
japanese law covers threats and slander ,  but it `` does not apply to hate speech against general groups of people '' . 
additionally in some countries ,  including the united states ,  hate speech is constitutionally protected . 
on june 30, 2017, germany approved a bill criminalizing hate speech on social media sites . 
australia's hate speech laws vary by jurisdiction ,  and seek especially to prevent victimisation on account of race . 
hate speech is speech that attacks a person or group on the basis of attributes such as race ,  religion ,  ethnic origin ,  national origin ,  sex ,  disability ,  sexual orientation ,  or gender identity . 
laws against hate speech can be divided into two types: those intended to preserve public order and those intended to protect human dignity . 
while hate speech could be countered under obscenity law  -lrb-  on par with sexual obscenity ,  for example  -rrb-  ,  as distinct from freedom of speech laws and censorship ,  little has been done to effectively pursue that direction of justice . 
several prizes are awarded in the name of henrik ibsen ,  among them the international ibsen award ,  the norwegian ibsen award and the ibsen centennial commemoration award . 
the 100th anniversary of ibsen's death in 2006 was commemorated with an `` ibsen year '' in norway and other countries . 
ibsen intentionally obscured his influences . 
ibsen's biographer henrik jæger famously wrote in 1888 that ibsen did not have a drop of norwegian blood in his veins ,  stating that `` the ancestral ibsen was a dane '' . 
in `` an enemy of the people ''  -lrb-  1882 -rrb- ,  ibsen went even further . 
from his marriage with suzannah thoresen ,  ibsen had one son ,  lawyer and government minister sigurd ibsen . 
ibsen was nominated for the nobel prize in literature in 1902, 1903, and 1904.
at fifteen ,  ibsen was forced to leave school . 
the oldest documented member of the ibsen family was ship's captain rasmus ibsen  -lrb-  1632–1703 -rrb- from stege ,  denmark . 
ibsen's next play `` peer gynt '' was consciously informed by kierkegaard . 
the ibsen society of america  -lrb-  isa  -rrb-  was founded in 1978 at the close of the ibsen sesquicentennial symposium held in new york city to mark the 150th anniversary of henrik ibsen's birth . 
their son was tancred ibsen ,  who became a film director and was married to lillebil ibsen; their only child was diplomat tancred ibsen ,  jr .  sigurd ibsen's daughter ,  irene ibsen ,  married josias bille ,  a member of the danish ancient noble bille family; their son was danish actor joen bille . 
on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of ibsen's death in 2006, the norwegian government organised the ibsen year ,  which included celebrations around the world . 
henrik johan ibsen  -lrb-  ; ; 20 march 1828 – 23 may 1906 -rrb- was a norwegian playwright ,  theatre director ,  and poet . 
the hawaiian language takes its name from the largest island in the hawaiian state ,  hawaii  -lrb-  ``  in the hawaiian language  -rrb-  . 
it should not be mistaken for the hawaiian language nor for a dialect of english . 
a creole language spoken in hawaii is hawaiian pidgin  -lrb-  or hawaii creole english ,  hce  -rrb-  . 
the hawaiian language  -lrb-  hawaiian: ``  ,    -rrb-  is a polynesian language that takes its name from hawaii ,  the largest island in the tropical north pacific archipelago where it developed . 
the second polish republic ,  commonly known as interwar poland ,  refers to the country of poland in the period between the first and second world wars  -lrb-  1918–1939 -rrb- . 
the second world war in 1939 ended the sovereign second polish republic . 
the training of the polish army was thorough . 
interbellum ,  poland was unofficially divided into two parts – better developed `` poland a '' in the west ,  and underdeveloped `` poland b '' in the east . 
according to the 1939 statistical yearbook of poland ,  total length of railways of poland  -lrb-  as for 31 december 1937 -rrb- was  . 
historically ,  poland was a nation of many nationalities . 
also ,  before the outbreak of the war ,  there were about a million radios  -lrb-  see radio stations in interwar poland  -rrb-  . 
on top of this ,  there were natural disasters ,  such as the 1934 flood in poland . 
interbellum poland was also a country with numerous social problems . 
between 1939 and 1990, the polish government-in-exile operated in paris and later in london ,  presenting itself as the only legal and legitimate representative of the polish nation . 
in 1939, before the outbreak of the war ,  lot polish airlines ,  which was established in 1929, had its hub at warsaw okęcie airport . 
hostile relations with neighbours were a major problem for the economy of interbellum poland . 
after regaining its independence ,  poland was faced with major economic difficulties . 
keller supported eugenics . 
helen adams keller was born on june 27, 1880, in tuscumbia ,  alabama . 
anne sullivan stayed as a companion to helen keller long after she taught her . 
sullivan arrived at keller's house on march 5, 1887, a day keller would forever remember as `` my soul's birthday . `` 
helen keller was viewed as isolated but was very in touch with the outside world . 
keller also expressed concerns about human overpopulation . 
according to those who attended ,  helen keller spoke of the joy that life gave her . 
keller went on to become a world-famous speaker and author . 
a prolific author ,  keller was well-traveled and outspoken in her convictions . 
haddocks' eyes is a term for the name of a song sung by the white knight from lewis carroll's `` through the looking-glass '' ,   . 
hoosier is the official demonym for a resident of the u . s .  state of indiana . 
indiana adopted the nickname `` the hoosier state '' more than 150 years ago . 
humorous folk etymologies for the term `` hoosier '' have a long history ,  as recounted by dunn in `` the word hoosier '' . 
other indiana businesses include hoosier racing tire and the hoosier bat company ,  manufacturer of wooden baseball bats . 
in 1900, meredith nicholson wrote `` the hoosiers '' ,  an early attempt to study the etymology of the word as applied to indiana residents . 
 ''hoosier '' is used in the names of numerous indiana-based businesses and organizations . 
horner's root-finding method: until computers came into general use in about 1970 the term 'horner's method' was used the refer to a root-finding method for polynomials named after horner who described a similar method in 1819.
in mathematics ,  the term horner's rule  -lrb-  or horner's method ,  horner's scheme etc  -rrb-  refers to a polynomial evaluation method named after william george horner expressed by
after the story's appearance in `` the new yorker '' ,  salinger—who had already withdrawn to his home in new hampshire—stopped publishing altogether . 
in 1996, orchises press ,  a small virginia publishing house ,  started a process of publishing `` hapworth '' in book form . 
finally ,  with the release of `` the complete new yorker '' on dvd in 2005, the story was once again widely available . 
while benzodiazepines can put people to sleep  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  inhibit nrem stage 1 and 2 sleep  -rrb-  ,  while asleep ,  the drugs disrupt sleep architecture: decreasing sleep time ,  delaying time to rem sleep ,  and decreasing deep slow-wave sleep  -lrb-  the most restorative part of sleep for both energy and mood  -rrb-  . 
benzodiazepines can be useful for short-term treatment of insomnia . 
hypnotic  -lrb-  from greek `` hypnos '' ,  sleep  -rrb-  or soporific drugs ,  commonly known as sleeping pills ,  are a class of psychoactive drugs whose primary function is to induce sleep and to be used in the treatment of insomnia  -lrb-  sleeplessness  -rrb-  ,  or for surgical anesthesia . 
hypnotic drugs are regularly prescribed for insomnia and other sleep disorders ,  with over 95% of insomnia patients being prescribed hypnotics in some countries . 
questions have been raised as to whether they disturb sleep architecture . 
older adults should not use benzodiazepines to treat insomnia unless other treatments have failed to be effective . 
their use has also been proposed in the treatment of cancer . 
hacker ethic is a term for the moral values and philosophy that are common in hacker culture . 
the hacker ethic was described as a `` new way of life ,  with a philosophy ,  an ethic and a dream '' . 
a referral hotel is a hotel chain that offers branding to independently-operated hotels; the chain itself is founded by or owned by the member hotels as a group . 
these hotels are generally 100 rooms or fewer . 
boutique hotels are typically hotels with a unique environment or intimate setting . 
extended stay hotels are small to medium-sized hotels that offer longer-term full service accommodations compared to a traditional hotel . 
extended stay hotels are small to medium-sized hotels that offer longer term full service accommodations compared to a traditional hotel . 
in japan ,  love hotels have a history of over 400 years . 
the precursor to the modern hotel was the inn of medieval europe . 
the ice hotel in jukkasjärvi ,  sweden ,  was the first ice hotel in the world; first built in 1990, it is built each winter and melts every spring . 
hotel operations vary in size ,  function ,  and cost . 
the building still exists ,  and although it has been used for other purposes over the years ,  it is now again a hotel and a member of the malmaison hotel chain . 
grammatically ,  hotels usually take the definite article – hence `` the astoria hotel '' or simply `` the astoria . `` 
the ritz-carlton ,  hong kong claims to be the world's highest hotel . 
capsule hotels are a type of economical hotel first introduced in japan ,  where people sleep in stacks of rectangular containers . 
these are similar to transit hotels in that they appeal to travelers ,  however ,  unlike transit hotels ,  they do not eliminate the need to go through customs . 
hotel operations vary in size ,  function ,  complexity ,  and cost . 
some hotels are built specifically as a destination in itself ,  for example at casinos and holiday resorts . 
transit hotels are short stay hotels typically used at international airports where passengers can stay while waiting to change airplanes . 
in 2006, `` guinness world records '' listed the first world hotel in genting highlands ,  malaysia ,  as the world's largest hotel with a total of 6,118 rooms  -lrb-  and which has now expanded to 7,351 rooms  -rrb-  . 
the organizational chart and volume of job positions and hierarchy varies by hotel size ,  function ,  and is often determined by hotel ownership and managing companies . 
some hotels have accommodation underwater ,  such as utter inn in lake mälaren ,  sweden . 
in 1985, hefner had a minor stroke at age 59.
hefner's brother keith died at the age of 87 on april 8, 2016, one day before hefner's 90th birthday . 
hefner was born in chicago on april 9, 1926, the first child of glenn lucius hefner  -lrb-  1896–1976 -rrb- ,  an accountant ,  and his wife grace caroline  -lrb-  swanson  -rrb-  hefner  -lrb-  1895–1997 -rrb- who worked as a teacher . 
in may 2017, eugena washington was the last playmate of the year to be announced by hugh hefner at the playboy mansion . 
in january 2016, the playboy mansion was put on the market for $200 million ,  on condition that hugh hefner would continue to work and live in the mansion . 
hefner and harris subsequently reconciled and married on december 31, 2012.
in 2012, hefner announced that his youngest son ,  cooper ,  would likely succeed him as the public face of `` playboy '' . 
hefner's former girlfriend ,  holly madison ,  said that while she lived in the playboy mansion ,  hefner `` would encourage competition—and body image issues—between his multiple live-in girlfriends . 
hefner promoted a bon vivant lifestyle in his magazine and in two tv shows he hosted ,  `` playboy's penthouse ''  -lrb-  1959–1960 -rrb- and `` playboy after dark ''  -lrb-  1969–1970 -rrb- . 
hugh marston hefner  -lrb-  april 9, 1926 – september 27, 2017 -rrb- was an american magazine publisher and life-stylist . 
in 2007, the university's audiovisual archive at the norris theater received a donation from hefner and was renamed to the hugh m .  hefner moving image archive in his honor . 
in the 1993 `` the simpsons '' episode `` krusty gets kancelled '' ,  hefner guest-voiced himself . 
stezer further lamented the consequences of hefner's role as a `` general '' of the sexual revolution:
through his father's line ,  hefner was a descendant of plymouth governor william bradford . 
from 1973 until the pdpa unification in 1977, amin was second only to taraki in the khalqist pdpa . 
as it turned out ,  the relationship between puzanov and amin broke down . 
when amin became leader ,  he tried to reduce afghanistan's dependence on the soviet union . 
taraki was instructed to stop-over in moscow ,  where the soviet leaders urged him to remove amin from power as per the kgb's decision ,  because amin posed danger . 
anahita ratebzad ,  the education minister ,  said about amin:
during his short stay in power ,  amin became committed to establishing a collective leadership; when taraki was ousted ,  amin promised `` from now on there will be no one-man government .  .  . `` 
on 27 june amin became a member of the pdpa politburo ,  the leading decision-making body in afghanistan . 
on september 13, taraki invited amin to the presidential palace for lunch with him and the gang of four . 
this ,  according to beverley male ,  `` suggested that some plot against amin was in preparation '' . 
amin's short-lived presidency was marked by controversies from beginning to end . 
after taraki's arrest ,  the soviets tried to rescue taraki  -lrb-  or ,  according to other sources ,  kidnap amin  -rrb-  via the embassy or bagram air base but the strength of amin's officers repelled their decision to make a move . 
following taraki's fall from power ,  amin was elected chairman of the presidum of the revolutionary council and general secretary of the pdpa central committee by the pdpa politburo . 
in other words ,  the modern definition may be thought of as ,  `` that pride that goes just before the fall . `` 
crucial to this definition are the ancient greek concepts of honour  -lrb-  τιμή ,  `` timē ''  -rrb-  and shame  -lrb-  αἰδώς ,  `` aidōs ''  -rrb-  . 
hubris  -lrb-   ,  from ancient greek   -rrb-  describes a personality quality of extreme or foolish pride or dangerous over confidence ,  often in combination with  -lrb-  or synonymous with  -rrb-  arrogance . 
the greek word for sin ,  hamartia  -lrb-  ἁμαρτία  -rrb-  ,  originally meant `` error '' in the ancient dialect ,  and so poets like hesiod and aeschylus used the word `` hubris '' to describe transgressions against the gods . 
in ancient greek ,  `` hubris '' referred to actions that shamed and humiliated the victim for the pleasure or gratification of the abuser . 
in ancient athens ,  hubris was defined as the use of violence to shame the victim  -lrb-  this sense of hubris could also characterize rape  -rrb-  . 
heavy water is not radioactive . 
the physical properties of water and heavy water differ in several respects . 
semiheavy water ,  hdo ,  exists whenever there is water with light hydrogen  -lrb-  protium ,    -rrb-  and deuterium  -lrb-  d or   -rrb-  in the mix . 
heavy water is 10.6% denser than ordinary water ,  and heavy water's physically different properties can be seen without equipment if a frozen sample is dropped into normal water ,  as it will sink . 
on earth ,  deuterated water ,  hdo ,  occurs naturally in normal water at a proportion of about 1 molecule in 3,200.
because it would take a very large amount of heavy water to replace 25% to 50% of a human being's body water  -lrb-  water being in turn 50–75% of body weight  -rrb-  with heavy water ,  accidental or intentional poisoning with heavy water is unlikely to the point of practical disregard . 
thus semiheavy water molecules are far more common than `` pure ''  -lrb-  homoisotopic  -rrb-  heavy water molecules . 
a molecule of heavy water has two deuterium atoms in place of the two protium atoms of ordinary `` light '' water . 
heavy water was first produced in 1932, a few months after the discovery of deuterium . 
when a large fraction of water  -lrb-  > 50%  -rrb-  in higher organisms is replaced by heavy water ,  the result is cell dysfunction and death . 
however ,  all concentrations over 50% of deuterium in the water molecules were found to kill plants . 
in theory ,  deuterium for heavy water could be created in a nuclear reactor ,  but separation from ordinary water is the cheapest bulk production process . 
although many people associate heavy water primarily with its use in nuclear reactors ,  pure heavy water is not radioactive . 
heavy water  -lrb-  deuterium oxide ,  ' ,  '  -rrb-  is a form of water that contains a larger than normal amount of the hydrogen isotope deuterium  -lrb-   or d ,  also known as `` heavy hydrogen ''  -rrb-  ,  rather than the common hydrogen-1 isotope  -lrb-   or h ,  also called protium  -rrb-  that makes up most of the hydrogen in normal water . 
for comparison ,  ordinary water  -lrb-  the `` ordinary water '' used for a deuterium standard  -rrb-  contains only about 156 deuterium atoms per million hydrogen atoms ,  meaning that 0.0156% of the hydrogen atoms are of the heavy type . 
the wabash plant was reopened and began resumption of heavy water production in 1952.
most modern reactors use enriched uranium with ordinary water as the moderator . 
if the water is ice-cold the higher melting temperature of heavy ice can also be observed: it melts at 3.7 °c ,  and thus does not melt in ice-cold normal water . 
harold urey discovered the isotope deuterium in 1931 and was later able to concentrate it in water . 
even if pure heavy water had been used in the water cooler indefinitely ,  it is not likely the incident would have been detected or caused harm ,  since no employee would be expected to get much more than 25% of their daily drinking water from such a source . 
at the present time it is often closely aligned with the field of science studies . 
modern engineering as it is understood today took form during the scientific revolution ,  though much of the mathematics and science was built on the work of the greeks ,  egyptians ,  mesopotamians ,  chinese ,  indians . 
he concluded that the black hole entropy is directly proportional to the area of the event horizon . 
hawking knew that if the horizon area were an actual entropy ,  black holes would have to radiate . 
stephen hawking had shown earlier that the total horizon area of a collection of black holes always increases with time . 
since black holes are exact solutions of einstein's equations ,  they were thought not to have any entropy either . 
one way of salvaging the second law is if black holes are in fact random objects with an entropy that increases by an amount greater than the entropy of the consumed gas . 
hamilton  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a port city in the canadian province of ontario . 
hamilton is represented by the tiger-cats in the canadian football league . 
hamilton ranks first in canada for police-reported hate crimes in 2016.
though suffering through the hamilton street railway strike of 1906, with industrial businesses expanding ,  hamilton's population doubled between 1900 and 1914.
hamilton is home to 26,330 immigrants who arrived in canada between 2001 and 2010 and 13,150 immigrants who arrived between 2011 and 2016.
the around the bay road race circumnavigates hamilton harbour . 
although the hamilton police service has authority to enforce ,  bylaws passed by the hamilton city council are mainly enforced by provincial offences officers employed by the city of hamilton . 
founded in 1914, the art gallery of hamilton is ontario's third largest public art gallery . 
growth in the arts and culture sector has garnered media attention for hamilton . 
hamilton's climate is humid-continental ,  characterized by changeable weather patterns . 
the town of hamilton was conceived by george hamilton  -lrb-  a son of a queenston entrepreneur and founder ,  robert hamilton  -rrb-  ,  when he purchased farm holdings of james durand ,  the local member of the british legislative assembly ,  shortly after the war of 1812.
the dundas valley school of art is an independent art school which has served the hamilton region since 1964.
the hamilton go centre ,  formerly the toronto ,  hamilton and buffalo railway station ,  is a commuter rail station on the lakeshore west line of go transit . 
on january 1, 2001, the new city of hamilton was formed from the amalgamation of hamilton and its five neighbouring municipalities: ancaster ,  dundas ,  flamborough ,  glanbrook ,  and stoney creek . 
in 2019, forge fc will debut as hamilton's soccer team in the canadian premier league . 
hamilton harbour is a natural harbour with a large sandbar called the beachstrip . 
when ranked on a `` total crime severity index '' ,  hamilton was 21st in canada in 2011 for a metropolitan area . 
the highest temperature ever recorded in hamilton was 41.1 °c  -lrb-  106 °f  -rrb-  on 14 july 1868.
the hamilton city council is granted authority to govern by the province through the municipal act of ontario . 
hamilton also has a notable french community for which provincial services are offered in french . 
hamilton is home to more than 100 waterfalls and cascades ,  most of which are on or near the bruce trail as it winds through the niagara escarpment . 
citizens of hamilton are represented at all three levels of canadian government - federal ,  provincial ,  and munipical . 
leader of the ontario new democratic party and leader of the official opposition ,  andrea horwath ,  represents hamilton centre ,  paul miller  -lrb-  ndp  -rrb-  represents hamilton east-stoney creek ,  monique taylor  -lrb-  ndp  -rrb-  represents hamilton mountain ,  sandy shaw  -lrb-  ndp  -rrb-  represents hamilton west—ancaster—dundas ,  and progressive conservative donna skelly represents flamborough—glanbrook . 
his heir was sigismund . 
the hussite movement began in the kingdom of bohemia and quickly spread throughout the remaining lands of the bohemian crown ,  including moravia and silesia . 
bohemia and moravia ,  or what is now the territory of the czech republic ,  remained majority hussite for two centuries until roman catholicism was reimposed by the holy roman emperor after the 1620 battle of white mountain during the thirty years' war . 
the prospect of a civil war began to emerge . 
this predominantly religious movement was propelled by social issues and strengthened czech national awareness . 
the authorities of both countries appealed urgently and repeatedly to king sigismund to release jan hus . 
herman moved to spruce island around 1811 to 1817.
biographers disagree about herman's early life . 
the finnish orthodox church chapel in tapiola ,  finland is dedicated to st .  herman of alaska . 
saint herman of alaska  -lrb-  ; 1750s – november 15, 1836 -rrb- was a russian orthodox monk and missionary to alaska ,  which was then part of russian america . 
sergius and herman of valaam chapel  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  the saints sergius and herman of valaam chapel  -rrb-  ,  on spruce island ,  to the holy resurrection cathedral . 
herman spent the rest of his life on spruce island ,  where he died on november 15, 1836.
saint herman's orthodox theological seminary in kodiak ,  alaska is named in his honor ,  as are numerous parish churches throughout the world . 
there are several feast days throughout the year on which saint herman of alaska is commemorated . 
the hausdorff dimension ,  more specifically ,  is a further dimensional number associated with a given set ,  where the distances between all members of that set are defined . 
let `` x '' be a metric space . 
in mathematics ,  hausdorff dimension  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
the hausdorff dimension measures the local size of a space taking into account the distance between points ,  the metric . 
in mathematical terms ,  the hausdorff dimension generalizes the notion of the dimension of a real vector space . 
the heckler & koch group comprises heckler & koch gmbh ,  heckler & koch defense ,  nsaf ltd .  ,  and heckler & koch france sas . 
heckler & koch developed a colt m4 variant ,  marketed as the hk416.
in 1974, heckler & koch diversified into two more areas ,  hk defense and law enforcement technology and hk hunting and sports firearms . 
in 1961, heckler & koch developed the 7.62×51mm hk21 general-purpose machine gun ,  based on the g3 battle rifle . 
in 1966, heckler & koch introduced the hk54 machine pistol ,  which eventually launched in 1969 as the mp5 machine pistol . 
in 1990, heckler & koch completed two decades of development of their revolutionary caseless weapon system and produced prototypes of the hk g11.
heckler & koch gmbh  -lrb-  hk  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  is a german defense manufacturing company that manufactures handguns ,  rifles ,  submachine guns ,  and grenade launchers . 
on december 28, 1949, the engineering office heckler & co .  changed its name and was registered officially as heckler & koch gmbh . 
it fires from a closed bolt  -lrb-  bolt forward  -rrb-  position . 
in 1992, heckler & koch introduced the `` mp5/10 ''  -lrb-  chambered in 10mm auto  -rrb-  and `` mp5/40 ''  -lrb-  chambered for the  . 40 s&w cartridge  -rrb-  ,  which are based on the mp5a4 and mp5a5.
the `` mp5a4 ''  -lrb-  fixed stock  -rrb-  and `` mp5a5 ''  -lrb-  sliding stock  -rrb-  models ,  which were introduced in 1974, are available with four-position trigger groups . 
since the 9×19mm parabellum cartridge is relatively low powered ,  the bolt does not have an anti-bounce device like the g3, but instead the bolt carrier contains tungsten granules that prevent the bolt group from bouncing back after impacting the barrel extension . 
the mp5 has a hammer firing mechanism . 
the heavier bolt carrier lies up against the bolt head when the weapon is ready to fire and inclined planes on the front locking piece lie between the rollers and force them out into recesses in the barrel extension . 
the bolt rigidly engages the barrel extension—a cylindrical component welded to the receiver into which the barrel is pinned . 
the delay results from the amount of time it takes for enough recoil energy to be transferred through to the bolt carrier in a sufficient quantity for it to be driven to the rear against the force of inertia of the bolt carrier and the forward pressure exerted against the bolt by the recoil spring . 
the primary version of the mp5 family is the mp5a2, which is a lightweight ,  air-cooled ,  selective fire delayed blowback operated 9×19mm parabellum weapon with a roller-delayed bolt . 
the lever-type ejector is located inside the trigger housing  -lrb-  activated by the movement of the recoiling bolt  -rrb-  . 
in 1999, heckler & koch developed the heckler & koch ump ,  the mp5's successor; both are available  . 
only once the locking rollers are fully cammed into the bolt head can the entire bolt group continue its rearward movement in the receiver ,  breaking the seal in the chamber and continuing the feeding cycle . 
in 1974, h&k initiated design work on a sound-suppressed variant of the mp5, designated the mp5sd  -lrb-  sd— ''schalldämpfer '' ,  german for `` sound suppressor ''  -rrb-  ,  which features an integral but detachable aluminium sound suppressor and a lightweight bolt . 
middleton served in a variety of public offices in south carolina . 
henry middleton  -lrb-  1717 – june 13, 1784 -rrb- was a planter and public official from south carolina . 
henry middleton was born in 1717 near charleston ,  province of south carolina ,  to arthur middleton  -lrb-  1681–1737 -rrb- and susan amory  -lrb-  1690-1722 -rrb- ,  on the family plantation ,  `` the oaks '' . 
some dry cured hams ,  such as the jinhua ham ,  take approximately 8 to 10 months to complete . 
as a processed meat ,  the term `` ham '' includes both whole cuts of meat and ones that have been mechanically formed . 
the duration of the curing process varies by the type of ham ,  with ,  for example ,  serrano ham curing in 9–12 months ,  parma hams taking more than 12 months ,  and iberian ham taking up to 2 years to reach the desired flavour characteristics . 
ham is produced by curing raw pork by salting ,  also known as dry curing ,  or brining ,  also known as wet curing . 
traditional dry cure hams may use only salt as the curative agent ,  such as with san daniele or parma hams ,  although this is comparatively rare . 
ham can also be additionally preserved through smoking ,  in which the meat is placed in a smokehouse  -lrb-  or equivalent  -rrb-  to be cured by the action of smoke . 
the preserving of pork leg as ham has a long history ,  with cato the elder writing about the `` salting of hams '' in his `` de agri cultura '' tome around 160 bc . 
colonel in the campaigns against the cherokee indians in 1757–1761, during the french and indian war  -lrb-  also known as the seven years' war  -rrb-  . 
british forces ,  during their occupation of charleston ,  had burned the laurens home at mepkin during the war . 
instead of completing his studies ,  john laurens returned to the united states in 1776, to serve in the american revolutionary war . 
this prompted britain to declare war on the dutch republic ,  it becoming known as the fourth anglo-dutch war . 
he married eleanor ball ,  also of a south carolina rice planter family ,  on june 25, 1750.
henry laurens  -lrb-  december 8, 1792 -rrb- was an american merchant ,  slave trader ,  and rice planter from south carolina who became a political leader during the revolutionary war . 
laurens' oldest son ,  colonel john laurens ,  was killed in 1782 in the battle of the combahee river ,  as one of the last casualties of the revolutionary war . 
as designed ,  hotol would have been 62 metres long ,  12.8 metres high ,  a fuselage diameter of 5.7 meters and a wingspan of 19.7 metres . 
a cheaper redesign ,  interim hotol or hotol 2, which was to be launched from the back of a modified antonov an-225 `` mriya '' transport aircraft ,  was promoted by bae in 1991; however ,  this proposal was rejected as well . 
in november 1985, the rae issued an assessment of hotol's study proposal; the organisation believe that hotol would take up to 20 years to develop ,  rather than the 12-year timetable that had been envisioned by industry . 
the rae also projected that the project would have an estimated total cost of £5 billion  -lrb-  as of its value in 1985 -rrb- ,  £750 million of which would be required in a six-year definition phase and an estimated £25 million in a pre-definition feasibility study . 
hotol ,  for horizontal take-off and landing ,  was a 1980s british design for a single-stage-to-orbit  -lrb-  ssto  -rrb-  spaceplane that was to be powered by an airbreathing jet engine . 
it was a crucial element of the programme ,  having been publicly attributed as `` the heart of hotol's very low launch costs '' . 
the ideas behind hotol originated from work done by british engineer alan bond in the field of precooled jet engines . 
in august 1984, bae unveiled a public display of the hotol satellite launcher project and released details on its proposed operations . 
the termination of development work on hotol led to the formation of reaction engines limited  -lrb-  rel  -rrb-  to develop and produce skylon ,  a proposed spacecraft based on hotol technologies ,  including its engine . 
hotol was envisioned as an unmanned ,  fully reuseable single-stage-to-orbit  -lrb-  ssto  -rrb-  winged spaceplane . 
this was the first shark known to do this . 
smooth hammerheads have also been kept in the past . 
hammerhead sharks are known to eat a large range of prey such as fish  -lrb-  including other sharks  -rrb-  ,  squid ,  octopus ,  and crustaceans . 
hammerheads have disproportionately small mouths . 
using mitochondrial dna ,  a phylogenetic tree of the hammerhead sharks showed the winghead shark as its most basal member . 
this practice ,  known as finning ,  is lethal to the shark . 
the hall effect is due to the nature of the current in a conductor . 
the hall effect is the production of a voltage difference  -lrb-  the hall voltage  -rrb-  across an electrical conductor ,  transverse to an electric current in the conductor and to an applied magnetic field perpendicular to the current . 
the hall coefficient is defined as the ratio of the induced electric field to the product of the current density and the applied magnetic field . 
for clarity ,  the original effect is sometimes called the ordinary hall effect to distinguish it from other `` hall effects '' which have different physical mechanisms . 
in 2015, the dam generated 3.6 twh . 
the dam is protected against over-topping by two spillways . 
hoover dam is a concrete arch-gravity dam in the black canyon of the colorado river ,  on the border between the u . s .  states of nevada and arizona . 
control of water was the primary concern in the building of the dam . 
during the years of lobbying leading up to the passage of legislation authorizing the dam in 1928, the press generally referred to the dam as `` boulder dam '' or as `` boulder canyon dam '' ,  even though the proposed site had shifted to black canyon . 
there were 112 deaths reported as associated with the construction of the dam . 
the colorado river had experienced natural flooding before the construction of the hoover dam . 
originally known as boulder dam from 1933, it was officially renamed hoover dam ,  for president herbert hoover ,  by a joint resolution of congress in 1947.
despite the site change ,  the dam project was referred to as the `` boulder canyon project '' . 
when secretary wilbur spoke at the ceremony starting the building of the railway between las vegas and the dam site on september 17, 1930, he named the dam `` hoover dam '' ,  citing a tradition of naming dams after presidents ,  though none had been so honored during their terms of office . 
hoover dam was recognized as a national civil engineering landmark in 1984.
after hoover's election defeat in 1932 and the accession of the roosevelt administration ,  secretary ickes ordered on may 13, 1933, that the dam be referred to as `` boulder dam '' . 
the heavily traveled u . s .  route 93  -lrb-  us 93 -rrb- ran along the dam's crest until october 2010, when the hoover dam bypass opened . 
before the dam could be built ,  the colorado river needed to be diverted away from the construction site . 
hoover dam concrete is not subject to alkali–silica reaction  -lrb-  asr  -rrb-  ,  as the hoover dam builders happened to use nonreactive aggregate ,  unlike that at downstream parker dam ,  where asr has caused measurable deterioration . 
the initial plans for the facade of the dam ,  the power plant ,  the outlet tunnels and ornaments clashed with the modern look of an arch dam . 
when the cofferdams were in place and the construction site was drained of water ,  excavation for the dam foundation began . 
the contractor had seven years to build the dam ,  or penalties would ensue . 
on december 21, 1928, president coolidge signed the bill authorizing the dam . 
lake mead and downstream releases from the dam also provide water for both municipal and irrigation uses . 
a total of of concrete was used in the dam before concrete pouring ceased on may 29, 1935.
even before congress approved the boulder canyon project ,  the bureau of reclamation was considering what kind of dam should be used . 
tests at grand coulee dam showed that the technique worked ,  in principle . 
it is a direct sequel to `` the adventures of tom sawyer '' . 
throughout the 20th century ,  and despite arguments that the protagonist and the tenor of the book are anti-racist ,  criticism of the book continued due to both its perceived use of racial stereotypes and its frequent use of the racial slur `` nigger '' . 
while many harpsichords have one string per note ,  more elaborate harpsichords can have two or more strings for each note . 
pedal harpsichord: occasionally ,  harpsichords were built which included another set or sets of strings underneath and operated by pedals which pluck the lowest keys of the harpsichord . 
the folding harpsichord was an instrument that could be folded up for travel . 
for a detailed account of music composed for the revived harpsichord ,  see `` contemporary harpsichord '' . 
they included the first harpsichords with two keyboards ,  used for transposition . 
a spinet is a harpsichord with the strings set at an angle  -lrb-  usually about 30 degrees  -rrb-  to the keyboard . 
in modern usage ,  `` harpsichord '' can mean any member of the family of instruments . 
through the 19th century ,  the harpsichord was almost completely supplanted by the piano . 
the flemish instruments served as the model for 18th century harpsichord construction in other nations . 
bach was also a pioneer of the harpsichord concerto ,  both in works designated as such ,  and in the harpsichord part of his fifth brandenburg concerto . 
when describing a harpsichord it is customary to specify its choirs of strings ,  often called its disposition . 
the harpsichord was most likely invented in the late middle ages . 
