deoxygenated hemoglobin is the form of hemoglobin without the bound oxygen . 
hemoglobin a is the most intensively studied of the hemoglobin molecules . 
it is necessary for hemoglobin to release the oxygen that it binds; if not ,  there is no point in binding it . 
in general ,  hemoglobin can be saturated with oxygen molecules  -lrb-  oxyhemoglobin  -rrb-  ,  or desaturated with oxygen molecules  -lrb-  deoxyhemoglobin  -rrb-  . 
the mammalian hemoglobin molecule can bind  -lrb-  carry  -rrb-  up to four oxygen molecules . 
a variant hemoglobin ,  called fetal hemoglobin  -lrb-  hbf ,  αγ  -rrb-  ,  is found in the developing fetus ,  and binds oxygen with greater affinity than adult hemoglobin . 
the shift encourages oxygen to bind to the three remaining heme units within hemoglobin  -lrb-  thus ,  oxygen binding is cooperative  -rrb-  . 
this shift promotes the binding of oxygen to the remaining three monomer's heme groups ,  thus saturating the hemoglobin molecule with oxygen . 
hemoglobin's reversible oxygenation was described a few years later by felix hoppe-seyler . 
in the tetrameric form of normal adult hemoglobin ,  the binding of oxygen is ,  thus ,  a cooperative process . 
 ''oxyhemoglobin '' is formed during physiological respiration when oxygen binds to the heme component of the protein hemoglobin in red blood cells . 
there is more than one hemoglobin gene: in humans ,  hemoglobin a  -lrb-  the main form of hemoglobin present  -rrb-  is coded for by the genes ,  `` hba1 '' ,  `` hba2 '' ,  and `` hbb '' . 
in contrast ,  oxygenated hemoglobin exhibits diamagnetism ,  a weak repulsion from a magnetic field . 
as oxygen binds to one monomer of hemoglobin ,  the tetramer's conformation shifts from the t  -lrb-  tense  -rrb-  state to the r  -lrb-  relaxed  -rrb-  state . 
in its r state ,  hemoglobin will bind oxygen more readily ,  thus allowing organisms to perform the necessary metabolic processes when oxygen is present at low partial pressures . 
here ,  the iron has been oxidized by two electrons ,  and the oxygen reduced by two electrons . 
hemoglobin adaptation extends to humans ,  as well . 
carbon `` di ''oxide occupies a different binding site on the hemoglobin . 
the iron ion may be either in the fe or in the fe state ,  but ferrihemoglobin  -lrb-  methemoglobin  -rrb-   -lrb-  fe  -rrb-  cannot bind oxygen . 
the oxygen-carrying property of hemoglobin was discovered by hünefeld in 1840.
even though carbon dioxide is carried by hemoglobin ,  it does not compete with oxygen for the iron-binding positions but is bound to the protein chains of the structure . 
cnut seized the throne ,  crowning himself king of england . 
edward's solution was to expel jews from england . 
the dominance and independence of england was maintained by the kings that followed . 
while he was growing up ,  england was ruled by the regency government . 
in 1066, a norman expedition invaded and conquered england . 
the reign of edward i  -lrb-  reigned 1272–1307 -rrb- was rather more successful . 
england was also well-off compared to the other nations of europe . 
it was also the end of the period when england was a separate realm before its royal union with scotland . 
traces of their presence are ubiquitous throughout england . 
by the eighth century ,  a kind of england had emerged . 
henry i ,  the fourth son of william i the conqueror ,  succeeded his elder brother william ii as king of england in 1100.
there were renewed scandinavian attacks on england at the end of the 10th century . 
these conquests led to his adopting the title 'king of the english' for the first time . 
under the tudors and the later stuart dynasty ,  england became a colonial power . 
during edward's reign england changed from being a catholic nation to a protestant one ,  in schism from rome . 
in 1512, the young king started a war in france . 
in england ,  half a million people died ,  more than 10% of the population . 
his son ,  edward ii ,  proved a disaster . 
the end of roman rule in britain facilitated the anglo-saxon settlement of britain ,  which historians often regard as the origin of england and of the english people . 
it is possible that the celtic languages developed or spread to england as part of this system; by the end of the iron age there is much evidence that they were spoken across all england and western parts of britain . 
philip ii tried to invade england with the spanish armada in 1588 but was famously defeated . 
in 1437, henry vi came of age and began to actively rule as king . 
the newly established church of england amounted to little more than the existing catholic church ,  but led by the king rather than the pope . 
he died in january 1547 at age 55 and was succeeded by his son ,  edward vi . 
on 28 september 1066, william of normandy invaded england in a campaign called the norman conquest . 
john's son ,  henry iii ,  was only 9 years old when he became king  -lrb-  1216–1272 -rrb- . 
æthelstan continued the expansion of his father and aunt and was the first king to achieve direct rulership of what we would now consider england . 
with henry vii's accession to the throne in 1485, the wars of the roses came to an end ,  and tudors would continue to rule england for 118 years . 
in 1381, a peasants' revolt led by wat tyler spread across large parts of england . 
england was far less than enthusiastic to accept an outsider ,  and a woman ,  as their ruler . 
the elizabethan era was the epoch in english history of queen elizabeth i's reign  -lrb-  1558–1603 -rrb- . 
during this period ,  several rulers attempted to unite the various anglo-saxon kingdoms ,  an effort that led to the emergence of the kingdom of england by the 10th century . 
the reign of henry ii represents a reversion in power from the barony to the monarchical state in england; it was also to see a similar redistribution of legislative power from the church ,  again to the monarchical state . 
when england lost the hundred years' war in august 1453, henry fell into mental breakdown until christmas 1454.
england has been continually inhabited since the last ice age ended around 9,000 bc ,  the beginning of the middle stone age ,  or mesolithic era . 
edward iii ,  son of edward ii ,  was crowned at age 14 after his father was deposed by his mother and her consort roger mortimer . 
alfred of wessex died in 899 and was succeeded by his son edward the elder . 
christianisation of anglo-saxon england began around ad 600, influenced by celtic christianity from the northwest and the roman catholic church from the southeast . 
edward died in 1483, only 40 years old . 
it seems edward had his son æthelstan brought up in the mercian court ,  and on edward's death athelstan succeeded to the mercian kingdom ,  and ,  after some uncertainty ,  wessex . 
after hippocrates ,  the next significant physician was galen ,  a greek who lived from ad 129 to ad 200.
ancient greek schools of medicine were split  -lrb-  into the knidian and koan  -rrb-  on how to deal with disease . 
soranus of ephesus ,  a 2nd-century greek physician ,  was hippocrates' first biographer and is the source of most personal information about him . 
hippocrates of kos  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  ,  also known as hippocrates ii ,  was a greek physician of the age of pericles  -lrb-  classical greece  -rrb-  ,  who is considered one of the most outstanding figures in the history of medicine . 
soranus wrote that hippocrates' father was heraclides ,  a physician ,  and his mother was praxitela ,  daughter of tizane . 
the hippocratic school of medicine described well the ailments of the human rectum and the treatment thereof ,  despite the school's poor theory of medicine . 
henri huchard ,  a french physician ,  said that these revivals make up `` the whole history of internal medicine . `` 
 ''his figure .  .  .  stands for all time as that of the ideal physician , ``  according to `` a short history of medicine '' ,  inspiring the medical profession since his death . 
for this reason ,  he may more properly be termed as the `` father of medicine '' . 
francis adams describes him as `` strictly the physician of experience and common sense . `` 
according to galen ,  a later physician ,  polybus was hippocrates' true successor ,  while thessalus and draco each had a son named hippocrates  -lrb-  hippocrates iii and iv  -rrb-  . 
he is also credited with greatly advancing the systematic study of clinical medicine ,  summing up the medical knowledge of previous schools ,  and prescribing practices for physicians through the hippocratic corpus and other works . 
göring remained in aviation after the war . 
hitler later recalled his early association with göring:
in his own nuremberg testimony ,  göring denied this story . 
göring joined the nazi party in 1922 after hearing a speech by hitler . 
göring's daughter ,  edda ,  was born on 2 june 1938.
göring immediately called for a crackdown on communists . 
göring met mussolini ,  who expressed an interest in meeting hitler ,  who was by then in prison . 
göring was known for his extravagant tastes and garish clothing . 
when world war i began in august 1914, göring was stationed at mulhouse with his regiment . 
göring was noted for his patronage of music ,  especially opera . 
by 1941, göring was at the peak of his power and influence ,  and hitler designated him as his successor and deputy in all his offices . 
göring was appointed reich master of the hunt in 1933 and master of the german forests in 1934.
stivers later said that he did not know what was in the pill until after göring's suicide . 
göring was born on 12 january 1893 at the marienbad sanatorium in rosenheim ,  bavaria . 
göring's name is closely associated with the nazi plunder of jewish property . 
after completing the pilot's training course ,  göring was assigned to `` jagdstaffel '' 5.
in may 1931, hitler sent göring on a mission to the vatican ,  where he met the future pope pius xii . 
during a cabinet meeting in september 1936, göring and hitler announced that the german rearmament programme must be sped up . 
göring was found guilty on all four counts and was sentenced to death by hanging . 
after the fall of france ,  hitler awarded göring the grand cross of the iron cross for his successful leadership . 
bormann made an announcement over the radio that göring had resigned for health reasons . 
after göring met adolf hitler and joined the nazi party  -lrb-  nsdap  -rrb-  in 1922, they moved to obermenzing ,  a suburb of munich . 
the telegram was intercepted by bormann ,  who convinced hitler that göring was a traitor and that the telegram was a demand to resign or be overthrown . 
in britain and the united states ,  some viewed göring as more acceptable than the other nazis and as a possible mediator between the western democracies and hitler . 
after the war ,  göring was convicted of conspiracy ,  crimes against peace ,  war crimes and crimes against humanity at the nuremberg trials . 
it is also used in beverages ,  such as horehound beer ,  steeped as tea  -lrb-  similar to the maghrebi mint tea  -rrb-  ,  and in the rock and rye cocktail . 
marrubium vulgare  -lrb-  white horehound or common horehound  -rrb-  is a flowering plant in the mint family  -lrb-  lamiaceae  -rrb-  ,  native to europe ,  northern africa ,  and southwestern and central asia . 
horehound was introduced to southern australia in the 19th century as a medicinal herb . 
the oxford english dictionary derives the word from two old english forms: `` hoar ''  -lrb-  `` white , ``  `` light-colored , ``  as in `` hoarfrost ''  -rrb-  and `` hune '' a word of unknown origin designating a class of herbs or plants . 
hyperthyroidism is the condition that occurs due to excessive production of thyroid hormone by the thyroid gland . 
hyperthyroidism due to certain types of thyroiditis can eventually lead to hypothyroidism  -lrb-  a `` lack '' of thyroid hormone  -rrb-  ,  as the thyroid gland is damaged . 
such hypothyroidism may be treated by regular thyroid hormone testing and oral thyroid hormone supplementation . 
thyroid scintigraphy is a useful test to characterize  -lrb-  distinguish between causes of  -rrb-  hyperthyroidism ,  and this entity from thyroiditis . 
functional thyroid tissue producing an excess of thyroid hormone occurs in a number of clinical conditions . 
some have swelling of the front of the neck from an enlarged thyroid gland  -lrb-  a goiter  -rrb-  . 
thyroid hormone is critical to normal function of cells . 
for the imaging scan ,  i-123 is considered an almost ideal isotope of iodine for imaging thyroid tissue and thyroid cancer metastasis . 
publishers of web content may object to the transclusion of material from their own web sites into other web sites ,  or they may require an agreement to do so . 
other publishers may seek specifically to have their materials transcluded into other web sites ,  as in the form of web advertising ,  or as widgets like a hit counter or web bug . 
through techniques such as ajax ,  scripts associated with an html document can instruct a web browser to modify the document in-place ,  as opposed to the earlier technique of having to pull an entirely new version of the page from the web server . 
such scripts may transclude elements or documents from a server after the web browser has rendered the page ,  in response to user input or changing conditions ,  for example . 
in computer science ,  transclusion is the inclusion of part or all of an electronic document into one or more other documents by hypertext reference . 
html has relied heavily on client-side transclusion from the earliest days of the web  -lrb-  so web pages could be displayed more quickly before multimedia elements finished loading  -rrb-  ,  rather than embedding the raw data for such objects inline into a web page's markup . 
future versions of html may support deeper transclusion of portions of documents using xml technologies such as entities ,  xpointer document referencing ,  and xslt manipulations . 
daas invited russell and lovecraft to the organization and both accepted ,  lovecraft in april 1914.
lovecraft's aunts disapproved of this relationship with sonia . 
late 1919 saw lovecraft become more outgoing . 
during this period lovecraft revived his earlier scientific periodicals . 
lovecraft's weight increased to on his wife's home cooking . 
not much of lovecraft and susie's activities from late 1908 to 1913 are recorded . 
it was at one such convention in july that lovecraft met sonia greene . 
lovecraft was born in providence ,  rhode island ,  where he spent most of his life . 
for his part ,  lovecraft said he found his mother to be `` a positive marvel of consideration . `` 
lovecraft immersed himself in the world of amateur journalism for most of the following decade . 
lovecraft was born in his family home on august 20, 1890, in providence ,  rhode island . 
thirty years later night gaunts would appear in lovecraft's writing . 
lovecraft was listed along with his parents on the phillips family monument  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
according to scholar s .  t .  joshi: `` there is never an entity in lovecraft that is not in some fashion material '' . 
the huns also traded with the romans . 
the first hunnic ruler known by name is uldin . 
it was also practiced by other peoples called huns in asia . 
from 434 the brothers attila and bleda ruled the huns together . 
scholars also discussed the relationship between the xungnu ,  the huns ,  and a number of people in central asia were also known as or came to be identified with the name `` hun '' or `` iranian huns '' ,  the chionites ,  the kidarites ,  and the hephthalites  -lrb-  or white huns  -rrb-  being the most prominent . 
as to the hunnic language itself ,  only three words are recorded in ancient sources as being `` hunnic , ``  all of which appear to be from an indo-european language . 
during their brief diversion from the eastern roman empire ,  the huns may have threatened tribes further west . 
hunnic governmental structure has long been debated . 
roman gold coins appear to have been in circulation as currency within the whole of the hunnic empire . 
bleda died in 445, and attila became the sole ruler of the huns . 
however ,  by the middle of the fifth century ,  the huns are also known to have also owned permanent wooden houses ,  which maenchen-helfen believes were built by their gothic subjects . 
after the fall of the hunnic empire ,  various legends arose concerning the huns . 
after attila's death in 453, the hunnic empire faced an internal power struggle between its vassalized germanic peoples and the hunnic ruling body . 
the etymology of `` hun '' is unclear . 
almost nothing is known about the religion of the huns . 
very little is known about hunnic culture and very few archaeological remains have been conclusively associated with the huns . 
ancient descriptions of the huns are uniform in stressing their strange appearance from a roman perspective . 
john man argues that the huns of attila's time likely worshipped the sky and the steppe deity tengri ,  who is also attested as having been worshipped by the xiongnu . 
a late roman ridge helmet of the berkasovo-type was found with a hun burial at concesti . 
the huns may have stimulated the great migration ,  a contributing factor in the collapse of the western roman empire . 
in 447, attila invaded the balkans and thrace . 
denis sinor has argued that at the time of attila ,  the hunnic economy became almost entirely dependent on plunder and tribute from the roman provinces . 
classical sources also frequently use the names of older and unrelated steppe nomads instead of the name `` hun '' ,  calling them massagetae ,  scythians ,  cimmerians ,  among other names . 
priscus also attests that the widow of attila's brother bleda was in command of a village that the roman ambassadors rode through: her territory may have included a larger area . 
priscus also speaks of `` picked men '' or `` logades ''  -lrb-  `` λογάδες ''  -rrb-  forming part of attila's government ,  naming five of them . 
he suggests that various roman defectors to the huns may have worked in a sort of imperial bureaucracy . 
civilians and soldiers captured by the huns might also be ransomed back ,  or else sold to roman slave dealers as slaves . 
the tool time girl also assists tim and al during the show by bringing them tools . 
each episode includes tim's own binford-sponsored home improvement show ,  called `` tool time '' ,  a show-within-a-show . 
in the first two years of the show ,  pamela anderson played the part of tim's tool girl ,  lisa ,  on `` tool time '' ,  but left the show to focus on her role on the syndicated series `` baywatch '' . 
walt disney studios home entertainment has released all eight seasons on dvd in region 1, 2 and 4.
bob vila appeared as a guest star on several episodes of `` home improvement '' ,  while tim allen and pamela anderson both appeared on bob vila's show `` home again '' . 
the special is included on the season 8 dvd set . 
this popular catchphrase would not be uttered after `` home improvement ''s seventh season ,  until tim's last line in the series finale ,  which are the last two words ever spoken . 
once the second phase of the pilot was produced ,  with all the actors that made the final cut into the series  -lrb-  including patricia richardson  -rrb-  ,  tim taylor's `` hammer time '' became `` tool time '' . 
home improvement is an american television sitcom starring tim allen that aired on abc from september 17, 1991 to may 25, 1999, with a total of 204 half-hour episodes spanning over eight seasons . 
 ''home improvement '' received numerous awards and nominations in its 8-season run . 
watchmojo . com ranked home improvement as the #9 tv sitcom from the 1990s . 
beginning in season 2, `` home improvement '' began each episode with a cold open ,  which features the show's logo during the teaser . 
richard karn guest starred in two episodes of tim allen's 2010s abc sitcom `` last man standing '' in 2013.
 ''tool time '' was conceived as a parody of the pbs home-improvement show `` this old house '' . 
also in later seasons ,  wilson's full name was revealed to be wilson w .  wilson ,  jr . 
before the first pilot was shot ,  actor john bedford lloyd was in the running for one of two roles; that of tim's `` tool time '' assistant  -lrb-  originally named `` glen ''  -rrb-  and the role of wilson . 
roman britain  -lrb-   or ,  later ,  ``  '' ,  `` the britains ''  -rrb-  was the area of the island of great britain that was governed by the roman empire ,  from 43 to 410 ad . 
in the following years ,  the romans conquered more of the island ,  increasing the size of roman britain . 
roman citizens settled in britain from many parts of the empire . 
albinus had demonstrated the major problem posed by roman britain . 
on nero's accession roman britain extended as far north as lindum . 
it is not clear when or how christianity came to britain . 
the urban population of roman britain was about 240,000 people at the end of the fourth century . 
the final roman withdrawal from britain occurred around 410; the native kingdoms are considered to have formed sub-roman britain after that . 
during this time ,  the emperor nero considered withdrawing roman forces from britain altogether . 
for much of the history of roman britain ,  a large number of soldiers were garrisoned on the island . 
many of britain's major cities ,  such as london  -lrb-  londinium  -rrb-  ,  manchester  -lrb-  mamucium  -rrb-  and york  -lrb-  eboracum  -rrb-  ,  were founded by the romans ,  but the original roman settlements were abandoned not long after the romans left . 
during their occupation of britain the romans founded a number of important settlements ,  many of which still survive . 
roman britain had an estimated population between 2.8 million and 3 million people at the end of the second century . 
this was the high-water mark of roman territory in britain: shortly after his victory ,  agricola was recalled from britain back to rome ,  and the romans retired to a more defensible line along the forth–clyde isthmus ,  freeing soldiers badly needed along other frontiers . 
colchester was probably the earliest capital of roman britain ,  but it was soon eclipsed by london with its strong mercantile connections . 
the conquest of britain continued under command of gnaeus julius agricola  -lrb-  77–84 -rrb- ,  who expanded the roman empire as far as caledonia . 
after capturing the south of the island ,  the romans turned their attention to what is now wales . 
julius caesar invaded britain in 55 and 54 bc as part of his gallic wars . 
during their occupation of britain the romans built an extensive network of roads which continued to be used in later centuries and many are still followed today . 
under the roman empire ,  administration of peaceful provinces was ultimately the remit of the senate ,  but those ,  like britain ,  that required permanent garrisons ,  were placed under the emperor's control . 
the romans introduced a number of species to britain ,  including possibly the now-rare roman nettle  -lrb-  `` urtica pilulifera ''  -rrb-  ,  said to have been used by soldiers to warm their arms and legs ,  and the edible snail `` helix pomatia '' . 
it has been argued that roman britain's continental trade peaked in the late 1st century ad and thereafter declined as a result of an increasing reliance on local products by the population of britain ,  caused by economic development on the island and by the roman state's desire to save money by shifting away from expensive long-distance imports . 
the traditional view is that northern britain descended into anarchy during albinus's absence . 
a letter found on a lead tablet in bath ,  somerset ,  datable to c .  363, had been widely publicised as documentary evidence regarding the state of christianity in britain during roman times . 
there was also cultural diversity in other roman-british towns ,  which were sustained by considerable migration ,  both within britannia and from other roman territories ,  including north africa ,  roman syria ,  the eastern mediterranean ,  and continental europe . 
sufficient roman silver has been found in scotland to suggest more than ordinary trade ,  and it is likely that the romans were reinforcing treaty agreements by paying tribute to their implacable enemies ,  the picts . 
during the roman period britain's continental trade was principally directed across the southern north sea and eastern channel ,  focusing on the narrow strait of dover ,  with more limited links via the atlantic seaways . 
under roman rule the britons continued to worship native celtic deities ,  such as ancasta ,  but often conflated with their roman equivalents ,  like mars rigonemetos at nettleham . 
while paulinus was campaigning in mona ,  the southeast of britain rose in revolt under the leadership of boudica . 
the most common cause of hemiparesis and hemiplegia is stroke . 
pusher syndrome is a clinical disorder following left or right brain damage in which patients actively push their weight away from the nonhemiparetic side to the hemiparetic side . 
weakness on one side of the face may occur and may be due to a viral infection ,  stroke or a cancer . 
having a patient sit with their stronger side next to a wall and instructing them to lean towards the wall is an example of a possible treatment for pusher behaviour . 
hemiplegia patients usually show a characteristic gait . 
pusher syndrome is sometimes confused with and used interchangeably as the term hemispatial neglect ,  and some previous theories suggest that neglect leads to pusher syndrome . 
other causes of hemiplegia in adults include trauma ,  bleeding ,  brain infections and cancers . 
in patients with acute stroke and hemiparesis ,  the disorder is present in 10.4% of patients . 
other impairments ,  though ,  can at first seem completely non-related to the limb weakness but are ,  in fact ,  a direct result of the damage to the affected side of the brain . 
bergson lived the quiet life of a french professor ,  marked by the publication of his four principal works:
james's impression of bergson is given in his letters under date of 4 october 1908:
bergson traveled to london in 1908 and met there with william james ,  the harvard philosopher who was bergson's senior by seventeen years ,  and who was instrumental in calling the attention of the anglo-american public to the work of the french professor . 
in 1900 the college of france selected bergson to a chair of greek and roman philosophy ,  which he held until 1904.
henri bergson married louise neuberger ,  a cousin of marcel proust ,  in 1891.
while at the lycée bergson won a prize for his scientific work and another ,  in 1877 when he was eighteen ,  for the solution of a mathematical problem . 
in 1901 the académie des sciences morales et politiques elected bergson as a member ,  and he became a member of the institute . 
bergson dedicated `` time and free will '' to  -lrb-  1832–1918 -rrb- ,  then public education minister ,  a disciple of félix ravaisson  -lrb-  1813–1900 -rrb- and the author of a philosophical work `` on the founding of induction ''  -lrb-  `` du fondement de l'induction '' ,  1871 -rrb- . 
bergson attended the lycée fontanes  -lrb-  known as the lycée condorcet 1870–1874 and 1883–present  -rrb-  in paris from 1868 to 1878.
on the death of gabriel tarde ,  the sociologist and philosopher ,  in 1904, bergson succeeded him in the chair of modern philosophy . 
later he developed the idea of two `` reservoirs '' of stress resistance ,  or alternatively stress energy . 
selye wrote `` the stress of life ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb- ,  `` from dream to discovery: on being a scientist ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- and `` stress without distress ''  -lrb-  1974 -rrb- . 
he later coined the term `` stress '' ,  which has been accepted into the lexicon of most other languages . 
selye discovered and documented that stress differs from other physical responses in that stress is stressful whether one receives good or bad news ,  whether the impulse is positive or negative . 
later selye and eight nobel laureates founded the canadian institute of stress . 
reflecting the two types of hackers ,  there are two definitions of the word `` hacker '':
white hats are hackers who work to keep data safe from other hackers by finding system vulnerabilities that can be mitigated . 
black hats or crackers are hackers with malicious intentions . 
sometimes ,  `` hacker '' is simply used synonymously with `` geek '': `` a true hacker is not a group person . 
they restrict the use of the term cracker to their categories of script kiddies and black hat hackers instead . 
while `` hacker '' can refer to any skilled computer programmer ,  the term has become associated in popular culture with a `` security hacker '' ,  someone who ,  with their technical knowledge ,  uses bugs or exploits to break into computer systems . 
even if not malicious ,  their work can still be illegal ,  if done without the target system owner's consent ,  and grey hats are usually associated with black hat hackers . 
crackers find exploits for system vulnerabilities and often use them to their advantage by either selling the fix to the system owner or selling the exploit to other black hat hackers ,  who in turn use it to steal information or gain royalties . 
among security hackers ,  there are several types ,  including:
their work is not illegal because it is done with the system owner's consent . 
heart of darkness  -lrb-  1899 -rrb- is a novella by polish-english novelist joseph conrad about a narrated voyage up the congo river into the congo free state in the so-called `` heart of africa '' . 
later in 1902, `` heart of darkness '' was included in the book ``  ''  -lrb-  published on 13 november 1902, by william blackwood  -rrb-  . 
the volume consisted of `` youth: a narrative '' ,  `` heart of darkness '' and `` the end of the tether '' in that order . 
some have referred to hinduism as the `` vaidika dharma '' . 
the ancient scriptures of hinduism are in sanskrit . 
to its adherents ,  hinduism is a traditional way of life . 
part of the problem with a single definition of the term `` hinduism '' is the fact that hinduism does not have a founder . 
dharma is considered the foremost goal of a human being in hinduism . 
hinduism ,  to them ,  is a tradition that can be traced at least to the ancient vedic era . 
moksha  -lrb-  sanskrit: '  -rrb-  or mukti  -lrb-  sanskrit:   -rrb-  is the ultimate ,  most important goal in hinduism . 
hinduism as it is commonly known can be subdivided into a number of major currents . 
the proper pursuit of artha is considered an important aim of human life in hinduism . 
michaels distinguishes three hindu religions and four forms of hindu religiosity . 
the denominations of hinduism ,  states lipner ,  are unlike those found in major religions of the world ,  because hindu denominations are fuzzy with individuals practicing more than one ,  and he suggests the term `` hindu polycentrism '' . 
the four largest denominations of hinduism are the vaishnavism ,  shaivism ,  shaktism and smartism . 
theism is also difficult to use as a unifying doctrine for hinduism ,  because while some hindu philosophies postulate a theistic ontology of creation ,  other hindus are or have been atheists . 
hinduism is an indian religion and `` dharma '' ,  or way of life ,  widely practised in the indian subcontinent and parts of southeast asia . 
hinduism is the world's third largest religion; its followers ,  known as hindus ,  constitute about 1.15 billion ,  or 15–16% of the global population . 
sarvepalli radhakrishnan sought to reconcile western rationalism with hinduism ,  `` presenting hinduism as an essentially rationalistic and humanistic religious experience '' . 
philosophically ,  their beliefs are rooted in the dualism sub-schools of vedantic hinduism . 
in agamic schools of hinduism ,  the vedic literature and the agamas are equally authoritative . 
authority and eternal truths play an important role in hinduism . 
since the 19th-century indian modernists have re-asserted the 'aryan origins' of hinduism ,  `` purifying '' hinduism from its tantric elements and elevating the vedic elements . 
this inclusivism was further developed in the 19th and 20th centuries by hindu reform movements and neo-vedanta ,  and has become characteristic of modern hinduism . 
some hindus challenge the authority of the vedas ,  thereby implicitly acknowledging its importance to the history of hinduism ,  states lipner . 
major life stage milestones are celebrated as `` sanskara ''  -lrb-  `` saṃskāra '' ,  rites of passage  -rrb-  in hinduism . 
there are 108 muktikā upanishads in hinduism ,  of which between 10 and 13 are variously counted by scholars as principal upanishads . 
 ''this sense of greater unity '' ,  states sanderson ,  `` came to be called hinduism '' . 
hinduism has no central doctrinal authority and many practising hindus do not claim to belong to any particular denomination or tradition . 
beginning in the 19th century ,  indian modernists re-asserted hinduism as a major asset of indian civilisation ,  meanwhile `` purifying '' hinduism from its tantric elements and elevating the vedic elements . 
in hinduism ,  kama is considered an essential and healthy goal of human life when pursued without sacrificing dharma ,  artha and moksha . 
the help desk staff and supporting it staff may not all work from the same location . 
a large number of these help desks have strict rosters . 
a typical help desk can effectively perform several functions . 
some target the enterprise level help desk and some target departmental needs . 
there are also in-house help desks designed to provide assistance to employees . 
bordeaux came from a family of lawyers of savoy . 
when his father died in 1896 he returned to savoy . 
fielding wrote at least two articles it in 1737 and 1738.
he also contributed a number of works to journals of the day . 
he became the chief writer for the whig government of henry pelham . 
although writing for the opposition to walpole that included tories as well as whigs ,  fielding was `` unshakably a whig '' and often praised whig heroes such as the duke of marlborough and gilbert burnet . 
his younger sister ,  sarah ,  also became a successful writer . 
joined by his younger half-brother john ,  he helped found what some have called london's first police force ,  the bow street runners ,  in 1749.
fielding dedicated his play `` don quixote in england '' to the opposition whig leader lord chesterfield and it was published on 17 april 1734, the same day writs were issued for the general election . 
a major part of defining a crime as a hate crime is that it is directed toward a historically oppressed group . 
a hate crime law is a law intended to deter bias-motivated violence . 
a hate crime  -lrb-  also known as a bias-motivated crime or bias crime  -rrb-  is a prejudice-motivated crime which occurs when a perpetrator targets a victim because of his or her membership  -lrb-  or perceived membership  -rrb-  in a certain social group or race . 
hate crimes can have significant and wide-ranging psychological consequences ,  not only for their direct victims but for others as well . 
hans christian andersen  -lrb-  ; ; 2 april 1805 – 4 august 1875 -rrb- was a danish author . 
in the 1840s ,  andersen's attention returned to the stage ,  but with little success . 
andersen's father ,  who had received an elementary school education ,  introduced andersen to literature ,  reading to him the `` arabian nights '' . 
hans christian andersen was born in odense ,  denmark on 2 april 1805.
in june 1847, andersen paid his first visit to england and enjoyed a triumphal social success during the summer . 
ten years later ,  andersen visited england again ,  primarily to meet dickens . 
one of copenhagen's widest and busiest boulevards is named `` h . c .  andersens boulevard '' . 
andersen often fell in love with unattainable women ,  and many of his stories are interpreted as references . 
andersen would continue to write fairy tales and published them in installments until 1872.
1845 saw a breakthrough for andersen with the publication of four translations of his fairy tales . 
it should be called the 'hamlet complex' . `` 
 ''hamlet '' is shakespeare's longest play . 
the protagonist of `` hamlet '' is prince hamlet of denmark ,  son of the recently deceased king hamlet ,  and nephew of king claudius ,  his father's brother and successor . 
of all the characters ,  hamlet has the greatest rhetorical skill . 
hamlet's soliloquies have also captured the attention of scholars . 
the tragedy of hamlet ,  prince of denmark ,  often shortened to hamlet  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a tragedy written by william shakespeare at an uncertain date between 1599 and 1602.
laertes and hamlet fight by ophelia's graveside ,  but the brawl is broken up . 
his very first words in the play are a pun; when claudius addresses him as `` my cousin hamlet ,  and my son '' ,  hamlet says as an aside: `` a little more than kin ,  and less than kind . `` 
hamlet jokes with claudius about where he has hidden polonius's body ,  and the king ,  fearing for his life ,  sends rosencrantz and guildenstern to accompany hamlet to england with a sealed letter to the english king requesting that hamlet be executed immediately . 
after the ghost appears again ,  the three vow to tell prince hamlet what they have witnessed . 
 ''hamlet '' departed from contemporary dramatic convention in several ways . 
l .  frank baum's first published short story was `` they played a new hamlet ''  -lrb-  1895 -rrb- . 
it is not until late in the play ,  after his experience with the pirates ,  that hamlet is able to articulate his feelings freely . 
polonius forces ophelia to return hamlet's love letters and tokens of affection to the prince while he and claudius watch from afar to evaluate hamlet's reaction . 
polonius tells claudius and gertrude his theory regarding hamlet's behaviour ,  and speaks to hamlet in a hall of the castle to try to uncover more information . 
in the 1950s ,  lacan's structuralist theories about `` hamlet '' were first presented in a series of seminars given in paris and later published in `` desire and the interpretation of desire in `` hamlet '' '' . 
there is the story of the woman who read hamlet for the first time and said ,  `` i don't see why people admire that play so . 
 ''any dating of `` hamlet '' must be tentative '' ,  cautions the `` new cambridge '' editor ,  phillip edwards . 
in the essay `` hamlet made simple '' ,  david p .  gontar turns the tables on the psychoanalysts by suggesting that claudius is not a symbolic father figure but actually prince hamlet's biological father . 
in the `` bloom's shakespeare through the ages '' volume on hamlet ,  editors bloom and foster express a conviction that the intentions of shakespeare in portraying the character of hamlet in the play exceeded the capacity of the freudian oedipus complex to completely encompass the extent of characteristics depicted in hamlet throughout the tragedy: `` for once ,  freud regressed in attempting to fasten the oedipus complex upon hamlet: it will not stick ,  and merely showed that freud did better than t . s . 
she gives the example of hamlet's advice to ophelia ,  `` get thee to a nunnery '' ,  which is simultaneously a reference to a place of chastity and a slang term for a brothel ,  reflecting hamlet's confused feelings about female sexuality . 
beginning in 1910, with the publication of `` the œdipus-complex as an explanation of hamlet's mystery: a study in motive '' ernest jones—a psychoanalyst and freud's biographer—developed freud's ideas into a series of essays that culminated in his book `` hamlet and oedipus ''  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- . 
old high german evolved from about 500 ad . 
the high german languages are marked by the high german consonant shift ,  separating them from low german and low franconian  -lrb-  dutch  -rrb-  within the continental west germanic dialect continuum . 
as a technical term ,  the `` high '' in high german is a geographical reference to the group of dialects that forms `` high german ''  -lrb-  i . e . 
bok is better known for his art than for his fiction . 
bok and petaja first met in the summer of 1936.
between 1967 and 1970, petaja published five portfolios of bok's art . 
the science fiction and fantasy author emil petaja  -lrb-  1915–2000 -rrb- was lifelong friend of bok and collector of his work . 
after bok's death ,  petaja did as much as anyone to keep the artist's work before the public eye . 
bok and petaja's friendship continued in los angeles ,  where each had relocated in 1937.
petaja's first book ,  `` brief candle ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- ,  contained twelve poems by petaja and twelve illustrations by bok . 
 ''hen wlad fy nhadau ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the national anthem of wales . 
in 1905, `` hen wlad fy nhadau '' became the first national anthem to be sung at the start of a sporting event . 
usually this will be the only anthem sung: only the first stanza and chorus are usually sung  -lrb-  and in the welsh language  -rrb-  . 
tradition has established `` hen wlad fy nhadau '' as an unofficial welsh anthem since 1905, when it was first sung by fans at rugby games ,  although the official anthem at the time was `` god bless the prince of wales '' . 
at the bangor eisteddfod of 1874 `` hen wlad fy nhadau '' gained further popularity when it was sung by robert rees  -lrb-  `` eos morlais ''  -rrb-  ,  one of the leading welsh soloists of his day . 
in 1977 the band released their first album ,  `` street '' . 
brood's outspoken statements in the press about sex and drug use brought him into the dutch public arena even more than his music . 
in 2007 the film `` wild romance '' ,  a movie about brood's life ,  premiered in the netherlands ,  with brood portrayed by daniël boissevain . 
hermanus `` herman '' brood  -lrb-  ; 5 november 1946 – 11 july 2001 -rrb- was a dutch musician and painter . 
herman brood was born in zwolle ,  and started playing the piano at age 12.
after his career in music ,  brood turned to painting and became a well-known character in amsterdam art circles . 
in the middle of the show bono delivered an emotional eulogy to brood before the band performed `` in a little while '' . 
in algebra ,  a homomorphism is a structure-preserving map between two algebraic structures of the same type  -lrb-  such as two groups ,  two rings ,  or two vector spaces  -rrb-  . 
a homomorphism is a map between two algebraic structures of the same type  -lrb-  that is of the same name  -rrb-  ,  that preserves the operations of the structures . 
homomorphisms of vector spaces are also called linear maps ,  and their study is the object of linear algebra . 
hypercard 2.0 added a debugger ,  also . 
hypercard is based on the concept of a `` stack '' of virtual `` cards '' . 
at the same time hypercard 2.0 was being developed ,  a separate group within apple developed and in 1991 released hypercard iigs ,  a version of hypercard for the apple iigs system . 
hypercard was a huge hit almost instantly . 
each hypercard object class ,  contains a set of `` properties '' . 
hypercard has been used for a range of hypertext and artistic purposes . 
hypercard contains an object oriented scripting language called `` hypertalk '' . 
although `` stacks ''  -lrb-  hypercard program documents  -rrb-  were not binary-compatible ,  a translator program  -lrb-  another hypercard stack  -rrb-  allowed stacks to be moved from one platform to the other . 
it was this combination of features that also made hypercard a powerful hypermedia system . 
very few viruses were based on hypercard ,  and their overall impact was minimal . 
hypercard has lower hardware requirements than macromedia director . 
the first hypercard virus was discovered in belgium and the netherlands in april 1991.
hypercard was created by bill atkinson following an lsd trip . 
hypercard was originally released in 1987 for $49.95 and was included for free with all new macs sold then . 
in 2001 steve wozniak called hypercard `` the best program ever written '' . 
hypercard ran in the classic environment ,  but was not ported to mac os x . 
despite the new revenue stream ,  claris did little to market hypercard . 
inside apple ,  the quicktime team was one of hypercard's biggest customers . 
several attempts were made to restart hypercard development once it returned to apple . 
biological tissue has little inherent contrast in either the light or electron microscope . 
for light microscopy ,  a steel knife mounted in a microtome is used to cut 4-micrometer-thick tissue sections which are mounted on a glass microscope slide . 
further fixatives are often used for electron microscopy such as osmium tetroxide or uranyl acetate . 
embedding can also be accomplished using frozen ,  non-fixed tissue in a water-based medium . 
sections can be cut through the tissue in a number of directions . 
the aim of tissue processing is to remove water from tissues and replace with a medium that solidifies to allow thin sections to be cut . 
frozen sectioning can also be used to determine if a tumour is malignant when it is found incidentally during surgery on a patient . 
there are many other staining techniques that have been used to selectively stain cells and cellular components . 
uranyl acetate and lead citrate are commonly used to impart contrast to tissue in the electron microscope . 
fixed or unfixed tissue may be frozen and sliced using a microtome mounted in a refrigeration device known as a cryostat . 
herodotus  -lrb-   484 bc – 425 bc  -rrb-  was an ancient greek historian who was born in halicarnassus in the persian empire  -lrb-  modern-day bodrum ,  turkey  -rrb-  . 
on account of this ,  he is often referred to as `` the father of history '' ,  a title first conferred on him by the first-century bc roman orator cicero . 
schneider proposes that by testing an historian against the criteria of the `` objective historian '' then ,  even if an historian holds specific political views  -lrb-  and she gives an example of a well-qualified historian's testimony that was disregarded by a united states court because he was a member of a feminist group  -rrb-  ,  providing the historian uses the `` objective historian '' standards ,  he or she is a `` conscientious historian '' . 
a historian is a person who studies and writes about the past ,  and is regarded as an authority on it . 
famous historians in this tradition include urwah  -lrb-  d .  712 -rrb- ,  wahb ibn munabbih  -lrb-  d .  728 -rrb- ,  ibn ishaq  -lrb-  d .  761 -rrb- ,  al-waqidi  -lrb-  745–822 -rrb- ,  ibn hisham  -lrb-  d .  834 -rrb- ,  muhammad al-bukhari  -lrb-  810–870 -rrb- and ibn hajar  -lrb-  1372–1449 -rrb- . 
he was also one of the first historians who understood the importance of general and universally applicable ideas in the shaping of historical events . 
one of the major progenitors of the history of culture and art ,  was the swiss historian jacob burckhardt burckhardt's best-known work is `` the civilization of the renaissance in italy ''  -lrb-  1860 -rrb- . 
by summarizing gray's judgement ,  in an article published in the `` yale law journal '' ,  wendie e .  schneider distils these seven points for what he meant by an objective historian: schneider uses the concept of the `` objective historian '' to suggest that this could be an aid in assessing what makes an historian suitable as an expert witnesses under the daubert standard in the united states . 
this was necessary so that there would be a legal bench mark to compare and contrast the scholarship of an objective historian against the illegitimate methods employed by david irving ,  as before the `` irving v penguin books and lipstadt '' trial ,  there was no legal precedent for what constituted an objective historian . 
schneider proposed this ,  because ,  in her opinion ,  irving could have passed the standard daubert tests unless a court was given `` a great deal of assistance from historians '' . 
 ''historian '' became a professional occupation in the late nineteenth century as research universities were emerging in germany and elsewhere . 
hesse's `` siddhartha '' is one of the most popular western novels set in india . 
by the time hesse returned to civilian life in 1919, his marriage had shattered . 
there is also a theater in chicago named after the novel ,  steppenwolf theater . 
 ''the glass bead game '' was hesse's last novel . 
the same year ,  he began spending time with older companions and took up drinking and smoking . 
in his time ,  hesse was a popular and influential author in the german-speaking world; worldwide fame only came later . 
this experience from his youth ,  especially his time spent at the seminary in maulbronn ,  he returns to later in his novel `` beneath the wheel '' . 
marie's father ,  hermann gundert  -lrb-  also the namesake of his grandson  -rrb-  ,  managed the publishing house at the time ,  and johannes hesse succeeded him in 1893.
in 1931, hesse began planning what would become his last major work ,  `` the glass bead game ''  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
in 1901, hesse undertook to fulfill a long-held dream and travelled for the first time to italy . 
during this time ,  there also was increased dissonance between him and maria ,  and in 1911 hesse left for a long trip to sri lanka and indonesia . 
hermann karl hesse was born on 2 july 1877 in the black forest town of calw in württemberg ,  german empire  -lrb-  deutsches-kaiserreich  -rrb-  . 
during this time ,  he was introduced to the home of fräulein von reutern ,  a friend of his family's . 
young hesse shared a love of music with his mother . 
they also rearranged the balance of power in the muslim world as egypt once again emerged as a major power in the eastern mediterranean . 
in 1347 the black death spread from constantinople across the mediterranean basin . 
today ,  the mediterranean sea is the southern border of the european union and represents one of the largest area by trade in the world . 
from the 6th century bc up to including the first half of the 4th century bc ,  many of the significant mediterranean peoples came under achaemenid persian rule ,  making them dominate the mediterranean during all these years . 
full persian dominance in the mediterranean ended after the greco-persian war in the 5th century bc ,  and persia eventually lost all her influence in the mediterranean in the late 4th century bc following alexander's conquests . 
after the third punic war ,  rome then became the leading force in the mediterranean region . 
when augustus founded the roman empire ,  the mediterranean sea began to be called `` mare nostrum ''  -lrb-  latin: `` our sea ''  -rrb-  by the romans . 
there were several things which could happen to people in the mediterranean region of the middle ages:
slavery was a strategic and very important part of all mediterranean societies during the middle ages . 
american naval power made the mediterranean a base for the united states sixth fleet during the cold war . 
for several centuries ,  the mediterranean was a `` roman lake '' ,  surrounded on all sides by the empire . 
the major centres of the mediterranean at the time became part of alexander's empire as a result . 
between 831 and 1071, the emirate of sicily was one of the major centres of islamic culture in the mediterranean . 
the americas were also a source of extreme wealth to the western powers ,  from which some of the mediterranean states were largely cut off . 
persian dominance ended after the greco-persian war in the 5th century bc and persia was crippled by macedonia in the 4th century bc . 
the development of long range seafaring had an influence upon the entire mediterranean . 
this was to be known as the `` cam brain machine ''  -lrb-  cbm  -rrb-  . 
de garis published his last `` cam-brain '' research paper in 2002.
from 1993 to 2000 de garis participated in a research project at atr's human information processing research laboratories  -lrb-  atr-hip  -rrb-  which aimed to create a billion-neuron artificial brain by the year 2001.
at usu de garis announced he was establishing a `` brain builder '' group to create a second generation `` cam-brain '' . 
https urls begin with `` https:// '' and use port 443 by default ,  whereas http urls begin with `` http:// '' and use port 80 by default . 
the protocol is therefore also often referred to as http over tls ,  or http over ssl . 
because https piggybacks http entirely on top of tls ,  the entirety of the underlying http protocol can be encrypted . 
to prepare a web server to accept https connections ,  the administrator must create a public key certificate for the web server . 
not all web servers provide forward secrecy . 
the system can also be used for client authentication in order to limit access to a web server to authorized users . 
https encrypts all message contents ,  including the http headers and the request/response data . 
 ,  33.2% of alexa top 1,000,000 websites use https as default ,  57.1% of the internet's 137,971 most popular websites have a secure implementation of https ,  and 70% of page loads  -lrb-  measured by firefox telemetry  -rrb-  use https . 
this is the case with http transactions over the internet ,  where typically only the server is authenticated  -lrb-  by the client examining the server's certificate  -rrb-  . 
strictly speaking ,  https is not a separate protocol ,  but refers to use of ordinary http over an encrypted ssl/tls connection . 
 ,  https is used more often by web users than the original non-secure http ,  primarily to protect page authenticity on all types of websites; secure accounts; and keep user communications ,  identity ,  and web browsing private . 
in the sixth century bc ,  the achaemenid empire conquered egypt . 
roman rule in egypt  -lrb-  including byzantine  -rrb-  lasted from 30 bc to 641 ad ,  with a brief interlude of control by the sasanian empire between 619–629, known as sasanian egypt . 
the brief french invasion of egypt led by napoleon bonaparte began in 1798.
egypt remained entirely ottoman until 1867, except during french occupation from 1798 to 1801.
the thirty-first dynasty of egypt ,  also known as the second egyptian satrapy ,  was effectively a short-living province of the achaemenid empire between 343 bc to 332 bc . 
the death of cleopatra ended the nominal independence of egypt resulting in egypt becoming one of the provinces of the roman empire . 
in 1517, ottoman sultan selim i captured cairo ,  absorbing egypt into the ottoman empire . 
the modern republic of egypt was founded in 1953, and with the complete withdrawal of british forces from the suez canal in 1956, it marked the first time in 2300 years that egypt was both fully independent and ruled by native egyptians . 
the final loss of egypt was of incalculable significance to the byzantine empire ,  which had relied on egypt for many agricultural and manufactured goods . 
human settlement in egypt dates back to at least 40,000 bc with aterian tool manufacturing . 
sasanian egypt  -lrb-  known in middle persian sources as `` agiptus ''  -rrb-  refers to the brief rule of egypt and parts of libya by the sasanian empire ,  which lasted from 619 to 629, until the sasanian rebel shahrbaraz made an alliance with the byzantine emperor heraclius and had control over egypt returned to him . 
british indirect rule lasted from 1882, when the british succeeded in defeating the egyptian army at tel el-kebir in september and took control of the country ,  to the 1952 egyptian revolution which made egypt a republic and when british advisers were expelled . 
the entire twenty-seventh dynasty of egypt ,  from 525 bc to 402 bc ,  save for petubastis iii ,  was an entirely persian-ruled period ,  with the achaemenid kings being granted the title of pharaoh . 
a unified kingdom was founded 3150 bc by king menes ,  leading to a series of dynasties that ruled egypt for the next three millennia . 
during the 15th and 16th centuries ,  the italian renaissance palazzo consisted of plentiful rooms of connectivity . 
most commonly ,  a household is a family unit of some kind ,  although households may also be other social groups ,  such as roommates or ,  in a rooming house ,  unconnected individuals . 
a house is a building that functions as a home . 
the layout allowed occupants to freely walk room to room from one door to another ,  thus breaking the boundaries of privacy . 
on the other hand ,  some architects have designed homes in which eating ,  working and living are brought together . 
the garbage-sand mixture is also used to protect the house from flooding . 
an early example of the segregation of rooms and consequent enhancement of privacy may be found in 1597 at the beaufort house built in chelsea . 
a house may have a backyard or frontyard ,  which serve as additional areas where inhabitants can relax or eat . 
many houses have several large rooms with specialized functions and several very small rooms for other various reasons . 
rooms were changed from public to private as single entryways forced notions of entering a room with a specific purpose . 
