the indian removal act of 1830 incorporated this concept . 
andrew jackson's reputation took a blow for his treatment of the indians . 
the indian removal act was the key law that forced the removal of the indians ,  and was signed into law by president andrew jackson on may 28, 1830.
in 1790, the new u . s .  congress passed the indian nonintercourse act  -lrb-  renewed and amended in 1793, 1796, 1799, 1802, and 1834 -rrb- to protect and codify the land rights of recognized tribes . 
yet the state of georgia defied the supreme court ruling ,  and the desire of white settlers and land speculators for indian lands continued unabated . 
the indian removal act was signed by andrew jackson ,  who took a hard line on indian removal ,  but it was put into effect primarily under the martin van buren administration . 
as a result ,  the five civilized tribes were resettled in the new indian territory in modern-day oklahoma . 
some whites claimed that the indian presence was a threat to peace and security; the georgia legislature passed a law that after march 31, 1831, forbade whites from living on indian territory without a license from the state ,  in order to exclude white missionaries who opposed indian removal . 
in 1795, in his seventh annual message to congress ,  washington intimated that if the u . s .  government wanted peace with the indians ,  then it must give peace to them ,  and that if the u . s .  wanted raids by indians to stop ,  then raids by american `` frontier inhabitants '' must also stop . 
american leaders in the revolutionary and early national era debated whether the american indians should be treated officially as individuals or as nations in their own right . 
when andrew jackson became president as the candidate of the newly organized democratic party ,  he agreed that the indians should be forced to exchange their eastern lands for western lands and relocate to them ,  and enforced indian removal policy vigorously . 
the green party first entered the dáil in 1989.
the green party  -lrb-   ,  literally `` green alliance ''  -rrb-  is a green political party that operates in ireland—both the republic of ireland and northern ireland . 
the green party lost all its dáil seats in the 2011 general election . 
the green party is organised throughout the island of ireland ,  with regional structures in both the republic of ireland and northern ireland . 
the green party entered government for the first time after the 2007 general election ,  held on 24 may . 
green party candidates have been elected to most levels of representation: local  -lrb-  in the republic  -rrb-  ,  dáil éireann ,  northern ireland assembly and european parliament . 
eamon ryan was elected as party leader on 27 may 2011, succeeding john gormley . 
on 30 may 2016, the green party joined the social democrats to form a technical group in the dáil . 
the following day ,  the six green party tds voted for the re-election of bertie ahern as taoiseach . 
the party gained its first representation in the northern ireland assembly in 2007, the green party in northern ireland having become a regional branch of the party the previous year . 
the party continued to struggle until the 1989 general election when the green party  -lrb-  as it was now named  -rrb-  won its first seat in dáil éireann ,  when roger garland was elected in dublin south . 
at the 1997 general election ,  the party gained a seat when john gormley won a dáil seat in dublin south-east . 
the green party supported the passage legislation for ec–ecb–imf financial support for ireland's bank bailout . 
iconoclasm may be carried out by people of a different religion ,  but is often the result of sectarian disputes between factions of the same religion . 
islam ,  in general ,  tends to be more iconoclastic than christianity ,  with sunni islam being more iconoclastic than shia islam . 
brigid would be symbolically invited into the house and a bed would often be made for her . 
in ireland ,  brigid's crosses  -lrb-  `` pictured on the right ''  -rrb-  were made at imbolc . 
often ,  some of the food and drink would be set aside for brigid . 
families would have a special meal or supper on imbolc eve . 
on imbolc eve ,  brigid was said to visit virtuous households and bless the inhabitants . 
imbolc or imbolg  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  also called  -lrb-  saint  -rrb-  brigid's day  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  ,  is a gaelic traditional festival marking the beginning of spring . 
for christians ,  especially in ireland ,  it is the feast day of saint brigid . 
imbolc is strongly associated with saint brigid  -lrb-   ,  modern irish: ' ,  modern scottish gaelic: ' or ``  '' ,  anglicised `` bridget ''  -rrb-  . 
in ireland and scotland ,  a representation of brigid would be paraded around the community by girls and young women . 
imbolc or imbolc-based festivals are held by some neopagans . 
some of these writers refer to `` the vegetarian isaiah '' ,  `` the notorious vegetarian isaiah '' ,  and `` isaiah ,  the vegetarian prophet '' . 
within the text of the book of isaiah ,  isaiah himself is referred to as `` the prophet '' ,  but the exact relationship between the book of isaiah and any such historical isaiah is complicated . 
isaiah was the 8th-century bc jewish prophet for whom the book of isaiah is named . 
some writers assert that isaiah was a vegetarian ,  on the basis of passages in the book of isaiah that extol nonviolence and reverence for life ,  such as isaiah 1:11, 11:6-9, 65:25, and 66:3.
lisp implementations can freely mix interpreted and compiled code . 
many languages have been implemented using both compilers and interpreters ,  including basic ,  c ,  lisp ,  pascal ,  and python . 
the interpreter executes the program directly ,  translating each statement into a sequence of one or more subroutines ,  and then into another language  -lrb-  often machine code  -rrb-  . 
the concept intifada was first utilized in modern times in 1952 within the kingdom of iraq ,  when socialist and communist parties took to the streets to protest the hashemite monarchy ,  with inspiration of the 1952 egyptian revolution . 
the d layer is the innermost layer ,  to above the surface of the earth . 
the e layer is the middle layer ,  to above the surface of the earth . 
at night the f layer is the only layer of significant ionization present ,  while the ionization in the e and d layers is extremely low . 
the f layer or region ,  also known as the appleton–barnett layer ,  extends from about to more than above the surface of earth . 
this region is also known as the kennelly–heaviside layer or simply the heaviside layer . 
after sunset an increase in the height of the e layer maximum increases the range to which radio waves can travel by reflection from the layer . 
the f layer persists by day and night and is the main region responsible for the refraction and reflection of radio waves . 
because the f layer remains by day and night ,  it is responsible for most skywave propagation of radio waves and long distances high frequency  -lrb-  hf ,  or shortwave  -rrb-  radio communications . 
when a radio wave reaches the ionosphere ,  the electric field in the wave forces the electrons in the ionosphere into oscillation at the same frequency as the radio wave . 
radio propagation depends uniquely on electron density . 
the critical frequency is the limiting frequency at or below which a radio wave is reflected by an ionospheric layer at vertical incidence . 
this region above the f layer peak and below the plasmasphere is called the topside ionosphere . 
medium frequency  -lrb-  mf  -rrb-  and lower high frequency  -lrb-  hf  -rrb-  radio waves are significantly attenuated within the d layer ,  as the passing radio waves cause electrons to move ,  which then collide with the neutral molecules ,  giving up their energy . 
this led to the discovery of hf radio propagation via the ionosphere in 1923.
the e layer  -lrb-  sporadic e-layer  -rrb-  is characterized by small ,  thin clouds of intense ionization ,  which can support reflection of radio waves ,  rarely up to 225 mhz . 
thus ,  `` interlingua '' would mean `` between language '' . 
for this reason ,  interlingua is frequently termed a `` naturalistic '' ial . 
words in interlingua retain their original form from the source language; they are altered as little as possible to fit interlingua's phonotactics . 
until 1995 the island had a governor . 
the isle of wight  -lrb-  ; also referred to informally as the island or abbreviated to iow  -rrb-  is a county and the largest and second-most populous island in england . 
thereafter the island was under control of the english crown and its lordship a royal appointment . 
during the dark ages the island was settled by jutes as the pagan kingdom of wihtwara under king arwald . 
the future queen victoria spent childhood holidays on the island and became fond of it . 
from then onwards ,  there are indications that the island had wide trading links ,  with a port at bouldnor ,  evidence of bronze age tin trading ,  and finds of late iron age coins . 
the norman conquest of 1066 created the position of lord of the isle of wight; the island was given by william the conqueror to his kinsman william fitzosbern . 
the internet control message protocol  -lrb-  icmp  -rrb-  is a supporting protocol in the internet protocol suite . 
the categorical dual of an inverse limit is a direct limit  -lrb-  or inductive limit  -rrb-  . 
an inverse system is then just a contravariant functor `` i '' → `` c '' ,  and the inverse limit functor formula_3 is a covariant functor . 
the inverse limit is often denoted with the inverse system  -lrb-  `` x '' ,  `` f ''  -rrb-  being understood . 
for an abelian category `` c '' ,  the inverse limit functor is left exact . 
the terminology is somewhat confusing: inverse limits are a class of limits ,  while direct limits are a class of colimits . 
ψ: `` y '' → `` x '' with ψ = `` f '' ψ for all `` i '' ≤ `` j ''  -rrb-  there exists a unique morphism `` u '': `` y '' → `` x '' such that the diagram
we define the inverse limit of the inverse system  -lrb-   -lrb-  `` a ''  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  `` f ''  -rrb-   -rrb-  as a particular subgroup of the direct product of the `` a '''s:
no manned missions have been sent to any planet of the solar system . 
in practice ,  spaceflights of this type are confined to travel between the planets of the solar system . 
for comparison ,  launching a spacecraft into low earth orbit requires a change in speed of about 9.5 km/s . 
due to the sun's gravitational pull ,  a spacecraft moving farther from the sun will slow down ,  while a spacecraft moving closer will speed up . 
the hohmann transfer applies to any two orbits ,  not just those with planets involved . 
currently ,  the only spacecraft to use a solar sail as the main method of propulsion is ikaros which was launched by jaxa on may 21, 2010.
spacex is currently developing a system in which a reusable first stage vehicle would transport a manned interplanetary spacecraft to earth orbit ,  detach ,  return to its launch pad where a tanker spacecraft would be mounted atop it ,  then both fueled ,  then launched again to rendezvous with the waiting manned spacecraft . 
space elevators have also sometimes been referred to as `` beanstalks '' ,  `` space bridges '' ,  `` space lifts '' ,  `` space ladders '' and `` orbital towers '' . 
remotely guided space probes have flown by all of the planets of the solar system from mercury to neptune ,  with the new horizons probe having flown by the dwarf planet pluto and the dawn spacecraft currently orbiting the dwarf planet ceres . 
the gravitational slingshot technique uses the gravity of planets and moons to change the speed and direction of a spacecraft without using fuel . 
a space elevator is a theoretical structure that would transport material from a planet's surface into orbit . 
it is difficult to use this method for journeys in the inner part of the solar system ,  although it is possible to use other nearby planets such as venus or even the moon as slingshots in journeys to the outer planets . 
although most articles about light sails focus on interstellar travel ,  there have been several proposals for their use within the solar system . 
then ,  if additionally the spacecraft wishes to enter into orbit around the destination planet  -lrb-  instead of just flying by it  -rrb-  ,  it must match the planet's orbital speed around the sun ,  usually requiring another large velocity change . 
many astronomers ,  geologists and biologists believe that exploration of the solar system provides knowledge that could not be gained by observations from earth's surface or from orbit around earth . 
for many years economical interplanetary travel meant using the hohmann transfer orbit . 
the most distant spacecrafts ,  voyager 1 and voyager 2 have left the solar system as of while pioneer 10, pioneer 11, and new horizons are on course to leave it . 
one proposal using a fusion rocket was project daedalus . 
interplanetary spaceflight or interplanetary travel is travel between planets ,  usually within a single planetary system . 
as an example of the velocity changes involved ,  a spacecraft travelling from low earth orbit to mars using a simple trajectory must first undergo a change in speed  -lrb-  also known as a delta-v  -rrb-  ,  in this case an increase ,  of about 3.8 km/s . 
even unprocessed rock may be useful as rocket propellant if mass drivers are employed . 
for returning mass to earth ,  a related option is to mine raw materials from a solar system celestial object ,  refine ,  process ,  and store the reaction products  -lrb-  propellant  -rrb-  on the solar system body until such time as a vehicle needs to be loaded for launch . 
oxygen is a common constituent of the moon's crust ,  and is probably abundant in most other bodies in the solar system . 
one of the main challenges in interplanetary travel is producing the very large velocity changes necessary to travel from one body to another in the solar system . 
the above can be demonstrated in one dimension by deriving the formula for the sum of two waves . 
the principle of superposition of waves states that when two or more propagating waves of same type are incident on the same point ,  the resultant amplitude at that point is equal to the vector sum of the amplitudes of the individual waves . 
the two waves will superpose and add: the sum of the two waves is using the trigonometric identity for the sum of two cosines: formula_8, this can be written this represents a wave at the original frequency ,  traveling to the right like the components ,  whose amplitude is proportional to the cosine of formula_10.
an either-way offence allows the defendant to elect between trial by jury on indictment in the crown court and summary trial in a magistrates' court . 
in this definition ,  references to the way or ways in which an offence is triable are to be construed without regard to the effect ,  if any ,  of section 22 of the magistrates' courts act 1980 on the mode of trial in a particular case . 
during the 1970s and the 1980s ,  inter also added two to its coppa italia tally ,  in 1977–78 and 1981–82.
for the 2010–11 season ,  inter's away kit featured the serpent . 
the club won its very first championship in 1910 and its second in 1920.
inter is the only italian club to have never been relegated from the top flight . 
one of the founders of inter ,  a painter named giorgio muggiani ,  was responsible for the design of the first inter logo in 1908.
the first game played at the stadium was on 19 september 1926, when inter beat milan 6–3 in a friendly match . 
inter started the 2007–08 season with the goal of winning both serie a and champions league . 
the club has also won three uefa cups ,  two intercontinental cups and one fifa club world cup . 
the club has also won three uefa cups ,  two intercontinental cups and one fifa club world cup . 
on 21 august 2010, inter defeated roma 3–1 and won the 2010 supercoppa italiana ,  their fourth trophy of the year . 
in 1922, inter remained in the top league after winning two play-offs . 
football club internazionale milano ,  commonly referred to as internazionale  -lrb-    -rrb-  or simply inter and colloquially known as inter milan outside italy ,  is a professional italian football club based in milan ,  italy . 
during that year the club changed its name to `` football club internazionale milano '' . 
the club was founded on 9 march 1908 as `` football club internazionale '' ,  following the schism with the milan cricket and football club  -lrb-  now a . c .  milan  -rrb-  . 
on 11 may 2006, inter retained their coppa italia title once again after defeating roma with a 4–1 aggregate victory  -lrb-  a 1–1 scoreline in rome and a 3–1 win at the san siro  -rrb-  . 
in 1967, with jair gone and suárez injured ,  inter lost the european cup final 2–1 to celtic . 
large amounts of human beta interferon were made by superinducing the beta interferon gene in human fibroblast cells . 
several different types of interferons are approved for use in humans . 
interferons can disrupt signaling by other stimuli . 
based on the type of receptor through which they signal ,  human interferons have been classified into three major types . 
the superinduced human beta interferon messenger rna was prepared by tan's lab for cetus corp .  to clone the human beta interferon gene in bacteria and the recombinant interferon was developed as 'betaseron' and approved for the treatment of ms .  superinduction of the human beta interferon gene was also used by israeli scientists to manufacture human beta interferon . 
interferons ,  such as interferon gamma ,  directly activate other immune cells ,  such as macrophages and natural killer cells . 
however each ifn type can also activate unique stats . 
the type ii ifn  -lrb-  ifn-γ  -rrb-  gene was also isolated around this time . 
interferons  -lrb-  ifns  -rrb-  are a group of signaling proteins made and released by host cells in response to the presence of several viruses . 
such settlements within palestinian territories currently exist in area c of the west bank and in east jerusalem ,  and within syrian territory in the golan heights . 
following the 1967 war ,  israeli settlements also existed within egyptian territory in the sinai peninsula ,  and within the palestinian territory of the gaza strip; however ,  israel evacuated the sinai settlements following the 1979 egypt–israel peace agreement and from the gaza strip in 2005 under israel's unilateral disengagement plan . 
the israeli-occupied area known as east jerusalem and the israeli-occupied golan heights are also considered settlements by the international community ,  though israel has applied its civil law to both territories and does not consider its developments there to be settlements . 
in january 2015 the israeli interior ministry gave figures of 389,250 israeli citizens living in the west bank and a further 375,000 israeli citizens living in east jerusalem . 
irrealist art edition
various writers have addressed the question of irrealism in art . 
 ''the irrealist work ,  then ,  operates within a given system , ``  writes swinford ,  `` and attests to its plausibility ,  despite the fact that this system ,  and the world it represents ,  is often a mutation ,  an aberration . `` 
it is the result of awareness that every human act is the result of the limitations of the world of the actor . `` 
they write that jokes of the kind:
richard m steers and luciara nardon in their book about global economy use the `` two cows '' metaphor to illustrate the concept of cultural differences . 
the punch line is what happens to you and the cows in this system . 
although lightbulb jokes tend to be derogatory in tone  -lrb-  `` e . g . 
a lightbulb joke is a joke that asks how many people of a certain group are needed to change ,  replace ,  or screw in a light bulb . 
about 90% of those who prepare iec standards work in industry . 
other standards developed in cooperation between iec and iso are assigned numbers in the 80000 series ,  such as iec 82045-1.
iec standards adopted by other certifying bodies may have some noted differences from the original iec standard . 
iec standards have numbers in the range 60000–79999 and their titles take a form such as `` iec 60417: graphical symbols for use on equipment '' . 
standards of the 60000 series are also found preceded by en to indicate that the iec standard is also adopted by cenelec as a european standard; for example iec 60034 is also available as en 60034.
the iec is made up of members ,  called national committees ,  and each nc represents its nation's electrotechnical interests in the iec . 
iso 9660 is a file system for optical disc media . 
iso 9660 traces its roots to the high sierra format file system . 
ice skating is the act of motion by wearer of the ice skates to propel the participant across a sheet of ice . 
a skate can glide over ice because there is a layer of ice molecules at the surface that are not as tightly bound as the molecules of the mass of ice beneath . 
skating depends on the roughness of the ice ,  the design of the ice skate ,  and the skill and experience of the skater . 
skaters did not actually skate on the ice ,  but rather glided on top of it . 
the first instructional book concerning ice skating was published in london in 1772.
on the continent ,  participation in ice skating was limited to members of the upper classes . 
the international skating union was founded in 1892 as the first international ice skating organization in scheveningen ,  in the netherlands . 
it was with the publication of this manual that ice skating split into its two main disciplines ,  speed skating and figure skating . 
the ioc session is the general meeting of the members of the ioc ,  held once a year in which each member has one vote . 
it is the ioc's supreme organ and its decisions are final . 
ioc is a united nations observer of olympic truce . 
the first integrated circuits contained only a few transistors . 
analog ics ease the burden on circuit designers by having expertly designed analog circuits available instead of designing a difficult analog circuit from scratch . 
an integrated circuit or monolithic integrated circuit  -lrb-  also referred to as an ic ,  a chip ,  or a microchip  -rrb-  is a set of electronic circuits on one small flat piece  -lrb-  or `` chip ''  -rrb-  of semiconductor material that is normally silicon . 
the early integrated circuits were ssi . 
ics have two main advantages over discrete circuits: cost and performance . 
however ,  in general usage `` integrated circuit '' has come to refer to the single-piece circuit construction originally known as a `` monolithic integrated circuit '' . 
modern semiconductor chips have billions of components ,  and are too complex to be designed by hand . 
an `` integrated circuit '' is defined as: a circuit in which all or some of the circuit elements are inseparably associated and electrically interconnected so that it is considered to be indivisible for the purposes of construction and commerce . 
digital memory chips and application-specific integrated circuits  -lrb-  asics  -rrb-  are examples of other families of integrated circuits that are important to the modern information society . 
the cost of designing and developing a complex integrated circuit is quite high ,  normally in the multiple tens of millions of dollars . 
digital integrated circuits can contain anywhere from one to billions of logic gates ,  flip-flops ,  multiplexers ,  and other circuits in a few square millimeters . 
the tools work together in a design flow that engineers use to design and analyze entire semiconductor chips . 
analog ics ,  such as sensors ,  power management circuits ,  and operational amplifiers  -lrb-  op-amps  -rrb-  ,  work by processing continuous signals . 
fairchild semiconductor was also home of the first silicon-gate ic technology with self-aligned gates ,  the basis of all modern cmos integrated circuits . 
the distinction between a large mcm and a small printed circuit board is sometimes fuzzy . 
ics can also combine analog and digital circuits on a single chip to create functions such as analog-to-digital converters and digital-to-analog converters . 
modern often further sub-categorize the huge variety of integrated circuits now available:
the semiconductor chip protection act of 1984 established intellectual property protection for photomasks used to produce integrated circuits . 
remote 3270 controllers are frequently `` multi-dropped '' ,  with multiple control units on a line . 
in a data stream ,  both text and control  -lrb-  or formatting functions  -rrb-  are interspersed allowing an entire screen to be `` painted '' as a single output operation . 
the ibm 3270 is a class of block oriented computer terminals  -lrb-  sometimes called `` display devices ''  -rrb-  introduced by ibm in 1971 normally used to communicate with ibm mainframes . 
the project became an albatross for pei's firm . 
one of pei's design projects at the gsd was a plan for an art museum in shanghai . 
pei simply smiled and said: `` no compromises . `` 
a new offer had arrived for pei from the chinese government in 1982.
in 1978, pei was asked to initiate a project for his home country . 
pei celebrated his 100th birthday on 26 april 2017.
pei's work is celebrated throughout the world of architecture . 
pei's work on the kennedy project boosted his reputation as an architect of note . 
in 1952 pei and his team began work on a series of projects in denver ,  colorado . 
an associate of pei's said later that he never saw the architect so involved in a project . 
the challenge of coordinating these projects took an artistic toll on pei . 
roberts disliked pei's initial designs ,  referring to them as `` just a bunch of towers '' . 
the `` louvre pyramid '' has become pei's most famous structure . 
ieoh ming pei ,  faia ,  riba  -lrb-  born 26 april 1917 -rrb- ,  commonly known as i .  m .  pei ,  is a chinese american architect . 
the success of ncar brought renewed attention to pei's design acumen . 
in 1955 pei's group took a step toward institutional independence from webb and knapp by establishing a new firm called i .  m .  pei & associates . 
the project's difficulties took an emotional and physical strain on the pei family . 
although these projects were satisfying ,  pei wanted to establish an independent name for himself . 
pei also worked at this time on two projects for a new japanese religious movement called `` shinji shumeikai '' . 
the opening of the louvre pyramid coincided with four other projects on which pei had been working ,  prompting architecture critic paul goldberger to declare 1989 `` the year of pei '' in `` the new york times '' . 
as the 1990s began ,  pei transitioned into a role of decreased involvement with his firm . 
in 1974, augusta ,  ga turned to pei and his firm for downtown revitalization . 
once again ,  pei sought to combine new design elements with the classical aesthetic most appropriate for the location of the building . 
soon after the move to shanghai ,  pei's mother developed cancer . 
the pei plan was an urban redevelopment initiative designed for downtown oklahoma city ,  oklahoma ,  in the 1960s and 1970s . 
pei's ancestors' success meant that the family lived in the upper echelons of society ,  but pei said his father was `` not cultivated in the ways of the arts '' . 
in 1995, pei was hired to design an extension to the `` deutsches historisches museum '' ,  or german historical museum in berlin . 
at the same time ,  pei designed a new museum for luxembourg ,  the `` musée d'art moderne grand-duc jean '' ,  commonly known as the mudam . 
pei felt that his design for the bank of china tower needed to reflect `` the aspirations of the chinese people '' . 
during the first decade of the 2000s ,  pei designed a variety of buildings ,  including the suzhou museum near his childhood home . 
pei spent two and a half years with the ndrc ,  but has revealed few details . 
pei's first major recognition came with the national center for atmospheric research in colorado  -lrb-  designed in 1961, and completed in 1967 -rrb- . 
during the inauguration ceremonies ,  however ,  neither freed nor pei was recognized for their role in the project . 
although the city of cleveland benefited greatly from the new tourist attraction ,  pei was unhappy with it . 
mit's architecture faculty was also focused on the beaux-arts school ,  and pei found himself uninspired by the work . 
the 486dx2 at 66 mhz was faster than the 486dx-50, overall . 
a 16-mhz 80486 therefore had a performance similar to a 33-mhz 386, and the older design had to reach 50 mhz to be comparable with a 25-mhz 80486 part . 
150 mhz and 160 mhz parts were planned but never officially released . 
amd produced several clones of the 80486 using a 40 mhz bus  -lrb-  486dx-40, 486dx/2-80, and 486dx/4-120 -rrb- which had no equivalent available from intel ,  as well as a part specified for 90 mhz ,  using a 30 mhz external clock ,  that was sold only to oems . 
the 16 mhz i486sx model was used by dell computers . 
the specified maximal internal clock frequency  -lrb-  on intel's versions  -rrb-  ranged from 16 to 100 mhz . 
certain steppings of the dx4 also officially supported 50 mhz bus operation ,  but it was a seldom used feature . 
the 486dx2 66 mhz processor was popular on home-oriented pcs during the early to mid 1990s ,  toward the end of the ms-dos gaming era . 
the intel 80486, also known as the i486 or 486, is a higher performance follow-up to the intel 80386 microprocessor . 
one of the few 80486 models specified for a 50 mhz bus  -lrb-  486dx-50 -rrb- initially had overheating problems and was moved to the 0.8-micrometre fabrication process . 
some systems allowed the user to upgrade the i486sx to a cpu with the fpu enabled . 
intel's i486sx was a modified intel 486dx microprocessor with its floating-point unit  -lrb-  fpu  -rrb-  disabled . 
the national and international trade in ivory of threatened species such as african and asian elephants is illegal . 
in october 2008, ebay expanded the ban ,  disallowing any sales of ivory on ebay . 
a more recent sale in 2008 of 108 tonnes from the three countries and south africa took place to japan and china . 
the debate surrounding ivory trade has often been depicted as africa vs the west . 
since then ,  some southern african countries have had their populations of elephants `` downlisted '' to appendix two ,  allowing sale of some stockpiles . 
trade in the ivory from the tusks of dead woolly mammoths frozen in the tundra has occurred for 300 years and continues to be legal . 
elk also have two ivory teeth ,  which are believed to be the remnants of tusks from their ancestors . 
these `` hanko '' can be carved out in a matter of seconds using machinery and were partly responsible for massive african elephant decline in the 1980s ,  when the african elephant population went from 1.3 million to around 600,000 in ten years . 
to reiterate this point ,  19 african countries signed the `` accra declaration '' in 2006 calling for a total ivory trade ban ,  and 20 range states attended a meeting in kenya calling for a 20-year moratorium in 2007.
since the ivory ban ,  some southern african countries have claimed their elephant populations are stable or increasing ,  and argued that ivory sales would support their conservation efforts . 
it also identifies all ifvs as having some characteristics of an apc and a light tank . 
all ifvs possess armored hulls protected against rifle and machine gun fire . 
some armies continue to maintain fleets of both ifvs and apcs . 
with a few exceptions ,  such as the bmp-1 and the bmp-3, designs such as the marder and the bmp-2 have set the trend of arming ifvs with an autocannon suitable for use against lightly armored vehicles ,  low-flying aircraft ,  and dismounted infantry . 
ifvs may be armed with 20mm to 57mm automatic cannon ,  73mm to 100mm low or medium velocity guns ,  anti-tank guided missiles ,  or automatic grenade launchers . 
ifvs assumed a new significance after the yom kippur war . 
by 1982 30,000 ifvs had entered service worldwide ,  and the ifv concept appeared in the doctrines of 30 national armies . 
the infantry fighting vehicle  -lrb-  ifv  -rrb-  concept evolved directly out of that of the armored personnel carrier  -lrb-  apc  -rrb-  . 
during the late 1960s and early 1970s ,  the us army had gradually abandoned its attempts to utilize the m113 as an ifv and refocused on creating a dedicated ifv design able to match the bmp . 
since 2013, icq has 11 million monthly users . 
at its peak around 2001, icq had more than 100 million accounts registered . 
when accepting `` icq privacy policy ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  a user gives all the copyright in the posted information to icq inc . 
ownership of icq passed from mirabilis to aol in 1998, and from aol to mail . ru group in 2010.
icq users are identified and distinguished from one another by uin ,  or user identification numbers ,  distributed in sequential order . 
after emperor napoleon iii saw the rejected works of 1863, he decreed that the public be allowed to judge the work themselves ,  and the salon des refusés  -lrb-  salon of the refused  -rrb-  was organized . 
while many viewers came only to laugh ,  the salon des refusés drew attention to the existence of a new tendency in art and attracted more visitors than the regular salon . 
the development of impressionism in the visual arts was soon followed by analogous styles in other media that became known as impressionist music and impressionist literature . 
artists' petitions requesting a new salon des refusés in 1867, and again in 1872, were denied . 
the public ,  at first hostile ,  gradually came to believe that the impressionists had captured a fresh and original vision ,  even if the art critics and art establishment disapproved of the new style . 
many people use this internet slang not only on the internet but also face-to-face . 
internet slang originated in the early days of the internet with some terms predating the internet . 
this is because internet slang is prevalent in languages more actively used on the internet ,  like english ,  which is the internet's lingua franca . 
internet slang  -lrb-  internet shorthand ,  cyber-slang ,  netspeak ,  or chatspeak  -rrb-  refers to various kinds of slang used by different people on the internet . 
internet slang does not constitute a homogeneous language variety . 
internet slang has crossed from being mediated by the computer into other non-physical domains . 
the primary motivation for using a slang unique to the internet is to ease communication . 
the expansion of internet slang has been furthered through codification and the promotion of digital literacy . 
on the whole ,  the popular use of internet slang has resulted in a unique online and offline community as well as a couple sub-categories of `` special internet slang which is different from other slang spread on the whole internet .  .  .  similar to jargon .  .  .  usually decided by the sharing community '' . 
there have been ongoing debates about how the use of slang on the internet influences language usage outside of technology . 
they swore loyalty to the king of the zulu nation . 
impi is a zulu word for any armed body of men . 
it was from these small clans ,  including among them the elangeni and the zulu ,  that shaka sprung . 
some had even led detachments for the zulu kings on military missions . 
the genesis of the zulu impi thus lies in tribal structures existing long before the coming of europeans or the shaka era . 
the zulu thus had clear scope and opportunity to master and adapt the new weaponry . 
as early as shaka's reign small numbers of firearms ,  often obsolete muskets and rifles ,  were obtained by the zulus from europeans by trade . 
the zulu typically took the offensive ,  deploying in the well-known `` buffalo horns '' formation  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
they were systematised radically by the zulu king shaka ,  who was then only the exiled illegitimate son of king senzangakhona ,  but already showing much prowess as a general in the army of mthethwa king dingiswayo in the mthethwa-ndwandwe war in the early 1810s . 
the zulu impi is popularly identified with the ascent of shaka ,  ruler of the relatively small zulu tribe before its explosion across the landscape of southern africa ,  but its earliest shape as a purposeful instrument of statecraft lies in the innovations of the mthethwa chieftain dingiswayo ,  according to some historians  -lrb-  morris 1965 -rrb- . 
what was different was the systematisation and organisation ,  a pattern yielding major benefits when the zulu were dispatched on raiding missions . 
as noted above ,  shaka was neither the originator of the impi ,  or the age grade structure ,  nor the concept of a bigger grouping than the small clan system . 
command and control of the impis was problematic at times . 
the impi ,  in its shakan form ,  is best known among western readers from the anglo-zulu war of 1879, particularly the famous zulu victory at isandhlwana ,  but its development was over 60 years in coming before that great clash . 
as weapons ,  the zulu warrior carried the `` iklwa '' stabbing spear  -lrb-  losing one could result in execution  -rrb-  and a club or cudgel fashioned from dense hardwood known in zulu as the `` iwisa '' ,  usually called the knobkerrie in english ,  for beating an enemy in the manner of a mace . 
the zulu also allowed their opponents too much time to set up fortified strongpoints ,  assaulting well defended camps and positions with painful losses . 
there are multiple categories of goddesses in irish mythology: the mother goddess ,  seasonal goddess ,  and warrior goddess are a few . 
the irish gods are divided into four main groups . 
the stories in this manuscript are a part of the ulster cycle of irish mythology . 
noted irish playwright lady gregory also collected folk stories to preserve irish history . 
they are often figures in irish mythology and study astronomy . 
heroes in irish mythology can be found in two distinct groups . there is the hero in the tribe and the hero outside of the tribe . 
depending on the sources ,  the importance of gods and goddesses in irish mythology varies . 
like the ulster cycle ,  the fenian cycle ,  also referred to as the ossianic cycle ,  is concerned with the deeds of irish heroes . 
some of these goddesses are considered to be all one goddess while other stories treat them as separate . 
there was also a tendency to rework irish genealogies to fit into the known schema of greek or biblical genealogy . 
these goddesses are the patronesses of feasts . 
the main goddesses are the machas: carman ,  tailtiu ,  tea ,  but there are other seasonal goddesses . 
the ulaid had close links with the irish colony in scotland ,  and part of cú chulainn's training takes place in that colony . 
it is a form of risk management ,  primarily used to hedge against the risk of a contingent or uncertain loss . 
from an insured's standpoint ,  the result is usually the same: the insurer pays the loss and claims expenses . 
insurance is a means of protection from financial loss . 
under a `` pay on behalf '' policy ,  the insurance carrier would defend and pay a claim on behalf of the insured who would not be out of pocket for anything . 
if the insured has a `` reimbursement '' policy ,  the insured can be required to pay for a loss and then be `` reimbursed '' by the insurance carrier for the loss and out of pocket costs including ,  with the permission of the insurer ,  claim expenses . 
when insured parties experience a loss for a specified peril ,  the coverage entitles the policyholder to make a claim against the insurer for the covered amount of loss as specified by the policy . 
insurance involves pooling funds from `` many '' insured entities  -lrb-  known as exposures  -rrb-  to pay for the losses that some may incur . 
an insured is thus said to be `` indemnified '' against the loss covered in the policy . 
the business model is to collect more in premium and investment income than is paid out in losses ,  and to also offer a competitive price which consumers will accept . 
the couple had two sons ,  rajiv gandhi  -lrb-  born 1944 -rrb- and sanjay gandhi  -lrb-  born 1946 -rrb- . 
she married feroze gandhi at the age of 25, in 1942.
the emergency saw the entry of gandhi's younger son ,  sanjay gandhi ,  into indian politics . 
the relationship between india and the soviet union deepened during gandhi's rule . 
the congress under gandhi swept back to power in january 1980.
in 2012, gandhi was ranked number 7 in outlook india's poll of the greatest indian . 
indira gandhi was brought at 9:30 am to the all india institutes of medical sciences where doctors operated on her . 
to the rural and urban poor ,  untouchables ,  minorities and women in india ,  gandhi was `` indira amma or mother indira . `` 
gandhi inherited a weak and troubled economy . 
gandhi had been swept up in the call for indian independence since she was born in 1917.
indira gandhi was born as indira nehru in a kashmiri pandit family on 19 november 1917 in allahabad . 
she claims that she was given away for adoption because indira gandhi hid her as a child and her mother as a wife of sanjay gandhi for political reasons . 
gandhi came out of the language conflicts with the strong support of the south indian populace . 
gandhi was accused of using the attack for political ends . 
in the 1950s ,  indira ,  now mrs indira gandhi after her marriage ,  served her father unofficially as a personal assistant during his tenure as the first prime minister of india . 
gandhi inherited a weak economy when she again became prime minister in 1980.
indira gandhi is remembered for her ability to effectively promote indian foreign policy measures . 
indira gandhi used the emergency provisions to change conflicting party members . 
gandhi was cremated on 3 november near raj ghat . 
gandhi appreciated the shah's disregard of pan-islamism in diplomacy . 
being at the forefront of indian politics for decades ,  gandhi left a powerful but controversial legacy on indian politics . 
in 1999, indira gandhi was named `` woman of the millennium '' in an online poll organised by the bbc . 
indira priyadarshini gandhi  -lrb-  ; née nehru; 19 november 1917 – 31 october 1984 -rrb- ,  was an indian politician ,  stateswoman and a central figure of the indian national congress . 
indira gandhi did not often discuss her gender ,  but she did involve herself in women's issues before becoming the prime minister . 
after leading india to victory against pakistan in the bangladesh liberation war in 1971, prime minister  -lrb-  mrs .  indira gandhi  -rrb-  recommended & president v .  v .  giri awarded mrs .  gandhi india's highest civilian honour ,  the bharat ratna . 
at the end of this term in 1977, she was such a dominating figure in indian politics that a congress party president had coined the phrase `` india is indira and indira is india . `` 
in the late 1960s and 1970s ,  gandhi had the indian army crush militant communist uprisings in the indian state of west bengal . 
as prime minister ,  gandhi was known for her political intransigency and unprecedented centralisation of power . 
gandhi contributed and further carried out the vision of jawaharlal nehru ,  former premier of india to develop the program . 
the biggest achievement of indira gandhi after the 1971 election came in december 1971 with india's decisive victory over pakistan in the liberation war ,  that led to the formation of independent bangladesh . 
gandhi considered the north-eastern regions important ,  because of its strategic situation . 
gandhi saw this test as chinese nuclear intimidation ,  therefore ,  gandhi promoted the views of nehru to establish india's stability and security interests as independent from those of the nuclear superpowers . 
the kashmir conflict remained largely peaceful if frozen under gandhi's premiership . 
responding to the insurgency in nagaland ,  gandhi `` unleashed a powerful military offensive '' in the 1970s . 
foreign and domestic policy successes in the 1970s enabled gandhi to rebuild india's image in the eyes of african states . 
gandhi's advocacy for women's rights began with her help in establishing the congress party's women's section . 
gandhi felt guilty about her inability to fully devote her time to her children . 
the eu's `` de facto '' capital is brussels . 
the african union  -lrb-  au ,  or ,  in its other official languages ,  ua  -rrb-  is a continental intergovernmental union ,  similar but less integrated to the eu ,  consisting of 54 african states . 
the best-known example of regional integration is the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  ,  an economic and political intergovernmental organisation of 28 member states ,  all in europe . 
for influential italian anarchist errico malatesta `` all anarchists ,  whatever tendency they belong to ,  are individualists in some way or other . 
ethical egoism  -lrb-  also called simply egoism  -rrb-  is the normative ethical position that moral agents ought to do what is in their own self-interest . 
an influential form of individualist anarchism ,  called `` egoism , ``  or egoist anarchism ,  was expounded by one of the earliest and best-known proponents of individualist anarchism ,  the german max stirner . 
moral subjectivism is that species of moral relativism that relativizes moral value to the individual subject . 
individualists are chiefly concerned with protecting individual autonomy against obligations imposed by social institutions  -lrb-  such as the state or religious morality  -rrb-  . 
stanford encyclopedia of philosophy calls it `` right libertarianism '' but states: `` libertarianism is often thought of as 'right-wing' doctrine . 
individualist anarchism is not a single philosophy but refers to a group of individualistic philosophies that sometimes are in conflict . 
egoist anarchism is a school of anarchist thought that originated in the philosophy of max stirner ,  a nineteenth-century hegelian philosopher whose `` name appears with familiar regularity in historically orientated surveys of anarchist thought as one of the earliest and best-known exponents of individualist anarchism . `` 
ethical egoism does not ,  however ,  require moral agents to harm the interests and well-being of others when making moral deliberation; e . g . 
as such libertarian socialism ,  within the larger socialist movement ,  seeks to distinguish itself both from leninism/bolshevism and from social democracy . 
he wrote `` no one ought to harm another in his life ,  health ,  liberty ,  or possessions . `` 
in relation to this view of individuality ,  french individualist anarchist emile armand advocates egoistical denial of social conventions and dogmas to live in accord to one's own ways and desires in daily life since he emphasized anarchism as a way of life and practice . 
though philosophical anarchism does not necessarily imply any action or desire for the elimination of the state ,  philosophical anarchists do not believe that they have an obligation or duty to obey the state ,  or conversely ,  that the state has a right to command . 
libertarian socialism  -lrb-  sometimes dubbed socialist libertarianism ,  or left-libertarianism  -rrb-  is a group of anti-authoritarian political philosophies inside the socialist movement that rejects socialism as centralized state ownership and control of the economy ,  as well as the state itself . 
ethical egoism contrasts with ethical altruism ,  which holds that moral agents have an obligation to help and serve others . 
solipsism is the philosophical idea that only one's own mind is sure to exist . 
individualism is the moral stance ,  political philosophy ,  ideology ,  or social outlook that emphasizes the moral worth of the individual . 
a libertine is one devoid of most moral restraints ,  which are seen as unnecessary or undesirable ,  especially one who ignores or even spurns accepted morals and forms of behaviour sanctified by the larger society . 
horst matthai quelle was a spanish language german anarchist philosopher influenced by max stirner . 
josiah warren is widely regarded as the first american anarchist ,  and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, `` the peaceful revolutionist '' ,  was the first anarchist periodical published . 
individualist anarchism refers to several traditions of thought within the anarchist movement that emphasize the individual and their will over any kinds of external determinants such as groups ,  society ,  traditions ,  and ideological systems . 
it was re-discovered and promoted by german philosophical anarchist and lgbt activist john henry mackay . 
in 1793, william godwin ,  who has often been cited as the first anarchist ,  wrote `` political justice '' ,  which some consider to be the first expression of anarchism . 
in drug discovery ,  for example ,  verification of efficacy `` in vivo '' is crucial ,  because `` in vitro '' assays can sometimes yield misleading results with drug candidate molecules that are irrelevant `` in vivo ''  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  because such molecules cannot reach their site of `` in vivo '' action ,  for example as a result of rapid catabolism in the liver  -rrb-  . 
the maxim `` in vivo veritas ''  -lrb-  `` in a living thing there is truth ''  -rrb-  is used to describe this type of testing and is a play on `` in vino veritas '' ,   -lrb-  `` in wine there is truth ''  -rrb-  ,  a well-known proverb . 
in contrast to `` in vitro '' experiments ,  `` in vivo '' studies are those conducted in animals ,  including humans ,  and whole plants . 
the primary disadvantage of `` in vitro '' experimental studies is that it may be challenging to extrapolate from the results of `` in vitro '' work back to the biology of the intact organism . 
results obtained from `` in vitro '' experiments cannot usually be transposed ,  as is ,  to predict the reaction of an entire organism `` in vivo '' . 
 ''in vitro '' studies permit a species-specific ,  simpler ,  more convenient ,  and more detailed analysis than can be done with the whole organism . 
 ''in vitro '' work simplifies the system under study ,  so the investigator can focus on a small number of components . 
just as studies in whole animals more and more replace human trials ,  so are `` in vitro '' studies replacing studies in whole animals . 
floating-point numbers in ieee 754 format consist of three fields: a sign bit ,  a biased exponent ,  and a fraction . 
ieee 754-1985 was an industry standard for representing floating-point numbers in computers ,  officially adopted in 1985 and superseded in 2008 by ieee 754-2008.
as illustrated in the pictures ,  the three fields in the ieee 754 representation of this number are:
it was intended for use with the original intel 8088-based ibm pc  -lrb-  model 5150 -rrb- . 
the intel 80186, also known as the iapx 186, or just 186, is a microprocessor and microcontroller introduced in 1982.
it was also available as the 80188, with an 8-bit external data bus . 
however ,  because its integrated hardware was incompatible with the hardware used in the original ibm pc ,  the 80286 was used as the successor instead in the ibm pc/at . 
spain had expelled its sephardi population in 1492; many of these spanish jews left spain for portugal but eventually were targeted there as well . 
king ferdinand ii of aragon and queen isabella i of castile established the spanish inquisition in 1478.
they maintained that kramer could not legally function in their areas . 
the peruvian inquisition ,  based in lima ,  administered all the spanish territories in south america and panama . 
thus ,  after 1391, a new social group appeared and were referred to as `` conversos '' or `` new christians '' . 
the last execution of the inquisition was in spain in 1826.
with the exception of the papal states ,  the institution of the inquisition was abolished in the early 19th century ,  after the napoleonic wars in europe and the spanish american wars of independence in the americas . 
dominican priest heinrich kramer was assistant to the archbishop of salzburg . 
in the 13th century ,  pope gregory ix  -lrb-  reigned 1227–1241 -rrb- assigned the duty of carrying out inquisitions to the dominican order and franciscan order . 
in 1538 the spanish inquisition cautioned its members not to believe everything the malleus said . 
the term `` inquisition '' comes from the medieval latin word `` inquisitio '' ,  which referred to any court process that was based on roman law ,  which had gradually come back into use during the late medieval period . 
the wars of independence of the former spanish colonies in the americas concluded with the abolition of the inquisition in every quarter of hispanic america between 1813 and 1825.
portugal and spain in the late middle ages consisted largely of multicultural territories of muslim and jewish influence ,  reconquered from islamic control ,  and the new christian authorities could not assume that all their subjects would suddenly become and remain orthodox roman catholics . 
in spain the practices of the inquisition were finally outlawed in 1834.
sarah denied laughing when god questioned abraham about it . 
the story of isaac is important in the abrahamic religions including judaism ,  christianity and islam . 
in papua ,  as well as in the province of west papua ,  `` kecamatan '' are commonly referred to as `` distrik '' . 
the province of papua is one of three provinces to have obtained special autonomy status ,  the others being aceh and west papua . 
papua is the largest and easternmost province of indonesia ,  comprising most of western new guinea . 
the province was formerly called `` irian jaya '' and comprised the entire western new guinea until the inauguration of the province of west papua in 2003.
 ''papua '' is the official indonesian and internationally recognised name for the province . 
they may fear that making a commitment to interdisciplinary research will increase the risk of being denied tenure . 
interdisciplinary programs may fail if they are not given sufficient autonomy . 
interdisciplinarity or interdisciplinary studies involves the combining of two or more academic disciplines into one activity  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  a research project  -rrb-  . 
therefore ,  both disciplinarians and interdisciplinarians may be seen in complementary relation to one another . 
due to these and other barriers ,  interdisciplinary research areas are strongly motivated to become disciplines themselves . 
interdisciplinarity can likewise be applied to complex subjects that can only be understood by combining the perspectives of two or more fields . 
the adjective `` interdisciplinary '' is most often used in educational circles when researchers from two or more disciplines pool their approaches and modify them so that they are better suited to the problem at hand ,  including the case of the team-taught course where students are required to understand a given subject in terms of multiple traditional disciplines . 
an initial distinction should be made between interdisciplinary studies ,  which can be found spread across the academy today ,  and the study of interdisciplinarity ,  which involves a much smaller group of researchers . 
insertion sort is a simple sorting algorithm that builds the final sorted array  -lrb-  or list  -rrb-  one item at a time . 
insertion sort iterates ,  consuming one input element each repetition ,  and growing a sorted output list . 
he thereby became the only individual ,  as of 2019, to have received both a nobel and an ig nobel . 
two books have been published with write-ups on some of the winners: `` the ig nobel prize '' ,  and `` the ig nobel prize 2 '' which was later retitled `` the man who tried to clone himself '' . 
the ig nobel prize  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a parody of the nobel prize awarded every autumn to celebrate ten unusual or trivial achievements in scientific research . 
sir andre geim ,  who had been awarded an ig nobel prize in 2000 for levitating a frog by magnetism ,  was awarded a nobel prize in physics in 2010 for his work with graphene . 
a september 2009 article in `` the national '' titled `` a noble side to ig nobels '' says that ,  although the ig nobel awards are veiled criticism of trivial research ,  history shows that trivial research sometimes leads to important breakthroughs . 
in 1997 the `` fundación isaac albéniz '' was founded to promote spanish music and musicians and to act as a research centre for albéniz and spanish music in general . 
during the late 1880s ,  the strong influence of spanish style is evident in albéniz's music . 
chase describes music from this period , 
in addition to the spanish spirit infused in albéniz's music ,  he incorporated other qualities as well . 
albéniz's early works were mostly `` salon style '' music . 
a film about his life entitled `` albéniz '' was made in 1947.
he is best known for his piano works based on spanish folk music idioms . 
as one of the leading composers of his era ,  albéniz's influences on both contemporary composers and on the future of spanish music are profound . 
perhaps the best source on the works is albéniz himself . 
the itu radiocommunication sector  -lrb-  itu-r  -rrb-  is one of the three sectors  -lrb-  divisions or units  -rrb-  of the international telecommunication union  -lrb-  itu  -rrb-  and is responsible for radio communication . 
in 1992, the ccir became the itu-r . 
the stated reason for such attacks was that some landowners had become free state senators . 
a total of 192 `` stately homes '' of the old landed class and free state politicians were destroyed by republicans during the war . 
the northern units of the ira largely supported the free state side in the civil war because of collins's policies ,  and over 500 of them joined the new free state's national army . 
like the anti-treaty ira ,  the free state's national army was initially rooted in the ira that fought against the british . 
the irish civil war  -lrb-  ; 28 june 1922 – 24 may 1923 -rrb- was a conflict that followed the irish war of independence and accompanied the establishment of the irish free state ,  an entity independent from the united kingdom but within the british empire . 
the civil war was won by the free state forces ,  who benefitted from substantial quantities of weapons provided by the british government . 
however ,  for those who were determined to make the free state into a viable ,  self-governing irish state ,  this was an act of rebellion that would have to be put down by them rather than the british . 
the civil war was waged between two opposing groups ,  irish republicans and irish nationalists ,  over the anglo-irish treaty . 
all these issues were the cause of a split in the ira and ultimately civil war . 
many of those who fought on both sides in the conflict had been members of the irish republican army  -lrb-  ira  -rrb-  during the war of independence . 
the fact that the irish civil war was fought between irish nationalist factions meant that the sporadic conflict in northern ireland ended . 
by contrast ,  the free state government managed to expand its forces dramatically after the start of the war . 
the civil war ,  though short ,  was bloody . 
the only real conventional battle during the free state offensive ,  the battle of killmallock ,  was fought when free state troops advanced south from limerick . 
the large towns in ireland were all relatively easily taken by the free state in august 1922.
in october 1923, around 8,000 of the 12,000 republican prisoners in free state gaols went on a hunger strike . 
by early 1923, the offensive capability of the anti-treaty ira had been seriously eroded and when ,  in february 1923, the republican leader liam deasy was captured by free state forces ,  he called on the republicans to end their campaign and reach an accommodation with the free state . 
the economic costs of the war were also high . 
it was also in this period that the anti-treaty ira began burning the homes of free state senators and of many of the anglo-irish landed class . 
by the 1950s ,  the issues over which the civil war had been fought were largely settled . 
in october 1922, éamon de valera and the anti-treaty tds  -lrb-  members of parliament  -rrb-  set up their own `` republican government '' in opposition to the free state . 
the free state government had started peace negotiations in early may ,  which broke down . 
the anglo-irish treaty was agreed to end the 1919–1921 irish war of independence between the irish republic and the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . 
thousands of anti-treaty ira members  -lrb-  including éamon de valera on 15 august  -rrb-  were arrested by the free state forces in the weeks and months after the end of the war ,  when they had dumped their arms and returned home . 
this oath was highly objectionable to many irish republicans . 
the cost of the war and the budget deficit it caused was a difficulty for the new free state and affected the boundary commission negotiations of 1925, which were to determine the border with northern ireland . 
