 ''kind of blue '' remains the best-selling jazz album of all time . 
each album helped establish davis's quintet as one of the best . 
the latter recording remains one of the most popular jazz albums of all time ,  having sold over four million copies in the u . s . 
the sextet made their recording debut on `` jazz track ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- . 
they appeared on `` 'round about midnight '' ,  davis's first album for columbia . 
after appearances at the 1975 newport jazz festival in july and the schaefer music festival in new york city on september 5, davis dropped out of music . 
while touring europe ,  the group made its first album ,  `` miles in berlin ''  -lrb-  1965 -rrb- . 
music writer christopher smith wrote , 
in 1987, he won a grammy award for best jazz instrumental performance ,  soloist . 
the gift was the reason why the jazz program at uncg is named the miles davis jazz studies program . 
at an early age he liked music ,  especially blues ,  big bands ,  and gospel . 
the sextet had played `` so what '' and `` all blues '' at performances ,  but the remaining three compositions they saw for the first time in the studio . 
after touring chicago and detroit with parker's quintet ,  davis returned to new york city in march 1948 and joined the jazz at the philharmonic tour ,  which included a stop in st .  louis on april 30.
his bands performed this way until his hiatus in 1975.
the compilation studio album `` big fun ''  -lrb-  1974 -rrb- contains four long improvisations recorded between 1969 and 1972.
in his autobiography ,  davis wrote frankly about his life during his hiatus from music . 
in 1986, the new england conservatory awarded davis an honorary doctorate for his contributions to music . 
he released `` you're under arrest '' ,  his final album for columbia ,  in september 1985.
in september 1944, davis accepted his father's idea of studying at the institute of musical arts ,  later known as the juilliard school ,  in new york city . 
avakian then suggested that he work with a bigger ensemble ,  similar to `` music for brass ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  an album of orchestral and brass-arranged music led by gunther schuller featuring davis as a guest soloist . 
in 1956, he left his quintet temporarily to tour europe as part of the birdland all-stars ,  which included the modern jazz quartet and french and german musicians . 
in march and april 1959, davis recorded what many critics consider his greatest album ,  `` kind of blue ''  -lrb-  1959 -rrb- . 
in february 1954 davis returned to new york city ,  feeling good `` for the first time in a long time , ``  mentally and physically stronger ,  and joined a gym . 
the touring band of 1969–1970—with shorter ,  corea ,  holland ,  and dejohnette—never completed a studio recording together ,  and became known as davis's `` lost quintet '' . 
davis noted later that `` my best friend is gil evans ''; their work was included in the boxed set ``  ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  which won a grammy award for best historical album and best album notes in 1997.
davis adopted a variety of musical directions in a five-decade career that kept him at the forefront of many major stylistic developments in jazz . 
by early 1957, davis was exhausted from recording and touring with his quintet and wished to pursue new projects . 
miles dewey davis iii  -lrb-  may 26, 1926september 28, 1991 -rrb- was an american jazz trumpeter ,  bandleader ,  and composer . 
studio activity in the 1970s culminated in sessions throughout 1973 and 1974 for `` get up with it ''  -lrb-  1974 -rrb- ,  a compilation that included four long pieces  -lrb-  comprising over ninety minutes of new music  -rrb-  alongside four shorter recordings from 1970 and 1972.
string phenomenology is the part of string theory that attempts to construct realistic models of particle physics based on string and m-theory . 
in this way ,  the conjectured relationship between strings and branes was reduced to a relationship between strings and strings ,  and the latter could be tested using already established theoretical techniques . 
one of the important developments following witten's announcement was witten's work in 1996 with string theorist petr hořava . 
there are several versions of string theory: type i ,  type iia ,  type iib ,  and two flavors of heterotic string theory  -lrb-   and   -rrb-  . 
in string theory ,  the fundamental objects that give rise to elementary particles are the one-dimensional strings . 
one of the deepest problems in modern physics is the problem of quantum gravity . 
one of the vibrational states of a string gives rise to the graviton ,  a quantum mechanical particle that carries gravitational force . 
for example ,  type iia string theory is equivalent to type iib string theory via t-duality ,  and the two versions of heterotic string theory are also related by t-duality . 
another relationship between different string theories is t-duality . 
the application of quantum mechanics to physical objects such as the electromagnetic field ,  which are extended in space and time ,  is known as quantum field theory . 
indeed ,  hyperbolic space can have more than two dimensions and one can `` stack up '' copies of hyperbolic space to get higher-dimensional models of anti-de sitter space . 
string theory is a theoretical framework that attempts to reconcile gravity and quantum mechanics . 
compactification is one way of modifying the number of dimensions in a physical theory . 
if this calabi–yau manifold is also taken to be small ,  one is left with a theory in four-dimensions . 
this construction describes a hypothetical universe with only two space dimensions and one time dimension ,  but it can be generalized to any number of dimensions . 
one notable feature of string theory and m-theory is that these theories require extra dimensions of spacetime for their mathematical consistency . 
similarly ,  type iib string theory is related to itself in a nontrivial way by s-duality . 
string theory extends ordinary particle physics by replacing zero-dimensional point particles by one-dimensional objects called strings . 
prior to witten's announcement ,  string theorists had identified five versions of superstring theory . 
in spite of this progress ,  the relationship between strings and five-dimensional branes remained conjectural because theorists were unable to quantize the branes . 
a theory of strings that incorporates the idea of supersymmetry is called a superstring theory . 
a matrix model describes the behavior of a set of matrices within the framework of quantum mechanics . 
witten's conjecture was based in part on the existence of these dualities and in part on the relationship of the string theories to a field theory called eleven-dimensional supergravity . 
in one approach to m-theory phenomenology ,  theorists assume that the seven extra dimensions of m-theory are shaped like a manifold . 
application layer multicast overlay services are not based on ip multicast or data link layer multicast . 
ip multicast is a technique for one-to-many communication over an ip network . 
in ip multicast the implementation of the multicast concept occurs at the ip routing level ,  where routers create optimal distribution paths for datagrams sent to a multicast destination address . 
multicast should not be confused with physical layer point-to-multipoint communication . 
scalable video multicast in an application of interactive multicast ,  where a subset of the viewers receive additional data for high-resolution video . 
she won the 1911 nobel prize in chemistry . 
marie curie was the first woman to be awarded a nobel prize . 
marie curie was the first woman to win a nobel prize ,  the first person to win two nobel prizes ,  the only woman to win in two fields ,  and the only person to win in multiple sciences . 
in 2015, two other women were also interred on their own merits . 
she was the first woman to become a professor at the university of paris . 
also in 2011, a new warsaw bridge over the vistula was named in her honor . 
she was also the first woman to become a professor at the university of paris ,  and in 1995 became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the panthéon in paris . 
she was born in warsaw ,  in what was then the kingdom of poland ,  part of the russian empire . 
on the first centenary of marie curie's second nobel prize in 2011, an allegorical mural was painted on the façade of her warsaw birthplace . 
still ,  as an old man and a mathematics professor at the warsaw polytechnic ,  he would sit contemplatively before the statue of maria skłodowska which had been erected in 1935 before the radium institute that she had founded in 1932.
also ,  promptly after the war started ,  she attempted to donate her gold nobel prize medals to the war effort but the french national bank refused to accept them . 
władysław skłodowski taught mathematics and physics ,  subjects that maria was to pursue ,  and was also director of two warsaw `` gymnasia '' for boys . 
in 1995, she became the first woman to be entombed on her own merits in the panthéon ,  paris . 
her daughter later remarked on the french press' hypocrisy in portraying curie as an unworthy foreigner when she was nominated for a french honor ,  but portraying her as a french heroine when she received foreign honors such as her nobel prizes . 
in the course of their research ,  they also coined the word `` radioactivity '' . 
in late 1891, she left poland for france . 
she named the first chemical element she discovered `` polonium '' ,  after her native country . 
in 1912, the warsaw scientific society offered her the directorship of a new laboratory in warsaw but she declined ,  focusing on the developing radium institute to be completed in august 1914, and on a new street named rue pierre-curie . 
later ,  she began training other women as aides . 
marie skłodowska curie  -lrb-  ; ; ; born maria salomea skłodowska; 7 november 18674 july 1934 -rrb- was a polish and naturalized-french physicist and chemist who conducted pioneering research on radioactivity . 
maria made an agreement with her sister ,  bronisława ,  that she would give her financial assistance during bronisława's medical studies in paris ,  in exchange for similar assistance two years later . 
maria skłodowska was born in warsaw ,  in congress poland in the russian empire ,  on 7 november 1867, the fifth and youngest child of well-known teachers bronisława ,  `` née '' boguska ,  and władysław skłodowski . 
in 1902 she visited poland on the occasion of her father's death . 
mrs .  william brown meloney ,  after interviewing curie ,  created a `` marie curie radium fund '' and raised money to buy radium ,  publicising her trip . 
international recognition for her work had been growing to new heights ,  and the royal swedish academy of sciences ,  overcoming opposition prompted by the langevin scandal ,  honored her a second time ,  with the 1911 nobel prize in chemistry . 
in 1897, her daughter irène was born . 
the matlab application is built around the matlab scripting language . 
matlab has structure data types . 
as of 2018, matlab has more than 3 million users worldwide . 
when creating a matlab function ,  the name of the file should match the name of the first function in the file . 
matlab supports elements of lambda calculus by introducing function handles ,  or function references ,  which are implemented either in  . m files or anonymous/nested functions . 
in 2000, matlab was rewritten to use a newer set of libraries for matrix manipulation ,  lapack . 
unfortunately ,  matlab jit does not support matlab structures ,  therefore just a simple bundling of various variables into a structure will come at a cost . 
the name `` meuse '' is derived from the french name of the river which ultimately derives from the celtic or proto-celtic name * ''mosā '' . 
the dutch name `` maas '' descends from middle dutch `` mase '' ,  which comes from the presumed but unattested old dutch form * ''masa '' ,  from proto-germanic * ''masō '' . 
despite the similarity ,  the germanic name is not derived from the celtic name ,  judging from the change from earlier `` o '' into `` a '' ,  which is characteristic of the germanic languages . 
these have subsequently been repeated ,  several times ,  on the bbc's archive radio station bbc7  -lrb-  now bbc radio 4 extra  -rrb-  . 
he co-founded `` the goon show '' radio show with spike milligan ,  peter sellers and harry secombe ,  but appeared in only the first 38 shows on the bbc light programme from 1951 to 1953.
he also appeared in the `` goon show '' film `` down among the z men '' . 
bentine was also interested in science . 
from january to may 1984 bentine put out 11 half-hour episodes ,  in two series ,  of `` the michael bentine show '' on radio 4.
once in the raf he went through flying training . 
michael bentine ,  cbe  -lrb-  born michael james bentin; 26 january 1922 – 26 november 1996 -rrb- was a british comedian ,  comic actor and founding member of the goons . 
he was also a holder of the peruvian order of merit ,  as was his grandfather ,  don  ,  for his work leading the fundraising for the peruvian earthquake appeal . 
he was the subject of `` this is your life '' in april 1963 when he was surprised by eamonn andrews at the bbc television theatre . 
mania varies in intensity ,  from mild mania  -lrb-  hypomania  -rrb-  to delirious mania ,  marked by such symptoms as disorientation ,  florid psychosis ,  incoherence ,  and catatonia . 
mania can also be caused by physical trauma or illness . 
when the causes are physical ,  it is called secondary mania . 
manic persons often can be mistaken for being under the influence of drugs . 
in the icd-10 there are several disorders with the manic syndrome: organic manic disorder  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  mania without psychotic symptoms  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  mania with psychotic symptoms  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  other manic episodes  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  unspecified manic episode  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  manic type of schizoaffective disorder  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  bipolar affective disorder ,  current episode manic without psychotic symptoms  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  bipolar affective disorder ,  current episode manic with psychotic symptoms  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
b deficiency can also cause characteristics of mania and psychosis . 
mania may be associated with strokes ,  especially cerebral lesions in the right hemisphere . 
winston churchill had periods of `` manic symptoms '' that may have been both an asset and a liability . 
hypomania is a lowered state of mania that does little to impair function or decrease quality of life . 
various triggers have been associated with switching from euthymic or depressed states into mania . 
lithium is the classic mood stabilizer to prevent further manic and depressive episodes . 
although mania is often conceived as a `` mirror image '' to depression ,  the heightened mood can be either euphoric or irritable; indeed ,  as the mania intensifies ,  irritability can be more pronounced and result in violence ,  or anxiety . 
targets of various treatments such as gsk-3, and erk1 have also demonstrated mania like behavior in preclinical models . 
mania may also ,  as earlier mentioned ,  be divided into three “stages . ” stage i corresponds with hypomania and may feature typical hypomanic characteristics ,  such as gregariousness and euphoria . 
in the early years of multimedia the term `` rich media '' was synonymous with interactive multimedia ,  and `` hypermedia '' was an application of multimedia . 
streaming multimedia may be live or on-demand . 
multimedia is content that uses a combination of different content forms such as text ,  audio ,  images ,  animations ,  video and interactive content . 
performing arts may also be considered multimedia considering that performers and props are multiple forms of both content and media . 
that era saw also a boost in the production of educational multimedia cd-roms . 
a few episodes later ,  in `` grossberg's return '' ,  grossberg reappears as a board member of network 66.
max headroom  -lrb-  frewer  -rrb-  is a computer reconstruction of carter ,  created after bryce lynch uploaded a copy of his mind . 
in the pilot episode ,  grossberg is the chairman of network 23, a major city television station with the highest-rated investigative-news show in town ,  hosted by edison carter . 
edison carter  -lrb-  matt frewer  -rrb-  is a hard-hitting reporter for network 23, who sometimes uncovered things that his superiors in the network would have preferred kept private . 
 ''max headroom: 20 minutes into the future '' was re-shot as a pilot program for a new series broadcast by the u . s .  abc television network . 
in the pilot episode of the series ,  bryce is enlisted by evil network ceo ned grossberg  -lrb-  charles rocket  -rrb-  to investigate the mental patterns of unconscious reporter edison carter ,  to determine whether or not carter has discovered the secrets of the `` blipverts '' scandal . 
while carter is a dedicated professional ,  max is a wisecracking observer of human contradictions . 
in the end ,  grossberg is publicly exposed as responsible for the blipverts scandal ,  and is removed as chairman of network 23.
severe malaria is usually caused by `` p .  falciparum ''  -lrb-  often referred to as falciparum malaria  -rrb-  . 
infection with `` p .  falciparum '' may result in cerebral malaria ,  a form of severe malaria that involves encephalopathy . 
malaria has several serious complications . 
malaria parasites can also be transmitted by blood transfusions ,  although this is rare . 
sequestered red blood cells can breach the blood–brain barrier and cause cerebral malaria . 
the impact of sickle cell trait on malaria immunity illustrates some evolutionary trade-offs that have occurred because of endemic malaria . 
symptoms of malaria can recur after varying symptom-free periods . 
the classic symptom of malaria is paroxysm—a cyclical occurrence of sudden coldness followed by shivering and then fever and sweating ,  occurring every two days  -lrb-  tertian fever  -rrb-  in `` p .  vivax '' and `` p .  ovale '' infections ,  and every three days  -lrb-  quartan fever  -rrb-  for `` p .  malariae '' . 
malaria in pregnant women is an important cause of stillbirths ,  infant mortality ,  abortion and low birth weight ,  particularly in `` p .  falciparum '' infection ,  but also with `` p .  vivax '' . 
malaria parasites belong to the genus `` plasmodium ''  -lrb-  phylum apicomplexa  -rrb-  . 
when the sun and moon are aligned on the same side of the earth ,  the moon is `` new '' ,  and the side of the moon facing earth is not illuminated by the sun . 
the number of days counted from the time of the new moon is the moon's `` age '' . 
this phenomenon is called earthshine and sometimes picturesquely described as `` the old moon in the new moon's arms '' or ,  as pictured here ,  `` the new moon in the old moon's arms '' . 
the lunar phase or phase of the moon is the shape of the directly sunlit portion of the moon as viewed from earth . 
when the moon as seen from earth is a narrow crescent ,  earth as viewed from the moon is almost fully lit by the sun . 
 -lrb-  the side of the moon facing away from earth is sometimes called the `` dark side of the moon '' ,  although that is a misnomer .   -rrb- 
 ''half moon '' is often used to mean the first- and third-quarter moons ,  while the term `` quarter '' refers to the extent of the moon's cycle around the earth ,  not its shape . 
 -lrb-  that is ,  if the right side is dark ,  the moon is becoming darker; if the right side is lit ,  the moon is getting brighter .   -rrb- 
traditionally ,  for the babylonian and hebrew lunisolar calendars ,  the years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 are the long  -lrb-  13-month  -rrb-  years of the metonic cycle . 
a lunar year of 12 synodic months is about 354 days ,  approximately 11 days short of the `` 365-day '' solar year . 
as `` the twentieth year '' takes place nineteen years after `` the first year '' ,  this seems to indicate that the metonic cycle was applied to numa's calendar . 
for astronomy and calendar studies ,  the metonic cycle or enneadecaeteris  -lrb-  from  ,  `` nineteen years ''  -rrb-  is a period of very close to 19 years that is nearly a common multiple of the solar year and the synodic  -lrb-  lunar  -rrb-  month . 
the difference between the two periods  -lrb-  of 19 years and 235 synodic months  -rrb-  is only a few hours ,  depending on the definition of the year . 
asteroid 11121 malpighi is named in his honor . 
in 1668, malpighi received a letter from mr .  oldenburg of the royal society in london ,  inviting him to correspond . 
malpighi's investigations of the lifecycle of plants and animals led him into the topic of reproduction . 
because malpighi had a wide knowledge of both plants and animals ,  he made contributions to the scientific study of both . 
in it ,  malpighi described how the form of a blood clot differed in the right against the left sides of the heart . 
because of this work ,  many microscopic anatomical structures are named after malpighi ,  including a skin layer  -lrb-  malpighi layer  -rrb-  and two different malpighian corpuscles in the kidneys and the spleen ,  as well as the malpighian tubules in the excretory system of insects . 
in 1653, his father ,  mother ,  and grandmother being dead ,  malpighi left his family villa and returned to the university of bologna to study anatomy . 
marcello malpighi died of apoplexy  -lrb-  an old-fashioned term for a stroke or stroke-like symptoms  -rrb-  in rome on 29 september 1694, at the age of 66.
in this frame ,  the total momentum is zero . 
in newtonian mechanics ,  linear momentum ,  translational momentum ,  or simply momentum  -lrb-  pl . 
being a vector ,  momentum has magnitude and direction . 
the unit of momentum is the product of the units of mass and velocity . 
momentum is a vector quantity: it has both magnitude and direction . 
this equation is derived by keeping track of both the momentum of the object as well as the momentum of the ejected/accreted mass  -lrb-  `` dm ''  -rrb-  . 
the momentum of a system of particles is the vector sum of their momenta . 
if the center of mass is moving at velocity  ,  the momentum is: this is known as euler's first law . 
the rate of change of momentum is 3  -lrb-  kg⋅m/s  -rrb- /s = 3 n . 
rockets also make use of conservation of momentum: propellant is thrust outward ,  gaining momentum ,  and an equal and opposite momentum is imparted to the rocket . 
the momentum of a particle is conventionally represented by the letter  . 
by itself ,  the law of conservation of momentum is not enough to determine the motion of particles after a collision . 
momentum is a measurable quantity ,  and the measurement depends on the motion of the observer . 
when considered together ,  the object and the mass  -lrb-  `` dm ''  -rrb-  constitute a closed system in which total momentum is conserved . 
momentum depends on the frame of reference ,  but in any inertial frame it is a `` conserved '' quantity ,  meaning that if a closed system is not affected by external forces ,  its total linear momentum does not change . 
the term `` mood stabilizer '' does not describe a mechanism ,  but rather an effect . 
his most important point is that christianity mandates that one `` love your neighbour as yourself . `` 
lewis spends most of his defence of the christian faith on an argument from morality ,  a point which persuaded him from atheism to christianity . 
in 2006, `` mere christianity '' was placed third in `` christianity today '' list of the most influential books amongst evangelicals since 1945.
lewis claims that to understand christianity ,  one must understand the moral law ,  which is the underlying structure of the universe and is `` hard as nails . `` 
the next third of the book explores the ethics resulting from christian belief . 
several abstract strategy games are listed below:
a mathematical game is a game whose rules ,  strategies ,  and outcomes are defined by clear mathematical parameters . 
after the war ,  gardner returned to the university of chicago . 
gardner was one of the foremost anti-pseudoscience polemicists of the 20th century . 
martin gardner had a major impact on mathematics in the second half of the 20th century . 
gardner ,  son of a petroleum geologist father and an educator and artist mother ,  grew up in and around tulsa ,  oklahoma . 
midi time code  -lrb-  mtc  -rrb-  embeds the same timing information as standard smpte timecode as a series of small 'quarter-frame' midi messages . 
like most audiovisual timecodes such as smpte time code ,  it encodes only time of day ,  repeating each 24 hours . 
the midi time code is 32 bits long ,  of which 24 are used ,  while 8 bits are unused and always zero . 
mass transfer is the net movement of mass from one location ,  usually meaning stream ,  phase ,  fraction or component ,  to another . 
mass transfer finds extensive application in chemical engineering problems . 
there are notable similarities in the commonly used approximate differential equations for momentum ,  heat ,  and mass transfer . 
the museum of jurassic technology at 9341 venice boulevard in the palms district of los angeles ,  california ,  was founded by david hildebrand wilson and diana drake wilson  -lrb-  husband and wife  -rrb-  in 1988.
their third album `` two hearts ''  -lrb-  3 april 1985 -rrb- reached the top 20 in australia and top 50 in the us . 
men at work were an australian rock band formed in 1979 and best known for their 1981 hit `` down under '' . 
men at work have sold over 30 million albums worldwide . 
the band toured australia ,  south america ,  europe and the us from 1998 to 2000.
3 in new zealand . 
hay had asked greg ham to join the group ,  but greg had hesitated ,  as he was finishing his music degree . 
hay has billed shows for 2019 as men at work without any of the remaining original band members . 
the men at work tour of 2019 will be hay and la based session players only . 
by mid-1996, after a ten-year absence ,  hay and ham reformed men at work to tour south america . 
the band released their second album ,  `` cargo '' ,  in april 1983, which also peaked at no . 
there may be an important association between foetal distress and hypoxia with msaf . 
thereby making the suctioning redundant and useless as the meconium may already deep within the lungs at the time of birth . 
additionally ,  foetal distress occurs frequently without the passage of meconium as well . 
meconium aspiration syndrome  -lrb-  mas  -rrb-  also known as neonatal aspiration of meconium is a medical condition affecting newborn infants . 
therefore ,  the majority of meconium-induced lung damage may be due to the apoptosis of lung epithelium . 
although meconium is present in the gastrointestinal tract early in development ,  msaf rarely occurs before 34 weeks gestation . 
the extent of surfactant inhibition depends on both the concentration of surfactant and meconium . 
it is important to note that the association between foetal distress and meconium passage is not a definite cause-effect relationship as over ¾ of infants with msaf are vigorous at birth and do not have any distress or hypoxia . 
the main theories of meconium passage into amniotic fluid are caused by foetal maturity or from foetal stress as a result of hypoxia or infection . 
furthermore ,  aspiration of thick meconium leads to obstruction of airways resulting in a more severe hypoxia . 
other stressors which causes foetal distress ,  and therefore meconium passage ,  includes when umbilical vein oxygen saturation is below 30% . 
originally ,  it was believed that mas developed as a result of the meconium being a physical blockage of the airways . 
however ,  it should be noted that the exact mechanism for meconium passage into the amniotic fluid is not completely understood and it may be a combination of several factors . 
meconium is typically sterile however ,  it can contain various cultures of bacteria so appropriate antibiotics may need to be prescribed . 
respiratory distress in an infant born through the darkly coloured msaf as well as meconium obstructing the airways is usually sufficient enough to diagnose mas . 
prevention during pregnancy may include amnioinfusion and antibiotics but the effectiveness of these treatments are questionable . 
meconium is the earliest stool of a mammalian infant . 
meconium ileus should be distinguished from meconium plug syndrome ,  in which a tenacious mass of mucus prevents the meconium from passing and there is no risk of intestinal perforation . 
the meconium sometimes becomes thickened and congested in the intestines ,  a condition known as meconium ileus . 
terminal meconium occurs when the fetus passes the meconium a short enough time before birth/cesarean section that the amniotic fluid remains clear ,  but individual clumps of meconium are in the fluid . 
turkey was therefore prepared
the passage of civil aircraft between the mediterranean and black seas is permitted but only along routes authorised by the turkish government . 
by allowing the soviet aircraft carrying cruisers to transit the straits ,  turkey could leave the more restrictive montreux convention in place . 
the inclusion of aircraft on any other ship does not classify it as an aircraft carrier . 
turkey chose to accept the designation of the soviet aircraft carrying cruisers as aircraft cruisers ,  as any revision of the convention could leave turkey with less control over the turkish straits ,  and the un convention on the law of the sea had already established more liberal passage through other straits . 
only black sea states may transit capital ships of any tonnage ,  escorted by no more than two destroyers . 
the terms of the convention have been the source of controversy over the years ,  most notably about the soviet union's military access to the mediterranean sea . 
to take advantage of this exception ,  the soviet union designated its kiev-class and kuznetsov-class aircraft carriers as `` aircraft carrying cruisers . `` 
the convention was one of a series of agreements in the 19th and 20th centuries that sought to address the long-running `` straits question '' of who should control the strategically vital link between the black sea and mediterranean sea . 
jordan had a versatile offensive game . 
jordan is the fourth of five children . 
jordan played in his final nba game on april 16, 2003, in philadelphia . 
jordan and the bulls compiled a 62–20 record in the 1997–98 season . 
it's very ,  very frustrating '' ,  jordan said later that year . 
jordan is also known for his product endorsements . 
during his heyday ,  jordan did much to increase the status of the game . 
for a guard ,  jordan was also a good rebounder  -lrb-  6.2 per game  -rrb-  . 
jordan kept busy over the next few years . 
jordan responded by scoring 38 points in the next game ,  which chicago won . 
with the recognition that 2002–03 would be jordan's final season ,  tributes were paid to him throughout the nba . 
jordan won his first nba finals mvp award ,  and he cried while holding the nba finals trophy . 
jordan had completely recovered in time for the 1986–87 season ,  and he had one of the most prolific scoring seasons in nba history . 
jordan led the team in scoring ,  averaging 17.1 ppg for the tournament . 
he's the one who came up with the concept of 'air jordan . ' ''
jordan is one of the most marketed sports figures in history . 
jordan's talent was clear from his first nba season; by november he was being compared to julius erving . 
jordan retired for a second time in january 1999, but returned for two more nba seasons from 2001 to 2003 as a member of the wizards . 
a dna test showed jordan was not the father of the child . 
jordan co-owns an automotive group which bears his name . 
jordan's second season was cut short when he broke his foot in the third game of the year ,  causing him to miss 64 games . 
jordan was freshly motivated by the playoff defeat ,  and he trained aggressively for the 1995–96 season . 
jordan and the bulls continued their dominance in the 1991–92 season ,  establishing a 67–15 record ,  topping their franchise record from 1990–91.
jordan led the league in scoring with 30.4 ppg and won the league's regular season and all-star game mvp awards . 
in the 1990–91 season ,  jordan won his second mvp award after averaging 31.5 ppg on 53.9% shooting ,  6.0 rpg ,  and 5.5 apg for the regular season . 
jordan also has been associated with the looney tunes cartoon characters . 
although jordan was a well-rounded player ,  his `` air jordan '' image is also often credited with inadvertently decreasing the jump shooting skills ,  defense ,  and fundamentals of young players ,  a fact jordan himself has lamented . 
 ''forbes '' designated jordan as the athlete with the highest career earnings in 2017.
a scholar who participates in musical research is a musicologist . 
film promotion is the practice of promotion specifically in the film industry ,  and usually occurs in coordination with the process of film distribution . 
it is a variant of the `` oggy oggy oggy ,  oi oi oi '' chant . 
the chant called for her to be removed from that role . 
the junction 27 to 28  -lrb-  a12 -rrb- section was completed in july 2010, the junction 28 to 29  -lrb-  a127 -rrb- in june 2011 and finally the junction 29 to 30  -lrb-  a13 -rrb- section opened in may 2012.
in 2003, a maximum of 196,000 vehicles a day were recorded on the motorway just south of london heathrow airport between junctions 13 and 14.
15% of uk motorway traffic volume was on the m25 and there were plans to add six lanes to the section from junctions 12 to 15 as well as widening the rest of the motorway to four lanes . 
the m25 or london orbital motorway is long encircling almost all of greater london ,  england  -lrb-  with the exception of north ockendon  -rrb-  . 
originally built almost wholly as a dual three-lane motorway ,  much of the motorway has been widened: to dual four lanes for almost half ,  to a dual five-lanes section between junctions 12 and 14 and a dual six-lane section between junctions 14 and 15.
the m25 is one of europe's busiest motorways . 
the m25 is one of the busiest motorways in europe . 
little was done to progress these plans until the 1960s when the greater london council developed its london ringways plan consisting of four `` rings '' around the capital . 
in 1995 a contract was awarded to widen the section between junctions 8 and 10 from six to eight lanes for a cost of £93.4 million and a motorway incident detection and automatic signalling  -lrb-  midas  -rrb-  system was introduced to the m25 from junction 10 to junction 15 at a cost of £13.5m in 1995.
further widening is in progress of minor sections with plans for managed motorways in many others . 
originally ,  the m25 was unlit except for sections around heathrow ,  major interchanges and junctions 23–30.
this compares to 197,219 counts measured on the m1 motorway between junction 7 and 8 outside hemel hempstead in 2014, and 195,325 counts measured on the m60 motorway between junctions 12 and 13 in western manchester ,  also in 2014.
the motorway passes through five counties . 
the mohs scale is a purely ordinal scale . 
the mohs scale of mineral hardness is a qualitative ordinal scale characterizing scratch resistance of various minerals through the ability of harder material to scratch softer material . 
despite its lack of precision ,  the mohs scale is relevant for field geologists ,  who use the scale to roughly identify minerals using scratch kits . 
gell-mann married j .  margaret dow  -lrb-  d .  1981 -rrb- in 1955: their children are elizabeth sarah gell-mann  -lrb-  b . 
together with author michael crichton ,  gell-mann is responsible for defining the theoretical psychological phenomenon called the gell-mann amnesia effect . 
both anderson and johnson say that gell-mann is a perfectionist and that his semibiography ,  `` the quark and the jaguar ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- is consequently incomplete . 
gell-mann is a proponent of the consistent histories approach to understanding quantum mechanics . 
the author george johnson has written a biography of gell-mann ,  `` strange beauty: murray gell-mann ,  and the revolution in 20th-century physics ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- ,  which was shortlisted for the royal society book prize . 
as a humanist and an agnostic ,  gell-mann is a humanist laureate in the international academy of humanism . 
in 1964, gell-mann and ,  independently ,  george zweig went on to postulate the existence of quarks ,  particles of which the hadrons of this scheme are composed . 
gell-mann endorsed barack obama for the united states presidency in october 2008.
murray gell-mann  -lrb-  ; born september 15, 1929 -rrb- is an american physicist who received the 1969 nobel prize in physics for his work on the theory of elementary particles . 
the magnetic field lines of the planet’s magnetic field are not stationary . 
the amount of solar wind plasma and energy that enters the magnetosphere is regulated by the orientation of the interplanetary magnetic field ,  which is embedded in the solar wind . 
because the solar wind exists at all times and not just times of solar flares ,  the magnetopause is a permanent feature of the space near any planet with a magnetic field . 
the condition governing this position is that the dynamic ram pressure from the solar wind is equal to the magnetic pressure from the earth's magnetic field: where formula_2 and formula_3 are the density and velocity of the solar wind ,  and `` b '' -lrb-  `` r ''  -rrb-  is the magnetic field strength of the planet in si units  -lrb-  `` b '' in t ,  μ in h/m  -rrb-  . 
it serves to decelerate and deflect the solar wind flow before it reaches the magnetopause . 
it acts as a cushion that transmits the pressure from the flow of the solar wind and the barrier of the magnetic field from the object . 
a magnetosphere is classified as `` intrinsic '' when formula_5, or when the primary opposition to the flow of solar wind is the magnetic field of the object . 
pluto ,  on the other hand ,  has no magnetic field . 
the magnetopause is the area of the magnetosphere wherein the pressure from the planetary magnetic field is balanced with the pressure from the solar wind . 
this is usefully modeled by the formula wherein formula_1 represents the radius of the planet ,  formula_2 represents the magnetic field on the surface of the planet at the equator ,  and formula_3 represents the velocity of the solar wind:
manama has an arid climate . 
historically ,  manama has been restricted to what is now known as the manama souq and the manama fort  -lrb-  now the ministry of interior  -rrb-  to its south . 
manama is the main hub of the country's road network . 
manama is the focal point of the bahraini economy . 
the newly independent state of bahrain designated manama as the capital city . 
manama  -lrb-   ``  ''     -rrb-  is the capital and largest city of bahrain ,  with an approximate population of 157,000 people . 
historically ,  the ports at manama were of poor reputation . 
for the year of 1911–12, manama was visited by 52 steamships ,  the majority being british and the rest turkish-arabian . 
other notable primary and secondary schools situated in the city include the bahrain school ,  the indian school ,  bahrain amongst others . 
football is the most popular sport in manama  -lrb-  and the rest of the country  -rrb-  ,  with three teams from manama participating in the bahraini premier league . 
in 1926, a second public school for boys opened up in the capital city ,  manama . 
in 1947, following the end of the war and subsequent indian independence ,  the british residency of the persian gulf moved to manama from bushire . 
manama was designated as the capital of arab culture for the year 2012 by the arab league . 
lipscomb was born april 9, 1895.
lipscomb spent most of his life working as a tenant farmer in texas . 
mance lipscomb  -lrb-  april 9, 1895 – january 30, 1976 -rrb- was an american blues singer ,  guitarist and songster . 
the melbourne cup has a long tradition ,  with the first race held in 1861.
the melbourne cup race is a handicap contest in which the weight of the jockey and riding gear is adjusted with ballast to a nominated figure . 
after the declaration of weights for the melbourne cup ,  the winner of any handicap flat race of the advertised value of a$55,000 or over to the winner ,  or an internationally recognised listed ,  group ,  or graded handicap flat race ,  shall carry such additional weight  -lrb-  if any  -rrb-  ,  for each win ,  as the vrc handicapper shall determine . 
the messerschmitt me 163 komet was a german rocket-powered interceptor aircraft . 
two prototypes were followed by 30 me 163 b-0 pre-production aircraft armed with two 20 mm mg 151/20 cannon and some 400 me 163 b-1 production aircraft armed with two 30 mm  -lrb-  1.18 inch  -rrb-  mk 108 cannons ,  but which were otherwise similar to the b-0.
in service ,  the me 163 turned out to be difficult to use against enemy aircraft . 
 ''major '' späte flew the first-ever me 163b combat sortie on may 13, 1944 from the bad zwischenahn base ,  with the me 163b v41 armed prototype aircraft ,  bearing the `` stammkennzeichen '' of pk+ql . 
captain eric brown rn ,  chief naval test pilot and commanding officer of the captured enemy aircraft flight ,  who tested the me 163 at the royal aircraft establishment  -lrb-  rae  -rrb-  at farnborough ,  said ,  `` the me 163 was an aeroplane that you could not afford to just step into the aircraft and say 'you know ,  i'm going to fly it to the limit . '
although the engine proved to be extremely unreliable ,  the aircraft had excellent performance ,  reaching a speed of in one test . 
during testing ,  the jettisonable main landing gear arrangement ,  of a differing design to that used on the later b-series production aircraft ,  was a serious problem . 
due to the skid-based landing gear system ,  the komet was immobile until the `` scheuch-schlepper '' tractor could back the trailer up to the nose of the aircraft ,  place its two rear arms under the wing panels ,  and jack up the trailer's arms to hoist the aircraft off the ground or place it back on its take-off dolly to tow it back to its maintenance area . 
the biggest concern about the design was the short flight time ,  which never met the projections made by walter . 
five prototype me 163a v-series aircraft were built ,  adding to the original dfs 194  -lrb-  v1 -rrb- ,  followed by eight pre-production examples designated me 163 a-0.
on around 17 may 1945, he flew an me 163b at husum with the help of a cooperative german ground crew ,  after initial towed flights in an me 163a to familiarise himself with the handling . 
according to the raf museum ,  48 aircraft were captured intact and 24 were shipped to the united kingdom for evaluation ,  although only one ,  `` vf241 '' ,  was test flown  -lrb-  unpowered  -rrb-  . 
referring to the komet ,  he said `` this is the only one that had good flight characteristics ''; he called the other four `` killers '' . 
according to rudolf opitz ,  chief test pilot of the me 163, it could `` fly circles around any other fighter of its time '' . 
during the spain meetings ,  atta and bin al-shibh had coordinated the details of the attacks . 
on may 17, atta applied for a united states visa . 
after leaving plankontor in the summer of 1997, atta disappeared again and did not return until 1998.
there are multiple ,  conflicting explanations for atta's behavior and motivation . 
atta continued with flight training that included solo flights and simulator time . 
kersten said in an interview at the agency's headquarters in wiesbaden that atta was in afghanistan from late 1999 until early 2000, and that there was evidence that atta met with osama bin laden there . 
atta and marwan al-shehhi arrived in the united states in june ,  2000.
from july 13 to 16, atta stayed at the hotel sant jordi in tarragona . 
by early 1999, atta had completed his thesis ,  and formally defended it in august 1999.
on august 1, 1995, atta went back to egypt for three months of study . 
atta was born in 1968 in a small town in egypt's nile delta . 
in july 2001, atta again left for spain in order to meet with bin al-shibh for the last time . 
at 8:46:35 am ,  atta flew the plane into the north tower of the world trade center . 
in 1990, atta's family moved into an 11th floor apartment in giza . 
ramzi bin al-shibh was also there teaching occasional classes ,  and became atta's friend . 
atta returned to hamburg on october 31, 1995, and joined the pilgrimage to mecca that fall . 
mohamed atta ended up in germany two weeks later ,  in july 1992.
on april 11, atta and shehhi rented an apartment at 10001 atlantic blvd ,  apt . 
by mid-1998, atta was no longer eligible for university housing in centrumshaus . 
mohamed atta varied his name on documents ,  also using `` mehan atta '' ,  `` mohammad el amir '' ,  `` muhammad atta '' ,  `` mohamed el sayed '' ,  `` mohamed elsayed '' ,  `` muhammad al-amir '' ,  `` awag al sayyid atta '' ,  `` muhammad al-amir '' ,  and `` awad al sayad '' . 
after coming to hamburg in 1992, atta became more religious and frequently attended the mosque . 
atta remained in cairo with his family ,  after hauth and bodenstein returned to germany . 
another candidate for top ace on the aircraft was `` oberstleutnant '' heinrich bär ,  who is credited with 16 enemy aircraft while flying me262's out of his total of 240 aircraft shot down . 
while german use of the aircraft ended with the close of world war ii ,  a small number were operated by the czechoslovak air force until 1951.
this problem faces any aircraft that approaches another from behind at much higher speed ,  as the slower aircraft in front can always pull a tighter turn ,  forcing the faster aircraft to overshoot . 
the messerschmitt me 262, nicknamed schwalbe  -lrb-  german: `` swallow ''  -rrb-  in fighter versions ,  or sturmvogel  -lrb-  german: `` storm bird ''  -rrb-  in fighter-bomber versions ,  was the world's first operational jet-powered fighter aircraft . 
a prominent royal navy test pilot ,  captain eric brown ,  chief naval test pilot and commanding officer of the captured enemy aircraft flight royal aircraft establishment ,  who tested the me 262 noted: `` this was a blitzkrieg aircraft . 
as the me 262a's pioneering junkers jumo 004 axial-flow jet engines needed careful nursing by their pilots ,  these jet aircraft were particularly vulnerable during takeoff and landing . 
me 262 pilots claimed a total of 542 allied aircraft shot down ,  although higher claims are sometimes made . 
several years before world war ii ,  the germans foresaw the great potential for aircraft that used the jet engine constructed by hans joachim pabst von ohain in 1936.
on the second attempt ,  wendel solved the problem by tapping the aircraft's brakes at takeoff speed ,  lifting the horizontal tail out of the wing's turbulence . 
the czechoslovak aircraft industry continued to produce single-seat  -lrb-  avia s-92 -rrb- and two-seat  -lrb-  avia cs-92 -rrb- variants of the me 262 after world war ii . 
the me 262 appeared to have a higher critical mach number than any american fighter . 
other sources state the aircraft was damaged during evasive manoeuvres and escaped . 
plans were first drawn up in april 1939, and the original design was very different from the aircraft that eventually entered service ,  with wing root-mounted engines ,  rather than podded ones ,  when submitted in june 1939.
the hg iii had a conventional tail ,  but a 45° wing sweep and turbines embedded in the wing roots . 
during march ,  me 262 fighter units were able ,  for the first time ,  to mount large-scale attacks on allied bomber formations . 
on 25 february 1945, mustangs of the 55th fighter group surprised an entire `` staffel '' of me 262as at takeoff and destroyed six jets . 
in mid-1943, adolf hitler envisioned the me 262 as a ground-attack/bomber aircraft rather than a defensive interceptor . 
the v1 through v4 prototype airframes all possessed what would become an uncharacteristic feature for most later jet aircraft designs ,  a fully retracting conventional gear setup with a retracting tailwheel—indeed ,  the very first prospective german `` jet fighter '' airframe design ever flown ,  the heinkel he 280, used a retractable tricycle landing gear from its beginnings ,  and flying on jet power alone as early as the end of march 1941.
the british hawker tempest scored several kills against the new german jets ,  including the messerschmitt me 262.
combating the allied fighters could be effectively done the same way as the u . s .  fighters fought the more nimble ,  but slower ,  japanese fighters in the pacific . 
one of the most advanced aviation designs in operational use during world war ii ,  the me 262's roles included light bomber ,  reconnaissance and experimental night fighter versions . 
directors of polish schools and teachers were imprisoned ,  as was the staff of polish pre-schools in the masuria region . 
areas that had many polish language speakers were known as the polish departments . 
after the plebiscite in german areas of masuria attacks on polish population commenced by german mobs ,  and polish priests and politicians were driven from their homes after the plebiscite at least 10,000 poles had to flee german held masuria to poland . 
they were often forced to destroy polish signs ,  emblems and symbols of polish institutions . 
names of those masurs supporting the polish side were published in german newspapers ,  and their photos presented in german shops; afterwards a regular hunts were organised after them by german militias which terrorized the polish population . 
in the final moments of august 1939 all remains of political and cultural life of polish minority was eradicated by the nazis ,  with imprisonment of polish activists and liquidation of polish institutions . 
the german authorities in their efforts of germanisation tried somewhat artificially to separate masurian language from polish by classifying it as non-slavic language different from polish one ,  this was reflected in official census thus the masurian population in 1890, 143,397 were reported by german officials as having german as their language  -lrb-  either primary or secondary  -rrb-  ,  152,186 polish and 94,961 masurian . 
as the polish journalist andrzej k .  wróblewski stated ,  the polish post-war policy succeeded in what the prussian state never managed: the creation of a german national consciousness among the masurians . 
most of the originally protestant churches in masuria are now used by the polish roman catholic church as the number of lutherans in masuria declined from 68,500 in 1950 to 21,174 in 1961 and further to 3,536 in 1981.
jerzy lanc ,  a teacher and polish national who had moved to masuria in 1931 to establish a polish school in piassutten  -lrb-  piasutno  -rrb-  ,  died in his home of carbon monoxide poisoning ,  most likely murdered by local german nationalists . 
according to german author andreas kossert ,  polish parties were financed and aided by the polish government in warsaw ,  and remained splintergroups without any political influence ,  e . g . 
masuria and the masurian lake district are known in polish as `` kraina tysiąca jezior '' and in german as `` land der tausend seen '' ,  meaning `` land of a thousand lakes . `` 
masuria  -lrb-   ,   ,  masurian: `` mazurÿ ''  -rrb-  is a region in northern poland ,  famous for its 2,000 lakes . 
during the polish–soviet war działdowo was briefly occupied by the red army and were regarded as liberators by the local german populace ,  which hoisted the german flag ,  but it was soon recovered by the polish army . 
after the unification of germany into the german empire in 1871, the polish language was removed from schools in 1872, as part of otto von bismarck's culture war . 
in 2014, the european speedster assembly had contributed $717,000 to msf . 
a serious crisis within msf erupted in connection with the organisation's work in kosovo when the greek section of msf was expelled from the organization . 
msf went through a long process of self-examination and discussion in 2005–2006.
in 1990, msf first entered liberia to help civilians and refugees affected by the liberian civil war . 
msf has been active in uganda since 1980, and provided relief to civilians during the country's guerrilla war during the  . 
in 1984, as the situation in lebanon deteriorated further and security for aid groups was minimised ,  msf withdrew its volunteers . 
the incident had serious repercussions as msf is the only primary health care provider in this part of jonglei state . 
msf first began work in srebrenica  -lrb-  in bosnia and herzegovina  -rrb-  as part of a un convoy in 1993, one year after the bosnian war had begun . 
msf provided shelter ,  water and health care to civilians affected by nato's strategic bombing campaigns . 
msf has general consultative status with the united nations economic and social council . 
msf's first mission was to the nicaraguan capital ,  managua ,  where a 1972 earthquake had destroyed most of the city and killed between 10,000 and 30,000 people . 
the early 1990s saw msf open a number of new national sections ,  and at the same time ,  set up field missions in some of the most dangerous and distressing situations it had ever encountered . 
the moose  -lrb-  north america  -rrb-  or elk  -lrb-  eurasia  -rrb-  ,  `` alces alces '' is a member of the new world deer subfamily and is the largest and heaviest extant species in the deer family . 
 ''alces alces '' is called a `` moose '' in north american english ,  but an `` elk '' in british english; its scientific name comes from its name in latin . 
confusingly ,  the word `` elk '' is used in north america to refer to a different animal ,  `` cervus canadensis '' ,  which is also called by the algonkian indigenous name ,  `` wapiti '' . 
dictionaries of the 18th century simply described `` elk '' as a deer that was `` as large as a horse '' . 
after expanding for most of the 20th century ,  the moose population of north america has been in steep decline since the 1990s . 
moose reestablished populations in eastern new york and connecticut and appeared headed south towards the catskill mountains ,  a former habitat . 
loss of the insulating winter coat through attempts to rid the moose of winter tick increases the risk of hypothermia in winter . 
the moose became extinct in britain during the bronze age ,  long before the european arrival in the americas . 
since the 1990s ,  moose populations have declined dramatically in much of temperate north america ,  although they remain stable in arctic and subarctic regions . 
towns and cities could also field militias . 
the medieval knight was usually a mounted and armoured soldier ,  often connected with nobility or royalty ,  although  -lrb-  especially in north-eastern europe  -rrb-  knights could also come from the lower classes ,  and could even be enslaved persons . 
though vegetius had no military experience and `` de re militari '' was derived from the works of cato and frontinus ,  his books were the standard for military discourse in western europe from their production until the 16th century . 
as central governments grew in power ,  a return to the citizen and mercenary armies of the classical period also began ,  as central levies of the peasantry began to be the central recruiting tool . 
publius flavius vegetius renatus wrote `` de re militari  -lrb-  concerning military matters  -rrb- ``  possibly in the late 4th century . 
in 1489, king henry vii of england commissioned the translation of `` de re militari '' into english ,  `` so every gentleman born to arms and all manner of men of war ,  captains ,  soldiers ,  vituallers and all others would know how they ought to behave in the feats of wars and battles '' . 
moats and other water defences ,  whether natural or augmented ,  were also vital to defenders . 
the more resources the noble had access to ,  the better his troops would typically be . 
england was one of the most centralized states in the late middle ages ,  and the armies that fought the hundred years' war were mostly paid professionals . 
the of a tape is the surface that can be magnetically manipulated by a tape head . 
it is caused by hydrolysis of the binder in the tape and can render the tape unusable . 
a device that stores computer data on magnetic tape is known as a tape drive . 
in all tape formats ,  a tape drive uses motors to wind the tape from one reel to another ,  passing over tape heads to read ,  write or erase as it moves . 
magnetic tape revolutionized sound recording and reproduction and broadcasting . 
early ibm 7 track tape drives were floor-standing and used vacuum columns to physically buffer long u-shaped loops of tape . 
the ampex system was called quadruplex and used tape ,  mounted on reels like audio tape ,  which wrote the signal in what is now called `` transverse scan '' . 
in `` mabo v queensland  -lrb-  no 1 -rrb- ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- the high court held that this legislation was contrary to the racial discrimination act 1975.
mabo v queensland  -lrb-  no 2 -rrb-  -lrb-  commonly known as mabo  -rrb-  was a landmark high court of australia decision in 1992 recognising native title in australia for the first time . 
in 2009 as part of the q150 celebrations ,  the mabo high court of australia decision was announced as one of the q150 icons of queensland for its role as a `` defining moment '' . 
in so ruling ,  the high court overturned `` milirrpum v nabalco pty ltd '' ,  a contrary decision of the supreme court of the northern territory . 
ten years following the mabo decision mrs mabo claimed that issues remained within the community about land on mer . 
meatballwiki was started in 2000 by sunir shah ,  a forum administrator from ontario ,  canada ,  on clifford adams's internet domain usemod . com . 
meatballwiki was a wiki dedicated to online communities ,  network culture ,  and hypermedia . 
according to the 2014 census ,  the population of marrakesh was 928,850 against 843,575 in 2004.
marrakesh is a vital component to the economy and culture of morocco . 
marrakesh  -lrb-   or ; `` murrākuš ''; `` meṛṛakec ''  -rrb-  ,  also known by the french spelling marrakech ,  is a major city of the kingdom of morocco . 
as one of the principal tourist cities in africa ,  marrakesh has over 400 hotels . 
marrakesh is served by ménara international airport and the marrakesh railway station ,  which connects the city to casablanca and northern morocco . 
marrakesh is possibly the most important of morocco's four former imperial cities . 
two types of music are traditionally associated with marrakesh . 
football clubs based in marrakesh include najm de marrakech ,  kac marrakech ,  mouloudia de marrakech and chez ali club de marrakech . 
from medieval times until around the beginning of the 20th century ,  the entire country of morocco was known as the `` kingdom of marrakesh '' ,  as the kingdom's historic capital city was often marrakesh . 
marrakesh has the largest traditional berber market in morocco and the image of the city is closely associated with its `` souks '' . 
for centuries marrakesh has been known as the location of the tombs of morocco's seven patron saints  -lrb-  `` sebaatou rizjel ''  -rrb-  . 
during the early 20th century ,  marrakesh underwent several years of unrest . 
more recently ,  several marrakesh female music groups have also risen to popularity . 
the ramparts of marrakesh ,  which stretch for some around the medina of the city ,  were built by the almoravids in the 12th century as protective fortifications . 
in 2009, marrakesh mayor fatima zahra mansouri became the second woman to be elected mayor in morocco . 
marrakesh ,  the regional capital ,  constitutes a prefecture-level administrative unit of morocco ,  marrakech prefecture ,  forming part of the region of marrakech-safi . 
the arts and crafts of marrakesh have had a wide and enduring impact on moroccan handicrafts to the present day . 
on 15 april 1994, the marrakesh agreement was signed here to establish the world trade organisation ,  and in march 1997 marrakesh served as the site of the world water council's first world water forum ,  which was attended by over 500 international participants . 
golf is a popular sport in marrakech . 
shrimp ,  chicken and lemon-filled `` briouats '' are another traditional specialty of marrakesh . 
the ben youssef madrasa ,  located to the north of the medina ,  was an islamic college in marrakesh named after the almoravid sultan ali ibn yusuf  -lrb-  1106–1142 -rrb- who expanded the city and its influence considerably . 
the théâtre royal de marrakesh ,  the institut français and dar chérifa are major performing arts institutions in the city . 
the kasbah mosque overlooks place moulay yazid in the kasbah district of marrakesh ,  close to the el badi palace . 
the marrakesh area was inhabited by berber farmers from neolithic times ,  and numerous stone implements have been unearthed in the area . 
a hot semi-arid climate  -lrb-  köppen climate classification `` bsh ''  -rrb-  predominates at marrakesh . 
koutoubia mosque is the largest mosque in the city ,  located in the southwest medina quarter of marrakesh alongside the square . 
the bahia palace ,  set in extensive gardens ,  was built in the late 19th century by the grand vizier of marrakesh ,  si ahmed ben musa  -lrb-  bou-ahmed  -rrb-  . 
he and matilda had three sons and two daughters:
saint matilda  -lrb-   – 14 march 968 -rrb- was duchess of saxony from 912 and german queen  -lrb-  queen of the franks  -rrb-  from 919 by her marriage with henry the fowler ,  the first king of the ottonian dynasty . 
matilda was born in enger near herford ,  in the westphalian part of the german stem duchy of saxony . 
there is a stained glass window dedicated to saint matilda in the parish church  -lrb-  built 1838–41 -rrb- of coole ,  ireland . 
the mazar-i-sharif means `` the noble shrine '' . 
mazar-i-sharif is the regional hub of northern afghanistan ,  located in close proximity to both uzbekistan and tajikistan . 
mazar-i-sharif is also known for the famous afghan song `` bia ke berem ba mazar ''  -lrb-  `` come let's go to mazar ''  -rrb-  by sarban . 
thus the ruler of north central afghanistan decided to shift the capital of the city of mazar-i-sharif . 
the taliban also reportedly sought out and massacred members of the hazara ,  while in control of mazar . 
following the september 11 attacks in 2001, mazar-i-sharif was the first afghan city to fall to the u . s . -backed northern alliance  -lrb-  united front  -rrb-  . 
the ancient city of balkh is also nearby . 
metaphors are most frequently compared with similes . 
one of the most commonly cited examples of a metaphor in english literature is the `` all the world's a stage '' monologue from `` as you like it '':
in the previous example ,  `` the world '' is compared to a stage ,  describing it with the attributes of `` the stage ''; `` the world '' is the tenor ,  and `` a stage '' is the vehicle; `` men and women '' is the secondary tenor ,  and `` players '' is the secondary vehicle . 
maasai mara national reserve  -lrb-  also known as maasai mara ,  masai mara and by the locals as the mara  -rrb-  is a large game reserve in narok county ,  kenya ,  contiguous with the serengeti national park in mara region ,  tanzania . 
in may 2001, the not-for-profit mara conservancy took over management of the mara triangle . 
the maasai mara national reserve  -lrb-  mmnr  -rrb-  covers some in south-western kenya . 
