moldova is a former soviet republic in eastern europe . 
70% of total electrical energy power consumed in moldova is imported from ukraine and only 30% is produced in moldova . 
moldova has made progress in economic reform since independence . 
the russian ruble devaluation of 1998 had a deleterious effect on moldova's economy ,  but economic growth has been steady since 2000.
moldova has experienced economic difficulties ,  like many other former soviet republics . 
moldova increasingly faces the challenges experienced by other transition economies . 
during 2002, moldova rescheduled an outstanding eurobond ,  in the amount of $39.6 million ,  to avoid a potential default . 
moldova's proximity to the black sea gives it a mild and sunny climate . 
as far as the internet is concerned ,  moldova has one of the best wired internet connections in the world as well as one of the cheapest in $ per mbit . 
the country's major airport is in chișinău . 
in 1990 a total of 317 million tonkilometers of freight were carried on inland waterways as compared with 15,007 million ton-kilometers on railways and 1,673 million ton-kilometers on roads . 
in 1994 the moldovan air force consisted of 1,300 men organized into one fighter regiment ,  one helicopter squadron ,  and one missile brigade . 
as of early 1994, the former soviet 14th guards army  -lrb-  about 9,200 troops  -rrb-  consisted of one army headquarters ,  the 59th guards motor rifle division ,  one tank battalion ,  one artillery regiment ,  and one anti-aircraft brigade . 
at the beginning of 1994, the moldovan ground forces  -lrb-  under the ministry of defense  -rrb-  consisted of 9,800 men organized into three motor rifle brigades ,  one artillery brigade ,  and one reconnaissance/assault battalion . 
other military forces also existed within moldova . 
the armed forces of the republic of moldova  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the moldovan national army consist of the ground forces and air and air defense force . 
moldova has accepted all relevant arms control obligations of the former soviet union . 
moldova has established diplomatic relations with 97 states ,  the holy see ,  the sovereign military order of malta ,  and the european union . 
after achieving independence from the soviet union ,  the republic of moldova established relations with other european countries . 
from 1968 to september 10, 1993, midway island was a naval air facility . 
until 1993, the atoll was the home of the naval air facility midway island . 
midway atoll  -lrb-  colloquial: midway islands; hawaiian: `` pihemanu kauihelani ''  -rrb-  is a atoll in the north pacific ocean at  . 
midway was also an important submarine base . 
with about 3,500 people living on sand island ,  midway also supported the u . s .  troops during the vietnam war . 
an albatross on midway can have up to 50% of its intestinal tract filled with plastic . 
the islands of midway atoll have been extensively altered as a result of human habitation . 
the channel was widened ,  and naval air station midway was completed . 
eastern island airstrip is a disused airfield which was in use by u . s .  forces during the battle of midway . 
a japanese submarine bombarded midway on february 10, 1942.
the refuge is now titled as the midway atoll national wildlife refuge and battle of midway national memorial . 
midway has no indigenous inhabitants and was uninhabited until the 19th century . 
the location of midway in the pacific became important militarily . 
the atoll was the first pacific island annexed by the united states ,  as the unincorporated territory of midway island ,  and was administered by the united states navy . 
the monument also includes the hawaiian islands national wildlife refuge ,  and the midway atoll national wildlife refuge . 
midway was formed roughly 28 million years ago when the seabed underneath it was over the same hotspot from which the island of hawaii is now being formed . 
midway atoll is part of a chain of volcanic islands ,  atolls ,  and seamounts extending from hawaii up to the tip of the aleutian islands and known as the hawaiian–emperor seamount chain . 
the name `` moldova '' derives from the moldova river; the valley of this river served as a political centre at the time of the foundation of the principality of moldavia in 1359.
moldova signed a military agreement with romania to strengthen regional security . 
moldova has signed the association agreement with the european union in brussels on 27 june 2014.
the largest city in moldova is chișinău with a population of 635,994 people . 
on 27 august 1991, as the dissolution of the soviet union was under way ,  the moldavian ssr declared independence and took the name moldova . 
the history of what is today moldova has been intertwined with that of poland for centuries . 
in september 2010, the european parliament approved a grant of €90 million to moldova . 
like the present-day republic and romania's north-eastern region ,  it was known to the locals as `` moldova '' . 
moldova  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of moldova  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked country in eastern europe ,  bordered by romania to the west and ukraine to the north ,  east ,  and south . 
in antiquity ,  moldova's territory was inhabited by dacian tribes . 
moldova is a unitary parliamentary representative democratic republic . 
the agreement is part of moldova's strategy to reform its military and cooperate with its neighbours . 
after the failure of the 1991 soviet coup d'état attempt ,  moldova declared its independence on 27 august 1991.
officially ,  the name `` republic of moldova '' is designated by the united nations . 
 ,  there are around 1,295,000 internet users in moldova with overall internet penetration of 35.9% . 
the highest temperature ever recorded in moldova was on 21 july 2007 in camenca . 
the territory of moldova east of the river dniester is split between parts of the podolian plateau ,  and parts of the eurasian steppe . 
moldova has 66 cities  -lrb-  towns  -rrb-  ,  including 13 with municipality status ,  and 916 communes . 
the head of state is the president of moldova ,  who between 2001 and 2015 was elected by the moldovan parliament ,  requiring the support of three-fifths of the deputies  -lrb-  at least 61 votes  -rrb-  . 
for a short time in the 1990s ,  at the founding of the commonwealth of independent states ,  the name of the current republic of moldova was also spelled `` moldavia '' . 
moldova joined the north atlantic treaty organisation's partnership for peace on 16 march 1994.
in the 1980s ,  amid political conditions created by the glasnost and perestroika ,  a democratic movement of moldova was formed ,  which in 1989 became known as the nationalist popular front of moldova  -lrb-  fpm  -rrb-  . 
moldova is a parliamentary republic with a president as head of state and a prime minister as head of government . 
after achieving independence from the soviet union ,  moldova's foreign policy was designed with a view to establishing relations with other european countries ,  neutrality ,  and european union integration . 
since the fall of the soviet union ,  the russian government has frequently used its connections with the russian orthodox church to block and stymie the integration of former soviet states like moldova into the west . 
on 29 november 2013, at a summit in vilnius ,  moldova signed an association agreement with the european union dedicated to the european union's 'eastern partnership' with ex-soviet countries . 
moldova is divided into 32 districts  -lrb-  `` raioane '' ,  singular `` raion ''  -rrb-  ,  three municipalities and two autonomous regions  -lrb-  gagauzia and transnistria  -rrb-  . 
moldova's agricultural products include vegetables ,  fruits ,  grapes ,  wine ,  and grains . 
on 23 december 1994, the parliament of moldova adopted a `` law on the special legal status of gagauzia '' ,  and in 1995 the latter was constituted . 
the commission for the study of the communist dictatorship in moldova is assessing the activity of the communist totalitarian regime . 
in 1994, moldova became a member of nato's partnership for peace program ,  and a member of the council of europe on 29 june 1995.
likewise ,  traian băsescu declared that the unification of moldova with romania is the next national project for romania ,  as more than 75% of the population speaks romanian . 
moldova improved its legislation by enacting the `` law on preventing and combating family violence '' ,  in 2008.
moldova is also the least visited country in europe by tourists with only 11,000 annually recorded visitors from abroad . 
with few natural energy resources ,  moldova imports almost all of its energy supplies from russia and ukraine . 
in 2005, moldova and the eu established an action plan that sought to improve collaboration between its two neighbouring countries ,  romania and ukraine . 
monaco  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the principality of monaco  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a sovereign city-state ,  country ,  and microstate on the french riviera in western europe . 
in 1419, the grimaldi family purchased monaco from the crown of aragon and became the official and undisputed rulers of `` the rock of monaco '' . 
between 1793 and 1814 monaco was occupied by the french  -lrb-  in this period much of europe had been overrun by the french under command of napoleon  -rrb-  . 
monaco has an area of  ,  making it the second-smallest country in the world after the vatican . 
the 2014 film `` grace of monaco '' is loosely based on this crisis . 
monaco is the second-smallest country by area in the world; only vatican city is smaller . 
this made monaco not only a playground for the rich ,  but a favored place for them to live . 
however ,  monaco does maintain two small military units . 
in july 1918, the franco-monegasque treaty was signed ,  providing for limited french protection over monaco . 
in 1793, revolutionary forces captured monaco and it remained under direct french control until 1814, when the grimaldi family returned to the throne . 
monaco remained under roman control until the collapse of the western roman empire in 476.
in november 1942, the italian army invaded and occupied monaco . 
this date is often cited as the beginning of monaco's modern history . 
this transfer and monaco's sovereignty was recognised by the franco-monegasque treaty of 1861.
in july 1918, a treaty was signed providing for limited french protection over monaco . 
francesco grimaldi seized the rock of monaco in 1297, starting the grimaldi dynasty ,  under the sovereignty of the republic of genoa . 
monaco's military defense since then has been the responsibility of france . 
one of the motivations for the treaty was the upcoming monaco succession crisis of 1918.
the early history of monaco is primarily concerned with the protective and strategic value of the rock of monaco ,  the area's chief geological landmark ,  which served first as a shelter for ancient peoples and later as a fortress . 
monaco's military defense ,  however ,  is still the responsibility of france . 
age structure: <br> ''0-14 years: '' 12.3%  -lrb-  male 1,930/ female 1,841 -rrb- <br> ''15-64 years: '' 60.8%  -lrb-  male 9,317/ female 9,249 -rrb- <br> ''65 years and over: '' 26.9%  -lrb-  male 3,640/ female 4,562 -rrb-  -lrb-  2012 estimate  -rrb- 
french is the official language; italian ,  english ,  and monégasque also are spoken . 
they have a joint communal council of monaco . 
the prince is advised by the crown council of monaco . 
the council of government is under the authority of the prince . 
this is an overview of the economy of monaco . 
monaco levies no income tax on individuals . 
there is no commercial agriculture in monaco; it is 100% urban . 
monaco is noted for its activity in the field of marine sciences . 
now part of the eurozone ,  but not the eu ,  monaco mints its own euro coins . 
low taxes have drawn many foreign companies to monaco and account for around 75% of the $5.748 billion annual gdp income in  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- . 
there is no airport in the principality of monaco . 
there are two ports in monaco ,  one is port hercules and the other is in fontvieille . 
there are six bus routes in monaco ,  all operated by compagnie des autobus de monaco  -lrb-  cam  -rrb-  . 
a heliport ,  the monaco heliport ,  is the only aviation facility in the principality . 
also ,  there is no rank higher than 'colonel' in either branch of the monegasque military . 
they are also equipped with ambulances and personnel have paramedic training . 
the minister of the department of the interior is appointed by the prince of monaco for one 5-year term ,  and is mainly responsible for both policing and military activity within monaco . 
the rank structure of the armed forces of monaco is based largely upon the rank structure of the french army . 
 ,  68.4% of mongolia's exports went to the prc ,  and the prc supplied 29.8% of mongolia's imports . 
there are some 1,000 catholics in mongolia and ,  in 2003, a missionary from the philippines was named mongolia's first catholic bishop . 
the official language of mongolia is mongolian ,  and is spoken by 95% of the population . 
at  ,  mongolia is the world's 18th-largest country  -lrb-  after iran  -rrb-  . 
in 2002, about 30% of all households in mongolia lived from breeding livestock . 
mongolia does not share a border with kazakhstan ,  although only separates them . 
 ''homo erectus '' inhabited mongolia from 850,000 years ago . 
mongolia has of paved roads ,  with of that total completed in 2013 alone . 
by the beginning of the 20th century ,  about 750 monasteries were functioning in mongolia . 
mongolia is ranked as lower-middle-income economy by the world bank . 
mongolia has a number of domestic airports with some of them having international status . 
mongolia  -lrb-  ;  in mongolian cyrillic; transliterated in mongolian script  -rrb-  is a landlocked country in east asia . 
mongolia fought against japan during the battles of khalkhin gol in 1939 and during the soviet–japanese war in august 1945 to liberate southern mongolia from japan and china . 
although mongolia does not share a border with kazakhstan ,  its westernmost point is only from kazakhstan . 
the trans-mongolian railway is the main rail link between mongolia and its neighbors . 
on january 26, 1952, yumjaagiin tsedenbal took power in mongolia after the death of choibalsan . 
mongolian national universities are all spin-offs from the national university of mongolia and the mongolian university of science and technology . 
in winter the whole of mongolia comes under the influence of the siberian anticyclone . 
with the fall of the qing dynasty in 1911, mongolia under the bogd khaan declared independence . 
mongolia is divided into 21 provinces  -lrb-  aimags  -rrb-  and subdivided into 329 districts  -lrb-  sums  -rrb-  . 
the non-governmental organisation freedom house considers mongolia to be free . 
because of a boom in the mining sector ,  mongolia had high growth rates in 2007 and 2008  -lrb-  9.9% and 8.9% ,  respectively  -rrb-  . 
today ,  mongolian is written using the cyrillic alphabet in mongolia ,  although in the past it was written using the mongolian script . 
lines 3–5 of the memorial inscription of bilge khagan  -lrb-  684–737 -rrb- in central mongolia summarizes the time of the khagans:
the area controlled by the bogd khaan was approximately that of the former outer mongolia during the qing period . 
during the state socialist period ,  education was one of the areas of significant achievement in mongolia . 
mining is continuing to rise as a major industry of mongolia as evidenced by the number of chinese ,  russian and canadian firms starting mining businesses in mongolia . 
the mongolic khitans ,  descendants of the xianbei ,  ruled mongolia during the liao dynasty  -lrb-  907–1125 -rrb- ,  after which the khamag mongol  -lrb-  1125–1206 -rrb- rose to prominence . 
the `` economist '' predicted this trade deficit of 14% of mongolia's gdp would transform into a surplus in 2013.
mongolia is high ,  cold ,  and dry . 
mongolia's largest lake by area ,  uvs lake is in the great lakes depression . 
the few streams of southern mongolia do not reach the sea but run into lakes or deserts . 
mongolia has two major mountain ranges . 
in total ,  the lakes and rivers of mongolia cover 10,560 square kilometres ,  or 0.67% of the country . 
area: <br> ''total: '' 1,564,116 km <br> ''land: '' 1,553,556 km <br> ''water: '' 10,560 km²
this article is about the demographics of mongolia ,  including population density ,  ethnicity ,  education level ,  health of the populace ,  economic status ,  religious affiliations and other aspects of the population . 
mongolia's first multi-party elections for a people's great hural  -lrb-  parliament  -rrb-  were held on 29 july 1990.
in 2005 mongolian presidential election nambaryn enkhbayar  -lrb-  mprp  -rrb-  was elected as the country's president . 
until june 1996 the predominant party in mongolia was the ex-communist party mongolian people's revolutionary party  -lrb-  mprp  -rrb-  . 
elbegdorj is mongolia's first president to never have been a member of the former communist mongolian people's revolutionary party and the first to obtain a western education . 
in 1997 natsagiin bagabandi  -lrb-  mprp  -rrb-  was elected as the country's president in 1997 mongolian presidential election . 
as a result of 2000 parliamentary elections mprp was back in power in the parliament and the government as well as the presidency . 
from shortly after the mongolian revolution of 1921 until 1990, the mongolian government was modeled on the soviet system; only the communist party—the mongolian people's revolutionary party  -lrb-  mprp  -rrb- —was officially permitted to function . 
in 2010 former communist party mongolian people's revolutionary party reverted its name to its original name ,  the mongolian people's party . 
mongolia's gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  growth fell from 3.2% in 1999 to 1.3% in 2000.
until recently ,  there have been a very few restrictions on foreign investments during most of mongolia's post-socialist period . 
as of 1 january 1991, mongolia and the former soviet union agreed to conduct bilateral trade in hard currency at world prices . 
however ,  because much of this growth is export-based ,  mongolia is suffering from the global slowdown in mining caused by decreased growth in china . 
the former soviet union served as the primary market for mongolian industry . 
despite its external trade difficulties ,  mongolia has continued to press ahead with reform . 
economic activity in mongolia has traditionally been based on agriculture and livestock . 
in 2005 mongolia's state-run radio and tv provider converted to a public service provider . 
private radio and tv broadcasters ,  multi-channel satellite ,  and cable tv providers are also available . 
in 2007, only about 2600 km of mongolia's road network were paved . 
there are few licensed taxi companies such as ulaanbaatar taxi  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- ,  noyon taxi  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- ,  telecom taxi  -lrb-  1109 -rrb- ,  1616 taxi  -lrb-  1616 -rrb- and itaxi operating in ulaanbaatar . 
those closest to ulaanbaatar lack scheduled air service . 
buses are the main mode of public transportation in ulaanbaatar . 
construction is underway on an east-west road  -lrb-  the so-called millennium road  -rrb-  that incorporates the road from ulaanbaatar to arvaikheer and on the extension of the darkhan-bulgan road beyond bulgan . 
the transportation system in mongolia consists of a network of railways ,  roads ,  waterways ,  and airports . 
with the disintegration of the mongol empire in the late 13th century ,  the mongol army as a unified unit also crumbled . 
the mongolian armed forces  -lrb-   ,  `` mongol ulsyn zevsegt hüchin ''  -rrb-  is the collective name for the mongolian army and the joint forces that comprise it . 
during most of the qing dynasty time ,  the mongols gave military assistance to the manchus . 
the battles of khalkhin gol began on 11 may 1939.
as a unified state ,  mongolia traces its origins to the mongol empire created by genghis khan in the 13th century . 
a number of irishmen settled in montserrat in 1632.
montserrat  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a caribbean island in the leeward islands ,  which is part of the chain known as the lesser antilles ,  in the west indies . 
in 1493, christopher columbus named the island `` santa maría de montserrate '' ,  after the virgin of montserrat in the monastery of montserrat ,  on montserrat mountain ,  near barcelona in catalonia ,  spain . 
 ''montserrat '' means `` serrated mountain '' in catalan . 
the geographer thomas jeffrey claimed in `` the west india atlas ''  -lrb-  1780 -rrb- that the majority of those on montserrat were either irish or of irish descent ,  `` so that the use of the irish language is preserved on the island ,  even among the negroes '' . 
much of montserrat came to be owned by smallholders . 
despite the seizing by force of the island by the english ,  the island's legal status is that of a `` colony acquired by settlement '' . 
there is indirect evidence that the use of the irish language continued in montserrat until at least the middle of the nineteenth century . 
montserrat is nicknamed `` the emerald isle of the caribbean '' both for its resemblance to coastal ireland and for the irish ancestry of many of its inhabitants . 
montserrat is an island in the caribbean sea ,  in the leeward islands . 
the island is 16 km  -lrb-  9.9 mi  -rrb-  long and 11 km  -lrb-  6.8 mi  -rrb-  wide ,  with a coastline of about 40 km . 
according to the 2001 uk census 7,983 montserratian-born people were residing in the uk  -lrb-  almost twice the population of montserrat itself  -rrb-  . 
the current premier of the island is donaldson romeo ,  of the people's democratic movement  -lrb-  montserrat  -rrb-  ,  replacing the outgoing premier ,  reuben meade of the movement for change and prosperity ,  who was the island's first premier of montserrat
the premier is appointed by the governor from among the members of the legislative assembly . 
today ,  montserrat’s main economic activity is in construction and government services which together accounted for about 50 percent of gdp in 2000 when it was ec$76 million . 
the montserrat development corporation was an entity founded by the government of montserrat and the department for international development in 2008.
a large part of morocco is mountainous . 
the spanish enclave of ifni in the south was returned to morocco in 1969.
in 1884, spain created a protectorate in the coastal areas of morocco . 
in 1631, morocco was reunited by the alaouite dynasty ,  who have been the ruling house of morocco ever since . 
morocco  -lrb-  ; ; ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the kingdom of morocco  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  ,  is a country located in the maghreb region of north west africa with an area of  . 
the iberomaurusian was succeeded by the beaker culture in morocco . 
in 1904, france and spain carved out zones of influence in morocco . 
morocco claims the non-self-governing territory of western sahara ,  formerly spanish sahara ,  as its southern provinces . 
tens of thousands of colonists entered morocco . 
since morocco controls most of western sahara ,  its `` de facto '' southern boundary is with mauritania . 
morocco claims that the western sahara is part of its territory and refers to that as its southern provinces . 
morocco is a member of the arab league ,  the union for the mediterranean and the african union . 
this code was used as the basis for morocco's internet domain ,   . ma . 
the geography of morocco spans from the atlantic ocean ,  to mountainous areas ,  to the sahara desert . 
in 2002, morocco and spain agreed to a us-brokered resolution over the disputed island of perejil . 
morocco has a coast by the atlantic ocean that reaches past the strait of gibraltar into the mediterranean sea . 
the unitary sovereign state of morocco is a constitutional monarchy with an elected parliament . 
morocco claims the areas of ceuta ,  melilla and peñón de vélez de la gomera ,  all of them currently under spanish jurisdiction . 
morocco was the first nation to recognise the fledgling united states as an independent nation in 1777.
upon the death of mohammed v ,  hassan ii became king of morocco on 3 march 1961.
morocco nominally was ruled by its sultan . 
morocco became a french protectorate through the treaty of fez in 1912.
morocco was home to half a million europeans . 
the wattasid dynasty were a ruling dynasty of morocco . 
in early 1976, spain ceded the administration of the western sahara to morocco and mauritania . 
the kingdom of nekor was an emirate centered in the rif area of morocco . 
the marinid dynasty was a sunni muslim dynasty of zenata berber descent that ruled morocco from the 13th to the 15th century . 
the idrisi dynasty was a muslim polity centered in morocco ,  which ruled from 788 to 974.
internationally ,  morocco has maintained strong ties to the west . 
on april 7, 1956, france officially relinquished its protectorate in morocco . 
germany was outmaneuvered diplomatically ,  and france took full control of morocco . 
in 1912, after the first moroccan crisis and the agadir crisis ,  the treaty of fez was signed ,  dividing morocco into french and spanish protectorates . 
the arrival of phoenicians on the moroccan coast heralded many centuries of rule by foreign powers in the north of morocco . 
the successful portuguese efforts to control the atlantic coast in the 15th century did not affect the interior of morocco . 
the barghawatas were a confederation of berber groups inhabiting the atlantic coast of morocco ,  who belonged to the masmuda berber tribal division . 
mohammed v's son hassan ii became king of morocco on march 3, 1961.
the almohad movement was started by ibn tumart among the masmuda tribes of southern morocco . 
the almohad caliphate was a moroccan ,  berber muslim movement founded in the 12th century . 
the marinids overthrew the almohad dynasty controlling morocco in 1244, and briefly controlled all the maghreb in the mid-14th century . 
in 1956, after 44 years of french rule ,  morocco regained independence from france ,  and shortly afterward regained most of the territories under spanish control . 
mauretania was an independent tribal berber kingdom on the mediterranean coast of north africa ,  corresponding to northern modern-day morocco from about the 3rd century bce . 
in the chalcolithic period ,  or the copper age ,  the beaker culture reached the north coast of morocco . 
after staying for eight days in morocco ,  the vikings went back to spain and continued up the east coast . 
the spanish enclave of ifni in the south became part of the new state of morocco in 1969, but other spanish possessions in the north ,  including ceuta ,  melilla and plaza de soberanía ,  remained under spanish control ,  with morocco viewing them as occupied territory . 
on 20 december 1777, morocco became one of the first states to recognize the sovereignty of a newly independent united states . 
the agreement had been signed in 2004 along with a similar agreement with the european union ,  morocco's main trade partner . 
morocco borders the north atlantic ocean to the west ,  and the west mediterranean sea to the north . 
morocco spans from the mediterranean sea and atlantic ocean on the north and the west respectively ,  into large mountainous areas in the interior body ,  to the sahara desert in the far south . 
the population of morocco in 2014 is 33,848,242.
morocco has been inhabited by berbers  -lrb-  `` imazighen ''  -rrb-  since at least 5,000 years ago . 
morocco is divided also into 13 prefectures and 62 provinces . 
on june 17, 2011, king mohammed vi announced a series of reforms that would transform morocco into a constitutional monarchy . 
his son ,  king mohammed vi ,  assumed the throne in july 1999.
morocco is divided into 16 administrative regions; the regions are administered by the walis and governors appointed by the king . 
in the arab world ,  morocco has the second-largest non-oil gdp ,  behind egypt ,  as of 2017.
morocco is a fairly stable economy with continuous growth over the past half-century . 
morocco suffers both from structural unemployment and a large external debt . 
the world economic forum placed morocco as the 1st most competitive economy in north africa ,  in its african competitiveness report 2014-2015.
the tangier–casablanca high-speed rail link marks the first stage of the oncf’s high-speed rail master plan ,  pursuant to which over of new railway lines will be built by 2035.
the spanish army also made extensive use of moroccan troops recruited in the spanish protectorate ,  during both the rif war of 1921–26 and the spanish civil war of 1936–39.
after the end of world war ii ,  moroccan troops formed part of the french far east expeditionary corps engaged in the first indochina war from 1946 to 1954.
the oldest `` moroccan '' military forces are those of the mauri berber kingdoms from around 225 bce . 
morocco is very active in maghreb and african affairs . 
portraying morocco as a democratic state became important if morocco wished to receive loans and investments by foreign powers . 
morocco also gains financial support from countries that it assists . 
foreign relations have had a significant impact on economic and social development in morocco . 
the frelimo regime also gave shelter and support to south african  -lrb-  african national congress  -rrb-  and zimbabwean  -lrb-  zimbabwe african national union  -rrb-  rebel movements ,  while the governments of rhodesia and later south africa  -lrb-  at that time still apartheid  -rrb-  backed renamo in the civil war . 
the 1984 nkomati accord ,  while failing in its goal of ending south african support to renamo ,  opened initial diplomatic contacts between the mozambican and south african governments . 
frelimo won ,  under joaquim chissano ,  while renamo ,  led by afonso dhlakama ,  ran as the official opposition . 
the towns traded with merchants from both the african interior and the broader indian ocean world . 
in december 1999, mozambique held elections for a second time since the civil war ,  which were again won by frelimo . 
renamo accused frelimo of fraud ,  and threatened to return to civil war ,  but backed down after taking the matter to the supreme court and losing . 
during these wars ,  the mazrui and omani arabs reclaimed much of the indian ocean trade ,  forcing the portuguese to retreat south . 
to the south of the zambezi river ,  the lowlands are broader with the mashonaland plateau and lebombo mountains located in the deep south . 
during the 1970s and the early 1980s ,  mozambique's foreign policy was inextricably linked to the struggles for majority rule in rhodesia and south africa as well as superpower competition and the cold war . 
mozambique  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of mozambique  -lrb-   or ``  '' ,    -rrb-  ,  is a country located in southeast africa bordered by the indian ocean to the east ,  tanzania to the north ,  malawi and zambia to the northwest ,  zimbabwe to the west ,  and eswatini  -lrb-  swaziland  -rrb-  and south africa to the southwest . 
from the late first millennium ad ,  vast indian ocean trade networks extended as far south into mozambique as the ancient port town of chibuene . 
after clashes between renamo guards and the police in muxungue and gondola in april 2013, renamo said it would boycott and disrupt local elections in november 2013.
since the end of the civil war in 1992, about 300 renamo guards had remained armed and refused to join the national army or the police force . 
renamo and some other opposition parties made claims of election fraud and denounced the result . 
the island-town was the capital of the portuguese colony until 1898, when it was moved south to lourenço marques  -lrb-  now maputo  -rrb-  . 
the resettlement of civil war refugees and successful economic reform have led to a high growth rate: the country enjoyed a remarkable recovery ,  achieving an average annual rate of economic growth of 8% between 1996 and 2006 and between 6–7% from 2006 to 2011.
turnout was very low . 
since 2013, a low-intensity insurgency by renamo has been occurring ,  mainly in the country's central and northern regions . 
mozambique is a member of the united nations ,  the african union ,  the commonwealth of nations ,  the organisation of the islamic cooperation ,  the community of portuguese language countries ,  the non-aligned movement and the southern african development community ,  and is an observer at la francophonie . 
mozambique is a member of the non-aligned movement and ranks among the moderate members of the african bloc in the united nations and other international organisations . 
the second general elections were held 3–5 december 1999, with high voter turnout . 
the country is divided into two topographical regions by the zambezi river . 
as part of their response to frelimo ,  the portuguese government began to pay more attention to creating favourable conditions for social development and economic growth . 
in 1995, mozambique joined the commonwealth of nations ,  becoming ,  at the time ,  the only member nation that had never been part of the british empire . 
representatives of the soviet union advanced the theory that the plane had been intentionally diverted by a false navigational beacon signal ,  using a technology provided by military intelligence operatives of the south african government . 
with support for renamo from south africa drying up ,  in 1990 the first direct talks between the frelimo government and renamo were held . 
the war was marked by huge human rights violations by both renamo and frelimo . 
frelimo won ,  under joaquim chissano ,  while renamo ,  led by afonso dhlakama ,  ran as the official opposition . 
in december 1999, mozambique held elections for a second time since the civil war ,  which were again won by frelimo . 
in 1984, mozambique negotiated the nkomati accord with p .  w .  botha and the south african government ,  in which mozambique was to expel the african national congress in exchange for south africa stopping support of renamo . 
much of the economic recovery which has followed the end of the mozambican civil war  -lrb-  1977–1992 -rrb- is being led by investors and tourists from neighbour south africa and from east asia . 
during these wars ,  the mazrui and omani arabs reclaimed much of the indian ocean trade ,  forcing the portuguese to retreat south . 
renamo accused frelimo of fraud ,  and threatened to return to civil war ,  but backed down after taking the matter to the supreme court and losing . 
in the united states ,  the cia and conservatives lobbied for support to renamo ,  which was strongly resisted by the state department ,  which would `` not recognize or negotiate with renamo '' . 
rainfall is heavy along the coast and decreases in the north and south . 
besides the zambezi ,  the most considerable river in mozambique is the limpopo which enters the indian ocean about north of delagoa bay . 
they both rise in the manica plateau and enter the ocean in pungwe bay ,  their mouths a mile or two apart . 
mozambique is located on the east coast of southern africa . 
the coastline extends from 26° 52′ s .  to 10° 40′ s .  ,  and from south to north makes a double curve with a general trend outward to the east . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
also ,  according to a 2011 survey ,  the total fertility rate was 5.9 children per woman ,  with 6.6 in rural areas and 4.5 in urban areas . 
most educated mozambicans speak english ,  which is used in schools and business as second or third language . 
in 1994 the country held its first democratic elections . 
the second local elections ,  involving 33 municipalities with some 2.4 million registered voters ,  took place in november 2003.
turnout was very low . 
joaquim chissano was elected president with 53% of the vote ,  and a 250-member national assembly was voted in with 129 frelimo deputies ,  112 renamo deputies ,  and 9 representatives of three smaller parties that formed the democratic union  -lrb-  ud  -rrb-  . 
the second general elections were held december 3–5, 1999, with high voter turnout . 
the opposition did not file a complaint about the results of the legislative vote . 
his successor ,  joaquim chissano ,  continued the reforms and began peace talks with renamo . 
after some delays ,  in 1998 the country held its first local elections to provide for local representation and some budgetary authority at the municipal level . 
telecommunications in mozambique include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
there was estimated to be a total of 30,400 km of highways ,  of which 5,685 km was paved . 
there are over 30,000km of roads ,  but much of the network is unpaved . 
the number of personnel in the air force are estimated at 4000.
also ,  several mozambican officer cadets attend the portuguese air force academy . 
the mozambique air force  -lrb-  `` forca aérea de moçambique ''  -rrb-  or fam was part of the national army initially ,  and from 1985 to 1990 was known as the people's liberation air force  -lrb-  `` força aérea popular de libertação ''  -rrb-  . 
six mig-21s are now back in mozambique with the final two aircraft shipped from romania in early july '' . 
there are about 2000 personnel in the navy . 
the mozambican army was formed in 1976 from three conventional battalions ,  two of which were trained in tanzania and a third of which was trained in zambia . 
the fadm were formed in mid august 1994, by the integration of the people's forces of liberation of mozambique  -lrb-  fplm  -rrb-  with the military wing of renamo ,  following the end of the civil war . 
the 1984 nkomati accord ,  while failing in its goal of ending south african support to renamo ,  opened initial diplomatic contacts between the mozambican and south african governments . 
illicit drugs: southern african transit point for south asian hashish ,  south asian heroin ,  and south american cocaine probably destined for the european and south african markets; producer of cannabis  -lrb-  for local consumption  -rrb-  and methaqualone  -lrb-  for export to south africa  -rrb- ; corruption and poor regulatory capability makes the banking system vulnerable to money laundering ,  but the lack of a well-developed financial infrastructure limits the country's utility as a money-laundering center . 
memes first need retention . 
in her book `` the meme machine '' ,  susan blackmore regards religions as particularly tenacious memes . 
the reuse of the neural space hosting a certain meme's copy to host different memes is the greatest threat to that meme's copy . 
one technique of meme mapping represents the evolution and transmission of a meme across time and space . 
thus memes that prove more effective at replicating and surviving are selected in the meme pool . 
consequently ,  a successful meme may or may not need to provide any benefit to its host . 
aaron lynch attributed the robustness of religious memes in human culture to the fact that such memes incorporate multiple modes of meme transmission . 
clusters of memes ,  or `` memeplexes ''  -lrb-  also known as `` meme complexes '' or as `` memecomplexes ''  -rrb-  ,  such as cultural or political doctrines and systems ,  may also play a part in the acceptance of new memes . 
the word `` meme '' is a neologism coined by richard dawkins . 
the word `` meme '' originated with richard dawkins' 1976 book `` the selfish gene '' . 
however ,  as hosts are mortal ,  retention is not sufficient to perpetuate a meme in the long term; memes also need transmission . 
some commentators have likened the transmission of memes to the spread of contagions . 
memes ,  analogously to genes ,  vary in their aptitude to replicate; successful memes remain and spread ,  whereas unfit ones stall and are forgotten . 
a meme  -lrb-     -rrb-  is an idea ,  behavior ,  or style that spreads from person to person within a culture—often with the aim of conveying a particular phenomenon ,  theme ,  or meaning represented by the meme . 
adam mcnamara has suggested that memes can be thereby classified as either internal or external memes  -lrb-  i-memes or e-memes  -rrb-  . 
architectural memes ,  according to salingaros ,  can have destructive power . 
a meme which increases the longevity of its hosts will generally survive longer . 
she would also be free to make one film with mmp per each completed film for fox . 
she reached a settlement with the studio in march: it included a new contract to be made later in the year ,  and a starring role in the film version of the broadway play `` the seven year itch '' ,  for which she was to receive a bonus of $100,000.
her last completed film was the drama `` the misfits ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- . 
it has been voted one of the best films ever made in polls by the bbc ,  the american film institute ,  and `` sight & sound '' . 
the fox contract gave monroe more publicity . 
although her role in `` love happy '' was very small ,  she was chosen to participate in the film's promotional tour in new york that year . 
in `` o .  henry's full house '' ,  her final film of the year ,  she had a minor role as a prostitute . 
monroe's three other films in 1952 continued her typecasting in comic roles that focused on her sex appeal . 
by the end of the year ,  monroe and fox had come to an agreement about a new seven-year contract . 
she was briefly suspended in early 1954 for refusing a film project but returned to star in one of the biggest box office successes of her career ,  `` the seven year itch ''  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- . 
the studio blamed monroe for the film's demise and began spreading negative publicity about her ,  even alleging that she was mentally disturbed . 
monroe's contract was not renewed in august 1947, and she returned to modeling while also doing occasional odd jobs at the studio . 
in the last weeks of her life ,  she was also planning on starring in a biopic of jean harlow . 
when the studio was still reluctant to change monroe's contract ,  she founded a film production company in late 1954; she named it marilyn monroe productions  -lrb-  mmp  -rrb-  . 
the last film that monroe completed was john huston's `` the misfits '' ,  which miller had written to provide her with a dramatic role . 
by 1953, monroe was one of the most marketable hollywood stars; she had leading roles in the noir film `` niagara '' ,  which focused on her sex appeal ,  and the comedies `` gentlemen prefer blondes '' and `` how to marry a millionaire '' ,  which established her star image as a `` dumb blonde '' . 
monroe's next film was otto preminger's western `` river of no return '' ,  which had been filmed prior to her suspension and featured robert mitchum as her co-star . 
film historian laura mulvey has written of her as an endorsement for american consumer culture:
 ''the seven year itch '' was released the following june and grossed over $4.5 million at the box office ,  making it one of the biggest commercial successes that year . 
after filming for `` the seven year itch '' wrapped in november ,  monroe began a new battle for control over her career and left hollywood for the east coast ,  where she and photographer milton greene founded their own production company ,  marilyn monroe productions  -lrb-  mmp  -rrb-  – an action that has later been called `` instrumental '' in the collapse of the studio system . 
monroe starred in three movies that were released in 1953 and emerged as a major sex symbol and one of hollywood's most bankable performers . 
while `` niagara '' made monroe a sex symbol and established her `` look '' ,  her second film of the year ,  the satirical musical comedy `` gentlemen prefer blondes '' ,  established her screen persona as a `` dumb blonde '' . 
in vertebrates ,  not all axons are myelinated . 
the process of generating myelin is called myelination or myelinogenesis . 
cholesterol ,  is an essential lipid component of myelin ,  without which myelin fails to form . 
myelinated fibers lack voltage-gated sodium channels along the myelinated internodes ,  exposing them only at the nodes of ranvier . 
whilst the role of myelin as an `` axonal insulator '' is well-established ,  other functions of myelinating cells are less well known or only recently established . 
unmyelinated fibers and myelinated axons of the mammalian central nervous system do not regenerate . 
more precisely ,  myelin speeds the transmission of electrical impulses called action potentials along myelinated axons by insulating the axon and reducing axonal membrane capacitance . 
on 5 march 2000, mk launched a petition for a cornish assembly . 
mk was formed as a pressure group in 1951.
mk contested all six cornish constituencies in the 2015 general election . 
george was himself a member of mk in his youth . 
mk supported the uk's membership of the european union . 
mk adopted the following objectives:
on economic policy ,  mk is left-of-centre . 
following the vote ,  mk reiterated its promise to campaign for a devolved cornish assembly . 
mk was founded as a pressure group on 6 january 1951.
mk describes its philosophy as based on being: `` cornish ,  green ,  left of centre ,  decentralist . `` 
it also advocates the establishment of a cornish university . 
mebyon kernow – the party for cornwall  -lrb-   ,  mk; cornish for `` sons of cornwall ''  -rrb-  is a cornish nationalist ,  centre-left political party in cornwall ,  united kingdom . 
in its early years ,  mk engaged in cultural activities ,  such as producing cornish calendars and sending a birthday prayer in cornish to the duke of cornwall . 
mk is an advocate of cornish nationalism ,  seeing cornwall as a separate nation rather than an english county . 
in 1988, mk established the campaign for a cornish constituency ,  which won the support of cornwall county council ,  all the district authorities ,  several cornish organisations and three of cornwall's five mps . 
this was modelled from the `` declaration for a cornish assembly '' ,  which stated that:
mk also contested the 1979 european parliament election ,  winning 5.9% of the vote in the constituency of cornwall and west plymouth . 
in the half-century preceding its foundation ,  cornish identity had been strengthened by the celtic revival ,  especially by the revival of the cornish language . 
on 4 october 1997, at the mebyon kernow national conference ,  jenkin was replaced by dick cole as the leader of mk . 
the late jurassic spans from 163 to 145 million years ago . 
the late cretaceous spans from 100 to 66 million years ago . 
the triassic ranges roughly from 252 million to 201 million years ago ,  preceding the jurassic period . 
the early triassic ,  about 252 to 247 million years ago ,  was dominated by deserts in the interior of the pangaea supercontinent . 
the early jurassic spans from 200 to 175 million years ago . 
the middle jurassic spans from 175 to 163 million years ago . 
the early cretaceous spans from 145 to 100 million years ago . 
the most important humid episodes were the carnian pluvial event and one in the rhaetian ,  a few million years before the triassic–jurassic extinction event . 
the middle triassic ,  from 247 to 237 million years ago ,  featured the beginnings of the breakup of pangaea and the opening of the tethys sea . 
the period is bracketed between the permian–triassic extinction event and the triassic–jurassic extinction event ,  two of the `` big five '' ,  and it is divided into three major epochs: early ,  middle ,  and late triassic . 
the jurassic ranges from 200 million years to 145 million years ago and features three major epochs: the early jurassic ,  the middle jurassic ,  and the late jurassic . 
about 20 minority languages are also spoken in the middle east . 
until world war ii ,  it was customary to refer to areas centered around turkey and the eastern shore of the mediterranean as the `` near east '' ,  while the `` far east '' centered on china ,  and the middle east then meant the area from mesopotamia to burma ,  namely the area between the near east and the far east . 
 ''mideast '' is also acceptable ,  but `` middle east '' is preferred . 
various concepts are often being paralleled to middle east ,  most notably near east ,  fertile crescent and the levant . 
the term has come into wider usage as a replacement of the term near east  -lrb-  as opposed to the far east  -rrb-  beginning in the early 20th century . 
the term `` middle east '' may have originated in the 1850s in the british india office . 
however ,  the usage `` near east '' was retained by a variety of academic disciplines ,  including archaeology and ancient history ,  where it describes an area identical to the term `` middle east '' ,  which is not used by these disciplines  -lrb-  see ancient near east  -rrb-  . 
in 1958, the state department explained that the terms `` near east '' and `` middle east '' were interchangeable ,  and defined the region as including only egypt ,  syria ,  israel ,  lebanon ,  jordan ,  iraq ,  saudi arabia ,  kuwait ,  bahrain ,  and qatar . 
the term `` middle east '' has also been criticised as eurocentric  -lrb-  `` based on a british western perception ''  -rrb-  by hanafi  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- . 
the middle east is a transcontinental region centered on western asia ,  turkey  -lrb-  both asian and european  -rrb-  ,  and egypt  -lrb-  which is mostly in north africa  -rrb-  . 
the associated press stylebook says that near east formerly referred to the farther west countries while middle east referred to the eastern ones ,  but that now they are synonymous . 
there are terms similar to `` near east '' and `` middle east '' in other european languages ,  but since it is a relative description ,  the meanings depend on the country and are different from the english terms generally . 
the largest romanian-speaking community in the middle east is found in israel ,  where romanian is spoken by 5% of the population . 
arabs constitute the largest ethnic group in the middle east ,  followed by turkic people . 
with the disappearance of the ottoman empire in 1918, `` near east '' largely fell out of common use in english ,  while `` middle east '' came to be applied to the re-emerging countries of the islamic world . 
the middle east is very diverse when it comes to religions ,  many of which originated there . 
the band completely dissolved in 1976.
in 1974, taner öngür and ayzer danga left the band . 
in july 1970, aziz azmet ,  the band's vocalist left the band due to musical disagreements and ersen dinleten replaced him for a short time . 
moğollar  -lrb-  `` mongols '' in turkish  -rrb-  is one of the pioneer bands in turkish rock music for about 40 years and one of the founders of turkish folk rock  -lrb-  or anatolian rock  -rrb-  . 
in 1971, barış manço joined as vocalist and the band was renamed manchomongol . 
monism attributes oneness or singleness  -lrb-  greek: μόνος  -rrb-  to a concept e . g .  ,  existence . 
historically ,  the master shot was perhaps the most important shot of any given scene . 
in film ,  a medium shot ,  mid shot  -lrb-  ms  -rrb-  ,  or waist shot is a camera angle shot from a medium distance . 
the medium shot shows equality between subjects and background . 
the moon is a differentiated body . 
during new moon ,  the near side is dark . 
the moon's appearance ,  like the sun's ,  can be affected by earth's atmosphere . 
the moon's far side has a crust that is thicker than that of the near side . 
the periodicity and recurrence of eclipses of the sun by the moon ,  and of the moon by earth ,  is described by the saros ,  which has a period of approximately 18 years . 
the modern english adjective pertaining to the moon is `` lunar '' ,  derived from the latin word for the moon ,  `` luna '' . 
the moon is in synchronous rotation with earth ,  and thus always shows the same side to earth ,  the near side . 
the moon is exceptionally large relative to earth: its diameter is more than a quarter and its mass is 1/81 of earth's . 
because the moon's orbit around earth is inclined by about 5.145°  -lrb-  5° 9'  -rrb-  to the orbit of earth around the sun ,  eclipses do not occur at every full and new moon . 
the moon is the second-densest satellite in the solar system ,  after io . 
the moon's average orbital distance is  ,  or 1.28 light-seconds . 
the moon is thought to have formed about 4.51 billion years ago ,  not long after earth . 
the moon is an astronomical body that orbits planet earth and is earth's only permanent natural satellite . 
the moon is in synchronous rotation as it orbits earth; it rotates about its axis in about the same time it takes to orbit earth . 
the impact blasted material into earth's orbit and then the material accreted and formed the moon . 
the earth and the moon's barycentre ,  their common centre of mass ,  is located  -lrb-  about a quarter of earth's radius  -rrb-  beneath earth's surface . 
eclipses only occur when the sun ,  earth ,  and moon are all in a straight line  -lrb-  termed `` syzygy ''  -rrb-  . 
this is thought to be because the moon fused from two different bodies . 
lunar swirls are enigmatic features found across the moon's surface . 
a permanent asymmetric moon dust cloud exists around the moon ,  created by small particles from comets . 
the moon has an external magnetic field of about 1–100 nanoteslas ,  less than one-hundredth that of earth . 
it is speculated that these patches were the poles of the moon billions of years ago ,  before it was tidally locked to earth . 
the moon's axial tilt with respect to the ecliptic is only 1.5424° ,  much less than the 23.44° of earth . 
since the apollo 17 mission in 1972, the moon has been visited only by unmanned spacecraft . 
almost all maria are on the near side of the moon ,  and cover 31% of the surface of the near side ,  compared with 2% of the far side . 
the moon formed 4.51 billion years ago ,  some 60 million years after the origin of the solar system . 
many scholars believe that marco polo exaggerated his importance in china . 
marco polo returned to venice in 1295 with his fortune converted into gemstones . 
in 1271, niccolò ,  maffeo and marco polo embarked on their voyage to fulfil kublai's request . 
though he was not the first european to reach china  -lrb-  see europeans in medieval china  -rrb-  ,  marco polo was the first to leave a detailed chronicle of his experience . 
an authoritative version of marco polo's book does not and cannot exist ,  for the early manuscripts differ significantly . 
in 1168, his great-uncle ,  marco polo ,  borrowed money and commanded a ship in constantinople . 
a number of errors in marco polo's account have been noted: for example ,  he described the bridge later known as marco polo bridge as having twenty-four arches instead of eleven or thirteen . 
in 1323, polo was confined to bed ,  due to illness . 
marco polo  -lrb-   ,   ,  ; 1254january 8–9, 1324 -rrb- was an italian merchant ,  explorer ,  and writer ,  born in the republic of venice . 
it has however been pointed out that polo's accounts of china are more accurate and detailed than other travelers' accounts of the periods . 
skeptics have long wondered if marco polo wrote his book based on hearsay ,  with some pointing to omissions about noteworthy practices and structures of china as well as the lack of details on some places in his book . 
his father later married floradise polo  -lrb-  née trevisan  -rrb-  . 
morgan writes that since much of what `` the book of marvels '' has to say about china is `` demonstrably correct '' that to claim that polo did not go to china `` creates far more problems than it solves '' and so that the `` balance of probabilities '' strongly suggests that polo really did go to china ,  even if he exaggerated somewhat his importance in china . 
marco polo was born in 1254 in the republic of venice ,  though the exact date and place of birth are archivally unknown . 
wood accused marco polo of taking other people's accounts in his book ,  retelling other stories as his own ,  or basing his accounts on persian guidebooks or other lost sources . 
effects light - electrotachyscope - ellipsoidal reflector spot light - establishing shot - extreme close-up - extreme long shot - eye-level camera angle
b roll - baby plates - backlot - background lighting - balloon light - barn doors  -lrb-  lighting  -rrb-  - below the line  -lrb-  film production  -rrb-  - best boy - blocking - bluescreen - boom shot - boomerang  -lrb-  lighting  -rrb-  - bounce board - brightness  -lrb-  lighting  -rrb-  - broadside  -lrb-  lighting  -rrb-  - butterfly  -lrb-  lighting  -rrb- 
equivalently ,  the appalachians are the parent of the white mountains and blue ridge mountains ,  and the white mountains and the blue ridge mountains are children of the appalachians . 
erosion is at work while the mountains are being uplifted until the mountains are reduced to low hills and plains . 
the mountain systems of the earth are characterized by a tree structure ,  where mountain ranges can contain sub-ranges . 
mountain ranges are usually segmented by highlands or mountain passes and valleys . 
if the definition of a mountain range is stretched to include underwater mountains ,  then the ocean ridges form the longest continuous mountain system on earth ,  with a length of  . 
ancient roman observances celebrated in march include agonium martiale ,  celebrated on march 1, march 14, and march 17, matronalia ,  celebrated on march 1, junonalia ,  celebrated on march 7, equirria ,  celebrated on march 14, mamuralia ,  celebrated on either march 14 or march 15, hilaria on march 15 and then through march 22–28, argei ,  celebrated on march 16–17, liberalia and bacchanalia ,  celebrated march 17, quinquatria ,  celebrated march 19–23, and tubilustrium ,  celebrated march 23.
march is the third month of the year in both the julian and gregorian calendars . 
the name of march comes from `` martius '' ,  the first month of the earliest roman calendar . 
under the calendar of ancient rome ,  the festival of bona dea fell on may 1, argei fell on may 14 or may 15, agonalia fell on may 21, and ambarvalia on may 29.
the virginids also shower at various dates in may . 
eta aquariids meteor shower appears in may . 
