inhibition of both mao-a and mao-b is used in the treatment of clinical depression and anxiety . 
this may be preferable to risking the effects of an interaction between the two drugs ,  but it is often not easy for the patient . 
tryptophan supplements should not be consumed with maois as the potentially fatal serotonin syndrome may result . 
they are also used in the treatment of parkinson's disease and several other disorders . 
ordinarily ,  mao-a would destroy the excess ne; when mao-a is inhibited ,  however ,  ne levels get too high ,  leading to dangerous increases in blood pressure . 
rimas are displaced from mao-a in the presence of tyramine ,  rather than inhibiting its breakdown in the liver as general maois do . 
fungi are fundamental for life on earth in their roles as symbionts ,  e . g . 
some fungi can cause disease in humans and other animals - the study of pathogenic fungi that infect animals is referred to as medical mycology . 
many fungi produce toxins ,  antibiotics ,  and other secondary metabolites . 
the middle ages saw little advancement in the body of knowledge about fungi . 
by decomposing these molecules ,  fungi play a critical role in the global carbon cycle . 
melancholia was described as a distinct disease with particular mental and physical symptoms in the 5th and 4th centuries bc . 
during the later 16th and early 17th centuries ,  a curious cultural and literary cult of melancholia arose in england . 
when a patient could not be cured of the disease it was thought that the melancholia was a result of demonic possession . 
in music ,  the post-elizabethan cult of melancholia is associated with john dowland ,  whose motto was `` semper dowland ,  semper dolens ''  -lrb-  `` always dowland ,  always mourning ''  -rrb-  . 
in the 19th century ,  `` melancholia '' could be physical as well as mental ,  and melancholic conditions were classified as such by their common cause rather than by their properties . 
mimosa contains some level of heptanoic acid . 
 ''mimosa '' can be distinguished from the large related genera ,  `` acacia '' and `` albizia '' ,  since its flowers have 10 or fewer stamens . 
a manhattan is a cocktail made with whiskey ,  sweet vermouth and bitters . 
the original `` manhattan cocktail '' was a mix of `` american whiskey ,  italian vermouth and angostura bitters '' . 
the same cocktail appears listed as a `` tennessee cocktail '' in `` shake 'em up ! `` 
it is closely related to the brooklyn cocktail ,  which uses dry vermouth and maraschino liqueur in place of the manhattan's sweet vermouth ,  and amer picon in place of the manhattan's angostura bitters . 
the whiskey-based manhattan is one of five cocktails named for a new york city borough . 
mira a is a well-known example of a category of variable stars known as mira variables ,  which are named after it . 
this binary star system consists of a red giant  -lrb-  mira ,  designated mira a  -rrb-  undergoing mass loss and a high temperature white dwarf companion  -lrb-  mira b  -rrb-  that is accreting mass from the primary . 
ο ceti is a binary stellar system ,  consisting of a variable red giant  -lrb-  mira a  -rrb-  along with a white dwarf companion  -lrb-  mira b  -rrb-  . 
mira a is a pulsating variable star and was the first non-supernova variable star discovered ,  with the possible exception of algol . 
msc first chartered the ship ,  then known as mv `` strong virginian '' ,  in 1992.
virginian was chartered again in 1998 and ,  for the next four years ,  the ship was used to support the u . s .  army . 
sealift incorporated bought the ship from van ommeren shipping usa ,  inc .  taking delivery on june 10, 2003.
the u . s .  navy’s military sealift command is the contracting authority . 
zahir shah was born on 15 october 1914, in kabul ,  afghanistan . 
zahir shah was fluent in pashto ,  persian ,  and french . 
zahir khan was proclaimed king  -lrb-  shah  -rrb-  on 8 november 1933 at the age of 19, after the assassination of his father mohammed nadir shah . 
hamid karzai ,  who was favored by zahir shah ,  became president of afghanistan after the loya jirga . 
zahir shah attended the 7 december 2004 swearing-in of hamid karzai as president of afghanistan . 
during august 1973, zahir shah abdicated rather than risk a civil war ,  ending over 200 years of royal rule in afghanistan . 
zahir shah was educated in a special class for princes at habibia high school in kabul . 
in april 2002, four months after the end of taliban rule ,  zahir shah returned to afghanistan to initiate the loya jirga ,  which met during june 2002.
the origin of the miso of japan is not completely clear . 
for example ,  the soybeans used in sendai miso are much more coarsely mashed than in normal soy miso . 
today ,  miso is produced industrially in large quantities ,  and traditional home-made miso has become a rarity . 
máel coluim's sons dub and cináed were later kings . 
the annals of ulster report that máel coluim was killed in 954.
máel coluim was probably born during his father's reign  -lrb-  889–900 -rrb- . 
malcolm's father duncan i became king in late 1034, on the death of malcolm ii ,  duncan's maternal grandfather and malcolm's great-grandfather . 
malcolm's second wife ,  st .  margaret of scotland ,  is scotland's only royal saint . 
this malcolm refused to accept ,  and returned immediately to scotland . 
by the end of 1070, malcolm had married edgar's sister margaret of wessex ,  the future saint margaret of scotland . 
malcolm's family attempted to overthrow macbeth in 1045, but malcolm's grandfather crínán of dunkeld was killed in the attempt . 
malcolm's marriage to ingibiorg secured him peace in the north and west . 
equally ,  malcolm's raids in northumbria may have been related to the disputed `` kingdom of the cumbrians '' ,  reestablished by earl siward in 1054, which was under malcolm's control by 1070.
unlike in 1072, malcolm was prepared to fight ,  but a peace was arranged by edgar ætheling and robert curthose whereby malcolm again acknowledged the overlordship of the english king . 
malcolm again made peace ,  and this time kept it for over a decade . 
mtus apply to communications protocols and network layers . 
larger mtu is associated with reduced overhead . 
the internet protocol defines the `` path mtu '' of an internet transmission path as the smallest mtu of any of the ip hops of the `` path '' between a source and destination . 
 ,  packetization layer path mtu discovery ,  describes a path mtu discovery technique which responds more robustly to icmp filtering . 
some systems may decide mtu at connect time . 
the transmission of a packet on a physical network segment that is larger than the segment's mtu is known as jabber . 
standards  -lrb-  ethernet ,  for example  -rrb-  can fix the size of an mtu; or systems  -lrb-  such as point-to-point serial links  -rrb-  may decide mtu at connect time . 
in the context of internet protocol ,  mtu refers to the maximum size of an ip packet that can be transmitted without fragmentation over a given medium . 
mount baker was well-known to indigenous peoples of the pacific northwest . 
after mount rainier ,  mount baker is the most heavily glaciated of the cascade range volcanoes; the volume of snow and ice on mount baker ,  is greater than that of all the other cascades volcanoes  -lrb-  except rainier  -rrb-  combined . 
isaac i .  stevens ,  the first governor of washington territory ,  wrote about mount baker in 1853:
mount baker is drained on the north by streams that flow into the north fork nooksack river ,  on the west by the middle fork nooksack river ,  and on the southeast and east by tributaries of the baker river . 
lake shannon and baker lake are the largest nearby bodies of water ,  formed by two dams on the baker river . 
the present-day cone of mount baker is relatively young; it is perhaps less than 100,000 years old . 
a considerable amount of research has been done at mount baker over the past decade ,  and it is now among the most-studied of the cascade volcanoes . 
the largest of these cones is the black buttes edifice ,  active between 500,000 and 300,000 years ago and formerly bigger than today's mount baker . 
mount baker was built from stacks of lava and volcanic breccia prior to the end of the last glacial period ,  which ended about 15,000 years ago . 
the `` sergeant matej kocak '' class ,  the second class of mps ships chartered by msc ,  also gained amidships and a helicopter deck after conversion . 
strategic sealift ships are part of the united states military sealift command's  -lrb-  msc  -rrb-  prepositioning program . 
rust disappeared from the finnish air traffic radar near espoo . 
around 7:00 p . m .  rust appeared above moscow . 
rust was arrested two hours later . 
rust's trial began in moscow on 2 september 1987.
in their interview `` rust in red square '' ,  recorded in may 2007, rust gives a full account of the flight in english . 
the fighters lost contact with rust soon after this . 
on the morning of 28 may 1987, rust refuelled at helsinki-malmi airport . 
following the 20th anniversary of his flight on 28 may 2007, the international media interviewed rust about the flight and its aftermath . 
some systems allow code executed by a user to access all rights of that user ,  which is known as over-privileged code . 
some systems allow all users to modify their internal structures ,  and such users today would be considered over-privileged users . 
once a system has been compromised ,  one or more backdoors may be installed in order to allow access in the future ,  invisibly to the user . 
in computing ,  privilege refers to how much a user or program is allowed to modify a system . 
the two ways that malware does this is through overprivileged users and overprivileged code . 
this makes users vulnerable to malware in the form of e-mail attachments ,  which may or may not be disguised . 
users may also execute disguised malicious email attachments . 
these definitions lead to the observation that a virus requires the user to run an infected software or operating system for the virus to spread ,  whereas a worm spreads itself . 
the goal is to stop any operations the malware may attempt on the system before they occur ,  including activities which might exploit bugs or trigger unexpected operating system behavior . 
malware distributors would trick the user into booting or running from an infected device or medium . 
backdoors may be installed by trojan horses ,  worms ,  implants ,  or other methods . 
rootkits can prevent a harmful process from being visible in the system's list of processes ,  or keep its files from being read . 
malware may provide data that overflows the buffer ,  with malicious executable code or data after the end; when this payload is accessed it does what the attacker ,  not the legitimate software ,  determines . 
an example of this is a pe infection ,  a technique ,  usually used to spread malware ,  that inserts extra data or executable code into pe files . 
muralitharan won 18 man of the match awards in test cricket . 
muralitharan reclaimed the record for most test wickets during the first test against england at kandy on 2007.
muralitharan was on the winning side on 54 of the 133 test matches he played . 
sri lanka won by eight wickets and muralitharan had figures of 12 for 117.
against teams excluding bangladesh and zimbabwe ,  muralitharan took 624 wickets in 108 tests . 
muralitharan played in five cricket world cup tournaments ,  in 1996, 1999, 2003, 2007 and 2011.
muralitharan took 4–48 on the first day of the second test as australia were skittled for 120 in the first innings . 
muralitharan has a strike rate close to 70 in test cricket and scored over 55% of his test runs in fours and sixes . 
playing his 58th test ,  muralitharan claimed his 300th test wicket when he dismissed shaun pollock in the first test in durban ,  in december 2000.
in august that same year muralitharan produces his career-best test match figures of 16 for 220, in the one-off test against england . 
prior to the eventful boxing day test of 1995, muralitharan had captured 80 wickets in 22 tests at an unflattering average of 32.74.
in january 1998, muralitharan took his first ten-wicket haul against zimbabwe in the first test at kandy . 
muralitharan ,  together with chaminda vaas ,  holds the record for the highest 10th wicket partnership in tests for sri lanka . 
on 16 march 1997, muralitharan became the first sri lankan to reach 100 test wickets ,  when he dismissed stephen fleming in the second innings of the hamilton test . 
averaging over six wickets per test ,  muralitharan is one of the most successful bowlers in the game . 
muttiah muralitharan also took at least five five-fors against all the other nine test sides . 
at the start of his last match ,  muralitharan was eight short of 800 wickets . 
muralitharan also holds the record for scoring most runs in test cricket while batting at the number 11 position . 
muralitharan is the first wrist-spinning off-spinner in the history of the game . 
on 16 march 2004 muralitharan became the fastest and the youngest bowler to reach 500 wickets during the second test between sri lanka and australia played in kandy . 
after an outstanding year muralitharan was adjudged as the wisden leading cricketer in the world in 2006.
however ,  his sons ,  including muralitharan's father muttiah ,  remained in sri lanka . 
at the conclusion of muralitharan's test career cricket writer rahul bhattacharya summed up muralitharan's trials thus: `` murali is described often as a fox . 
muralitharan held the number one spot in the international cricket council's player rankings for test bowlers for a record period of 1,711 days spanning 214 test matches . 
in 2014, muralitharan joined australian team as a coaching consultant for the test series against pakistan in the uae . 
muralitharan himself believed there was a possibility that he would reach this milestone . 
on 7 july 2010, muttiah muralitharan formally announced his retirement from test cricket at a media briefing in colombo . 
in august 1993 at moratuwa ,  muralitharan captured 5 for 104 in south africa's first innings ,  his first five-wicket haul in tests . 
in july 2008, muralitharan and ajantha mendis stopped india's strong batting as sri lanka won the first test by a record innings and 239 runs in colombo . 
mole day originated in an article in `` the science teacher '' in the early 1980s . 
this makes mole day an integral part of national chemistry week . 
14 in the uk album charts . 
24 in the uk album charts . 
the band's 1995 touring schedule began in europe in late april . 
the band toured japan in late may and europe in june ,  august and december . 
the band concluded the year's touring with thirteen dates in germany . 
from march until early may 2005, the band toured the united states ,  and in june and august were on the `` 30th anniversary '' tour in europe . 
in april 2002, a dvd of some of motörhead's performances from the 1970s and 1980s along with some stock footage of the band was released as `` the best of motörhead '' . 
from 19 november to 15 december the band toured america with canadian speed metal band exciter and danish heavy metal band mercyful fate and from 26 to 30 december performed five shows in germany . 
the band posted the following message on facebook:
lemmy said he felt little kinship with the speed metal bands motörhead have inspired:
the band returned to the states for a seven show tour between late september and early october . 
the band toured the uk supporting hawkwind in june ,  then from late july they commenced the `` beyond the threshold of pain '' tour with the count bishops . 
21 in the uk charts . 
initial reactions to the band had been unfavourable; they won a poll for `` the best worst band in the world '' in the music magazine `` nme '' . 
although motörhead is often considered a heavy metal band ,  lemmy always described motörhead's music as simply `` rock and roll '' . 
he has said that they had more in common with punk bands ,  but with their own unique sound ,  motörhead is embraced in both punk and metal scenes . 
throughout the rest of october and better part of november ,  the band were on a european tour with anthrax . 
in june and july the band played five dates in japan ,  and from mid-october until mid-november they toured europe . 
the band were contracted to united artists by andrew lauder ,  the a&r man for the band lemmy was previously in ,  hawkwind . 
in 1999 motörhead made a tour of the states between 20 april and 2 june ,  before going to karo studios in brackel ,  germany to record their next album ,  `` we are motörhead '' ,  which was released in may the following year . 
being in bands where you have to wait around for a couple of hours fucks you up . `` 
the band toured argentina and brazil during october and conducted the `` bombers and eagles in '92 '' tour of europe with saxon throughout december . 
the band conducted their `` it serves you right '' tour of britain in february ,  the `` lights out over europe '' tour followed ,  lasting until early april ,  when the band returned to britain to play another six venues . 
from early june until early august the band were on their 'it never gets dark' tour of sweden and norway ,  an american tour followed in mid-november until late december . 
motörhead released 22 studio albums ,  10 live recordings ,  12 compilation albums ,  and five eps over a career spanning 40 years . 
during july and august ,  except for a break to appear at the reading festival ,  the band were working on their next album ,  `` bomber '' . 
now on his own ,  lemmy decided to form a new band called motörhead ,  inspired by the final song he had written for hawkwind . 
to coincide with the release of their upcoming album ,  motörhead embarked on a 35th anniversary uk tour ,  from 8–28 november 2010, and a european tour from 30 november 2010 – 19 december 2010.
the band finished the year with six dates in germany during december . 
on 18 june 2013, the new album's title was revealed to be `` aftershock '' . 
after taking a month off ,  the band began working on a new album at chuck reid's house in the hollywood hills . 
the band did eventually ,  but made another studio album first ,  `` snake bite love '' ,  recorded in various studios and released on 3 march 1998.
tegmark argues that a level iii multiverse does not contain more possibilities in the hubble volume than a level i or level ii multiverse . 
in level iii they live on another quantum branch in infinite-dimensional hilbert space . `` 
such bubbles are embryonic level i multiverses . 
similarly ,  all level ii bubble universes with different physical constants can ,  in effect ,  be found as `` worlds '' created by `` splits '' at the moment of spontaneous symmetry breaking in a level iii multiverse . 
hugh everett iii's many-worlds interpretation  -lrb-  mwi  -rrb-  is one of several mainstream interpretations of quantum mechanics . 
level ii also includes john archibald wheeler's oscillatory universe theory and lee smolin's fecund universes theory . 
in these contexts ,  parallel universes are also called `` alternate universes '' ,  `` quantum universes '' ,  `` interpenetrating dimensions '' ,  `` parallel dimensions '' ,  `` parallel worlds '' ,  `` parallel realities '' ,  `` quantum realities '' ,  `` alternate realities '' ,  `` alternate timelines '' ,  `` alternate dimensions '' and `` dimensional planes '' . 
in brief ,  one aspect of quantum mechanics is that certain observations cannot be predicted absolutely . 
cosmologist max tegmark has provided a taxonomy of universes beyond the familiar observable universe . 
protesters during the ferguson riots used molotov cocktails . 
the name `` molotov cocktail '' was coined by the finns during the winter war ,  called in or `` molotovin koktaili '' . 
by august 1940, the war office produced training instructions for the creation and use of molotov cocktails . 
during the protests in venezuela from 2014 and into 2017, protesters had used molotov cocktails similar demonstrators in other countries . 
a molotov cocktail ,  also known as a petrol bomb ,  bottle bomb ,  poor man's grenade ,  molotovin koktaili  -lrb-  finnish  -rrb-  ,  polttopullo  -lrb-  finnish  -rrb-  ,  fire bomb  -lrb-  not to be confused with an actual fire bomb  -rrb-  or just molotov ,  sometimes shortened as molly ,  is a generic name used for a variety of bottle-based improvised incendiary weapons . 
there were many who were sceptical about the efficacy of molotov cocktails and sips grenades against the more modern german tanks . 
improvised incendiary devices of this type were used for the first time in the spanish civil war between july 1936 and april 1939, before they became known as `` molotov cocktails . `` 
when the hand-held bottle firebomb was developed to attack soviet tanks ,  the finns called it the `` molotov cocktail '' ,  as `` a drink to go with the food '' . 
the wick is usually soaked in alcohol or kerosene ,  rather than petrol . 
as incendiary devices ,  molotov cocktails are illegal to manufacture or possess in many regions . 
there are two major forms of matzo . 
after baking ,  matzo may be ground into fine crumbs ,  known as matzo meal . 
matzo that is kosher for passover is limited in ashkenazi tradition to plain matzo made from flour and water . 
matzo meal can be used like flour during the week of passover when flour can otherwise be used only to make matzo . 
soft matzo is made only by hand ,  and generally with `` shmurah '' flour . 
the entire process of making matzo takes only a few minutes in efficient modern matzo bakeries . 
there are numerous explanations behind the symbolism of matzo . 
at the passover seder ,  simple matzo made of flour and water is mandatory . 
matzo may be used whole ,  broken ,  chopped  -lrb-  `` matzo farfel ''  -rrb-  ,  or finely ground  -lrb-  `` matzo meal ''  -rrb-  to make numerous matzo-based cooked dishes . 
oat matzo may only be used by those who cannot have any other kind because it's not certain that oat is actually one of the five grains  -lrb-  it may be a mistranslation  -rrb-  ,  so those who can have wheat matzo should do so . 
he is also a recipient of the `` chevalier de l'ordre des arts et des lettres de france ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- . 
tremblay has received numerous awards in recognition of his work . 
he has been openly gay throughout his public life ,  and he has written many novels  -lrb-  `` the duchess and the commoner '' ,  `` la nuit des princes charmants '' ,  `` le coeur découvert '' ,  `` le coeur éclaté ''  -rrb-  and plays  -lrb-  `` hosanna '' ,  `` la duchesse de langeais '' ,  `` fragments de mensonges inutiles ''  -rrb-  centred on gay characters . 
for many years ,  tremblay has believed that the only reasonable solution for quebec is to separate from canada . 
the most profound and lasting effects of tremblay's early plays ,  including `` hosanna '' and `` la duchesse de langeais '' ,  were the barriers they toppled in quebec society . 
there is no single learning algorithm that works best on all supervised learning problems  -lrb-  see the no free lunch theorem  -rrb-  . 
this requires the learning algorithm to generalize from the training data to unseen situations in a `` reasonable '' way  -lrb-  see inductive bias  -rrb-  . 
martin helwig  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  5 november 1516 – 26 january 1574 -rrb- was a german cartographer of and from silesia and pedagogue . 
not all macro viruses are detected by antivirus software . 
many antivirus programs can detect macro viruses ,  however the macro virus' behavior can still be difficult to detect . 
once a file containing a macro virus is opened ,  the virus can infect the system . 
this includes access 97  -lrb-  version 8.0 -rrb- ,  access 2000  -lrb-  version 9.0 -rrb- ,  access 2002  -lrb-  version 10.0 -rrb- ,  access 2003  -lrb-  version 11.5 -rrb- ,  access 2007  -lrb-  version 12.0 -rrb- ,  access 2010  -lrb-  version 14.0 -rrb- ,  and access 2013  -lrb-  version 15.0 -rrb- . 
with office 95, microsoft access 7.0  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
access also has report creation features that can work with any data source that access can access . 
new features were added to the access 2002 format which can be used by access 2002, 2003, 2007, and 2010.
microsoft access is a file server-based database . 
microsoft access stores data in its own format based on the access jet database engine . 
workgroup security is not supported in the access 2007 and access 2010 accdb database format ,  although access 2007 and access 2010 still support it for mdb databases . 
microsoft access offers parameterized queries . 
microsoft access 2000 increased the maximum database size to 2gb from 1gb in access 97.
access 2013 offers the ability to publish access web solutions on sharepoint 2013.
the original concept of access was for end users to be able to access data from any source . 
microsoft office access 2007 and newer can import from or link to:
1992: microsoft released access version 1.0 on november 13, 1992, and an access 1.1 release in may 1993 to improve compatibility with other microsoft products and to include the access basic programming language . 
while microsoft fixed this problem for jet 3.5/access 97 post-release ,  it never fixed the issue with jet 3.0/access 95.
microsoft access applications can adopt a split-database architecture . 
access databases linked to sql server or to access data projects work well over vpns and wans . 
note that the access macro language ,  allowing an even higher level of abstraction than vba ,  was significantly enhanced in access 2010 and again in access 2013.
access services stores those objects in sharepoint . 
access 2010 allows databases to be published to sharepoint 2010 web sites running access services . 
microsoft offers free runtime versions of microsoft access which allow users to run an access desktop application without needing to purchase or install a retail version of microsoft access . 
access 2013 can create web applications directly in sharepoint 2013 sites running access services . 
microsoft access 2010 introduced a new version of the accdb format supported hosting access web solutions on a sharepoint 2010 server . 
in previous versions of access ,  including access 2010, databases can also be converted to access data projects  -lrb-  adp  -rrb-  which are tied directly to one sql server database . 
microsoft access 2007 introduced a new database format: accdb . 
microsoft has issued hotfixes kb2553029 for access 2007 and kb2553116 for access 2010, but will not fix the issue with jet 4.0 as it is out of mainstream support . 
microsoft access 2013 offers traditional access desktop solutions plus a significantly updated sharepoint 2013 web solution . 
different metabolic pathways function based on the position within a eukaryotic cell and the significance of the pathway in the given compartment of the cell . 
in biochemistry ,  a metabolic pathway is a linked series of chemical reactions occurring within a cell . 
a malthusian catastrophe  -lrb-  also known as malthusian check ,  malthusian spectre or malthusian crunch  -rrb-  is a prediction that population growth will outpace agricultural production – that there will be too many people and not enough food . 
in this view `` christ's reign ''  -lrb-  during the millennium  -rrb-  will be spiritual in and through the church . 
20:1–6 in which `` christ's reign '' is current in and through the church . 
in this view ,  `` christ's reign '' will be physically on the earth . 
the first two refer to different views of the relationship between the `` millennial kingdom '' and christ's second coming . 
postmillennialism sees christ's second coming as subsequent to the millennium and concurrent with the final judgment . 
premillennialism sees christ's second advent as preceding the millennium ,  thereby separating the second coming from the final judgment . 
christianity and judaism have both produced messianic movements from time to time which featured millennialist teachings - such as the notion that an earthly kingdom of god was at hand . 
the rights to the `` might and magic '' name were purchased for us$1.3 million by ubisoft ,  who `` rebooted '' the franchise with a new series with no apparent connection to the previous continuity ,  starting with the games `` heroes of might and magic v '' and `` dark messiah of might and magic '' . 
flash was a two-part system ,  a graphics and animation editor known as macromedia flash ,  and a player known as macromedia flash player . 
in 2008, adobe released the tenth version of flash ,  `` adobe flash cs4 '' . 
 ''actionscript '' is the programming language used by flash . 
in april 2006, the flash swf file format specification was released with details on the then newest version format  -lrb-  flash 8 -rrb- . 
performance has later improved for the latter two ,  on mac os x with flash player 10.1, and on linux with flash player 11.
end-users can view flash content via flash player  -lrb-  for web browsers  -rrb-  ,  air  -lrb-  for desktop or mobile apps  -rrb-  or third-party players such as scaleform  -lrb-  for video games  -rrb-  . 
in 2007, adobe's first version release was `` adobe flash cs3 professional '' ,  the ninth major version of flash . 
on august 20, 2007, adobe announced on its blog that with update 3 of flash player 9, flash video will also implement some parts of the mpeg-4 international standards . 
flash player 10.3 beta incorporates acoustic echo cancellation . 
virtually all browser plugins for video are free of charge and cross-platform ,  including adobe's offering of flash video ,  which was introduced with flash version 6.
in 2000, the first major version of actionscript was developed ,  and released with `` flash 5 '' . 
in 2016, adobe renamed flash professional ,  the primary authoring software for flash content ,  to adobe animate to reflect its growing use for authoring html5 content in favour of flash content . 
in february 2003, macromedia purchased presedia ,  which had developed a flash authoring tool that automatically converted powerpoint files into flash . 
adobe flash lite enabled viewing flash content on older smartphones ,  but has been discontinued and superseded by adobe air . 
the flash 9 specification was made available under similar restrictions . 
as of 2016, web applications and rias can be developed with flash using the actionscript 3.0 programming language and related tools such as adobe flash builder . 
in 2007, youtube offered videos in html5 format to support the iphone and ipad ,  which did not support flash player . 
in october 1998, macromedia disclosed the flash version 3 specification on its website . 
flash movie files are in the `` swf '' format ,  traditionally called `` shockwave flash '' movies ,  `` flash movies '' ,  or `` flash applications '' ,  usually have a  . swf file extension ,  and may be used in the form of a web page plug-in ,  strictly `` played '' in a standalone flash player ,  or incorporated into a self-executing projector movie  -lrb-  with the  . exe extension in microsoft windows  -rrb-  . 
flash is also used to build interfaces and huds for 3d video games using scaleform gfx ,  a technology that renders flash content within non-flash video games . 
after flash 5 introduced actionscript in 2000, developers combined the visual and programming capabilities of flash to produce interactive experiences and applications for the web . 
it has support for a scripting language called actionscript ,  which can be used to display flash video from an swf file . 
after adobe introduced hardware-accelerated 3d for flash  -lrb-  stage3d  -rrb-  ,  flash websites saw a growth of 3d content for product demonstrations and virtual tours . 
when the project was announced ,  seven goals were outlined: the abolition of licensing fees for adobe flash player and adobe integrated runtime ,  the removal of restrictions on the use of the shockwave flash  -lrb-  swf  -rrb-  and flash video  -lrb-  flv  -rrb-  file formats ,  the publishing of application programming interfaces for porting flash to new devices ,  and the publishing of the flash cast protocol and action message format  -lrb-  amf  -rrb-  ,  which let flash applications receive information from remote databases . 
brainwashing  -lrb-  also known as mind control ,  menticide ,  coercive persuasion ,  thought control ,  thought reform ,  and re-education  -rrb-  is the concept that the human mind can be altered or controlled by certain psychological techniques . 
mind control remains an important theme in science fiction . 
he also pointed out that in their efforts against terrorism western governments were also using some mind control techniques ,  including thought-terminating clichés . 
eileen barker criticized the concept of mind control because it functioned to justify costly interventions such as deprogramming or exit counseling . 
his best-selling 1956 book ,  `` the rape of the mind '' ,  concludes by saying:
in her 2004 popular science book ,  ``  '' ,  neuroscientist and physiologist kathleen taylor reviewed the history of mind control theories ,  as well as notable incidents . 
a subgenre is `` corporate mind control '' ,  in which a future society is run by one or more business corporations that dominate society using advertising and mass media to control the population's thoughts and feelings . 
scholars have said that modern business corporations practice mind control to create a work force that shares common values and culture . 
he concludes that the concept of brainwashing has been unfairly blacklisted . 
joost meerloo ,  a dutch psychiatrist ,  was an early proponent of the concept of brainwashing . 
in 1956, after reexamining the concept of brainwashing following the korean war ,  the u . s .  army published a report entitled `` communist interrogation ,  indoctrination ,  and exploitation of prisoners of war '' ,  which called brainwashing a `` popular misconception '' . 
while some psychologists were receptive to the concept ,  sociologists were for the most part skeptical of its ability to explain conversion to nrms . 
the soviet-occupied territories were converted into republics of the soviet union . 
the move raised tensions with the soviets ,  who responded that germany was supposed to have consulted with the soviet union under article iii of the molotov–ribbentrop pact . 
for decades ,  it was the official policy of the soviet union to deny the existence of the secret protocol to the soviet–german pact . 
the soviets organized staged elections ,  the result of which was to become a legitimization of the soviet annexation of eastern poland . 
that night ,  stalin replied that the soviets were willing to sign the pact and that he would receive ribbentrop on 23 august . 
some scholars believe that ,  from the very beginning of the tripartite negotiations between the soviet union ,  great britain and france ,  it was clear that the soviet position required the other parties to agree to a soviet occupation of estonia ,  latvia ,  and lithuania ,  as well as for finland to be included in the soviet sphere of influence . 
another clause of the treaty stipulated that germany would not interfere with the soviet union's actions towards bessarabia ,  then part of romania; as a result ,  not only bessarabia ,  but northern bukovina and hertza regions too ,  were occupied by the soviets ,  and integrated into the soviet union . 
for its part ,  nazi germany also did a public volte-face regarding its virulent opposition to the soviet union ,  though hitler still viewed an attack on the soviet union as `` inevitable ''
that version persisted ,  without exception ,  in historical studies ,  official accounts ,  memoirs and textbooks published in the soviet union until the soviet union's dissolution . 
the outcome of world war i was disastrous for both the german reich and the russian soviet federative socialist republic . 
the territories of poland annexed by the soviet union after the 1939 soviet invasion of poland  -lrb-  east to the curzon line  -rrb-  remained in the ussr at the end of world war ii ,  and currently are the parts of ukraine and belarus . 
the molotov–ribbentrop pact ,  also known as the nazi–soviet pact ,  the hitler–stalin pact ,  or the german–soviet nonaggression pact  -lrb-  by `` time '' as `` communazi deal '' or `` communazi pact ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  officially: treaty of non-aggression between germany and the union of soviet socialist republics  -rrb-  ,  was a neutrality pact between nazi germany and the soviet union signed in moscow on 23 august 1939 by foreign ministers joachim von ribbentrop and vyacheslav molotov ,  respectively . 
on 10 january 1941, germany and the soviet union signed an agreement settling several ongoing issues . 
the article `` on soviet–german relations '' in the soviet newspaper `` izvestia '' of august 21, 1939, stated:
on 25 august ,  surprising hitler ,  britain entered into a defense pact with poland . 
soviet official casualty counts in the war exceeded 200,000, although soviet premier nikita khrushchev later claimed the casualties may have been one million . 
the soviets also helped germany to avoid british naval blockades by providing a submarine base ,  basis nord ,  in the northern soviet union near murmansk . 
german war planners had estimated serious shortfalls of raw materials if germany entered a war without soviet supply . 
nazi germany unilaterally terminated the molotov–ribbentrop pact at 03:15 on 22 june 1941 by launching a massive attack on the soviet positions in eastern poland which marked the beginning of the invasion of the soviet union known as operation barbarossa . 
germany and the soviet union entered an intricate trade pact on february 11, 1940, that was over four times larger than the one the two countries had signed in august 1939.
the soviet leadership believed that the west wanted to encourage german aggression in the east and that france and britain might stay neutral in a war initiated by germany ,  hoping that the warring states would wear each other out and put an end to both the soviet union and nazi germany . 
between 28 june and 4 july ,  the soviet union occupied and annexed bessarabia ,  northern bukovina and the hertza region of romania . 
in late july and early august 1939, soviet and german officials agreed on most of the details for a planned economic agreement ,  and specifically addressed a potential political agreement ,  which the soviets stated could only come after an economic agreement . 
consequently ,  polish forces were not able to mount significant resistance against the soviets . 
stalin's invasion of bukovina in 1940 violated the pact ,  as it went beyond the soviet sphere of influence agreed with the axis . 
the finnish and baltic invasions began a deterioration of relations between the soviets and germany . 
on 30 august 1939, the `` times '' reported a soviet build-up on its western frontiers by moving 200,000 troops from the far east . 
the soviet people and the working people of germany have an interest in preventing the english war plan . `` 
in august 1940, the soviet union briefly suspended its deliveries under their commercial agreement after their relations were strained following disagreement over policy in romania ,  the soviet war with finland ,  germany falling behind in its deliveries of goods under the pact and with stalin worried that hitler's war with the west might end quickly after france signed an armistice . 
on 21 september ,  the soviets and germans signed a formal agreement coordinating military movements in poland ,  including the `` purging '' of saboteurs . 
although the nazi–soviet relationship started to deteriorate soon after that ,  the pact remained in force for nearly two years ,  until the german government of adolf hitler broke the pact by invading the soviet union on 22 june 1941  -lrb-  operation barbarossa  -rrb-  . 
public schools in mobile are operated by the mobile county public school system . 
it consists of the college of arts and sciences ,  school of business ,  school of christian studies ,  school of education ,  the school of leadership development ,  and the school of nursing . 
the center is home to the first academic cancer research center in the central gulf coast region . 
ums-wright preparatory school is an independent co-educational preparatory school . 
in 1861, alabama joined the confederate states of america ,  which surrendered in 1865.
the private catholic institutions include mcgill-toolen catholic high school  -lrb-  1896 -rrb- ,  corpus christi school ,  little flower catholic school  -lrb-  1934 -rrb- ,  most pure heart of mary catholic school  -lrb-  1900 -rrb- ,  saint dominic school  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- ,  saint ignatius school  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- ,  saint mary catholic school  -lrb-  1867 -rrb- ,  saint pius x catholic school  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  and saint vincent depaul catholic school  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- . 
the parish was the first french catholic parish established on the gulf coast of the united states . 
the university of south alabama is a public ,  doctoral-level university established in 1963.
mobile is located in the southwestern corner of the u . s .  state of alabama . 
notable private protestant institutions include st .  paul's episcopal school  -lrb-  1947 -rrb- ,  mobile christian school  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- ,  st .  lukes episcopal school  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- ,  cottage hill baptist school system  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- ,  faith academy  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- ,  and trinity lutheran school  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- . 
mobile's `` press-register '' is alabama's oldest active newspaper ,  first published in 1813.
alabama's only saltwater port ,  mobile is located on the mobile river at the head of the mobile bay and the north-central gulf coast . 
they play their home games at the mitchell center . 
the federal district court ordered that the three students be admitted to murphy for the 1964 school year ,  leading to the desegregation of mobile county's school system . 
mobile  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is the county seat of mobile county ,  alabama ,  united states . 
mobile was established in 1702 by the french as the first capital of colonial `` la louisiane ''  -lrb-  new france  -rrb-  . 
the top graduating high school seniors from their respective states compete each june . 
in 1963, three african-american students brought a case against the mobile county school board for being denied admission to murphy high school . 
mobile also has a large number of private schools ,  most of them parochial in nature . 
mobile was the slave-trading center of the state until the 1850s ,  when it was surpassed by montgomery . 
additionally ,  the university of south alabama operates the university of south alabama children's and women's hospital with 219 beds ,  dedicated exclusively to the care of women and minors . 
there are four major medical centers within the city limits . 
mobile's alabama state docks underwent the largest expansion in its history in the early 21st century . 
they have spread throughout the south and southwest . 
also there is the older bankhead tunnel that also goes under the mobile river . 
during the american civil war ,  mobile was a confederate city . 
it assumed its current configuration in 1988, when the university military school  -lrb-  founded 1893 -rrb- and the julius t .  wright school for girls  -lrb-  1923 -rrb- merged to form ums-wright . 
barton academy is a historic greek revival school building and local landmark on government street . 
the first mayor elected under the new system of single-member district  -lrb-  smd  -rrb-  voting was arthur r .  outlaw ,  who served his second term as mayor from 1985–1989.
alabama was granted statehood in 1819; mobile's population had increased to 809 by that time . 
the red imported fire ant was first introduced into the united states via the port of mobile . 
the spanish renamed the fort as fortaleza carlota ,  and held mobile as a part of spanish west florida until 1813, when it was seized by united states general james wilkinson during the war of 1812.
these include ashland place ,  campground ,  church street east ,  de tonti square ,  leinkauf ,  lower dauphin street ,  midtown ,  oakleigh garden ,  old dauphin way ,  spring hill ,  and toulminville . 
mobile is home to a variety of museums . 
bishop state community college ,  founded in 1927, is a public ,  historically african american ,  community college . 
the population within the city limits was 195,111 as of the 2010 united states census ,  making it the third most populous city in alabama ,  the most populous in mobile county ,  and the largest municipality on the gulf coast between new orleans ,  louisiana ,  and st .  petersburg ,  florida . 
mobile infirmary medical center has 704 beds and is the largest nonprofit hospital in the state . 
the european settlement of mobile began with french colonists ,  who in 1702 constructed `` fort louis de la louisiane '' ,  at twenty-seven mile bluff on the mobile river ,  as the first capital of the french colony of la louisiane . 
faulkner university is a four-year private church of christ-affiliated university based in montgomery ,  alabama . 
the university of south alabama in mobile established a football team in 2007, which went undefeated in its 2009 inaugural season . 
with a current capacity of 40,646, ladd–peebles stadium is the fourth-largest stadium in the state . 
major colleges and universities in mobile that are accredited by the southern association of colleges and schools include the university of south alabama ,  spring hill college ,  the university of mobile ,  faulkner university ,  and bishop state community college . 
since the change to single-member districts ,  more women and african americans were elected to the council than under the at-large system . 
 -lrb-  in new orleans such a group is called a krewe .   -rrb- 
sam jones was elected in 2005 as the first african-american mayor of mobile . 
mobile was well situated for trade ,  as its location tied it to a river system that served as the principal navigational access for most of alabama and a large part of mississippi . 
mobile is the home of ladd–peebles stadium . 
the elevation in mobile ranges from on water street in downtown to at the mobile regional airport . 
the maos belong to the protein family of flavin-containing amine oxidoreductases . 
they are listed here in the order in which they appear in the charter itself:
the barons were trying to force john to keep to the charter ,  but clause 61 was so heavily weighted against the king that this version of the charter could not survive . 
by 15 june ,  general agreement had been made on a text ,  and on 19 june ,  the rebels renewed their oaths of loyalty to john and copies of the charter were formally issued . 
it was john's hope that the pope would give him valuable legal and moral support ,  and accordingly john played for time; the king had declared himself to be a papal vassal in 1213 and correctly believed he could count on the pope for help . 
once aware of the charter ,  the pope responded in detail: in a letter dated 24 august and arriving in late september ,  he declared the charter to be `` not only shameful and demeaning but also illegal and unjust '' since john had been `` forced to accept '' it ,  and accordingly the charter was `` null ,  and void of all validity for ever ''; under threat of excommunication ,  the king was not to observe the charter ,  nor the barons try to enforce it . 
letters backing john arrived from the pope in april ,  but by then the rebel barons had organised into a military faction . 
under what historians later labelled `` clause 61 '' ,  or the `` security clause '' ,  a council of 25 barons would be created to monitor and ensure john's future adherence to the charter . 
it has values in <nowiki>{</nowiki> ,   ,  <nowiki>}</nowiki> depending on the factorization of into prime factors:
methadone ,  sold under the brand name dolophine among others ,  is an opioid used for opioid maintenance therapy in opioid dependence ,  and for pain . 
methadone is used as an analgesic in chronic pain ,  often in rotation with other opioids . 
methadone has been widely used for pregnant women addicted to opioids . 
in mathematics ,  the classic möbius inversion formula was introduced into number theory on 1832 by august ferdinand möbius . 
c .  wood in 1904 and was survived by his widow ,  two sons and a daughter . 
his 1935 monograph on `` optical rotatory power ''  -lrb-  1935 -rrb- has long been regarded as a standard work on the subject . 
marvel comics is the brand name and primary imprint of marvel worldwide inc .  ,  formerly marvel publishing ,  inc .  and marvel comics group ,  a publisher of american comic books and related media . 
in 1978, jim shooter became marvel's editor-in-chief . 
marvel discontinued its marvel adventures imprint in march 2012, and replaced them with a line of two titles connected to the marvel universe tv block . 
in 2009, the walt disney company acquired marvel entertainment ,  marvel worldwide's parent company . 
on august 31, 2009, the walt disney company announced a deal to acquire marvel comics' parent corporation ,  marvel entertainment ,  for $4 billion or $4.2 billion ,  with marvel shareholders to receive $30 and 0.745 disney shares for each share of marvel they own . 
marvel's conan the barbarian title stopped in 1993 after 275 issues . 
in 1997, toy biz bought marvel entertainment group to end the bankruptcy ,  forming a new corporation ,  marvel enterprises . 
also that year ,  marvel created a wiki on its web site . 
with the new millennium ,  marvel comics emerged from bankruptcy and again began diversifying its offerings . 
in 1998, the company launched the imprint marvel knights ,  taking place just outside marvel continuity with better production qualtity . 
then on july 17, 2018, marvel entertainment announced the licensing of marvel characters to idw for a line of middle-grade reader market comic books to start publishing in november 2018.
following the events of the company-wide crossover `` secret wars '' in 2015, a relaunched marvel universe began in september 2015, called the all-new ,  all-different marvel . 
marvel relaunched the crossgen imprint ,  owned by disney publishing worldwide ,  in march 2011.
marvel ventured into audio in 1975 with a radio series and a record ,  both had stan lee as narrator . 
marvel started in 1939 as timely publications ,  and by the early 1950s ,  had generally become known as atlas comics . 
star comics ,  a children-oriented line differing from the regular marvel titles ,  was briefly successful during this period . 
in late 1994, marvel acquired the comic book distributor heroes world distribution to use as its own exclusive distributor . 
hale's projected release date is december 6, 2037.
the murders and suicide were unrelated to hale or creativity . 
in 2000, a religious group in oregon called the church of the creator sued hale's organization ,  the world church of the creator ,  for trademark infringement . 
after hale appointed himself `` pontifex maximus '' ,  he changed the name of the organization to the world church of the creator . 
on april 6, 2005, hale was sentenced to a 40-year prison term for attempting to solicit lefkow's murder . 
during a television interview in the summer of 1999, hale stated that his `` church does not condone violent or illegal activities '' . 
it was not until 1972 that daniel bell used the term positively . 
it was also used by hannah arendt in her essay `` crisis in education '' ,  which was written in 1958 and refers to the use of meritocracy in the english educational system . 
after the fall of the han dynasty ,  the nine-rank system was established during the three kingdoms period . 
although the concept has existed for centuries ,  the term `` meritocracy '' is relatively new . 
in rhetoric ,  the demonstration of one's merit regarding mastery of a particular subject is an essential task most directly related to the aristotelian term `` ethos '' . 
the vietnam war  -lrb-  1945–1975 -rrb- was the second east–west war that occurred in asia during the cold war . 
the events that precipitated the cold war in europe were the soviet and yugoslav ,  bulgarian and albanian military interventions to the greek civil war  -lrb-  1944–1949 -rrb- ,  in behalf of the greek communists; and the berlin blockade  -lrb-  1948–1949 -rrb- by the soviet union . 
at the death of stalin in 1953, nikita khrushchev became leader of the soviet union and of the cpsu  -lrb-  communist party of the soviet union  -rrb-  ,  and then consolidated an anti-stalinist government . 
the tenets of the soviet union's national policy of marxist–leninist atheism originated from the philosophies of georg wilhelm friedrich hegel  -lrb-  1770–1831 -rrb- and ludwig feuerbach  -lrb-  1804–1872 -rrb- ,  and of karl marx  -lrb-  1818–1883 -rrb- and lenin  -lrb-  1870–1924 -rrb- . 
under guise of governing by the socialist principles of lenin and marx ,  stalin's marxist–leninist dictatorship made a police state of the ussr ,  unlike lenin's socialist state of the bolshevik period  -lrb-  1917–29 -rrb- . 
in 1927, the communist party endorsed stalin's policy of socialism in one country as the soviet union's national policy ,  and expelled the leftist trotsky and the centrists kamenev and zinoviev from the politburo of the communist party of the soviet union . 
in 1925, the 14th communist party congress chose stalin's policy ,  which decision defeated trotsky as a possible leader of the communist party and of the soviet union . 
strategically ,  the `` wehrmacht '''s extensive and effective attack threatened the territorial integrity of the soviet union ,  and the political integrity of stalin's model of a marxist–leninist state ,  when the nazis were initially welcomed as liberators by the anti-communist and nationalist populations in the byelorussian soviet socialist republic ,  the georgian soviet socialist republic ,  and the ukrainian soviet socialist republic . 
in the late 1930s ,  stalin's official textbook `` the history of the communist party of the soviet union  -lrb-  bolsheviks  -rrb- ``   -lrb-  1938 -rrb- ,  made the term `` marxism–leninism '' common ,  political-science usage among communists and non-communists . 
the cuban revolution  -lrb-  1956–59 -rrb- ,  led by fidel castro and ché guevara ,  deposed the régime  -lrb-  1952–1959 -rrb- of fulgencio batista ,  and established the republic of cuba ,  a socialist state formally recognised by the soviet union . 
consequent to the ideological sino-soviet split  -lrb-  1956–1966 -rrb- ,  the communist party of each socialist country ,  the communist party of china  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  and the communist party of the soviet union  -lrb-  cpsu  -rrb-  claimed to be the sole heir-and-successor to the interpretation of marxism–leninism ,  and thus to be the ideological leader of world communism . 
stalin then completed his political purging of the communist party by exiling trotsky from the soviet union in 1929; afterwards ,  in the political opposition to the practical régime of stalinism was denounced as trotskyism  -lrb-  bolshevik–leninism  -rrb-  ,  a deviation from marxism–leninism ,  the state ideology of the soviet union . 
in 1918, the bolsheviks consolidated government power by expelling the mensheviks and the socialist revolutionaries from the soviets . 
in 1929, stalin personally and politically controlled the cpsu and the soviet union ,  by way of deception and administrative acumen . 
tito at stalin's disposal . 
in 1934, stalin's development of soviet society contradicted and then replaced ,  the social ,  cultural ,  and intellectual freedoms of lenin's bolshevik period . 
stalin justified his régime's deviations from lenin's practices with the book `` concerning questions of leninism ''  -lrb-  1926 -rrb- ,  in which stalin represented marxism–leninism as a separate communist ideology ,  which featured an omniscient leader; his interpretations of lenin and marx — stalinism — later became the official state ideology of the soviet union . 
in 1943, the red army began to repel the nazi invasion of the soviet union ,  especially at the battle of stalingrad  -lrb-  23 august 1942–2 february 1943 -rrb- and at the battle of kursk  -lrb-  5 july – 23 august 1943 -rrb- . 
in the 1929–1941 period ,  stalin's elimination of bolshevik rivals ended democratic centralism in the communist party ,  replaced with his personal authority . 
in that geopolitical vein ,  khrushchev presented de-stalinization as the restoration of leninism as the official state ideology of the soviet union . 
in the 1925–1927 period ,  stalin dissolved the `` troika '' and disowned the centrist moderates ,  kamenev and zinoviev ,  for an expedient alliance with the three most-right-wing opportunists from the bolshevik period: alexei rykov  -lrb-  premier of russia ,  1924–1929; premier of the soviet union ,  1924–1930 -rrb- ,  nikolai bukharin ,  and mikhail tomsky  -lrb-  leader of the all-russian central council of trade unions  -rrb-  . 
in 1939, the soviet union and nazi germany agreed to the treaty of non-aggression between germany and the union of soviet socialist republics  -lrb-  molotov–ribbentrop pact ,  23 august 1939 -rrb- and to jointly invade and partition poland ,  by way of which nazi germany started the second world war  -lrb-  1 september 1939 -rrb- . 
in asia ,  a successful mongolian communist revolution established the mongolian people's republic  -lrb-  1924–1992 -rrb- . 
despite the white–red civil war ,  russia remained a combatant in the great war  -lrb-  1914–1918 -rrb- ,  which the bolshevik's had quit with the treaty of brest-litovsk  -lrb-  3 march 1918 -rrb- ,  which then provoked the allied intervention to the russian civil war  -lrb-  1918–1925 -rrb- by the armies of seventeen countries ,  featuring great britain ,  france ,  and italy ,  the united states and imperial japan . 
in the 1929–1932 period of the first five-year plan ,  stalin effected the dekulakization of the farmlands of the soviet union ,  a politically radical dispossession of the `` kulak '' class of peasant-landlords from the tsarist social order of monarchy . 
in continental asia ,  to end the imperial japanese occupation of china ,  stalin ordered mao zedong and the communist party of china  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  to temporarily cease the chinese civil war  -lrb-  1927–1949 -rrb- against chiang kai-shek and the anti-communist kuomintang  -lrb-  kmt  -rrb-  ,  as the second united front ,  in the second sino-japanese war  -lrb-  1937–1945 -rrb- . 
late in 1917 — to relieve strategic pressures from the western front  -lrb-  4 august 1914–11 november 1918 -rrb- — imperial germany impelled the withdrawal of imperial russia from the war's eastern front  -lrb-  17 august 1914–3 march 1918 -rrb- by sending lenin and his bolshevik cohort in a diplomatically-sealed train to realise socialist revolution in russia . 
gorbachev was a socialist . 
gorbachev was only the second soviet leader ,  after khrushchev ,  not to die in office . 
opinions on gorbachev are deeply divided . 
on 15 march 1990, gorbachev was elected as the first executive president of the soviet union with 59% of the deputies' votes . 
mikhail sergeyevich gorbachev  -lrb-  born 2 march 1931 -rrb- is a russian and formerly soviet politician . 
meanwhile ,  gorbachev was losing further ground to nationalists . 
gorbachev often referred to himself in the third person . 
gorbachev's leadership style differed from that of his predecessors . 
two days after gorbachev left office ,  on 27 december 1991, yeltsin moved into gorbachev's old office . 
furthermore ,  the democratisation of the soviet union and eastern europe had irreparably undermined the power of the cpsu and gorbachev himself . 
out of office ,  gorbachev had more time to spend with his wife and family . 
this decision would come back to haunt gorbachev later . 
in effect ,  communist rule in the soviet union had ended . 
taubman noted that by 1989 or 1990, gorbachev had transformed into a social democrat . 
gorbachev rose steadily through the ranks of the local administration . 
for all intents and purposes ,  the coup destroyed gorbachev politically . 
in june 1950, gorbachev became a candidate member of the communist party . 
gorbachev was born on 2 march 1931 in the village of privolnoye ,  stavropol krai . 
gorbachev continued to work on drafting a new treaty of union which would have created a truly voluntary federation in an increasingly democratised soviet union . 
in the soviet union ,  alcohol consumption had risen steadily between 1950 and 1985.
after the war ,  gorbachev's parents had their second son ,  aleksandr ,  in 1947; he and mikhail would be their only children . 
after protests broke out in moscow over the election ,  gorbachev praised the protesters . 
this move was a serious blow to gorbachev personally and to his efforts for reform . 
many also saw this publication as the start of a campaign to oust gorbachev . 
taubman believed that gorbachev identified with lenin on a psychological level . 
in the second year of his leadership ,  gorbachev began speaking of `` glasnost '' ,  or `` openness '' . 
in 2000, gorbachev helped form the russian united social democratic party . 
gorbachev had remained close to his parents; after his father became terminally ill in 1974, gorbachev travelled to be with him in privolnoe shortly before the former's death . 
as an adult ,  gorbachev reached five foot nine in height . 
in 2012, putin announced that he was standing again as president ,  something gorbachev was critical of . 
gorbachev had inherited a renewed period of high tension in the cold war . 
gorbachev's hopes of a new union were further hit when the congress of people's deputies dissolved itself on 5 september . 
later that year ,  gorbachev founded a new political party ,  called the union of social democrats . 
also during 1988, gorbachev announced that the soviet union would abandon the brezhnev doctrine ,  and allow the eastern bloc nations to freely determine their own internal affairs . 
on 15 march ,  gorbachev himself was elected as the first—and as it turned out ,  only—president of the soviet union by the congress of people's deputies and chose a presidential council of 15 politicians . 
one of the terms gorbachev recurrently employed was `` perestroika '' ,  which he had first used publicly in march 1984.
privately ,  gorbachev told politburo members that stalin was `` a criminal ,  devoid of any morality '' . 
under the pretense that gorbachev was ill ,  his vice president ,  yanayev ,  took over as president . 
most of these men had been former allies of gorbachev or had been promoted by him ,  which drew fresh criticism . 
the government considered gorbachev sufficiently reliable that he was sent as part of soviet delegations to western europe; he made five trips there between 1970 and 1977.
this raised hopes that gorbachev would extend his non-interventionist doctrine to the internal workings of the ussr . 
herod the great built two palaces for himself on the mountain and fortified masada between 37 and 31 bce . 
in this context ,  `` marvel universe '' is taken to refer to the mainstream marvel continuity ,  which is known as earth-616 or currently as earth prime . 
in 2009 marvel officially described its world's geography in a two-part miniseries ,  the `` marvel atlas '' . 
the marvel universe is strongly based on the real world . 
the marvel universe is further depicted as existing within a `` multiverse '' consisting of thousands of separate universes ,  all of which are the creations of marvel comics and all of which are ,  in a sense ,  `` marvel universes '' . 
the action of most marvel comics titles takes place in a continuity known as earth-616.
also ,  time itself passes much differently within the confines of the marvel universe than it does in the real world . 
the marvel universe also contains hundreds of intelligent alien races . 
a continuity should also not be confused with an imprint; for example ,  while the titles of some imprints ,  such as ultimate marvel ,  take place in a different continuity ,  some or all publications in other imprints ,  such as epic comics ,  marvel max ,  and marvel uk ,  take place within the earth-616 continuity . 
alternative continuities in the marvel multiverse are generally defined in terms of their differences from earth-616.
the marvel universe is a fictional universe where the stories in most american comic book titles and other media published by marvel comics take place . 
this being is indicated to be the creator of all existence and all realities of the marvel universe and possibly beyond . 
marvel comics itself exists as a company within the marvel universe ,  and versions of people such as stan lee and jack kirby have appeared in some of the stories ,  whereas characters like steve rogers ,   -lrb-  captain america's alter ego  -rrb-  ,  have worked for marvel . 
also abundant in the marvel universe are legendary creatures such as gods ,  demons and vampires . 
in 1982, marvel published the mini-series `` contest of champions '' ,  in which all of the major heroes in existence at the time were gathered together to deal with one threat . 
pop culture characters such as dracula and frankenstein actually exist in the marvel universe . 
most of the superhumans in marvel's earth owe their powers to the celestials ,  cosmic entities who visited earth millions of years ago and experimented on our prehistoric ancestors  -lrb-  a process they also carried out on several other planets  -rrb-  . 
over time ,  a few marvel comics writers lobbied marvel editors to incorporate the idea of a multiverse resembling dc's parallel worlds; this plot device allows one to create several fictional universes which normally do not overlap . 
unlike the dc universe ,  few of marvel's 1940s characters have become major characters in modern publications; captain america is one exception ,  and to a lesser extent his contemporary ,  namor the sub-mariner ,  primarily because both of these characters were reintroduced to readers and to the marvel universe during the 1960s . 
west german neo-nazis gave the group logistical assistance . 
the hostage-takers demanded the release of 234 palestinians and non-arabs jailed in israel ,  along with two west german insurgents held by the west german penitentiary system ,  andreas baader and ulrike meinhof ,  who were founders of the west german red army faction . 
at 4:30 pm ,  a squad of 38 west german police officers was dispatched to the olympic village . 
the munich massacre was an attack during the 1972 summer olympics in munich ,  west germany ,  in which the palestinian terrorist group black september took eleven israeli olympic team members hostage and killed them along with a west german police officer . 
the west germans had not arranged for armored personnel carriers ahead of time and only at this point were they called in to break the deadlock . 
five west german policemen were deployed around the airport in sniper roles—three on the roof of the control tower ,  one hidden behind a service truck and one behind a small signal tower at ground level . 
the german weekly news magazine `` der spiegel '' wrote in a 2012 cover story that the west german authorities had a tip-off from a palestinian informant in beirut three weeks before the massacre . 
meanwhile ,  the west german authorities gave the order for snipers positioned nearby to open fire ,  which occurred around 11:00 pm . 
a boeing 727 jet was positioned on the tarmac with sixteen west german police inside dressed as flight crew . 
the west german authorities apparently assured lalkin that extra security would be provided to look after the israeli team ,  but lalkin doubts that any additional measures were ever taken . 
three more members of israel's olympic team ,  two sailors and their manager ,  were housed in kiel ,  from munich . 
zamir has stated repeatedly in interviews over the years that he was never consulted by the germans at any time during the rescue attempt and thought that his presence actually made the germans uncomfortable . 
it has been claimed that the german authorities ,  under the leadership of chancellor willy brandt and minister for the interior hans-dietrich genscher ,  rejected israel's offer to send an israeli special forces unit to west germany . 
at the last minute ,  as the helicopters were arriving at fürstenfeldbruck ,  the west german police aboard the airplane voted to abandon their mission ,  without consulting the central command . 
olympic organizers asked west german forensic psychologist georg sieber to create 26 terrorism scenarios to aid the organizers in planning security . 
at 6 pm munich time ,  the palestinians issued a new dictate ,  demanding transportation to cairo . 
weightlifter yossef romano ,  a veteran of the six-day war in june 1967, also attacked and wounded one of the intruders before being shot and killed . 
the maremma has an area of about  . 
the maremma has given rise to ,  or given its name to ,  several breeds of domestic animal . 
nesmith was born in houston ,  texas ,  in 1942.
nesmith did not participate in the monkees' 20th-anniversary reunion . 
in the early 1980s ,  nesmith teamed up with satirist p . j . 
nesmith has been considered one of the pioneers of country rock . 
as he prepared for his exit from the monkees in 1970, nesmith was approached by john ware of the corvettes ,  a band that featured nesmith's friend john london ,  who played on some of the earliest pre-monkees nesmith 45s as well as numerous monkees sessions ,  and had 45s produced by nesmith for the dot label in 1969.
nesmith was the most publicly vocal monkee about the band's prefabricated image . 
the new band was christened michael nesmith and the first national band and went on to record three albums for rca records in 1970.
nesmith began his recording career in 1963 by releasing a single on the highness label . 
nesmith was enrolled in the dallas public school system in 1949, aged 6.
in 1969, nesmith formed the group first national band with kuehne ,  john ware ,  and red rhodes . 
in a post on his facebook page in 2011, nesmith reported that both guitars were stolen in the early 1970s . 
in 1998, nesmith published his first novel ,  `` the long sandy hair of neftoon zamora '' . 
during this time ,  nesmith created a video-clip for `` rio '' which helped spur nesmith's creation of a television program called `` popclips '' for the nickelodeon cable network . 
as with the other monkees ,  nesmith came to be frustrated by the manufactured image of the whole project . 
in 2012, nesmith briefly toured europe prior to re-joining the monkees for their tours of the united states . 
phyllis's third child and nesmith's fourth ,  daughter jessica ,  was born in september 1970.
in 1981, nesmith won the first grammy award given for video of the year for his hour-long television show ,  `` elephant parts '' . 
