its indonesia was formed on 26 april 2011.
jakarta also has one of the worst traffic jams in the world . 
a wide variety of vehicles are used for transportation on indonesia's roads . 
indonesia has also been gradually introducing an intelligent transportation system  -lrb-  its  -rrb-  since 2012.
ministry of public works is responsible to these networks ,  except dki jakarta part from jakarta inner ring road to jakarta outer ring road . 
the indonesian armed forces are voluntary . 
the indonesian national armed forces  -lrb-   ,  literally ``  ''indonesian national military '' ''; abbreviated as tni  -rrb-  are the military forces of the republic of indonesia . 
on 21 june 1962, the name ``  ''tentara nasional indonesia '' ''  -lrb-  tni  -rrb-  was changed to ``  ''angkatan bersenjata republik indonesia '' ''  -lrb-  republic of indonesia armed forces/abri  -rrb-  . 
during the new order-era ,  the indonesian military enjoyed certain privileges and played a significant role in indonesian politics . 
the indonesian armed forces was formed during the indonesian national revolution ,  when it undertook a guerrilla war along with informal militia . 
indonesian nationalism and militarism started to gain momentum and support in world war ii during the japanese occupation of indonesia . 
the military involvement in indonesian politics was formulated in the `` dwifungsi ''  -lrb-  dual function  -rrb-  doctrine of the indonesian national armed forces . 
in 2008, indonesia was admitted as a member of the g20, as the only asean member state to be included in the group . 
indonesia considers asean as cornerstone of its foreign policy ,  through exercising its regional power and influence in peaceful and constructive manner among asean countries . 
problems in timor and indonesia's reluctance to implement economic reform ,  have complicated indonesia's relationship with donors . 
a cornerstone of indonesia's contemporary foreign policy is its participation in the association of southeast asian nations  -lrb-  asean  -rrb-  ,  of which it was a founding member in 1967 with thailand ,  malaysia ,  singapore ,  and the philippines . 
asean headquarter has led to the prominence of jakarta as a diplomatic hub in southeast asia . 
indonesia and other asean member countries collectively have also played a role in encouraging the government of myanmar to open up its political system and introduce other reforms more quickly . 
the islands of indonesia ,  also known as the indonesian archipelago and formerly known as the indian archipelago ,  may refer either to the islands comprising the nation-state of indonesia or to the geographical groups which include its islands . 
iran has an area of  . 
the persian pronunciation of `` iran '' is  . 
education in iran is highly centralized . 
iran controlled over 70,000 troops deployed in syria . 
iran  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  also called persia  -lrb-    -rrb-  and officially known as the islamic republic of iran  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a country in western asia . 
iranian scientists outside iran have also made some major contributions to science . 
in 2015, iran and the p5+1 reached a deal on the nuclear program that removed the main sanctions pertaining to iran's nuclear program by 2016.
as the iranians dispersed into the wider area of greater iran and beyond ,  the boundaries of modern-day iran were dominated by median ,  persian ,  and parthian tribes . 
today ,  both `` iran '' and `` persia '' are used in cultural contexts ,  while `` iran '' remains irreplaceable in official state contexts . 
iran is the world's third country to have developed gtl technology . 
iran consists of the iranian plateau ,  with the exception of the coasts of the caspian sea and khuzestan . 
in 2010, iran was ranked 69, out of 139 nations ,  in the global competitiveness report . 
economic sanctions against iran ,  such as the embargo against iranian crude oil ,  have affected the economy . 
the earliest attested archaeological artifacts in iran ,  like those excavated at kashafrud and ganj par in northern iran ,  confirm a human presence in iran since the lower paleolithic . 
after the supreme leader ,  the constitution defines the president of iran as the highest state authority . 
iran also has around 350,000 reserve force ,  totaling around 900,000 trained troops . 
isfahan has a population of around 2.2 million  -lrb-  2016 census  -rrb-  ,  and is iran's third most populous city . 
the iranian nuclear program was launched in the 1950s . 
in 2004, a large share of iran's natural gas reserves were untapped . 
historically ,  iran has been referred to as `` persia '' by the west ,  due mainly to the writings of greek historians who referred to all of iran as  -lrb-  ; from old persian   -rrb-  ,  meaning `` land of the persians '' ,  while persis itself was one of the provinces of ancient iran that is today defined as fars . 
the fourth most populous city of iran ,  karaj ,  has a population of around 1.9 million  -lrb-  2016 census  -rrb-  . 
shiraz ,  with a population of around 1.8 million  -lrb-  2016 census  -rrb-  ,  is iran's sixth most populous city . 
iran hosts one of the largest refugee populations in the world ,  with more than one million refugees ,  mostly from afghanistan and iraq . 
the leader of the revolution  -lrb-  `` supreme leader ''  -rrb-  is responsible for delineation and supervision of the policies of the islamic republic of iran . 
the electoral victory of rouhani has relatively improved the relations of iran with other countries . 
eagles ,  falcons ,  partridges ,  pheasants ,  and storks are also native to the wildlife of iran . 
by the second millennium bc ,  the ancient iranian peoples arrived in what is now iran from the eurasian steppe ,  rivaling the native settlers of the region . 
over five million tourists visited iran in the fiscal year of 2014–2015, four percent more than the previous year . 
historical and cultural usage of the word `` iran '' is not restricted to the modern state proper . 
gary lewis ,  the united nations resident coordinator for iran ,  has said that `` water scarcity poses the most severe human security challenge in iran today '' . 
iran is a diverse country ,  consisting of numerous ethnic and linguistic groups that are unified through a shared iranian nationality . 
from the 34th to the 20th century bc ,  northwestern iran was part of the kura-araxes culture ,  which stretched into the neighboring caucasus and anatolia . 
iran lost all its asiatic lions and the now extinct caspian tigers by the earlier part of the 20th century . 
the central bank of the islamic republic of iran is responsible for developing and maintaining the iranian rial ,  which serves as the country's currency . 
the sovereign state of iran is a founding member of the un ,  eco ,  nam ,  oic ,  and opec . 
the two puppet states were soon overthrown following the iran crisis of 1946, and the oil concessions were revoked . 
as iran shrank ,  many transcaucasian and north caucasian muslims moved towards iran ,  especially until the aftermath of the circassian genocide ,  and the decades afterwards ,  while iran's armenians were encouraged to settle in the newly incorporated russian territories ,  causing significant demographic shifts . 
some historians have estimated that iran's population did not again reach its pre-mongol levels until the mid-20th century . `` 
with a population of around 1.7 million  -lrb-  2016 census  -rrb-  ,  tabriz is the fifth most populous city of iran ,  and had been the second most populous until the late 1960s . 
in the biomedical sciences ,  iran's institute of biochemistry and biophysics has a unesco chair in biology . 
ottoman rule ended with world war i ,  and the british empire administered iraq as mandatory iraq until the establishment of the kingdom of iraq in 1933.
iraq was divided into three vilayets:
iraq's activity in the baghdad pact ceased . 
the departure of us troops from iraq in 2011 triggered a renewed insurgency and by a spillover of the syrian civil war into iraq . 
iraq also became an oligarchy government at this time . 
in the later 11th century ,  iraq fell under the rule of the khwarazmian dynasty . 
assyria had a period of empire from the 19th to 18th centuries bc . 
during the late 14th and early 15th centuries ,  the black sheep turkmen ruled the area now known as iraq . 
ottoman rule over iraq lasted until world war i ,  when the ottomans sided with germany and the central powers . 
by 2018, violence in iraq was at its lowest level in ten years . 
c .  2030 bc . 
the safavid dynasty of iran briefly asserted their hegemony over iraq in the periods of 1508-1533 and 1622-1638.
the effects of the sanctions on the civilian population of iraq have been disputed . 
in 2003, after the american and british invasion ,  iraq was occupied by coalition forces . 
in 1961, kuwait gained independence from britain and iraq claimed sovereignty over kuwait . 
the un security council did not issue a resolution authorizing the use of force against iraq . 
terrorism emerged as a threat to iraq's people not long after the invasion of 2003.
by 2015, iraq was effectively divided ,  the central and southern part being controlled by the government ,  the northwest by the kurdistan regional government and the western part by the islamic state of iraq and the levant . 
the us urged the united nations to take military action against iraq . 
a long-standing territorial dispute was the ostensible reason for iraq's invasion of kuwait in 1990.
in 1831, the ottomans managed to overthrow the mamluk regime and again imposed their direct control over iraq . 
the current territory of the modern state of iraq was defined by the anglo-iraqi treaty of 1922 which resulted from the 1920 iraqi revolt against british occupation . 
by 1974 the situation in the north escalated again into the second kurdish iraqi war ,  to last until 1975.
the jalayirids were a mongol jalayir dynasty which ruled over iraq and western persia after the breakup of the ilkhanate in the 1330s . 
the combination of rain shortage and extreme heat makes much of iraq a desert . 
the war has also affected settlement patterns in the northern kurdish areas . 
the desert zone ,  an area lying west and southwest of the euphrates river ,  is a part of the syrian desert and arabian desert ,  which covers sections of syria ,  jordan ,  and saudi arabia and most of the arabian peninsula . 
it has been recognized since 1913 as the boundary between western kuwait and iraq . 
the mountainous region of northern iraq receives appreciably more precipitation than the central or southern desert region ,  where they tend to have a mediterranean climate . 
mean minimum temperatures in the winter range from near freezing  -lrb-  just before dawn  -rrb-  in the northern and northeastern foothills and the western desert to and in the alluvial plains of southern iraq . 
between upper and lower mesopotamia is the urban area surrounding baghdad . 
the climate of iraq is mainly a hot desert climate or a hot semi-arid climate to the northernmost part . 
western and southern iraq is a vast desert region covering some 64,900 square miles  -lrb-  168,000 square km  -rrb-  ,  almost two-fifths of the country . 
the geography of iraq is diverse and falls into five main regions: the desert  -lrb-  west of the euphrates  -rrb-  ,  upper mesopotamia  -lrb-  between the upper tigris and euphrates rivers  -rrb-  ,  the northern highlands of iraq ,  lower mesopotamia ,  and the alluvial plain extending from around tikrit to the persian gulf . 
an alluvial plain begins north of baghdad and extends to the persian gulf . 
there are two other major lakes in the country to the north of bahr al milh: buhayrat ath tharthar and buhayrat al habbaniyah . 
the uplands region ,  between the tigris north of samarra and the euphrates north of hit ,  is known as al jazira  -lrb-  the island  -rrb-  and is part of a larger area that extends westward into syria between the two rivers and into turkey . 
iraq is the region known outside the islamic world as mesopotamia . 
the water from these two great rivers ,  and the fertility of the soil in the alluvial plain and the delta ,  allowed early agriculture to sustain a stable population as far back as the 7th millennium bc . 
the legislative branch is composed of the council of representatives and a federation council . 
one such court is the central criminal court . 
under the law ,  a region can be created out of one or more existing governorates or two or more existing regions ,  and a governorate can also join an existing region to create a new region . 
it is a multi-party system whereby the executive power is exercised by the prime minister of the council of ministers as the head of government ,  as well as the president of iraq ,  and legislative power is vested in the council of representatives and the federation council . 
oil continues to dominate iraq's economy . 
in the 1970s ,  iraq produced over 3.5 million barrels of oil per day . 
however ,  because most of iraq's gas output is associated with oil ,  output growth depends on developments in the oil industry . 
between june 2009 and february 2010 the iraqi oil ministry tendered for the award of service contracts to develop iraq's existing oil fields . 
iraq changed its oil reserve currency from the u . s .  dollar to the euro in 2000.
in 2004 iraq had eight oil refineries ,  the largest of which were at baiji ,  basra ,  and daura . 
iraq's recent contracts with major oil companies have the potential to greatly expand oil revenues ,  but iraq will need to upgrade its oil processing ,  pipeline ,  and export infrastructure to enable these deals to reach their potential . 
historically ,  50 to 60 percent of iraq's arable land has been under cultivation . 
traditionally ,  most of iraq's manufacturing activity has been closely connected to the oil industry . 
real gdp per capita  -lrb-  measured in 1990 $  -rrb-  increased significantly during the 1950s ,  60s and 70s ,  which can be explained by both higher oil production levels as well as oil prices ,  which famously peaked in the 1970s due to the opec's oil embargo ,  causing the 1973 oil crisis . 
iraq's economy is dominated by the oil sector ,  which has provided about 99.7% of foreign exchange earnings in modern times . 
the iran–iraq war and the 1980s oil glut depleted iraq's foreign exchange reserves ,  devastated its economy ,  and left the country saddled with a foreign debt of more than $40 billion . 
at the outbreak of the war ,  iraq had amassed an estimated 35 billion in foreign exchange reserves . 
since mid-2009, oil export earnings have returned to levels seen before and government revenues have rebounded ,  along with global oil prices . 
iraq is one of the most oil-rich countries in the world ,  holding the fifth largest proven crude oil reserves . 
transport in iraq consists of railways ,  highways ,  waterways ,  pipelines ,  ports and harbors ,  marines and airports . 
since 1980, the foreign relations of iraq were influenced by a number of controversial decisions by the saddam hussein administration . 
since the overthrow of saddam hussein in 2003, hoshyar zebari was first appointed minister of foreign affairs in the iraqi governing council in baghdad on 3 september 2003.
the baath maintained control over the ministry of foreign affairs and over all iraqi diplomatic missions abroad . 
the head of state is the president of ireland . 
northern ireland has been a major factor in irish politics since the island of ireland was divided between northern ireland and what is now the republic in 1920.
ireland is a common law jurisdiction . 
article 15 of the constitution of ireland established the oireachtas as the national parliament of ireland . 
local government in ireland is governed by a series of local government acts ,  beginning with the local government  -lrb-  ireland  -rrb-  act 1898.
it has formed government in the periods 1922–32  -lrb-  cumann na ngaedheal  -rrb-  ,  1948–51, 1954–57, 1973–77, 1981–82, 1982–87, 1994–97, and 2011 to present . 
since its foundation it has been the stated long-term policy of governments of what is now the republic to bring an end to the conflict in northern ireland and to bring about a united ireland . 
the civil service of ireland consists of two broad components ,  the `` civil service of the government '' and the `` civil service of the state '' . 
the state operates under the constitution of ireland  -lrb-    -rrb-  which was adopted in 1937 by means of a plebiscite . 
ireland is a parliamentary ,  representative democratic republic and a member state of the european union . 
however ,  with the resumption of devolved government in northern ireland in may 2007, the council has now re-assumed its duties . 
article 28a of the constitution of ireland provides a constitutional basis for local government . 
the economist intelligence unit rated ireland as a `` full democracy '' in 2016.
this role as a junior coalition partner has led to labour being classed as the half party of ireland's two and a half party system . 
the three infrastructure owning networks are:
there are also six mnvos  -lrb-  mobile network virtual operator  -rrb- : 48  -lrb-  runs off the three network  -rrb-  ,  virgin mobile  -lrb-  runs off the three network  -rrb-  ,  tesco mobile  -lrb-  runs off the three network  -rrb-  ,  lycamobile  -lrb-  runs off the three network  -rrb-  ,  blueface  -lrb-  runs off the three network  -rrb-  and postfone  -lrb-  runs off the vodafone network  -rrb-  . 
there are three mobile telecommunications providers: three ireland ,  eirmobile and vodafone ireland . 
3g services launched in 2004  -lrb-  vodafone ireland  -rrb-  and other networks quickly followed suit ,  and 4g launched in 2013  -lrb-  meteor  -rrb-  and is now available on most networks . 
ireland has three mobile networks that own and operate their own network infrastructure and a number of mvno operators that operate mobile phone services using one of these infrastructure providers' radio networks . 
the telecommunications market in ireland was opened to competition in 1998.
in 2016, 41.9% of ireland's mobile subscriptions were using 4g technology . 
ireland has five main international airports: dublin airport ,  belfast international airport  -lrb-  aldergrove  -rrb-  ,  cork airport ,  shannon airport and ireland west airport  -lrb-  knock  -rrb-  . 
ireland has major ports in dublin ,  belfast ,  cork ,  rosslare ,  derry and waterford . 
in northern ireland ,  the road network and railways are in state ownership . 
public transport services in northern ireland are sparse in comparison with those of the rest of ireland or great britain . 
ireland's roads link dublin with all the major cities  -lrb-  belfast ,  cork ,  limerick ,  derry ,  galway ,  and waterford  -rrb-  . 
suburban railway networks operate in dublin ,  dublin suburban rail ,  and belfast ,  belfast suburban rail ,  with limited local services being offered in ,  or planned for ,  cork ,  limerick ,  and galway . 
the irish road network has evolved separately in the two jurisdictions into which ireland is divided ,  while the irish rail network was mostly created prior to the partition of ireland . 
aircoach ,  a private operator ,  does however operate a competing dublin to belfast express service via dublin airport . 
most of the transport system in ireland is in public hands ,  either side of the irish border . 
in the republic of ireland ,  the minister for transport ,  acting through the department of transport ,  is responsible for the state's road network ,  rail network ,  public transport ,  airports and several other areas . 
in 1995 a decision was made by the u . s .  government to appoint a special envoy to northern ireland to help with the northern ireland peace process . 
ireland also participates in the eu-china human rights dialogue . 
iceland now claims a substantial area of the continental shelf to the west of ireland ,  to a point 49°48'n 19°00'w ,  which is further south than ireland . 
 ,  daniel mulhall is the irish ambassador to the united states while the position of u . s .  ambassador to ireland is vacant . 
since at least the 1600s ireland has had political connections with the united kingdom ,  with the whole island becoming a part of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland from 1801 to 1922.
ireland has held the presidency of the council of the european union on seven occasions  -lrb-  in 1975, 1979, 1984, 1990, 1996, 2004 and 2013 -rrb- . 
israel has a small coastline on the red sea in the south . 
south of the kinneret lies the saltwater dead sea which forms the border between israel and jordan and is below sea level ,  making it the lowest water surface on earth . 
israel stretches from north to south ,  and its width ranges from to ,  at its narrowest point ,   . 
the idea of a channel connecting the mediterranean and dead seas or the red and dead seas has been discussed . 
israel is divided into four physiographic regions: the mediterranean coastal plain ,  the central hills ,  the jordan rift valley and the negev desert . 
the geography of israel is very diverse ,  with desert conditions in the south ,  and snow-capped mountains in the north . 
modern israel is bounded to the north by lebanon ,  the northeast by syria ,  the east by jordan and the west bank ,  and to the southwest by egypt . 
israel's area is approximately  ,  which includes of inland water . 
israel is divided east-west by a mountain range running north to south along the coast . 
the arabah valley along the jordanian border stretches from eilat in the south to the tip of the dead sea in the north and is very arid with barely of rain annually . 
the bed of the lake forms part of the jordan rift valley . 
israel lies to the north of the equator around 31°30' north latitude and 34°45' east longitude . 
the demographics of israel are monitored by the israel central bureau of statistics . 
according to israel's central bureau of statistics ,  in 2008, of israel's 7.3 million people ,  75.6 percent were jews of any background . 
the paternal lineage of the jewish population of israel as of 2015 is as follows:
in 2008, venture capital investment in israel ,  rose 19 percent to $1.9 billion . 
the economy of israel is advanced by global standards . 
in 2012, ten companies were responsible for 47.7% of israel's exports . 
in september 2010, israel was invited to join the oecd . 
the bank of israel and israel's export institute have warned that the country is too dependent on a small number of exporters . 
israel is one of the world's major exporters of military equipment ,  accounting for 10% of the world total in 2007.
in 2013, commercial trade between israel and the palestinian territories were valued at us$20 billion annually . 
israel led the world in the share of its growth attributable to high-tech ventures: 70 percent . `` 
after statehood ,  israel faced a deep economic crisis . 
 ,  cut diamonds were israel's largest export product ,  comprising 23.2% of all exports . 
until the early 2000s ,  natural gas use in israel was minimal . 
the global competitiveness report of 2016 to 2017 ranked israel as having the world's second most innovative economy . 
israel also has a small but fast growing hedge fund industry . 
arab nations not only refused to have direct trade with israel  -lrb-  the primary boycott  -rrb-  ,  but they also refused to do business with any corporation that operated in israel  -lrb-  secondary boycott  -rrb-  ,  or any corporation that did business with a corporation that did business with israel  -lrb-  tertiary boycott  -rrb-  . 
 ''between 1991 and 2000, israel's annual venture-capital outlays ,  nearly all private ,  rose nearly 60-fold ,  from $58 million to $3.3 billion; companies launched by israeli venture funds rose from 100 to 800; and israel's information-technology revenues rose from $1.6 billion to $12.5 billion . 
israel is one of the world's three major centers for polished diamonds ,  alongside belgium and india . 
in may 2007, israel was invited to open accession discussions with the oecd . 
eleven minutes after midnight ,  the united states `` de facto '' recognized the state of israel . 
the writers also had to decide on the name for the new state . 
in the end ,  the officials rejected the name palestine because they thought that would be the name of the new arab state and could cause confusion so they opted for the most straightforward option: israel . 
at the same time ,  a large number of arabs left ,  fled or were expelled from ,  what became israel . 
the israeli declaration of independence ,  formally the declaration of the establishment of the state of israel  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was proclaimed on 14 may 1948  -lrb-  5 iyar 5708 -rrb- by david ben-gurion ,  the executive head of the world zionist organization ,  chairman of the jewish agency for palestine ,  and soon to be first prime minister of israel . 
and from the 1948 arab–israeli war until the early 1970s ,  800,000–1,000,000 jews left ,  fled ,  or were expelled from their homes in arab countries; 260,000 of them reached israel between 1948 and 1951; and 600,000 by 1972.
ben-gurion agreed with the latter but noted that hebrew should be the main language of the state . 
in a on 15 may 1948 to the secretary-general of the united nations ,  the secretary-general of the league of arab states claimed that `` the arab states find themselves compelled to intervene in order to restore law and order and to check further bloodshed '' . 
as leader of the yishuv ,  david ben-gurion was the first person to sign . 
on 12 may 1948, the minhelet haam  -lrb-   ,  lit . 
by then israel had retained its independence and increased its land area by almost 50% compared to the 1947 un partition plan . 
following the declaration ,  moetzet haam became the provisional state council ,  which acted as the legislative body for the new state until the first elections in january 1949.
including islands ,  italy has a coastline of on the adriatic sea ,  ionian sea ,  tyrrhenian sea ,  ligurian sea ,  sea of sardinia and strait of sicily . 
the third largest island is elba ,  the largest island of the tuscan archipelago  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the po valley is the largest plain in italy ,  with  ,  and it represents over 70% of the total plain area in the country . 
the highest peak in italy is mont blanc ,  at above sea level . 
today ,  large numbers of people with full or significant italian ancestry are found in brazil  -lrb-  25 million  -rrb-  ,  argentina  -lrb-  20 million  -rrb-  ,  us  -lrb-  17.8 million  -rrb-  ,  france  -lrb-  5 million  -rrb-  ,  venezuela  -lrb-  2 million  -rrb-  ,  uruguay  -lrb-  1.5 million  -rrb-  ,  canada  -lrb-  1.4 million  -rrb-  ,  and australia  -lrb-  800,000 -rrb- . 
at the beginning of year 2017, italy had an estimated population of 60.4 million . 
according to the italian government ,  there were an estimated 5,000,073 foreign nationals resident in italy . 
70.4% of italian population is classified as urban ,  a relatively low figure among developed countries . 
the new government led by matteo renzi proposed a new electoral law . 
all italian citizens older than 18 can vote ,  but to vote for the senate the voter must be at least 25 or older . 
at different times since his entering the italian parliament ,  silvio berlusconi ,  leader of the centre-right ,  had repeatedly vowed to stop the `` communists '' ,  while leftist parties had insisted that they would oust berlusconi . 
executive power is exercised by the council of ministers ,  which is led by the prime minister ,  officially referred to as `` president of the council ''  -lrb-  `` presidente del consiglio ''  -rrb-  . 
the italian judicial system is based on roman law ,  the napoleonic code and later statutes . 
after the first democratic elections with universal suffrage in 1948 in which the christian democracy and their allies won against the popular front of the italian communist and socialists parties ,  the communist party never returned in the government . 
between 17 may 2006 and 21 february 2007, romano prodi served as prime minister of italy following the narrow victory of his the union coalition over the house of freedoms led by silvio berlusconi in the april 2006 italian elections . 
the coalition led by berlusconi won the election and the leader of the centre-right created the berlusconi iv cabinet . 
the issue was a major one ,  to the extent that the constitutional court itself ruled that the italian parliament should remain in charge only to reform the electoral system and then should be dissolved . 
with article 48 of the constitution ,  which guarantees the right to vote ,  the people exercise their power through their elected representatives in the parliament . 
prodi's government became the third-longest to stay in power before he narrowly lost a vote of confidence ,  by three votes ,  in october 1998.
the current average age of italian university professors is 63, of bank directors and ceos 67, of members of parliament 56 and of labor union representatives 59.
the communist party was at this point the largest communist party in western europe and remained such for the rest of its existence . 
article 1 of the italian constitution states: `` italy is a democratic republic founded on labour . 
meanwhile ,  in 2013, a ruling by the constitutional court of italy established that the italian electoral system employed to elect the parliament breached a number of constitutional requirements . 
the italian socialist party ,  led by bettino craxi ,  became more and more critical of the communists and of the soviet union; craxi himself pushed in favor of ronald reagan's positioning of pershing ii missiles in italy ,  a move many communists strongly disapproved of . 
the new italian government headed by enrico letta took two months to form and made international news when luigi preiti shot at policemen near the building where they were swearing in the new government on sunday 28 april 2013.
national elections held on 13 may 2001 returned berlusconi to power at the head of the five-party center-right house of freedoms coalition ,  comprising the prime minister's own party ,  forza italia ,  the national alliance ,  the north league ,  the christian democratic center and the united christian democrats . 
by the end of the war ,  italian per capita income was at its lowest point since the beginning of the 20th century . 
italy's involvement in world war ii as a member of the axis powers required the establishment of a war economy . 
italy emerged from world war i in a poor and weakened condition . 
italian rates of growth were second only ,  but very close ,  to the german rates ,  in europe ,  and among the oeec countries only japan had been doing better . 
in the post-war period ,  italy was transformed from an agricultural based economy which had been severely affected by the consequences of the world wars ,  into one of the world's most advanced nations ,  and a leading country in world trade and exports . 
the economy of italy is the 3rd-largest national economy in the eurozone ,  the 8th-largest by nominal gdp in the world ,  and the 12th-largest by gdp  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  . 
but this result came at a terrible cost: by the end of the war ,  italy had lost 700,000 soldiers and had a ballooning sovereign debt amounting to billions of lira . 
italy was among the countries hit hardest by the great recession of 2008-2009 and the subsequent european debt crisis . 
transport networks in italy are integrated into the trans-european transport networks . 
italy's road network is also widespread ,  with a total length of about 487,700 km . 
also the bologna-florence high-speed line was upgraded to 300 km/h for a journey time of 35 minutes . 
italy has 2,507 people and 12.46 km per kilometer of rail track ,  giving italy the world's 13th largest rail network . 
more than 100 trains per day are operated . 
when using the rail passes ,  the date of travel needs to be filled in before boarding the trains . 
the italian armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  encompass the italian army ,  the italian navy and the italian air force . 
italy is part of the un ,  eu ,  nato ,  the oecd ,  the osce the dac ,  the wto ,  the g6, g7, g8, g10, g20, the union for the mediterranean ,  the council of europe ,  the central european initiative ,  the asem ,  the mef . 
austria took the offensive against the terms of the alliance and italy decided to take part in world war i as a principal allied power with france and great britain . 
foreign relations of the italian republic are the italian government's external relations with the outside world . 
standard italian also differs in some respects from most nearby italian languages:
due to heavy italian influence during the italian colonial period ,  italian is still understood by some in former colonies . 
italian  -lrb-  `` italiano '' or   -rrb-  is a romance language . 
italian became the language used in the courts of every state in the italian peninsula . 
throughout italy ,  regional variations of standard italian ,  called regional italian ,  are spoken . 
the renaissance era ,  known as in italian ,  was seen as a time of `` rebirth '' ,  which is the literal meaning of both  -lrb-  from french  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  italian  -rrb-  . 
according to the italian ministry of foreign affairs ,  every year there are more than 200,000 foreign students who study the italian language; they are distributed among the 90 institutes of italian culture that are located around the world ,  in the 179 italian schools located abroad ,  or in the 111 italian lecturer sections belonging to foreign schools where italian is taught as a language of culture . 
italian has a seven-vowel system ,  consisting of  ,  as well as 23 consonants . 
the italian alphabet is typically considered to consist of 21 letters . 
some other features that distinguish italian from the western romance languages:
the conservativeness of italian phonology is partly explained by its origin . 
although over 17 million americans are of italian descent ,  only a little over one million people in the united states speak italian at home . 
italian was also one of the many recognised languages in the austro-hungarian empire . 
italian is also used in administration and official documents in vatican city . 
italian is a romance language ,  and is therefore a descendant of vulgar latin  -lrb-  the spoken form of non-classical latin  -rrb-  . 
nevertheless ,  an italian language media market does exist in the country . 
italian grammar is typical of the grammar of romance languages in general . 
many speakers are native bilinguals of both standardized italian and other regional languages . 
ice-t appears in the film `` gift '' . 
in 1993, ice-t along with other rappers and the three `` yo ! 
some reviews of the album were unenthusiastic ,  as many had hoped for a return to the political raps of ice-t's most successful albums . 
in 1982, ice-t met producer willie strong from saturn records . 
ice-t had also collaborated with certain other heavy metal bands during this time period . 
ice-t's first film appearances were in the motion pictures ,  `` breakin' ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- ,  and its sequel ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- . 
tracy lauren marrow ,  son of solomon and alice marrow ,  was born in newark ,  new jersey . 
ice-t voiced in the video game ``  '' ,  as well as agent cain in ``  '' . 
ice-t finally landed a deal with a major label sire records . 
ice-t's friends al p .  and sean e .  sean went to prison . 
in 1991, he released his album `` o . g . 
his first rap album since 1999, `` gangsta rap '' ,  was released on october 31, 2006.
when people ask if it's ice-t ,  the actor yells back ,  `` no ,  it's lemonade ! `` 
ice-t split amicably with sire/warner bros .  records after a dispute over the artwork of the album `` home invasion '' . 
marrow and other crips wrote and performed `` crip rhymes ''  . 
the protohistoric early iron age in sri lanka lasted from 1000 bc to 600 bc . 
the duration of the iron age varies depending on the region under consideration . 
the iron age is the final epoch of the three-age system ,  preceded by the stone age  -lrb-  neolithic  -rrb-  and the bronze age . 
the early iron age artefacts found in kultepe site ,  azerbaijan show that iron smelting was known and used in this region before the 2nd millennium bc  -lrb-  as early as the 3rd millennium bc  -rrb-  . 
the germanic iron age of scandinavia is taken to end c .  ad 800, with the beginning of the viking age . 
iron was being used in mundigak to manufacture some items in the 3rd millennium bc such as a small copper/bronze bell with an iron clapper ,  a copper/bronze rod with two iron decorative buttons . 
by convention ,  the iron age in the ancient near east is taken to last from c .  1200 bc  -lrb-  the bronze age collapse  -rrb-  to c .  550 bc  -lrb-  or 539 bc  -rrb-  ,  taken as the beginning of historiography  -lrb-  herodotus  -rrb-  or the end of the proto-historical period . 
the iron age in central asia began when iron objects appear among the indo-european saka in present-day xinjiang between the 10th century bc and the 7th century bc ,  such as those found at the cemetery site of chawuhukou . 
the iron age is taken to end ,  also by convention ,  with the beginning of the historiographical record . 
the beginning of the 1st millennium bc saw extensive developments in iron metallurgy in india . 
the development of iron smelting was once attributed to the hittites of anatolia during the late bronze age . 
the iron age in egyptian archaeology essentially corresponds to the third intermediate period of egypt . 
smelted iron appears sporadically in the archeological record from the middle bronze age . 
the earliest bloomery smelting of iron is found at tell hammeh ,  jordan around 930 bc  -lrb-  c dating  -rrb-  . 
a-net soon vanished ,  leaving efnet as the only irc network . 
efnet or eris-free network is a major internet relay chat  -lrb-  irc  -rrb-  network ,  with more than 35,000 users . 
it is the modern-day descendant of the original irc network . 
undernet also runs an open proxy scanner . 
undernet uses gnuworld to provide x ,  its channel service bot . 
as undernet limits channel registration to `` established channels '' or channels with an active userbase ,  undernet introduced a version of `` chanfix ''  -lrb-  under the nickname `` c ''  -rrb-  designed to work like efnet's chanfix . 
at that point dalnet was one of the four biggest irc networks . 
dalnet is accessible by connecting with an irc client to an active dalnet server on ports 6660 through 6669, and 7000.
the network was soon renamed from dal's net to dalnet . 
the main characteristics of dalnet is its chanserv services which was invented on dalnet in 1995.
bitchx is a free irc client and has been considered to be the most popular ircii-based irc client . 
mirc has a number of distinguishing features . 
mirc has been described as `` one of the most popular irc clients available for windows . `` 
mirc is an internet relay chat  -lrb-  irc  -rrb-  client for windows ,  created in 1995.
mirc's abilities and behaviors can be altered and extended using the embedded mirc scripting language . 
xchat is an internet relay chat client . 
xchat's main source code tree has not received any patches since 2013.
xchat is a full-featured internet relay chat client with a graphical user interface surrounding the basic chat window . 
an irc channel takeover is an acquisition of irc channel operator status by someone other than the channel's owner . 
this has been used to take over irc servers . 
if both channels were created at the same time ,  all user statuses are retained when the two are combined; if one is newer than the other ,  special statuses are removed from those in the newer channel . 
irssi  -lrb-    -lrb-  audio  -rrb-   -rrb-  is an irc client program for linux ,  freebsd ,  macos and microsoft windows . 
according to the developers ,  irssi was written from scratch ,  not based on ircii  -lrb-  like bitchx and epic  -rrb-  . 
as of 2011 trade in counterfeit copyrighted and trademarked works was a $600 billion industry worldwide and accounted for 5–7% of global trade . 
intellectual property rights include patents ,  copyright ,  industrial design rights ,  trademarks ,  plant variety rights ,  trade dress ,  geographical indications ,  and in some jurisdictions trade secrets . 
trade secret misappropriation is different from violations of other intellectual property laws ,  since by definition trade secrets are secret ,  while patents and registered copyrights and trademarks are publicly available . 
a copyright gives the creator of an original work exclusive rights to it ,  usually for a limited time . 
violation of intellectual property rights ,  called `` infringement '' with respect to patents ,  copyright ,  and trademarks ,  and `` misappropriation '' with respect to trade secrets ,  may be a breach of civil law or criminal law ,  depending on the type of intellectual property involved ,  jurisdiction ,  and the nature of the action . 
patent infringement typically is caused by using or selling a patented invention without permission from the patent holder . 
copyright does not cover ideas and information themselves ,  only the form or manner in which they are expressed . 
plant breeders' rights or plant variety rights are the rights to commercially use a new variety of a plant . 
he mentions that `` if copyright were a natural right nothing could justify terminating this right after a certain period of time '' . 
with no need for registration or copyright notices ,  this is thought to have led to an increase in orphan works  -lrb-  copyrighted works for which the copyright owner cannot be contacted  -rrb-  ,  a problem that has been noticed and addressed by governmental bodies around the world . 
an industrial design right  -lrb-  sometimes called `` design right '' or `` design patent ''  -rrb-  protects the visual design of objects that are not purely utilitarian . 
use of the term `` intellectual rights '' has declined since the early 1980s ,  as use of the term `` intellectual property '' has increased . 
the statute of monopolies  -lrb-  1624 -rrb- and the british statute of anne  -lrb-  1710 -rrb- are seen as the origins of patent law and copyright respectively ,  firmly establishing the concept of intellectual property . 
balancing rights so that they are strong enough to encourage the creation of intellectual goods but not so strong that they prevent the goods' wide use is the primary focus of modern intellectual property law . 
balancing rights so that they are strong enough to encourage the creation of information and intellectual goods but not so strong that they prevent their wide use is the primary focus of modern intellectual property law . 
in commonwealth common law jurisdictions ,  confidentiality and trade secrets are regarded as an equitable right rather than a property right but penalties for theft are roughly the same as in the united states . 
copyright infringement is reproducing ,  distributing ,  displaying or performing a work ,  or to make derivative works ,  without permission from the copyright holder ,  which is typically a publisher or other business representing or assigned by the work's creator . 
the term can be found used in an october 1845 massachusetts circuit court ruling in the patent case `` davoll et al . 
further along these lines ,  the ethical problems brought up by ip rights are most pertinent when it is socially valuable goods like life-saving medicines are given ip protection . 
the term `` industrial property '' is sometimes used to refer to a large subset of intellectual property rights including patents ,  trademarks ,  industrial designs ,  utility models ,  service marks ,  trade names ,  and geographical indications . 
the first known use of the term `` intellectual property '' dates to 1769, when a piece published in the `` monthly review '' used the phrase . 
in the context of trademarks ,  this expansion has been driven by international efforts to harmonise the definition of `` trademark '' ,  as exemplified by the agreement on trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights ratified in 1994, which formalized regulations for ip rights that had been handled by common law ,  or not at all ,  in member states . 
in civil law jurisdictions ,  intellectual property has often been referred to as intellectual rights ,  traditionally a somewhat broader concept that has included moral rights and other personal protections that cannot be bought or sold . 
a patent is a form of right granted by the government to an inventor or their successor-in-title ,  giving the owner the right to exclude others from making ,  using ,  selling ,  offering to sell ,  and importing an invention for a limited period of time ,  in exchange for the public disclosure of the invention . 
the rents from ireland were generally spent elsewhere; an estimated £6,000,000 was remitted out of ireland in 1842.
the potato was introduced to ireland as a garden crop of the gentry . 
the event is sometimes referred to as the irish potato famine ,  mostly outside ireland . 
john mitchel ,  one of the leaders of the young ireland movement ,  wrote in 1860:
furthermore ,  a disproportionate share of the potatoes grown in ireland were of a single variety ,  the irish lumper . 
according to woodham-smith ,  `` the unreliability of the potato was an accepted fact in ireland '' . 
some scholars estimate that the population of ireland was reduced by 20–25% . 
mitchel wrote in his `` the last conquest of ireland  -lrb-  perhaps  -rrb- ``  ,  on the same subject ,  that no one from ireland ever asked for charity during this period ,  and that it was england who sought charity on ireland's behalf ,  and ,  having received it ,  was also responsible for administering it . 
he said that repeal of the act of union was a necessity and ireland's only hope . 
the famine was a watershed in the history of ireland ,  which from 1801 to 1922 was ruled directly by westminster as part of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . 
throughout the entire period of the famine ,  ireland was exporting enormous quantities of food . 
the historian cecil woodham-smith wrote in ``  '' that no issue has provoked so much anger and embittered relations between england and ireland `` as the indisputable fact that huge quantities of food were exported from ireland to england throughout the period when the people of ireland were dying of starvation '' . 
the problem in ireland was not lack of food ,  which was plentiful ,  but the price of it ,  which was beyond the reach of the poor . 
the great famine  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  or the great hunger ,  was a period in ireland between 1845 and 1849 of mass starvation ,  disease ,  and emigration . 
since the acts of union in january 1801, ireland had been part of the united kingdom . 
the famine marked the beginning of the depopulation of ireland in the 19th century . 
records show that irish lands exported food even during the worst years of the famine . 
the potato blight would return to ireland in 1879 though by then the rural cottier tenant farmers and labourers of ireland had begun the `` land war '' ,  described as one of the largest agrarian movements to take place in nineteenth-century europe . 
in total ,  the association raised approximately £390,000 for irish relief . 
during the famine ,  about one million people died and a million more emigrated from ireland ,  causing the island's population to fall by between 20% and 25% . 
the already strained relations between many irish and the british crown soured further both during and after the famine ,  heightening ethnic and sectarian tensions ,  and boosting irish nationalism and republicanism in ireland and among irish emigrants in the united states and elsewhere . 
in 1843, the british government considered that the land question in ireland was the root cause of disaffection in the country . 
between 1832 and 1859, 70% of irish representatives were landowners or the sons of landowners . 
since over three million irish people were totally dependent on potatoes for food ,  hunger and famine were inevitable . 
the potato blight returned to europe in 1879, but by that point the labourers of ireland had ,  in the legacy of the great irish famine ,  begun the `` land war '' ,  described as one of the largest agrarian movements to take place in 19th-century europe . 
in 1851, the census of ireland commissioners recorded 24 failures of the potato crop going back to 1728, of varying severity . 
landlords in ireland often used their powers without compunction ,  and tenants lived in dread of them . 
he expressed the view that the resources of ireland were still abundantly adequate to maintain the population ,  and that ,  until those resources had been utterly exhausted ,  he hoped that there was no one in `` ireland who will so degrade himself as to ask the aid of a subscription from england '' . 
the united states helped out the irish during the famine immensely . 
the rights to a plot of land in ireland could mean the difference between life and death in the early 19th century . 
christine kinealy has written that `` the major tragedy of the irish famine of 1845–52 marked a watershed in modern irish history . 
the famine remains a controversial event in irish history . 
in the 17th and 18th centuries ,  irish catholics were strongly discriminated against . 
james s .  donnelly ,  jr .  ,  a historian at the university of wisconsin–madison ,  wrote in his book ,  `` landlord and tenant in nineteenth-century ireland '':
in june 1847 the poor law amendment act was passed which embodied the principle ,  popular in britain ,  that irish property must support irish poverty . 
mitchel later wrote one of the first widely circulated tracts on the famine ,  `` the last conquest of ireland  -lrb-  perhaps  -rrb- ``  ,  published in 1861.
during the famine ,  ireland produced enough food ,  flax ,  and wool to feed and clothe double its nine million people . 
the crime and outrage act was passed in december 1847 as a compromise ,  and additional troops were sent to ireland . 
in 1844, irish newspapers carried reports concerning a disease which for two years had attacked the potato crops in america . 
in 1845, 24% of all irish tenant farms were of 0.4–2 hectares  -lrb-  1–5 acres  -rrb-  in size ,  while 40% were of 2–6 hectares  -lrb-  5–15 acres  -rrb-  . 
prior to the arrival in ireland of the disease `` phytophthora infestans '' ,  commonly known as `` blight '' ,  only two main potato plant diseases had been identified . 
the principal beneficiary of this system was the english consumer who increased their consumption of beef raised in ireland . 
under british law ,  the isle of man is not part of the united kingdom . 
the manx name of the isle of man is ': '  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a manx word meaning 'island'; '  -lrb-    -rrb-  appears in the genitive case as '  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  with initial consonant mutation ,  hence ' ,  `` island of mann '' . 
the old irish form of the name is ' or ' . 
the earliest recorded manx form of the name is ' or ``  . 
the island was cut off from the surrounding islands around 8000 bc ,  but was colonised by sea some time before 6500 bc . 
in various laws of the united kingdom ,  `` the united kingdom '' is defined to exclude the isle of man . 
the island has been inhabited since before 6500 bc . 
later ,  a manannán is recorded as the first king of mann in a manx poem  -lrb-  dated 1504 -rrb- . 
the isle of man  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  sometimes referred to simply as mann  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  is a self-governing british crown dependency in the irish sea between great britain and ireland . 
in 1266, the island became part of scotland under the treaty of perth ,  after being ruled by norway . 
the isle of man is located in the middle of the northern irish sea ,  almost equidistant from england ,  northern ireland ,  scotland  -lrb-  closest  -rrb-  ,  and wales  -lrb-  farthest  -rrb-  . 
latin was originally used by the tribe of the latins ,  which inhabited the region of latium  -lrb-  latin: `` latium ''  -rrb-  in the middle of italy with their centre  -lrb-  from the 8th century bc  -rrb-  in rome . 
those who accept their indo-european identity are derived ,  as in the case of messapian ,  from the eastern adriatic coast . 
in the fifth century bc ,  latin is no more than a language confined to the territory of rome with its linguistic neighbour to the north ,  the faliscan dialect . 
by the end of the 8th century bc ,  the greek settlers in the south of the italian peninsula had introduced the alphabet that would later be spread to the iron age cultures on the peninsula . 
the similarity between etruscan and the lemnos inscriptions leads one to understand the existence of a `` continuum '' of non-indo-european languages that spread throughout the central and eastern mediterranean before the indo-european invasions . 
however ,  since it also shares similarities with other western indo-european branches  -lrb-  particularly celtic languages  -rrb-  ,  some linguists prefer to consider it as an independent indo-european language . 
of course ,  the most famous indo-european language in italy is latin ,  whose diffusion coincided with the expansion of roman power . 
the italic languages are a branch of the indo-european language family ,  originally spoken by italic peoples . 
a `` channel operator '' is a client on an irc channel that manages the channel . 
a hostmask is a unique identifier of an irc client connected to an irc server . 
irc has a line-based structure . 
the standard structure of a network of irc servers is a tree . 
there are thousands of running irc networks in the world . 
all client-to-server irc protocols in use today are descended from the protocol implemented in the irc2.4.0 version of the irc2 server ,  and documented in rfc 1459.
as of 2016, freenode is the largest irc network with around 90,000 users . 
channels that are available across an entire irc network are prefixed with a '#' ,  while those local to a server use '&' . 
some of these issues have been addressed in `` modern irc '' . 
irc servers ,  services ,  and other clients including bots can use it to identify a specific irc session . 
irc networks may also k-line or g-line users or servers that have a harming effect . 
channels ,  a form of timestamped channel on normally non-timestamped networks . 
an irc daemon can also be used on a local area network  -lrb-  lan  -rrb-  . 
channels on a network can be displayed using the irc command `` list '' ,  which lists all currently available channels that do not have the modes +s or +p set ,  on that particular network . 
on most networks ,  an operator can:
irc is an open protocol that uses tcp and ,  optionally ,  tls . 
the basic means of communicating to a group of users in an established irc session is through a `` channel '' . 
some irc servers support ssl/tls connections for security purposes . 
they run various implementations of irc servers ,  and are administered by various groups of irc operators ,  but the protocol exposed to irc users is very similar ,  and all irc networks can be accessed by the same client software ,  although there might be slight incompatibilities and limited functionality due to the differing server software implementations . 
once anet disbanded ,  the name efnet became meaningless ,  and once again it was the one and only irc network . 
some irc networks such as freenode use these as `` cloaks '' to indicate that a user is affiliated with a group or project . 
for example ,  the akkadian sign an  -lrb-    -rrb-  could be an ideograph for `` deity '' ,  an ideogram for the god anum in particular ,  a logograph for the akkadian stem `` il- '' `` deity '' ,  a logograph for the akkadian word `` šamu '' `` sky '' ,  or a syllabogram for either the syllable `` an '' or `` il '' . 
some systems also use ideograms ,  symbols denoting abstract concepts . 
an ideogram or ideograph  -lrb-  from greek `` idéa '' `` idea '' and `` gráphō '' `` to write ''  -rrb-  is a graphic symbol that represents an idea or concept ,  independent of any particular language ,  and specific words or phrases . 
thereafter ,  the ira waged a guerrilla campaign against the british occupation of ireland in the 1919–21 irish war of independence . 
the ira fought a guerrilla war against the crown forces in ireland from 1919 to july 1921.
the irish republican army  -lrb-  ira  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  was an irish republican revolutionary paramilitary organisation . 
these issues were the cause of a split in the ira and ultimately ,  the irish civil war . 
assessments of the effectiveness of the ira's campaign vary . 
this was the first unit of the ira to break with the pro-treaty government . 
during this time ,  the volunteers gradually became known as the irish republican army  -lrb-  ira  -rrb-  . 
furthermore ,  it instructed all ira units to reaffirm their allegiance to the irish republic on 2 april . 
in may 1921, the ira in dublin attacked and burned the custom house . 
the dáil belatedly accepted responsibility for ira actions in april 1921, just three months before the end of the irish war of independence . 
as he feared ,  the destruction proved a pyrrhic victory for the republic ,  with so many ira men killed or captured that the ira in dublin suffered a severe blow . 
the ira was also involved in the destruction of many stately homes in munster . 
the ira leadership was deeply divided over the decision by the dáil to ratify the treaty . 
large deposits of iron are found in banded iron formations . 
significant amounts of iron occur in the iron sulfide mineral pyrite  -lrb-  fes  -rrb-  ,  but it is difficult to extract iron from it and it is therefore not used . 
many coordination compounds of iron are known . 
iron represents an example of allotropy in a metal . 
iron chemical compounds have many uses . 
the banded iron formations were laid down in the time between and  . 
iron is a chemical element with symbol fe  -lrb-  from   -rrb-  and atomic number 26.
iron forms compounds mainly in the +2 and +3 oxidation states . 
about 1 in 20 meteorites consist of the unique iron-nickel minerals taenite  -lrb-  35–80% iron  -rrb-  and kamacite  -lrb-  90–95% iron  -rrb-  . 
naturally occurring iron consists of four stable isotopes: 5.845% of fe ,  91.754% of fe ,  2.119% of fe and 0.282% of fe . 
unlike many other metals ,  iron does not form amalgams with mercury . 
iron is the sixth most abundant element in the universe ,  and the most common refractory element . 
prussian blue ,  fefe -lrb-  cn  -rrb-  ,  is the most famous of the cyanide complexes of iron . 
cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer contains iron in the rare +1 oxidation state . 
fission and alpha-particle emission would then make heavy nuclei decay into iron ,  converting all stellar-mass objects to cold spheres of pure iron . 
because of the softness of iron ,  it is much easier to work with than its heavier congeners ruthenium and osmium . 
the melting point of iron is experimentally well defined for pressures less than 50 gpa . 
the ieee 802.15 task group 4d was chartered to define an amendment to the 802.15.4-2006 standard . 
ieee 802.15.4b was approved in june 2006 and was published in september 2006 as ieee 802.15.4-2006.
the ieee 802.15.2-2003 standard was published in 2003 and task group two went into `` hibernation '' . 
ieee 802.15 is a working group of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers  -lrb-  ieee  -rrb-  ieee 802 standards committee which specifies wireless personal area network  -lrb-  wpan  -rrb-  standards . 
the standard can be downloaded via the ieee get program ,  which is funded by ieee 802 volunteers . 
ieee 802.15.4a  -lrb-  formally called ieee 802.15.4a-2007 -rrb- is an amendment to ieee 802.15.4 specifying additional physical layers  -lrb-  phys  -rrb-  to the original standard . 
ieee 802.15.3c-2009 was published on september 11, 2009.
the draft standard is under development ,  more information can be found on the ieee 802.15 task group 8 web page . 
documents related to the development of ieee 802.15.3a are archived on the ieee document server . 
ieee 802.15.3-2003 is a mac and phy standard for high-rate  -lrb-  11 to 55 mbit/s  -rrb-  wpans . 
ieee 802 is a family of ieee standards dealing with local area networks and metropolitan area networks . 
the ieee 802 family of standards is maintained by the ieee 802 lan/man standards committee  -lrb-  lmsc  -rrb-  . 
802.11n can use either the 2.4 ghz or the 5 ghz band; 802.11ac uses only the 5 ghz band . 
devices using 802.11b experience interference from other products operating in the 2.4 ghz band . 
since the 2.4 ghz band is heavily used to the point of being crowded ,  using the relatively unused 5 ghz band gives 802.11a a significant advantage . 
like 802.11b ,  802.11g devices suffer interference from other products operating in the 2.4 ghz band ,  for example wireless keyboards . 
802.11b and 802.11g use the 2.4 ghz ism band ,  operating in the united states under part 15 of the u . s .  federal communications commission rules and regulations; 802.11n can also use that band . 
the 802.11b standard has a maximum raw data rate of 11 mbit/s ,  and uses the same media access method defined in the original standard . 
802.11-1997 was the first wireless networking standard in the family ,  but 802.11b was the first widely accepted one ,  followed by 802.11a ,  802.11g ,  802.11n ,  and 802.11ac . 
upon publication on march 29, 2012, the new standard was referred to as ieee 802.11-2012.
the original version of the standard ieee 802.11 was released in 1997 and clarified in 1999, but is now obsolete . 
in june 2003, a third modulation standard was ratified: 802.11g . 
the irn-bru 32 energy drink variant was launched in 2006.
1980 saw the introduction of low calorie irn-bru: this was re-launched in 1991 as diet irn-bru and again in 2011 as irn-bru sugar free . 
irn-bru  -lrb-   `` iron brew ''  -rrb-  is a scottish carbonated soft drink ,  often described as `` scotland's other national drink ''  -lrb-  after whisky  -rrb-  . 
as of may 2017, irn-bru still contains these colourings . 
barr's trademark application for the brand name irn-bru dates from july 1946 when the drink was still off sale because of wartime regulations . 
  -rrb-  ,  the rfc can advance to internet standard . 
becoming a standard is a two-step process within the internet standards process: `` proposed standard '' and `` internet standard '' . 
an internet standard is documented by a request for comments  -lrb-  rfc  -rrb-  or a set of rfcs . 
the most fundamental of the internet standards are the ones defining the internet protocol . 
the definitive list of internet standards is now maintained by the rfc editor . 
a draft standard was an intermediary step that occurred after a proposed standard but prior to an internet standard . 
all internet standards are given a number in the std series . 
the itu-t now operates under much more streamlined processes . 
itu-t recommendations are the names given to telecommunications and computer protocol specification documents published by itu-t . 
the itu telecommunication standardization sector  -lrb-  itu-t  -rrb-  is one of the three sectors  -lrb-  divisions or units  -rrb-  of the international telecommunication union  -lrb-  itu  -rrb- ; it coordinates standards for telecommunications . 
 -lrb-  specifications jointly maintained by the itu-t and iso/iec are not free .   -rrb- 
itu-t has a permanent secretariat ,  the telecommunication standardization bureau  -lrb-  tsb  -rrb-  ,  based at the itu headquarters in geneva ,  switzerland . 
the technical work ,  the development of recommendations ,  of itu-t is managed by study groups  -lrb-  sgs  -rrb-  . 
the standardization efforts of itu commenced in 1865 with the formation of the international telegraph union  -lrb-  itu  -rrb-  . 
most of the work of itu-t is carried out by its sector members and associates ,  while the telecommunication standardization bureau  -lrb-  tsb  -rrb-  is the executive arm of itu-t and coordinator for a number of workshops and seminars to progress existing work areas and explore new ones . 
it was at this time that ccitt was renamed the telecommunication standardization sector  -lrb-  itu-t  -rrb-  ,  as one of three sectors of the union alongside the radiocommunication sector  -lrb-  itu-r  -rrb-  and the telecommunication development sector  -lrb-  itu-d  -rrb-  . 
proponents of this theory suggest that children whose view of self is `` good and moral '' tend to have a developmental trajectory toward pro-social behavior and few signs of anti-social behavior . 
in behavioral psychology ,  the concept of internalization may also refer to disorders and behaviors in which a person deals with stressors in manners not externally evident . 
for a related issue regarding trade execution ,  see payment for order flow . 
indium was isolated the next year . 
indium has no metabolic role in any organism . 
indium has many semiconductor-related applications . 
the average indium price in 2016 was 240/kg ,  down from 705/kg in 2014.
indium has 49 electrons ,  with an electronic configuration of kr4d5s5p . 
indium has 39 known isotopes ,  ranging in mass number from 97 to 135.
indium is a chemical element with symbol in and atomic number 49.
the density of indium ,  7.31 g/cm ,  is also greater than gallium ,  but lower than thallium . 
the primary consumption of indium worldwide is lcd production . 
indium is produced exclusively as a by-product during the processing of the ores of other metals . 
indium nitride is readily attacked by acids and alkalis . 
the stable indium isotope ,  indium-113, is one of the p-nuclei ,  the origin of which is not fully understood; although indium-113 is known to be made directly in the s- and r-processes  -lrb-  rapid neutron capture  -rrb-  ,  and also as the daughter of very long-lived cadmium-113, which has a half-life of about eight quadrillion years ,  this cannot account for all indium-113.
according to the unep ,  indium's end-of-life recycling rate is less than 1% . 
