music row houses many gospel music and contemporary christian music companies centered around 16th and 17th avenues south . 
the nashville region was also stated to be the `` number one '' metro area for professional and business service jobs in america ,  as well as having the `` hottest housing market in america '' as stated by zillow . 
the tennessee state fair is also held annually in september . 
the hermitage ,  the former home of president andrew jackson ,  is one of the largest presidential homes open to the public ,  and is also one of the most visited . 
although nashville is renowned as a music recording center and tourist destination ,  its largest industry is health care . 
 ,  nashville has the largest metropolitan area in the state of tennessee ,  spanning 13 counties and an estimated population of 1,903,045.
the contemporary christian music industry is based along nashville's music row ,  with a great influence in neighboring williamson county . 
according to the united states census bureau ,  the city has a total area of  ,  of which of it is land and of it  -lrb-  4.53%  -rrb-  is water . 
the 2015 population of the nashville—davidson–murfreesboro–columbia combined statistical area ,  a larger trade area ,  was 2,027,489.
as the city's name itself is a metonym for the country music industry ,  many popular tourist attractions involve country music ,  including the country music hall of fame and museum ,  belcourt theatre ,  and ryman auditorium . 
as of 2006, nashville's music industry is estimated to have a total economic impact of $6.4 billion per year and to contribute 19,000 jobs to the nashville area . 
fisk university also maintains a jazz station ,  wfsk . 
corecivic ,  formerly known as corrections corporation of america and one of the largest private corrections company in the united states ,  was founded in nashville in 1983.
nashville is the capital and most populous city of the u . s .  state of tennessee . 
the age distribution was 22.2% under 18, 10.3% from 18 to 24, 32.8% from 25 to 44, 23.9% from 45 to 64, and 10.7% who were 65 or older . 
there is also a piano bar and a gift shop . 
nashville's elevation ranges from its lowest point ,  above sea level at the cumberland river ,  to its highest point ,  above sea level in the radnor lake state natural area . 
nashville has a vibrant music and entertainment scene spanning a variety of genres . 
a multitude of music clubs and honky-tonk bars can be found in downtown nashville ,  particularly the area encompassing lower broadway ,  second avenue ,  and printer's alley ,  which is often referred to as `` the district '' . 
the christian record companies include emi christian music group ,  provident label group and word records . 
three major interstate highways  -lrb-  i-40, i-65 and i-24 -rrb- converge near the core area of downtown ,  and many regional cities are within a day's driving distance . 
in 1843, the city was named as the permanent capital of the state of tennessee . 
located in northern middle tennessee ,  nashville is the main core of the largest metropolitan area in tennessee . 
this resulted in the more industrialized and urbanized centers being underrepresented for many years . 
chapters of this secret insurgent group formed throughout the state and the south; they opposed voting and organizing by freedmen ,  and sometimes also attacked their white allies ,  including schoolteachers from the north . 
in september 2006, the schermerhorn symphony center opened as the home of the nashville symphony . 
nashville is a center for the music ,  healthcare ,  publishing ,  private prison ,  banking and transportation industries ,  and is home to numerous colleges and universities such as tennessee state university ,  vanderbilt university ,  belmont university ,  fisk university ,  and lipscomb university . 
novial was introduced in jespersen's book `` an international language '' in 1928.
novial was first described in jespersen’s book `` an international language ''  -lrb-  1928 -rrb- . 
the note's frequency is:
the note's frequency is:
where `` p '' is the midi note number  -lrb-  and 69 is the number of semitones between c  -lrb-  note 0 -rrb- and a  -rrb-  . 
a written note can also have a note value ,  a code that determines the note's relative duration . 
<score vorbis= ''true ''> \relative c' { c1 d1 e1 f1 g1 a1 b1 c1 b1 a1 g1 f1 e1 d1 c1 \layout { \midi { </score> the staff above shows the notes c ,  d ,  e ,  f ,  g ,  a ,  b ,  c and then in reverse order ,  with no key signature or accidentals . 
the lowest note on most pianos is a ,  the highest c .  the midi system for electronic musical instruments and computers uses a straight count starting with note 0 for c at 8.1758 hz up to note 127 for g at 12,544 hz . 
for instance ,  raising the note b to b is equal to the note c .  assuming all such equivalences ,  the complete chromatic scale adds five additional pitch classes to the original seven lettered notes for a total of 12  -lrb-  the 13th note completing the octave  -rrb-  ,  each separated by a half-step . 
for notes in an a440 equal temperament ,  this formula delivers the standard midi note number  -lrb-  `` p ''  -rrb-  . 
because of that ,  all notes with these kinds of relations can be grouped under the same pitch class . 
notes that belong to the diatonic scale relevant in the context are sometimes called `` diatonic notes ''; notes that do not meet that criterion are then sometimes called `` chromatic notes '' . 
in most countries using these suffixes ,  the letter h is used to represent what is b natural in english ,  the letter b is used instead of b ,  and heses  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  h  -rrb-  is used instead of b  -lrb-  although bes and heses both denote the english b  -rrb-  . 
the sharp symbol arose from a barred b ,  called the `` cancelled b '' . 
in musical notation ,  accidentals are placed before the note symbols . 
nephrology  -lrb-  from greek '' nephros '' `` kidney '' ,  combined with the suffix `` -logy '' ,  `` the study of ''  -rrb-  is a specialty of medicine and pediatrics that concerns itself with the kidneys: the study of normal kidney function and kidney disease ,  the preservation of kidney health ,  and the treatment of kidney disease ,  from diet and medication to renal replacement therapy  -lrb-  dialysis and kidney transplantation  -rrb-  . 
a nephrologist is a physician who specializes in the care and treatment of kidney disease . 
before then ,  the specialty was usually referred to as `` kidney medicine . `` 
nephrologists may further sub-specialise in dialysis ,  kidney transplantation ,  chronic kidney disease ,  cancer-related kidney diseases  -lrb-  onconephrology  -rrb-  ,  procedural nephrology or other non-nephrology areas as described above . 
when the kidneys are no longer able to sustain the demands of the body ,  end-stage kidney failure is said to have occurred . 
structural abnormalities of the kidneys are identified with imaging tests . 
in the usa ,  founded in 1964, the national kidney foundation is a national organization representing patients and professionals who treat kidney diseases . 
in the united kingdom ,  the uk national kidney federation and british kidney patient association  -lrb-  bkpa  -rrb-  represents patients ,  and the renal association represents renal physicians and works closely with the national service framework for kidney disease . 
patients are referred to nephrology specialists after a urinalysis ,  for various reasons ,  such as acute kidney failure ,  chronic kidney disease ,  hematuria ,  proteinuria ,  kidney stones ,  hypertension ,  and disorders of acid/base or electrolytes . 
native esperanto speakers  -lrb-  esperanto: `` denaskuloj '' or `` denaskaj esperantistoj ''  -rrb-  are people who have acquired esperanto as one of their native languages . 
similarly ,  the annual happens alongside the largest esperanto convention ,  the world congress of esperanto  -lrb-  `` universala kongreso ''  -rrb-  . 
the republic of nicaragua v .  the united states of america  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- icj 1 is a public international law case decided by the international court of justice  -lrb-  icj  -rrb-  . 
the 1914 bryan–chamorro treaty granted perpetual canal rights to the u . s .  in nicaragua and was signed ten days before the u . s . -operated panama canal opened for use ,  thus preventing anyone from building a competing canal in nicaragua without u . s .  permission . 
in 1927, under augusto césar sandino ,  a major peasant uprising was launched against both the u . s .  occupation and the nicaraguan establishment . 
theorem: there is no unitary operator `` u '' on formula_9 such that for all normalised states formula_11 and formula_3 in formula_13
suppose we have two quantum systems `` a '' and `` b '' with a common hilbert space formula_1.
the no-cloning theorem is normally stated and proven for pure states; the no-broadcast theorem generalizes this result to mixed states . 
in physics ,  the no-cloning theorem states that it is impossible to create an identical copy of an arbitrary unknown quantum state . 
he was awarded the acheson award by the electrochemical society in 1984.
norman hackerman  -lrb-  march 2, 1912 – june 16, 2007 -rrb- was an american chemist ,  professor ,  and academic administrator who served as the 18th president of the university of texas at austin  -lrb-  1967–1970 -rrb- and later as the 4th president of rice university  -lrb-  1970–1985 -rrb- . 
in 1982 the electrochemical society created the norman hackerman young author award to honor the best paper published in the journal of the electrochemical society for a topic in the field of electrochemical science and technology by a young author or authors . 
a park in central nancy is named after blondlot . 
it is clear that reichenbach was aware of mesmer's work and that researchers in paris working with blondlot were aware of reichenbach's work ,  although there is no proof that blondlot was personally aware of it . 
in the darkened room during blondlot's demonstration ,  wood surreptitiously removed an essential prism from the experimental apparatus ,  yet the experimenters still said that they observed n rays . 
n rays  -lrb-  or n-rays  -rrb-  were a hypothesized form of radiation ,  described by prosper-rené blondlot in 1903, and initially confirmed by others ,  but subsequently found to be illusory . 
the russian aircraft carrier is named in his honor . 
in 1919, kuznetsov joined the northern dvina naval flotilla ,  after adding two years to his age in order to be eligible to serve . 
nuon is a technology developed by vm labs that adds features to a dvd player . 
as of november 2004, there were no nuon-enabled dvd players shipping and no new nuon software titles ,  meaning that it was  discontinued . 
new england also has its own food language . 
new england has many local lagers and ales . 
new england cuisine is an american cuisine which originated in the new england region of the united states ,  and traces its roots to english cuisine . 
much of the pizza in new england is greek pizza ,  owing to the strong presence of greek immigrants and greek americans in the food service industry in new england . 
many of new england's earliest puritan settlers were from eastern england and also brought with them traditions of dairy products and baking pies and other foods common in england . 
some of the finest rum distilleries were located in new england prior to prohibition . 
new england hot dog rolls are split on top instead of on the side ,  and have a more rectangular shape . 
simon was married five times . 
simon described a typical writing session with the show:
simon incorporated some of their experiences into his play `` laughter on the 23rd floor ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- . 
after his follow-up play ,  `` lost in yonkers ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- ,  simon was awarded a pulitzer prize . 
simon's characters often amuse the audience with sparkling `` zingers , ``  believable due to simon's skill with writing dialogue . 
before writing ,  simon tries to create an image of his characters . 
simon's nephew is u . s .  district judge michael h .  simon and his niece-in-law is u . s .  congresswoman suzanne bonamici . 
neil simon was born on july 4, 1927, in the bronx ,  new york ,  to jewish parents . 
many of simon's plays are set in new york city ,  which gives them an urban flavor . 
broadway critic walter kerr tries to rationalize why simon's work has been underrated:
and where infidelity is the theme in a simon play ,  rarely ,  if ever ,  do those characters gain happiness: `` in simon's eyes ,  adds johnson ,  `` divorce is never a victory . `` 
simon's plays are generally semi-autobiographical ,  often portraying aspects of his troubled childhood and first marriages . 
simon recalls: `` i was constantly being dragged out of movies for laughing too loud . `` 
simon was willing to experiment and take risks ,  often moving his plays in new and unexpected directions . 
the goal of nafta was to eliminate barriers to trade and investment between the u . s .  ,  canada and mexico . 
a 2014 study on the effects of nafta on us trade jobs and investment found that between 1993 and 2013, the us trade deficit with mexico and canada increased from $17.0 to $177.2 billion ,  displacing 851,700 us jobs . 
according to the u . s .  trade representative ,  this trade supports over 140,000 small- and medium-sized businesses in the us . 
while some jobs were lost to mexico as a result of nafta ,  considerably more would have been lost to china if not for nafta . 
according to a 2012 study ,  with reduced nafta trade tariffs ,  trade with the united states and mexico only increased by a modest 11% in canada compared to an increase of 41% for the u . s .  and 118% for mexico . 
the us had a trade surplus with nafta countries of $28.3 billion for services in 2009 and a trade deficit of $94.6 billion  -lrb-  36.4% annual increase  -rrb-  for goods in 2010.
a 2015 study found that us welfare increased by 0.08% as a result of nafta tariff reductions ,  and that us intra-bloc trade increased by 41% . 
production of corn in mexico has increased since nafta . 
most of the increase in members' agricultural trade ,  which was only recently brought under the purview of the world trade organization ,  was due to very high trade barriers before nafta or other regional trade agreements . 
the us chamber of commerce credits nafta with increasing u . s .  trade in goods and services with canada and mexico from $337 billion in 1993 to $1.2 trillion in 2011, while the afl–cio blames the agreement for sending 700,000 american manufacturing jobs to mexico over that time . 
u . s .  congressional approval for nafta would have been impossible without addressing public concerns about nafta's environmental impact . 
a 2015 study found that mexico's welfare increased by 1.31% as a result of the nafta tariff reductions ,  and that mexico's intra-bloc trade increased by 118% . 
many american small businesses depend on exporting their products to canada or mexico under nafta . 
nafta then replaced the previous canada-us fta . 
the report also estimated that nafta added $80 billion to the us economy since its implementation ,  equivalent to a 0.5% increase in us gdp . 
in 2015, the congressional research service concluded that the `` net overall effect of nafta on the us economy appears to have been relatively modest ,  primarily because trade with canada and mexico accounts for a small percentage of us gdp . 
nafta also sought to eliminate non-tariff trade barriers and to protect the intellectual property rights on traded products . 
the paris commitments are voluntary ,  and nafta's are compulsory . 
 ''national lampoon '' was started by harvard graduates and `` harvard lampoon '' alumni doug kenney ,  henry beard and robert hoffman in 1969, when they first licensed the `` lampoon '' name for a monthly national publication . 
national lampoon was an american humor magazine which ran from 1970 to 1998.
national lampoon's most successful sales period was 1973–75.
in 1980, a paperback compilation book ,  `` national lampoon foto funnies '' which appeared as a part of national lampoon comics ,  was published . 
it was also during this time that lemmings  -lrb-  national lampoon  -rrb-  show and the national lampoon radio hour show was broadcast ,  bringing interest and acclaim to the national lampoon brand with magazine talent like writer michael o'donoghue that would go on to write for saturday night live with many of the players transitioning from lemmings  -lrb-  national lampoon  -rrb-  and the national lampoon radio hour . 
at that time ,  the `` national lampoon '' magazine entered a period of precipitous decline . 
 ''national lampoon '' was a monthly magazine for most of its publication history . 
j2 communications' focus was to make money by licensing out the brand name `` national lampoon '' . 
a number of the `` national lampoon '''s most acerbic and humorous covers were designed or overseen by gross ,  including:
at that point `` national lampoon '' was considered valuable only as a brand name that could be licensed out to other companies . 
in 1985, matty simmons  -lrb-  who had been working only on the business end of the lampoon up to that point  -rrb-  took over as editor-in-chief . 
the magazine sold yellow binders with the lampoon logo ,  designed to store a year's worth of issues . 
at the same time ,  the '' national lampoon show's `` john belushi and gilda radner left the troupe to join the original septet of '' snl's '' not ready for primetime players . 
the first issue was april 1970; by november of that year ,  michael c .  gross had become the art director . 
a non-disclosure agreement  -lrb-  nda  -rrb-  may be classified as unilateral ,  bilateral ,  or multilateral:
when presented with a unilateral nda ,  some parties may insist upon a bilateral nda ,  even though they anticipate that only one of the parties will disclose information under the nda . 
a multilateral nda can be advantageous because the parties involved review ,  execute ,  and implement just one agreement . 
a bilateral nda  -lrb-  sometimes referred to as a mutual nda or a two-way nda  -rrb-  involves two parties where both parties anticipate disclosing information to one another that each intends to protect from further disclosure . 
the expression `` network effect '' is applied to positive network externalities as in the case of the telephone . 
p2p networks positively affect property rights . 
network effect relates to the intellectual commons in a positive way . 
the network effect can create a bandwagon effect as the network becomes more valuable and more people join ,  resulting in a positive feedback loop . 
according to metcalfe ,  the rationale behind the sale of networking cards was that the cost of the network was directly proportional to the number of cards installed ,  but the value of the network was proportional to the square of the number of users . 
network effects were popularized by robert metcalfe ,  stated as metcalfe's law . 
author ,  high-tech entrepreneur rod beckstrom presented a mathematical model for describing networks that are in a state of positive network effect at blackhat and defcon in 2009 and also presented the `` inverse network effect '' with an economic model for defining it as well . 
critical fission reactors are the most common type of nuclear reactor . 
with the news of fission neutrons from uranium fission ,  szilárd immediately understood the possibility of a nuclear chain reaction using uranium . 
not all fissionable isotopes can sustain a chain reaction . 
the most common fission process is binary fission ,  and it produces the fission products noted above ,  at 95±15 and 135±15 u . 
in nuclear physics and nuclear chemistry ,  nuclear fission is either a nuclear reaction or a radioactive decay process in which the nucleus of an atom splits into smaller parts  -lrb-  lighter nuclei  -rrb-  . 
nuclear fission can occur without neutron bombardment as a type of radioactive decay . 
in the years after world war ii ,  many countries were involved in the further development of nuclear fission for the purposes of nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons . 
in a nuclear reactor or nuclear weapon ,  the overwhelming majority of fission events are induced by bombardment with another particle ,  a neutron ,  which is itself produced by prior fission events . 
see fission products  -lrb-  by element  -rrb-  for a description of fission products sorted by element . 
the strategic importance of nuclear weapons is a major reason why the technology of nuclear fission is politically sensitive . 
all fissionable and fissile isotopes undergo a small amount of spontaneous fission which releases a few free neutrons into any sample of nuclear fuel . 
in engineered nuclear devices ,  essentially all nuclear fission occurs as a `` nuclear reaction '' — a bombardment-driven process that results from the collision of two subatomic particles . 
fissionable ,  non-fissile isotopes can be used as fission energy source even without a chain reaction . 
nuclear fission in fissile fuels are the result of the nuclear excitation energy produced when a fissile nucleus captures a neutron . 
several heavy elements ,  such as uranium ,  thorium ,  and plutonium ,  undergo both spontaneous fission ,  a form of radioactive decay and `` induced fission '' ,  a form of nuclear reaction . 
this type of fission  -lrb-  called spontaneous fission  -rrb-  is rare except in a few heavy isotopes . 
fission is a form of nuclear transmutation because the resulting fragments are not the same element as the original atom . 
some work in nuclear transmutation had been done . 
there ,  the news on nuclear fission was spread even further ,  which fostered many more experimental demonstrations . 
in such a reaction ,  free neutrons released by each fission event can trigger yet more events ,  which in turn release more neutrons and cause more fission . 
the chemical element isotopes that can sustain a fission chain reaction are called nuclear fuels ,  and are said to be `` fissile '' . 
the total `` prompt fission '' energy amounts to about 181 mev ,  or ~ 89% of the total energy which is eventually released by fission over time . 
however ,  this process cannot happen to a great extent in a nuclear reactor ,  as too small a fraction of the fission neutrons produced by any type of fission have enough energy to efficiently fission u-238  -lrb-  fission neutrons have a mode energy of 2 mev ,  but a median of only 0.75 mev ,  meaning half of them have less than this insufficient energy  -rrb-  . 
just as the term nuclear `` chain reaction '' would later be borrowed from chemistry ,  so the term `` fission '' was borrowed from biology . 
while the fundamental physics of the fission chain reaction in a nuclear weapon is similar to the physics of a controlled nuclear reactor ,  the two types of device must be engineered quite differently  -lrb-  see nuclear reactor physics  -rrb-  . 
producing a fission chain reaction in natural uranium fuel was found to be far from trivial . 
however ,  much was still unknown about fission and chain reaction systems . 
gaiman wrote two series for marvel comics . 
gaiman was able to read at the age of four . 
in late 2008, gaiman released a new children's book ,  `` the graveyard book '' . 
gaiman's work is known for a high degree of allusiveness . 
neil richard mackinnon gaiman  -lrb-  ; born neil richard gaiman ,  10 november 1960 -rrb- is an english author of short fiction ,  novels ,  comic books ,  graphic novels ,  audio theatre ,  and films . 
gaiman is overseeing `` the sandman universe '' ,  a line of comic books published by vertigo . 
gaiman appeared as himself on `` the simpsons '' episode `` the book job '' ,  which broadcast on 20 november 2011.
in 2015, starz greenlighted a series adaptation of gaiman's novel `` american gods '' . 
the 1996 novelisation of gaiman's teleplay for the bbc mini-series `` neverwhere '' was his first solo novel . 
gaiman is a supporter and board member of the comic book legal defense fund . 
gaiman has said roger zelazny was the author who influenced him the most ,  with this influence particularly seen in gaiman's literary style and the topics he writes about . 
gaiman wrote the 1996 bbc dark fantasy television series `` neverwhere '' . 
after the novel was published ,  the website evolved into a more general official neil gaiman website . 
gaiman has not written a direct sequel to `` american gods '' but he has revisited the characters . 
neil gaiman was featured in the `` history channel '' documentary `` comic book superheroes unmasked '' . 
 ''american gods '' became one of gaiman's best-selling and multi-award-winning novels upon its release in 2001.
in 2009, gaiman wrote a two-part batman story for dc comics to follow `` batman r . i . p . `` 
gaiman's 2009 newbery medal winning book `` the graveyard book '' will be made into a movie ,  with ron howard as the director . 
in 2011, it was announced that gaiman would be writing the script to a new film version of `` journey to the west '' . 
in 2007, gaiman it was announced that after ten years in development ,  the feature film of ``  '' would finally begin production with a screenplay by gaiman that he would direct for warner independent . 
gaiman generally posts to the blog describing the day-to-day process of being neil gaiman and writing ,  revising ,  publishing ,  or promoting whatever the current project is . 
gaiman produced two stories for dc's `` secret origins '' series in 1989.
in september 2016, neil gaiman announced that he had been working for some years on retellings of norse mythology . 
one of gaiman's most commented-upon friendships is with the musician tori amos ,  a `` sandman '' fan who became friends with gaiman after making a reference to `` neil and the dream king '' on her 1991 demo tape . 
gaiman is married to songwriter and performer amanda palmer ,  with whom he has an open marriage . 
this legal battle was brought by gaiman and the specifically formed marvels and miracles ,  llc ,  which gaiman created to help sort out the legal rights surrounding marvelman . 
the greek word has the primary meaning of `` nubile young woman; bride ,  young wife '' and is not associated with deities in particular . 
nymphs were the frequent target of satyrs . 
nymphs in such groupings could belong to any of the classes mentioned above  -lrb-  naiades ,  oreades ,  and so on  -rrb-  . 
the word `` nymphet '' is used to identify a sexually precocious girl . 
a nymph  -lrb-   `` nýmphē , ``  ancient: modern:   -rrb-  in greek mythology is a minor female nature deity typically associated with a particular location or landform . 
due to the depiction of the mythological nymphs as females who mate with men or women freely and without care ,  the term is often related to women who are perceived as behaving similarly . 
universal law is the law of nature . 
however ,  an even earlier set of laws is attributed to the seven laws of noah . 
while others distinguish between natural law and natural right . 
of these ,  aristotle is often said to be the father of natural law . 
the best evidence of aristotle's having thought there was a natural law comes from the `` rhetoric '' ,  where aristotle notes that ,  aside from the `` particular '' laws that each people has set up for itself ,  there is a `` common '' law that is according to nature . 
contemporarily ,  the concept of natural law is closely related to the concept of natural rights . 
over the next decades the church of the east became increasingly nestorian in doctrine ,  leading to it becoming known alternatively as the nestorian church . 
nestorius and his teachings were eventually condemned as heretical at the council of ephesus in 431, and again at the council of chalcedon in 451, which led to the nestorian schism; churches supporting nestorian teachings broke with the rest of the christian church . 
the persian patriarch babai  -lrb-  497–502 -rrb- reiterated and expanded upon the church's esteem for theodore ,  solidifying the church's adoption of nestorianism . 
nestorianism became a distinct sect following the nestorian schism ,  beginning in the 430s . 
after that time ,  however ,  nestorianism went into decline . 
the church survived these trials under the guidance of patriarch aba i ,  who had converted to christianity from zoroastrianism . 
in response to pleas for assistance from the syrian church ,  armenian prelates issued a letter addressed to persian christians reaffirming their condemnation of the nestorianism as heresy . 
in 1999, klein published the book `` no logo '' ,  which for many became a manifesto of the anti-globalization movement . 
klein's third book ,  `` the shock doctrine: the rise of disaster capitalism '' ,  was published on september 4, 2007.
klein has written on various current issues ,  such as the iraq war . 
klein's fifth book ,  `` no is not enough: resisting trump's shock politics and winning the world we need '' was published in june 2017.
in summer 2009, on the occasion of the publication of the hebrew translation of her book `` the shock doctrine '' ,  klein visited israel ,  the west bank ,  and gaza ,  combining the promotion of her book and the bds campaign . 
klein's fourth book ,  `` this changes everything: capitalism vs .  the climate '' was published in september 2014.
klein was also a spokesperson for the protest against the spotlight on tel aviv at the 2009 toronto international film festival ,  a spotlight that klein said was a very selective and misleading portrait of israel . 
in november 2017, the democracy in europe movement 2025 announced that klein had been appointed to their advisory panel . 
since 2009, klein’s attention has turned to environmentalism ,  with particular focus on climate change ,  the subject of her book `` this changes everything ''  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- . 
the book appears to claim that these shocks are in some cases intentionally encouraged or even manufactured . 
naomi klein was born in montreal ,  quebec ,  and brought up in a jewish family with a history of peace activism . 
klein's `` fences and windows ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- is a collection of her articles and speeches written on behalf of the anti-globalization movement  -lrb-  all proceeds from the book go to benefit activist organizations through the fences and windows fund  -rrb-  . 
klein spent much of her teenage years in shopping malls ,  obsessed with designer labels . 
in march 2008, klein was the keynote speaker at the first national conference of the alliance of concerned jewish canadians . 
nsaids work by inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase enzymes  -lrb-  cox-1 and/or cox-2 -rrb- . 
by inhibiting physiological cox activity ,  all nsaids increase the risk of kidney disease and ,  through a related mechanism ,  heart attack . 
the effectiveness of nsaid's for treating non-cancer chronic pain and cancer-related pain in children and adolescents is not clear . 
aspirin ,  the only nsaid able to irreversibly inhibit cox-1, is also indicated for antithrombosis through inhibition of platelet aggregation . 
just as the class p can be thought of as the tractable problems  -lrb-  cobham's thesis  -rrb-  ,  so nc can be thought of as the problems that can be efficiently solved on a parallel computer . 
the parallel computer in the definition can be assumed to be a `` parallel ,  random-access machine ''  -lrb-  pram  -rrb-  . 
production and processing of `` nori '' is an advanced form of agriculture . 
 ''nori '' is sometimes also used as a form of food decoration . 
 ''nori '' is commonly used as a wrap for sushi and `` onigiri '' . 
the word ``  ''nori '' '' first appeared in an english-language publication in `` c . p . 
several grades of `` nori '' are available in the united states . 
the question then arises: what role does reason play in motivating moral behaviour ? 
these theories mainly offered the use of overarching moral principles to resolve difficult moral decisions . 
social structure and motivation can make morality binding in a sense ,  but only because it makes moral norms feel inescapable ,  according to foot . 
it can be unclear what it means to say that a person `` ought to do x because it is moral ,  whether they like it or not '' . 
one of the examples cited in johnston's book is that of j .  d .  rockefeller deciding where to build his first major oil refinery . 
integrative negotiation often involves a higher degree of trust and the formation of a relationship . 
each seeks to accord the other enough benefit that it will hold to the agreement that gives the first party an agreeable outcome ,  and vice versa . 
additionally ,  negotiators can use certain communication techniques to build a stronger relationship and develop more meaningful negotiation solution . 
people negotiate daily ,  often without considering it a negotiation . 
they may also work under other titles ,  such as diplomats ,  legislators ,  or brokers . 
since prospect theory indicates that people value losses more than gains and are more risk-averse about losses ,  concession-convergence bargaining is likely to be more acrimonious and less productive of an agreement
a method of fa may be used by nfp users to identify these fertile times . 
the first organization to teach a symptothermal method was founded in 1971.
systems of fertility awareness may be referred to as fertility awareness–based methods  -lrb-  fab methods  -rrb- ; the term fertility awareness method  -lrb-  fam  -rrb-  refers specifically to the system taught by toni weschler . 
development of fertility awareness methods is ongoing . 
fertility awareness methods may be used to avoid pregnancy ,  to achieve pregnancy ,  or as a way to monitor gynecological health . 
women who are breastfeeding a child and wish to avoid pregnancy may be able to practice the lactational amenorrhea method  -lrb-  lam  -rrb-  . 
these monitors may use bbt-only systems ,  they may analyze urine test strips ,  they may use symptothermal observations ,  they may monitor the electrical resistance of saliva and vaginal fluids ,  or a combination of any of these factors . 
the two-day method ,  a mucus-only system ,  and cyclebeads and icyclebeads  -lrb-  the digital version  -rrb-  ,  based on the standard days method ,  are designed to be both effective and simple to teach ,  learn ,  and use . 
the calendar-rhythm method is also considered a calendar-based method ,  though it is not well defined and has many different meanings to different people . 
calendar rules may set a standard number of days ,  specifying that  -lrb-  depending on a woman's past cycle lengths  -rrb-  the first three to six days of each menstrual cycle are considered infertile . 
methods of identifying infertile days have been known since antiquity ,  but scientific knowledge gained during the past century has increased the number and variety of methods . 
on 7 july 2014, a route for the nicaragua canal was approved . 
the water to fill the canal's giant locks would come from the artificial lake ,  not from lake nicaragua . 
the canal and other associated projects would be financed by investors throughout the world and would generate jobs for nicaragua and other central american countries . 
at each oceanic canal entrance ,  breakwaters and port facilities would have been constructed . 
transit time would have been about 30 hours . 
for comparison ,  the panama canal handled 12,855 transits in 2009.
the nicaraguan canal  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  formally the nicaraguan canal and development project  -lrb-  also referred to as the nicaragua grand canal ,  or the grand interoceanic canal  -rrb-  was a proposed shipping route through nicaragua to connect the caribbean sea  -lrb-  and therefore the atlantic ocean  -rrb-  with the pacific ocean . 
stratfor indicated that after 10 years ,  ownership shares would periodically be handed over to nicaragua ,  so that after 50 years nicaragua would be the majority shareholder . 
the nicaragua canal project saw business rivalry greatly intensify in late 2014.
even with the panama canal expansion project ,  which began commercial operation to modern new panamax vessels on 26 june 2016, some ships would be too big for the panama canal . 
disposal of excavation material would have been done along the canal in designated disposal areas typically within 3 km of the canal . 
a channel would have to be dug in the lake bottom ,  as it is not deep enough for large vessels to transit the canal . 
in january 2014, wang and president ortega issued a statement that the project's construction would begin in december 2014, and that it would be completed in 2019.
both the west canal and the east canal would each have one lock with 3 consecutive chambers to raise ships to the level of lake nicaragua that has an average water elevation of 31.3 m ,  range 30.2–33.0 m .  the western brito lock would be inland from the pacific ,  and the eastern camilo lock would be inland from the caribbean sea . 
on 26 september 2012, the nicaraguan government and the newly formed hong kong nicaragua canal development group  -lrb-  hknd  -rrb-  signed a memorandum of understanding that committed hknd to financing and building the `` nicaraguan canal and development project '' . 
as the original panama canal still has capacity for panamax-sized shipping and panama has completed its panama canal expansion project ,  adding more capacity and allowing transit for even larger new panamax size ships ,  projections for the nicaragua canal's traffic may be optimistic . 
thus ,  competition may undermine the nicaragua canal's economic viability if it was ever built . 
however ,  the 2015 nicaraguan government's report on the canal states: `` the nicaraguan government and hknd will guarantee that persons and families on the route of the canal's construction will have living conditions superior to those they currently have without the canal . `` 
in the 2020s ,  growth in global maritime trade is expected to cause congestion and delays in transit through the panama canal without a complementary route through the isthmus ,  and by 2030, the volume of trade that a nicaragua canal could serve would have grown by 240% . 
some nu metal musicians have rejected the label nu metal and have tried to distance themselves from it . 
nu metal guitar riffs occasionally are similar to those of death metal . 
during the 2010s ,  there has been a minor nu metal revival; many bands that combine nu metal with other genres  -lrb-  for example ,  metalcore  -rrb-  emerged and some nu metal bands from the 1990s and early 2000s returned to the nu metal sound . 
during the 2010s ,  there was a discussion within media of a possible nu metal revival because of bands fusing nu metal with other genres ,  the return of nu metal bands ,  extant bands going back to the nu metal genre and nu metal bands forming . 
slipknot prefer to distance themselves from other nu metal groups ,  describing their own music as `` metal metal '' and equate their link to nu metal as a coincidence of their time of emergence . 
nu metal is often influenced by hip hop . 
in addition to criticizing nu metal ,  many heavy metal musicians and fans of heavy metal music have rejected nu metal as a legitimate subgenre of heavy metal ,  saying it is not `` true heavy metal '' . 
soulfly moved away from the nu metal style and moved to styles such as death metal and thrash metal . 
nu metal is also known as nü-metal and aggro-metal . 
most of nu metal's mainstream popularity sharply declined in 2003 and 2004.
in 2014, davis spoke about the nu metal label ,  saying:
nu metal is one of the key genres of the new wave of american heavy metal . 
nu metal fashion has been compared to hip hop fashion . 
in 1994, korn released their self-titled debut album ,  which is widely considered the first nu metal album . 
although some nu metal bands ,  such as limp bizkit and linkin park have rapping in their music ,  some nu metal bands ,  such as godsmack and staind ,  do not feature rapping . 
nu metal bassists and drummers are often influenced by funk and hip hop ,  respectively ,  adding to nu metal's rhythmic nature . 
in the mid-to-late 2000s ,  many nu metal bands experimented with other genres and sounds . 
tool ,  an alternative metal band cited as influential to nu metal ,  influenced the bands mudvayne ,  limp bizkit ,  and otep . 
some musicians who influenced nu metal have tried to distance themselves from the subgenre and its bands . 
despite the mtv report that nu metal was declining ,  nu metal remained extremely popular with bands such as linkin park ,  godsmack ,  trapt ,  and evanescence . 
it originally used the termcap library ,  which was used in other programs ,  such as the vi editor . 
ncurses can use either terminfo  -lrb-  with extensible data  -rrb-  or termcap . 
few  -lrb-  mytinfo was an older exception  -rrb-  use both . 
there are hundreds of programs which use ncurses . 
ncurses is a part of the gnu project . 
nba entertainment and nba tv studios are directed out of offices located in secaucus ,  new jersey . 
on july 1, 2011, at 12:01 am ,  the nba announced another lockout . 
bryant won his first bill russell nba finals most valuable player award in his 13th season after leading the lakers to their first nba championship since the departure of shaquille o'neal . 
the iconic logo debuted in 1971  -lrb-  with a small change to the typeface on the nba wordmark in 2017 -rrb- and would remain a fixture of the nba brand . 
the san antonio spurs won their first championship ,  and first by a former aba team ,  by beating the new york knicks ,  who were the first ,  and are the only ,  eighth seed to ever make it to the nba finals . 
japanese-american wataru misaka broke the nba color barrier in the 1947–48 season when he played for the new york knicks . 
in 1995, the nba expanded to canada with the addition of the vancouver grizzlies and the toronto raptors . 
in 1998, the nba owners began a lockout which lasted 191 days and was settled on january 18, 1999.
veterans shawn marion ,  jason kidd ,  jason terry ,  and peja stojaković celebrated their first nba championship . 
in spacecraft dynamics ,  precession  -lrb-  a change in the first euler angle  -rrb-  is sometimes referred to as nutation . 
in greek mythology ,  narcissus  -lrb-  ; ancient greek: νάρκισσος `` nárkissos ''  -rrb-  was a hunter from thespiae in boeotia who was known for his beauty . 
drifting mines were occasionally used during world war i and world war ii . 
after world war i the drifting contact mine was banned ,  but was occasionally used during world war ii . 
during the gulf war ,  iraqi naval mines severely damaged and  . 
the next major use of mines was during the russo-japanese war of 1904–1905.
the earliest mines were usually of this type . 
the american civil war of 1861-1865 also saw the successful use of mines . 
during the next 72 hours ,  33 mines were swept . 
it was used on the delaware river as a drift mine . 
naval mines may be classified into three major groups; contact ,  remote and influence mines . 
the drifting mines were much harder to remove than tethered mines after the war ,  and they caused about the same damage to both sides . 
the imperial russian navy ,  a pioneer in mine warfare ,  successfully deployed mines against the ottoman navy during both the crimean war and the russo-turkish war  -lrb-  1877-1878 -rrb- . 
the mines employed were controlled mines ,  anchored to the bottoms of the harbors and detonated under control from large mine casemates on shore . 
during world war i ,  mines were used extensively to defend coasts ,  coastal shipping ,  ports and naval bases around the globe . 
mining campaigns could have devastating consequences . 
this was profligate and ineffectual; used against acoustic mines at penang ,  200 bombs were needed to detonate just 13 mines . 
in the summer of 1984, magnetic sea mines damaged at least 19 ships in the red sea . 
the jacobi mine was designed by german-born ,  russian engineer jacobi ,  in 1853.
limpet mines are a special form of contact mine that are manually attached to the target by magnets and remain in place . 
el moutawakel was also one of the ambassadors of the morocco bid for the 2026 fifa world cup . 
in 2007, el moutawakel was named the minister of sports in the upcoming cabinet of morocco . 
her medal also meant the breakthrough for sporting women in morocco and other mostly muslim countries . 
the official name of the club is north melbourne ,  but the club has gone under several other aliases over the years . 
in 1877, the club was re-established as a stand-alone club under the new name of `` hotham '' . 
 ''north melbourne will be premiers in 1993 ''  -rrb-  ,  or to remove the words `` north melbourne '' during the period when the club was competing only as the kangaroos . 
the vfa grew to 13 senior clubs in the 1890s . 
since then ,  north melbourne has played the most friday night games of any afl club . 
 ''join in the chorus '' is the official anthem of the north melbourne football club . 
on 18 march 2005, the north melbourne football club held a special gala dinner entitled the `` north story '' to celebrate the 80th anniversary of north's admission to the vfl ,  and the 30th anniversary of the club's first vfl premiership . 
the north melbourne football club is a non-profit organisation limited by guarantee . 
 ''join in the chorus '' is believed to be the oldest club anthem of any afl club and has been associated with north from its early vfa days . 
the club was eliminated in the preliminary finals in 2000 against melbourne . 
north melbourne is unique in its structure ,  because from 1986 to 2006 the club was privately owned and limited by shares . 
in 1999, north melbourne defeated carlton in the 1999 grand final by 35 points . 
in 1876 north melbourne disbanded and many of its player and members joined albert-park ,  giving the club such a strong north melbourne character that many described it as `` albert-park `` cum '' north melbourne '' . 
north was now without a playing team and the essendon association club was now without a ground ,  so as a matter of convenience the two clubs amalgamated so they could compete in the 1922 season . 
north was kicked out of the vfa during the 1907/08 offseason as a result of applying to join the vfl ,  before the local community reestablished the north melbourne football club under a new committee ,  successfully enabling the club to play in the vfa in the 1908 season . 
north merged with fellow vfa football club west melbourne in 1907, which at the time had lost its home ground . 
the north melbourne football club ,  nicknamed the kangaroos or less formally the roos ,  the kangas or north ,  is the fourth oldest australian rules football club in the australian football league  -lrb-  afl  -rrb-  and is one of the oldest sporting clubs in australia and the world . 
in 1996, the club was in advanced talks with the fitzroy football club to create the north fitzroy kangaroos football club ,  which was in a terminal financial condition ,  to a merger between the two clubs; however ,  fitzroy ultimately merged with the brisbane bears instead . 
onfield ,  the 1950s and 1960s were lean years for north melbourne ,  though the club did secure two consecutive night premierships in 1965 and 1966.
in 2014, north melbourne finished 6th at the end of the home and away season and reached 40,000 members for the first time in the club's history . 
as they drew in the 1977 grand final ,  which north went on to win in the replay by 27 points . 
the 21st century did not begin well for north melbourne . 
essendon  -lrb-  main  -rrb-  – north and essendon have a chequered history that dates back to the late 19th century; firstly in 1896, essendon had north excluded from the vfl because both clubs drew supporters from the same area . 
the board governs the club as well as selecting a chairman to head the club through a majority vote of directors . 
port adelaide lost their first finals appearance to north melbourne in 1999 in the qualifying final ,  and in port's premiership year of 2004, north beat port by 92 points ,  however ,  port beat north melbourne in the 2007 preliminary final by 87 points . 
he continued an active role with north melbourne until his death in 1921.
north melbourne reverted to public company in november 2008.
port adelaide – port adelaide often refer to north melbourne as the `` bogey side '' and as of 2018, north lead 21–12.
also ,  north melbourne will play essendon on good friday 19 april 2019.
four other states are known or believed to possess nuclear weapons: india ,  pakistan ,  and north korea have openly tested and declared that they possess nuclear weapons ,  while israel is deliberately ambiguous regarding its nuclear weapons status . 
the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons ,  commonly known as the non-proliferation treaty or npt ,  is an international treaty whose objective is to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and weapons technology ,  to promote cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy ,  and to further the goal of achieving nuclear disarmament and general and complete disarmament . 
he wrote letters to stalin pleading for forgiveness and rehabilitation ,  but through wiretaps of bukharin's private conversations with stalin's enemies ,  stalin knew bukharin's repentance was insincere . 
having helped stalin achieve unchecked power against the left opposition ,  bukharin found himself easily outmaneuvered by stalin . 
nikolai bukharin was born on september 27  -lrb-  october 9, new style  -rrb-  ,  1888, in moscow . 
bukharin was forced to renounce his views under pressure . 
after lenin's death in 1924, bukharin became a full member of the politburo . 
bukharin believed passionately in the promise of world revolution . 
bukharin had acted as mandelstam's political protector since 1922.
nikolai bukharin was a cartoonist who left many cartoons of contemporary soviet politicians . 
according to zhores and roy medvedev in `` the unknown stalin ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  bukharin's last message to stalin stated `` koba ,  why do you need me to die ? 
stalin's collectivization policy proved to be as disastrous as bukharin predicted ,  but stalin had by then achieved unchallenged authority in the party leadership . 
there are several interpretations of bukharin's motivations  -lrb-  besides being coerced  -rrb-  in the trial . 
trotsky ,  the prime force behind the left opposition ,  was defeated by a triumvirate formed by stalin ,  zinoviev ,  and kamenev ,  with the support of bukharin . 
after the ratification of the treaty ,  bukharin resumed his responsibilities within the party . 
however ,  stalin's decision to proceed with collectivisation drove the two men apart ,  and bukharin was expelled from the politburo in 1929.
russian historian yury zhukov stated that nikolai bukharin's portraits of joseph stalin were the only ones drawn from the original ,  not from a photograph . 
the thesis would become a hallmark of stalinism . 
in phonetics ,  a nasal ,  also called a nasal occlusive ,  nasal stop in contrast with a nasal fricative ,  or nasal continuant ,  is an occlusive consonant produced with a lowered velum ,  allowing air to escape freely through the nose . 
most nasals are voiced ,  and in fact ,  the nasal sounds and are among the most common sounds cross-linguistically . 
the nuvistor is a type of vacuum tube announced by rca in 1959.
in 2000, `` no logo '' was short-listed for the `` guardian '' first book award in 2000.
no logo: taking aim at the brand bullies is a book by the canadian author naomi klein . 
in this book ,  klein criticized nike so severely that nike published a point-by-point response . 
the book comprises four sections: `` no space '' ,  `` no choice '' ,  `` no jobs '' ,  and `` no logo '' . 
the final section of the book discusses various movements that have sprung up during the 1990s . 
pro logo '' . 
the book begins by tracing the history of brands . 
graduates of the national war college include numerous current and former flag officers ,  general officers ,  and u . s .  ambassadors . 
ambassador to libya j .  christopher stevens; the late brigadier general john ray budner formerly in command of the north american air defense command combat operations center; and former u . s .  air force chief of staff norton a .  schwartz; one of the initial nuclear theorists bernard brodie was a founding faculty member . 
mid-level and senior military officers who are likely to be promoted to the most senior ranks are selected to study at the war college in preparation for higher staff and command positions . 
it is not known exactly when norn became extinct . 
the features of norn grammar were very similar to the other scandinavian languages . 
norn is an extinct north germanic language that was spoken in the northern isles  -lrb-  orkney and shetland  -rrb-  off the north coast of mainland scotland and in caithness in the far north of the scottish mainland . 
orkney and shetland were pledged to james iii in 1468 and 1469 respectively ,  and it is with these pledges that the replacement of norn with scots is most associated . 
with a population of 36,347  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  it is the sixth-largest city in sardinia . 
nuoro is the hometown of grazia deledda ,  the only italian woman to win  -lrb-  1926 -rrb- the nobel prize in literature . 
after the fall of the western roman empire ,  sardinia was held first by the vandals and then by the byzantines . 
besides other major international events ,  the nürburgring has seen the brief return of formula one racing ,  as the 1984 european grand prix was held at the track ,  followed by the 1985 german grand prix . 
prior to the 2013 german grand prix both mark webber and lewis hamilton said they like the track . 
the new track was completed in 1984 and named `` gp-strecke ''  -lrb-  : literally ,  ``  ''grand prix course '' ''  -rrb-  . 
this extended the gp track from  ,  while at the same time ,  the hockenheimring was shortened from  . 
the track was completed in spring of 1927, and the adac eifelrennen races were continued there . 
although being one of the slower corners on the `` nordschleife '' ,  the `` karussell '' is perhaps its most famous and one of its most iconic- it is one of two berm-style ,  banked corners on the track . 
once this part of the track is dealt with ,  the drivers are near the end of the lap; with two more corners to negotiate before the 2.135 km long `` döttinger höhe '' straight . 
following the success and first world championship of michael schumacher ,  a second german f1 race was held at the nürburgring between 1995 and 2006, called the european grand prix ,  or in 1997 and 1998, the luxembourg grand prix . 
also ,  several rounds of the german motorcycle grand prix were held ,  mostly on the `` südschleife '' ,  but the hockenheimring and the solitudering were the main sites for grand prix motorcycle racing . 
the german motorcycle grand prix was held for the last time on the old nürburgring in 1980, also permanently moving to hockenheim . 
in 1929 the full nürburgring was used for the last time in major racing events ,  as future grands prix would be held only on the `` nordschleife '' . 
jackie stewart nicknamed the old track `` the green hell '' . 
drivers are flat out for some time here . 
in 2014, the new owners of the nürburgring were unable to secure a deal to continue hosting the german grand prix in the odd numbered years ,  so the 2015 and 2017 german grands prix were cancelled . 
after world war ii ,  racing resumed in 1947 and in 1951, the `` nordschleife '' of the nürburgring again became the main venue for the german grand prix as part of the formula one world championship  -lrb-  with the exception of 1959, when it was held on the avus in berlin  -rrb-  . 
it is now mostly gone  -lrb-  in part due to the construction of the new circuit  -rrb-  or converted to a normal public road ,  but since 2005 a vintage car event has been hosted on the old track layout ,  including part of the parking area . 
since its opening in 1927, the track has been used by the public for the so-called `` touristenfahrten '' ,  i . e . 
on 5 august 1961, during practice for the 1961 german grand prix ,  phil hill became the first person to complete a lap of the `` nordschleife '' in under 9 minutes ,  with a lap of 8 minutes 55.2 seconds  -lrb-  153.4 km/h or 95.3 mph  -rrb-  in the ferrari 156 `` sharknose '' formula one car . 
on rare occasions ,  it is possible to drive both the `` nordschleife '' and the grand prix circuit combined . 
bmw sauber’s nick heidfeld made history on 28 april 2007 as the first driver in over thirty years to tackle the nürburgring `` nordschleife '' track in a contemporary formula one car . 
in the early 1920s ,  adac eifelrennen races were held on public roads in the eifel mountains . 
as a result ,  early in the season it was decided that the 1976 race would be the last to be held on the old circuit . 
jeremy clarkson noted in `` top gear '' in 2004 that `` over the years this track has claimed over 200 lives '' . 
right before `` flugplatz '' is `` quiddelbacher-höhe ''  -lrb-  peak ,  as in `` mountain summit ''  -rrb-  ,  where the track crosses a bridge over the bundesstraße 257.
by the late 1960s ,  the `` nordschleife '' and many other tracks were becoming increasingly dangerous for the latest generation of f1 cars . 
the northern hemisphere is the half of earth that is north of the equator . 
the arctic is the region north of the arctic circle . 
between the arctic circle and the tropic of cancer lies the northern temperate zone . 
for the same reason ,  flows of air down toward the northern surface of the earth tend to spread across the surface in a clockwise pattern . 
noun classes should not be confused with noun classifiers . 
in linguistics ,  a noun class is a particular category of nouns . 
lng is also being used in aircraft . 
besides use in road vehicles ,  cng can also be used in aircraft . 
three main types of activated carbons for ang are: activated carbon fiber  -lrb-  acf  -rrb-  ,  powdered activated carbon  -lrb-  pac  -rrb-  ,  activated carbon monolith . 
depending on the current market price for jet fuel and lng ,  fuel for an lng-powered aircraft could cost 5,000 rubles  -lrb-  us$100 -rrb- less per tonne ,  roughly 60% ,  with considerable reductions to carbon monoxide ,  hydrocarbon and nitrogen oxide emissions . 
this produced water often has a high content of salt and other dissolved minerals that occur in the formation . 
the processed natural gas may then be used for residential ,  commercial and industrial uses . 
non-hydrocarbons such as carbon dioxide ,  nitrogen ,  helium  -lrb-  rarely  -rrb-  ,  and hydrogen sulfide must also be removed before the natural gas can be transported . 
it is estimated that there are about 900 000 km³ of `` unconventional '' gas such as shale gas ,  of which 180 000 km³ may be recoverable . 
the by-products of this processing include: ethane ,  propane ,  butanes ,  pentanes ,  and higher molecular weight hydrocarbons ,  hydrogen sulfide  -lrb-  which may be converted into pure sulfur  -rrb-  ,  carbon dioxide ,  water vapor ,  and sometimes helium and nitrogen . 
sea transport using cng carrier ships that are now under development may be competitive with lng transport in specific conditions . 
the actual heating value when the water formed does not condense is the net heat of combustion and can be as much as 10% less . 
the us energy information administration reports the following emissions in million metric tons of carbon dioxide in the world for 2012:
in the united states ,  the average volume of water used per hydraulic fracture has been reported as nearly 7,375 gallons for vertical oil and gas wells prior to 1953, nearly 197,000 gallons for vertical oil and gas wells between 2000–2010, and nearly 3 million gallons for horizontal gas wells between 2000–2010.
cng-specific engines ,  however ,  use a higher compression ratio due to this fuel's higher octane number of 120–130.
a million decatherms is a trillion btu ,  roughly a billion cubic feet of natural gas . 
however ,  considering the tens of millions of structures that use the fuel ,  the individual risk of using natural gas is very low . 
natural gas heating systems may cause carbon monoxide poisoning if unvented or poorly vented . 
cng is transported at high pressure ,  typically above  . 
subsidence may affect ecosystems ,  waterways ,  sewer and water supply systems ,  foundations ,  and so on . 
cng is a cleaner and also cheaper alternative to other automobile fuels such as gasoline  -lrb-  petrol  -rrb-  and diesel . 
natural gas can be used to produce hydrogen ,  with one common method being the hydrogen reformer . 
natural gas is often described as the cleanest fossil fuel . 
quantities of natural gas are measured in normal cubic meters  -lrb-  cubic meter of gas at `` normal '' temperature and pressure   -rrb-  or standard cubic feet  -lrb-  cubic foot of gas at `` standard '' temperature and pressure   -rrb-  ,   . 
locally produced electricity and heat using natural gas powered combined heat and power plant  -lrb-  chp or cogeneration plant  -rrb-  is considered energy efficient and a rapid way to cut carbon emissions . 
the field was found in the deep waters off the northern coast of egypt and eni claims that it will be the largest ever in the mediterranean and even the world . 
hydrogen has many applications: it is a primary feedstock for the chemical industry ,  a hydrogenating agent ,  an important commodity for oil refineries ,  and the fuel source in hydrogen vehicles . 
natural gas can be `` associated ''  -lrb-  found in oil fields  -rrb-  ,  or `` non-associated ''  -lrb-  isolated in natural gas fields  -rrb-  ,  and is also found in coal beds  -lrb-  as coalbed methane  -rrb-  . 
after a brief drop ,  withdrawals have been increasing nearly every year since 2006, with 2017 production at 33.4 million cubic feet . 
a gigajoule  -lrb-  gj  -rrb-  is a measure approximately equal to half a barrel  -lrb-  250 lbs  -rrb-  of oil ,  or 1 million btus ,  or of gas . 
shale gas is natural gas produced from shale . 
major proven resources  -lrb-  in cubic kilometers  -rrb-  are world 187 300  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  iran 33 600  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  russia 32 900  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  qatar 25 100  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  turkmenistan 17 500  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- and the united states 8500  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- . 
the volume of water used to hydraulically fracture wells varies according to the hydraulic fracturing technique . 
domestic appliances ,  furnaces ,  and boilers use low pressure ,  usually 6 to 7 inches of water  -lrb-  6 '' to 7 '' wc  -rrb-  ,  which is about 0.25 psig . 
a nuclear chain reaction occurs when one single nuclear reaction causes an average of one or more subsequent nuclear reactions ,  this leading to the possibility of a self-propagating series of these reactions . 
the nuclear chain reaction releases several million times more energy per reaction than any chemical reaction . 
when a fissile atom undergoes nuclear fission ,  it breaks into two or more fission fragments . 
fission chain reactions occur because of interactions between neutrons and fissile isotopes  -lrb-  such as u  -rrb-  . 
inhour is a unit of reactivity of a nuclear reactor . 
nuclear fission weapons require a mass of fissile fuel that is prompt supercritical . 
chemical chain reactions were first proposed by german chemist max bodenstein in 1913, and were reasonably well understood before nuclear chain reactions were proposed . 
however ,  such explosions do not happen during a chain reaction ,  but rather as a result of energy from radioactive beta decay ,  after the fission chain reaction has been stopped . 
it is impossible for a nuclear power plant to undergo a nuclear chain reaction that results in an explosion of power comparable with a nuclear weapon ,  but even low-powered explosions due to uncontrolled chain reactions ,  that would be considered `` fizzles '' in a bomb ,  may still cause considerable damage and meltdown in a reactor . 
the concept of a nuclear chain reaction was reportedly first hypothesized by hungarian scientist leó szilárd on september 12, 1933.
chain reactions naturally give rise to reaction rates that grow  -lrb-  or shrink  -rrb-  exponentially ,  whereas a nuclear power reactor needs to be able to hold the reaction rate reasonably constant . 
in these devices ,  the nuclear chain reaction begins after increasing the density of the fissile material with a conventional explosive . 
without delayed neutrons ,  changes in reaction rates in nuclear reactors would occur at speeds that are too fast for humans to control . 
