1958 saw the publication of robeson's `` manifesto-autobiography '' ,  `` here i stand '' . 
robeson is also a member of the american theater hall of fame . 
in 1952, robeson was awarded the international stalin prize by the soviet union . 
ashcroft and robeson's relationship ended in 1932, following which robeson and essie reconciled ,  although their relationship was permanently scarred . 
paul leroy robeson was born in princeton ,  new jersey ,  in 1898, to reverend william drew robeson and maria louisa bustill . 
robeson stayed at the barvikha sanatorium until september 1961, when he left for london . 
edgecombe avenue itself was later co-named paul robeson boulevard . 
robeson entered new york university school of law in fall 1919.
nikita khrushchev's denunciation of stalinism at the 1956 party congress silenced robeson on stalin ,  though robeson continued to praise the soviet union . 
in 1948, robeson was preeminent in henry a .  wallace's bid for the president of the united states ,  during which robeson traveled to the deep south ,  at risk to his own life ,  to campaign for him . 
robeson eventually met with farmer ,  but because he was asked to denounce communism and the soviet union in order to assume a place in the mainstream ,  robeson adamantly declined . 
robeson and brown performed a series of concert tours in america from january 1926 until may 1927.
early in his life ,  robeson was one of the most influential participants in the harlem renaissance . 
in 1963, robeson returned to the united states and for the remainder of his life lived in seclusion . 
robeson disagreed and made his own travel arrangements ,  arriving in moscow in march 1961.
in 1956, robeson was called before huac after he refused to sign an affidavit affirming that he was not a communist . 
robeson also developed a sympathy for china's side in the second sino-japanese war . 
during a hiatus in new york ,  robeson learned that essie was several months pregnant . 
in order to isolate robeson politically ,  the house un-american activities committee  -lrb-  huac  -rrb-  subpoenad jackie robinson to comment on robeson's paris speech . 
on january 23, 1976, following complications of a stroke ,  robeson died in philadelphia at the age of 77.
between 1925 and 1961, robeson recorded and released some 276 distinct songs ,  many of which were recorded several times . 
returning to the united states in 1939, during world war ii robeson supported the american and allied war efforts . 
robeson and essie then flew to yalta to rest and spend time with nikita khrushchev . 
robeson's last british film was `` the proud valley ''  -lrb-  1940 -rrb- ,  set in a welsh coal-mining town . 
during the tour he was introduced to faith bandler who interested the robesons in the plight of the australian aborigines . 
tass said the ship's crew would establish a robeson museum aboard the tanker . 
robeson was recruited by pollard to play for the nfl's akron pros while he continued his law studies . 
robeson worked briefly as a lawyer ,  but he renounced a career in law due to widespread racism . 
in 1928, robeson played `` joe '' in the london production of the american musical `` show boat '' ,  at the theatre royal ,  drury lane . 
polaris ,  designated α ursae minoris  -lrb-  latinized to alpha ursae minoris ,  abbreviated alpha umi ,  α umi  -rrb-  ,  commonly the north star or pole star ,  is the brightest star in the constellation of ursa minor . 
in those times ,  it was not yet as close to the north celestial pole as it is now ,  and used to rotate around the pole . 
in shakespeare's play julius caesar ,  written around 1599, caesar describes himself as being `` as constant as the northern star '' ,  though in caesar's time there was no constant northern star . 
in 2016, the international astronomical union organized a working group on star names  -lrb-  wgsn  -rrb-  to catalog and standardize proper names for stars . 
in the tuareg berber language in north africa the north star is known as ``  ''tatrit tan tamasna '' '' which means: `` star of the plains '' or `` star of the desert '' and that indicates its central role in navigating the vast deserts . 
in antiquity ,  polaris was not yet the closest naked-eye star to the celestial pole ,  and the entire constellation of ursa minor was used for navigation rather than any single star . 
the modern name `` polaris '' is shortened from new latin `` stella polaris '' `` polar star '' ,  coined in the renaissance era ,  when the star had approached the celestial pole to within a few degrees . 
it was invoked as a symbol of steadfastness in poetry ,  as `` steadfast star '' by spenser . 
the two smaller companions are polaris b ,  a f3 main-sequence star orbiting at a distance of 2400 astronomical units  -lrb-  au  -rrb-  ,  and polaris ab  -lrb-  or p  -rrb-  ,  a very close f6 main-sequence star with an 18.8 au radius orbit and  . 
the midpoint formula_7 of the perpendicular from the focus formula_3 onto the directrix formula_5 is called `` vertex '' and the line formula_10 the `` axis of symmetry '' of the parabola . 
any parabola can be repositioned and rescaled to fit exactly on any other parabola—that is ,  all parabolas are geometrically similar . 
if one introduces cartesian coordinates ,  such that formula_11 and the directrix has the equation formula_12 one obtains for a point formula_13 from formula_14 the equation formula_15.
the focus–directrix property of the parabola and other conic sections is due to pappus . 
an answer to either set of questions will allow us to devise a means of answering the other . 
american philosopher roderick chisholm in his `` theory of knowledge '' details the problem of the criterion with two sets of questions:
the cambrian spans from 541 million years to 485 million years and is the first period of the paleozoic era of the phanerozoic . 
there are six periods in the paleozoic era: cambrian ,  ordovician ,  silurian ,  devonian ,  carboniferous  -lrb-  alternatively subdivided into the mississippian period and the pennsylvanian period  -rrb-  ,  and the permian . 
the devonian spanned from 416 million years to 359 million years ago . 
the permian spanned from 299 to 252 million years ago and was the last period of the paleozoic era . 
recovery of life in the sea may have been much faster . 
the silurian spanned from 443 to 416 million years ago . 
the carboniferous spanned from 359 million to 299 million years ago . 
pakistan  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the islamic republic of pakistan  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a country in south asia . 
in the 1971 conflict over east pakistan the jamaat-e-islami fought the bengali nationalists on the pakistan army's side . 
the flora and fauna of pakistan suffer from a number of problems . 
in response to india's support for the insurgency in east pakistan ,  preemptive strikes on india by pakistan's air force ,  navy ,  and marines sparked a conventional war in 1971 that resulted in an indian victory and east pakistan gaining independence as bangladesh . 
pakistan's political experience is essentially related to the struggle of indian muslims to regain the power they lost to british colonisation . 
however ,  in west pakistan the conflict was described as a civil war as opposed to a war of liberation . 
the name `` pakistan '' literally means `` land of the pure '' in urdu and persian . 
many birds sighted in pakistan are migratory ,  coming from europe ,  central asia ,  and india . 
the creation of pakistan was never fully accepted by many british leaders ,  among them lord mountbatten . 
some of the earliest ancient human civilisations in south asia originated from areas encompassing present-day pakistan . 
after pakistan's first ever general elections the 1973 constitution was created by an elected parliament . 
pakistan occupies a geopolitically important location at the crossroads of south asia ,  the middle east ,  and central asia . 
with dominion status in the commonwealth of nations ,  independent pakistan had two british monarchs before it became a republic . 
pakistan's desire for an international organization of muslim countries was fulfilled in the 1970s when the organization of islamic conference  -lrb-  oic  -rrb-  was formed . 
a regional and middle power ,  pakistan has the sixth-largest standing armed forces in the world and is also a nuclear power as well as a declared nuclear-weapons state ,  the second in south asia and the only nation in the muslim world to have that status . 
as of the general elections held in 2013, the three main political parties in the country are: the centre-right conservative pakistan muslim league-n; the centre-left socialist ppp; and the centrist and third-way pakistan movement for justice  -lrb-  pti  -rrb-  . 
china in 2017, was reported to have a population of 1,379,302,711.
china has great physical diversity . 
china originally had an estimated number of 50,000 rivers . 
historically there have been instances of imperialism in china . 
one group of people in china are the tibetans . 
however ,  there are many other ethnic groups in china that have their own definitions of what concerns the territory of china . 
china’s hydropower potential is the largest in the world . 
based on 2005 estimates ,  14.86%  -lrb-  about   -rrb-  of china’s total land area is arable . 
further north ,  the inner mongolian plateau ,  between 900–1,500 m in elevation ,  arcs north up the spine of china and becomes the greater hinggan range of northeast china . 
the taihang mountains form the western side of the triangular north china plain . 
further east are the taihang mountains of hebei ,  the dominant topographical feature of north china . 
china has bilateral investment agreements with 100+ countries and economies . 
the structure of government in china is in the framework of a socialist republic which is run by a single party: the communist party of china . 
india does not recognize pakistan’s ceding lands to china in a 1964 boundary agreement . 
china lies in two of the world's major ecozones ,  the palearctic and the indomalaya . 
beijing ,  at the north tip of the north china plain ,  is shielded by the intersection of the taihang and yan mountains . 
the qin mountains ,  a continuation of the kunlun mountains ,  divides the north china plain from the yangtze river delta and is the major physiographic boundary between the two great parts of china proper . 
china is involved in a complex dispute with malaysia ,  philippines ,  vietnam ,  and possibly brunei over the spratly  -lrb-  nansha  -rrb-  islands in the south china sea . 
like other densely populated areas of china ,  the plain is subject to floods and earthquakes . 
india: on may 15, 2015, mr .  li from china and mr .  modi from india held talks at the great hall of the people during modi's china tour . 
for both infant and maternal mortality rates ,  china stands at 118 in comparison to the world . 
china also controls the paracel  -lrb-  xisha  -rrb-  islands ,  which are also claimed by vietnam ,  and asserts a claim to the japanese-administered senkaku  -lrb-  diaoyu  -rrb-  islands in the east china sea . 
the world's tallest mountains ,  the karakorum ,  pamirs and tian shan divide china from south and central asia . 
according to the world bank ,  as of 2015, china’s total arable land was estimated at 119,000,000 hectares . 
china's territorial waters are principally marginal seas of the western pacific ocean . 
the population of china fluctuated between 30 million and 86 million during the han dynasty . 
under the tang dynasty ,  the population increased from 45 million to 80 million over the course of 200 years . 
the prc controls mainland china ,  hainan island ,  hong kong ,  macau and some south china sea islands . 
the 89 million-member communist party of china  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  continues to dominate government . 
china practices a form of democracy that it calls socialist consultative democracy . 
the politics of the people's republic of china takes place in a framework of a socialist republic run by a single party ,  the communist party of china ,  headed by general secretary . 
the president of china is the titular head of state ,  serving as the ceremonial figurehead under national people's congress . 
china's complex political ,  ethnic and ideological mosaic ,  much less uniform beneath the surface than in the idealized story of the publicity department of the communist party of china ,  resists simple categorization . 
by the june 2010, china had 420 million internet users . 
internet use also has soared in china from about 60,000 internet users in 1995 to 22.5 million users in 2000; by 2005 the number had reached 103 million . 
the central people's broadcasting station controlled china's national radio network . 
in 1987 china central television  -lrb-  cctv  -rrb-  ,  the state network ,  managed china's television programs . 
see internet in the people's republic of china
on average ,  china's mobile subscribers increased by 4.78 million each month . 
by 1987 china possessed a diversified telecommunications system that linked all parts of the country by telephone ,  telegraph ,  radio ,  and television . 
china imported its first mobile phone telecommunication facilities in 1987 and it took a decade for the number of subscribers to reach 10 million . 
communications in china were established rapidly in the early 1950s . 
the people's republic of china possesses a diversified communications system that links all parts of the country by internet ,  telephone ,  telegraph ,  radio ,  and television . 
china’s 2.7 million kilometers of optical fiber telecommunication cables by 2003 assisted greatly in the modernization process . 
china is the largest user of largest voice calling over the internet or voice over internet protocol  -lrb-  voip  -rrb-  services with 51 million tom-skype users as of november 2007.
in march 2012, the ministry of industry and information technology announced that china has 1.01 billion mobile phone subscribers; of these ,  144 million are connected to 3g networks . 
the television system grew rapidly in 1980s ,  with 90 television stations and 80 million sets by 1987.
in 2007 china has 467 airports . 
rail is the major mode of transport in china . 
all other trolleybus systems in china opened after 1950.
today ,  china is linked by an evolving network of highways  -lrb-  china national highways  -rrb-  and expressways  -lrb-  expressways of china  -rrb-  . 
currently there over 30 rapid transit systems in mainland china . 
china is in the midst of a massive upgrade of its transport infrastructure . 
as of early 2017, china has 5636.5 km of under construction rail transit lines . 
china is the world's leading producer of electric bicycles . 
air china owns 17.5% of cathay pacific  -lrb-  second largest shareholder  -rrb-  and the civil aviation administration of china  -lrb-  caac  -rrb-  ,  an administrative agency of the state council ,  owns majority and controlling stakes in china southern airlines ,  china eastern airlines ,  and air china . 
transport in china has experienced major growth and expansion in recent years . 
transport in mainland china is regulated by a new agency formed from the ministry of communications ,  the ministry of railways ,  the civil aviation administration of china . 
in 2002 the government merged the nine largest airlines into three regional groups based in beijing ,  shanghai ,  and guangzhou ,  respectively: air china ,  china eastern airlines ,  and china southern airlines ,  which operate most of china's external flights . 
the high-speed service is mainly operated by china railway high-speed . 
more than 30 projects are being implemented or studied in china in some big cities . 
china ,  however ,  is planning to build a new airport in nagqu ,  tibet in 2011.
the civil aviation administration of china  -lrb-  caac  -rrb-  ,  also called the general administration of civil aviation of china ,  was established as a government agency in 1949 to operate china's commercial air fleet . 
by the end of 2010, the total length of all public roads in china reached 3,984,000 km ,  with about of expressways by the end of 2012.
in another move to better capitalize and reform the rail system ,  the ministry of railways established three public shareholder-owned companies in 2003: china railways container transport company ,  china railway special cargo service company ,  and china railways parcel express company . 
in 2005 china had a total road network of more than 3.3 million km ,  although approximately 1.47 million km of this network are classified as `` village roads '' . 
china also has established rail links between seaports and interior export-processing zones . 
china has improved ties with russia . 
chinese's own view of china was viewed at 96% . 
this weakened china's power both regionally and internally . 
by the late 1950s ,  relations between china and the soviet union had become so divisive that in 1960, the soviets unilaterally withdrew their advisers from china . 
the united states was a strong supporter of china after japan invaded in 1937.
since 1997, around 40 african heads of state have visited china . 
china's focus especially was on the third world as china portrayed itself as the legitimate leader of the global battle against imperialism and capitalism . 
china has also expanded several levels of cooperation with the caribbean region . 
japan after 1860 modernized its military after western models and was far stronger than china . 
like most other nations ,  china's foreign policy is carried out by the ministry of foreign affairs . 
the foreign relations of the people's republic of china  -lrb-  prc  -rrb-  ,  commonly known to most states as china ,  guides the way in which china interacts with foreign nations and expresses its political ,  economic and cultural strengths ,  weaknesses and values . 
china also reached a 2000 agreement with vietnam to resolve some differences over their maritime borders ,  though disagreements remain over some islands in the south china sea . 
a weakened china lost wars with japan and gave up nominal control over the ryukyu islands in 1870 to japan . 
with china's growing influence around the world ,  beijing has now set its efforts on africa . 
china has border and maritime disputes ,  including with vietnam in the gulf of tonkin and with japan . 
these conflicts have had a negative impact on china's reputation in many parts of the world . 
china's foreign policy today is summarized as strategic relations with neighboring countries and the world's superpowers to strive for china's national interest ,  and to create a favorable environment for china's domestic development for perpetual competition in the world in the long-run . 
manchuria was a contested zone with russia and japan trying to take control away from china . 
the two sides established diplomatic relations in 1972, and japanese investment in china was important in the early years of china's economic reforms and ever since . 
for centuries china had claimed suzerain authority over numerous adjacent areas . 
during the cold war ,  a few smaller nations also entered in alliances with china ,  such as burundi under michel micombero . 
following the dissolution of the soviet union in late 1991, china also opened diplomatic relations with the republics of the former soviet union . 
the word 'phonology'  -lrb-  as in `` the phonology of english ''  -rrb-  can also refer to the phonological system  -lrb-  sound system  -rrb-  of a given language . 
sign languages have a phonological system equivalent to the system of sounds in spoken languages . 
for example ,  in thai ,  hindi ,  and quechua ,  there are minimal pairs of words for which aspiration is the only contrasting feature  -lrb-  two words can have different meanings but with the only difference in pronunciation being that one has an aspirated sound where the other has an unaspirated one  -rrb-  . 
the word `` phonology '' comes from ancient greek  ,  `` phōnḗ '' ,  `` voice ,  sound , ``  and the suffix `` -logy ''  -lrb-  which is from greek  ,  `` lógos '' ,  `` word ,  speech ,  subject of discussion ''  -rrb-  . 
second ,  actual speech ,  even at a word level ,  is highly co-articulated ,  so it is problematic to expect to be able to splice words into simple segments without affecting speech perception . 
this is one of the fundamental systems which a language is considered to comprise ,  like its syntax and its vocabulary . 
different linguists therefore take different approaches to the problem of assigning sounds to phonemes . 
the same principles have been applied to the analysis of sign languages  -lrb-  see phonemes in sign languages  -rrb-  ,  even though the sub-lexical units are not instantiated as speech sounds . 
there are also differing ideas as to whether this grouping of sounds is purely a tool for linguistic analysis ,  or reflects an actual process in the way the human brain processes a language . 
the prometheus myth first appeared in the late 8th-century bce greek epic poet hesiod's `` theogony ''  -lrb-  507–616 -rrb- . 
the poem offers direct biblical connotations for the prometheus myth which was unseen in any of the ancient greek poets dealing with the prometheus myth in either drama ,  tragedy ,  or philosophy . 
in another myth ,  prometheus establishes the form of animal sacrifice practiced in ancient greek religion . 
 ''prometheus bound '' ,  perhaps the most famous treatment of the myth to be found among the greek tragedies ,  is traditionally attributed to the 5th-century bce greek tragedian aeschylus . 
neither of these would guide percy shelley in his poetic retelling and reintegration of the prometheus myth . 
olga raggio in her study `` the myth of prometheus '' attributes plato in the `` protagoras '' as an important contributor to the early development of the prometheus myth . 
hesiod revisits the story of prometheus and the theft of fire in `` works and days ''  -lrb-  42–105 -rrb- . 
shakespeare's symbolic reference to the `` heat '' associated with prometheus's fire is to the association of the gift of fire to the mythological gift or theological gift of life to humans . 
some two dozen other greek and roman authors retold and further embellished the prometheus myth from as early as the 5th century bce  -lrb-  diodorus ,  herodorus  -rrb-  into the 4th century ad . 
the three most prominent aspects of the prometheus myth have parallels within the beliefs of many cultures throughout the world  -lrb-  see creation of man from clay ,  theft of fire ,  and references for eternal punishment  -rrb-  . 
 ''prometheus bound '' also includes two mythic innovations of omission . 
years later ,  the greek hero heracles  -lrb-  hercules  -rrb-  slays the eagle and frees prometheus from his torment  -lrb-  520–528 -rrb- . 
 ''pramantha '' was the tool used to create fire . 
this drawing is perhaps one of the most intense examples of the visualization of the myth of prometheus from the renaissance period . 
other minor details attached to the myth include: the duration of prometheus' torment; the origin of the eagle that ate the titan's liver  -lrb-  found in pseudo-apollodorus and hyginus  -rrb- ; pandora's marriage to epimetheus  -lrb-  found in pseudo-apollodorus  -rrb- ; myths surrounding the life of prometheus' son ,  deucalion  -lrb-  found in ovid and apollonius of rhodes  -rrb- ; and prometheus' marginal role in the myth of jason and the argonauts  -lrb-  found in apollonius of rhodes and valerius flaccus  -rrb-  . 
within the pages of his introduction to the chelsea house edition on percy shelley ,  harold bloom also identifies the six major schools of criticism opposing shelley's idealized mythologizing version of the prometheus myth . 
to the socratic greeks ,  one important aspect of the discussion of religion would correspond to the philosophical discussion of 'becoming' with respect to the new testament syncretism rather than the ontological discussion of 'being' which was more prominent in the ancient greek experience of mythologically oriented cult and religion . 
 ''frankenstein; or ,  the modern prometheus '' ,  written by mary shelley when she was 18, was published in 1818, two years before percy shelley's above mentioned play . 
the most ancient sources for understanding the origin of the prometheus myths and legends have been argued to rely on the images represented in the titanomachy ,  a lost epic of the cosmological struggle between the greek gods and their parents ,  the titans . 
the two major authors to have an influence on the development of the myths and legends surrounding the titan prometheus during the socratic era of greater athens were aeschylus and plato . 
in greek mythology ,  prometheus  -lrb-  ;  ,   ,  meaning `` forethought ''  -rrb-  is a titan ,  culture hero ,  and trickster figure who is credited with the creation of man from clay ,  and who defies the gods by stealing fire and giving it to humanity ,  an act that enabled progress and civilization . 
in his book titled `` prometheus: archetypal image of human existence '' ,  c .  kerényi states the key contrast between goethe's version of prometheus with the ancient greek version . 
this same image would also be used later in the rome of the augustan age as documented by furtwangler . 
the greek city of panopeus had a cult statue that was supposed to honor prometheus for having created the human race there . 
a similar rendering is also found at the great altar of zeus at pergamon from the second century bce . 
phenylketonuria  -lrb-  pku  -rrb-  is an inborn error of metabolism that results in decreased metabolism of the amino acid phenylalanine . 
the damage done to the brain if pku is untreated during the first months of life is not reversible . 
classical pku ,  and its less severe forms `` mild pku '' and `` mild hyperphenylalaninemia '' are caused by a mutated gene for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase  -lrb-  pah  -rrb-  ,  which converts the amino acid phenylalanine  -lrb-  `` phe ''  -rrb-  to other essential compounds in the body ,  in particular tyrosine . 
pku is an autosomal recessive metabolic genetic disorder . 
babies born to mothers who have poorly treated pku may have heart problems ,  a small head ,  and low birth weight . 
because the mother's body is able to break down phenylalanine during pregnancy ,  infants with pku are normal at birth . 
in general ,  however ,  outcomes for people treated for pku are good . 
 ''diurnal parallax '' is a parallax that varies with rotation of the earth or with difference of location on the earth . 
 ''lunar parallax ''  -lrb-  often short for `` lunar horizontal parallax '' or `` lunar equatorial horizontal parallax ''  -rrb-  ,  is a special case of  -lrb-  diurnal  -rrb-  parallax: the moon ,  being the nearest celestial body ,  has by far the largest maximum parallax of any celestial body ,  it can exceed 1 degree . 
the lunar horizontal parallax at any time depends on the linear distance of the moon from the earth . 
the diagram  -lrb-  above  -rrb-  for stellar parallax can illustrate lunar parallax as well ,  if the diagram is taken to be scaled right down and slightly modified . 
astronomers also use the word `` parallax '' as a synonym for `` distance measurement '' by other methods: see parallax  -lrb-  disambiguation  -rrb- #astronomy . 
stellar parallax is most often measured using annual parallax ,  defined as the difference in position of a star as seen from the earth and sun ,  i .  e .  the angle subtended at a star by the mean radius of the earth's orbit around the sun . 
to measure large distances ,  such as the distance of a planet or a star from earth ,  astronomers use the principle of parallax . 
paralysis is most often caused by damage in the nervous system ,  especially the spinal cord . 
if a clot is large enough to block one or both femoral arteries ,  there may be hind leg paralysis because the major source of blood flow to the hind leg is blocked . 
paralysis is a loss of muscle function for one or more muscles . 
after 24 hours ,  the chance of recovery declines rapidly ,  since with continued pressure ,  the spinal cord tissue deteriorates and dies . 
cats with a heart murmur may develop blood clots that travel through arteries . 
paralysis can occur in localised or generalised forms ,  or it may follow a certain pattern . 
once the distributors from united artists viewed the film ,  they were very enthusiastic and left the film as it is . 
kubrick and his partners purchased the film rights from cobb's widow for $10,000.
the film was nominated for a bafta award under the category best film but lost to `` the bridge on the river kwai '' . 
the film begins with a voiceover describing the trench warfare situation of world war i up to 1916.
the film cost slightly less than $1 million and just about broke even . 
on its release ,  the film's anti-military tone was subject to criticism and censorship . 
all three men are then executed . 
on june 29, 1999, mgm home entertainment released the film on dvd; later that year ,  on september 22, the film was also released in the vhs format . 
it won the prestigious grand prix of the belgian film critics association . 
gene siskel ,  on a section of `` siskel and ebert's at the movies '' show regarding stanley kubrick films ,  declared `` paths of glory '' to be one of the all-time great films and `` almost '' as good as kubrick's `` dr .  strangelove '' . 
paths of glory is a 1957 american anti-war film by stanley kubrick based on the novel of the same name by humphrey cobb . 
set during world war i ,  the film stars kirk douglas as colonel dax ,  the commanding officer of french soldiers who refuse to continue a suicidal attack ,  after which dax attempts to defend them against a charge of cowardice in a court-martial . 
the only female character in the film ,  the woman who sings `` the faithful hussar '' ,  was portrayed by german actress christiane harlan  -lrb-  credited in the film as susanne christian  -rrb-  . 
another major effort is in model building where model builders develop ideas for what physics may lie beyond the standard model  -lrb-  at higher energies or smaller distances  -rrb-  . 
the current state of the classification of all elementary particles is explained by the standard model . 
the standard model has been found to agree with almost all the experimental tests conducted to date . 
in addition ,  there are important non-collider experiments that also attempt to find and understand physics beyond the standard model . 
in recent years ,  measurements of neutrino mass have provided the first experimental deviations from the standard model . 
the primary goal ,  which is pursued in several distinct ways ,  is to find and understand what physics may lie beyond the standard model . 
the proton has a mass of around ; some other massive quantum particles ,  both elementary and hadronic ,  have yet higher masses . 
that term was deprecated after the formulation of the standard model during the 1970s ,  in which the large number of particles was explained as combinations of a  -lrb-  relatively  -rrb-  small number of more fundamental particles . 
a river which courses through a very tight meander is also sometimes said to form a `` peninsula '' within the  -lrb-  almost closed  -rrb-  loop of water . 
physical geography  -lrb-  also known as geosystems or physiography  -rrb-  is one of the two major sub-fields of geography . 
plains are one of the major landforms on earth ,  where they are present on all continents ,  and would cover more than one-third of the world’s land area . 
plains occur as lowlands along the bottoms of valleys or on the doorsteps of mountains ,  as coastal plains ,  and as plateaus or uplands . 
peter altenberg  -lrb-  9 march 1859 – 8 january 1919 -rrb- was a writer and poet from vienna ,  austria . 
altenberg's detractors said he was a drug addict and a womanizer . 
altenberg ,  who never married ,  died on 8 january 1919, aged 59.
two selections have been translated ,  `` evocations of love ''  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- and `` telegrams of the soul: selected prose of peter altenberg ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- . 
the study sample consisted of 44 palestinian christians and 119 palestinian muslims . 
arab citizens of israel identify themselves as israeli ,  palestinian or arab . 
the origins of palestinians are complex and diverse . 
palestinian arabic is a subgroup of the broader levantine arabic dialect . 
palestinian music is well known throughout the arab world . 
both figures include palestinians in east jerusalem . 
after the war ,  there was a hiatus in palestinian political activity . 
according to the pcbs ,  there are an estimated 4,816,503 palestinians in the palestinian territories  ,  of whom 2,935,368 live in the west bank and 1,881,135 in the gaza strip . 
israel did not allow the palestinian refugees of the war to return to israel . 
this too was the case for palestinian literature up to the 1948 arab-israeli war ,  but following the palestinian exodus of 1948 it has become `` a literature written by palestinians '' regardless of their residential status . 
an independent palestinian state has not exercised full sovereignty over the land in which the palestinians have lived during the modern era . 
other groups of palestinians ,  such as the negev bedouins or druze may no longer self-identify as palestinian for political reasons . 
however ,  palestinian sovereignty over the areas claimed as part of the palestinian state remains limited ,  and the boundaries of the state remain a point of contestation between palestinians and israelis . 
similar to the structure of palestinian society ,  the palestinian field of arts extends over four main geographic centers: the west bank and gaza strip ,  israel ,  the palestinian diaspora in the arab world ,  and the palestinian diaspora in europe ,  the united states and elsewhere . 
the british census of 1922 registered 752,048 inhabitants in palestine ,  consisting of 660,641 palestinian arabs  -lrb-  christian and muslim arabs  -rrb-  ,  83,790 palestinian jews ,  and 7,617 persons belonging to other groups . 
palestinian literature forms part of the wider genre of arabic literature . 
following the 1948 establishment of israel ,  the use and application of the terms `` palestine '' and `` palestinian '' by and to palestinian jews largely dropped from use . 
in total ,  an estimated 600,000 palestinians are thought to reside in the americas . 
another very popular food is palestinian kofta or kufta . 
the palestinian national charter ,  as amended by the plo's palestinian national council in july 1968, defined `` palestinians '' as `` those arab nationals who ,  until 1947, normally resided in palestine regardless of whether they were evicted from it or stayed there . 
the historical record reveals an interplay between `` arab '' and `` palestinian '' identities and nationalism . 
the first palestinian nationalist organizations emerged at the end of the world war i . 
palestinians living in lebanon are deprived of basic civil rights . 
historian avi shlaim states that the palestinians' lack of sovereignty over the land has been used by israelis to deny palestinians their rights to self-determination . 
this subgenre has served as a way to politicize the palestinian issue through music . 
the 993,818 palestinian refugees in the gaza strip and 705,207 palestinian refugees in the west bank ,  who hail from towns and villages now located within the borders of israel ,  are included in these figures . 
since then ,  the new palestinian musical subgenre has grown to include artists in the palestinian territories ,  israel ,  great britain ,  the united states and canada . 
recent estimates of the cost to palestinians in property confiscations by israel from 1948 onwards has concluded that palestinians have suffered a net $300 billion loss in assets . 
the battle of karameh and the events of black september in jordan contributed to growing palestinian support for these groups ,  particularly among palestinians in exile . 
however ,  palestinian sport authorities have indicated that palestinians in the diaspora will be eligible to compete for palestine once the diplomatic and security situation improves . 
the israeli civil administration put the number of palestinians in the west bank at 2,657,029 as of may 2012.
ali qleibo ,  a palestinian anthropologist ,  has critiqued muslim historiography for assigning the beginning of palestinian cultural identity to the advent of islam in the 7th century . 
until the end of the 19th century ,  most palestinian muslim villagers in the countryside did not have local mosques . 
palestinian intellectuals ,  among them may ziade and khalil beidas ,  were an integral part of the arab intelligentsia . 
unrwa figures do not include some 274,000 people ,  or 1 in 5.5 of all arab residents of israel ,  who are internally displaced palestinian refugees . 
many palestinians have settled in the united states ,  particularly in the chicago area . 
he explained further that kassab's 1909 book `` palestine ,  hellenism ,  and clericalism '' noted in passing that `` the orthodox palestinian ottomans call themselves arabs ,  and are in fact arabs , ``  despite describing the arabic speakers of palestine as palestinians throughout the rest of the book . `` 
in 2008, minority rights group international estimated the number of palestinians in jordan to be about 3 million . 
in 2012, egypt deviated from this practice by granting citizenship to 50,000 palestinians ,  mostly from the gaza strip . 
palestinians who live or work in israel generally can also speak modern hebrew ,  as do some who live in the west bank and gaza strip . 
the palestinian people  -lrb-   ,  `` ash-sha‘b al-filasṭīnī ''  -rrb-  ,  also referred to as palestinians  -lrb-   ,  `` al-filasṭīniyyūn '' ,    -rrb-  or palestinian arabs  -lrb-   ,  `` al-'arabi il-filastini ''  -rrb-  ,  are an ethnonational group comprising the modern descendants of the peoples who have lived in palestine over the centuries ,  including jews and samaritans ,  and who today are largely culturally and linguistically arab . 
many palestinians themselves refer to jews as their `` awlâd 'ammnâ '' or paternal cousins . 
palestinian arabic ,  like other variations of the levantine dialect ,  exhibits substantial influences in lexicon from aramaic . 
1911 -rrb- ,  published in jaffa by issa and yusef al-issa ,  addressed its readers as `` palestinians '' . 
for research-oriented careers ,  students work toward a doctoral degree specializing in a particular field . 
the term `` physicist '' was coined by william whewell  -lrb-  also the originator of the term `` scientist ''  -rrb-  in his 1840 book `` the philosophy of the inductive sciences '' . 
a physicist is a scientist who specializes in the field of physics ,  which encompasses the interactions of matter and energy at all length and time scales in the physical universe . 
management of physics related work qualifies ,  and so does appropriate graduate student work . 
chartered physicist is considered to be equal in status to chartered engineer ,  which the iop also awards as a member of the engineering council uk ,  and other chartered statuses in the uk . 
the canadian association of physicists can appoint an official designation called the p .  phys . 
the south african institute of physics delivers a certification of professional physicists  -lrb-  pr . phys  -rrb-  . 
particular species of patents for inventions include biological patents ,  business method patents ,  chemical patents and software patents . 
the patent law was revised in 1844 - patent cost was lowered and importation patents were abolished . 
in the united states ,  in 2000 the cost of obtaining a patent  -lrb-  patent prosecution  -rrb-  was estimated to be from $10,000 to $30,000 per patent . 
a patent ,  being an exclusionary right ,  does not necessarily give the patent owner the right to exploit the invention subject to the patent . 
by the civil war about 80,000 patents had been granted . 
a patent is a form of intellectual property . 
a patent is requested by filing a written application at the relevant patent office . 
once filed ,  a patent application is `` prosecuted '' . 
once granted the patent is subject in most countries to renewal fees to keep the patent in force . 
this led to the diffusion of patent systems to other countries . 
the patent office generally has responsibility for the grant of patents ,  with infringement being the remit of national courts . 
commonly ,  a nation or a group of nations forms a patent office with responsibility for operating that nation's patent system ,  within the relevant patent laws . 
one effect of modern patent usage is that a small-time inventor ,  who can afford both the patenting process and the defense of the patent ,  can use the exclusive right status to become a licensor . 
the european patent office  -rrb-  also require annual renewal fees to be paid for a patent application before it is granted . 
some other types of intellectual property rights are also called `` patents '' in some jurisdictions: industrial design rights are called `` design patents '' in the us ,  plant breeders' rights are sometimes called `` plant patents '' ,  and utility models and `` gebrauchsmuster '' are sometimes called `` petty patents '' or `` innovation patents '' . 
a patent does not give a right to make or use or sell an invention . 
pythagoreanism also entailed a number of dietary prohibitions . 
during the sixth century bc ,  the number philosophy of the pythagoreans triggered a revolution in greek sculpture . 
dante alighieri was fascinated by pythagorean numerology and based his descriptions of hell ,  purgatory ,  and heaven on pythagorean numbers . 
the pythagorean theorem was known and used by the babylonians and indians centuries before pythagoras ,  but it is possible that he may have been the first one to introduce it to the greeks . 
pythagoras of samos  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an ancient ionian greek philosopher and the eponymous founder of pythagoreanism . 
percy bysshe shelley wrote an ode entitled `` to the pythagorean diet '' and leo tolstoy adopted the pythagorean diet himself . 
a revival of pythagorean teachings occurred in the first century bc when middle platonist philosophers such as eudorus and philo of alexandria hailed the rise of a `` new '' pythagoreanism in alexandria . 
the emperor hadrian's pantheon in rome was also built based on pythagorean numerology . 
numenius of apamea interpreted plato's teachings in light of pythagorean doctrines . 
this story seems to have originated from the writer neanthes ,  who told it about later pythagoreans ,  not about pythagoras himself . 
modern scholars debate whether these numerological teachings were developed by pythagoras himself or by the later pythagorean philosopher philolaus of croton . 
ten was regarded as the `` perfect number '' and the pythagoreans honored it by never gathering in groups larger than ten . 
pythagoras's biographers state that he also was the first to identify the five regular solids and that he was the first to discover the theory of proportions . 
they believed that odd numbers were masculine ,  that even numbers were feminine ,  and that the number five represented marriage ,  because it was the sum of two and three . 
iamblichus ,  in particular ,  presents the `` pythagorean way of life '' as a pagan alternative to the christian monastic communities of his own time . 
sizeable pythagorean communities existed in magna graecia ,  phlius ,  and thebes during the early fourth century bc . 
pythagoras influenced plato ,  whose dialogues ,  especially his `` timaeus '' ,  exhibit pythagorean teachings . 
the oldest known building designed according to pythagorean teachings is the porta maggiore basilica ,  a subterranean basilica which was built during the reign of the roman emperor nero as a secret place of worship for pythagoreans . 
two groups existed within early pythagoreanism: the `` mathematikoi ''  -lrb-  `` learners ''  -rrb-  and the `` akousmatikoi ''  -lrb-  `` listeners ''  -rrb-  . 
the number three also features prominently: the `` divine comedy '' has three parts and beatrice is associated with the number nine ,  which is equal to three times three . 
by this measure ,  whitehead declared that einstein and other modern scientists like him are `` following the pure pythagorean tradition . `` 
pythagorean teachings were known as `` symbols ''  -lrb-  `` symbolon ''  -rrb-  and members took a vow of silence that they would not reveal these symbols to non-members . 
most of the major sources on pythagoras's life are from the roman period ,  by which point ,  according to the german classicist walter burkert ,  `` the history of pythagoreanism was already .  .  .  the laborious reconstruction of something lost and gone . `` 
many philosophers still emerged from the classical tradition ,  as saw their philosophy as a way of life . 
important german philosophers and social thinkers included immanuel kant ,  georg wilhelm friedrich hegel ,  karl marx ,  max weber ,  georg simmel ,  and martin heidegger . 
early examples include: immanuel kant ,  johann gottlieb fichte ,  friedrich wilhelm joseph schelling ,  and georg wilhelm friedrich hegel . 
british social thought ,  with thinkers such as herbert spencer ,  addressed questions and ideas relating to political economy and social evolution . 
a philosopher is one who challenges what is thought to be common sense ,  doesn’t know when to stop asking questions ,  and reexamines the old ways of thought . 
gregory of nyssa ,  for example ,  describes how his sister macrina persuaded their mother to forsake `` the distractions of material life '' for a life of philosophy . 
in the fourth century ,  the word philosopher began to designate a man or woman who led a monastic life . 
bulero returns to earth and fires mayerson because mayerson was afraid to travel to the moon to rescue him . 
bulero is willing to take mayerson back to earth but refuses to after learning that mayerson did not inject himself with the toxin . 
on mars ,  mayerson buys some chew-z from eldritch ,  who appears in holographic form . 
both mayerson and fugate have precognitions of reports that bulero is going to be responsible for murdering eldritch . 
the novel opens shortly after barney mayerson ,  p . p . 
confusion gradually mounts for gumm . 
ragle gumm lives in the year 1959 in a quiet american suburb . 
gumm tries to escape the town and is turned back by kafkaesque obstructions . 
 ''a scanner darkly '' was one of the few dick novels to gestate over a long period of time . 
the rotoscoped film `` a scanner darkly '' was authorized by dick's estate . 
a scanner darkly is a science fiction novel by american writer philip k .  dick ,  published in 1977.
dick said in an interview ,  `` everything in `` a scanner darkly '' i actually saw . `` 
 ''a scanner darkly '' is a fictionalized account of real events ,  based on dick's experiences in the 1970s drug culture . 
the novel is one of dick's best-known works and served as the basis for a 2006 film of the same name ,  directed by richard linklater . 
in the afterword dick dedicates the book to those of his friends—he includes himself—who suffered debilitation or death as a result of their drug use . 
in 1974, french filmmaker jean-pierre gorin commissioned dick to write a screenplay for a `` ubik '' film . 
an audiobook version of `` ubik '' was released in 2008 by blackstone audio . 
dick's former wife tessa remarked that `` ubik is a metaphor for god . 
ubik  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a 1969 science fiction novel by american writer philip k .  dick . 
ubik is claimed to have been developed by her and several other half-lifers as a defense against jory . 
each chapter is introduced by a commercial advertising ubik as a different product serving a specific use . 
fitting also notes dick's effort to de-sacralize and commercialize ubik through the ironic advertising messages which begin each chapter . 
do androids dream of electric sheep ? 
rosen attempts to blackmail deckard to get him to drop the case ,  but deckard retests rachael and determines that rachael is ,  indeed ,  an android . 
and `` blade runner '' have been published:
in connection with deckard's mission ,  the novel explores the issue of what it is to be human and whether empathy is a purely human ability . 
meanwhile ,  the three remaining nexus-6 android fugitives plan how they can outwit deckard . 
three novels intended to serve as sequels to both `` do androids dream of electric sheep ? `` 
deckard uses the empathy test on resch to confirm that he is actually human and then on himself ,  finding that he has a sense of empathy for the androids . 
they continue the story of rick deckard and attempt to reconcile many of the differences between the novel and the 1982 film . 
critical reception of `` do androids dream of electric sheep ? `` 
radio free albemuth is a dystopian novel by philip k .  dick ,  written in 1976 and published posthumously in 1985.
as with `` valis '' ,  `` radio free albemuth '' deals with dick's highly personal style of christianity  -lrb-  or gnosticism  -rrb-  . 
john alan simon wrote ,  produced and directed a film adaptation of `` radio free albemuth '' . 
passports contain a statement of the nationality of the holder . 
consequently ,  comparatively few people held passports . 
a passport holder is normally entitled to enter the country that issued the passport ,  though some people entitled to a passport may not be full citizens with right of abode . 
for some countries ,  passports are required for some types of travel between their sovereign territories . 
a hong kong special administrative region passport  -lrb-  hksar passport  -rrb-  permits visa-free access to many more countries than ordinary prc passports . 
each country sets its own conditions for the issue of passports . 
many countries issue only one passport to each national  -lrb-  an exception is the family passport ,  see below under `` types ''  -rrb-  . 
in 1920, the league of nations held a conference on passports ,  the paris conference on passports & customs formalities and through tickets . 
separate passports for travel abroad existed or exist in the following countries:
internal passports are issued by some countries as an identity document . 
the strongest and weakest passports are as follows: a rough standardization exists in types of passports throughout the world ,  although passport types ,  number of pages and definitions can vary by country . 
while the united nations held a travel conference in 1963, no passport guidelines resulted from it . 
under some circumstances some countries allow people to hold more than one passport document . 
passport cards are issued to the id-1  -lrb-  credit card sized  -rrb-  standard . 
non-citizens in the two countries are issued special non-citizen passports as opposed to regular passports issued by the estonian and latvian authorities to citizens . 
danish citizens residing in greenland or faroe islands can choose between holding a danish eu passport and a greenlandic or faroese non-eu danish passport . 
a point of view shot  -lrb-  also known as pov shot ,  first-person shot or a subjective camera  -rrb-  is a short film scene that shows what a character  -lrb-  the subject  -rrb-  is looking at  -lrb-  represented through the camera  -rrb-  . 
supporting narrative elements are required to indicate the shot to the viewer as a pov shot . 
a pov shot need not be the strict point-of-view of an actual single character in a film . 
point-of-view ,  or simply p . o . v .  ,  camera angles record the scene from a particular player's viewpoint . 
pov shots were used extensively by alfred hitchock for various narrative effects . 
 ''persistence of vision '' can also be understood to mean the same as `` flicker fusion '' ,  the effect that vision seems to persist when a stream of light is repeatedly interrupted for very brief instances and can't really enter the eyes continuously . 
since its introduction ,  the term `` persistence of vision '' has been believed to be the explanation for motion perception in optical toys like the phenakistiscope and the zoetrope ,  and later in cinema . 
a propaganda film is a film that involves some form of propaganda . 
some film academics have noted film's great illusory abilities . 
from youngest to oldest they are:
the pliocene  -lrb-  ; also pleiocene  -rrb-  epoch is the epoch in the geologic timescale that extends from 5.333 million to 2.58 million years bp . 
as with other older geologic periods ,  the geological strata that define the start and end are well identified but the exact dates of the start and end of the epoch are slightly uncertain . 
it was often the name by which kings were recorded in the later annals and king lists . 
this is the combination of the deshret and hedjet crowns into a double crown ,  called the pschent crown . 
during the early days prior to the unification of upper and lower egypt ,  the deshret or the `` red crown '' ,  was a representation of the kingdom of lower egypt ,  while the hedjet ,  the `` white crown '' ,  was worn by the kings of the kingdom of upper egypt . 
the earliest example of a `` nebty '' name comes from the reign of king aha from the first dynasty . 
the red crown of lower egypt ,  the deshret crown ,  dates back to pre-dynastic times and symbolised chief ruler . 
the crowns may have been passed along to the successor . 
the horus name was adopted by the king ,  when taking the throne . 
also called the blue crown ,  the khepresh crown has been depicted since the new kingdom . 
the white crown of upper egypt ,  the hedjet ,  was worn in the predynastic period by scorpion ii ,  and ,  later ,  by narmer . 
depictions of pharaohs wearing the atef crown originate from the old kingdom . 
the hemhem crown is usually depicted on top of nemes ,  pschent ,  or deshret crowns . 
the paper is now held between a frisket and tympan  -lrb-  two frames covered with paper or parchment  -rrb-  . 
these are folded down ,  so that the paper lies on the surface of the inked type . 
after around 1800, iron presses were developed ,  some of which could be operated by steam power . 
gutenberg may have also been inspired by the paper presses which had spread through the german lands since the late 14th century and which worked on the same mechanical principles . 
the operation of a press became synonymous with the enterprise of printing ,  and lent its name to a new medium of expression and communication ,  `` the press '' . 
in the 19th century ,  the replacement of the hand-operated gutenberg-style press by steam-powered rotary presses allowed printing on an industrial scale . 
typically used for texts ,  the invention and global spread of the printing press was one of the most influential events in the second millennium . 
european printing presses of around 1600 were capable of producing about 1,500 impressions per workday . 
for many works prior to the printing press ,  the name of the author has been entirely lost . 
by the late 1930s or early 1940s ,  rotary presses had increased substantially in efficiency: a model by platen printing press was capable of performing 2,500 to 3,000 impressions per hour . 
the printing press was an important step towards the democratization of knowledge . 
their company koenig & bauer ag is still one of the world's largest manufacturers of printing presses today . 
by comparison ,  book printing in east asia did not use presses and was solely done by block printing . 
a printing press is a device for applying pressure to an inked surface resting upon a print medium  -lrb-  such as paper or cloth  -rrb-  ,  thereby transferring the ink . 
on the other hand ,  the printing press was criticized for allowing the dissemination of information which may have been incorrect . 
rafter's breakthrough came in 1997.
rafter finished 1993 with a ranking of 66.
rafter turned professional in 1991.
rafter won his first tour level match in 1993, at wimbledon . 
rafter was on the australian teams that won the world team cup in 1999 and 2001.
at the 1999 french open ,  rafter drew future world no . 
at the 2009 aegon masters tennis ,  rafter lost his opening round robin match against the 1987 wimbledon champion pat cash 2–6, 6–2, 10–6.
rafter won his first career singles title in 1994 in manchester . 
on australia day 2008, pat rafter was inducted into the australian open hall of fame . 
with party list pr ,  political parties define candidate lists and voters vote for a list . 
nevertheless ,  the number of candidates elected from the list is determined by the number of votes the list receives . 
voters typically have two votes ,  one for their district representative and one for the party list . 
some party list proportional systems with open lists use a two-tier compensatory system ,  as in denmark ,  norway ,  and sweden . 
 -lrb-  see also the complete list of electoral systems by country .   -rrb- 
open list systems and stv ,  the only prominent pr system which does not require political parties ,  enable independent candidates to be elected . 
voters typically have two votes ,  one for their single-member district and one for the party list ,  the party list vote determining the balance of the parties in the elected body . 
the most widely used families of pr electoral systems are party list pr ,  the single transferable vote  -lrb-  stv  -rrb-  ,  and mixed member proportional representation  -lrb-  mmp  -rrb-  . 
the table below lists the countries that use a pr electoral system to fill a nationwide elected body . 
in an open list ,  voters may vote ,  depending on the model ,  for one person ,  or for two ,  or indicate their order of preference within the list . 
in closed list systems ,  each party lists its candidates according to the party's candidate selection process . 
the system is also used for the welsh and scottish assemblies where it is called the additional member system . 
the minimum threshold is the minimum vote required to win a seat . 
mixed member systems are susceptible to gerrymandering for the local seats that remain a part of such systems . 
the single transferable vote  -lrb-  stv  -rrb-  ,  also called `` choice voting '' ,  is a ranked system: voters rank candidates in order of preference . 
note intermediate pr systems with a high electoral threshold ,  or other features that reduce proportionality ,  are not necessarily much fairer: in the turkish general election ,  2002, using an open list system with a 10% threshold ,  46% of votes were wasted . 
since most votes count ,  there are fewer `` wasted votes '' ,  so voters ,  aware that their vote can make a difference ,  are more likely to make the effort to vote ,  and less likely to vote tactically . 
some scholars recommend voting districts of roughly four to eight seats ,  which are considered small relative to pr systems in general . 
similar to stv ,  the vote counting procedure occurs in rounds . 
in asset voting ,  the voters vote for candidates and then the candidates negotiate amongst each other and reallocate votes amongst themselves . 
party list proportional representation is an electoral system in which seats are first allocated to parties based on vote share ,  and then assigned to party-affiliated candidates on the parties' electoral lists . 
a practical election using a single transferable vote was devised in denmark by carl andræ ,  a mathematician ,  and first used there in 1855, making it the oldest pr system ,  but the system never really spread . 
however because up to half the parliamentary seats are list rather than district seats ,  the districts are necessarily up to twice as large as with a plurality/majoritarian system where all representatives serve single-member districts . 
at one extreme ,  the binomial electoral system used in chile between 1989 and 2013, a nominally proportional open-list system ,  features two-member districts . 
other aspects of pr can influence proportionality such as the size of the elected body ,  the choice of open or closed lists ,  ballot design ,  and vote counting methods . 
in stv elections ,  winning the quota  -lrb-  ballots/ -lrb-  seats+1 -rrb-  -rrb-  of first preference votes assures election . 
mixed member proportional representation  -lrb-  mmp  -rrb-  is a two-tier system that combines a single-district vote ,  usually first-past-the-post ,  with a compensatory regional or nationwide party list proportional vote . 
the term `` stv '' in australia refers to the senate electoral system ,  a variant of `` hare-clark '' characterized by the `` above the line '' group voting ticket ,  a party list option . 
with the sainte-laguë index ,  the discrepancy between a party’s vote share and seat share is measured relative to its vote share . 
the libyans supplied the ira with the rpg-7.
the provisional ira was organised hierarchically . 
the ira denied involvement ,  however . 
at the top of the organisation was the ira army council ,  headed by the ira chief of staff . 
on 31 august 1994, the ira declared an indefinite ceasefire . 
a little under 300 ira members were killed in the troubles . 
the ira was responsible for more deaths than any other organisation during the troubles . 
the ira has also feuded with other republican paramilitary groups such as the official ira in the 1970s and the irish people's liberation organisation in the 1990s . 
for a detailed breakdown of casualties caused by and inflicted on the ira see provisional ira campaign 1969-1997#casualties ''
by 1971, the provisionals had inherited most of the existing ira organisation in the north ,  as well as the more militant ira members in the rest of ireland . 
political opponents accused the ira and sinn féin of a coverup . 
there have been some high-profile allegations of senior ira figures having been british informers . 
the ira publicly condemned sectarianism and sectarian attacks . 
after the provisionals' split from the official ira ,  the provisional ira began planning for offensive action against what it viewed as british occupation . 
the real ira claimed responsibility for his assassination on 12 april 2009.
the ira referred to its ordinary members as volunteers  -lrb-  or `` óglaigh '' in irish  -rrb-  . 
the incident centres were seen by locals as 'ira police stations' and gave some legitimacy to the ira as a policing force . 
the ira decommissioned all of its remaining arms between july and september 2005.
the ira's vigilantism has been repeatedly condemned as `` summary justice '' . 
during the conflict ,  the ira took on the role of policing in some catholic/nationalist areas of northern ireland . 
the gac in turn elected a 12-member ira executive ,  which selected seven volunteers to form the ira army council . 
in february 2015, the garda commissioner stated that gardaí have no evidence that the ira's military structure remains or that the ira is engaged in crime . 
ira supporters argue that the ira's `` securing of funds by extralegal methods is justified as a means to achieve a political goal . 
having compared the weapons destroyed with the british security forces' estimates of the ira weaponry ,  and because of the ira's full involvement in the process of destroying the weapons ,  the iicd arrived at their conclusion that all ira weaponry has been destroyed . 
popular support for the ira's campaign in the troubles is hard to gauge ,  given that sinn féin ,  the ira's political wing ,  did not stand in elections until the early 1980s . 
several splinter groups have been formed as a result of splits within the ira ,  including the continuity ira which emerged from a split in 1986 but did not become active until the provisional ira ceasefire of 1994, and the real ira after the final 1997 ceasefire ,  both of which are still active in the low-level dissident irish republican campaign . 
by the mid-1970s ,  the hopes of the ira leadership for a quick military victory were receding and the british military was unsure of when it would see any substantial success against the ira . 
apart from its armed campaign ,  the ira has also been involved in many other activities . 
in addition ,  some ira members carried out attacks against protestant civilians . 
in october 1997, the us stopped designating the ira as a terrorist organisation . 
it is estimated that ,  by the 1990s ,  the ira needed £10.5 million a year to operate . 
since then ,  there have been occasional claims in the media that the ira had not decommissioned all of its weaponry . 
the ira have had contacts with foreign governments and other illegal armed organisations . 
the provisional ira emerged in december 1969, following a split in the republican movement . 
it said that if any weapons had been kept ,  they would have been kept by individuals and against ira orders . 
the ira was chiefly active in northern ireland ,  although it took its campaign to england and mainland europe . 
the provisional irish republican army  -lrb-  ira or provisional ira or provos  -rrb-  was an irish republican paramilitary organisation that sought to end british rule in northern ireland ,  facilitate the reunification of ireland and bring about an independent republic encompassing all of ireland . 
they give 10,000 as the total number of past and present ira members at that time . 
however ,  this activity allowed the british government to portray the ira as no more than a criminal gang . 
the ira has also received weapons and logistical support from irish americans in the united states . 
in 2008, the independent monitoring commission stated that the ira was no longer involved in criminality ,  but that some members have engaged in criminality for their own ends ,  without the sanction or support of the ira . 
in their assessment of the ira campaign ,  the british army would describe the years 1970–72 as the `` insurgency phase '' . 
