by the 10th century ,  the majority of the population of north africa was muslim . 
around 1,000 bc ,  bantu migrants had reached the great lakes region in central africa . 
by the 1st millennium bc ,  iron working had been introduced in northwestern africa ,  egypt ,  and nubia . 
the first known hominids evolved in africa . 
by 711 ad ,  the umayyad caliphate had conquered all of north africa . 
the earliest state in eritrea and northern ethiopia ,  dʿmt ,  dates from around the 8th and 7th centuries bc . 
around 3,500 bc ,  one of the first sacral kingdoms to arise in the nile was ta-seti ,  located in northern nubia . 
in 760 bc ,  the kushites were expelled from egypt by iron-wielding assyrians . 
the sao civilization flourished from c .  the sixth century bc to as late as the 16th century ad in central africa . 
the first metals to be smelted in africa were lead ,  copper ,  and bronze in the fourth millennium bc . 
middle kingdom of egypt arose when mentuhotep ii of eleventh dynasty unified egypt once again between 2041 and 2016 bc beginning with his conquering of tenth dynasty in 2041 bc . 
the towns of roman north africa had a substantial jewish population . 
christianity gained a foothold in africa at alexandria in the 1st century ad and spread to northwest africa . 
copper was smelted in egypt during the predynastic period ,  and bronze came into use after 3,000 bc at the latest in egypt and nubia . 
the kingdom of kerma allied itself with the hyksos invasion of egypt . 
the earliest known recorded history arose in the kingdom of kush ,  and later in ancient egypt ,  the sahel ,  the maghreb and the horn of africa . 
by the 9th century ad ,  the unity brought about by the islamic conquest of north africa and the expansion of islamic culture came to an end . 
the kingdom of baguirmi existed as an independent state during the 16th and 17th centuries southeast of lake chad in what is now the country of chad . 
halfway through the first millennium bc ,  the bantu had also settled as far south as what is now angola . 
the ancient history of north africa is inextricably linked to that of the ancient near east . 
during the 10th through 13th centuries ,  there was a large-scale movement of bedouins out of the arabian peninsula . 
from the late 15th century ,  europeans joined the slave trade . 
the berber kingdoms subsequently regained their independence . 
a division in the church that came to be known as the donatist heresy began in 313 among christians in north africa . 
khoisan people inhabited the remaining parts of southern africa . 
after the fourth millennium bc ,  egypt started to extend direct military and political control over her southern and western neighbors . 
around 1.8 million years ago ,  `` homo ergaster '' first appeared in the fossil record in africa . 
sub-saharan africa developed more or less independently in those times . 
pharaonic egypt had come to an end . 
a decline in trade weakened roman control . 
in 670 bc ,  nubians were pushed out of egypt by assyrians using iron weapons ,  after which the use of iron in the nile valley became widespread . 
farther south ,  in central nigeria ,  around 1,000 bc ,  the nok culture developed on the jos plateau . 
later an arabised berber group ,  the hawwara ,  went south to nubia via egypt . 
on his return voyage to new zealand in 1774, cook landed at the friendly islands ,  easter island ,  norfolk island ,  new caledonia ,  and vanuatu . 
cook returned to hawaii in 1779.
he also identified cook strait ,  which separates the north island from the south island ,  and which tasman had not seen . 
the history of oceania includes the history of australia ,  new zealand ,  papua new guinea ,  fiji and other pacific island nations . 
abel tasman was the first known european explorer to reach the islands of van diemen's land  -lrb-  now tasmania  -rrb-  and new zealand ,  and to sight the fiji islands . 
the first settlers of australia ,  new guinea ,  and the large islands just to the east arrived between 50,000 and 30,000 years ago ,  when neanderthals still roamed europe . 
the first people of the northern mariana islands navigated to the islands at some period between 4000 bce to 2000 bce from south-east asia . 
the dutch were the first non-natives to undisputedly explore and chart coastlines of australia ,  tasmania ,  new zealand ,  tonga ,  fiji ,  samoa ,  and easter island . 
particularly along the north coast of new guinea and in the islands north and east of new guinea ,  the austronesian people ,  who had migrated into the area somewhat more than 3,000 years ago ,  came into contact with these pre-existing populations of papuan-speaking peoples . 
the first dutch government posts were established in 1898 and in 1902: manokwari on the north coast ,  fak-fak in the west and merauke in the south at the border with british new guinea . 
it is here that james cook made first contact with an aboriginal tribe known as the gweagal . 
niue was a british protectorate ,  but the uk's direct involvement ended in 1901 when new zealand annexed the island . 
from the sandwich islands cook sailed north and then north-east to explore the west coast of north america north of the spanish settlements in alta california . 
migrating from south-east asia ,  they appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the solomon islands archipelago ,  including makira and possibly the smaller islands farther to the east . 
the magellan-elcano expedition achieved the first circumnavigation of the world and reached the philippines ,  the mariana islands and other islands of oceania . 
the marshall islands were claimed by spain in 1874.
among the last islands in oceania to be colonised was niue  -lrb-  1900 -rrb- . 
britain also established colonies in australia in 1788, new zealand in 1840 and fiji in 1872, with much of oceania becoming part of the british empire . 
a successive european claim occurred in 1828, when the netherlands formally claimed the western half of the island as netherlands new guinea . 
from 1527 to 1595 a number of other large spanish expeditions crossed the pacific ocean ,  leading to the discovery of the marshall islands and palau in the north pacific ,  as well as tuvalu ,  the marquesas ,  the solomon islands archipelago ,  the cook islands and the admiralty islands in the south pacific . 
the esteem which the islanders nevertheless held for cook caused them to retain his body . 
for over a century after tasman's voyages ,  until the era of james cook ,  tasmania and new zealand were not visited by europeans—mainland australia was visited ,  but usually only by accident . 
cook then voyaged west ,  reaching the south-eastern coast of australia on 19 april 1770, and in doing so his expedition became the first recorded europeans to have encountered its eastern coastline . 
hansa societies worked to remove restrictions to trade for their members . 
dutch freight costs were much lower than those of the hansa ,  and the hansa were excluded as middlemen . 
the dutch regarded amsterdam's grain trade as the mother of all trades  -lrb-  `` moedernegotie ''  -rrb-  . 
visby functioned as the leading centre in the baltic before the hansa . 
the hansa also waged a vigorous campaign against pirates . 
a major economic advantage for the hansa was its control of the shipbuilding market ,  mainly in lübeck and in danzig . 
the economic crises of the late 15th century did not spare the hansa . 
german cities achieved domination of trade in the baltic with striking speed during the 13th century ,  and lübeck became a central node in the seaborne trade that linked the areas around the north and baltic seas . 
the legacy of the hansa is remembered today in several names: the german airline lufthansa  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  `` air hansa ''  -rrb- ; f . c . 
the hegemony of lübeck peaked during the 15th century . 
lübeck's location on the baltic provided access for trade with scandinavia and kievan rus' ,  putting it in direct competition with the scandinavians who had previously controlled most of the baltic trade routes . 
lübeck became a base for merchants from saxony and westphalia trading eastward and northward . 
after the eu enlargement to the east in may 2004 there were some experts who wrote about the resurrection of the baltic hansa . 
the `` queen of the hansa '' ,  lübeck ,  where traders were required to trans-ship goods between the north sea and the baltic ,  gained imperial privileges to become a free imperial city in 1226, as its potential trading partner hamburg had in 1189.
most foreign cities confined the hanseatic traders to certain trading areas and to their own trading posts . 
hansa territories stretched from the baltic to the north sea and inland during the late middle ages ,  and diminished slowly after 1450.
in addition to those essays and articles shown above ,  scholarship on horror fiction is almost as old as horror fiction itself . 
achievements in horror fiction are recognized by numerous awards . 
modern scholarship on horror fiction draws upon a range of sources . 
much horror fiction derives from the cruellest personages of the 15th century . 
horror is a genre of speculative fiction which is intended to frighten ,  scare ,  disgust ,  or startle its readers by inducing feelings of horror and terror . 
they instead use the terms dark fantasy or gothic fantasy for supernatural horror ,  or `` psychological thriller '' for non-supernatural horror . 
there are many horror novels for teens ,  such as the monstrumologist by rick yancey  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- . 
the first sentence from his seminal essay ,  `` supernatural horror in literature '' . 
often the central menace of a work of horror fiction can be interpreted as a metaphor for the larger fears of a society . 
noël carroll's `` philosophy of horror '' postulates that a modern piece of horror fiction's `` monster '' ,  villain ,  or a more inclusive menace must exhibit the following two traits:
which is to say that ,  roughly ,  `` f '' is functionally independent from the complex conjugate of `` z '' . 
if `` f '' is `` complex differentiable '' at `` every '' point `` z '' in an open set `` u '' ,  we say that `` f '' is holomorphic on `` u '' . 
in mathematics ,  a holomorphic function is a complex-valued function of one or more complex variables that is ,  at every point of its domain ,  complex differentiable in a neighbourhood of the point . 
the fact that all holomorphic functions are complex analytic functions ,  and vice versa ,  is a major theorem in complex analysis . 
given a complex-valued function `` f '' of a single complex variable ,  the derivative of `` f '' at a point `` z '' in its domain is defined by the limit
this is the same as the definition of the derivative for real functions ,  except that all of the quantities are complex . 
from 1856, native muslims and jews were viewed as french subjects ,  but not french `` citizens '' . 
this civil war lasted until 2002.
the referendum was held in algeria on 1 july 1962, and france declared algeria independent on 3 july . 
the last significant events in the country's recent history have been the algerian war and algerian civil war . 
30–150,000 pro-french muslims were also killed in algeria by fln in post-war reprisals . 
in august 1947, the french national assembly approved the government-proposed organic statute of algeria . 
a new generation of islamic leadership emerged in algeria at the time of world war i and grew to maturity during the 1920s and 1930s . 
in the central maghrib ,  the abdalwadid founded a dynasty that ruled the kingdom of tlemcen in algeria . 
much of the history of algeria has taken place  on the fertile coastal plain of north africa ,  which is often called the maghreb  -lrb-  or maghrib  -rrb-  . 
in march 1943, muslim leader ferhat abbas presented the french administration with the manifesto of the algerian people ,  signed by 56 algerian nationalist and international leaders . 
as a result of what the french considered an insult to the french consul in algiers by the day in 1827, france blockaded algiers for three years . 
with their interest focused primarily on egypt and muslim lands beyond ,  the fatimids left the rule of most of algeria to the zirids and hammadid  -lrb-  972–1148 -rrb- ,  a berber dynasty that centered significant local power in algeria for the first time ,  but who were still at war with banu ifran  -lrb-  kingdom of tlemcen  -rrb-  and maghraoua  -lrb-  942-1068 -rrb- . 
various groups were formed in opposition to french rule ,  most notable the national liberation front  -lrb-  fln  -rrb-  and the national algerian movement . 
from the 8th century umayyad conquest of north africa led by musa bin nusayr ,  arab colonization started . 
between 350,000 and 1 million algerians are estimated to have died during the war ,  and more than 2 million ,  out of a total muslim population of 9 or 10 million ,  were made into refugees or forcibly relocated into government-controlled camps . 
as carthaginian power waned ,  the influence of berber leaders in the hinterland grew . 
after the fall of the vichy regime in algeria  -lrb-  november 11, 1942 -rrb- as a result of operation torch ,  the free french commander in chief in north africa slowly rescinded repressive vichy laws ,  despite opposition by colon extremists . 
algeria and surrounding areas ,  collectively known as the barbary states ,  were responsible for piracy in the mediterranean sea ,  as well as the enslaving of christians ,  actions which brought them into the first and second barbary war with the united states of america . 
since 4000 bc ,  the indigenous peoples of northern africa successfully resisted phoenician ,  roman ,  vandal ,  byzantine ,  turkish ,  and french invaders but accepted islam between the 7th to 9th century ,  and arabic is now the language spoken by a majority in the country . 
the economy was run along corporatist lines with strict governmental controls on all aspects of the economy . 
no official results were announced for more than a month after the first round . 
the international reaction to the second round have varied . 
prior to its recognized independence as zimbabwe in 1980, the nation had been known by several names: rhodesia ,  southern rhodesia and zimbabwe rhodesia . 
in the 1880s ,  the british arrived with cecil rhodes' british south africa company . 
presidential elections were held in march 2002.
in 1953, in the face of african opposition ,  britain consolidated the two colonies of rhodesia with nyasaland  -lrb-  now malawi  -rrb-  in the ill-fated federation of rhodesia and nyasaland which was dominated by southern rhodesia . 
the second round went ahead ,  despite widespread criticism ,  and led to victory for mugabe . 
however the head of the african union described it as such . 
although smith's declaration was not recognised by the united kingdom nor any other foreign power ,  southern rhodesia dropped the designation `` southern '' ,  and claimed nation status as the republic of rhodesia in 1970 although this was not recognised internationally . 
the talks were mediated by south african president thabo mbeki . 
the movement for democratic change  -lrb-  mdc  -rrb-  was established in september 1999 as an opposition party founded by trade unionist morgan tsvangirai . 
mugabe won the second round by an overwhelming margin and was sworn in for another term as president on 29 june . 
at present almost no arable land is in the possession of white farmers . 
the evidence that the ancestral shona speakers came from south africa is that the ceramic styles associated with shona speakers in zimbabwe from the thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries can be traced back to western stream  -lrb-  kalunndu  -rrb-  pottery styles in south africa . 
morgan tsvangirai was badly beaten on 12 march 2007 after being arrested and held at machipisa police station in the highfield suburb of harare . 
the first bantu-speaking farmers arrived during the bantu expansion around 2000 years ago . 
the shona staged unsuccessful revolts  -lrb-  known as chimurenga  -rrb-  against encroachment upon their lands ,  by clients of bsac and cecil rhodes in 1896 and 1897.
after losing their remaining south african lands in 1840, mzilikazi and his tribe permanently settled the southwest of present-day zimbabwe in what became known as matabeleland ,  establishing bulawayo as their capital . 
zanu-pf has said that mugabe will participate in a second round; the party alleged that some electoral officials ,  in connection with the mdc ,  fraudulently reduced mugabe's score ,  and as a result a recount was conducted . 
as provided ,  robert mugabe will remain president ,  morgan tsvangirai will become prime minister ,  zanu-pf and the mdc will share control of the police ,  mugabe's zanu  -lrb-  pf  -rrb-  will command the army ,  and arthur mutambara becomes deputy prime minister . 
the region to the north was administered separately by the bsac and later named northern rhodesia  -lrb-  now zambia  -rrb-  . 
the african union has called for a `` government of national unity . `` 
on 15 september 2008, the leaders of the 14-member southern african development community witnessed the signing of the power-sharing agreement ,  brokered by south african leader thabo mbeki . 
in 1826–1828 russia fought another war against persia . 
the history of russia between 1922 and 1991 is essentially the history of the union of soviet socialist republics ,  or soviet union . 
with the collapse of the soviet union in 1991, russia lost the superpower status that it had won in the second world war . 
the romanov dynasty ruled russia until 1917.
russia was in a continuous state of financial crisis . 
the war with germany thus ended triumphantly for the soviet union . 
the war ended in 1721 when an exhausted sweden sued for peace with russia . 
in the 1860s a movement known as nihilism developed in russia . 
although the soviet union was victorious in world war ii ,  the war resulted in around 26–27 million soviet deaths  -lrb-  estimates vary  -rrb-  and had devastated the soviet economy in the struggle . 
the disastrous performance of the russian armed forces in the russo-japanese war was a major blow to the russian state and increased the potential for unrest . 
the first russian ruler to officially crown himself `` tsar '' was ivan iv . 
the soviet union opposed the united states in a number of proxy conflicts all over the world ,  including the korean war and vietnam war . 
much of russia's expansion occurred in the 17th century ,  culminating in the first russian colonisation of the pacific in the mid-17th century ,  the russo-polish war  -lrb-  1654–67 -rrb- that incorporated left-bank ukraine ,  and the russian conquest of siberia . 
by the mid-1990s russia had a system of multiparty electoral politics . 
in the late 1870s russia and the ottoman empire again clashed in the balkans . 
in celebration of his conquests ,  peter assumed the title of emperor ,  and the russian tsardom officially became the russian empire in 1721.
the invasion of russia was a catastrophe for napoleon and his 450,000 invasion troops . 
peter the great  -lrb-  1672–1725 -rrb- brought autocracy into russia and played a major role in bringing his country into the european state system . 
as western europe modernized ,  after 1840 the issue for russia became one of direction . 
by the time of her death in 1796, catherine's expansionist policy had made russia into a major european power . 
in 2014, following a referendum ,  in which separation was favored by a large majority of voters ,  the russian leadership announced the accession of crimea into the russian federation . 
by the middle of 1915 the impact of the war was demoralizing . 
after the 13th century ,  moscow became a cultural center ,  and by the 18th century ,  the tsardom of russia had grown to become the russian empire ,  stretching from eastern poland to the pacific ocean . 
peter the great died in 1725, leaving an unsettled succession ,  but russia had become a great power by the end of his reign . 
peter reorganized his government based on the latest western models ,  molding russia into an absolutist state . 
by the 1830s ,  russia had conquered all persian territories and major ottoman territories in the caucasus . 
purges in other soviet republics also helped centralize control in the ussr . 
at the opening of hostilities ,  the russians took the offensive against both germany and austria-hungary . 
moscow's leadership in russia was now firmly based and by the middle of the 14th century its territory had greatly expanded through purchase ,  war ,  and marriage . 
the history of russia begins with that of the east slavs and the finno-ugric peoples . 
furthermore ,  russia's economy had been hurt by napoleon's continental system ,  which cut off trade with britain . 
at the same time ,  the soviet union also occupied the three formerly independent baltic states  -lrb-  estonia ,  latvia and lithuania  -rrb-  . 
russia's recent annexation of the crimean peninsula has led to severe economic sanctions imposed by the united states and the european union . 
since the war against napoleon ,  russia had become deeply involved in the affairs of europe ,  as part of the `` holy alliance . `` 
catherine successfully waged war against the decaying ottoman empire and advanced russia's southern boundary to the black sea . 
the mongols left their impact on the russians in such areas as military tactics and transportation . 
during the occupation ,  the leningrad region lost around a quarter of its population ,  soviet belarus lost from a quarter to a third of its population ,  and 3.6 million soviet prisoners of war  -lrb-  of 5.5 million  -rrb-  died in german camps . 
in the 15th century ,  the grand princes of moscow continued to consolidate russian land to increase their population and wealth . 
well-situated in the central river system of russia and surrounded by protective forests and marshes ,  moscow was at first only a vassal of vladimir ,  but soon it absorbed its parent state . 
ivan iii tripled the territory of his state ,  ended the dominance of the golden horde over the rus' ,  renovated the moscow kremlin ,  and laid the foundations of the russian state . 
although a russian army defeated the golden horde at kulikovo in 1380, mongol domination of the russian-inhabited territories ,  along with demands of tribute from russian princes ,  continued until about 1480.
out of a total population of around 43 million people ,  russia lost about 1.5 million in the year 1812; of these about 250,000 to 300,000 were soldiers and the rest peasants and serfs . 
schroeder says poland was the root cause of the conflict but russia's refusal to support the continental system was also a factor . 
from its first years ,  government in the soviet union was based on the one-party rule of the communists ,  as the bolsheviks called themselves ,  beginning in march 1918.
the mongols held russia and volga bulgaria in sway from their western capital at sarai ,  one of the largest cities of the medieval world . 
however ,  the conflict between soviet and u . s .  national interests ,  known as the cold war ,  came to dominate the international stage in the postwar period . 
russia's great power status obscured the inefficiency of its government ,  the isolation of its people ,  and its economic backwardness . 
in 1938–1939, immediately prior to wwii ,  the soviet union successfully fought against imperial japan in the soviet–japanese border conflicts in the russian far east ,  which led to soviet-japanese neutrality and the tense border peace that lasted until august 1945.
a contemporary of the tudors and other `` new monarchs '' in western europe ,  ivan proclaimed his absolute sovereignty over all russian princes and nobles . 
the russian statehood survived the `` time of troubles '' and the rule of weak or corrupt tsars because of the strength of the government's central bureaucracy . 
the period from the consolidation of the bolshevik revolution in 1917 until 1921 is known as the period of war communism . 
at the end of ivan iv's reign the polish–lithuanian and swedish armies carried out a powerful intervention in russia ,  devastating its northern and northwest regions . 
the german and ottoman fleets prevented russia from importing supplies and exporting goods through the baltic and black seas . 
the hertz is defined as one cycle per second . 
hertz are commonly expressed in multiples: kilohertz  -lrb-  10 hz ,  khz  -rrb-  ,  megahertz  -lrb-  10 hz ,  mhz  -rrb-  ,  gigahertz  -lrb-  10 hz ,  ghz  -rrb-  ,  terahertz  -lrb-  10 hz ,  thz  -rrb-  ,  petahertz  -lrb-  10 hz ,  phz  -rrb-  ,  and exahertz  -lrb-  10 hz ,  ehz  -rrb-  . 
whereas 1 hz is 1 cycle per second ,  1 bq is 1 aperiodic radionuclide event per second . 
units . 
the hertz  -lrb-  symbol: hz  -rrb-  is the derived unit of frequency in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  and is defined as one cycle per second . 
the term `` heroic couplet '' is sometimes reserved for couplets that are largely `` closed '' and self-contained ,  as opposed to the enjambed couplets of poets like john donne . 
english heroic couplets ,  especially in dryden and his followers ,  are sometimes varied by the use of the occasional alexandrine ,  or hexameter line ,  and triplet . 
höðr is not mentioned again until the prelude to baldr's death is described . 
the `` gylfaginning '' does not say what happens to höðr after this . 
according to the `` prose edda '' and the `` poetic edda '' ,  the goddess frigg ,  baldr's mother ,  made everything in existence swear never to harm baldr ,  except for the mistletoe ,  which she found too unimportant to ask  -lrb-  alternatively ,  which she found too young to demand an oath from  -rrb-  . 
the population of herat numbers approximately 436,300 as of 2013.
the ah76 highway connects herat to maymana and the north . 
herat was also a centre of the followers of ustadh sis . 
herodotus described herat as `` the bread-basket of central asia '' . 
herat was shortly captured by kara koyunlu between 1458–1459.
herat was invaded and destroyed by genghis khan's mongol army in 1221.
herat received damage during the soviet–afghan war in the 1980s ,  especially its western side . 
herat dates back to the avestan times and was traditionally known for its wine . 
most sources suggest that herat was predominantly zoroastrian in the pre-islamic period . 
by the early 18th century herat was governed by various hotaki and abdali afghans . 
in the 16th century ,  all future safavid rulers ,  from tahmasp i to abbas i ,  were governors of herat in their youth . 
herat was a part of the taherid dominion in khorāsān until the rise of the saffarids in sistān under ya'qub-i laith in 861, who ,  in 862, started launching raids on herat before besieging and capturing it on 16 august 867, and again in 872.
herat dates back to ancient times  -lrb-  its exact age remains unknown  -rrb-  . 
timur took herat in 1380 and he brought the kartid dynasty to an end a few years later . 
herat has a cold semi-arid climate  -lrb-  köppen climate classification `` bsk ''  -rrb-  . 
in 1857 hostilities between the persians and the british ended after the treaty of paris was signed ,  and the persian troops withdrew from herat . 
the town itself was surrounded on its three landward sides  -lrb-  north ,  west ,  and south  -rrb-  by earthworks . 
on the eastern side ,  the town was bordered by the innermost part of the schlei inlet and the bay of haddebyer noor . 
the settlement developed as a trading centre at the head of a narrow ,  navigable inlet known as the schlei ,  which connects to the baltic sea . 
hedeby  -lrb-   ,  old norse `` heiðabýr '' ,  german `` haithabu ''  -rrb-  was an important danish viking age  -lrb-  8th to the 11th centuries  -rrb-  trading settlement near the southern end of the jutland peninsula ,  now in the schleswig-flensburg district of schleswig-holstein ,  germany . 
the origins of the hazara have not been fully reconstructed . 
the hazara people have been organized by various tribes . 
other famous hazara athletes are syed abdul jalil waiz  -lrb-  badminton  -rrb-  and ali hazara  -lrb-  football  -rrb-  . 
rajab ali hazara who is leading under 16 pakistan football team as captain and many other youngsters representing hazaras in sports in pakistan . 
sunni hazara have been attached to non-hazara tribes  -lrb-  such as taimuris  -rrb-  ,  while the ismaili hazara have always been kept separate from the rest of the hazara on account of religious beliefs and political purposes . 
mistrust of the central government by the hazaras and local uprisings continued . 
most pakistani hazaras today live in the city of quetta ,  in balochistan ,  pakistan . 
the national assembly of afghanistan  -lrb-  parliament  -rrb-  is 25% made up of ethnic hazara ,  which represents 61 members . 
the hazara identity in afghanistan is believed by many to have originated in the aftermath of the 1221 siege of bamyan . 
over the many years as a result of political unrest in afghanistan some hazaras have migrated to iran . 
though hazara played a role in the anti-soviet movement ,  other hazara participated in the new communist government ,  which actively courted afghan minorities . 
genetically ,  the hazara are a mixture of western eurasian and eastern eurasian components . 
women of non-eastern eurasian mtdna in hazaras are at 65% most which are west eurasians and some south asian . 
during the second reign of dost mohammad khan in the 19th century ,  hazara from hazarajat began to be taxed for the first time . 
in the most basic variant of the hawala system ,  money is transferred via a network of hawala brokers ,  or `` hawaladars '' . 
the coping mechanisms that appeared were patterned on the hawala system . 
the unique feature of the system is that no promissory instruments are exchanged between the hawala brokers; the transaction takes place entirely on the honour system . 
 ''hawala '' itself influenced the development of the agency in common law and in civil laws ,  such as the `` aval '' in french law and the `` avallo '' in italian law . 
after the september 11 terrorist attacks ,  the american government suspected that some hawala brokers may have helped terrorist organizations transfer money to fund their activities ,  and the 9/11 commission report stated that `` al qaeda frequently moved the money it raised by hawala '' . 
hawala follows islamic traditions but its use is not limited to muslims . 
some government officials assert that hawala can be used to facilitate money laundering ,  avoid taxation ,  and move wealth anonymously . 
in a run-to-waste system ,  nutrient and water solution is periodically applied to the medium surface . 
each day ,  as the plants rotate ,  they are periodically watered with a hydroponic growth solution to provide all nutrients necessary for robust growth . 
the hydroponic method of plant production by means of suspending the plant roots in a solution of nutrient-rich ,  oxygenated water . 
hydroponics is a subset of hydroculture ,  which is a method of growing plants without soil by using mineral nutrient solutions in a water solvent . 
however ,  it is also heavy ,  and ,  if the system does not provide continuous water ,  the plant roots may dry out . 
the biggest advantage of top-fed deep water culture over standard deep water culture is increased growth during the first few weeks . 
baked clay pellets are suitable for hydroponic systems in which all nutrients are carefully controlled in water solution . 
both the airstone and the water pump run 24 hours a day . 
 ''top-fed '' deep water culture is a technique involving delivering highly oxygenated nutrient solution direct to the root zone of plants . 
in its simplest form ,  there is a tray above a reservoir of nutrient solution . 
with this method ,  the plants grow much faster because of the high amount of oxygen that the roots receive . 
growstones ,  made from glass waste ,  have both more air and water retention space than perlite and peat . 
once the upper tray fills past the drain stop ,  it begins recirculating the water until the timer turns the pump off ,  and the water in the upper tray drains back into the reservoirs . 
however ,  it is heavy ,  does not hold water very well ,  and it must be sterilized between uses . 
mineral wool products can be engineered to hold large quantities of water and air that aid root growth and nutrient uptake in hydroponics; their fibrous nature also provides a good mechanical structure to hold the plant stable . 
perlite has similar properties and uses to vermiculite but ,  in general ,  holds more air and less water and is buoyant . 
if too much water and not enough air surrounds the plants roots ,  it is possible to gradually lower the medium's water-retention capability by mixing in increasing quantities of perlite . 
the containers should exclude light to prevent algae and fungal growth in the nutrient solution . 
the clay pellets are inert ,  ph neutral and do not contain any nutrient value . 
the limitation of hydroponics is the fact that of water can only hold of air ,  no matter whether aerators are utilized or not . 
in a slightly more complex system ,  it is automated with a delivery pump ,  a timer and irrigation tubing to deliver nutrient solution with a delivery frequency that is governed by the key parameters of plant size ,  plant growing stage ,  climate ,  substrate ,  and substrate conductivity ,  ph ,  and water content . 
passive sub-irrigation ,  also known as passive hydroponics ,  semi-hydroponics ,  or `` hydroculture '' ,  is a method wherein plants are grown in an inert porous medium that transports water and fertilizer to the roots by capillary action from a separate reservoir as necessary ,  reducing labor and providing a constant supply of water to the roots . 
a study showed that rice husks did not affect the effects of plant growth regulators . 
terrestrial plants may be grown with only their roots exposed to the mineral solution ,  or the roots may be supported by an inert medium ,  such as perlite or gravel . 
however ,  more recent research suggests that wood fibre may have detrimental effects on `` plant growth regulators '' . 
in the final six years of his life ,  purcell wrote music for forty-two plays . 
music for the funeral of queen mary was reworked by wendy carlos for the title music of the 1971 film by stanley kubrick ,  `` a clockwork orange '' . 
he composed an anthem and two elegies for queen mary ii's funeral ,  his `` funeral sentences and music for the funeral of queen mary '' . 
a purcell club was founded in london in 1836 for promoting the performance of his music ,  but was dissolved in 1863.
bright cecilia ''  -lrb-  1692 -rrb- ,  `` come ye sons of art ''  -lrb-  1694 -rrb- and `` funeral sentences and music for the funeral of queen mary ''  -lrb-  1695 -rrb- . 
purcell's music was widely featured as background music in the academy award winning 1979 film `` kramer vs .  kramer '' with the soundtrack being released by cbs masterworks records
in 1679, he wrote songs for john playford's `` choice ayres ,  songs and dialogues '' and an anthem ,  the name of which is unknown ,  for the chapel royal . 
purcell is said to have been composing at nine years old ,  but the earliest work that can be certainly identified as his is an ode for the king's birthday ,  written in 1670.
after his death ,  purcell was honoured by many of his contemporaries ,  including his old friend john blow ,  who wrote `` an ode ,  on the death of mr .  henry purcell  -lrb-  mark how the lark and linnet sing  -rrb- ``  with text by his old collaborator ,  john dryden . 
in contrast ,  hydrophiles are attracted to water . 
the term `` hydrophobe '' comes from the ancient greek ὑδρόφοβος ,  `` having a horror of water '' ,  constructed from ὕδωρ ,  `` water '' ,  and φόβος ,  `` fear '' . 
water on hydrophobic surfaces will exhibit a high contact angle . 
harley-davidson would use seats of this type until 1958.
it remains the only shaft-driven harley-davidson ever made . 
after 1913 the majority of bikes produced by harley-davidson would be v-twin models . 
by january 2007, the price of harley-davidson shares reached $70.
after the u . s .  entry into the war ,  the u . s .  military purchased over 20,000 motorcycles from harley-davidson . 
this is the first documented appearance of a harley-davidson motorcycle in the historical record . 
harley-davidson increased its share in buell to ninety-eight percent in 1998, and to complete ownership in 2003.
on october 15, 2009, harley-davidson announced that it would divest its interest in mv agusta . 
according to interbrand ,  the value of the harley-davidson brand fell by 43 percent to $4.34 billion in 2009.
the classic harley-davidson engines are v-twin engines ,  with a 45° angle between the cylinders . 
harley-davidson launched a line of bicycles in 1917 in hopes of recruiting customers for its motorcycles . 
harley-davidson ,  inc .   -lrb-  h-d  -rrb-  ,  or harley ,  is an american motorcycle manufacturer ,  founded in milwaukee ,  wisconsin in 1903.
in 1977, following the successful manufacture of the liberty edition to commemorate america's bicentennial in 1976, harley-davidson produced what has become one of its most controversial models ,  the harley-davidson confederate edition . 
by 1920, harley-davidson was the largest motorcycle manufacturer in the world ,  with 28,189 machines produced ,  and dealers in 67 countries . 
construction started on the $75 million ,  130,000 square-foot  -lrb-  12,000 m  -rrb-  harley-davidson museum in the menomonee valley on june 1, 2006.
in 1921, a harley-davidson ,  ridden by otto walker ,  was the first motorcycle ever to win a race at an average speed greater than  . 
in 1906, harley and the davidson brothers built their first factory on chestnut street  -lrb-  later juneau avenue  -rrb-  ,  at the current location of harley-davidson's corporate headquarters . 
despite this ,  harley-davidson unveiled a new lineup for 1934, which included a flathead engine and art deco styling . 
as part of the deal ,  harley-davidson put $26m into mv agusta's accounts ,  essentially giving castiglioni $26m to take the brand . 
in the late summer of 1929, harley-davidson introduced its 45 cubic inches  -lrb-  737 cm³  -rrb-  flathead v-twin to compete with the indian 101 scout and the excelsior super x . 
in august 2009, harley-davidson announced plans to enter the market in india ,  and started selling motorcycles there in 2010.
on october 15, 2009, harley-davidson inc .  issued an official statement that it would be discontinuing the buell line and ceasing production immediately . 
the aermacchi-built harley-davidsons became entirely two-stroke powered when the 250 cc two-stroke ss-250 replaced the four-stroke 350 cc sprint in 1974.
efi became standard on all harley-davidson motorcycles ,  including sportsters ,  upon the introduction of the 2007 product line . 
in 1998 the first harley-davidson factory outside the us opened in manaus ,  brazil ,  taking advantage of the free economic zone there . 
all ulster english has more obvious pronunciation similarities with scottish english than other irish english dialects do . 
hiberno-english  -lrb-  from latin `` hibernia '': `` ireland ''  -rrb-  or irish english is the set of english dialects natively written and spoken within the island of ireland  -lrb-  including both the republic of ireland and northern ireland  -rrb-  . 
see also: convergence of fourier series . 
the classical fourier transform on r is still an area of ongoing research ,  particularly concerning fourier transformation on more general objects such as tempered distributions . 
harmonic analysis is a branch of mathematics concerned with the representation of functions or signals as the superposition of basic waves ,  and the study of and generalization of the notions of fourier series and fourier transforms  -lrb-  i . e . 
a home run accomplished in any of the above manners is an automatic home run . 
when two consecutive batters each hit a home run ,  this is described as back-to-back home runs . 
oh holds the all-time home run world record ,  having hit 868 home runs in his career . 
a leadoff home run is a home run hit by the first batter of a team ,  the leadoff hitter of the first inning of the game . 
such a home run can also be called a `` sudden death '' or `` sudden victory '' home run . 
an offshoot of hitting for the cycle ,  a `` home run cycle '' is where a player hits a solo ,  2-run ,  3-run ,  and grand slam all in one game . 
a walk-off home run is a home run hit by the home team in the bottom of the ninth inning ,  any extra inning ,  or other scheduled final inning ,  which gives the home team the lead and thereby ends the game . 
there is also the `` inside-the-park '' home run where the batter reaches home safely while the baseball is in play on the field . 
the record for consecutive home runs by a batter under any circumstances is four . 
a third batter hitting a home run is commonly referred to as back-to-back-to-back . 
another variant of the home run cycle would be the `` natural home run cycle '' ,  which would require a batter to hit a solo ,  2-run ,  3-run ,  and grand slam in that order . 
twice in mlb history have two brothers hit back-to-back home runs . 
in fact ,  he hit three home runs in that game ,  and his two grand slams were in consecutive at-bats . 
however ,  after the umpires consulted with each other after watching the instant replay ,  the hit was ruled a home run ,  marking the first time an instant replay home run was hit in a playoff game . 
these types of home runs are characterized by the specific game situation in which they occur ,  and can theoretically occur on either an outside-the-park or inside-the-park home run . 
simple back-to-back home runs are a relatively frequent occurrence . 
before 1931, a ball that bounced over an outfield fence during a major league game was considered a home run . 
two world series have ended via the `` walk-off '' home run . 
when a home run is scored ,  the batter is also credited with a hit and a run scored ,  and an rbi for each runner that scores ,  including himself . 
home runs are often characterized by the number of runners on base at the time . 
after 2 minutes and 15 seconds ,  the umpires came back and ruled it a home run . 
sheffield had hit mlb's 249,999th home run against gio gonzález in his previous at-bat . 
on june 19, 2012, josé bautista and colby rasmus hit back-to-back home runs and back-to-back-to-back home runs with edwin encarnación for a lead change in each instance . 
molina was credited with the home run ,  and two rbis ,  but not for the run scored which went to burriss instead . 
in 1996, brady anderson set a major league record by hitting a lead-off home run in four consecutive games . 
an inside-the-park home run occurs when a batter hits the ball into play and is able to circle the bases before the fielders can put him out . 
harappa  -lrb-  ; urdu/  -rrb-  is an archaeological site in punjab ,  pakistan ,  about west of sahiwal . 
the excavators of the site have proposed the following chronology of harappa's occupation:
as early as 1826 harappa ,  located in west punjab ,  attracted the attention of a british officer in india ,  who gets credit for preliminary excavations in harappa . 
although modern harappa has a legacy railway station from the period of the british raj ,  it is a small crossroads town of 15,000 people today . 
a popular form of polish literature that employs the hendacasyllable is the sapphic stanza: 11/11/11/5.
in poetry ,  a hendecasyllable is a line of eleven syllables . 
the third form of hendecasyllabic verse is the `` sapphic ''  -lrb-  latin: `` hendecasyllabus sapphicus ''; so named for its use in the sapphic stanza  -rrb-  ,  with the pattern:
the polish hendecasyllable is often combined with an 8-syllable line: 11a/8b/11a/8b . 
another form of hendecasyllabic verse is the `` alcaic ''  -lrb-  latin: `` hendecasyllabus alcaicus ''; used in the alcaic stanza  -rrb-  ,  which has the pattern:
south of  ,  gaelic place names are more common ,  and after the 13th century ,  gaelic became the main language of the entire hebridean archipelago . 
the hebrides are the source of much of scottish gaelic literature and gaelic music . 
the scottish gaelic college ,   ,  is based on skye and islay . 
the name ' recorded by ptolemy may be pre-celtic . 
there are various examples of inner hebridean island names that were originally gaelic but have become completely replaced . 
the etymology of small islands may be no less complex . 
he mentioned neither the druids nor the name of the island . 
in the 20th century ,  murdo macfarlane of lewis wrote ' ,  a well-known poem about the gaelic revival in the outer hebrides . 
the names of uninhabited islands follow the same general patterns as the inhabited islands . 
the etymology of st kilda ,  a small archipelago west of the outer hebrides ,  and its main island hirta ,  is very complex . 
the earliest comprehensive written list of hebridean island names was undertaken by donald monro in 1549, which in some cases also provides the earliest written form of the island name . 
north of dál riata ,  the inner and outer hebrides were nominally under pictish control ,  although the historical record is sparse . 
ironically ,  given the status of the western isles as the last gaelic-speaking stronghold in scotland ,  the gaelic language name for the islands – ``  – means `` isles of the foreigners ''; from the time when they were under norse colonisation . 
the origin of uist  -lrb-    -rrb-  is similarly unclear . 
in relation to  ,  r .  l .  stevenson believed that `` black and dismal '' was a translation of the name ,  noting that `` as usual ,  in gaelic ,  it is not the only one . `` 
schedel is best known for his writing the text for the `` nuremberg chronicle '' ,  known as `` schedelsche weltchronik ''  -lrb-  english: `` schedel's world chronicle ''  -rrb-  ,  published in 1493 in nuremberg . 
hartmann schedel  -lrb-  13 february 1440 – 28 november 1514 -rrb- was a german physician ,  humanist ,  historian ,  and one of the first cartographers to use the printing press . 
the iambic six-foot line has also been used occasionally ,  and an accentual six-foot line has been used by translators from the latin and many poets . 
hexameter is a metrical line of verses consisting of six feet . 
while the above classical hexameter has never enjoyed much popularity in english ,  where the standard metre is iambic pentameter ,  english poems have frequently been written in iambic hexameter . 
variations of the sequence from line to line ,  as well as the use of caesura  -lrb-  logical full stops within the line  -rrb-  are essential in avoiding what may otherwise be a monotonous sing-song effect . 
the kings were as follows:
after the death of aegimius ,  his two sons ,  pamphylus and dymas ,  voluntarily submitted to hyllus  -lrb-  who was ,  according to the dorian tradition in herodotus v .  72, really an achaean  -rrb-  ,  who thus became ruler of the dorians ,  the three branches of that race being named after these three heroes . 
they withdrew to thessaly ,  where aegimius ,  the mythical ancestor of the dorians ,  whom heracles had assisted in war against the lapithae ,  adopted hyllus and made over to him a third part of his territory . 
this second attempt was followed by a third under cleodaeus and a fourth under aristomachus ,  both unsuccessful . 
macaria volunteers for the sacrifice and a spring is named the macarian spring in her honor . 
two types of hiv have been characterized: hiv-1 and hiv-2.
hiv-1 and hiv-2 appear to package their rna differently . 
since hiv-1 is derived from sivcpz ,  and hiv-2 from sivsm ,  the genetic sequence of hiv-2 is only partially homologous to hiv-1 and more closely resembles that of sivsm . 
hiv is different in structure from other retroviruses . 
as these two viruses turned out to be the same ,  in 1986 lav and htlv-iii were renamed hiv . 
two rna genomes are encapsidated in each hiv-1 particle  -lrb-  see structure and genome of hiv  -rrb-  . 
hiv differs from many viruses in that it has very high genetic variability . 
hiv-2 is much less pathogenic than hiv-1 and is restricted in its worldwide distribution to west africa . 
some people are resistant to certain strains of hiv . 
after hiv has bound to the target cell ,  the hiv rna and various enzymes ,  including reverse transcriptase ,  integrase ,  ribonuclease ,  and protease ,  are injected into the cell . 
the hiv virion enters macrophages and cd4 t cells by the adsorption of glycoproteins on its surface to receptors on the target cell followed by fusion of the viral envelope with the target cell membrane and the release of the hiv capsid into the cell . 
hiv-1 testing is initially done using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay  -lrb-  elisa  -rrb-  to detect antibodies to hiv-1.
hiv infects vital cells in the human immune system ,  such as helper t cells  -lrb-  specifically cd4 t cells  -rrb-  ,  macrophages ,  and dendritic cells . 
dual-tropic hiv-1 strains are thought to be transitional strains of hiv-1 and thus are able to use both ccr5 and cxcr4 as co-receptors for viral entry . 
sexual intercourse is the major mode of hiv transmission . 
the integrated viral dna may then lie dormant ,  in the latent stage of hiv infection . 
in these situations ,  a second specimen is collected and tested for hiv infection . 
hiv-2 will preferentially bind to the mrna that was used to create the gag protein itself . 
the latest recommendations of the us centers for disease control and prevention  -lrb-  cdc  -rrb-  show that hiv testing must start with an immunoassay combination test for hiv-1 and hiv-2 antibodies and p24 antigen . 
the final step of the viral cycle ,  assembly of new hiv-1 virions ,  begins at the plasma membrane of the host cell . 
hiv latency ,  and the consequent viral reservoir in cd4 t cells ,  dendritic cells ,  as well as macrophages ,  is the main barrier to eradication of the virus . 
the human immunodeficiency virus  -lrb-  hiv  -rrb-  is a lentivirus  -lrb-  a subgroup of retrovirus  -rrb-  that causes hiv infection and over time acquired immunodeficiency syndrome  -lrb-  aids  -rrb-  . 
as the sole viral protein on the surface of the virus ,  the envelope protein is a major target for hiv vaccine efforts . 
during direct examination ,  if the examining attorney who called the witness finds that their testimony is antagonistic or contrary to the legal position of their client ,  the attorney may request that the judge declare the witness hostile . 
the attorney will integrate a hostile witness's expected responses into the larger case strategy through pretrial planning and through adapting as necessary during the course of the trial . 
henry was the youngest of william and matilda's four sons . 
during this period ,  neither william nor robert seems to have trusted henry . 
robert remained in england for a few months more with henry before returning to normandy . 
robert returned to normandy ,  expecting to have been given both the duchy and england ,  to find that william rufus had crossed the channel and been crowned king . 
robert's invasion force failed to leave normandy ,  leaving william rufus secure in england . 
in 1087, william was fatally injured during a campaign in the vexin . 
duke robert was taken prisoner ,  but bellême escaped . 
in addition to matilda and william ,  henry possibly had a short-lived son ,  richard ,  with his first wife ,  matilda of scotland . 
robert ,  who invaded in 1101, disputed henry's control of england; this military campaign ended in a negotiated settlement that confirmed henry as king . 
william rufus sequestered henry's new estates in england ,  leaving henry landless . 
henry i  -lrb-  c .  1068 – 1 december 1135 -rrb- ,  also known as henry beauclerc ,  was king of england from 1100 to his death in 1135.
his power base in england broken ,  robert accepted henry's offer of banishment and left the country for normandy . 
in june 1120, henry and louis formally made peace on terms advantageous to the king of england: william adelin gave homage to louis ,  and in return louis confirmed william's rights to the duchy . 
robert ii of flanders also briefly joined the alliance ,  before his death in 1111.
william rufus began to support henry with money ,  encouraging his campaign against robert ,  and henry used some of this to construct a substantial castle at domfront . 
the king appeared confident of regaining the remainder of normandy from robert ,  and henry appeared ever closer to william rufus ,  the pair campaigning together in the norman vexin between 1097 and 1098.
in dividing his lands ,  william appears to have followed the norman tradition ,  distinguishing between normandy ,  which he had inherited ,  and england ,  which he had acquired through war . 
in 1088, robert's plans for the invasion of england began to falter ,  and he turned to henry ,  proposing that his brother lend him some of his inheritance ,  which henry refused . 
william rufus crossed into normandy to take the war to robert in 1094, and when progress stalled ,  called upon henry for assistance . 
with william dead ,  henry's alliance with anjou – which had been based on his son marrying fulk's daughter – began to disintegrate . 
henry was hastily crowned king in westminster abbey on 5 august by maurice ,  the bishop of london ,  as anselm ,  the archbishop of canterbury ,  had been exiled by william rufus ,  and thomas ,  the archbishop of york ,  was in the north of england at ripon . 
for henry ,  marrying matilda gave his reign increased legitimacy ,  and for matilda ,  an ambitious woman ,  it was an opportunity for high status and power in england . 
a fresh rebellion broke out amongst the barons in southern normandy ,  led by william ,  the count of ponthieu ,  whereupon geoffrey and matilda intervened in support of the rebels . 
in late 1090 william rufus encouraged conan pilatus ,  a powerful burgher in rouen ,  to rebel against robert; conan was supported by most of rouen and made appeals to the neighbouring ducal garrisons to switch allegiance as well . 
henry's mother ,  matilda of flanders ,  was the granddaughter of robert ii of france ,  and she probably named henry after her uncle ,  king henry i of france . 
relations between henry ,  matilda ,  and geoffrey became increasingly strained during the king's final years . 
on one hand ,  the symbolism and homage was important to him; on the other hand ,  he needed anselm's support in his struggle with his brother duke robert . 
henry had no way of legally removing the duchy from his brother robert ,  and initially henry avoided using the title `` duke '' at all ,  emphasising that ,  as the king of england ,  he was only acting as the guardian of the troubled duchy . 
hentai is perceived as `` dwelling '' on sexual fetishes . 
hentai is defined differently in english . 
usage of the term hentai does not define a genre in japan . 
depictions of sex and abnormal sex can be traced back through the ages ,  predating the term `` hentai '' . 
the most prolific consumers of hentai are men . 
it was central park media's 1993 release of `` urotsukidoji '' which brought the first hentai film to american viewers . 
for example ,  outside of japan a work depicting lesbian sex might be described as `` yuri hentai '' ,  but in japan it would just be described as `` yuri '' . 
the history of word `` hentai '' has its origins in science and psychology . 
with the usage of hentai as any erotic depiction ,  the history of these depictions is split into their media . 
 ''urotsukidōji '' had previously been described with terms such as `` japornimation '' ,  and `` erotic grotesque '' ,  prior to being identified as hentai . 
to define erotic manga ,  a definition for manga is needed . 
following the end of world war ii ,  japan took a new interest in sexualization and public sexuality . 
he was the first monarch of the house of tudor . 
henry vii  -lrb-  ; 28 january 1457 – 21 april 1509 -rrb- was the king of england and lord of ireland from his seizure of the crown on 22 august 1485 to his death on 21 april 1509.
for most of henry vii's reign edward story was bishop of chichester . 
his first concern was to secure his hold on the throne . 
henry attained the throne when his forces defeated king richard iii at the battle of bosworth field ,  the culmination of the wars of the roses . 
henry's main claim to the english throne derived from his mother through the house of beaufort . 
in 1487, yorkists led by lincoln rebelled in support of lambert simnel ,  a boy who was claimed to be the earl of warwick ,  son of edward iv's brother clarence  -lrb-  who had last been seen as a prisoner in the tower  -rrb-  . 
as king ,  henry was styled as his gracehis full style was: `` henry ,  by the grace of god ,  king of england and france and lord of ireland '' . 
his father ,  edmund tudor ,  1st earl of richmond ,  died three months before his birth . 
in 1499, henry had the earl of warwick executed . 
richard iii's death at bosworth field effectively ended the wars of the roses ,  although it was not the last battle henry had to fight . 
for instance ,  other than the first few months of the reign ,  lord dynham and thomas howard ,  earl of surrey were the only two office holders in the position of lord high treasurer of england throughout his reign . 
in 1490, a young fleming ,  perkin warbeck ,  appeared and claimed to be richard ,  the younger of the `` princes in the tower '' . 
henry vii was born at pembroke castle on 28 january 1457 to margaret beaufort ,  countess of richmond . 
henry lived in the herbert household until 1469, when richard neville ,  earl of warwick  -lrb-  the `` kingmaker ''  -rrb-  ,  went over to the lancastrians . 
after his marriage ,  he used the red-and-white rose as his emblem which became known as the tudor rose . 
henry vii wanted to maintain the spanish alliance . 
the king had much support from the church under cranmer . 
henry viii  -lrb-  28 june 1491 – 28 january 1547 -rrb- was king of england from 1509 until his death . 
the king and queen were not pleased with married life . 
at home ,  he oversaw the legal union of england and wales with the laws in wales acts 1535 and 1542 and following the crown of ireland act 1542 he was the first english monarch to rule as king of ireland . 
this was approved by the pope ,  unaware of the king's nascent plans for the church . 
the style `` henry the eighth ,  by the grace of god ,  king of england ,  france and ireland ,  defender of the faith and of the church of england and also of ireland in earth supreme head '' remained in use until the end of henry's reign . 
over a hundred years later ,  king charles i  -lrb-  1625–1649 -rrb- was buried in the same vault . 
this final provision failed when james vi of scotland became king of england in 1603.
at the time of richmond's death in june 1536, parliament was enacting the second succession act ,  which could have allowed him to become king . 
in 1535, henry added the `` supremacy phrase '' to the royal style ,  which became `` henry the eighth ,  by the grace of god ,  king of england and france ,  defender of the faith ,  lord of ireland and of the church of england in earth supreme head '' . 
in any case ,  between 1532 and 1537, henry instituted a number of statutes that dealt with the relationship between king and pope and hence the structure of the nascent church of england . 
domestically ,  henry is known for his radical changes to the english constitution ,  ushering into england the theory of the divine right of kings . 
from 1514 to 1529, thomas wolsey  -lrb-  1473–1530 -rrb- ,  a cardinal of the established church ,  oversaw domestic and foreign policy for the young king from his position as lord chancellor . 
many changes were made to the royal style during his reign . 
on 8 january 1536 news reached the king and the queen that catherine of aragon had died . 
henry vii died on 21 april 1509, and the 17-year-old henry succeeded him as king . 
they would re-emerge during the reign of henry's daughter mary  -lrb-  1553–1558 -rrb- . 
henry needed the money; the 1544 campaign had cost £650,000, and england was once again bankrupt . 
intelligent and able ,  but also a devout catholic and opponent of the annulment ,  more initially cooperated with the king's new policy ,  denouncing wolsey in parliament . 
it was only then that pope clement took the step of excommunicating henry and thomas cranmer ,  although the excommunication was not made official until some time later . 
in the winter of 1532, henry met with francis i at calais and enlisted the support of the french king for his new marriage . 
other missions concentrated on arranging an ecclesiastical court to meet in england ,  with a representative from clement vii . 
although little opposition to the supremacy could be found in england's religious houses ,  they had links to the international church and were an obstacle to further religious reform . 
upon henry's death ,  he was succeeded by his son edward vi . 
remarkably ,  henry had also secured the promised title of `` most christian king of france '' from julius and possibly coronation by the pope himself in paris ,  if only louis could be defeated . 
thomas cromwell  -lrb-  c .  1485–1540 -rrb- also came to define henry's government . 
henry is generally credited with initiating the english reformation – the process of transforming england from a catholic country to a protestant one – though his progress at the elite and mass levels is disputed ,  and the precise narrative not widely agreed . 
opposition to henry's religious policies was quickly suppressed in england . 
the area that is now haryana has been ruled by some of the major empires of india . 
haryana as a state came into existence on 1november 1966 the punjab reorganisation act  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- . 
haryana  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  carved out of the former state of east punjab on 1november 1966 on linguistic as well as on cultural basis ,  is one of the 29 states in india . 
the commission recommended that the tehsil of kharad ,  which includes chandigarh ,  the state capital of punjab ,  should be a part of haryana . 
the state is one of the most literate states of india with a literacy rate of 83.78% as of 2011.
the state of bilaspur was merged into himachal pradesh on 1 july 1954 by the himachal pradesh and bilaspur  -lrb-  new state  -rrb-  act ,  1954.
himachal pradesh is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy ,  a feature the state shares with other indian states . 
the state government has played an instrumental role in the rise of literacy in the state by spending a significant proportion of the state's gdp on education . 
tourism in himachal pradesh is a major contributor to the state's economy and growth . 
at 6,816 m reo purgyil is the highest mountain peak in the state of himachal pradesh . 
himachal pradesh  -lrb-  ; literally `` snow-laden province ''  -rrb-  is a state in the northern part of india . 
the state also has 30 wildlife sanctuaries and 3 conservation reserves . 
the state of himachal pradesh is divided into 12 districts which are grouped into three divisions ,  shimla ,  kangra and mandi . 
himachal pradesh has the highest proportion of hindu population among all the states and union territories in india . 
other proposed railways in the state are dharamsala-palampur ,  baddi-chandigarh and bilaspur-manali-leh . 
according to a survey of cms - india corruption study 2017, himachal pradesh is india's least corrupt state . 
the air routes connect the state with delhi and chandigarh . 
hydropower is one of the major sources of income generation for the state . 
agriculture contributes about 9.4% to the net state domestic product . 
as of 2018, himachal is the 22nd-largest state economy in india with in gross domestic product and has the 13th-highest per capita income  -lrb-    -rrb-  among the states and union territories of india . 
himachal pradesh is one of the states that lies in the indian himalayan region  -lrb-  ihr  -rrb-  ,  one of the richest reservoirs of biological diversity in the world . 
