a java applet extends the class  ,  or in the case of a swing applet ,   . 
java applets were deprecated since java 9 in 2017 and removed from java se 11  -lrb-  18.9 -rrb- ,  released in september 2018.
java applets were introduced in the first version of the java language ,  which was released in 1995.
a java applet was a small application that is written in the java programming language ,  or another programming language that compiles to java bytecode ,  and delivered to users in the form of java bytecode . 
many java developers ,  blogs and magazines are recommending that the java web start technology be used in place of applets . 
java applets run at very fast speeds and until 2011, they were many times faster than javascript . 
the code of the applet is downloaded from a web server ,  after which the browser either embeds the applet into a web page or opens a new window showing the applet's user interface . 
the following example illustrates the use of java applets through the java . applet package . 
heathrow airport processed 78,047,278 passengers in 2017.
heathrow airport ,  also known as london heathrow  ,  is a major international airport near london ,  united kingdom . 
the airport has 4 active terminals . 
heathrow airport is used by over 80 airlines flying to 185 destinations in 84 countries . 
in 2015, heathrow was the busiest airport in europe in total passenger traffic ,  with 14% more passengers than paris–charles de gaulle airport and 22% more than istanbul atatürk airport . 
heathrow airport originated in 1929 as a small airfield  -lrb-  great west aerodrome  -rrb-  on land south-east of the hamlet of heathrow from which the airport takes its name . 
heathrow was the fourth busiest european airport by cargo traffic in 2013, after frankfurt airport ,  paris charles de gaulle and amsterdam airport schiphol . 
the following airlines operate regular scheduled passenger flights at london heathrow airport:
the airport has been criticized in recent years for overcrowding and delays; according to heathrow airport holdings ,  heathrow's facilities were originally designed to accommodate 55 million passengers annually . 
whilst the cost of landing at heathrow is determined by the caa and heathrow airport holdings ,  the allocation of landing slots to airlines is carried out by airport co-ordination limited  -lrb-  acl  -rrb-  . 
when ranked by passenger traffic ,  heathrow is the sixth busiest internationally ,  behind hartsfield–jackson atlanta international airport ,  beijing capital international airport ,  dubai international airport ,  chicago's o'hare international airport ,  and tokyo haneda airport ,  for the 12 months ending december 2015.
terminal 5 was voted skytrax world's best airport terminal 2014 in the annual world airport awards . 
night-time flights at heathrow are subject to restrictions . 
heathrow airport holdings has also proposed building a third runway to the north of the airport ,  which would significantly increase traffic capacity  -lrb-  see future expansion below  -rrb-  . 
the busiest single destination in passenger numbers is new york ,  with over 3 million passengers flying between heathrow and jfk airport in 2013.
new branches of both the heathrow express and the underground's piccadilly line serve a new shared heathrow terminal 5 station . 
along with gatwick ,  stansted ,  luton ,  southend and london city ,  heathrow is one of six airports with scheduled services serving the london area . 
once an aircraft is established on its final approach ,  control is handed over to heathrow tower . 
heathrow airport has anglican ,  catholic ,  free church ,  hindu ,  jewish ,  muslim and sikh chaplains . 
development of the whole heathrow area as a very much larger airport began in 1944: it was stated to be for long-distance military aircraft bound for the far east . 
he also used the babylonian unit `` pechus ''  -lrb-  `` cubit ''  -rrb-  of about 2° or 2.5° . 
hipparchus's long draconitic lunar period  -lrb-  5,458 months = 5,923 lunar nodal periods  -rrb-  also appears a few times in babylonian records . 
earlier greek astronomers and mathematicians were influenced by babylonian astronomy to some extent ,  for instance the period relations of the metonic cycle and saros cycle may have come from babylonian sources  -lrb-  see `` babylonian astronomical diaries ''  -rrb-  . 
relatively little of hipparchus's direct work survives into modern times . 
it is not known what hipparchus's economic means were nor how he supported his scientific activities . 
the first trigonometric table was apparently compiled by hipparchus ,  who is consequently now known as `` the father of trigonometry '' . 
on 1 january 1519, zwingli gave his first sermon in zürich . 
zwingli again took the lead in the disputation . 
huldrych zwingli or ulrich zwingli  -lrb-  1 january 1484 – 11 october 1531 -rrb- was a leader of the reformation in switzerland . 
zwingli approached the eucharist in a similar manner to baptism . 
zwingli was obliged to state the terms of the armistice . 
according to zwingli ,  the cornerstone of theology is the bible . 
outside of switzerland ,  no church counts zwingli as its founder . 
zwingli's and luther's old opponent ,  johann eck ,  counter-attacked with a publication ,  `` refutation of the articles zwingli submitted to the emperor '' . 
zwingli's theological stance was gradually revealed through his sermons . 
zwingli's collected works are expected to fill 21 volumes . 
bern ,  basel ,  schaffhausen ,  and zürich supported him . 
in 1519, zwingli became the pastor of the grossmünster in zürich where he began to preach ideas on reform of the catholic church . 
the battle lasted less than one hour and zwingli was among the 500 casualties in the zürich army . 
even before the bern disputation ,  zwingli was canvassing for an alliance of reformed cities . 
zwingli was a humanist and a scholar with many devoted friends and disciples . 
in the years following his recovery ,  zwingli's opponents remained in the minority . 
zwingli had instituted fundamental reforms ,  while bullinger consolidated and refined them . 
zwingli insisted that he was not an innovator and that the sole basis of his teachings was scripture . 
the first public controversy regarding zwingli's preaching broke out during the season of lent in 1522.
zwingli criticised the practice of priestly chanting and monastic choirs . 
on 11 december 1518, the canons elected zwingli to become the stipendiary priest and on 27 december he moved permanently to zürich . 
shortly after the second zürich disputation ,  many in the radical wing of the reformation became convinced that zwingli was making too many concessions to the zürich council . 
the zürich council decided that no compromise was possible . 
homeschooling ,  also known as home education is the education of children at home or a variety of other places . 
some degree of autonomous learning is popular with those who home educate their children . 
a homeschool cooperative is a cooperative of families who homeschool their children . 
however ,  martin-chang also found that unschooling children ages 5–10 scored significantly below traditionally educated children ,  while academically oriented homeschooled children scored from one half grade level above to 4.5 grade levels above traditionally schooled children on standardized tests  -lrb-  n=37 home schooled children matched with children from the same socioeconomic and educational background  -rrb-  . 
using the piers-harris children's self-concept scale ,  john taylor later found that ,  `` while half of the conventionally schooled children scored at or below the 50th percentile  -lrb-  in self-concept  -rrb-  ,  only 10.3% of the home-schooling children did so . `` 
home education was outlawed in apartheid-era south africa before 1994, and families were jailed for not sending their children to school . 
homeschooled children may receive more individualized attention than students enrolled in traditional public schools . 
it is one of the most popular forms of home education . 
they asserted that formal schooling before ages 8–12 not only lacked the anticipated effectiveness ,  but also harmed children . 
these findings are similar to findings in u . s .  research on homeschooled children and the outcomes of homeschooling . 
parents commonly cite two main motivations for homeschooling their children: dissatisfaction with the local schools and the interest in increased involvement with their children's learning and development . 
home education or homeschooling ,  in australia is much the same as elsewhere . 
some parents have objections to the secular nature of public schools and homeschool in order to give their children a religious education . 
for most of history and in different cultures ,  the education of children at home by family members was a common practice . 
according to the home school legal defense association  -lrb-  hslda  -rrb-  in 2004, `` many studies over the last few years have established the academic excellence of homeschooled children . `` 
most native american tribal cultures traditionally used home education and apprenticeship to pass knowledge to children . 
according to the us national center for education statistics ,  about three percent of all children in the us were homeschooled in 2011-2012 school year . 
homeschooling increased in popularity in the united states during the 2000s; the percentage of children ages 5 through 17 who were homeschooled increased from 1.7% in 1999 to 3% in 2011/12.
homeschooling can be used a form of supplemental education and as a way of helping children learn under specific circumstances . 
their analysis suggested that children need `` more of home and less of formal school '' ,  `` more free exploration with .  .  .  parents ,  and fewer limits of classroom and books '' ,  and `` more old fashioned chores – children working with parents – and less attention to rivalry sports and amusements . `` 
some children learn differently to the general crowd and can get bored or can struggle at school ,  where the teachers are unable to cater for the individuality of each child . 
many teachers and school districts oppose the idea of homeschooling . 
he frequently advocated the use of private schools . 
opposition to homeschooling comes from some organizations of teachers and school districts . 
many organisations exist to help parents and teachers with home education . 
home education and apprenticeship continued to remain the main form of education until the 1830s . 
in the description of protein structure ,  in particular in the protein data bank file format ,  a heteroatom record  -lrb-  hetatm  -rrb-  describes an atom as belonging to a small molecule cofactor rather than being part of a biopolymer chain . 
in chemistry ,  a heteroatom  -lrb-  from ancient greek `` heteros '' ,  `` different '' ,  + `` atomos '' ,  `` uncut ''  -rrb-  is ,  strictly ,  any atom that is not carbon or hydrogen . 
for example ,  if there is just one radioactive atom ,  and its half-life is one second ,  there will `` not '' be `` half of an atom '' left after one second . 
half-life is constant over the lifetime of an exponentially decaying quantity ,  and it is a characteristic unit for the exponential decay equation . 
in other words ,  the `` probability '' of a radioactive atom decaying within its half-life is 50% . 
humus is the dark organic matter that forms in soil when dead plant and animal matter decays . 
bedrock ,  which is not soil ,  uses the letter r . 
while distinct ,  humus is an integral part of soil organic matter . 
humus allows soil organisms to feed and reproduce ,  and is often described as the `` life-force '' of the soil . 
the concept of hydrogen bonding once was challenging . 
a single hydrogen atom can participate in two hydrogen bonds ,  rather than one . 
a hydrogen atom attached to a relatively electronegative atom is the hydrogen bond `` donor '' . 
hydrogen bonding is a key to the design of drugs . 
hydrogen bonding is of continuing theoretical interest . 
in the secondary structure of proteins ,  hydrogen bonds form between the backbone oxygens and amide hydrogens . 
the hydrogen bond can be compared with the closely related dihydrogen bond ,  which is also an intermolecular bonding interaction involving hydrogen atoms . 
a ubiquitous example of a hydrogen bond is found between water molecules . 
a symmetric hydrogen bond is a special type of hydrogen bond in which the proton is spaced exactly halfway between two identical atoms . 
liquids that display hydrogen bonding  -lrb-  such as water  -rrb-  are called associated liquids . 
certain hydrogen bonds - improper hydrogen bonds - show a blue shift of the x-h stretching frequency and a decrease in the bond length . 
hydrogen bonds between water molecules have an average lifetime of 10 seconds ,  or 10 picoseconds . 
intermolecular hydrogen bonding is responsible for the high boiling point of water  -lrb-  100 °c  -rrb-  compared to the other group 16 hydrides that have much weaker hydrogen bonds . 
low-barrier hydrogen bonds form when the distance between two heteroatoms is very small . 
many polymers are strengthened by hydrogen bonds within and between the chains . 
the one indispensable element of a coat of arms is the shield; many ancient coats of arms consist of nothing else ,  but no coat of arms exists without a shield . 
the field of a shield ,  or less often a charge or crest ,  is sometimes made up of a pattern of colours ,  or `` variation '' . 
in the united kingdom ,  this is shown between the shield and helmet ,  though it is often above the crest in continental heraldry . 
a more recent addition is the use of `` copper '' as a metal in one or two canadian coats of arms . 
a motto may be in any language . 
the field of a shield in heraldry can be divided into more than one tincture ,  as can the various heraldic charges . 
the third common mode of marshalling is with an inescutcheon ,  a small shield placed in front of the main shield . 
usually vairé will consist of one metal and one colour ,  but ermine or one of its variations may also be used ,  and vairé of four tinctures ,  usually two metals and two colours ,  is sometimes found . 
the crest rests on top of a helmet which itself rests on the most important part of the achievement: the shield . 
in the anglican tradition ,  clergy members may pass crests on to their offspring ,  but rarely display them on their own shields . 
to `` marshal '' two or more coats of arms is to combine them in one shield ,  to express inheritance ,  claims to property ,  or the occupation of an office . 
over time several schemes have been used . 
heraldic courtoisie is observed: that is ,  charges in a composite shield  -lrb-  or two shields displayed together  -rrb-  usually turn to face the centre . 
the primary element of an heraldic achievement is the shield ,  or escutcheon ,  upon which the coat of arms is depicted . 
if the armiger has the title of baron ,  hereditary knight ,  or higher ,  he may display a coronet of rank above the shield . 
if the bearer is entitled to the ribbon ,  collar ,  or badge of a knightly order ,  it may encircle or depend from the shield . 
the sides of the shield are known as the dexter and sinister flanks ,  although it is important to note that these terms are based on the point of view of the bearer of the shield ,  who would be standing behind it; accordingly the side which is to the bearer's right is the dexter ,  and the side to the bearer's left is the sinister ,  although to the observer ,  and in all heraldic illustration ,  the dexter is on the left side ,  and the sinister on the right . 
the coat of arms usually includes a shield ,  helmet ,  and crest ,  together with any accompanying devices ,  such as supporters ,  badges ,  heraldic banners ,  and mottoes . 
the other points include `` dexter chief '' ,  `` center chief '' ,  and `` sinister chief '' ,  running along the upper part of the shield from left to right ,  above the honour point; `` dexter flank '' and `` sinister flank '' ,  on the sides approximately level with fess point; and `` dexter base '' ,  `` middle base '' ,  and `` sinister base '' along the lower part of the shield ,  below the nombril point . 
coats consisting only of a divided field are somewhat more frequent in germany than elsewhere . 
from a very early date ,  illustrations of arms were frequently embellished with helmets placed above the shields . 
the heraldry of southern france ,  andorra ,  spain ,  and italy is characterized by a lack of crests ,  and uniquely shaped shields . 
 ,  also  ,   ,  and  ,  are japanese emblems used to decorate and identify an individual or family . 
the greek and latin writers frequently describe the shields and symbols of various heroes ,  and units of the roman army were sometimes identified by distinctive markings on their shields . 
when the same patterns are composed of tinctures other than argent and azure ,  they are termed `` vairé '' or `` vairy '' of those tinctures ,  rather than `` vair ''; `` potenté '' of other colours may also be found . 
one of the most distinctive qualities of heraldry is the use of a limited palette of colours and patterns ,  usually referred to as tinctures . 
in german heraldry one may encounter `` kursch '' ,  or vair bellies ,  depicted as brown and furry; all of these probably originated as variations of vair . 
a charge is any object or figure placed on a heraldic shield or on any other object of an armorial composition . 
these are divided into three categories ,  known as `` metals '' ,  `` colours '' ,  and `` furs '' . 
in recent years ,  the use of the cartouche for women's arms has become general in scottish heraldry ,  while both scottish and irish authorities have permitted a traditional shield under certain circumstances ,  and in canadian heraldry the shield is now regularly granted . 
quarters are numbered from the dexter chief  -lrb-  the corner nearest to the right shoulder of a man standing behind the shield  -rrb-  ,  proceeding across the top row ,  and then across the next row and so on . 
richard is also credited with having originated the english crest of a lion statant  -lrb-  now statant-guardant  -rrb-  . 
and kills the player . 
the game was released on steam on august 3, 2007.
using a modified version of the `` doom '' engine ,  `` heretic '' was one of the first first-person games to feature inventory manipulation and the ability to look up and down . 
 ''next generation '' reviewed the pc version of the game ,  and stated that `` if you're only going to get one action game in the next couple of months ,  this is the one . `` 
like `` doom '' ,  `` heretic '' was developed on nextstep . 
in 1996, `` computer gaming world '' listed being turned into a chicken as #3 on its list of `` the 15 best ways to die in computer gaming '' . 
this port is based on a beta version of the original pc version of `` hexen '' as many gameplay tweaks are shared ,  such as the simpler level design and the fighter's fists being weaker compared to other versions . 
the nintendo 64 version also left most critics unimpressed . 
 ''hexen '' is compatible with many `` doom '' source ports; `` hexen ''s features are also compatible with `` doom '' wads made for source ports regardless of what game they are being played on . 
the saturn version was far less positively received . 
 ''polyobjects '' are the walls that move within the game . 
 ''computer games strategy plus '' named `` hexen '' the best `` first-person action '' title of 1995.
like `` heretic '' ,  `` hexen '' was developed on nextstep . 
the playstation version ,  developed by probe entertainment ,  has the fmv scenes and redbook audio music from the pc cd-rom version ,  but no multiplayer mode . 
while this port shares the fmv scenes and most of the redbook audio music from the other cd-rom versions ,  it also includes some new music tracks . 
the gameplay of `` hexen ii '' is very similar to that of the original `` hexen '' . 
 ''hexen ii '' also adds certain role-playing video game elements to the mix . 
because of the popularity of the original `` hexen '' ,  the game was heavily anticipated . 
 ''hexen ii '' was based on an enhanced version of the `` quake '' engine . 
following the tradition from `` heretic '' and `` hexen '' ,  raven released the source code of the `` hexen ii '' engine on november 10, 2000.
using a modified quake ii engine ,  the game features a mix of a third-person camera with a first-person shooter's action ,  making for a new gaming experience at the time . 
 ''edge '' praised the game for its mixture of platform and shoot 'em up action ,  stating that `` heretic ii '' is different enough to stand out from both first-person and third-person games like id software's first-person shooters or core design's `` tomb raider '' games . 
the editors wrote that `` heretic ii '' `` proved that the `` quake ii '' engine could work in a third-person game `` and '' that a spell-casting ,  shirtless elf could actually kick ass . `` 
inspired by the tomb raider series ,  raven software decided to make use of the quake ii engine to create a third person action game . 
carter sided with the egyptian personnel . 
howard carter was born in kensington on 9 may 1874, the son of samuel john carter ,  an artist ,  and martha joyce carter  -lrb-  née sands  -rrb-  . 
carter is buried in putney vale cemetery in london . 
carter had authored a number of books on egyptology during his career . 
carter had ,  in fact ,  discovered tutankhamun's tomb  -lrb-  subsequently designated kv62 -rrb- . 
in 1914, lord carnarvon received the concession to dig in the valley of the kings ,  carter was again employed to lead the work . 
the egyptian authorities eventually agreed that carter should complete the tomb’s clearance . 
he informed carter that he had one more season of funding to make a significant find in the valley of the kings . 
once again ,  scotland was in the hands of a regent . 
in 1326, what may have been the first full parliament of scotland met . 
by 1550, after a change of regent in england ,  the english withdrew from scotland completely . 
scotland's ultimate victory confirmed scotland as a fully independent and sovereign kingdom . 
by the 21st century ,  there would be about as many people who were scottish canadians and scottish americans as the 5 million remaining in scotland . 
scotland played a major role in the british effort in the first world war . 
the early 18th century saw the beginnings of a fragmentation of the church of scotland . 
england had about five times the population of scotland at the time ,  and about 36 times as much wealth . 
the population of scotland grew steadily in the 19th century ,  from 1,608,000 in the census of 1801 to 2,889,000 in 1851 and 4,472,000 in 1901.
scotland also played a major part in the development of art and architecture . 
only 1,000 survived and only one ship managed to return to scotland . 
the gaelic kingdom of dál riata was founded on the west coast of scotland in the 6th century . 
scotland's scapa flow was the main base for the royal navy in the 20th century . 
a legacy of the reformation in scotland was the aim of having a school in every parish ,  which was underlined by an act of the scottish parliament in 1696  -lrb-  reinforced in 1801 -rrb- . 
the clan system of the highlands and islands had been seen as a challenge to the rulers of scotland from before the 17th century . 
with tariffs with england now abolished ,  the potential for trade for scottish merchants was considerable . 
in the centuries after the departure of the romans from britain ,  there were four groups within the borders of what is now scotland . 
scotland was a poor rural ,  agricultural society with a population of 1.3 million in 1755.
roman influence on scottish culture and history was not enduring . 
during the scottish enlightenment and industrial revolution ,  scotland became one of the commercial ,  intellectual and industrial powerhouses of europe . 
in 1603, james vi king of scots inherited the throne of the kingdom of england ,  and became king james i of england ,  leaving edinburgh for london ,  uniting england and scotland under one monarch . 
in the early 20th century there was a new surge of activity in scottish literature ,  influenced by modernism and resurgent nationalism ,  known as the scottish renaissance . 
people lived in scotland for at least 8,500 years before britain's recorded history . 
by the 18th century there were five universities in scotland ,  at edinburgh ,  glasgow ,  st .  andrews and king's and marischial colleges in aberdeen ,  compared with only two in england . 
from 1892 scottish universities could admit and graduate women and the numbers of women at scottish universities steadily increased until the early 20th century . 
the first half of the 20th century saw scottish universities fall behind those in england and europe in terms of participation and investment . 
in world war ii ,  prime minister winston churchill appointed labour politician tom johnston as secretary of state for scotland in february 1941; he controlled scottish affairs until the war ended . 
the creation of cairns and megalithic monuments continued into the bronze age ,  which began in scotland about 2000 bc . 
with all the main parties committed to the union ,  new nationalist and independent political groupings began to emerge ,  including the national party of scotland in 1928 and scottish party in 1930.
the scottish reform act 1832 increased the number of scottish mps and significantly widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes . 
in the same period ,  while expenditure in english universities rose by 90 per cent ,  in scotland the increase was less than a third of that figure . 
scottish politics in the late 18th century was dominated by the whigs ,  with the benign management of archibald campbell ,  3rd duke of argyll  -lrb-  1682–1761 -rrb- ,  who was in effect the `` viceroy of scotland '' from the 1720s until his death in 1761.
by the start of the 18th century ,  a political union between scotland and england became politically and economically attractive ,  promising to open up the much larger markets of england ,  as well as those of the growing english empire . 
while emigration began to tail off in england and wales after the first world war ,  it continued apace in scotland ,  with 400,000 scots ,  ten per cent of the population ,  estimated to have left the country between 1921 and 1931.
scotland's transformation into a rich leader of modern industry came suddenly and unexpectedly . 
when charles died in 1685 and his brother ,  a roman catholic ,  succeeded him as james vii of scotland  -lrb-  and ii of england  -rrb-  ,  matters came to a head . 
they joined to form the scottish national party  -lrb-  snp  -rrb-  in 1934, with the goal of creating an independent scotland ,  but it enjoyed little electoral success in the westminster system . 
with a population of 4.8 million in 1911, scotland sent 690,000 men to the war ,  of whom 74,000 died in combat or from disease ,  and 150,000 were seriously wounded . 
linen was scotland's premier industry in the 18th century and formed the basis for the later cotton ,  jute ,  and woollen industries . 
a national referendum to decide on scottish independence was held on 18 september 2014.
after the death of cromwell and the regime's collapse ,  charles ii was restored in 1660 and scotland again became an independent kingdom . 
once again scotland's government lay in the hands of regents in the name of the infant james v . 
from 1554, marie de guise ,  took over the regency ,  and continued to advance french interests in scotland . 
hadrian  -lrb-  ; ; 24 january 76 – 10 july 138 -rrb- was roman emperor from 117 to 138.
hadrian's marriage to sabina had been childless . 
anthony birley's 1997 biography of hadrian sums up and reflects these developments in hadrian historiography . 
hadrian spent the final years of his life at rome . 
hadrian was a passionate hunter from a young age . 
with or without antinous ,  hadrian travelled through anatolia . 
hadrian's movements after his journey down the nile are uncertain . 
hadrian appears to have continued through southern gaul . 
in september 128, hadrian attended the eleusinian mysteries again . 
she had recently died in rome and had been deified at hadrian's request . 
hadrian was to spend more than half his reign outside italy . 
hadrian's personal relationship with trajan was complex ,  and may have been difficult . 
in the `` historia augusta '' ,  hadrian is described as `` a little too much greek '' ,  too cosmopolitan for a roman emperor . 
hadrian's last years were marred by chronic illness . 
hadrian's last few years were marked by conflict and unhappiness . 
hadrian's parents died in 86, when he was ten years old . 
on his return to italy ,  hadrian made a detour to sicily . 
fronto later blamed hadrian for declining standards in the roman army of his own time . 
an aureus minted early in hadrian's reign represents the official position; it presents hadrian as trajan's `` caesar ''  -lrb-  trajan's heir designate  -rrb-  . 
while hadrian and his entourage were sailing on the nile ,  antinous drowned . 
hadrian arrived in egypt before the egyptian new year on 29 august 130.
in roman judaea hadrian visited jerusalem ,  which was still in ruins after the first roman–jewish war of 66–73.
hadrian remained in the east for a while ,  suppressing the jewish revolt that had broken out under trajan . 
when trajan died ,  his widow claimed that immediately before his death ,  he had nominated hadrian as emperor . 
soon after ,  in 125, hadrian appointed marcius turbo as his praetorian prefect . 
hadrian erased the province's name from the roman map ,  renaming it syria palaestina . 
in 136, just two years before his death ,  hadrian dedicated his temple of venus and roma . 
according to the `` historia augusta '' ,  hadrian composed the following poem shortly before his death:
it is possible that hadrian visited claudiopolis and saw the beautiful antinous ,  a young man of humble birth who became hadrian's beloved . 
hadrian energetically pursued his own imperial ideals and personal interests . 
on may 31, 1839, gansevoort ,  then living in new york city ,  wrote that he was sure herman could get a job on a whaler or merchant vessel . 
in march 1848, `` mardi '' was published by richard bentley in london ,  and in april by harper in new york . 
born herman melvill in new york city on august 1, 1819, to allan melvill  -lrb-  1782–1832 -rrb- and maria  -lrb-  gansevoort  -rrb-  melvill  -lrb-  1791–1872 -rrb- into a family of dutch extraction . 
in march 1847, `` omoo '' ,  a sequel to `` typee '' ,  was published by murray in london ,  and in may by harper in new york . 
the setting for the first day of issue was the whaling museum in new bedford ,  massachusetts . 
in 1889 melville became a member of the new york society library . 
he dedicated this new novel to hawthorne ,  though their friendship was to wane only a short time later . 
in october 1849, `` redburn '' was published by bentley in london ,  and in november by harper in new york . 
in january 1850, another novel `` white-jacket '' was published by bentley in london ,  and in march by harper in new york . 
melville was born in new york city ,  the third child of a merchant in french dry goods and his wife . 
newton arvin points out that only superficially the books after `` mardi '' seem as if melville's writing went back to the vein of his first two books . 
two months after his father's death ,  gansevoort entered the cap and fur business . 
melville died at his home in new york city early on the morning of september 28, 1891, at age 72.
melville's house in lansingburgh ,  new york ,  curretly  -lrb-  2018 -rrb- houses the lansingburgh historical society . 
herman melville  -lrb-  august 1, 1819 – september 28, 1891 -rrb- was an american novelist ,  short story writer ,  and poet of the american renaissance period . 
in this period his book `` israel potter '' was published . 
in 1985, the new york city herman melville society gathered at 104 east 26th street to dedicate the intersection of park avenue south and 26th street as herman melville square . 
he was viewed as a minor figure in american literature in the later years of his life and during the years after his death . 
probably inspired by his reading of richard henry dana ,  jr . 's new book `` two years before the mast , ``  and by jeremiah n .  reynolds's account in the may 1839 issue of `` the knickerbocker '' magazine of the hunt for a great white sperm whale named mocha dick ,  melville and gansevoort traveled to new bedford ,  where melville signed up for a whaling voyage aboard a new ship ,  the `` acushnet '' . 
they settled in a house on fourth avenue in new york city  -lrb-  now called madison avenue  -rrb-  . 
the item ,  offered as a news story ,  reported ,  on may 22, 1853, elizabeth  -lrb-  bessie  -rrb-  was born ,  the melvilles' third child and first daughter ,  and on or about that day herman finished work on `` isle of the cross ''—one relative wrote that 'the isle of the cross' is almost a twin sister of the little one  .  .  . ``  herman traveled to new york to discuss it with his publisher ,  but later wrote that harper & brothers was `` prevented '' from publishing his manuscript ,  presumed to be `` isle of the cross '' ,  which has been lost . 
in december ,  melville's father returned from new york city by steamboat ,  but ice forced him to travel the last seventy miles for two days and two nights in an open horse carriage at two degrees below zero  -lrb-  fahrenheit  -rrb-  ,  with the result that he developed a cold . 
the job came as a relief for his family ,  because he would be out of the house for much of the day . 
this was the last known contact between the two writers before melville visited hawthorne in liverpool four years later . 
this is the street where melville lived from 1863 to 1891 and where ,  among other works ,  he wrote `` billy budd '' . 
almost three weeks after his birth ,  on august 19, herman melville was baptized at home by a minister of the south reformed dutch church . 
the critic lewis mumford found a copy in the new york public library in 1925 `` with its pages uncut ''—in other words ,  it had sat there unread for 50 years . 
melville called his new home arrowhead because of the arrowheads that were dug up around the property during planting season . 
a new view emerged of melville's turn to poetry as a conscious choice that placed him among the most important american poets . 
melville owned an edition of shakespeare's works by 1849, and his reading of it greatly influenced the style of his next book ,  `` moby-dick ''  -lrb-  1851 -rrb- . 
melville had high hopes that his next book would please the public and restore his finances . 
in 1864, melville and allan paid a visit to the virginia battlefields of the american civil war . 
melville hall ,  the commissioned officer's club at the united states merchant marine academy ,  in kings point ,  new york is named in his honor . 
in 2000, the melville scholar elizabeth renker wrote `` a sea change in the reception of the poems is incipient . `` 
issues of sexuality have been observed in other works as well . 
 ''herman i think is making more progress than formerly , ``  allan wrote in may 1830 to major melvill ,  `` & without being a bright scholar ,  he maintains a respectable standing ,  & would proceed further ,  if he could only be induced to study more—being a most amiable & innocent child ,  i cannot find it in my heart to coerce him . `` 
high fidelity  -lrb-  often shortened to hi-fi or hifi  -rrb-  is a term used by listeners ,  audiophiles and home audio enthusiasts to refer to high-quality reproduction of sound . 
when the music is stored in an audio file format that is lossless such as flac ,  monkey's audio or wma lossless ,  the computer playback of recorded audio can serve as an audiophile-quality source for a hi-fi system . 
this is in contrast to the lower quality sound produced by inexpensive audio equipment ,  or the inferior quality of sound reproduction that can be heard in recordings made until the late 1940s . 
in the 2000s ,  modern hi-fi equipment can include signal sources such as digital audio tape  -lrb-  dat  -rrb-  ,  digital audio broadcasting  -lrb-  dab  -rrb-  or hd radio tuners . 
listening tests are used by hi-fi manufacturers ,  audiophile magazines and audio engineering researchers and scientists . 
in the 1950s ,  `` hi-fi '' became a generic term for home sound equipment ,  to some extent displacing `` phonograph '' and `` record player '' . 
during the 1950s ,  holden dominated the australian car market . 
holden launched the new hq series in 1971.
holden discontinued the torana in 1979 and the sunbird in 1980.
holden revived the monaro coupe in 2001.
from 2004, holden was only able to make a profit in 2010 and 2011.
in 1960, holden introduced its third major new model ,  the fb . 
on 18 may 2005, `` holden ltd '' became `` gm holden ltd '' ,  coinciding with the resettling to the new holden headquarters on 191 salmon street ,  port melbourne ,  victoria . 
it was renamed holden ltd in 1998, and general motors-holden in 2005.
holden's market surge from the 1990s reversed in the 2000s decade . 
from here ,  holden continued to pursue the goal of producing an australian car . 
holden re-introduced its defunct statesman title in 1990—this time under the holden marque ,  as the statesman and caprice . 
holden began to export vehicles in 1954, sending the fj to new zealand . 
holden continues solely as an importer of vehicles . 
throughout the 1990s ,  opel had also been the source of many holden models . 
holden caused controversy in 2005 with their holden employee pricing television advertisement ,  which ran from october to december 2005.
now holden imports their cars from opel in germany and gm plants in canada and usa . 
holden's most popular car to date ,  the commodore ,  was introduced in 1978 as the vb . 
the statesman remains noteworthy because it was not marketed as a `` holden '' ,  but rather a `` statesman '' . 
holden's logo ,  of a lion holding a stone ,  was introduced in 1928.
in 2010 holden sold vehicles across australia through the holden dealer network  -lrb-  310 authorised stores and 12 service centres  -rrb-  ,  which employed more than 13,500 people . 
greenberg felt that runs batted in were more important than home runs . 
greenberg was the first jewish superstar in american team sports . 
greenberg came in third in the vote for mvp . 
greenberg played the first twelve of his thirteen seasons in the major leagues on the detroit team . 
in 1940, greenberg switched from playing the first base position to the left field position . 
in 1937, greenberg recovered from his injury and was voted to the al all-star roster ,  but did not play . 
he finished the season with 16 hits ,  1 home run ,  and 15 rbis in 12 games . 
when he broke into the major leagues in 1930, greenberg was the youngest mlb player  -lrb-  19 -rrb- . 
greenberg played minor league baseball for three years . 
in 1947, greenberg and the tigers had a lengthy salary dispute . 
greenberg served 47 months ,  the longest of any major league player . 
greenberg would likely have approached 500 home runs and 1,800 rbis had he not served in the military . 
greenberg was the first major league player to hit 25 or more home runs in a season in each league ,  and remains the al record-holder for most rbis in a single season by a right-handed batter  -lrb-  183 in 1937, a 154-game schedule  -rrb-  . 
in 1939 greenberg was voted to the al all-star roster for the third year in a row and was a starter at first base ,  and singled and walked in 4 at-bats  -lrb-  al won 3-1 -rrb- . 
schliemann began work on troy in 1871.
schliemann is portrayed as `` heinrich obermann '' . 
peter ackroyd's novel `` the fall of troy ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- is based on schliemann's excavation of troy . 
calvert became schliemann's collaborator and partner . 
in time ,  schliemann represented a number of companies . 
schliemann threatened to divorce ekaterina twice before doing so . 
schliemann's methods have been described as `` savage and brutal . 
schliemann's first interest of a classical nature seems to have been the location of troy . 
schliemann later claimed that at the age of 7 he had declared he would one day excavate the city of troy . 
by 1858, schliemann was 36 years old and wealthy enough to retire . 
it was calvert who identified hissarlik as troy and suggested schliemann dig there on land owned by calvert's family . 
schliemann was elected a member of the american antiquarian society in 1880.
schliemann was born in neubukow ,  mecklenburg-schwerin  -lrb-  part of the german confederation  -rrb-  ,  in 1822.
further excavation of the troy site by others indicated that the level he named the troy of the `` iliad '' was inaccurate ,  although they retain the names given by schliemann . 
schliemann was at first skeptical about the identification of hissarlik with troy but was persuaded by calvert and took over calvert's excavations on the eastern half of the hissarlik site . 
schliemann had previously learned that his childhood sweetheart ,  minna ,  had married . 
hera called on hypnos and asked him to help her by putting zeus to sleep . 
hera was almost ready to trick zeus ,  but she needed the help of hypnos ,  who had tricked zeus once before . 
in greek mythology ,  hypnos  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` sleep ''  -rrb-  is the personification of sleep; the roman equivalent is known as somnus . 
thanks to hypnos helping to trick zeus ,  the war changed its course to hera's favour ,  and zeus never found out that hypnos had tricked him one more time . 
 -lrb-  in- `` not '' + somnus `` sleep ''  -rrb-  ,  as well as a few less-common words such as `` somnolent '' ,  meaning sleepy or tending to cause sleep and hypersomnia meaning excessive sleep ,  which can be caused by many conditions  -lrb-  known as secondary hypersomnia  -rrb-  or a rare sleep disorder causing excessive sleep with unknown cause ,  called idiopathic hypersomnia . 
in most branches of the anglican church ,  women can be ordained as priests ,  and in some of them ,  can also be ordained bishops . 
a priest may serve only at the pleasure of his bishop . 
bishops are chosen from among priests in churches that adhere to catholic usage . 
in the christian churches ,  holy orders are ordained ministries such as bishop ,  priest ,  or deacon ,  and the sacrament or rite by which candidates are ordained to those orders . 
in orthodox terminology ,  `` priesthood '' or `` sacerdotal '' refers to the ministry of bishops and priests . 
it does not have bishops as a separate order of ministry . 
the church does not use the term `` holy orders . `` 
the roman catholic church unconditionally recognizes the validity of ordinations in the eastern churches . 
the ministerial orders of the catholic church include the orders of bishops ,  deacons and presbyters ,  which in latin is `` sacerdos '' . 
the sequence in which holy orders are received are: minor orders ,  deacon ,  priest ,  bishop . 
anglican churches claim to have maintained apostolic succession . 
married men may be ordained to the diaconate as permanent deacons ,  but in the latin rite of the roman catholic church generally may not be ordained to the priesthood . 
the ordained priesthood and common priesthood  -lrb-  or priesthood of the all the baptized  -rrb-  are different in function and essence . 
the church of scotland has recently begun ordaining deacons to this role . 
orthodox bishops are always monks; a single or widowed man may be elected a bishop but he must be tonsured a monk before consecration as a bishop . 
eastern orthodox bishops have ,  on occasion ,  granted `` economy '' when anglican priests convert to orthodoxy . 
other presbyterians have used an 'order of deacons' as full-time servants of the wider church . 
the american methodist model is an episcopal system loosely based on the anglican model ,  as the methodist church arose from the anglican church . 
only bishops can validly administer the sacrament of holy orders . 
today only the `` iliad '' and `` odyssey '' are associated with the name 'homer' . 
the two best known ancient biographies of homer are the `` life of homer '' by the pseudo-herodotus and the `` contest of homer and hesiod '' . 
homer  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` hómēros ''  -rrb-  is the legendary author of the `` iliad '' and the `` odyssey '' ,  two epic poems that are the central works of ancient greek literature . 
the homeric question – concerning by whom ,  when ,  where and under what circumstances the `` iliad '' and `` odyssey '' were composed – continues to be debated . 
as with the multitude of legends surrounding homer's life ,  they indicate little more than the centrality of homer to ancient greek culture . 
these divisions probably date from before 200 bc ,  and may have been made by homer . 
in ancient greek chronology ,  the sack of troy was dated to 1184 bc . 
both of the homeric poems begin with an invocation to the muse . 
by around 1830, the central preoccupations of homeric scholars ,  dealing with whether or not `` homer '' actually existed ,  when and how the homeric poems originated ,  how they were transmitted ,  when and how they were finally written down ,  and their overall unity ,  had been dubbed `` the homeric question '' . 
the orally transmitted homeric poems were put into written form at some point between the eighth and sixth centuries bc . 
many traditions circulated in the ancient world concerning homer ,  most of which are lost . 
gernsback is also considered a pioneer in amateur radio . 
hugo gernsback  -lrb-  ; born hugo gernsbacher ,  august 16, 1884 – august 19, 1967 -rrb- was a luxembourgish-american inventor ,  writer ,  editor ,  and magazine publisher ,  best known for publications including the first science fiction magazine . 
the first mass-produced computer ,  the ibm 650, also announced in 1953 had about 8.5 kilobytes of drum memory . 
this appears to be the first published description of programming ,  so ada lovelace is widely regarded as the first computer programmer . 
the manchester baby was the world's first electronic stored-program computer . 
computers whose logic was primarily built using vacuum tubes are now known as first generation computers . 
the machine was inspired by john von neumann's seminal `` first draft of a report on the edvac '' and was one of the first usefully operational electronic digital stored-program computer . 
microcomputers ,  the first of which appeared in the 1970s ,  became ubiquitous in the 1980s and beyond . 
the first commercial computer was the ferranti mark 1, built by ferranti and delivered to the university of manchester in february 1951.
the world's first `` all-electronic desktop '' calculator was the british bell punch anita ,  released in 1961.
in 1879 gottlob frege develops the formal approach to logic and proposes the first logic language for logical equations . 
atlas also pioneered the atlas supervisor ,  `` considered by many to be the first recognisable modern operating system '' . 
it was widely used in the cpus and floating-point units of mainframe and other computers; it was implemented for the first time in edsac 2, which also used multiple identical `` bit slices '' to simplify design . 
the first modern analog computer was a tide-predicting machine ,  invented by sir william thomson ,  later lord kelvin ,  in 1872.
the mark 1 in turn quickly became the prototype for the ferranti mark 1, the world's first commercially available general-purpose computer . 
the us-built eniac  -lrb-  electronic numerical integrator and computer  -rrb-  was the first electronic programmable computer built in the us . 
in the first half of the 20th century ,  analog computers were considered by many to be the future of computing . 
in the us ,  in the period summer 1937 to the fall of 1939 arthur dickinson  -lrb-  ibm  -rrb-  invented the first digital electronic computer . 
it was built at the victoria university of manchester by frederic c .  williams ,  tom kilburn and geoff tootill ,  and ran its first program on 21 june 1948.
a next computer and its object-oriented development tools and libraries were used by tim berners-lee and robert cailliau at cern to develop the world's first web server software ,  cern httpd ,  and also used to write the first web browser ,  worldwideweb . 
how to use leisure time will be a major problem . `` 
his 1945 report ‘proposed electronic calculator’ was the first specification for such a device . 
although the computer was considered `` small and primitive '' by the standards of its time ,  it was the first working machine to contain all of the elements essential to a modern electronic computer . 
magnetic core memory patented in 1949 with its first usage demonstrated for the whirlwind computer in august 1953.
in april 1975 at the hannover fair ,  olivetti presented the p6060, the world's first complete ,  pre-assembled personal computer system . 
the principle of the modern computer was first described by computer scientist alan turing ,  who set out the idea in his seminal 1936 paper ,  `` on computable numbers '' . 
wilhelm schickard ,  a german polymath ,  designed a calculating machine in 1623 which combined a mechanised form of napier's rods with the world's first mechanical adding machine built into the base . 
in 1941, zuse followed his earlier machine up with the z3, the world's first working electromechanical programmable ,  fully automatic digital computer . 
cadet used 324 point-contact transistors provided by the uk company standard telephones and cables; 76 junction transistors were used for the first stage amplifiers for data read from the drum ,  since point-contact transistors were too noisy . 
the engine incorporated an arithmetic logic unit ,  control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops ,  and integrated memory ,  making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as turing-complete . 
the term digital was first suggested by george robert stibitz and refers to where a signal ,  such as a voltage ,  is not used to directly represent a value  -lrb-  as it would be in an analog computer  -rrb-  ,  but to encode it . 
the machine was not intended to be a practical computer but was instead designed as a testbed for the williams tube ,  the first random-access digital storage device . 
while the subject of exactly which device was the first microprocessor is contentious ,  partly due to lack of agreement on the exact definition of the term `` microprocessor '' ,  it is largely undisputed that the first single-chip microprocessor was the intel 4004, designed and realized by ted hoff ,  federico faggin ,  and stanley mazor at intel . 
meanwhile ,  john von neumann at the moore school of electrical engineering ,  university of pennsylvania ,  circulated his `` first draft of a report on the edvac '' in 1945.
while which specific system is considered the first microcomputer is a matter of debate ,  as there were several unique hobbyist systems developed based on the intel 4004 and its successor ,  the intel 8008, the first commercially available microcomputer kit was the intel 8080-based altair 8800, which was announced in the january 1975 cover article of `` popular electronics '' . 
edsac ran its first programs on 6 may 1949, when it calculated a table of squares and a list of prime numbers . the edsac also served as the basis for the first commercially applied computer ,  the leo i ,  used by food manufacturing company j .  lyons & co .  ltd .  edsac 1 and was finally shut down on 11 july 1958, having been superseded by edsac 2 which stayed in use until 1965.
the first practical integrated circuits were invented by jack kilby at texas instruments and robert noyce at fairchild semiconductor . 
however ,  the machine did make use of valves to generate its 125 khz clock waveforms and in the circuitry to read and write on its magnetic drum memory ,  so it was not the first completely transistorized computer . 
stored-program computers ,  by contrast ,  were designed to store a set of instructions  -lrb-  a program  -rrb-  ,  in memory – typically the same memory as stored data . 
preregular spaces are also called `` r spaces '' . 
a topological space is preregular if and only if its kolmogorov quotient is hausdorff . 
the band had a run of twenty-two of their albums charting in the uk from 1971 to 1993.
they are also regarded as an influential proto-punk band . 
in between these two tours ,  the band had recorded the album `` pxr5 '' in january 1978, but its release was delayed until 1979.
hawkwind are an english rock band and one of the earliest space rock groups . 
in 1988 the band recorded the album `` the xenon codex '' with guy bidmead ,  but all was not well in the band and soon after ,  both lloyd-langton and thompson departed . 
turner lost the case and the band began performing as space ritual . 
the band settled on the name `` hawkwind '' after briefly being billed as `` group x '' and `` hawkwind zoo '' . 
ron tree had known the band on the festival circuit and offered his services as a front-man ,  and the band duly employed him for the album `` alien 4 '' and its accompanying tour which resulted in the album `` love in space '' and `` video '' . 
still supporting space bandits ,  1991 commenced with perhaps the most surprising hawkwind tour in the band's history ,  without dave brock . 
calvert made a guest appearance with the band for their headline set at the reading festival in august 1975, after which he chose to rejoin the band as a full-time lead vocalist . 
rasta chanter captain rizz also joined the band for guest spots during live shows . 
he was initially invited simply to play with the band ,  but eventually replaced stand in drummer mick kirton to become the band's drummer to the present day . 
in 2001, davey agreed to rejoin the band permanently ,  but only after the departure of tree and richards . 
the successfully received tour was the first of several over the coming years ,  in an effort by the band to re-introduce themselves to the american market . 
the band changed record company to tony stratton-smith's charisma records and ,  on stratton-smith's suggestion ,  band management from douglas smith to tony howard . 
after a tour to promote the single and during the recording of the next album ,  rudolph was also dismissed ,  for allegedly trying to steer the band into a musical direction at odds with calvert and brock's vision . 
the exception is in endurance riding ,  where the minimum age to compete is based on the animal's actual calendar age . 
they reach full adult development by age five ,  and have an average lifespan of between 25 and 30 years . 
in modern times ,  sugar puff ,  who had been listed in `` guinness world records '' as the world's oldest living pony ,  died in 2007 at age 56.
ebbinghaus is also largely credited with drafting the first standard research report . 
ebbinghaus's effect on memory research was almost immediate . 
also ,  ebbinghaus's memory research halted research in other ,  more complex matters of memory such as semantic and procedural memory and mnemonics . 
during the next three years ,  he spent time at halle and berlin . 
the curve levels off after about one day . 
the reaction to his work in his day was mostly positive . 
some contemporary texts still describe ebbinghaus as a philosopher rather than a psychologist and he had also spent his life as a professor of philosophy . 
in addition to pioneering experimental psychology ,  ebbinghaus was also a strong defender of this direction of the new science ,  as is illustrated by his public dispute with university of berlin colleague ,  wilhelm dilthey . 
this inspiration is also evident in that ebbinghaus dedicated his second work `` principles of psychology '' to fechner ,  signing it `` i owe everything to you . `` 
hindi is the `` lingua franca '' of the `` hindi belt '' ,  and to a lesser extent other parts of india  -lrb-  usually in a simplified or pidginized variety such as bazaar hindustani or haflong hindi  -rrb-  . 
hindi  -lrb-  devanagari: हिन्दी ,  `` hindī ''  -rrb-  ,  or modern standard hindi  -lrb-  devanagari: मानक हिन्दी ,  `` mānak hindī ''  -rrb-  is a standardised and sanskritised register of the hindustani language . 
 ''heimskringla '' details that odin gave huginn and muninn the ability to speak . 
scholars have linked odin's relation to huginn and muninn to shamanic practice . 
the roskilde museum identifies the figure as odin sitting on his throne hliðskjálf ,  flanked by the ravens huginn and muninn . 
in the `` prose edda '' book `` skáldskaparmál ''  -lrb-  chapter 60 -rrb- ,  huginn and muninn appear in a list of poetic names for ravens . 
the plate has been interpreted as odin accompanied by two birds: his ravens . 
petersen says that odin is associated with disguise and that the masks on the ravens may be portraits of odin . 
grímnir says that he worries huginn may not come back ,  yet more does he fear for muninn:
in these excerpts muninn is referenced in a common noun for 'raven' and huginn is referenced in a kenning for 'carrion' . 
all of these heat engines are powered by the expansion of heated gases . 
during this process ,  a lot of heat is lost to the surroundings and so cannot be converted to work . 
the hadley system provides an example of a heat engine . 
heat engines are often confused with the cycles they attempt to implement . 
in thermodynamics and engineering ,  a heat engine is a system that converts heat or thermal energy—and chemical energy—to mechanical energy ,  which can then be used to do mechanical work . 
heimdallr is mentioned once in `` háttatal '' . 
heimdallr is mentioned thrice in `` völuspá '' . 
some scholars have theorized that this figure is a depiction of heimdallr with gjallarhorn . 
this figure has been often theorized as depicting heimdallr with gjallarhorn . 
the chapter points out that in the above `` húsdrápa '' section heimdallr is said to be the son of nine mothers . 
heimdallr is attested as having three other names; `` hallinskiði '' ,  `` gullintanni '' ,  and `` vindlér '' or `` vindhlér '' . 
high then quotes the above-mentioned stanza regarding heimdallr raising his horn in `` völuspá '' . 
high then quotes the above-mentioned `` grímnismál '' stanza about himinbjörg and provides two lines from the otherwise lost poem about heimdallr ,  `` heimdalargaldr '' ,  in which heimdallr proclaims himself to be the son of nine mothers . 
later in `` völuspá '' ,  the völva foresees the events of ragnarök and the role in which heimdallr and gjallarhorn will play at its onset; heimdallr will raise his horn and blow loudly . 
in the `` prose edda '' ,  heimdallr is mentioned in the books `` gylfaginning '' ,  `` skáldskaparmál '' ,  and `` háttatal '' . 
heimdallr is additionally referred to as rig ,  hallinskiði ,  gullintanni ,  and vindlér or vindhlér . 
today's parliament of the united kingdom largely descends ,  in practice ,  from the parliament of england ,  though the treaty of union of 1706 and the acts of union that ratified the treaty in 1707 and created a new parliament of great britain to replace the parliament of england and the parliament of scotland . 
this new parliament was ,  in effect ,  the continuation of the parliament of england with the addition of 45 mps and 16 peers to represent scotland . 
in 1949, the parliament act reduced the delaying power of the house of lords further to two sessions or one year . 
it implies that it would never be in any government's interest to legitimise the lords ,  as they would be forfeiting their own power . 
the house of lords ,  also known as the house of peers ,  is the upper house of the parliament of the united kingdom . 
the house of lords is the only upper house of any bicameral parliament to be larger than its lower house . 
in 1569, the authority of parliament was for the first time recognised not simply by custom or royal charter ,  but by an authoritative statute ,  passed by parliament itself . 
the power of parliament grew slowly ,  fluctuating as the strength of the monarchy grew or declined . 
the individual influence of a lord of parliament was thus diminished . 
it returned to its former position as the more powerful chamber of parliament—a position it would occupy until the 19th century . 
former mps would be allowed to stand for election to the upper house ,  but members of the upper house would not be immediately allowed to become mps . 
over the course of the century the power of the upper house were further eroded ,  and the commons gradually became the stronger house of parliament . 
the first english parliament is often considered to be the `` model parliament ''  -lrb-  held in 1295 -rrb- ,  which included archbishops ,  bishops ,  abbots ,  earls ,  barons ,  and representatives of the shires and boroughs of it . 
the queen's speech is delivered in the house of lords during the state opening of parliament . 
the crown was at the height of its power during the reign of henry viii  -lrb-  1509–1547 -rrb- . 
detailed proposals for lords reform ,  including a draft house of lords reform bill ,  were published on 17 may 2011.
a function formula_1 between two topological spaces is a homeomorphism if it has the following properties:
in the mathematical field of topology ,  a homeomorphism ,  topological isomorphism ,  or bicontinuous function is a continuous function between topological spaces that has a continuous inverse function . 
in norse mythology ,  hvergelmir  -lrb-  old norse `` bubbling boiling spring ''  -rrb-  is a major spring . 
if y = y and x < x . 
if  -lrb-  x ,  y  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  x ,  y  -rrb-  are two points of the plane ℝ ,  define  -lrb-  x ,  y  -rrb-  <  -lrb-  x ,  y  -rrb- 
for the converse direction ,  let `` a '' be a partially ordered set and `` t '' a totally ordered subset of `` a '' . 
it states that in any partially ordered set ,  every totally ordered subset is contained in a maximal totally ordered subset . 
 ''queen hel '' is not mentioned elsewhere in the saga . 
in chapter 5 of the `` prose edda '' book `` skáldskaparmál '' ,  hel is mentioned in a kenning for baldr  -lrb-  `` hel's companion ''  -rrb-  . 
hel may also be alluded to in `` hamðismál '' . 
the old norse feminine proper noun `` hel '' is identical to the name of the location over which she rules ,  old norse `` hel '' . 
if it is hel she is presumably greeting the dying baldr as he comes to her realm . 
in stanza 4 of `` baldrs draumar '' ,  odin rides towards the `` high hall of hel . `` 
in the `` poetic edda '' ,  `` prose edda '' ,  and `` heimskringla '' ,  hel is referred to as a daughter of loki . 
hel is referred to in the `` prose edda '' ,  written in the 13th century by snorri sturluson . 
the final stanza of the poem contains a mention of hel ,  though not by name:
high describes hel as `` half black and half flesh-coloured , ``  adding that this makes her easily recognizable ,  and furthermore that hel is `` rather downcast and fierce-looking . `` 
in norse mythology ,  hel is a being who presides over a realm of the same name ,  where she receives a portion of the dead . 
in a later work  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- ,  davidson states that the description of hel found in chapter 33 of `` gylfaginning '' `` hardly suggests a goddess . `` 
scholars have assumed that saxo used proserpina as a goddess equivalent to the norse hel . 
janan island ,  a small island south of hawar island ,  was also considered in the 2001 judgment . 
janan island ,  to the south of hawar island ,  is not legally considered to be a part of the group and is owned by qatar . 
despite their proximity to qatar  -lrb-  they are only about from the qatari mainland whilst being about from the main islands of bahrain  -rrb-  ,  most of the islands belong to bahrain ,  having been a part of a dispute between bahrain and qatar which was resolved in 2001.
the hawar islands  -lrb-  ; transliterated: juzur ḩawār  -rrb-  are an archipelago of desert islands owned by bahrain ,  situated off the west coast of qatar in the gulf of bahrain of the persian gulf . 
after his resignation as foreign minister ,  genscher was appointed honorary chairman of the fdp in 1992.
genscher had great interest in european integration and the success of german reunification . 
it is about respect for the victims of crimes against humanity '' ,  genscher said . 
a proponent of realpolitik ,  genscher has been called `` a master of diplomacy . `` 
genscher retained his posts as foreign minister and vice chancellor through german reunification and until 1992 when he stepped down for health reasons . 
following genscher's resignation ,  chancellor helmut kohl and fdp chairman otto graf lambsdorff named irmgard schwaetzer ,  a former aide to genscher ,  to be the new foreign minister . 
as a popular story on genscher's preferred method of shuttle diplomacy has it ,  `` two lufthansa jets crossed over the atlantic ,  and genscher was on both . `` 
in 1952, genscher fled to west germany ,  where he joined the free democratic party  -lrb-  fdp  -rrb-  . 
in 1965 genscher was elected on the north rhine-westphalian fdp list to the west german parliament and remained a member of parliament until his retirement in 1998.
genscher was a major player in the negotiations on the text of the helsinki accords . 
in 1984, genscher became the first western foreign minister to visit tehran since the iranian revolution of 1979.
during the gulf war ,  genscher sought to deal with iraq after other western leaders had decided to go to war to force it out of kuwait . 
on 18 may 1992 genscher retired at his own request from the federal government ,  which he had been member of for a total of 23 years . 
