kansas is a u . s .  state in the midwestern united states . 
nearly of the state's northeastern boundary is defined by the missouri river . 
kansas was admitted to the union as a free state on january 29, 1861, making it the 34th state to join the united states . 
in 1827, fort leavenworth became the first permanent settlement of white americans in the future state . 
tribes in the western part of the state were semi-nomadic and hunted large herds of bison . 
the kansas river  -lrb-  locally known as the kaw  -rrb-  ,  formed by the junction of the smoky hill and republican rivers at appropriately-named junction city ,  joins the missouri river at kansas city ,  after a course of across the northeastern part of the state . 
the arkansas river  -lrb-  pronunciation varies  -rrb-  ,  rising in colorado ,  flows with a bending course for nearly across the western and southern parts of the state . 
in english ,  the letter k usually represents the voiceless velar plosive . 
in the earliest latin inscriptions ,  the letters c ,  k and q were all used to represent the sounds and  -lrb-  which were not differentiated in writing  -rrb-  . 
k  -lrb-  named `` kay ''   -rrb-  is the eleventh letter of the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
kuiper's test is closely related to the better-known kolmogorov–smirnov test  -lrb-  or k-s test as it is often called  -rrb-  . 
the test statistic ,  `` v '' ,  for kuiper's test is defined as follows . 
another test statistic having this property is the watson statistic ,  which is related to the cramér–von mises test . 
on the subject ,  hammett said:
hammett is one of the main characters in ``  '' ,  along with the rest of the current line-up of metallica . 
when he was asked about his experiences of recording `` st .  anger '' ,  hammett said:
the bridge for `` creeping death '' was originally an exodus riff that hammett took with him to metallica . 
in 2009, hammett was ranked number 15 in joel mciver's book `` the 100 greatest metal guitarists '' . 
in 2006, hammett voiced himself on `` the simpsons ''  -lrb-  `` the mook ,  the chef ,  the wife and her homer ''  -rrb-  . 
hammett's musical interests eventually drew him into the fledgling thrash metal genre . 
hammett played guitar on the track `` satan '' with orbital for the `` spawn: the album '' soundtrack released in july 1997.
during the reign of qapagan khaghan ,  kul tigin and his older brother earned reputation for their military prowess . 
he was a second son of ilterish qaghan ,  the dynasty's founder ,  and the younger brother of bilge kaghan ,  the fourth kaghan . 
kul tigin was commanding a unit in battle ,  in which he lost 3 horses . 
kul tigin  -lrb-  old turkic: 𐰚𐰇𐰠𐱅𐰃𐰏𐰤 ,  `` kültigin '' ,   -lrb-   ,  pinyin: quètèqín ,  wade-giles: chüeh-t'e-ch'in ,  xiao'erjing: ٿُؤ تْ ٿٍ ,  ad 684–731 -rrb- was a general of the second turkic khaganate . 
friedman would not return to buffalo until 2012.
he was born as richard samet friedman in chicago in 1944 to jewish parents ,  dr .  s .  thomas friedman and his wife minnie  -lrb-  samet  -rrb-  friedman . 
friedman graduated from austin high school in austin ,  texas in 1962.
in 1975, friedman and his band taped an `` austin city limits '' show which was never aired . 
reshevsky won all 50 games ,  but friedman was ,  by far ,  the youngest competitor . 
by 1973, friedman had formed his second band ,  kinky friedman and the texas jewboys ,  which many took to be a play on the name of the famous band bob wills and his texas playboys . 
gödel visited the ias again in the autumn of 1935.
at the age of 18, gödel joined his brother in vienna and entered the university of vienna . 
to prove this theorem ,  gödel developed a technique now known as gödel numbering ,  which codes formal expressions as natural numbers . 
this problem became the topic that gödel chose for his doctoral work . 
this work was developed in number theory ,  using gödel numbering . 
gödel was born april 28, 1906, in brünn ,  austria-hungary  -lrb-  now brno ,  czech republic  -rrb-  into the german family of rudolf gödel  -lrb-  1874–1929 -rrb- ,  the manager of a textile factory ,  and marianne gödel  -lrb-  née handschuh ,  1879–1966 -rrb- . 
gödel earned his habilitation at vienna in 1932, and in 1933 he became a `` privatdozent ''  -lrb-  unpaid lecturer  -rrb-  there . 
in his two-page paper `` zum intuitionistischen aussagenkalkül ''  -lrb-  1932 -rrb- gödel refuted the finite-valuedness of intuitionistic logic . 
little is known of marx's childhood . 
marx was born on 5 may 1818 to heinrich marx  -lrb-  1777–1838 -rrb- and henriette pressburg  -lrb-  1788–1863 -rrb- . 
politically ,  marx's legacy is more complex . 
dana ,  a fourierist and an abolitionist ,  was marx's contact . 
marx and engels sympathised with the narodnik revolutionaries of the 1860s and 1870s . 
marx supported the cause of irish independence . 
at this point ,  marx moved from paris to brussels ,  where marx hoped to once again continue his study of capitalism and political economy . 
marx had a special concern with how people relate to their own labour power . 
marx and his family were reburied on a new site nearby in november 1954.
marx had been emotionally close to his father and treasured his memory after his death . 
from an academic perspective ,  marx's work contributed to the birth of modern sociology . 
marx and engels published in the `` neue rheinische zeitung '' in february 1849:
an outline of `` marxism '' had definitely formed in the mind of karl marx by late 1844.
marx's ideas have had a profound impact on world politics and intellectual thought . 
marx had his articles translated from german by  ,  until his proficiency in english had become adequate . 
marx viewed russia as the main counter-revolutionary threat to european revolutions . 
marx is typically cited as one of the principal architects of modern social science . 
marx's surviving daughters eleanor and laura ,  as well as charles longuet and paul lafargue ,  marx's two french socialist sons-in-law ,  were also in attendance . 
according to blumenberg ,  marx's irritability is often found in liver patients:
at the same time ,  marx stressed that capitalism was unstable and prone to periodic crises . 
born in trier ,  germany ,  marx studied law and philosophy at university . 
marx's thought demonstrates influences from many thinkers including ,  but not limited to:
marx's first article for the paper ,  on the british parliamentary elections ,  was published on 21 august 1852.
marx argued in `` the german ideology '' that capitalism will end through the organised actions of an international working class:
marx has been described as one of the most influential figures in human history ,  and his work has been both lauded and criticised . 
both marx and engels participated in drawing up the programme and organisational principles of the new communist league . 
like so many other early writings of his ,  `` german ideology '' would not be published in marx's lifetime and would be published only in 1932.
marx moved to london in early june 1849 and would remain based in the city for the rest of his life . 
spending summer and autumn 1836 in trier ,  marx became more serious about his studies and his life . 
in 2017 a feature film ,  `` the young karl marx '' ,  featuring marx ,  his wife jenny marx ,  and his collaborator friedrich engels ,  among other revolutionaries and intellectuals prior to the revolutions of 1848 received good reviews both for its historical accuracy and its brio in treating the intellectual life . 
in late 1847, marx and engels began writing what was to become their most famous work – a programme of action for the communist league . 
this work is also notable for another famous marx quote: `` from each according to his ability ,  to each according to his need '' . 
in may 2018, european commission president jean-claude juncker attended the event in karl marx's hometown of trier ,  germany ,  at which a statue of marx ,  donated by the chinese government ,  was unveiled . 
although critical of bauer ,  marx was increasingly influenced by the ideas of the young hegelians max stirner and ludwig feuerbach ,  but eventually marx and engels abandoned feuerbachian materialism as well . 
the probability of a player hitting all 20 numbers on a 20 spot ticket is 1 in 3,535,316,142,212,174,320.
keno is a lottery-like gambling game often played at modern casinos ,  and also offered as a game by some lotteries . 
some of the other paying `` catches '' on a 20 spot ticket or any other ticket with high `` solid catch '' odds are in reality very possible to hit:
even though it is virtually impossible to hit all 20 numbers on a 20 spot ticket ,  the same player would typically also get paid for hitting “catches” 0, 1, 2, 3, and 7 through 19 out of 20, often with the 17 through 19 catches paying the same as the solid 20 hit . 
in 1999, meave leakey led an expedition in kenya to search for fossils ,  the second such expedition in the area . 
knm-wt 40000 is the holotype ,  the specimen of which the description and name of the species is based . 
kenyanthropus platyops is a 3.5 to 3.2-million-year-old  -lrb-  pliocene  -rrb-  hominin fossil discovered in lake turkana ,  kenya in 1999 by justus erus ,  who was part of meave leakey's team . 
the species name “ ''platyops ''” is derived from two greek words: `` platus '' ,  which means `` flat '' ,  and `` opsis '' ,  which means `` to appear ,  to look '' ,  referring to the appearance of the very flat face of the fossil cranium . 
the location of the mudstone was near a shallow lake ,  suggesting that the hominins lived near rivers or lakes . 
after regaining independence from japan ,  many korean martial arts schools that opened up in the 1940s and 50's were founded by masters who had trained in karate in japan as part of their martial arts training . 
the martial arts movies of the 1960s and 1970s served to greatly increase the popularity of martial arts around the world ,  and in english the word `` karate '' began to be used in a generic way to refer to all striking-based oriental martial arts . 
japan was invading china at the time ,  and funakoshi knew that the art of tang/china hand would not be accepted; thus the change of the art's name to `` way of the empty hand . `` 
shintani died 7 may 2000.
by the 1970s ,  martial arts films had formed a mainstream genre that propelled karate and other asian martial arts into mass popularity . 
thus the word `` karate '' was originally a way of expressing `` martial art from china . `` 
the tournament may be exclusively for members of a particular style  -lrb-  closed  -rrb-  or one in which any martial artist from any style may participate within the rules of the tournament  -lrb-  open  -rrb-  . 
the ryukyu kingdom was annexed by japan in 1879.
matsumura's style would later become the shōrin-ryū style . 
despite the early adoption of shotokan in the uk ,  it was not until 1964 that jka shotokan officially came to the uk . 
in 1961 hidetaka nishiyama ,  a co-founder of the japan karate association  -lrb-  jka  -rrb-  and student of gichin funakoshi ,  began teaching in the united states . 
gichin funakoshi ,  founder of shotokan karate ,  is generally credited with having introduced and popularized karate on the main islands of japan . 
outside of the shotokan stable of karate styles ,  wado ryu karate was also an early adopted style in the uk ,  introduced by tatsuo suzuki ,  a 6th dan at the time in 1964.
it is `` the way of the empty hand '' . 
won kuk lee ,  a korean student of funakoshi ,  founded the first martial arts school after the japanese occupation of korea ended in 1945, called the chung do kwan . 
outside of bell's organisation ,  charles mack traveled to japan and studied under masatoshi nakayama of the japan karate association who graded mack to 1st dan shotokan on 4 march 1962 in japan . 
in 1924 gichin funakoshi ,  founder of shotokan karate ,  adopted the dan system from the judo founder jigoro kano using a rank scheme with a limited set of belt colors . 
matsumura taught his art to itosu ankō  -lrb-  1831–1915 -rrb- among others . 
tsutomu ohshima began studying karate under shotokan's founder ,  gichin funakoshi ,  while a student at waseda university ,  beginning in 1948.
bunkai is a useful tool to understand a kata . 
in canada during this same time ,  karate was also introduced by masami tsuruoka who had studied in japan in the 1940s under tsuyoshi chitose . 
however ,  in 1965 taiji kase came from japan along with enoeda and shirai ,  who went to england and italy respectively ,  and karate came under the influence of the jka
it includes japan's annexation of the okinawan island group in 1872, the first sino-japanese war  -lrb-  1894–1895 -rrb- ,  the russo-japanese war  -lrb-  1904–1905 -rrb- ,  the annexation of korea ,  and the rise of japanese militarism  -lrb-  1905–1945 -rrb- . 
karate ,  although not widely used in mixed martial arts ,  has been effective for some mma practitioners . 
hiroshi shirai ,  one of the original instructors sent by the jka to europe along with kase ,  enoeda and kanazawa ,  moved to italy in 1965 and quickly established a shotokan enclave that spawned several instructors who in their turn soon spread the style all over the country . 
this approach became increasingly popular since the 1970s ,  and since the 1990s ,  kickboxing has contributed to the emergence of mixed martial arts via further hybridisation with ground fighting techniques from brazilian jiu-jitsu and folk wrestling . 
kickboxing is a group of stand-up combat sports based on kicking and punching ,  historically developed from karate mixed with boxing . 
the combined population of the koreas is about 76 million  -lrb-  north korea: 25 million ,  south korea: 51 million  -rrb-  . 
the classification of korean is debated . 
in south korea ,  korea as a whole is referred to as  `` country of the `` han '' ''  -rrb-  . 
the name korea is now commonly used in english contexts by both north and south korea . 
today ,  both south korea and north korea celebrate hangul day as a national holiday . 
modern korean is written almost exclusively in the script of the korean alphabet  -lrb-  known as hangul in south korea and chosungul in china and north korea  -rrb-  ,  which was invented in the 15th century . 
korea is a region in east asia . 
korean is the official language of both north and south korea ,  and  -lrb-  along with mandarin  -rrb-  of yanbian korean autonomous prefecture in the manchuria area of china . 
the three kingdoms of korea consisted of goguryeo ,  silla ,  and baekje . 
in 1592 and again in 1597, the japanese invaded korea; the korean military at the time was unprepared and untrained ,  due to two centuries of peace on the korean peninsula . 
north korea and south korea usually compete as two separate nations in international events . 
the politics of the cold war resulted in the 1948 establishment of two separate governments ,  north korea and south korea . 
the korean war broke out when soviet-backed north korea invaded south korea ,  though neither side gained much territory as a result . 
taekwondo is one of korea's most famous sports . 
korea and japan still dispute the ownership of the dokdo ,  islets located east of the korean peninsula . 
consequently ,  north korea ,  a soviet-style socialist republic was established in the north and south korea; a western-style regime ,  was established in the south . 
the korean peninsula remained divided ,  the korean demilitarized zone being the `` de facto '' border between the two states . 
goryeo was founded in 918 and replaced silla as the ruling dynasty of korea . 
during the japanese annexation ,  the korean language was suppressed in an effort to eradicate korean national identity . 
south korea ranks second on math and literature and first in  . 
in 1897, the joseon dynasty proclaimed the korean empire  -lrb-  1897–1910 -rrb- . 
in 2018, the leaders of north korea and south korea officially signed the panmunjom declaration ,  announcing that they will work to end the conflict . 
confucian tradition has dominated korean thought ,  along with contributions by buddhism ,  taoism ,  and korean shamanism . 
the korean alphabet hangul was also invented during this time by king sejong the great . 
in 1904, the russo-japanese war pushed the russians out of the fight for korea . 
subsequent to its establishment ,  hyungchoogil was reinterpreted as a day of remembrance for those who died defending korea in all conflicts ,  not only during the korean war . 
in june 1950 north korea invaded the south ,  using soviet tanks and weaponry . 
in north korea ,  china ,  vietnam and japan ,  korea as a whole is referred to as  ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` jīusīn '' ,  `` cháoxiǎn '' ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` chōsen '' ,  ``  ''  -lrb-    -rrb-   `` land of the morning calm ''  -rrb-  . 
beginning in the 6th century ,  silla's power gradually extended across the korean peninsula . 
korea is bordered by china to the northwest ,  russia to the northeast ,  and neighbours japan to the east by the korea strait and the sea of japan  -lrb-  east sea  -rrb-  . 
ssireum is a traditional form of wrestling that has been practiced in korea for thousands of years ,  with evidence discovered from goguryeo of korea's three kingdoms period  -lrb-  57  to 688 -rrb- . 
other large groups of korean speakers through korean diaspora are found in china ,  the united states ,  japan ,  former soviet union and elsewhere . 
if `` v '' is either the empty set ∅ or the singleton set {ε} ,  then `` v '' = {ε}; if `` v '' is any other finite set ,  then `` v '' is a countably infinite set . 
korean is the official language of north korea and south korea . 
the korean names for the language are based on the names for korea used in both north korea and south korea . 
in south korea ,  the korean language is referred to by many names including `` hanguk-eo ''  -lrb-  `` korean language ''  -rrb-  ,  `` hanguk-mal ''  -lrb-  `` korean speech ''  -rrb-  and `` uri-mal ''  -lrb-  `` our language ''  -rrb-  . 
this suggests a strong korean presence or that khitan was in fact a koreanic or para-koreanic language . 
korean is spoken by the korean people in north korea and south korea and by the korean diaspora in many countries including the people's republic of china ,  the united states ,  japan ,  and russia . 
modern korean descends from middle korean ,  which in turn descends from old korean ,  which descends from the language spoken in prehistoric korea  -lrb-  labeled proto-korean  -rrb-  ,  whose nature is debated ,  in part because korean genetic origins are controversial  -lrb-  see koreans for archaeological and genetic studies of the koreans  -rrb-  . 
korean is agglutinative in its morphology and sov in its syntax . 
the english word `` korean '' is derived from goryeo ,  which is thought to be the first korean dynasty known to western nations . 
in south korea ,  the regulatory body for korean is the seoul-based national institute of the korean language ,  which was created by presidential decree on january 23, 1991.
korean has numerous small local dialects  -lrb-  called `` mal ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  literally `` speech '' ,  `` saturi ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or `` bang'eon ''  -lrb-   in korean  -rrb-  . 
 -lrb-  2014–2015 -rrb- . 
in 1995, maclachlan starred in paul verhoeven's `` showgirls '' . 
kyle merritt maclachlan  -lrb-  ; born february 22, 1959 -rrb- is an american actor . 
maclachlan was born at yakima valley memorial hospital in yakima ,  washington . 
according to maclachlan ,  they had been engaged for a few years when their six-year relationship ended in 1998.
maclachlan appeared as musician ray manzarek in oliver stone's 1991 film `` the doors '' ,  about the band of the same name . 
in the 1993 film version of franz kafka's `` the trial '' ,  with a screenplay by harold pinter ,  maclachlan played the lead role of the persecuted josef k . 
maclachlan played special agent dale cooper in lynch's abc television series `` twin peaks ''  -lrb-  1990–91 -rrb- ,  reprising that role for lynch's 1992 prequel ``  '' . 
however ,  kwolek was not very involved in developing the applications of kevlar . 
kevlar is a heat-resistant and strong synthetic fiber ,  related to other aramids such as nomex and technora . 
poly-paraphenylene terephthalamide – branded kevlar – was invented by polish-american chemist stephanie kwolek while working for dupont ,  in anticipation of a gasoline shortage . 
the feud between kla and dlk continued in the post-war kosovo . 
the kosovo war was an armed conflict in kosovo that started in late february 1998 and lasted until 11 june 1999.
on 7 september 1990 the constitution of the republic of kosovo was promulgated by the disbanded assembly of kosovo . 
one was conducted by the independent international commission on kosovo ,  entitled `` the kosovo report '' ,  which found that:
after the war ,  around 200,000 serbs ,  romani and other non-albanians fled kosovo . 
there was a perception among serbian nationalists that serbs were being driven out of kosovo . 
while this was most obviously a threat to the milošević government ,  it also included a coded threat to the albanians: any decision would depend on the `` position and actions of the kosovo albanian leadership and all kosovo albanian armed elements in and around kosovo . `` 
the democratic league of kosovo led by ibrahim rugova had been the leading political entity in kosovo since its creation in 1989.
it is widely believed that the kla received financial and material support from the kosovo albanian diaspora . 
it was fought by the forces of the federal republic of yugoslavia  -lrb-  by this time ,  consisting of the republics of montenegro and serbia  -rrb-  ,  which controlled kosovo before the war ,  and the kosovo albanian rebel group known as the kosovo liberation army  -lrb-  kla  -rrb-  ,  with air support from the north atlantic treaty organisation  -lrb-  nato  -rrb-  from 24 march 1999, and ground support from the albanian army . 
kosovo liberation army shared with democratic league of kosovo  -lrb-  ldk  -rrb-  ,  a party led by ibrahim rugova ,  common goal of ending repression from belgrade and making kosovo independent ,  but kla was opposed on ,  what they called ,  'internal rule' of kosovo by ldk . 
in november 1988 kosovo's head of the provincial committee was arrested . 
selimi stated that 'serbs who have blood on their hands would have to leave the kosovo' . 
in 1981 it was reported that some 4,000 serbs moved from kosovo to central serbia after the kosovo albanian riots in march that resulted in several serb deaths and the desecration of serbian orthodox architecture and graveyards . 
on 26 june 1990 serbian authorities closed the kosovo assembly ,  citing special circumstances . 
in early mid-september ,  for the first time ,  kla activity was reported in northern kosovo around podujevo . 
on 24 march at 19:00 utc nato started its bombing campaign against yugoslavia . 
the publication of these images sent a signal to the kla ,  its supporters and sympathisers ,  and to observers in general ,  that the us was decisively backing the kla and the albanian population in kosovo . 
while rugova promised to uphold the minority rights of serbs in kosovo ,  kla was much less tolerant . 
on 23 march ,  the serbian assembly accepted the principle of autonomy for kosovo and non-military part of the agreement ,  while rejecting a nato troop presence . 
the clinton administration claimed that dayton bound yugoslavia to hold discussions with rugova over kosovo . 
the kla ,  formed in 1991, initiated its first campaign in 1995 when it launched attacks targeting serbian law enforcement in kosovo ,  and in june 1996 the group claimed responsibility for acts of sabotage targeting kosovo police stations . 
on 24 may 1992 kosovar albanians held unofficial elections for an assembly and president of the republic of kosovo . 
in early april ,  serbia arranged for a referendum on the issue of foreign interference in kosovo . 
following the military campaign ,  the involvement of russian peacekeepers proved to be tense and challenging to the nato kosovo force . 
us president clinton and his administration were accused of inflating the number of kosovo albanians killed by state forces . 
meanwhile ,  the us held an `` outer wall of sanctions '' on yugoslavia which had been tied to a series of issues ,  kosovo being one of them . 
the war ended with the kumanovo treaty ,  with yugoslav and serb forces agreeing to withdraw from kosovo to make way for an international presence . 
a new set of kla attacks in mid-august triggered yugoslavian operations in south-central kosovo south of the pristina-peć road . 
rugova's policy of passive resistance succeeded in keeping kosovo quiet during the war with slovenia ,  and the wars in croatia and bosnia during the early 1990s . 
student demonstrations and riots in belgrade in june 1968 spread to kosovo in november ,  but yugoslav security forces quelled them . 
the lack of albanian-language educational materials in yugoslavia hampered albanian education in kosovo ,  so an agreement was struck with albania itself to supply textbooks . 
in 1974 kosovo's political status improved further when a new yugoslav constitution granted an expanded set of political rights . 
when retreating from kosovo after nato intervention ,  yugoslav units appeared combat effective with high morale and displaying large holdings of undamaged equipment . 
milošević and his government claimed that the constitutional changes were necessary to protect kosovo's remaining serbs against harassment from the albanian majority . 
yugoslavia claimed that nato attacks caused between 1,200 and 5,700 civilian casualties . 
kosovo was the poorest entity of yugoslavia: the average per capita income was $795, compared with the national average of $2,635.
the yeltsin agreement included milošević's allowing international representatives to set up a mission in kosovo to monitor the situation there . 
in 2000, a bbc article stated that `` nato at war '' shows how the united states ,  which had described the kla as `` terrorist '' ,  now sought a relationship with the group . 
kent is represented in cricket by kent county cricket club . 
kent was traditionally partitioned into east and west kent ,  and into lathes and hundreds . 
kent is in the southeastern corner of england . 
kent is one of the warmest parts of britain . 
other rivers of kent include the river stour in the east . 
at the 2011 census ,  kent ,  including medway ,  had 1,727,665 residents  -lrb-  18.0% of which in medway  -rrb- ; had 711,847 households  -lrb-  17.5% of which in medway  -rrb-  and had 743,436 dwellings  -lrb-  14.8% of which in medway  -rrb-  . 
music education is provided by kent music  -lrb-  formerly kent music school  -rrb-  ,  which has its origins in the 1940s . 
originally the east kent railway in 1858, it linked the northeast kent coast with london terminals at victoria and blackfriars . 
from about 1900, several coal pits operated in east kent . 
51.1% of kent's population excluding medway was female — as to medway this proportion was 50.4% . 
kent is the main area for hazelnut production in the uk . 
kent is a county in south east england and one of the home counties . 
some of kent is contiguous with the greater london sprawl ,  notably parts of dartford . 
kent has three county-wide stations – bbc radio kent ,  based in tunbridge wells; and the commercial stations heart kent and gold ,  both based in whitstable and london . 
after the war kent's borders changed several more times . 
kent music provides services across the county including kent county youth orchestra ,  kent youth choirs ,  and an annual summer school at benenden school . 
west and central kent has long had many city of london commuters . 
the tables below provide statistics for the administrative county of kent ,  that is ,  excluding medway . 
together ,  the two kent authorities have 38 of the 164 grammar schools remaining in britain . 
the second designated english cathedral was in kent at rochester cathedral . 
in the early 19th century ,  smugglers were very active on the kent coastline . 
kent county council's headquarters are in maidstone ,  while medway's offices are at gun wharf ,  chatham . 
men and women from east of the medway are men  -lrb-  or maids  -rrb-  of kent ,  those from the west are kentishmen or kentish maids . 
kent's principal river ,  the river medway ,  rises near east grinstead in sussex and flows eastwards to maidstone . 
in 1889 the county of london was created and took over responsibility for local administration of parts of north-west kent . 
kent is home to two national league netball clubs ,  both based in northwest kent: telstars  -lrb-  premier division 2 -rrb- and kcnc  -lrb-  premier division 3 -rrb- . 
kent has provided inspiration for several notable writers and artists . 
caesar wrote that the people of kent are 'by far the most civilised inhabitants of britain' . 
geneva  -rrb-  as being in 1674.
the authorized version is notably more latinate than previous english versions ,  especially the geneva bible . 
the use of authorized version or authorised version ,  capitalized and used as a name ,  is found as early as 1814.
the books of the king james version include the 39 books of the old testament ,  an intertestamental section containing 14 books of the apocrypha ,  and the 27 books of the new testament . 
the king james only movement advocates the superiority of the king james version over all other english translations . 
the authorized version became the only current version circulating among english-speaking people . 
the authorized version was meant to replace the `` bishops' bible '' as the official version for readings in the church of england . 
the authorized version is in the public domain in most of the world . 
the king james version is also one of the versions authorized to be used in the services of the episcopal church and the anglican communion ,  as it is the historical bible of this church . 
the authorized version new testament owes much more to the vulgate than does the old testament; still ,  at least 80% of the text is unaltered from tyndale's translation . 
today the unqualified title `` king james version '' usually indicates this oxford standard text . 
a number of bible verses in the king james version of the new testament are not found in more recent bible translations ,  where these are based on modern critical texts . 
the king james version  -lrb-  kjv  -rrb-  ,  also known as the king james bible  -lrb-  kjb  -rrb-  or simply the version  -lrb-  av  -rrb-  ,  is an english translation of the christian bible for the church of england ,  begun in 1604 and completed/published in 1611 under the sponsorship of king james i . 
a particular verse for which blayney's 1769 text differs from parris's 1760 version is matthew 5:13, where parris  -lrb-  1760 -rrb- has
only in the authorized version does the translation vary between the two verses . 
for their new testament ,  the translators chiefly used the 1598 and 1588/89 greek editions of theodore beza ,  which also present beza's latin version of the greek and stephanus's edition of the latin vulgate . 
as early as 1814, we find king james' version ,  evidently a descriptive phrase ,  being used . 
in the 1662 `` book of common prayer '' ,  the text of the authorized version finally supplanted that of the `` great bible '' in the epistle and gospel readings – though the prayer book psalter nevertheless continues in the great bible version . 
like tyndale's translation and the geneva bible ,  the authorized version was translated primarily from greek ,  hebrew and aramaic texts ,  although with secondary reference both to the latin vulgate ,  and to more recent scholarly latin versions; two books of the apocrypha were translated from a latin source . 
in the `` book of common prayer ''  -lrb-  1662 -rrb- ,  the text of the `` authorized version '' replaced the text of the `` great bible '' for epistle and gospel readings  -lrb-  but not for the psalter ,  which substantially retained coverdale's `` great bible '' version  -rrb-  ,  and as such was authorised by act of parliament . 
the authorized version has been called `` the most influential version of the most influential book in the world ,  in what is now its most influential language '' ,  `` the most important book in english religion and culture '' ,  and `` the most celebrated book in the english-speaking world '' . 
translations of the books of the biblical apocrypha were necessary for the king james version ,  as readings from these books were included in the daily old testament lectionary of the book of common prayer . 
the `` authorized version ''s acceptance by the general public took longer . 
in britain ,  the 1611 translation is generally known as the `` authorised version '' today . 
the second preface was called ``  '' ,  a long and learned essay that defends the undertaking of the new version . 
by the first half of the 18th century ,  the `` authorized version '' had become effectively unchallenged as the english translation used in anglican and english protestant churches ,  except for the psalms and some short passages in the `` book of common prayer '' of the church of england . 
the authorized version maintained its effective dominance throughout the first half of the 20th century . 
the king james version contains several mistranslations; especially in the old testament where the knowledge of hebrew and cognate languages was uncertain at the time . 
the oxford university press paperback edition of the `` authorized king james version '' provides oxford's standard text ,  and also includes the prefatory section `` the translators to the reader '' . 
in 1525, william tyndale ,  an english contemporary of martin luther ,  undertook a translation of the new testament . 
spacey's father was unconvinced that spacey could make a career for himself as an actor ,  and did not change his mind until spacey became well-known . 
spacey is well known in hollywood for his impressions . 
sam mendes directed spacey in shakespeare's `` richard iii ''; spacey played the title role . 
on october 29, 2017, actor anthony rapp alleged that spacey ,  while appearing intoxicated ,  made a sexual advance toward him in 1986, when rapp was 14 and spacey was 26.
in october 2008, spacey started the kevin spacey foundation in the united kingdom to encourage youth involvement in the arts . 
spacey appeared in the film `` billionaire boys club '' ,  which had a limited release on august 17, 2018.
in broadway theatre ,  spacey won a tony award in 1991 for his role in `` lost in yonkers '' . 
kevin spacey fowler  -lrb-  born july 26, 1959 -rrb- is an american actor ,  producer and singer . 
spacey also appeared in `` edison '' ,  which received a direct-to-video release in 2006.
the film was released on august 5, 2016.
on january 7, 2019, spacey pleaded not guilty to sexually abusing unruh's son . 
in december ,  spacey's `` usual suspects '' co-star gabriel byrne revealed that production on that film was shut down for two days because spacey made unwanted sexual advances toward a younger actor . 
in 2000, spacey brought dreyer to the academy awards; during the acceptance speech for his best actor award ,  spacey stated ,  `` dianne ,  thank you for teaching me about caring about the right things ,  and i love you . `` 
on november 1, 2017, spacey stated that he would be seeking `` evaluation and treatment '' for his behavior . 
in september 2006, spacey said that he intended to take up british citizenship when it is offered to him . 
in october 2017, spacey was accused by actor anthony rapp of making a sexual advance toward him when rapp was 14.
the charity shut down in february 2018 following sexual misconduct allegations against spacey . 
the next year ,  spacey appeared in `` billionaire boys club '' with his role unchanged . 
during the late 1970s ,  drexler began to develop ideas about molecular nanotechnology  -lrb-  mnt  -rrb-  . 
drexler is no longer a member of the foresight institute . 
drexler holds three degrees from mit . 
drexler was married to christine peterson for 21 years . 
kim eric drexler  -lrb-  born april 25, 1955 -rrb- is an american engineer best known for seminal studies of the potential of molecular nanotechnology  -lrb-  mnt  -rrb-  ,  from the 1970s and 1980s . 
in march 2004, drexler signed scientists' open letter in support of cryonics . 
north korea nevertheless claims that it won the korean war . 
china promised to support the north koreans in the event of a war against south korea . 
the korean war  -lrb-  in south korean  ,  `` korean war ''; in north korean  ,  `` fatherland: liberation war ''; 25 june 1950 – 27 july 1953 -rrb- was a war between north korea  -lrb-  with the support of china and the soviet union  -rrb-  and south korea  -lrb-  with the principal support of the united states  -rrb-  . 
the south korean government estimates 500 south korean pows continue to be detained in north korea . 
north korea continued to claim that any south korean pow who stayed in the north did so voluntarily . 
north korea may have detained up to 50,000 south korean pows after the ceasefire . 
there were numerous atrocities and massacres of civilians throughout the korean war committed by both the north and south koreans . 
throughout 1949 and 1950, the soviets continued arming north korea . 
on 8 september 1945, u . s . 
the war began on 25 june 1950 when north korea invaded south korea following a series of clashes along the border . 
serious border clashes between south and north occurred on 4 august 1949, when thousands of north korean troops attacked south korean troops occupying territory north of the 38th parallel . 
the u . s .  spent $30 billion in total on the war . 
despite pyongyang's expectations ,  however ,  beijing refused to help north korea for another war in korea . 
in north korea ,  the war is officially referred to as the `` fatherland liberation war ''  -lrb-  `` choguk haebang chǒnjaeng ''  -rrb-  or alternatively the ``  ''chosǒn `` korean '' war '' ''  -lrb-   ,  `` chosǒn chǒnjaeng ''  -rrb-  . 
after november 1950, north korean armor was rarely encountered . 
because neither korea had a significant navy ,  the korean war featured few naval battles . 
on 27 april 2018, it was announced that north korea and south korea agreed to talks to end the ongoing 65 year conflict . 
the korean war was the first war in which jet aircraft played the central role in air combat . 
in 1951, the u . s .  escalated closest to atomic warfare in korea . 
stalin initially did not think the time was right for a war in korea . 
in april 2018, the leaders of north and south korea met at the demilitarized zone and agreed to work towards a treaty to formally end the korean war . 
the chinese and north koreans estimated that about 390,000 soldiers from the united states ,  660,000 soldiers from south korea and 29,000 other un soldiers were `` eliminated '' from the battlefield . 
the soviet union withdrew as agreed from korea in 1948, and u . s .  troops withdrew in 1949.
during most of the war ,  the un navies patrolled the west and east coasts of north korea ,  sinking supply and ammunition ships and denying the north koreans the ability to resupply from the sea . 
soviet generals with extensive combat experience from the second world war were sent to north korea as the soviet advisory group . 
of the korean war-era massacres that the truth and reconciliation commission was petitioned to investigate ,  82% were perpetrated by south korean forces ,  with 18% perpetrated by north korean forces . 
as soon as word of the attack was received ,  u . s .  secretary of state dean acheson informed president truman that the north koreans had invaded south korea . 
the initial assault by north korean kpa forces was aided by the use of soviet t-34-85 tanks . 
on 25 september ,  seoul was recaptured by south korean forces . 
taking advantage of the un command's strategic momentum against the communists ,  general macarthur believed it necessary to extend the korean war into china to destroy depots supplying the north korean war effort . 
almost every substantial building in north korea was destroyed as a result . 
after macarthur was removed as supreme commander in korea in april 1951, his successors continued this policy and ultimately extended it to all of north korea . 
beginning in 2005, the south korean truth and reconciliation commission has investigated numerous atrocities committed by the japanese colonial government ,  north korean military ,  u . s .  military ,  and the authoritarian south korean government . 
north korea held parliamentary elections three months later on 25 august . 
imperial japan destroyed the influence of china over korea in the first sino-japanese war  -lrb-  1894–95 -rrb- ,  ushering in the short-lived korean empire . 
after the first two months of war ,  south korean and u . s .  forces rapidly dispatched to korea were on the point of defeat ,  forced back to a small area in the south known as the pusan perimeter . 
by 1949, south korean forces had reduced the active number of communist guerrillas in the south from 5,000 to 1,000.
during the first days of the war north korean soldiers committed the seoul national university hospital massacre . 
since the armistice ,  there have been numerous incursions and acts of aggression by north korea . 
although some south korean and u . s .  intelligence officers predicted an attack from the north ,  similar predictions were made before and nothing happened . 
as with the aerial bombing campaigns over germany and japan in world war ii ,  the nominal objective of the u . s .  air force was to destroy north korea's war infrastructure and shatter the country's morale . 
in china ,  the war is officially called the `` war to resist america and aid korea ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  although the term ``  ''chaoxian ''  -lrb-  korean  -rrb-  war ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is also used in unofficial contexts ,  along with the term ``  ''hán ''  -lrb-  korean  -rrb-  war ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  more commonly used in regions such as hong kong and macau . 
by 1 october 1950, the un command repelled the kpa northwards past the 38th parallel; the rok army crossed after them ,  into north korea . 
large u . s .  garrisons and air forces were in japan ,  but only 200–300 american troops were in korea . 
the final stage would involve destroying south korean government remnants and capturing the rest of south korea ,  including the ports . 
on 20 august 1950, premier zhou enlai informed the un that `` korea is china's neighbor  .  .  . 
after a new wave of un sanctions ,  on 11 march 2013, north korea claimed that the armistice had become invalid . 
in 2016, it was revealed that north korea approached the united states about conducting formal peace talks to formally end the war . 
although each navy consisted of only several small warships ,  the north and south korean navies fought in the war as sea-borne artillery for their armies . 
cnn reported ,  citing `` encyclopædia britannica '' that north korean civilian casualties were 600,000, while south korean civilian casualties reached one million . 
the escaped pows have testified about their treatment and written memoirs about their lives in north korea . 
on 25 june 1950, the united nations security council unanimously condemned the north korean invasion of the republic of korea ,  with un security council resolution 82.
the essential point  .  .  .  is that the american response to the north korean attack stemmed from considerations of u . s .  policy toward japan . `` 
for the remainder of the korean war the un command and the pva fought but exchanged little territory ,  as the stalemate held . 
as the overall commander of chinese forces ,  zhou enlai suggested that the north koreans should attempt to eliminate the enemy forces at incheon only if they had reserves of at least 100,000 men; otherwise ,  he advised the north koreans to withdraw their forces north . 
as a product of the cold war between the soviet union and the united states ,  korea had been split into two sovereign states . 
later ,  a u . s .  congress war crimes investigation ,  the united states senate subcommittee on korean war atrocities of the permanent subcommittee of the investigations of the committee on government operations ,  reported that `` two-thirds of all american prisoners of war in korea died as a result of war crimes '' . 
after conferring with mao that this would be macarthur's most likely strategy ,  zhou briefed soviet and north korean advisers of lei's findings ,  and issued orders to chinese army commanders deployed on the korean border to prepare for u . s .  naval activity in the korea strait . 
the north korean contributions to the chinese communist victory were not forgotten after the creation of the people's republic of china in 1949.
on 12 august 1950, the u . s .  air force dropped 625 tons of bombs on north korea; two weeks later ,  the daily tonnage increased to some 800 tons . 
following the war ,  dönitz was held as a prisoner of war by the allies . 
the following is dönitz's description of his new government:
on 1 may ,  dönitz announced that hitler had fallen and had appointed him as his successor . 
despite his postwar claims ,  dönitz was seen as supportive of nazism during the war . 
the following is dönitz's description of his showdown with himmler:
several antisemitic statements by dönitz are known . 
the war ended in 1918, but dönitz remained in a british camp near sheffield as a prisoner of war until returning to germany in july 1920.
dönitz was born in grünau near berlin ,  germany ,  to anna beyer and emil dönitz ,  an engineer ,  in 1891.
dönitz briefly succeeded adolf hitler as the head of state of nazi germany . 
he began his career in the imperial german navy before world war i . 
the major german naval operation of the war was the invasion of norway in april 1940.
dönitz was found not guilty on count  -lrb-  1 -rrb- of the indictment ,  but guilty on counts  -lrb-  2 -rrb- and  -lrb-  3 -rrb- . 
in 1910, dönitz enlisted in the `` kaiserliche marine ''  -lrb-  `` imperial navy ''  -rrb-  . 
dönitz ,  in contrast ,  began intensely training his crews in the new tactics . 
he argued a german fleet of 300 of the newer type vii u-boats could knock britain out of the war . 
on 23 may ,  the dönitz government was dissolved when dönitz was arrested by an raf regiment task force under the command of squadron leader mark hobden . 
the kaddish at the end of the service became designated as `` kaddish yatom '' or mourner's kaddish  -lrb-  literally ,  `` orphan's kaddish ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''the kaddish is in origin a closing doxology to an aggadic discourse . `` 
the oldest version of the kaddish is found in the `` siddur of rab amram gaon '' ,  c .  900.
lönnrot and his contemporaries  -lrb-  e . g . 
in total ,  lönnrot made eleven field trips in search of poetry . 
elias lönnrot departed on the first part of his ninth field trip on 16 september 1836.
the first version of `` the kalevala ''  -lrb-  called `` the old kalevala ''  -rrb-  was published in 1835.
the tenth field trip is a relative unknown . 
on the fifth field trip ,  lönnrot met arhippa perttunen who provided a large portion of the verses for `` the kalevala '' . 
throughout his career lönnrot made a total of eleven field trips within a period of fifteen years . 
the kalevala  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a 19th-century work of epic poetry compiled by elias lönnrot from karelian and finnish oral folklore and mythology . 
the `` kalevala '''s metre is a form of trochaic tetrameter that is now known as the `` kalevala metre '' . 
prior to the publication of the `` kalevala '' ,  elias lönnrot compiled several related works ,  including the three-part `` kantele ''  -lrb-  1829–1831 -rrb- ,  the `` old kalevala ''  -lrb-  1835 -rrb- and the `` kanteletar ''  -lrb-  1840 -rrb- . 
the ku klux klan  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  commonly called the kkk or the klan and commonly misspelled as the klu klux klan ,  is an american hate group . 
klan operations ended in south carolina and gradually withered away throughout the rest of the south . 
the first klan flourished in the southern united states in the late 1860s ,  then died out by the early 1870s . 
hundreds of klan members were fined or imprisoned during the crackdown . 
the second klan was a formal fraternal organization ,  with a national and state structure . 
the first klan had mixed results in terms of achieving its objectives . 
by 1868, two years after the klan's creation ,  its activity was beginning to decrease . 
in addition to its active membership ,  the klan has an `` unknown number of associates and supporters . `` 
the klan attacked black members of the loyal leagues and intimidated southern republicans and freedmen's bureau workers . 
klan leader nathan bedford forrest boasted that the klan was a nationwide organization of 550,000 men and that he could muster 40,000 klansmen within five days notice . 
as of 2016, researchers estimate that there are just over 30 active klan groups existing in the united states ,  with about 130 chapters . 
one alabama newspaper editor declared `` the league is nothing more than a nigger ku klux klan . `` 
today ,  many sources classify the klan as a `` subversive or terrorist organization '' . 
national sentiment gathered to crack down on the klan ,  even though some democrats at the national level questioned whether the klan really existed ,  or believed that it was a creation of nervous southern republican governors . 
six confederate veterans from pulaski ,  tennessee created the original ku klux klan on december 24, 1865, during the reconstruction of the south after the civil war . 
 ''king kong '' was filmed in several stages over an eight-month period . 
the scene where kong puts ann in the top of a tree switched from a puppet in kong's hand to a projected footage of ann sitting . 
a `` tyrannosaurus '' attacks ann and kong ,  but he kills it in the battle . 
after facing a `` brontosaurus '' and kong himself ,  driscoll and denham are the only survivors . 
in may and june 1932, cooper directed the first live-action `` kong '' scenes on the jungle set built for `` the most dangerous game '' . 
however ,  film historians have generally agreed that all scenes involving kong were achieved with animated models . 
king kong is a 1933 american pre-code monster adventure film directed and produced by merian c .  cooper and ernest b .  schoedsack . 
over the four-day period ,  the film grossed $89,931.
shackled in chains ,  kong is taken to new york city and presented to a broadway theatre audience as `` kong ,  the eighth wonder of the world '' . 
it has been ranked by rotten tomatoes as the greatest horror film of all time and the thirty-third greatest film of all time . 
the last scene shot was that of driscoll and ann racing through the jungle to safety following their escape from kong's lair . 
she estimated she worked for ten weeks on `` kong '' over its eight-month production . 
the final scene was originally staged on the top of the empire state building ,  but cooper was dissatisfied and re shot the scene with kong lying dead in the street with the crowd gathered about him . 
a sequel quickly followed with `` son of kong ''  -lrb-  also released in 1933 -rrb- ,  with several more films made in the following decades . 
rko head selznick and his executives wanted kong introduced earlier in the film  -lrb-  believing the audience would grow bored waiting for his appearance  -rrb-  ,  but cooper persuaded them that a suspenseful build-up would make kong's entrance all the more exciting . 
it was used in the climactic scene where one of the curtiss helldiver planes attacking kong crashes from the top of the empire state building ,  and in the scene where natives are running through the foreground ,  while kong is fighting other natives at the wall . 
kennings are strongly associated with old norse and later icelandic and old english poetry . 
old english kennings are all of the simple type ,  possessing just two elements ,  e . g . 
word order in old norse was generally much freer than in modern english because old norse and old english are synthetic languages ,  where added prefixes and suffixes to the root word  -lrb-  the core noun ,  verb ,  adjective or adverb  -rrb-  carry grammatical meanings ,  whereas middle english and modern english use word order to carry grammatical information ,  so-called analytic languages . 
modern scholars have also applied the term kenning to similar figures of speech in other languages ,  especially old english . 
old norse `` kenna ''  -lrb-  modern icelandic `` kenna '' ,  swedish `` känna '' ,  danish `` kende '' ,  norwegian `` kjenne '' or `` kjenna ''  -rrb-  is cognate with old english `` cennan '' ,  old frisian `` kenna '' ,  `` kanna '' ,  old saxon  -lrb-  `` ant ''  -rrb- `` kennian ''  -lrb-  middle dutch and dutch `` kennen ''  -rrb-  ,  old high german  -lrb-  `` ir- '' ,  `` in- '' ,  `` pi- ''  -rrb-  `` chennan ''  -lrb-  middle high german and german `` kennen ''  -rrb-  ,  gothic `` kannjan '' < proto-germanic * ''kannjanan '' ,  originally causative of * ''kunnanan '' `` to know  -lrb-  how to  -rrb- ``  ,  whence modern english `` can '' 'to be able'  -lrb-  from the same proto-indo-european root as modern english `` know '' and latin-derived `` cognition ''  -rrb-  . 
steinbeck invented compound phrases  -lrb-  similar to the old english use of kennings  -rrb-  ,  such as 'wife-loss' and 'friend-right' and 'laughter-starving , ' that simply seem eccentric . `` 
the practice of forming kennings has traditionally been seen as a common germanic inheritance ,  but this has been disputed since ,  among the early germanic languages ,  their use is largely restricted to old norse and old english poetry . 
kennings are virtually absent from the surviving corpus of continental west germanic verse; the old saxon heliand contains only one example: `` lîk-hamo '' `` body-raiment '' = `` body ''  -lrb-  heliand 3453 b  -rrb-  ,  a compound which ,  in any case ,  is normal in west germanic and north germanic prose  -lrb-  old english `` līchama '' ,  old high german `` lîchamo '' ,  `` lîchinamo '' ,  dutch `` lichaam '' ,  old icelandic `` líkamr '' ,  `` líkami '' ,  old swedish `` līkhamber '' ,  swedish `` lekamen '' ,  danish and norwegian bokmål `` legeme '' ,  norwegian nynorsk `` lekam ''  -rrb-  . 
descriptive epithets are a common literary device in many parts of the world ,  whereas kennings in this restricted sense are a distinctive feature of old norse and ,  to a lesser extent ,  old english poetry . 
ambiguity is usually less than it would be if an english text were subjected to the same contortions ,  thanks to the more elaborate morphology of old norse . 
in the above examples ,  `` fákr '' and `` marr '' are distinctively poetic lexemes; the normal word for `` horse '' in old norse prose is `` hestr '' . 
in old norse poetry ,  either component of a kenning  -lrb-  base-word ,  determinant or both  -rrb-  could consist of an ordinary noun or a `` heiti '' `` poetic synonym '' . 
the warrior referred to may be king harald . 
old norse kennings take the form of a genitive phrase  -lrb-  `` báru fákr '' `` wave's horse '' = `` ship ''  -lrb-  þorbjörn hornklofi: glymdrápa 3 -rrb-  -rrb-  or a compound word  -lrb-  `` gjálfr-marr '' `` sea-steed '' = `` ship ''  -lrb-  anon . 
kult was originally published by the company target games in 1991 as a swedish role-playing game ,  and has later been translated into several other languages . 
some symbols and creatures appearing in kult can also be seen in other swedish games to which the kult authors and production team also have contributed . 
central to the game is the aspect of mental balance ,  which is a sanity-gauge of sorts . 
kult is a contemporary horror role-playing game originally designed by gunilla jonsson and michael petersén ,  first published in sweden by äventyrsspel  -lrb-  later target games  -rrb-  in 1991.
kult has been published in swedish ,  german ,  english ,  italian ,  polish ,  spanish and french . 
continued play at this point is outside the focus of the game ,  however . 
abel was born in köthen ,  a small german city ,  where his father ,  christian ferdinand abel ,  had worked for years as the principal viola da gamba and cello player in the court orchestra . 
the young abel later boarded at st .  thomas school ,  leipzig ,  where he was taught by bach . 
in 1762, johann christian bach ,  the eleventh son of j . s . 
ericsson has had its headquarters in kista since 2003.
kista  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a district in the borough of rinkeby-kista ,  stockholm ,  sweden . 
kista was named after an old farm `` kista gård '' ,  still located in the area . 
korean cuisine is largely based on rice ,  vegetables ,  and meats . 
soups are a common part of any korean meal . 
koreans also produce a number of rice wines ,  both in filtered and unfiltered versions . 
as rice was prohibitively expensive when it first came to korea ,  the grain was likely mixed with other grains to `` stretch '' the rice; this is still done in dishes such as `` boribap ''  -lrb-  rice with barley  -rrb-  and `` kongbap ''  -lrb-  rice with beans  -rrb-  . 
grains have been one of the most important staples of the korean diet . 
rice is used to make a number of items ,  outside of the traditional bowl of plain white rice . 
foods are regulated by korean cultural etiquette . 
records indicate pork has been a part of the korean diet back to antiquity ,  similar to beef . 
the main dishes are made from grains such as `` bap ''  -lrb-  a bowl of rice  -rrb-  ,  `` juk ''  -lrb-  porridge  -rrb-  ,  and `` guksu ''  -lrb-  noodles  -rrb-  . 
fish and shellfish have been a major part of korean cuisine because of the oceans bordering the peninsula . 
mollusks eaten in korean cuisine include octopus ,  cuttlefish ,  and squid . 
gochujang is a fermented bean paste that has red pepper powder ,  soybean powder and rice flour added to it to create a spicy paste . 
chicken has played an important role as a protein in korean history ,  evidenced by a number of myths . 
beef is the most prized of all ,  with the cattle holding an important cultural role in the korean home . 
according to one survey conducted in 2006, dog meat was the fourth most commonly consumed meat in south korea . 
were kuiper's hypothesis correct ,  there would not be a kuiper belt today . 
the kuiper belt  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  occasionally called the edgeworth–kuiper belt ,  is a circumstellar disc in the outer solar system ,  extending from the orbit of neptune  -lrb-  at 30 au  -rrb-  to approximately 50 au from the sun . 
the kuiper belt was named after dutch-american astronomer gerard kuiper ,  though he did not predict its existence . 
further evidence for the existence of the kuiper belt later emerged from the study of comets . 
reportedly because the words `` kuiper '' and `` comet belt '' appeared in the opening sentence of fernández's paper ,  tremaine named this hypothetical region the `` kuiper belt '' . 
the classical kuiper belt appears to be a composite of two separate populations . 
despite its vast extent ,  the collective mass of the kuiper belt is relatively low . 
the presence of neptune has a profound effect on the kuiper belt's structure due to orbital resonances . 
the kuiper belt is distinct from the theoretical oort cloud ,  which is a thousand times more distant and is mostly spherical . 
at its fullest extent  -lrb-  but excluding the scattered disc  -rrb-  ,  including its outlying regions ,  the kuiper belt stretches from roughly 30 to 55 au . 
the remainder were scattered outward again by jupiter and in most cases ejected from the solar system reducing the primordial kuiper belt population by 99% or more . 
david jewitt comments: `` if anything .  .  .  fernández most nearly deserves the credit for predicting the kuiper belt . `` 
analysis indicates that kuiper belt objects are composed of a mixture of rock and a variety of ices such as water ,  methane ,  and ammonia . 
the term `` trans-neptunian object ''  -lrb-  tno  -rrb-  is recommended for objects in the belt by several scientific groups because the term is less controversial than all others—it is not an exact synonym though ,  as tnos include all objects orbiting the sun past the orbit of neptune ,  not just those in the kuiper belt . 
in 1976, kraftwerk toured in support of the `` radio-activity '' album . 
plank coproduced the first four kraftwerk albums . 
kraftwerk did not release another album for three years . 
kraftwerk  -lrb-   ,  `` power station ''  -rrb-  is a german band formed in düsseldorf in 1970 by ralf hütter and florian schneider . 
despite some innovations in touring ,  kraftwerk took a break from live performances after the `` radio-activity '' tour of 1976.
after the 1975 `` autobahn '' tour ,  kraftwerk began work on a follow-up album ,  `` radio-activity ''  -lrb-  german title: `` radio-aktivität ''  -rrb-  . 
the release of `` autobahn '' in 1974 saw kraftwerk moving away from the sound of its first three albums . 
after years of withdrawal from live performance kraftwerk began to tour europe more frequently . 
kraftwerk performed three concerts to open the exhibit . 
the year 1975 saw a turning point in kraftwerk's live shows . 
kraftwerk played at ultra music festival in miami on 23 march 2012.
as of 2018, the remaining members of the band continue to tour . 
ironically kraftwerk did not own a computer at the time of recording `` computer world '' . 
the same year ,  hütter and schneider start bringing everyday life into art and form kraftwerk '' . 
after having finished the radio-activity tour kraftwerk began recording `` trans-europe express ''  -lrb-  german: `` trans-europa express ''  -rrb-  at the kling klang studio . 
kraftwerk returned to live performance with the `` computer world '' tour of 1981, where the band effectively packed up its entire kling klang studio and took it along on the road . 
kraftwerk finally released `` the catalogue '' box set on 16 november . 
