in 1940 stewart and sullavan reunited for two films . 
stewart was active in philanthropy over the years . 
stewart was hospitalized after falling in december 1995.
after the war ,  stewart took time off to reassess his career . 
on may 20, 1995, his 87th birthday ,  the james m .  stewart foundation was created to honor james stewart . 
daughter kelly stewart is an evolutionary anthropologist . 
on july 23, 1959, stewart was promoted to brigadier general . 
one of stewart's lesser-known talents was his homespun poetry . 
stewart and mann also collaborated on other films outside the western genre . 
stewart was a life member of the sons of the revolution in the state of california . 
the american film institute has also named five of stewart's films to its list of the 100 best american films ever made . 
stewart's starring role in `` winchester '73 '' was also a turning point in hollywood . 
in the early 1960s ,  stewart took leading roles in three john ford films ,  his first work with the director . 
on january 1, 1960, stewart received news of the death of margaret sullavan . 
the second collaboration to define stewart's career in the 1950s was with director alfred hitchcock . 
in the documentary film `` james stewart: a wonderful life ''  -lrb-  1987 -rrb- ,  hosted by johnny carson ,  stewart said that he went back to westerns in 1950 in part because of the string of flops . 
at his request ,  he was identified only as `` james stewart ,  squadron commander '' in the documentary . 
stewart attended mercersburg academy prep school ,  graduating in 1928.
from the beginning of stewart's film career in 1935, through his final theatrical project in 1991, he appeared in more than 92 films ,  television programs ,  and shorts . 
hitchcock and stewart formed a corporation ,  patron inc .  ,  to produce the film ,  which later became the subject of a supreme court case `` stewart v .  abend ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- . 
in stewart's collaborations with director anthony mann ,  he entered the realm of the western . 
his poems were later compiled into a short collection ,  `` jimmy stewart and his poems ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- . 
after a progression of lesser western films in the late 1960s and early 1970s ,  stewart transitioned from cinema to television . 
for his first film in five years ,  stewart appeared in his third and final frank capra production ,  `` it's a wonderful life ``  -lrb-  1946 -rrb- . 
stewart enlisted in late 1940, a situation that coincided with the lapse in his mgm contract ,  marking a turning point in stewart's career ,  with 28 movies to his credit at that point . 
during this time ,  stewart wore the same cowboy hat and rode the same horse ,  `` pie '' ,  in most of his westerns . 
stewart's first movie with hitchcock was the technologically innovative 1948 film `` rope '' ,  shot in long `` real time '' takes . 
following the failure of `` the magic of lassie '' ,  stewart went into semi-retirement from acting . 
stewart actively supported reagan's bid for the republican presidential nomination in 1976.
it is said that the original name of jalalabad was adinapur . 
the british-indian forces invaded jalalabad in 1838, during the first anglo-afghan war . 
the economy of jalalabad gradually increased in the last decade . 
jalalabad is considered one of the most important cities of the pashtun culture . 
jakarta  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the special capital region of jakarta  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is the capital and largest city of indonesia . 
jakarta has grown more rapidly than kuala lumpur ,  bangkok and beijing . 
jack leon ruby  -lrb-  born jacob leon rubenstein; april 25, 1911 – january 3, 1967 -rrb- was a dallas ,  texas nightclub owner . 
jack ruby was born jacob leon rubenstein ,  on march 25, 1911, in the maxwell street area of chicago as the son of joseph rubenstein and fannie turek rutkowski  -lrb-  or rokowsky  -rrb-  ,  both polish-born orthodox jews from sokołów . 
in 1947 ruby moved to dallas where he and his brothers soon afterward shortened their surnames from rubenstein to ruby . 
randi is everything to me . `` 
in 1996, randi established the james randi educational foundation . 
randi is a registered democrat . 
geller sued both randi and csicop . 
geller sued randi and csicop for $15 million in 1991 and lost . 
randi was awarded a macarthur foundation fellowship in 1986.
randi was diagnosed with colorectal cancer in june 2009.
randi distinguishes between pseudoscience and crackpot science . 
randi stated `` 'more kids need to be stunned' '' . 
randi says he quit wor over complaints  -lrb-  disputed by randi  -rrb-  from the archbishop of ny ,  that randi had said on-air that `` jesus christ was a religious nut . `` 
randi retired from practicing magic at age 60, and from the jref at 87.
the last meeting was in 2015, coinciding with randi's retirement from the jref . 
randi also wrote a children's book in 1989 titled `` the magic world of the amazing randi '' ,  which introduced children to magic tricks . 
randi writes that ,  eventually ,  hydrick `` confessed everything '' . 
in 2010, randi was one of 16 new csi fellows elected by its board . 
in 1987, randi became a naturalized citizen of the united states . 
randi has consistently denied having any paranormal powers or abilities . 
in 2015, the james randi paranormal challenge was officially terminated . 
randi met magician uri geller in the early 1970s ,  and found geller to be `` very charming . 
in february 1988, randi tested the gullibility of the media by perpetrating a hoax of his own . 
on april 28, 2009, randi stated on the james randi educational foundation website that he wanted illegal drugs to be legalized so that users could kill themselves . 
in february 2006, randi underwent coronary artery bypass surgery . 
randi gained the international spotlight in 1972 when he publicly challenged the claims of uri geller . 
in the documentary ,  randi says that carson `` had been a magician himself and was skeptical '' of geller's claimed paranormal powers ,  so prior to the date of taping ,  randi was asked `` to help prevent any trickery '' . 
when he hosted his own radio show in the 1960s ,  randi lived in a small house in rumson ,  new jersey ,  that featured a sign on the premises that read: `` randi — charlatan '' . 
skeptics and magicians penn & teller credit randi and his career as a skeptic for their own careers . 
randi's parents were members of the anglican church but rarely attended services . 
the hoax was exposed on `` 60 minutes australia ''; `` carlos '' and randi explained how they had pulled it off . 
on 1 march 2013, the website doubtfulnews . com published a news story in which randi claimed to have been misquoted:
his cousin was james lind  -lrb-  1736-1812 -rrb- . 
in 1759, lind discovered that the steam of heated salt water was fresh . 
apart from that ,  only group one also showed some effect of its treatment . 
lind was born in edinburgh ,  scotland in 1716 into a family of merchants ,  then headed by his father ,  james lind . 
lind was married to isabella dickie and they had two sons – john and james . 
scurvy is a disease now known to be caused by a vitamin c deficiency ,  but in lind's day ,  the concept of vitamins was unknown . 
james lind  -lrb-  4 october 1716 – 13 july 1794 -rrb- was a scottish doctor . 
he wrote scripts for the war films `` the great escape ''  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- and `` 633 squadron ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- . 
he also wrote `` richard sahib '' for sturges which was never made . 
clavell was reportedly saved ,  along with an entire battalion ,  by an american prisoner of war who later became the model for `` the king '' in `` king rat '' . 
it was turned into a film in 1965.
later he was transferred to changi prison in singapore . 
this was his last completed novel at the time of his death . 
only the second was made and it was not released until 1967.
he wrote `` watusi ''  -lrb-  1959 -rrb- for director kurt neumann ,  who had also made `` the fly '' . 
in `` noble house '' marlowe is mentioned as having written a novel about changi which ,  although fictionalized ,  is based on real events  -lrb-  like those in `` king rat ''  -rrb-  . 
neither was filmed but `` far alert '' kept being sold and re-sold . 
so too was an epic film about the thirty year war ,  `` the last valley ''  -lrb-  1971 -rrb- . 
count johann von werth  -lrb-  1591 – 16 january 1652 -rrb- ,  also `` jan von werth '' or in french `` jean de werth '' ,  was a german general of cavalry in the thirty years' war . 
johann von werth's life became a popular legend in the rhineland and cologne that is frequently reenacted at karneval time:
werth was born in 1591 at büttgen in the duchy of jülich as the eldest son of lesser noble johann von wierdt  -lrb-  † 1606 -rrb- and elisabeth streithoven . 
when at last werth reappeared in the field it was as general of cavalry in the imperial and bavarian and cologne services . 
habermas has expressed optimism about the possibility of the revival of the public sphere . 
habermas then returned to his chair at frankfurt and the directorship of the institute for social research . 
according to habermas ,  a variety of factors resulted in the eventual decay of the public sphere ,  including the growth of a commercial mass media ,  which turned the critical public into a passive consumer public; and the welfare state ,  which merged the state with society so thoroughly that the public sphere was squeezed out . 
nancy fraser ,  the henry a .  and louise loeb professor of political and social science and professor of philosophy at the new school in new york city ,  is a noted feminist critic of habermas' work on the public sphere ,  arguing for the existence of multiple spheres and counterpublics . 
in such a direct democracy-driven system ,  the activist public sphere is needed for debates on matters of public importance and as well as the mechanism for that discussion to affect the decision-making process . 
several noted academics have provided various criticisms of habermas's notions regarding the public sphere . 
habermas was awarded the prince of asturias award in social sciences of 2003.
it also turned the `` public sphere '' into a site of self-interested contestation for the resources of the state rather than a space for the development of a public-minded rational consensus . 
jürgen habermas is the father of rebekka habermas ,  historian of german social and cultural history and professor of modern history at the university of göttingen . 
for this purpose ,  the dialectics between `` symbolic representation '' of `` the structures subordinated to all worlds of life ''  -lrb-  `` internal relationships ''  -rrb-  and the `` material reproduction '' of the social systems in their complex  -lrb-  `` external relationships '' between social systems and environment  -rrb-  has to be considered . 
watson is an atheist . 
in 1994, watson became president of cshl . 
watson married elizabeth lewis in 1968.
in 2008, watson was appointed chancellor emeritus of cshl . 
watson was quoted as calling venter `` hitler '' . 
watson was now certain that dna had a definite molecular structure that could be elucidated . 
in mid-march 1953, watson and crick deduced the double helix structure of dna . 
watson and crick had three sources for franklin's unpublished data:
in 1968, watson became the director of the cold spring harbor laboratory  -lrb-  cshl  -rrb-  . 
originally ,  watson was drawn into molecular biology by the work of salvador luria . 
views on watson's scientific contributions while at harvard are somewhat mixed . 
the medal was later returned to watson by the purchaser ,  alisher usmanov . 
in 1956, watson accepted a position in the biology department at harvard university . 
the phage group was the intellectual medium where watson became a working scientist . 
watson's research project involved using x-rays to inactivate bacterial viruses . 
watson's home university dropped the project and the book was commercially published . 
from 1956 to 1976, watson was on the faculty of the harvard university biology department ,  promoting research in molecular biology . 
in 1951 watson visited the stazione zoologica 'anton dohrn' in naples . 
watson has also been an institute adviser for the allen institute for brain science . 
the accusation was indefensible since franklin told crick and watson that the helix backbones had to be on the outside . 
jerk is a vector ,  and  -lrb-  as with `` acceleration ''  -rrb-  there is no distinct term to denote its scalar magnitude  -lrb-  more precisely ,  its norm ,  as ,  e . g .  ,  there is `` speed '' for the norm of the velocity vector  -rrb-  . 
in 1899 guglielmo marconi ,  the inventor of radiotelegraphy ,  decided to attempt transatlantic radio communication . 
ambrose fleming was born in lancaster and educated at university college school ,  london ,  and university college london . 
sir john ambrose fleming frs  -lrb-  29 november 1849 – 18 april 1945 -rrb- ,  an english electrical engineer and physicist ,  invented the first thermionic valve or vacuum tube ,  designed the radio transmitter with which the first transatlantic radio transmission was made ,  and also established the right-hand rule used in physics . 
fleming retired from university college ,  london in 1927 at the age of 77.
he coined the term power factor to describe the true power flowing in an ac power system . 
he honoured his agreement and didn't speak about it throughout marconi's life ,  but after his death in 1937 said marconi had been `` very ungenerous '' . 
in 1577 the brandenburg electors became co-regent with duke albert frederick of prussia . 
john george of brandenburg  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  11 september 1525 – 8 january 1598 -rrb- was a prince-elector of the margraviate of brandenburg  -lrb-  1571–1598 -rrb- and a duke of prussia . 
jahangir was fascinated with art and architecture . 
jahangir took his connoisseurship of art very seriously . 
jahangir was also revolutionary in his adaptation of european styles . 
nur jahan married her daughter to shahryar ,  jahangir's youngest son from his other queen ,  in the hope of having a living male heir to the throne when jahangir died . 
jahangir then challenged roe to pick out the original from the copies ,  a feat sir thomas roe could not do ,  to the delight of jahangir . 
jahangir's ambition did not materialise ,  however ,  due to his death in 1627.
mehr-un-nisa ,  or nur jahan ,  occupies an important place in the history of jahangir . 
jahangir named her taj bibi bilqis makani and she gave birth to prince khurram ,  the future shah jahan ,  jahangir's successor to the throne . 
jahangir posted islam khan i to subdue musa khan ,  an afghan rebel in bengal ,  in 1608.
jahangir considered his third son prince khurram  -lrb-  future shah jahan  -rrb-  ,  his favourite . 
jahangir is widely considered to have been a weak and incapable ruler . 
jahangir was trying to restore his health by visiting kashmir and kabul . 
the victorious jahangir ,  at 26 years of age ,  ordered the completion of the jahangir mahal a famous mughal citadel in orchha to commemorate and honour his victory . 
nur jahan struck coins in her own name during the last years of jahangir's reign when he was taken ill . 
in january 1764 wedgwood married sarah wedgwood  -lrb-  1734–1815 -rrb- ,  his third cousin . 
wedgwood was a prominent slavery abolitionist . 
in 1784 wedgwood was exporting nearly 80% of his total produce . 
a prominent abolitionist ,  wedgwood is remembered too for his ``  ''am i not a man and a brother ? ``  ''
josiah wedgwood  -lrb-  12 july 1730 – 3 january 1795 -rrb- was an english potter and entrepreneur . 
from 1787 until his death in 1795, wedgwood actively participated in the abolition-of-slavery cause . 
a plaque ,  in wedgwood's blue pottery style ,  marking the site of his london showrooms between 1774 and 1795 in wedgwood mews ,  is located at 12, greek street ,  london ,  w1.
wedgwood's company is still a famous name in pottery today  -lrb-  as part of waterford wedgwood; see waterford crystal  -rrb-  ,  and `` wedgwood china '' is sometimes used as a term for his jasperware ,  the coloured stoneware with applied relief decoration  -lrb-  usually white  -rrb-  ,  still common throughout the world . 
after passing on his company to his sons ,  wedgwood died at home ,  probably of cancer of the jaw ,  in 1795.
born in burslem ,  staffordshire ,  the eleventh and last child of potter thomas wedgwood  -lrb-  d .  1739 -rrb- and mary wedgwood  -lrb-  `` née '' stringer; d .  1766 -rrb- ,  josiah was raised within a family of english dissenters ,  he was the grandson of a unitarian minister and was an active unitarian . 
the supreme court of judicature act 1873  -lrb-  sometimes known as the judicature act 1873 -rrb- was an act of the parliament of the united kingdom in 1873.
however ,  under the conservative government ,  the 1874 and 1875 acts retained the judicial aspect of the house of lords and ensured the quality of judicial appointments to the house of lords by legislating under the appellate jurisdiction act 1876, for the mechanism of law lords . 
the name of julian's maternal grandmother is unknown . 
as he had requested ,  julian's body was buried in tarsus . 
in 363, julian embarked on an ambitious campaign against the sassanid empire . 
julian  -lrb-  ; ; 331/332 – 26 june 363 -rrb- ,  also known as julian the apostate ,  was roman emperor from 361 to 363, as well as a notable philosopher and author in greek . 
a member of the constantinian dynasty ,  julian was orphaned as a child . 
 -lrb-  julian expresses his gratitude to the empress eusebia in his third oration .   -rrb- 
if julian's later writings are to be believed ,  constantius would later be tormented with guilt at the massacre of 337.
in the same period ,  julian was also initiated into the eleusinian mysteries ,  which he would later try to restore . 
in the turmoil after the death of constantine in 337, in order to establish himself and his brothers ,  julian's zealous arian cousin constantius ii appears to have led a massacre of most of julian's close relatives . 
in the spring of 361, julian led his army into the territory of the alamanni ,  where he captured their king ,  vadomarius . 
during the withdrawal ,  julian's forces suffered several attacks from sassanid forces . 
julian was succeeded by the short-lived emperor jovian who reestablished christianity's privileged position throughout the empire . 
while he ceded much of the authority of the imperial government to the cities ,  julian also took more direct control himself . 
forgiving back taxes both made julian more popular and allowed him to increase collections of current taxes . 
julian's rise to augustus was the result of military insurrection eased by constantius's sudden death . 
as julian wished ,  his body was buried outside tarsus ,  though it was later removed to constantinople . 
because of his neoplatonist background julian accepted the creation of humanity as described in plato's `` timaeus '' . 
however ,  constantius died before the two could face each other in battle ,  and named julian as his successor . 
julian's choice of nevitta appears to have been aimed at maintaining the support of the western army which had acclaimed him . 
in the fourth year of julian's stay in gaul ,  the sassanid emperor ,  shapur ii ,  invaded mesopotamia and took the city of amida after a 73-day siege . 
john ii  -lrb-  ; 2 august 1455 – 9 january 1499 -rrb- was elector of brandenburg from 1486 until his death ,  the fourth of the house of hohenzollern . 
john cicero was the eldest son of elector albert iii achilles of brandenburg with his first wife margaret of baden . 
joachim frederick was born in cölln to john george ,  elector of brandenburg ,  and sophie of legnica . 
on 30 october 1594, john sigismund married anna of prussia ,  daughter of albert frederick ,  duke of prussia  -lrb-  1553–1618 -rrb- . 
john sigismund died in the following year . 
from 1938 to 1942 pollock worked for the wpa federal art project . 
pollock's most famous paintings were made during the `` drip period '' between 1947 and 1950.
in 1955, pollock painted `` scent '' and `` search , ``  his last two paintings . 
pollock promised to start a new painting especially for the photographic session ,  but when namuth arrived ,  pollock apologized and told him the painting was finished . 
pollock observed american indian sandpainting demonstrations in the 1940s . 
at the peak of his fame ,  pollock abruptly abandoned the drip style . 
pollock and krasner's relationship began to crumble by 1956, owing to pollock's continuing alcoholism and infidelity involving ruth kligman . 
jackson pollock's influence on his wife's ,  lee krasner's ,  artwork is often discussed by art historians . 
john bernard myers ,  a noted art dealer ,  was once quoted to say that `` there would never have been a jackson pollock without a lee pollock '' ,  whereas fritz bultman ,  a fellow painter ,  had referred to pollock as krasner's `` creation ,  her frankenstein '' ,  both men recognizing the immense impact krasner had on pollock's career . 
li took on a more serious role in the 2005 film ,  `` unleashed ''  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
this film ,  with its focus on dramatics rather than martial arts ,  netted li the hong kong film award for best actor . 
li's first role in a non-chinese film was as a villain in `` lethal weapon 4 ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- ,  and his first leading role in a hollywood film was as han sing in `` romeo must die ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- . 
li lianjie  -lrb-   ,  born 26 april 1963 -rrb- ,  better known by his stage name jet li ,  is a chinese film actor ,  film producer ,  martial artist ,  and retired wushu champion who was born in beijing . 
in 2006, the martial arts film epic `` fearless '' ,  was released worldwide . 
some of his more famous chinese films include:
in 1998, he made his american film debut in `` lethal weapon 4 '' which also marked the first time he had ever played a villain in a film . 
li starred in the 1995 film `` high risk '' ,  where jet li plays a captain who becomes disillusioned after his wife is murdered by crime lords . 
li also starred as the lead villain in the fantasy action film ``  '' with actors brendan fraser ,  isabella leong and michelle yeoh . 
jacopo amigoni  -lrb-  ca . 
amigoni died in madrid . 
among his pupils were charles joseph flipart ,  michelangelo morlaiter ,  pietro antonio novelli ,  joseph wagner ,  and antonio zucchi . 
in 1870, millet was elected to the salon jury . 
millet died on january 20, 1875.
most of the details about millet in the play are fictional . 
in 1849, millet painted `` harvesters '' ,  a commission for the state . 
this is one of the most well known of millet's paintings ,  `` the gleaners ''  -lrb-  1857 -rrb- . 
after his first painting ,  a portrait ,  was accepted at the salon of 1840, millet returned to cherbourg to begin a career as a portrait painter . 
from 1850 to 1853, millet worked on `` harvesters resting  -lrb-  ruth and boaz  -rrb- ``  ,  a painting he would consider his most important ,  and on which he worked the longest . 
during his period in florence he became an independent master ,  and worked often for the medici court . 
now etchers could do the very detailed work that was previously the monopoly of engravers ,  and callot made good use of the new possibilities . 
he also made more extensive and sophisticated use of multiple `` stoppings-out '' than previous etchers had done . 
during 1633, the year the larger set was published ,  lorraine had been invaded by the french during the thirty years' war and callot's artwork is still noted with francisco goya's `` los desastres de la guerra ''  -lrb-  `` the disasters of war ''  -rrb-  ,  which was influenced by callot -  -lrb-  goya owned a series of the prints  -rrb-  ,  as among the most powerful artistic statements of the inhumanity of war . 
in `` the power of myth , ``  campbell quotes from the novel:
campbell's most well-known work is his book `` the hero with a thousand faces ''  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- ,  in which he discusses his theory of the journey of the archetypal hero shared by world mythologies ,  termed the monomyth . 
in the 2000 documentary `` joseph campbell: a hero's journey '' ,  he explains god in terms of a metaphor:
campbell was also influenced by the psychological work of abraham maslow and stanislav grof . 
these appear at the end of his work `` the masks of god: creative mythology '' ,  as well as various lectures . 
campbell's ideas regarding myth and its relation to the human psyche are dependent in part on the pioneering work of sigmund freud ,  but in particular on the work of jung ,  whose studies of human psychology greatly influenced campbell . 
with the arrival of the great depression ,  campbell spent the next five years  -lrb-  1929–1934 -rrb- living in a rented shack in woodstock ,  new york . 
bruce robison writes that campbell continued his independent reading while teaching for a year in 1933 at the canterbury school ,  during which time he also attempted to publish works of fiction . 
campbell often referred to the work of modern writers james joyce and thomas mann in his lectures and writings ,  as well as to the art of pablo picasso . 
campbell's concept of `` monomyth ''  -lrb-  one myth  -rrb-  refers to the theory that sees all mythic narratives as variations of a single great story . 
joseph john campbell  -lrb-  1904–1987 -rrb- was an american professor of literature at sarah lawrence college who worked in comparative mythology and comparative religion . 
it contains seven solo lute pieces by dowland . 
dowland's music often displays the melancholia that was so fashionable in music at that time . 
two major influences on dowland's music were the popular consort songs ,  and the dance music of the day . 
there is no complete catalogue of dowland's works . 
one of his better known works is the lute song `` flow my tears '' ,  the first verse of which runs:
audubon identified 25 new species . 
the senior audubon had commanded ships . 
from his earliest days ,  audubon had an affinity for birds . 
in 1808, audubon moved to kentucky ,  which was rapidly being settled . 
audubon and rozier mutually agreed to end their partnership at ste . 
when audubon ,  at age 18, boarded ship in 1803 to immigrate to the united states ,  he changed his name to an anglicized form: john james audubon . 
the children were raised in couëron ,  near nantes ,  france ,  by audubon and his french wife ,  anne moynet audubon ,  whom he had married years before his time in saint-domingue . 
john james audubon  -lrb-  born jean rabin; april 26, 1785 – january 27, 1851 -rrb- was an american ornithologist ,  naturalist ,  and painter . 
masefield was born in ledbury in herefordshire ,  to caroline and george masefield ,  a solicitor . 
it was not until about the age of 70 that masefield slowed his pace due to illness . 
the masefield centre at warwick school ,  which masefield attended ,  and a high school in ledbury ,  herefordshire ,  have been named in his honour . 
ten years later ,  masefield wrote to scott to tell him what reading that poem had meant to him:
in 1921, masefield received an honorary doctorate of literature from the university of oxford . 
some critics judged masefield to be an even finer writer of prose than of verse . 
john edward masefield  -lrb-  ; 1 june 1878 – 12 may 1967 -rrb- was an english poet and writer and the poet laureate of the united kingdom from 1930 until 1967.
at the time of mccarthy's speech ,  communism was a significant concern in the united states . 
i have here in my hand a list of 205—a list of names that were made known to the secretary of state as being members of the communist party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in the state department . `` 
mccarthy won reelection in 1952 with 54% of the vote ,  defeating former wisconsin state attorney general thomas e .  fairchild but ,  as stated above ,  badly trailing a republican ticket which otherwise swept the state of wisconsin; all the other republican winners ,  including eisenhower himself ,  received at least 60% of the wisconsin vote . 
the subcommittee first investigated allegations of communist influence in the voice of america ,  at that time administered by the state department's united states information agency . 
 ''mccarthyism is americanism with its sleeves rolled , ``  mccarthy said in a 1952 speech ,  and later that year ,  he published a book titled `` mccarthyism: the fight for america . `` 
in fact ,  by the time of mccarthy's speech only about 65 of the employees mentioned in the byrnes letter were still with the state department ,  and all of these had undergone further security checks . 
in his campaign ,  mccarthy attacked la follette for not enlisting during the war ,  although la follette had been 46 when pearl harbor was bombed . 
joseph raymond mccarthy  -lrb-  november 14, 1908 – may 2, 1957 -rrb- was an american politician who served as a republican u . s . 
during the 1952 presidential election ,  the eisenhower campaign toured wisconsin with mccarthy . 
in this race ,  he was challenging three-term senator robert m .  la follette jr .  ,  founder of the wisconsin progressive party and son of the celebrated wisconsin governor and senator robert m .  la follette ,  sr . 
one of the strongest bases of anti-communist sentiment in the united states was the catholic community ,  which constituted over 20% of the national vote . 
mccarthy campaigned for the republican senate nomination in wisconsin while still on active duty in 1944 but was defeated by alexander wiley ,  the incumbent . 
during his years as an attorney ,  mccarthy made money on the side by gambling . 
mccarthy successfully ran for the u . s .  senate in 1946, defeating robert m .  la follette jr .  after three largely undistinguished years in the senate ,  mccarthy rose suddenly to national fame in february 1950 when he asserted in a speech that he had a list of `` members of the communist party and members of a spy ring '' who were employed in the state department . 
he entered little wolf high school ,  in manawa ,  wisconsin ,  when he was 20 and graduated in one year . 
with this background and due to the sensational nature of mccarthy's charge against the state department ,  the wheeling speech soon attracted a flood of press interest in mccarthy's claim . 
according to jack anderson & ronals w .  may ,  mccarthy ,  the man ,  the senator ,  the ism  -lrb-  boston ,  beacon press ,  1952 -rrb- p .  101-105, mccarthy's campaign funds ,  much of them from out of state ,  were ten times more than la follette's and mccarthy's vote benefited from a communist party vendetta against la follette . 
in autumn 1953, mccarthy's committee began its ill-fated inquiry into the united states army . 
with his victory in the 1952 presidential race ,  dwight eisenhower became the first republican president in 20 years . 
mccarthy discredited his critics and political opponents by accusing them of being communists or communist sympathizers . 
in 1942, shortly after the u . s .  entered world war ii ,  mccarthy joined the united states marine corps ,  despite the fact that his judicial office exempted him from military service . 
after hancock's father died in 1744, john was sent to live with his uncle and aunt ,  thomas hancock and lydia  -lrb-  henchman  -rrb-  hancock . 
the financial company passed on the name to the john hancock tower in boston ,  the john hancock center in chicago ,  as well as the john hancock student village at boston university . 
back in boston ,  hancock was reelected to the house of representatives . 
hancock served in congress through some of the darkest days of the revolutionary war . 
hancock was president of congress when the declaration of independence was adopted and signed . 
they stayed instead at hancock's childhood home in lexington . 
hancock's support was probably a deciding factor in the ratification . 
no full-length biography of hancock appeared until the 20th century . 
gage soon dismissed hancock from his post as colonel of the boston cadets . 
hancock was reelected to annual terms as governor for the remainder of his life . 
hancock admired and supported general washington ,  even though washington politely declined hancock's request for a military appointment . 
while president of congress ,  hancock became involved in a long-running controversy with harvard . 
hancock was one of boston's leaders during the crisis that led to the outbreak of the american revolutionary war in 1775.
from 1760 to 1761, hancock lived in england while building relationships with customers and suppliers . 
hancock was put forth as a candidate in the 1789 u .  s .  presidential election . 
in october 1777, after more than two years in congress ,  president hancock requested a leave of absence . 
with the war underway ,  hancock made his way to the continental congress in philadelphia with the other massachusetts delegates . 
many places and things in the united states have been named in honor of john hancock . 
although hancock was disappointed with his performance in the election ,  he continued to be popular in massachusetts . 
hutchinson had dared to hope that he could win over hancock and discredit adams . 
the household slaves continued to work for john and his aunt ,  but were eventually freed through the terms of thomas hancock's will; there is no evidence that john hancock ever bought or sold slaves . 
later ,  some of hancock's most ardent admirers would call this incident the first act of physical resistance to british authority in the colonies and credit hancock with initiating the american revolution . 
it is as editor of `` astounding science fiction ''  -lrb-  later called `` analog science fiction and fact ''  -rrb-  from late 1937 until his death for which campbell is primarily remembered today . 
john wood campbell jr .   -lrb-  june 8, 1910 – july 11, 1971 -rrb- was an american science fiction writer and editor . 
campbell began writing science fiction at age 18 while attending mit . 
shortly after campbell's death ,  the university of kansas science fiction program – now the center for the study of science fiction – established the annual john w .  campbell memorial award for best science fiction novel and also renamed after him its annual campbell conference . 
shortly after his death in 1971, the university of kansas science fiction program established the annual john w .  campbell memorial award for best science fiction novel and also renamed after him its annual campbell conference . 
in 2018 he won a retrospective hugo award for best editor ,  short form  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- . 
campbell began writing science fiction at age 18 while attending mit and sold his first stories quickly . 
asimov wrote: `` a number of writers wrote pseudoscientific stuff to ensure sales to campbell ,  but the best writers retreated ,  i among them . 
campbell and `` astounding '' shared one of the inaugural hugo awards with h .  l .  gold and `` galaxy '' at the 1953 world science fiction convention . 
from 1930 until the later part of that decade ,  campbell was prolific and successful under both names ,  though he stopped writing fiction shortly after he became editor of `` astounding '' in 1937.
algis budrys wrote that `` john w .  campbell was the greatest editor sf has seen or is likely to see ,  and is in fact one of the major editors in all english-language literature in the middle years of the twentieth century . 
john campbell was born in newark ,  new jersey in 1910.
poul anderson wrote that campbell `` had saved and regenerated science fiction '' ,  which had become `` the product of hack pulpsters '' when he took over `` astounding '' . 
between december 11, 1957, and june 13, 1958, campbell hosted a weekly science fiction radio program called `` exploring tomorrow '' . 
it was filmed as `` the thing from another world ''  -lrb-  1951 -rrb- ,  `` the thing ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- ,  and again as `` the thing ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- . 
the encyclopedia of science fiction wrote: `` more than any other individual ,  he helped to shape modern sf , ``  and darrell schweitzer credits him with having `` decreed that sf writers should pull themselves up out of the pulp mire and start writing intelligently ,  for adults . `` 
was adapted as the films `` the thing from another world ''  -lrb-  1951 -rrb- ,  `` the thing ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- ,  and `` the thing ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- . 
it is named after the english physicist james prescott joule  -lrb-  1818–1889 -rrb- . 
it is most notable for its signing of belle and sebastian and snow patrol . 
later that year ,  jeepster reissued belle & sebastian's debut album `` tigermilk '' ,  which had previously been available only on limited issue vinyl . 
2000 saw new albums released for belle & sebastian ,  looper ,  and the gentle waves ,  as well as belle & sebastian's first appearance on `` top of the pops '' . 
jeepster contributed six songs to the polydor records snow patrol compilation `` up to now '' in 2009.
john came to be venerated as a saint soon after his death . 
john was born in antioch in 349 to greek parents from syria . 
john was ordained as a deacon in 381 by saint meletius of antioch who was not then in communion with alexandria and rome . 
john chrysostom  -lrb-  ; ; – 14 september 407 -rrb- ,  archbishop of constantinople ,  was an important early church father . 
his time in constantinople was more tumultuous than his time in antioch . 
john wrote letters which still held great influence in constantinople . 
in 1872, church historian william stephens wrote:
according to the christian historian sozomen ,  libanius was supposed to have said on his deathbed that john would have been his successor `` if the christians had not taken him from us '' . 
as a result of his mother's influential connections in the city ,  john began his education under the pagan teacher libanius . 
along with professor steve durlauf ,  heckman is the co-director of the hceo working group . 
heckman was born to john jacob heckman and bernice irene medley in chicago ,  illinois . 
in addition to serving as the henry schultz distinguished service professor and director of the economics research center in the department of economics ,  heckman is also a professor of law at the law school and a professor in the irving b .  harris school of public policy at the university of chicago where he is the director of both the center for social program evaluation and center for the study of childhood development . 
founded in 2014 and directed by heckman ,  the center for the economics of human development  -lrb-  cehd  -rrb-  ,  at the university of chicago ,  umbrellas his multiple research areas and initiatives that encompass rigorous empirical research to determine effective human capital policies and program design . 
heckman is noted for his contributions to selection bias and self-selection analysis ,  especially heckman correction ,  which awarded him the nobel prize in economics . 
judith of poland  -lrb-   ,   ,  ; b . 
judith's oldest son ,  otto ii ,  inherited the margraviate of brandenburg after the death of his father in 1184.
after his father's death in 1170, otto became the second margrave of brandenburg and judith the margravine consort . 
like her birth date ,  judith's date of death remains unknown . 
archer and major had been friends for a number of years . 
jeffrey howard archer ,  baron archer of weston-super-mare  -lrb-  born 15 april 1940 -rrb- is an english novelist and former politician . 
on 4 february 2000, archer was expelled from the party for five years . 
they have two children: william archer  -lrb-  born 1972 -rrb- ,  a theatre producer ,  and james archer  -lrb-  born 1974 -rrb- ,  a financial adviser and businessman . 
archer has been married to mary weeden since july 1966.
archer has said that he spends considerable time writing and re-writing each book . 
his solicitors admitted that he had made a mistake ,  but archer later said that he had been exonerated . 
archer has also consistently been an opponent of a return to capital punishment . 
 ''the news of the world '' later settled out-of-court with archer ,  acknowledging they ,  too ,  had libelled him . 
archer's next novel ,  `` heads you win '' ,  was published in november 2018.
this was a time when archer was actively seeking another front-line political role . 
archer left school with o-levels in english literature ,  art and history . 
in parliament ,  archer was on the left of the conservative party ,  rebelling against some of his party's policies . 
as well as novels and short stories ,  archer has also written three stage plays . 
although the archers claimed they were a normal ,  happily-married couple ,  by this time ,  according to the journalist adam raphael ,  jeffrey and mary archer were living largely separate lives . 
andrina colquhoun ,  archer's former mistress ,  confirmed that they had been having an affair in the 1980s ,  thus contradicting the claim that he and mary archer had been “happily married” at the time of the trial . 
archer set up his own fundraising and public relations company ,  arrow enterprises ,  in 1969.
on `` question time '' on 20 january 1994, archer said that 18 should be the age of consent for gay sex ,  as opposed to 21, which it was at the time . 
the gallery ultimately lost money ,  however ,  and archer sold it two years later . 
on 26 september 2000, archer was charged with perjury and perverting the course of justice during the 1987 libel trial . 
brahms's first symphony ,  op . 
after the publication of his op . 
the first movement of this abandoned symphony was re-worked as the first movement of the first piano concerto . 
26 -rrb- and the first movement of the third piano quartet ,  which eventually appeared in 1875.
schumann's accolade led to the first publication of brahms's works under his own name . 
brahms's compositions at this period are known to have included piano music ,  chamber music and works for male voice choir . 
the `` handel variations '' also featured ,  together with the first piano quartet ,  in brahms's first viennese recitals ,  in which his performances were better-received by the public and critics than his music . 
brahms's personal life was also troubled . 
in january 1863 came brahms's first meeting with richard wagner ,  for whom he played his `` handel variations '' op . 
in 1882 brahms completed his piano concerto no . 
clara continued to support brahms's career by programming his music in her recitals . 
after the successful vienna premiere of his second string quintet ,  op . 
brahms wrote a number of major works for orchestra ,  including two serenades ,  four symphonies ,  two piano concertos  -lrb-  no . 
in february 1865 brahms's mother died ,  and he began to compose his large choral work `` a german requiem '' op . 
his chamber works include three string quartets ,  two string quintets ,  two string sextets ,  a clarinet quintet ,  a clarinet trio ,  a horn trio ,  a piano quintet ,  three piano quartets ,  and four piano trios  -lrb-  the fourth being published posthumously  -rrb-  . 
5, alludes to the finale of mendelssohn's piano trio in c minor  -rrb-  . 
indeed ,  the similarity of brahms's music to that of late beethoven had first been noted as early as november 1853 in a letter from albert dietrich to ernst naumann . 
johann jakob gave his son his first musical training; johannes also learnt to play the violin and the basics of playing the cello . 
the incident also displays brahms's love of practical jokes . 
brahms was now recognised as a major figure in the world of music . 
in july 1950, sartre wrote in `` les temps modernes '' about his and de beauvoir's attitude to the soviet union:
he would draw on his war experiences for his great trilogy of novels ,  `` les chemins de la liberté ''  -lrb-  `` the roads to freedom ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  1945–1949 -rrb- . 
sartre was drafted into the french army from 1929 to 1931 and served as a meteorologist for some time . 
a major theme of sarte's political essays in the 1960s was of his disgust with the `` americanization '' of the french working class who would much rather watch american tv shows dubbed into french than agitate for a revolution . 
he later argued in 1959 that each french person was responsible for the collective crimes during the algerian war of independence . 
in 1939 sartre was drafted into the french army ,  where he served as a meteorologist . 
he took it a second time and virtually tied for first place with beauvoir ,  although sartre was eventually awarded first place ,  with beauvoir second . 
as an anti-colonialist ,  sartre took a prominent role in the struggle against french rule in algeria ,  and the use of torture and concentration camps by the french in algeria . 
about the korean war ,  sartre wrote: `` i have no doubt that the south korean feudalists and the american imperialists have promoted this war . 
11 rue des saussaies was the headquarters of the gestapo in paris . 
one day you might phone a friend and the phone would ring for a long time in an empty flat . 
sartre was also noted for his open relationship with prominent feminist and fellow existentialist philosopher and writer simone de beauvoir . 
john paul jones  -lrb-  born john paul; july 6, 1747 july 18, 1792 -rrb- was the united states' first well-known naval commander in the american revolutionary war . 
in 1905, jones's remains were identified by u . s . 
it was not long afterward that john paul `` jones '' joined the american navy to fight against britain . 
as such ,  he is sometimes referred to as the `` father of the american navy ''  -lrb-  a sobriquet he shares with john barry and john adams  -rrb-  . 
during his second voyage in 1770, john paul had one of his crew flogged ,  leading to accusations that his discipline was `` unnecessarily cruel '' . 
john paul's career was quickly and unexpectedly advanced during his next voyage aboard the brig `` john '' ,  which sailed from port in 1768, when both the captain and a ranking mate suddenly died of yellow fever . 
the 50-gun british frigate and the 22-gun hired ship `` countess of scarborough '' placed themselves between the convoy and jones's squadron ,  allowing the merchants to escape . 
in 1779, captain jones took command of the 42-gun  -lrb-  or as he preferred it ,  `` bon homme richard ''  -rrb-  ,  a merchant ship rebuilt and given to america by the french shipping magnate ,  jacques-donatien le ray . 
jones grew up in scotland ,  became a sailor ,  and served as commander of several british merchant ships . 
jones had some early successes against british merchant shipping in the irish sea . 
john paul started his maritime career at the age of 13, sailing out of whitehaven in the northern english county of cumberland as apprentice aboard `` friendship '' under captain benson . 
leaving scotland ,  john paul commanded a london-registered vessel named `` betsy '' ,  a west indiaman mounting 22 guns ,  engaging in commercial speculation in tobago for about 18 months . 
throughout the mission ,  the crew acted as if they were aboard a privateer ,  not a warship ,  led by lieutenant thomas simpson ,  jones's second-in-command . 
for several years ,  paul sailed aboard a number of merchant and slave ships ,  including `` king george '' in 1764 as third mate and `` two friends '' as first mate in 1766.
in june 1782, jones was appointed to command the 74-gun  ,  but his command fell through when congress decided to give `` america '' to the french as replacement for the wrecked `` le magnifique '' . 
john paul jones was given an honorary pardon in 1999 by the port of whitehaven for his raid on the town ,  in the presence of lt .  steve lyons representing the us naval attaché to the uk ,  and yuri fokine the russian ambassador to the uk . 
they produced many of their films through their own production company ,  charter film productions ,  which they set up in 1937.
they were extras in anthony asquith's 1931 film `` tell england '' while still at school . 
all of frankenheimer's films up until `` grand prix '' had been made in black-and-white . 
the film was nominated for two oscars ,  including one for lansbury . 
john michael frankenheimer  -lrb-  february 19, 1930 – july 6, 2002 -rrb- was an american film and television director known for social dramas and action/suspense films . 
he also began studying film theory by reading books about other famous directors ,  such as sergei eisenstein along with how-to books about the craft of film making . 
the film was unseen ,  either theatrically or on broadcast ,  for many years . 
frankenheimer followed this with his most famous and best-regarded film ,  `` the manchurian candidate ''  -lrb-  1962 -rrb- . 
he stated that frankenheimer made some of the `` most distinctive films of his time '' and that he was ``  one of the most gifted directors of drama on television '' . 
the film failed to find an audience ,  but frankenheimer claimed it was one of his favorites . 
the first cut of the film was four-and-a-half hours long ,  the length frankenheimer had predicted . 
the film was released in 1982, along with his hbo television adaptation of the acclaimed play `` the rainmaker '' . 
this led him to join a film squadron based in burbank ,  california ,  where he shot his first documentary . 
the film tested very highly ,  and paramount and frankenheimer had high expectations for it but it was not a hit . 
the film is an expressionistic ,  part-horror ,  part-thriller ,  part-science fiction film about the obsession with eternal youth and misplaced faith in the ability of medical science to achieve it . 
the moving image collection of john frankenheimer is held at the academy film archive . 
again saddled with an unworkably long script ,  frankenheimer threw it out and took the locations and actors left from the previous film and began filming ,  with writers working in paris as the production shot in normandy . 
frankenheimer's 30 feature films and over 50 plays for television were notable for their influence on contemporary thought . 
jellicoe was appointed first sea lord in november 1916.
at the start of the first world war ,  the first lord of the admiralty winston churchill ,  removed admiral george callaghan ,  commander-in-chief of the home fleet  -lrb-  august 1914 -rrb- . 
as first sea lord jellicoe was awarded the grand cordon of the belgian order of leopold on 21 april 1917, the russian order of st .  george ,  3rd class on 5 june 1917, the grand cross of the italian military order of savoy on 11 august 1917 and the grand cordon of the japanese order of the rising sun on 29 august 1917.
he was advanced to knight grand cross of the order of the bath on 8 february 1915.
jellicoe was appointed second-in-command of the atlantic fleet in august 1907, hoisting his flag in the battleship  . 
nevertheless ,  he was appointed a member of the order of merit on 31 may 1916, advanced to knight grand cross of the royal victorian order on 17 june 1916 and awarded the grand cross of the french legion of honour on 15 september 1916.
for his efforts during the war woodward was knighted . 
in 1982, he commanded the `` hermes '' aircraft carrier group ,  task group 317.8, in the falklands war . 
admiral sir john forster `` sandy '' woodward  -lrb-  1 may 1932 – 4 august 2013 -rrb- was a british admiral who commanded the british naval task force in the south atlantic during the falklands war . 
having graduated from the royal naval college dartmouth ,  woodward joined the royal navy in 1946.
the first edition of woodward's memoirs were published in 1992.
blaylock's short story `` thirteen phantasms '' won the 1997 world fantasy award for best short fiction . 
he has been married to his wife ,  viki blaylock ,  for more than 40 years . 
he was born in long beach ,  california; studied english at california state university ,  fullerton ,  receiving an m . a . 
pournelle began fiction writing non-sf work under a pseudonym in 1965.
pournelle wrote the `` chaos manor '' column in `` byte '' . 
pournelle was also known for his paleoconservative political views ,  which were sometimes expressed in his fiction . 
pournelle was among those who in 1968 signed a pro-vietnam war advertisement in `` galaxy science fiction '' . 
he served in the u . s .  army during the korean war . 
ruth pournelle ,  his mother ,  was a teacher ,  although during world war ii ,  she worked in a munitions factory . 
jerry eugene pournelle  -lrb-  ; august 7, 1933 – september 8, 2017 -rrb- was an american polymath: scientist in the area of operations research ,  science fiction writer ,  essayist ,  and journalist . 
pournelle served as president of the science fiction and fantasy writers of america in 1973.
pournelle served a term as president of the science fiction and fantasy writers of america . 
barlaam and josaphat  -lrb-    -rrb-  are legendary christian martyrs and saints . 
josaphat himself later abdicated and went into seclusion with his old teacher barlaam . 
the story of barlaam and josaphat or joasaph is a christianized and later version of the story of siddhartha gautama ,  who became the buddha . 
the two were entered in the eastern orthodox calendar with a feast-day on 26 august ,  and in the roman martyrology in the western church as `` barlaam and josaphat '' on the date of 27 november . 
there are a large number of different books in various languages ,  all dealing with the lives of saints barlaam and josaphat in india . 
jaggies are stairlike lines that appear where there should be smooth straight lines or curves . 
they can occur for variety of reasons ,  the most common being that the output device  -lrb-  display monitor or printer  -rrb-  does not have enough resolution to portray a smooth line . 
jaggies occur due to the `` staircase effect '' . 
class action lawsuits are another example of judicial economy in action ,  as they are often tried as a single case ,  yet involve many cases with similar facts . rather than trying each case individually ,  which would unduly burden the judicial system ,  the cases can be consolidated into a class action . 
for example ,  the old instructions on burden of proof in civil cases read:
jury instructions are the set of legal rules that jurors ought follow when deciding a case . 
the third case ,  which dealt with murder ,  did not show any differences due to instructions . 
under the american judicial system ,  juries are often the trier of fact when they serve in a trial . 
natural law is often contrasted to positive law which asserts law as the product of human activity and human volition . 
in its general sense ,  natural law theory may be compared to both state-of-nature law and general law understood on the basis of being analogous to the laws of physical science . 
under the roman empire ,  schools of law were created ,  and practice of the law became more academic . 
modern jurisprudence began in the 18th century and was focused on the first principles of natural law ,  civil law ,  and the law of nations . 
but it must also be remembered that aristotle is describing a view of morality ,  not a system of law ,  and therefore his remarks as to nature are about the grounding of the morality enacted as law ,  not the laws themselves . 
aristotle is often said to be the father of natural law . 
the best evidence of aristotle's having thought there was a natural law comes from the rhetoric ,  where aristotle notes that ,  aside from the `` particular '' laws that each people has set up for itself ,  there is a `` common '' law that is according to nature . 
the law was as follows:
a jury trial ,  or trial by jury ,  is a lawful proceeding in which a jury makes a decision or findings of fact . 
jury trials are of far less importance  -lrb-  or of no importance  -rrb-  in countries that do not have a common law system . 
according to some sources ,  in the time of edward iii ,  `` by the law of the land '' had been substituted `` by due process of law '' ,  which in those times was a trial by twelve peers . 
the use of jury trials ,  which evolved within common law systems rather than civil law systems ,  has had a profound impact on the nature of american civil procedure and criminal procedure rules ,  even if a bench trial is actually contemplated in a particular case . 
jury trials are used in a significant share of serious criminal cases in almost all common law lawful systems  -lrb-  singapore ,  for example ,  is an exception  -rrb-  ,  and juries or lay judges have been incorporated into the legal systems of many civil law countries for criminal cases . 
