most common interest in hair is focused on hair growth ,  hair types ,  and hair care ,  but hair is also an important biomaterial primarily composed of protein ,  notably alpha-keratin . 
the hawker siddeley harrier ,  developed in the 1960s ,  is the first of the harrier jump jet series of aircraft . 
in the falklands war in 1982, 10 harrier gr . 3s of no . 
the aircraft was named after the harrier ,  a small bird of prey . 
in the 1970s the british aerospace sea harrier was developed from the harrier for use by the royal navy  -lrb-  rn  -rrb-  on s .  the sea harrier and the harrier fought in the 1982 falklands war ,  in which the aircraft proved to be crucial and versatile . 
the harrier's design was derived from the hawker p . 1127.
the first raf squadron to be equipped with the harrier gr . 1, no . 
 ''i still don't believe the harrier . 
the harrier has been described by pilots as `` unforgiving '' . 
the usmc received 102 av-8a and 8 tav-8a harriers between 1971 and 1976.
the harrier gr . 1 made its first flight on 28 december 1967.
the mcdonnell douglas av-8b harrier ii is the latest harrier variant ,  a second-generation series to replace the first generation of harrier jets already in service; all the above variants of the harrier have mainly been retired with the harrier ii taking their place in the raf ,  usmc and faa . 
however ,  both sea harriers and harrier gr . 3s were used in ground-attack missions against the main airfield and runway at stanley . 
the last first-generation harriers were retired by thailand in 2006.
the harrier has two control elements not found in conventional fixed-wing aircraft: the thrust vector and the reaction control system . 
the royal navy's fleet air arm  -lrb-  faa  -rrb-  operated a substantially modified variant of the harrier ,  the british aerospace sea harrier . 
the harrier was typically used as a ground attack aircraft ,  though its manoeuvrability also allows it to effectively engage other aircraft at short ranges . 
following the display of harrier operations from small carriers ,  the navies of spain and later thailand bought the harrier for use as their main carrier-based fixed-wing aircraft . 
the hawker harrier was an experimental biplane torpedo bomber aircraft built by hawker aircraft to a specification issued in the 1920s for the raf . 
in  ,  the british air ministry laid down specifications for a high altitude bomber to replace the hawker horsley and for a coastal torpedo bomber  -lrb-  specifications 23/25 and 24/25 -rrb- . 
on 6 april 1950 hergé established studios hergé as a public company . 
in november 1986, fanny closed studios hergé ,  replacing it with the hergé foundation . 
hergé's next `` adventure of tintin '' would be `` the secret of the unicorn '' ,  serialised in `` le soir '' from june 1942.
with their assistance ,  from 1942 to 1947, hergé adapted most of his previous `` adventures of tintin '' into 62-page colour versions . 
in november 1932 hergé announced that the following month he would send tintin on an adventure to asia . 
two live-action films were also produced ,  `` tintin and the golden fleece ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- and `` tintin and the blue oranges ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- ,  the former of which hergé had been closely involved with . 
hergé had developed the idea of setting an `` adventure of tintin '' on the moon while producing `` prisoners of the sun '' . 
its publication resulted in a massive boost to hergé's book sales too . 
widely celebrated in belgium ,  a hergé museum was established in louvain-la-neuve in 2009.
by this point ,  `` tintin '' magazine was at its commercial peak ,  with sales of 600,000 a week ,  although hergé had lost much of his interest in it . 
alongside his work on the new stories ,  hergé also made use of the studios in revising more of his early works . 
in 1979, hergé was diagnosed with osteomyelofibrosis ,  necessitating a complete blood transfusion . 
hergé's works have been widely acclaimed for their clarity of draughtsmanship and meticulous ,  well-researched plots . 
after the allied liberation of belgium in 1944, `` le soir '' was shut down and its staff – including hergé – accused of having been collaborators . 
although they retained respect for each other ,  hergé's repeated absences had created a tense situation between himself and leblanc . 
georges prosper remi  -lrb-  ; 22 may 1907 – 3 march 1983 -rrb- ,  known by the pen name hergé  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  was a belgian cartoonist . 
in june 1970, hergé's father died ,  and after the funeral he holidayed near lake geneva . 
during this period ,  hergé also contributed to `` l'ouest ''  -lrb-  `` the west ''  -rrb-  ,  a newspaper run by his friend raymond de becker . 
that same month ,  hergé broke from his manager ,  thiery ,  after discovering that the latter had been siphoning off money for himself . 
doreen valiente has called the horned god `` the eldest of gods '' in both the witches creed and also in her invocation to the horned god . 
in the hinduism ,  the horned god is referred to pashupati ,  see pashupati seal . 
whilst the horned god is the most common depiction of masculine divinity in wicca ,  he is not the only representation . 
it is not a personal god ,  but rather an impersonal divinity similar to the tao of taoism .   -rrb- 
in the writings of charles cardell and raymond howard ,  the god was referred to as atho . 
in her theory the male psyche's 'horned god' frequently compensates for inadequate fathering . 
the horned god is one of the two primary deities found in wicca and some related forms of neopaganism . 
murray derived this model of a horned god cult from james frazer and jules michelet . 
in traditional and mainstream wicca ,  the horned god is viewed as the divine male principality ,  being both equal and opposite to the goddess . 
doreen valiente writes that the horned god also carries the souls of the dead to the underworld . 
the term `` horned god '' itself predates wicca ,  and is an early 20th-century syncretic term for a horned or antlered anthropomorphic god with partly pseudohistorical origins ,  partly based on historical horned deities . 
several theories have been created to establish historical roots for modern neopagan worship of a horned god . 
margaret murray's theory of the historical origins of the horned god has been used by wiccans to create a myth of historical origins for their religion . 
the horned god represents the male part of the religion's duotheistic theological system ,  the consort of the female triple goddess of the moon or other mother goddess . 
</poem>
<poem style= ''margin-left:24px; ''> `` for hagese ''' . 
as haggis cannot be exported to the united states ,  it is instead made there ,  sometimes by scottish companies . 
although the name `` hagws '' or `` hagese '' was first recorded in england c .  1430, the dish is considered traditionally of scottish origin . 
haggis can be used as an ingredient in other dishes ,  even pizza ,  rather than the main part of a dish . 
a joke sometimes maintained is that a haggis is a small scottish animal with longer legs on one side ,  so that it can run around the steep hills of the scottish highlands without falling over . 
the scottish poem ,  `` flyting of dunbar and kennedy '' ,  which is dated before 1520  -lrb-  the generally accepted date prior to the death of william dunbar ,  one of the composers  -rrb-  ,  refers to 'haggeis' . 
haggis is popularly assumed to be of scottish origin ,  but many countries have produced similar dishes ,  albeit with different names . 
aaron hit  . 314 with 27 home runs and 106 rbi ,  in 1955.
aaron finished the season with 673 home runs . 
aaron was born in mobile ,  alabama to herbert aaron ,  sr .  and estella aaron . 
aaron founded the hank aaron rookie league program . 
years later ,  aaron remembered:
aaron lives in the atlanta area . 
aaron resides near atlanta . 
in 1963, aaron nearly won the triple crown . 
in 1970, aaron reached two more career milestones . 
aaron  -lrb-  then age 39 -rrb- hit 40 home runs in 392 at-bats ,  ending the 1973 season one home run short of the record . 
aaron was a member of the boy scouts of america . 
the board appears to have been convinced ,  as aaron was not drafted . 
in 1968, aaron was the first atlanta braves player to hit his 500th career home run ,  and in 1970, he was the first atlanta brave to reach 3,000 career hits . 
at the end of the 1969 season ,  aaron again finished third in the mvp voting . 
the second concerns the grail's history in the time of joseph of arimathea . 
grail literature divides into two classes . 
he then delivered a copy of the game ,  written in basic ,  to the pcc . 
hunt the wumpus is a text-based adventure game developed by gregory yob in 1973.
 ''hunt the wumpus '' is a text-based adventure game set in a series of caves connected by tunnels . 
the caves are in complete darkness ,  so the player cannot see into adjacent caves; instead ,  upon moving to a new empty cave ,  the game describes if they can smell a wumpus ,  hear a bat ,  or feel a draft from a pit in one of the connected caves . 
in 1929, hearst and mgm created the hearst metrotone newsreels . 
hearst communications is based in the hearst tower in midtown manhattan ,  new york city . 
hearst's magazine division began in 1903, with w .  r .  hearst's creation of `` motor '' magazine . 
the great depression hit hearst hard . 
in 1919, hearst's book publishing division was renamed cosmopolitan book . 
also in 1959, hearst acquired the paperback book publisher avon books . 
its ceo ,  dave morgan ,  was a former employee of hearst . 
in 2010, hearst acquired digital marketing agency icrossing . 
in 1999, hearst sold its avon and morrow book publishing activities to harpercollins . 
that december ,  dreamworks animation sold a 25% stake in awesomenesstv for $81.25 million to hearst . 
this eventually lead to the merger of the magazine hearst international with cosmopolitan in 1925.
the company was founded by william randolph hearst as an owner of newspapers ,  and the hearst family remains involved in its ownership and management . 
thompson attended i . n . 
starting in about 1980, thompson became more reclusive . 
in 1980 thompson divorced wife sandra conklin . 
the incidents strained thompson's relationship with wenner and `` rolling stone . `` 
plans for thompson to cover the 1976 presidential campaign for `` rolling stone '' and later publish a book fell through after wenner canceled the project without informing thompson . 
thompson went on to become a fierce critic of nixon ,  both during and after his presidency . 
the first use of the word `` gonzo '' to describe thompson's work is credited to the journalist bill cardoso . 
thompson finished his journalism career in the same way it had begun: writing about sports . 
thompson later remarked that the `` rolling stone '' article mobilized his opposition far more than his supporters . 
thompson's next ,  and penultimate ,  collection ,  `` kingdom of fear: loathsome secrets of a star-crossed child in the final days of the american century '' ,  was widely publicized as thompson's first memoir . 
throughout the early 1990s ,  thompson claimed to be at work on a novel entitled `` polo is my life '' . 
during this time thompson read and admired j .  p .  donleavy's `` the ginger man '' . 
in 1967, shortly before the summer of love thompson wrote `` the hashbury is the capital of the hippies '' for the new york times magazine . 
thompson died by suicide at the age of 67, following a series of health problems . 
the doonesbury cartoon character duke – who was modeled after thompson – pens an essay about `` my shoplifting conviction '' entitled `` fear and loathing at macy's menswear '' ,  a reference to thompson's book . 
from the late 1970s on ,  most of thompson's literary output appeared as a four-volume series of books entitled `` the gonzo papers '' . 
thompson continued to publish irregularly in `` rolling stone '' ,  ultimately contributing 17 pieces to the magazine between 1984 and 2004.
 ''the rum diary '' ,  a novel based on thompson's experiences in puerto rico ,  was eventually published in  . 
there was however one passion shared by thompson and nixon: a love of football ,  discussed in `` fear and loathing on the campaign trail '72 '' . 
the term is also associated with the empirical social sciences and with the work of franz boas . 
hegel's historicism also suggests that any human society and all human activities such as science ,  art ,  or philosophy ,  are defined by their history . 
the social theory of karl marx ,  with respect to modern scholarship ,  has an ambiguous relation to historicism . 
in his books ,  `` natural right and history '' and `` on tyranny '' ,  strauss offers a complete critique of historicism as it emerges in the works of hegel ,  marx ,  and heidegger . 
hegel viewed the realization of human freedom as the ultimate purpose of history ,  which could only be achieved through the creation of the perfect state . 
hegel's position is perhaps best illuminated when contrasted against the atomistic and reductionist opinion of human societies and social activities self-defining on an `` ad hoc '' basis through the sum of dozens of interactions . 
the same term ,  `` new historicism '' is also used for a school of literary scholarship which interprets a poem ,  drama ,  etc . 
leo strauss used the term `` historicism '' and reportedly termed it the single greatest threat to intellectual freedom insofar as it denies any attempt to address injustice-pure-and-simple  -lrb-  such is the significance of historicism's rejection of `` natural right '' or `` right by nature ''  -rrb-  . 
this school of thought is sometimes given the name of `` new historicism '' . 
another of his targets is what he terms `` moral historicism '' ,  the attempt to infer moral values from the course of history; in hegel's words ,  that `` history is the world's court of justice '' . 
it also administers hunter college high school and hunter college elementary school . 
out of 442 nationally ranked colleges and universities ,  hunter is no . 
hunter ,  a fully accredited college ,  is organized into four schools: the school of arts and sciences ,  the school of education ,  the school of the health professions ,  and the school of social work . 
hunter offers several honors programs ,  including the macaulay honors college and the thomas hunter honors program . 
 -lrb-  today ,  the elementary school and the high school still exist at a different location ,  and are now called the hunter college campus schools .   -rrb- 
hunter college owns and operates property outside of its main campuses ,  including the mfa building ,  roosevelt house ,  and the hunter college campus schools . 
hunter offers other honors programs ,  including: honors research training programs and departmental honors opportunities ,  the muse scholar program ,  the jenny hunter program ,  the athena program ,  and the yallow program . 
college sports and recreational programs are served by the hunter sportsplex ,  located below the west building . <ref name= ''about hunter: in brief ,  12/1/07 ''></ref>
today ,  hunter college is a comprehensive teaching and research institution . 
hunter was founded in 1870 as a women's college; it first admitted male freshmen in 1946.
in 1914 the normal college became hunter college in honor of its first president . 
the main campus is home to the school of arts and sciences and the school of education . 
hunter is also known as one of the more affordable schools in the manhattan area providing low-cost ,  yet high quality education . 
and high school gpa 25th–75th percentile range of 85% to 92% ,  meaning that 75% of students had an average high school gpa higher than an 85% and 25% had a high school gpa higher than 92% . 
hunter college has its origins in the 19th-century movement for normal school training which swept across the united states . 
until 1998, shearer was paid $30,000 per episode . 
shearer married penelope nichols in 1974.
shearer was a cast member on `` saturday night live '' between 1979 and 1980, and 1984 and 1985.
since 1983, shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy/music program `` le show '' . 
shearer co-created ,  co-wrote and co-starred in rob reiner's 1984 film `` this is spinal tap '' . 
it was filmed in 25 days . 
on july 7, 2015, shearer agreed to continue with the show ,  on the same terms as the other voice actors . 
shearer is also known for his prolific work as a voice actor on `` the simpsons '' . 
in 2002, shearer directed his first feature film `` teddy bears' picnic '' ,  which he also wrote . 
shearer was born december 23, 1943, in los angeles ,  the son of dora warren  -lrb-  née kohn; d .  2008 -rrb- ,  a bookkeeper ,  and mack shearer . 
in 1984, while promoting the film `` this is spinal tap '' ,  shearer ,  christopher guest and michael mckean performed on `` saturday night live '' . 
good versus evil is a common theme in high fantasy ,  and the character of evil is often an important theme in a work of high fantasy ,  as in `` the lord of the rings '' . 
there is often some evil that must be defeated ,  sometimes ,  a mysterious dark lord ,  often obsessed with taking over the world and killing the main hero . 
the plot of the story often depicts the hero's fight against the evil forces as a bildungsroman . 
high fantasy is defined as fantasy set in an alternative ,  fictional  -lrb-  `` secondary ''  -rrb-  world ,  rather than `` the real '' ,  or `` primary '' world . 
sexual activity may follow sexual arousal . 
human sexual activity ,  human sexual practice or human sexual behaviour is the manner in which humans experience and express their sexuality . 
homosexuality is the romantic or sexual attraction to the same sex . 
both genders in the study agreed they needed good health ,  good sexual functioning ,  positive sexual self-esteem ,  and a sexually skilful partner to maintain sexual desire . 
sexual activity can be classified into the gender and sexual orientation of the participants ,  as well as by the relationship of the participants . 
heterosexuality is the romantic or sexual attraction to the opposite sex . 
the frequency of sexual activity might range from zero  -lrb-  sexual abstinence  -rrb-  to 15 or 20 times a week . 
it is possible for a person whose sexual identity is mainly heterosexual to engage in sexual acts with people of the same sex . 
research on sexual frequency has also been conducted solely on female adolescents who engage in sexual activity . 
these social rules are referred to as sexual morality  -lrb-  what can and can not be done by society's rules  -rrb-  and sexual norms  -lrb-  what is and is not expected  -rrb-  . 
most people engage in sexual activity because of pleasure they derive from the arousal of their sexuality ,  especially if they can achieve orgasm . 
people who have a romantic or sexual attraction to both sexes are referred to as bisexual . 
two examples that are criminal offences in most jurisdictions are sexual assault and sexual activity with a person below the local age of consent . 
the sexual acts are all recorded as consensual and pleasurable to both parties . 
overall ,  research concluded that psychological well-being ,  sexual motivation ,  and sexual satisfaction were all positively correlated when dating couples partook in sexual activity for self-determined reasons . 
at times ,  a person may engage in a sexual activity solely for the sexual pleasure of their partner ,  such as because of an obligation they may have to the partner or because of love ,  sympathy or pity they may feel for the partner . 
most societies consider it a serious crime to force someone to engage in sexual acts or to engage in sexual activity with someone who does not consent . 
furthermore ,  teenagers who had their first sexual experience at age 15 or younger ,  or who had many sexual partners were not negatively affected and did not have associated lower well-being . 
any sexual activity that involves the introduction of semen into a woman's vagina ,  such as during sexual intercourse ,  or even contact of semen with her vulva ,  may result in a pregnancy . 
human sexual activity has sociological ,  cognitive ,  emotional ,  behavioural and biological aspects; these include personal bonding ,  sharing emotions and the physiology of the reproductive system ,  sex drive ,  sexual intercourse and sexual behaviour in all its forms . 
a hydraulic ram ,  or hydram ,  is a cyclic water pump powered by hydropower . 
the air in the tube cushions the shock of the water the same as the air in other configurations does . 
some later ram designs in the uk called compound rams were designed to pump treated water using an untreated drive water source ,  which overcomes some of the problems of having drinking water sourced from an open stream . 
in addition ,  there is a drive pipe supplying water from an elevated source and a delivery pipe ,  taking a portion of the water that comes through the drive pipe to an elevation higher than the source . 
an alternative to the hydraulic ram is the water-powered pump . 
since both efficiency and reliable cycling depend on water hammer effects ,  the drive pipe design is important . 
the delivery pipe is much less critical since the pressure vessel prevents water hammer effects from traveling up it . 
the motive power needed by the pump is generated by the hydraulic turbine from the available low head water energy . 
the subfamily homininae can be further subdivided into three branches: the tribe gorillini  -lrb-  gorillas  -rrb-  ,  and the tribe hominini with subtribes panina  -lrb-  chimpanzees  -rrb-  and hominina  -lrb-  humans and their extinct relatives  -rrb-  . 
their existence suggests that the homininae tribes diverged not earlier than about 8 million years ago  -lrb-  see human evolutionary genetics  -rrb-  . 
 ''h .  habilis '' may also have coexisted with `` h .  erectus '' in africa for a period of 500,000 years . 
 ''h .  habilis '' brain size has been shown to range from to  ,  rather than from to as previously thought . 
an alternative explanation would be that any ancestral relationship from `` h .  habilis '' to `` h .  erectus '' would have to have been cladogenetic rather than anagenetic  -lrb-  meaning that if an isolated subgroup population of `` h .  habilis '' became the ancestor of `` h .  erectus '' ,  other subgroups remained as unchanged `` h .  habilis '' until their much later extinction  -rrb-  . 
the body proportions for `` h .  habilis '' are in accordance with craniodental evidence ,  suggesting closer association with `` h .  erectus '' . 
 ''homo habilis '' has often been thought to be the ancestor of the more gracile and sophisticated `` homo ergaster '' ,  which in turn gave rise to the more human-appearing species ,  `` homo erectus '' . 
 ''h .  habilis ''' brain capacity of around 640 cm³ was on average 50% larger than australopithecines ,  but considerably smaller than the to range of modern `` homo sapiens '' . 
louis leakey  -lrb-  father of richard leakey  -rrb-  ,  the british-kenyan paleoanthropologist who was the first to suggest the existence of `` h .  habilis '' ,  and his wife ,  mary leakey ,  found the first trace of `` h .  habilis '' in 1955: two hominin teeth . 
the brain capacity is 510 cm³ ,  not as impressive as other early specimen and forms of `` h .  habilis '' discovered . 
other diatonic harmonicas include octave harmonicas . 
the basic parts of the harmonica are the comb ,  reed plates and cover plates . 
most harmonicas are constructed with the reed plates screwed or bolted to the comb or each other . 
the reed plate is a grouping of several reeds in a single housing . 
a notable exception to the traditional reed plate design is the all-plastic harmonicas designed by finn magnus in the 1950s ,  in which the reed and reed plate were molded out of a single piece of plastic . 
the magnus design had the reeds ,  reed plates and comb made of plastic and either molded or permanently glued together . 
reeds are pre-tuned to individual pitches . 
hops are toxic to dogs . 
as with grapes ,  the location where hops are grown affects the hops' characteristics . 
for this reason the protestants preferred hopped beer . 
essentially all of the harvested hops are used in beer making . 
north american beers often use cascade hops ,  columbus hops ,  centennial hops ,  willamette ,  amarillo hops and about forty more varieties as the us have lately been the more significant breeders of new hop varieties ,  including dwarf hop varieties . 
xanthohumol is the principal flavonoid in hops . 
the term `` noble hops '' traditionally refers to varieties of hops which are low in bitterness and high in aroma . 
the effect of hops on the finished beer varies by type and use ,  though there are two main hop types: bittering and aroma . 
hop plants are planted in rows about apart . 
in beer ,  they are considered aroma hops  -lrb-  as opposed to bittering hops  -rrb- ; see pilsner urquell as a classic example of the bohemian pilsener style ,  which showcases noble hops . 
in addition to beer ,  hops are used in herbal teas and in soft drinks . 
hop bars were used before modern machinery was invented to make the holes for the hop poles . 
hops contain beta acids or lupulones . 
dermatitis sometimes results from harvesting hops . 
hop acids also contribute to and stabilize the foam qualities of beer . 
hops are the flowers  -lrb-  also called seed cones or strobiles  -rrb-  of the hop plant `` humulus lupulus . `` 
aroma hops are typically added to the wort later to prevent the evaporation of the essential oils ,  to impart `` hop taste ''  -lrb-  if during the final 30 minutes of boil  -rrb-  or `` hop aroma ''  -lrb-  if during the final 10 minutes ,  or less ,  of boil  -rrb-  . 
these are desirable for their aroma contributions to beer . 
huey ,  dewey ,  and louie were the idea of al taliaferro ,  the artist for the `` silly symphonies '' comic strip ,  which featured donald duck . 
huey ,  dewey ,  and louie are the sons of donald's sister della duck; in `` donald's nephews '' ,  their mother is instead named dumbella . 
huey ,  dewey ,  and louie duck are triplet cartoon characters created in 1937 by writer ted osborne and cartoonist al taliaferro ,  and are owned by the walt disney company . 
in early comic books and shorts ,  the caps of huey ,  dewey ,  and louie were colored randomly ,  depending on the whim of the colorist . 
according to don rosa ,  huey ,  dewey and louie became members of the junior woodchucks when they were around 11 years old . 
the code of hammurabi is not the earliest surviving law code; it is predated by the code of ur-nammu ,  the laws of eshnunna ,  and the code of lipit-ishtar . 
hammurabi is best known for having issued the code of hammurabi ,  which he claimed to have received from shamash ,  the babylonian god of justice . 
in just a few years ,  hammurabi succeeded in uniting all of mesopotamia under his rule . 
after extolling hammurabi's military accomplishments ,  the hymn finally declares: `` i am hammurabi ,  the king of justice . `` 
the first few decades of hammurabi's reign were quite peaceful . 
the code of hammurabi was one of the first law code to place restrictions on what a wronged person was allowed to do in retribution . 
hammurabi was seen by many as a god within his own lifetime . 
mut-ashkur ,  the new king of assyria ,  was forced to pay tribute to hammurabi . 
nonetheless ,  the code of hammurabi shows marked differences from these earlier law codes and ultimately proved more influential . 
the superposition of all the waves results in the observed pattern of wave propagation . 
the complex amplitude of the primary wave at the point q located at a distance `` r '' from p is given by:
using huygens' theory and the principle of superposition of waves ,  the complex amplitude at a further point p is found by summing the contributions from each point on the sphere of radius `` r '' . 
in 1678, huygens proposed that every point to which a luminous disturbance reaches becomes a source of a spherical wave; the sum of these secondary waves determines the form of the wave at any subsequent time . 
the complex amplitude at p is then given by:
this was one of the investigations that led to the victory of the wave theory of light over the then predominant corpuscular theory . 
consider the case of a point source located at a point p ,  vibrating at a frequency `` f '' . 
honey collection is an ancient activity . 
honey barbecue and honey mustard are other common flavors used in sauces . 
mad honey intoxication is a result of eating honey containing grayanotoxins . 
the average ph of honey is 3.9, but can range from 3.4 to 6.1.
honey was also cultivated in ancient mesoamerica . 
the production of honeydew honey has some complications and dangers . 
a few types of honey have unusual viscous properties . 
polyfloral honey ,  also known as wildflower honey ,  is derived from the nectar of many types of flowers . 
honey use and production has a long and varied history . 
these species are known to feed on nectar and produce honey . 
honey with excessive water content is not suitable for long-term preservation . 
the viscosity of honey is affected greatly by both temperature and water content . 
in the usa ,  honey is also graded on its color and optical density by usda standards ,  graded on the pfund scale ,  which ranges from 0 for `` water white '' honey to more than 114 for `` dark amber '' honey . 
the melting point of crystallized honey is between  ,  depending on its composition . 
the fertility god of egypt ,  min ,  was offered honey . 
high-quality honey can be distinguished by fragrance ,  taste ,  and consistency . 
the hebrew bible contains many references to honey . 
the honey is then usually filtered to remove beeswax and other debris . 
the specific composition ,  color ,  aroma ,  and flavor of any batch of honey depend on the flowers foraged by bees that produced the honey . 
generally ,  honey is classified by the floral source of the nectar from which it was made . 
the effect honey has on light is useful for determining the type and quality . 
honey is collected from wild bee colonies or from domesticated beehives . 
in ancient greece ,  honey was produced from the archaic to the hellenistic periods . 
some cultures believed honey had many practical health uses . 
the oldest known honey remains were found in the country of georgia . 
monofloral honey is made primarily from the nectar of one type of flower . 
honey is generally considered ineffective for the treatment of allergic conjunctivitis . 
honey is also used to make mead beer ,  called `` braggot '' . 
at the temperature of 20°c ,  density of honey typically ranges between 1.38 and 1.45 kg/l . 
while the risk honey poses to infant health is small ,  taking the risk is not recommended until after one year of age ,  and then giving honey is considered safe . 
although the majority of calories in honey is from fructose ,  honey does not cause increased weight gain and fructose by itself is not an independent factor for weight gain . 
hengist and horsa appear in books 6 and 8:
according to bede ,  hengist and horsa were the sons of wictgils ,  son of witta ,  son of wecta ,  son of woden . 
vortigern granted this and ordered hengist to invite more saxons . 
vortigern and rowena were immediately married and hengist was given kent . 
vortigern allowed hengist to send for more of his countrymen to come over to fight for him . 
in the entry for the year 455 the `` chronicle '' details that hengist and horsa fought with vortigern at aylesford and that horsa died there . 
hengist's daughter was given to vortigern ,  who slept with her and deeply loved her . 
horsa and the men all agreed that hengist should allow the marriage ,  on the condition that vortigern give him kent . 
in 447 ad ,  vortigern received hengist and horsa `` as friends '' and gave to the brothers the isle of thanet . 
hengist and horsa were made generals over the exiles ,  as befitted their noble birth . 
the `` hero system '' uses `` champions ''' key system features . 
the `` hero system '' is used as the underlying mechanics of other hero games role-playing games such as `` fantasy hero '' ,  `` star hero '' ,  and `` pulp hero '' . 
also like `` champions '' ,  the `` hero system '' uses a point-based system for character creation . 
he also invented the davy lamp and a very early form of arc lamp . 
a possibility for foreign origin of the name may be `` heqet '' ,  name of an egyptian goddess of fertility and childbirth . 
the etymology of the name `` hecate ''  -lrb-  ἑκάτη ,  `` hekátē ''  -rrb-  is not known . 
in particular ,  there is some evidence that she might be derived from the local sun goddesses  -lrb-  see also arinna  -rrb-  ,  based on similar attributes . 
in early modern english ,  the name was also pronounced disyllabically  -lrb-  as   -rrb-  and sometimes spelled `` hecat '' . 
hecate or hekate  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` hekátē ''  -rrb-  is a goddess in ancient greek religion and mythology ,  most often shown holding a pair of torches or a key and in later periods depicted in triple form . 
haematopoiesis  -lrb-  from greek αἷμα ,  `` blood '' and ποιεῖν `` to make ''; also hematopoiesis in american english; sometimes also haemopoiesis or hemopoiesis  -rrb-  is the formation of blood cellular components . 
hogmanay  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the scots word for the last day of the year and is synonymous with the celebration of the new year  -lrb-  gregorian calendar  -rrb-  in the scottish manner . 
it is normally followed by further celebration on the morning of new year's day  -lrb-  1 january  -rrb-  or ,  in some cases ,  2 january—a scottish bank holiday . 
hamsters are omnivores . 
other hamsters commonly kept as pets are the three species of dwarf hamster . 
most hamsters are strictly solitary . 
by awarding hamsters which match standard hamster types ,  hamster shows encourage planned and careful hamster breeding . 
a hamster show is an event in which people gather hamsters to judge them against each other . 
hamster shows feature an exhibition of the hamsters participating in the judging . 
other hamster species commonly kept as pets are the three species of dwarf hamster ,  campbell's dwarf hamster  -lrb-  `` phodopus campbelli ''  -rrb-  ,  the winter white dwarf hamster  -lrb-  `` phodopus sungorus ''  -rrb-  and the roborovski hamster  -lrb-  `` phodopus roborovskii ''  -rrb-  . 
when kept as house pets the syrian hamster does not hibernate . 
winter white hamsters tend to have slightly smaller litters ,  as do chinese and roborovski hamsters . 
the judging of hamsters usually includes a goal of promoting hamsters which conform to natural or established varieties of hamsters . 
a behavioral characteristic of hamsters is food hoarding . 
the best-known species of hamster is the golden or syrian hamster  -lrb-  `` mesocricetus auratus ''  -rrb-  ,  which is the type most commonly kept as pets . 
they are completely weaned after three weeks ,  or four for roborovski hamsters . 
in 1917, finland declared independence . 
by 5300 bc ,  pottery was present in finland . 
finland by this time was depopulated ,  with a population in 1749 of 427,000.
during the finnish war between sweden and russia ,  finland was again conquered by the armies of tsar alexander i . 
the oldest swedish place names in finland are from this period as well as the swedish-speaking population of finland . 
from january to may 1918, finland experienced the brief but bitter finnish civil war . 
during the 1380s ,  a civil war in the scandinavian part of sweden brought unrest to finland as well . 
on the same day the finnish parliament issued a declaration by which it temporarily took power in finland . 
in 1696–1699, a famine caused by climate decimated finland . 
the name `` finland '' originally signified only the southwestern province that has been known as `` finland proper '' since the 18th century . 
this invasion had caused britain to declare war on finland on 6 december 1941.
during the 13th century ,  finland was integrated into medieval european civilization . 
finland after 1917 was bitterly divided along social lines . 
the soviet union started to tighten its policy against finland in the 1930s ,  limiting the navigation of finnish merchant ships between lake ladoga and the gulf of finland and blocking it totally in 1937.
finland's role in the second world war was in many ways strange . 
the strong fortress of viborg  -lrb-  finnish: `` viipuri '' ,  russian: `` vyborg ''  -rrb-  guarded the eastern border of finland . 
in 1812, after the russian conquest of finland ,  `` old finland '' was rejoined to the rest of the country but the landownership question remained a serious problem until the 1870s . 
worried by developments in russia and finland ,  the non-socialist senate proposed that parliament declare finland's independence ,  which was voted by the parliament on december 6, 1917.
from 3200 bc onwards ,  either immigrants or a strong cultural influence from south of the gulf of finland settled in southwestern finland . 
soon afterwards ,  another war determining finland's fate began  -lrb-  the great northern war of 1700–21 -rrb- . 
although finland lost territory in both of its wars with the soviets ,  the memory of these wars was sharply etched in the national consciousness . 
swedish came to be the language of the upper class in many other parts of finland as well . 
finland retained a democratic constitution and free economy during the cold war era . 
with the interruption of the gustav iii's war  -lrb-  1788–1790 -rrb- ,  the last decades of the 18th century had been an era of development in finland . 
after the reparations had been paid off ,  finland continued to trade with the soviet union in the framework of bilateral trade . 
very few written records of finland or its people remain in any language of the era . 
despite the passport union with sweden ,  norway ,  denmark ,  and iceland ,  finland could not join the nordic council until 1955 because of soviet fears that finland might become too close to the west . 
the last ice age in the area of the modern-day finland ended c .  9000 bc . 
during the second world war ,  finland fought two wars against the soviet union: the winter war of 1939–1940, resulting in the loss of finnish karelia ,  and the continuation war of 1941–1944  -lrb-  with considerable support from nazi germany resulting in a swift invasion of neighboring areas of the soviet union  -rrb-  ,  eventually leading to the loss of finland's only ice-free winter harbour petsamo . 
however ,  finland remained an independent democracy in northern europe . 
but ,  unlike all other axis states ,  finland never signed the tripartite pact and so finland never was `` de jure '' an axis nation . 
this policy remained the core of finland's foreign relations for the rest of the cold war era . 
in the aftermath of the february revolution in russia ,  finland received a new senate ,  and a coalition cabinet with the same power distribution as the finnish parliament . 
officially claiming to be neutral ,  finland lay in the grey zone between the western countries and the soviet union . 
the armistice compelled finland to drive german troops from its territory ,  leading to the lapland war 1944–1945.
the moscow armistice was signed between finland on one side and the soviet union and britain on the other side on september 19, 1944, ending the continuation war . 
in the early 13th century ,  bishop thomas became the first known bishop of finland . 
in middle and eastern finland ,  great amounts of tar were produced for export . 
the history of finland begins around 9,000 bc during the end of the last glacial period . 
in 1947, finland reluctantly declined marshall aid in order to preserve good relations with the soviets ,  ensuring finnish autonomy . 
the earliest written sources mentioning finland start to appear from the 12th century onwards when the catholic church started to gain a foothold in southwest finland . 
with median age at 41.6 years finland is one of the countries with the highest average age of its citizens . 
in 1906, as a result of the russian revolution of 1905 and the associated finnish general strike of 1905, the old four-chamber diet was replaced by a unicameral parliament of finland ``  -lrb-  the ``  ''  -rrb-  . `` 
in august 1939 nazi-germany and the soviet union signed the molotov–ribbentrop pact ,  where finland and the baltic states were given to the soviet `` sphere of influence '' . 
in the wake of the civil war there were many incidents along the border between finland and soviet russia ,  such as the aunus expedition and the pork mutiny . 
 ''for the majority of christian denominations ,  the holy spirit or holy ghost is the third person  -lrb-  hypostasis  -rrb-  of the trinity: the triune god manifested as god the father ,  god the son ,  and the god the holy spirit; each person itself being god . 
the new testament details a close relationship between the holy spirit and jesus during his earthly life and ministry . 
a helium-3 refrigerator uses helium-3 to achieve temperatures of 0.2 to 0.3 kelvin . 
the ratio of helium-3 to helium-4 in natural earth-bound sources varies greatly . 
this implies that helium-3 can overcome dipole–dipole interactions with less thermal energy than helium-4 can . 
helium-3 removed during this process is marketed for other applications . 
helium-3  -lrb-  he ,  see also helion  -rrb-  is a light ,  non-radioactive isotope of helium with two protons and one neutron  -lrb-  common helium having two protons and two neutrons  -rrb-  . 
the doe recognized the developing shortage of both tritium and helium-3.
helium-3 boils at 3.19 k compared with helium-4 at 4.23 k ,  and its critical point is also lower at 3.35 k ,  compared with helium-4 at 5.2 k .  helium-3 has less than half the density of helium-4 when it is at its boiling point: 59 gram per liter compared to the 125 gram per liter of helium-4—at a pressure of one atmosphere . 
tritium decays into helium-3 with a half-life of 12.3 years ,  so helium-3 can be produced by simply storing the tritium until it undergoes radioactive decay . 
mining gas giants for helium-3 has also been proposed . 
helium-3 is a most important isotope in instrumentation for neutron detection . 
there have been many claims about the capabilities of helium-3 power plants . 
a dilution refrigerator uses a mixture of helium-3 and helium-4 to reach cryogenic temperatures as low as a few thousandths of a kelvin . 
the quantum mechanical effects on helium-3 and helium-4 are significantly different because with two protons ,  two neutrons ,  and two electrons ,  helium-4 has an overall spin of zero ,  making it a boson ,  but with one fewer neutron ,  helium-3 has an overall spin of one half ,  making it a fermion . 
for decades this has been ,  and remains ,  the principal source of the world's helium-3.
not all authors feel the extraterrestrial extraction of helium-3 is feasible . 
in the 1994 study ,  extracting helium-3 from these sources consumes more energy than fusion would release . 
an important property of helium-3, which distinguishes it from the more common helium-4, is that its nucleus is a fermion since it contains an odd number of spin particles . 
in quantum mechanics ,  a hamiltonian is an operator corresponding to the total energy of the system in most of the cases . 
the hamiltonian is the sum of the kinetic energies of all the particles ,  plus the potential energy of the particles associated with the system . 
by analogy with classical mechanics ,  the hamiltonian is commonly expressed as the sum of operators corresponding to the kinetic and potential energies of a system in the form
terms of this form are known as `` mass polarization terms '' ,  and appear in the hamiltonian of many electron atoms  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
his trademark hi-hat beat is opening the hi-hat on first and third before hitting the snare . 
a hi-hat ,  also spelled hihat or high-hat ,  is a combination of two cymbals and a foot-operated pedal ,  all mounted on a metal stand . 
rivets in hi-hats failed to catch on . 
modern hi-hat cymbals are much heavier than modern crash cymbals ,  reflecting the trend to lighter and thinner crash cymbals as well as to heavier hi-hats . 
some hi-hats allow the tripod to be tilted or rotated . 
the bottom cymbal is fixed and the top is mounted on a rod which moves the top cymbal towards the bottom one when a foot pedal is depressed  -lrb-  a hi-hat that is in this position is said to be `` closed '' or `` closed hi-hats ''  -rrb-  . 
by using an x-hat ,  a drummer who is already using both feet on the bass drum pedals can still play hi-hat . 
an x-hat is an adapter to allow a pair of hi-hat cymbals to be mounted in a closed position on a cymbal stand . 
in this variation of the hi-hat ,  the top cymbal moves down and the bottom cymbal moves up simultaneously while the middle cymbal remains stationary . 
a right-handed drummer will normally play the hi-hat pedal with his left foot ,  and may use one or both drumsticks . 
if playing a standard 8th note pattern ,  he will play the hi-hat on 1 and 3 and not playing it on 2 and 4 where the snare drum is played . 
in the film ,  hal became operational on 12 january 1992 at the hal laboratories in urbana ,  illinois as production number 3.
hal communications corporation is a real corporation ,  with facilities located in urbana ,  illinois ,  which is where hal identifies himself as being activated: `` i am a hal 9000 computer . 
with the crew dead ,  hal reasons ,  he would not need to lie to them . 
hal is referenced in the popular webcomic homestuck as `` a . r . /auto-responder '' . 
hal is listed as the 13th-greatest film villain in the afi's 100 years .  .  . 100 heroes & villains . 
in the aforementioned game of chess hal makes minor and undetected mistakes in his analysis ,  a possible foreshadowing to hal's malfunctioning . 
in the novel ,  the orders to disconnect hal come from dave and frank's superiors on earth . 
in the 1982 novel ``  '' ,  hal is restarted by his creator ,  dr .  chandra ,  who arrives on the soviet spaceship `` leonov '' . 
the film says this occurred in 1992, while the book gives 1997 as hal's birth year . <ref name= ''urbana 1992/7 ''></ref>
while curnow tells floyd that dr .  chandra has begun designing the hal 10000, the 10000 has not been mentioned in subsequent novels . 
hal became operational in urbana ,  illinois ,  at the hal plant  -lrb-  the university of illinois' coordinated science laboratory ,  where the illiac computers were built  -rrb-  . 
prior to leaving earth ,  dr .  chandra has also had a discussion with hal's twin ,  the sal 9000.
the hydrolysis of water is the separation of water molecules into hydrogen and oxygen atoms  -lrb-  water splitting  -rrb-  using electricity  -lrb-  electrolysis  -rrb-  . 
a common kind of hydrolysis occurs when a salt of a weak acid or weak base  -lrb-  or both  -rrb-  is dissolved in water . 
strong acids also undergo hydrolysis . 
solutions of salts such as becl or al -lrb-  no  -rrb-  in water are noticeably acidic; the hydrolysis can be suppressed by adding an acid such as nitric acid ,  making the solution more acidic . 
hydrolysis can be the reverse of a condensation reaction in which two molecules join together into a larger one and eject a water molecule . 
usually hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule of water is added to a substance . 
the hydrolysis of peptides gives amino acids . 
the products for both hydrolyses are compounds with carboxylic acid groups . 
a hydroxy or hydroxyl group is the entity with the formula oh . 
the creation of a peptide bond to link two amino acids to make a protein removes the −oh from the carboxy group of one amino acid . 
according to iupac rules ,  the term hydroxyl refers to the radical oh only ,  while the functional group −oh is called hydroxy group . 
body heat is generated by metabolism . 
muscle contraction is a type of metabolic process that generates heat energy ,  and heat is also generated through friction when blood flows through the circulatory system . 
in general ,  warm-bloodedness refers to three separate categories of thermoregulation . 
the name of the god in greek  -lrb-  `` hēphaistos ''  -rrb-  has a root which can be observed in names of places of pre-greek origin ,  like phaistos  -lrb-  `` pa-i-to '' in linear b  -rrb-  . 
as a smithing god ,  hephaestus made all the weapons of the gods in olympus . 
over the school holidays in 1926, bosman visited his family in johannesburg . 
bosman's second wife was ella manson . 
bosman lamented the fact that johannesburg neglected its heritage . 
from 1948 to his death in 1951, bosman was employed as proof editor at the sunday express . 
after graduation ,  bosman accepted a teaching position in the groot marico district in an afrikaans-language school . 
bosman was born at kuils river ,  near cape town ,  to an afrikaner family . 
herman charles bosman  -lrb-  5 february 1905 – 14 october 1951 -rrb- is widely regarded as south africa's greatest short-story writer . 
by the 1890s ,  a number of european armies fielded either light  -lrb-  105 mm to 127 mm  -rrb-  or heavy  -lrb-  149 mm to 155 mm  -rrb-  field howitzers and a few ,  such as that of germany ,  fielded both . 
in 1859, the armies of europe  -lrb-  including those that had recently adopted gun-howitzers  -rrb-  began to rearm field batteries with rifled field guns . 
because of this ,  military authorities saw no point in obtaining rifled field howitzers to replace their smoothbore counterparts but ,  instead ,  used rifled field guns to replace both guns and howitzers . 
these field howitzers introduced at the end of the 19th century could fire shells with high trajectories giving a steep angle of descent and ,  as a result ,  could strike targets that were protected by intervening obstacles . 
as heavy field howitzers and light siege howitzers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries used ammunition of the same size and types ,  there was a marked tendency for the two types to merge . 
the term `` gun-howitzer '' is sometimes used for these  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  in russia  -rrb- ; many nations use `` howitzer '' ,  while the uk  -lrb-  and most members of the commonwealth of nations  -rrb-  calls them `` guns '' ,  for example gun ,  105 mm ,  field ,  l118.
in the mid-19th century ,  some armies attempted to simplify their artillery parks by introducing smoothbore artillery pieces that were designed to fire both explosive projectiles and cannonballs ,  thereby replacing both field howitzers and field guns . 
the longest-serving artillery piece of the 19th century was the mountain howitzer ,  which saw service from the war with mexico to the spanish–american war . 
these were characterized by a shorter trail than other field guns ,  meaning less stability when firing ,  which reduced the amount of powder that could be used; armies using these had to rely on a greater elevation angle to achieve a given range ,  which gave a steeper angle of descent . 
the hummer h2 was the second vehicle in the hummer range . 
the first vehicle in the hummer range was the hummer h1, based on the humvee . 
team hummer racing was created in 1993.
specific criticisms of hummers include:
there were two variations: the h2 suv and h2 sut . 
it was also revealed that the price tag of the hummer brand was $150 million . 
later ,  on february 24, 2010, gm announced the tengzhong deal had collapsed and the hummer brand would soon shut down . 
the hummer hx was developed in 2008 as an open-air ,  two-door off-road concept car ,  smaller than other hummer models . 
team hummer earned 11 production-class wins at the baja 1000.
the popularity of the h2 hummer with the general public created a demand for a stretched limousine version . 
hmmwvs first saw combat in operation just cause ,  the u . s .  invasion of panama in 1989.
the hmmwv has become the vehicular backbone of u . s .  forces around the world . 
by replacing the m1114, m1116, and earlier armored hmmwv types with a single model ,  the u . s .  army hopes to lower maintenance costs . 
the armor kits fielded include the armor survivability kit  -lrb-  ask  -rrb-  ,  frag 5, frag 6, as well as upgrade kits to the m1151.
the m1114 `` up-armored '' hmmwv ,  introduced in 1996, also features a similar weapons mount . 
these extended capacity hmmwvs can drive over an vertical wall and carry a payload . 
after operation restore hope in somalia ,  the military recognized a need for a more protected hmmwv and am general developed the m1114, an armored hmmwv to withstand small arms fire . 
during and after the war ,  the very light ,  -ton jeeps were complemented by the -ton dodge wc and korea war m37 models . 
the u . s .  marine corps decided to start replacing humvees in combat with mraps in 2007, and the u . s .  army stated that the vehicle was `` no longer feasible for combat '' in 2012.
the boomerang anti-sniper system was also fielded by some hmmwvs in iraq to immediately give troops the location of insurgents firing on them . 
explosively formed penetrators  -lrb-  efps  -rrb-  can also defeat the armor kits ,  causing casualties . 
by the mid-1960s ,  the u . s .  military clearly felt a need to reevaluate their ageing light vehicle fleet . 
the ancient mesopotamians also practiced prophylaxis and took measures to prevent the spread of disease . 
the ancient mesopotamians had no distinction between `` rational science '' and magic . 
ancient egypt made significant advances in astronomy ,  mathematics and medicine . 
the ebers papyrus  -lrb-  c .  1550 bc  -rrb-  also contains evidence of traditional empiricism . 
the mesopotamian cuneiform tablet plimpton 322, dating to the eighteenth century bc ,  records a number of pythagorean triplets  -lrb-  3,4,5 -rrb-  -lrb-  5,12,13 -rrb-  .  .  .  ,  hinting that the ancient mesopotamians might have been aware of the pythagorean theorem over a millennium before pythagoras . 
many ancient civilizations systematically collected astronomical observations . 
in aqueous solutions hydrogen peroxide differs from the pure material due to the effects of hydrogen bonding between water and hydrogen peroxide molecules . 
hydrogen peroxide is a chemical compound with the formula  . 
this boiling point is 14 °c greater than that of pure water and 36.2 °c less than that of pure hydrogen peroxide . 
determination of the molecular structure of hydrogen peroxide proved to be very difficult . 
hydrogen peroxide is unstable and slowly decomposes in the presence of light . 
enzymes that use or decompose hydrogen peroxide are classified as peroxidases . 
