janus kinase  -lrb-  jak  -rrb-  is a family of intracellular ,  nonreceptor tyrosine kinases that transduce cytokine-mediated signals via the jak-stat pathway . 
he is the elder of the brothers grimm . 
the extension of the law to high german in any case is entirely grimm's work . 
jacob grimm was born in hanau in hesse-kassel . 
jacob is recognized for enunciating grimm's law ,  the germanic sound shift ,  which was first observed by the danish philologist rasmus christian rask . 
grimm's famous `` deutsche grammatik ''  -lrb-  german grammar  -rrb-  was the outcome of his purely philological work . 
grimm's monumental dictionary of the german language ,  the `` deutsches wörterbuch '' ,  was started in 1838 and first published in 1854.
grimm died in berlin at age 78, working until the very end of his life . 
jacob grimm's work tied in strongly to his views on germany and its culture . 
the first work jacob grimm published ,  `` über den altdeutschen meistergesang ''  -lrb-  1811 -rrb- ,  was of a purely literary character . 
jacob ludwig karl grimm  -lrb-  4 january 1785 – 20 september 1863 -rrb- ,  also known as ludwig karl ,  was a german philologist ,  jurist ,  and mythologist . 
in 1995, kay was featured in the track `` lost souls '' for guru's album  . 
the group has a preference for playing live over recording studio albums . 
kay stated that the group's visual aesthetics are important . 
their sixth album titled `` dynamite '' ,  was released in 2005, and reached number 3 in the uk chart . 
the album's second single ,  `` too young to die '' entered the uk singles chart at number 15.
jamiroquai released `` automaton '' in 2017, their eighth studio album and the first in seven years . 
the band's 1996 album `` travelling without moving '' ,  holds the guinness world record for the best-selling funk album in history . 
the group issued their 2001 follow-up ,  `` a funk odyssey '' . 
before forming the group ,  kay was inspired by the iroquois' `` spiritual reverence for the earth '' . 
the group's sound was influenced by black music ,  and they explored other musical directions such as rock ,  electronica and latin music . 
being the front-man ,  kay is occasionally referred to as the group name ,  because he is the only person under contract with a record company as the artist name of jamiroquai . 
on february 28, 1847, sutter helped lead the kern and sutter massacres ,  in which 20 california indians were killed . 
there are numerous california landmarks bearing the name of sutter . 
the sutter buttes a mountain range in yuba city ,  california  -lrb-  sutter county  -rrb-  is named after him as well
sutter passed away in late 2016 from cancer . 
sutter built his home across from the lititz springs hotel ,  the present-day general sutter inn . 
sutter gave up new helvetia to pay the last of his debts . 
some native americans worked voluntarily for sutter  -lrb-  e . g . 
those of his elder son ,  john augustus sutter jr .  ,  were more successful . 
sutter sought reimbursement of his losses associated with the gold rush . 
the piece is scored for baritone voice ,  two flutes  -lrb-  or two piccolos  -rrb-  ,  two oboes ,  clarinet ,  bass clarinet ,  two bassoons ,  two horns ,  trumpet  -lrb-  or piccolo tpt  -rrb-  ,  timpani ,  synthesizer ,  and strings . 
 ''doctor atomic ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb-: an opera in two acts ,  about robert oppenheimer ,  the manhattan project ,  and the creation and testing of the first atomic bomb . 
 ''hallelujah junction ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb-: this piece for two pianos employs variations of a repeated two note rhythm . 
it was commissioned by the san francisco symphony . 
he graduated from concord high school in concord ,  new hampshire . 
john coolidge adams  -lrb-  born february 15, 1947 -rrb- is an american composer ,  clarinetist ,  and conductor of classical music and opera ,  with strong roots in minimalism . 
voight next starred in 1972's `` deliverance . `` 
in 1968 voight took a role in director paul williams's `` out of it '' . 
jane fonda won her second best actress award for her role ,  and voight won for best actor in a leading role . 
jonathan vincent voight  -lrb-  ; born december 29, 1938 -rrb- is an american actor . 
in 1969, voight was cast in the groundbreaking `` midnight cowboy '' ,  a film that would make his career . 
voight was born on december 29, 1938, in yonkers ,  new york ,  the son of barbara  -lrb-  ; 1910–1995 -rrb- and elmer voight  -lrb-  né voytka; 1909–1973 -rrb- ,  a professional golfer . 
both voight and co-star hoffman were nominated for best actor ,  but lost out to john wayne in '' true grit . `` 
after graduation ,  voight moved to new york city ,  where he pursued an acting career . 
voight was estranged from his children for several years ,  but they reconciled in 2007 after bertrand's death . 
saint john climacus  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  also known as john of the ladder ,  john scholasticus and john sinaites ,  was a 6th-7th-century christian monk at the monastery on mount sinai . 
there is almost no information about john's life . 
an icon known by the same title ,  `` ladder of divine ascent '' ,  depicts a ladder extending from earth to heaven  -lrb-  cf .    -rrb- 
john climacus was also known as `` scholasticus , ``  but he is not to be confused with st .  john scholasticus ,  patriarch of constantinople . 
jerome callet is the most well-known teacher of the `` tongue controlled embouchure '' method for brass instruments . 
jerome callet  -lrb-  born april 24, 1930 -rrb- is a musician ,  teacher and designer of brass instruments . 
john radcliffe  -lrb-  1650 – 1 november 1714 -rrb- was an english physician ,  academic and politician . 
the john radcliffe hospital in oxford is named after john radcliffe ,  as was the former radcliffe infirmary ,  now being redeveloped for academic use by oxford university as the radcliffe observatory quarter . 
in 1690 he was elected member of parliament for bramber ,  sussex and in 1713 member for buckingham . 
the actual word `` joual '' is the representation of how the word `` cheval ''  -lrb-  standard french:  ,  `` horse ''  -rrb-  is pronounced by those who speak `` joual '' . 
the end result is the word transcribed as `` joual '' . 
linguists tend to eschew this term ,  but historically some have reserved the term `` joual '' for the variant of quebec french spoken in montreal . 
diphthongs are normally present where long vowels would be present in standard french . 
the narrative of esau selling his birthright to jacob ,  in  ,  states that esau despised his birthright . 
27–28 -rrb- and dominion  -lrb-  v . 29 -rrb- ,  on jacob before esau's return . 
in genesis ,  esau returned to his brother ,  jacob ,  being famished from the fields . 
esau acts impulsively . 
esau is furious and vows to kill jacob  -lrb-    -rrb-  as soon as their father has died . 
lister was president of the royal society between 1895 and 1900.
lister's use of carbolic acid proved problematic . 
joseph lister ,  1st baron lister ,   -lrb-  5 april 182710 february 1912 -rrb- ,  known between 1883 and 1897 as sir joseph lister ,  bt .  ,  was a british surgeon and a pioneer of antiseptic surgery . 
lister is one of the two surgeons in the united kingdom who have the honour of having a public monument in london . 
lister moved from scotland to king's college hospital ,  in london . 
two postage stamps were issued in september 1965 to honour lister for his pioneering work in antiseptic surgery . 
lister successfully introduced carbolic acid  -lrb-  now known as phenol  -rrb-  to sterilise surgical instruments and to clean wounds . 
by this time ,  agnes was enamoured of medical research and was lister's partner in the laboratory for the rest of her life . 
lister obligingly advised them in the latest antiseptic surgical methods  -lrb-  which they followed to the letter  -rrb-  ,  and the king survived ,  later telling lister ,  `` i know that if it had not been for you and your work ,  i wouldn't be sitting here today . `` 
lister left glasgow university in 1869, being succeeded by prof george husband baird macleod . 
homann died in nuremberg in 1724.
the company was known as `` homann erben '' ,  `` homanniani heredes '' ,  or `` heritiers de homann '' abroad . 
jadavpur university is a public state university located in kolkata ,  west bengal ,  india . 
jadavpur university is semi-residential ,  which at present operates out of two urban campuses: one in jadavpur  -lrb-    -rrb-  and another in salt lake  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
university of calcutta is one of the three universities in early modern india ,  the other two being bombay  -lrb-  now mumbai  -rrb-  and madras university . 
internationally ,  jadavpur university ranked 601-650 by the `` qs world university rankings '' of 2018, 125 in asia and 74 among brics nations . 
however ,  students said they will continue to boycott classes until the vice chancellor resigns . 
in 2014 a series of protests broke out in response to the alleged molestation of a female student and beating of a male student by 10 other students on 28 august 2014.
following graduation in june 1985, he was assigned to command the 3rd battalion ,  9th marines ,  1st marine division ,  at camp pendleton ,  california ,  from july 1985 to july 1987.
during august 1990, jones was assigned as the commanding officer of the 24th marine expeditionary unit  -lrb-  24th meu  -rrb-  at marine corps base camp lejeune ,  north carolina . 
while overseas ,  he was promoted to first lieutenant in june 1968.
jones assumed duties as the commander of united states european command  -lrb-  eucom  -rrb-  on january 16, 2003, and supreme allied commander europe  -lrb-  saceur  -rrb-  the following day . 
he served as chairman of the atlantic council from june 2007 to january 2009, when he assumed the post of national security advisor which he held until november 2010.
returning to the united states in december 1968, jones was assigned to marine corps base camp pendleton ,  california ,  where he served as a company commander until may 1970.
after leaving the obama administration ,  jones returned as a fellow at the us chamber in 2011.
the board of directors of general dynamics has elected jones to be a director of the corporation ,  effective august 3, 2011.
in march 2013, jones was quoted comparing the conditions for iranians in a us camp in iraq with the conditions of detention for captives held in the guantanamo bay detention camps . 
jones was also a member of the board of directors of cross match technologies ,  a privately held biometric solutions company ,  from october 2007 to january 2009.
he was the first marine corps general to serve as saceur/eucom commander . 
lovelock was elected a fellow of the royal society in 1974.
lovelock was elected a fellow of the royal society in 1974.
lovelock states the following in order to explain the concept:
lovelock has become concerned about the threat of global warming from the greenhouse effect . 
it was while working as a consultant for nasa that lovelock developed the gaia hypothesis ,  for which he is most widely known . 
in `` the revenge of gaia ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  where he puts forward the concept of sustainable retreat ,  lovelock writes:a television interviewer once asked me ,  `` but what about nuclear waste ? 
lovelock subsequently said that his proposal was intended to stimulate interest and research would be the next step . 
lovelock thinks the time is past for sustainable development ,  and that we have come to a time when development is no longer sustainable . 
after the development of his electron capture detector ,  in the late 1960s ,  lovelock was the first to detect the widespread presence of cfcs in the atmosphere . 
in march 2012, the national portrait gallery unveiled a new portrait of lovelock by british artist michael gaskell  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- . 
a scheme similar to that proposed by lovelock and rapley is already being independently developed by a commercial company . 
in 1948, lovelock received a phd degree in medicine at the london school of hygiene and tropical medicine . 
in 2005, against the backdrop of renewed uk government interest in nuclear power ,  lovelock again publicly announced his support for nuclear energy ,  stating ,  `` i am a green ,  and i entreat my friends in the movement to drop their wrongheaded objection to nuclear energy '' . 
james ephraim lovelock ,   -lrb-  born 26 july 1919 -rrb- is an independent scientist ,  environmentalist ,  and futurist who lives in dorset ,  england . 
john akii-bua  -lrb-  3 december 1949 – 20 june 1997 -rrb- was a ugandan hurdler and the first olympic champion from his country . 
akii-bua died a widower ,  at the age of 47, survived by eleven children . 
to ribbentrop's disappointment ,  hitler sided with rosenberg . 
as the war went on ,  ribbentrop's influence waned . 
ribbentrop was a defendant at the nuremberg trials . 
from 1941 onwards ,  ribbentrop's influence declined . 
in 1934, hitler named ribbentrop special commissioner for disarmament . 
in august 1934, ribbentrop founded an organization linked to the nazi party called the `` büro ribbentrop ''  -lrb-  later renamed the `` dienststelle ribbentrop ''  -rrb-  . 
ribbentrop's time as foreign minister can be divided into three periods . 
hitler found ribbentrop increasingly tiresome and started to avoid him . 
after the outbreak of world war ii ,  ribbentrop spent most of the polish campaign travelling with hitler . 
on 20 april 1945, ribbentrop attended hitler's 56th birthday party in berlin . 
when hitler said 'grey' ,  ribbentrop said 'black ,  black ,  black' . 
ribbentrop's civil war predictions were greeted with incredulity by those british people who heard them . 
although the `` dienststelle ribbentrop '' was concerned with german foreign relations in every part of the world ,  it emphasised anglo-german relations ,  as ribbentrop knew that hitler favoured an alliance with britain . 
hitler rewarded ribbentrop by appointing him `` reich '' minister ambassador-plenipotentiary at large . 
on 10 july 1941 ribbentrop ordered general eugen ott ,  the german ambassador to japan to:
ribbentrop  -lrb-  and hitler for that matter  -rrb-  never understood that british foreign policy aimed at the appeasement of germany ,  not an alliance . 
with the appointment of ribbentrop to the minister of foreign affairs in february 1938, the dienststelle itself lost its importance and about a third of the staff of the office followed ribbentrop to the foreign office . 
 ''freiherr '' von weizsäcker responded ,  `` hitler never noticed ribbentrop's babbling because hitler always did all the talking . `` 
ribbentrop for his part told hitler that chamberlain's letter was just a bluff ,  and urged his master to call it . 
ulrich friedrich wilhelm joachim von ribbentrop  -lrb-  30 april 1893 – 16 october 1946 -rrb- ,  more commonly known as joachim von ribbentrop ,  was foreign minister of nazi germany from 1938 until 1945.
on neurath's advice ,  hitler disavowed ribbentrop's demand that king george receive and give the `` german greeting '' . 
ribbentrop liked and admired joseph stalin and was opposed to the attack on the soviet union in 1941.
ribbentrop quickly learned that hitler always favoured the most radical solution to any problem ,  and accordingly tendered his advice in that direction as a ribbentrop aide recalled:
in 1928, ribbentrop was introduced to adolf hitler as a businessman with foreign connections who `` gets the same price for german champagne as others get for french champagne '' . 
instead of focusing on talking to the turks ,  ribbentrop and papen became entangled in a feud over papen's demand that he by-pass ribbentrop and send his dispatches straight to hitler . 
in july 1939, ribbentrop's claims about an alleged statement of december 1938 made by the french foreign minister georges bonnet were to lead to a lengthy war of words via a series of letters to the french newspapers between ribbentrop and bonnet over precisely what bonnet had said to ribbentrop . 
in august 1936, hitler appointed ribbentrop ambassador to the united kingdom with orders to negotiate an anglo-german alliance . 
when on the morning of 3 september 1939 chamberlain followed through with his threat of a british declaration of war if germany attacked poland ,  a visibly shocked hitler asked ribbentrop `` now what ? 
another low point in ribbentrop's relations with the ss occurred in february 1943, when the sd backed a luther-led internal `` putsch '' to oust ribbentrop as foreign minister . 
ribbentrop served first on the eastern front ,  then was transferred to the western front . 
in 1935, sir eric phipps ,  the british ambassador to germany ,  complained to london about ribbentrop's british associates in the anglo-german fellowship . 
ribbentrop worked closely with the ss ,  with which he had reconciled ,  to purge the foreign office of those involved in the `` putsch '' . 
most of ribbentrop's time was spent either demanding that britain sign the anti-comintern pact or that london return the former german colonies in africa . 
ribbentrop was among the few who could meet with hitler at any time without an appointment ,  however ,  unlike goebbels or göring . 
when the first world war began later in 1914, ribbentrop left canada ,  which as part of the british empire was at war with germany ,  and moved to the neutral united states . 
in contrast to neurath's cautious and less bellicose nature ,  ribbentrop unequivocally supported war in 1938–39.
in 1935, ribbentrop arranged for a series of much-publicised visits of first world war veterans to britain ,  france and germany . 
in the autumn of 1940, ribbentrop made a sustained but unsuccessful effort to have spain enter the war on the axis side . 
as world war ii continued ,  ribbentrop's once-friendly relations with the ss became increasingly strained . 
' ,  i would still do it . `` 
another factor that aided ribbentrop's rise was hitler's distrust of ,  and disdain for ,  germany's professional diplomats . 
three days later ,  ribbentrop attempted to meet with hitler ,  but was rejected with the explanation the führer had more important things to do . 
on 27 august 1939, chamberlain sent a letter to hitler that was intended to counteract reports chamberlain had heard from intelligence sources in berlin that ribbentrop had convinced hitler that the molotov–ribbentrop pact would ensure that britain would abandon poland . 
ribbentrop supported his analysis of the situation by only showing hitler diplomatic dispatches that supported his view that neither britain or france would honour their commitments to poland . 
in september 1942, after a meeting with hitler ,  who was unhappy with his foreign minister's actions ,  ribbentrop changed course and ordered the deportations to be resumed immediately . 
no wonder henderson was angry; von ribbentrop on the other hand could see war ahead and went home beaming . 
john's campaign started well . 
john arrived back in england in october . 
john  -lrb-  24 december 1166 – 19 october 1216 -rrb- ,  also known as john lackland ,  was king of england from 1199 until his death in 1216.
a .  milne's poem for children ,  `` king john's christmas '' . 
the administration of justice was of particular importance to john . 
john remained lord of ireland throughout his reign . 
further desertions of john's local allies at the beginning of 1203 steadily reduced john's freedom to manoeuvre in the region . 
in 1214 john began his final campaign to reclaim normandy from philip . 
in september 1216, john began a fresh ,  vigorous attack . 
john's personal life greatly affected his reign . 
john was born to henry ii of england and eleanor of aquitaine on 24 december 1166.
when john still refused to come ,  philip declared john in breach of his feudal responsibilities ,  reassigned all of john's lands that fell under the french crown to arthur – with the exception of normandy ,  which he took back for himself – and began a fresh war against john . 
john spent much of 1205 securing england against a potential french invasion . 
john's only remaining possession on the continent was now the duchy of aquitaine . 
john's policy earned him the disrespectful title of `` john softsword '' from some english chroniclers ,  who contrasted his behaviour with his more aggressive brother ,  richard . 
eleanor ,  the queen mother ,  convinced richard to allow john into england in his absence . 
during the remainder of his reign ,  john focused on trying to retake normandy . 
historical interpretations of john have been subject to considerable change over the years . 
the problems amongst john's wider family continued to grow . 
john's royal household was based around several groups of followers . 
john made no efforts to reinvigorate the treaty of falaise ,  though ,  and both william and alexander in turn remained independent kings ,  supported by ,  but not owing fealty to ,  john . 
tensions between john and the barons had been growing for several years ,  as demonstrated by the 1212 plot against the king . 
although john was the count of poitou and therefore the rightful feudal lord over the lusignans ,  they could legitimately appeal john's actions in france to his own feudal lord ,  philip . 
the character of john's relationship with his second wife ,  isabella of angoulême ,  is unclear . 
john's illness grew worse and by the time he reached newark castle he was unable to travel any farther; john died on the night of 18/19 october . 
despite this ,  after richard died in 1199, john was proclaimed king of england ,  and came to an agreement with philip ii of france to recognise john's possession of the continental angevin lands at the peace treaty of le goulet in 1200.
for the remaining years of richard's reign ,  john supported his brother on the continent ,  apparently loyally . 
john instructed langton to organise peace talks with the rebel barons . 
simmering tensions remained with the native irish leaders even after john left for england . 
in 1929, styne was playing with the ben pollack band . 
styne died of heart failure in new york city at the age of 88.
styne wrote original music for the short-lived ,  themed amusement park freedomland u . s . a .  which opened on june 19, 1960.
in 1947, styne wrote his first score for a broadway musical ,  `` high button shoes '' ,  with cahn ,  and over the next several decades wrote the scores for many broadway shows ,  most notably `` gentlemen prefer blondes '' ,  `` peter pan ''  -lrb-  additional music  -rrb-  ,  `` bells are ringing '' ,  ``  '' ,  `` do re mi '' ,  `` funny girl '' ,  `` lorelei '' ,  `` sugar ''  -lrb-  with a story based on the movie `` some like it hot '' ,  but all new music  -rrb-  ,  and the tony-winning `` hallelujah ,  baby ! 
while reviews were mixed ,  the film made us$159.7 million worldwide . 
 ''the mexican '' earned $66.8 million at the u . s .  box office . 
a commercial success ,  it grossed over us$138 million worldwide ,  however . 
she has won three golden globe awards ,  from eight nominations ,  and has been nominated for four academy awards for her film acting ,  winning the academy award for best actress for her performance in `` erin brockovich ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- . 
a success with critics and at the box office alike ,  `` ocean's eleven '' became the fifth highest-grossing film of the year with a total of us$450 million worldwide . 
her films have collectively brought box office receipts of over us$2.8 billion ,  making her one of the most successful actresses in terms of box office receipts . 
through red om ,  roberts served as an executive producer of the first four films of the `` american girl '' film series  -lrb-  based on the `` american girl '' line of dolls  -rrb-  ,  released between 2004 and 2008.
 ''pretty woman '' saw the highest number of ticket sales in the u . s .  ever for a romantic comedy ,  and made us$463.4 million worldwide . 
in 1989, she was featured in `` steel magnolias '' ,  as a young bride with diabetes ,  and received both her first academy award nomination  -lrb-  as best supporting actress  -rrb-  and first golden globe award win  -lrb-  motion picture best supporting actress  -rrb-  for her performance . 
roberts was the highest-paid actress in the world throughout most of the 1990s and in the first half of the 2000s . 
in 2003, roberts was cast in mike newell's drama film `` mona lisa smile '' ,  also starring kirsten dunst ,  maggie gyllenhaal ,  and julia stiles . 
roberts played tinkerbell in steven spielberg's `` hook '' ,  and starred as a nurse in joel schumacher's romance film `` dying young ''; both films were also released in 1991, to a highly positive commercial response . 
stephen frears' `` mary reilly '' ,  her other 1996 film ,  was a critical and commercial failure . 
a second john sealy hospital was built in 1954 to replace the 1890 building . 
the current john sealy hospital was completed in 1978 at a cost of $32.5 million and was funded in full by the sealy & smith foundation . 
john the evangelist  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is the name traditionally given to the author of the gospel of john . 
christian tradition says that john the evangelist was john the apostle . 
when kirby and stan lee came together at marvel comics ,  his art developed again . 
in 1968 and 1969, joe simon was involved in litigation with marvel comics over the ownership of captain america ,  initiated by marvel after simon registered the copyright renewal for captain america in his own name . 
at the comic book convention marvelcon '75, in 1975, stan lee used a fantastic four panel discussion to announce that kirby was returning to marvel after having left in 1970 to work for dc comics . 
it would be the following year before kirby returned to the nascent marvel . 
around that time ,  the american comic book industry was booming . 
by the time kirby worked with joe simon ,  kirby had taught himself to use a brush ,  and would on occasion ink over inked work where he felt it was needed . 
when goodman eventually discovered it ,  he told simon and kirby to leave after finishing work on `` captain america comics '' #10.
kirby's style in the late 1960s was regarded so highly by stan lee that he instituted it as marvel's house style . 
at this point in the mid-1950s ,  kirby made a temporary return to the former timely comics ,  now known as atlas comics ,  the direct predecessor of marvel comics . 
still dissatisfied with marvel's treatment of him ,  and with an offer of employment from hanna-barbera ,  kirby left marvel to work in animation . 
bitter that timely comics' 1950s iteration ,  atlas comics ,  had relaunched captain america in a new series in 1954, kirby and simon created `` fighting american '' . 
with the success of the captain america character ,  simon said he felt that goodman was not paying the pair the promised percentage of profits ,  and so sought work for the two of them at national comics publications  -lrb-  later renamed dc comics  -rrb-  . 
it was at marvel ,  in collaborating with writer and editor-in-chief lee that kirby hit his stride once again in superhero comics ,  beginning with `` the fantastic four '' #1  -lrb-  nov .  1961 -rrb- . 
since he was working from california ,  they were able to undermine his work through redesigns in the new york office . 
during the 1940s kirby regularly teamed with simon ,  creating numerous characters for that company and for national comics publications ,  later to become dc comics . 
in later years ,  lee and kirby would contest who deserved credit for such creations as `` the fantastic four '' . 
kirby's final comics collaboration with stan lee ,  `` the silver surfer: the ultimate cosmic experience '' ,  was published in 1978 as part of the marvel fireside books series and is considered marvel's first graphic novel . 
due to the amount of work kirby produced ,  it was rare for him to ink his own work . 
the size of the art board made a difference to kirby's style . 
in the early 1940s kirby would at times disregard panel borders . 
you can imagine how it felt clownin' around with the co-creator of most of marvel's greatest strips once more . `` 
after the first issue was published ,  simon asked kirby to join the timely staff as the company's art director . 
after serving in the european theater in world war ii ,  kirby produced work for dc ,  harvey comics ,  hillman periodicals ,  and other publishers . 
at dc ,  kirby created his fourth world saga ,  which spanned several comics titles . 
tarzan's jungleland ,  on us1 in titusville ,  florida . 
peter weissmüller and john ott were both brewers ,  ott emigrating in 1902, weissmüller in 1904.
at age nine ,  young john weissmüller contracted polio . 
weissmuller's distinctive tarzan yell is still often used in films in his legacy . 
aside from his first screen appearance as adonis and the role of johnny duval in the 1946 film `` swamp fire '' ,  weissmuller played only three roles in films during the heyday of his hollywood career: tarzan ,  jungle jim ,  and himself . 
weissmuller starred in six tarzan movies for mgm with actress maureen o'sullivan as jane and cheeta the chimpanzee . 
weissmuller was one of the world's fastest swimmers in the 1920s ,  winning five olympic gold medals for swimming and one bronze medal for water polo . 
in september 1966, weissmuller joined former screen tarzans james pierce and jock mahoney to appear with ron ely as part of the publicity for the upcoming premiere of the `` tarzan '' tv series . 
johnny weissmuller  -lrb-  2 june 190420 january 1984 -rrb- was an austro-hungarian-born american competition swimmer and actor ,  best known for playing edgar rice burroughs's ape man tarzan in films of the 1930s and 1940s and for having one of the best competitive swimming records of the 20th century . 
the author of `` tarzan '' ,  edgar rice burroughs ,  was pleased with weissmuller ,  although he so hated the studio's depiction of a tarzan who barely spoke english that he created his own concurrent tarzan series filmed on location in central american jungles and starring herman brix as a suitably articulate version of the character . 
edgar rice burroughs himself paid oblique tribute to weissmuller's powerful screen persona in the last tarzan novel that he completed ,  albeit with a misspelling of the actor's name . 
a weakened phoenix force returns to reanimate jean . 
jean then subsequently forced the phoenix to resurrect her after manipulating the phoenix's mental landscape against it . 
as jean returns to her present ,  phoenix cryptically states that they will meet again . 
the original adult jean grey returned to the marvel universe in a new series titled `` phoenix resurrection: the return of jean grey '' ,  released on december 27, 2017.
regarding jean's actual return to the `` x-men '' franchise ,  marvel indicated that jean's eventual return is being discussed but stated that the return of jean grey was `` a story marvel does not want to rush '' . 
alive once again ,  jean is reunited with her friends as the phoenix force journeys back to space . 
jean ends up sent back in time for unknown reasons and ends up meeting that timeline's jean grey shortly after she first becomes phoenix . 
the storyline in which jean grey died as marvel girl and was reborn as phoenix  -lrb-  `` uncanny x-men '' #101–108, 1976–1977 -rrb- has been retroactively dubbed by fans `` the phoenix saga '' ,  and the storyline of her eventual corruption and death as dark phoenix  -lrb-  `` uncanny x-men '' #129–138, 1980 -rrb- has been termed `` the dark phoenix saga '' . 
jean manages to survive only by absorbing the remnant of the phoenix force housed within madelyne ,  giving her both madelyne's memories and the phoenix's memories from `` the dark phoenix saga '' . 
the story further supported the retcon establishing jean grey and the phoenix force as two separate entities . 
jean grey is a trained pilot and proficient unarmed combatant . 
jean is later kidnapped by the shi'ar and placed on trial for the destruction done by the phoenix force years earlier in a 2014 crossover story line `` the trial of jean grey '' . 
in the comics ,  having been fully established as separate from the `` jean grey '' copy created and taken over by the phoenix force ,  jean is `` absolved '' of involvement in the atrocities of `` the dark phoenix '' storyline ,  and she returned in the first issue of `` x-factor ''  -lrb-  1st series  -rrb-  . 
jean elaine grey was born the second daughter of john and elaine grey . 
claremont revealed that his and cockrum's motivation for jean grey's transformation into phoenix was to create `` the first female cosmic hero '' . 
for one reason or another ,  jean grey  -lrb-  both young and old  -rrb-  has ,  on more than one occasion ,  been repeatedly resurrected by either the phoenix or apparently her sheer force of will `` without '' phoenix . 
while searching for new mutants ,  jean and the all-new x-men get teleported into the ultimate marvel universe . 
though she had yet to fully return ,  the phoenix force and jean continued to manifest themselves ,  particularly the phoenix through the red-haired ,  green-eyed `` mutant messiah '' who slightly resembles jean named hope summers ,  and jean briefly appears in a vision to emma frost from the white hot room ,  warning the x-men to `` prepare '' . 
jean and her connection with the phoenix force was examined again one year after the conclusion of morrison's run on `` new x-men '' in ``  '' written by greg pak in 2005.
turner will return to portray the character as well as her alternate personality the phoenix in the 2019 film `` dark phoenix '' . 
the relationship between jean grey and the phoenix force  -lrb-  and the nature of the powers she has  -rrb-  is portrayed in a variety of ways throughout the character's history . 
professor xavier calls the x-men together for a meeting and jean tries unsuccessfully to rally the x-men against him before he manifests onslaught . 
in 1984, after 36 years in india ,  dupuis was called to teach theology and non-christian religions at the gregorian university of rome . 
he spent several decades in india and beginning in 1984 taught at the pontifical gregorian university in rome . 
director of the journal 'vidyajyoti journal of theological reflection' father dupuis was also an adviser to the catholic bishops conference of india . 
after being ordained priest in kurseong ,  india he completed a doctorate in theology at the gregorian university in rome on the religious anthropology of origen of alexandria . 
brabham was also a shareholder in jack brabham engines pty ltd .  ,  an australian company marketing jack brabham memorabilia . 
he was a founder of the brabham racing team and race car constructor that bore his name . 
brabham raced alongside his teammate jochen rindt during the 1968 season . 
brabham was the oldest surviving f1 champion . 
brabham and tauranac set up a company called motor racing developments  -lrb-  mrd  -rrb-  ,  which produced customer racing cars ,  while brabham himself continued to race for cooper . 
brabham won the 1948 australian speedcar championship ,  the 1949 australian and south australian speedcar championships ,  and the 1950–1951 australian championship with the car . 
brabham confirmed his third championship at the italian grand prix and became the only driver to win the formula one world championship in a car that carried his own name . 
in 1967, the formula one title went to brabham's teammate denny hulme . 
the brabham family have been involved in world-class motorsport for over 60 years . 
despite his success with cooper ,  brabham was sure he could do better . 
the brabham team continued in formula one ,  winning two further drivers' championships in the early 1980s under bernie ecclestone's ownership . 
sir john arthur brabham ,   -lrb-  2 april 1926 – 19 may 2014 -rrb- was an australian racing driver who was formula one world champion in  ,   ,  and  . 
the jones vector describes the polarization of light in free space or another homogeneous isotropic non-attenuating medium ,  where the light can be properly described as transverse waves . 
under tito's leadership ,  yugoslavia became a founding member of the non-aligned movement . 
in 1971, tito was re-elected as president of yugoslavia by the federal assembly for the sixth time . 
tito's yugoslavia was based on respect for nationality ,  although tito ruthlessly purged any flowerings of nationalism that threatened the yugoslav federation . 
in fact ,  stalin and tito had an uneasy alliance from the start ,  with stalin considering tito too independent . 
tito married bauer on 13 october of that year . 
on 1 september 1961, josip broz tito became the first secretary-general of the non-aligned movement . 
during this time tito wrote articles on the duties of imprisoned communists and on trade unions . 
tito visited india from 22 december 1954 through 8 january 1955.
in a correspondence between the two leaders ,  tito openly wrote:
tito was the chief architect of the second yugoslavia ,  a socialist federation that lasted from november 1943 until april 1992.
during the immediate post-war period tito's yugoslavia had a strong commitment to orthodox marxist ideas . 
upon his return home ,  broz found himself in the newly established kingdom of yugoslavia ,  where he joined the communist party of yugoslavia  -lrb-  kpj  -rrb-  . 
it is said that tito ordered his forces to assist escaping jews ,  and that more than 2,000 jews fought directly for tito . 
tito returned to moscow in august 1936, soon after the outbreak of the spanish civil war . 
on arrival in moscow ,  he found that all yugoslav communists were under suspicion . 
tito's visits to the united states avoided most of the northeast due to large minorities of yugoslav emigrants bitter about communism in yugoslavia . 
after the world congress ,  tito worked to promote the new comintern line on yugoslavia ,  which was that it would no longer work to break up the country ,  and would instead defend the integrity of yugoslavia against nazism and fascism . 
tito was named president of the national committee of liberation . 
prime minister josip broz tito met with the president of the bishops' conference of yugoslavia ,  aloysius stepinac on 4 june 1945, two days after his release from imprisonment . 
on 12 september 1944, king peter ii called on all yugoslavs to come together under tito's leadership and stated that those who did not were `` traitors '' ,  by which time tito was recognized by all allied authorities  -lrb-  including the government-in-exile  -rrb-  as the prime minister of yugoslavia ,  in addition to commander-in-chief of the yugoslav forces . 
in 1953, tito travelled to britain for a state visit and met with winston churchill . 
one significant consequence of the tension arising between yugoslavia and the soviet union ,  was tito's decision to begin a large scale repression against any real or alleged opponent of his own view of yugoslavia . 
in the final days of world war ii in yugoslavia ,  units of the partisans were responsible for atrocities after the repatriations of bleiburg ,  and accusations of culpability were later raised at the yugoslav leadership under tito . 
due to his overt communist links ,  broz was fired from his employment . 
josip broz  -lrb-  cyrillic: јосип броз ,  ; 7 may 1892 – 4 may 1980 -rrb- ,  commonly known as tito  -lrb-  ; cyrillic: тито ,    -rrb-  ,  was a yugoslav communist revolutionary and statesman ,  serving in various roles from 1943 until his death in 1980.
in the first post war years tito was widely considered a communist leader very loyal to moscow ,  indeed ,  he was often viewed as second only to stalin in the eastern bloc . 
the event was significant not only for yugoslavia and tito ,  but also for the global development of socialism ,  since it was the first major split between communist states ,  casting doubt on comintern's claims for socialism to be a unified force that would eventually control the whole world ,  as tito became the first  -lrb-  and the only successful  -rrb-  socialist leader to defy stalin's leadership in the cominform . 
john stauber is an american progressive writer . 
in july 2003, stauber and sheldon rampton wrote `` weapons of mass deception: the uses of propaganda in bush's war on iraq '' ,  which argued that the bush administration deceived the american public into supporting the war . 
hogan was born in london ,  england . 
hogan died of heart failure at his home in ireland on monday ,  12 july 2010, aged 69.
he wanted to form a new band . ``  ''
in 2014, lynne reformed elo and resumed concert touring under the moniker `` jeff lynne's elo '' . 
problems led to wood's departure from elo in 1972, after the band's eponymous first album ,  leaving lynne as the band's dominant creative force . 
after elo's original disbandment in 1986, lynne released two solo albums: `` armchair theatre ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- and `` long wave ''  -lrb-  2012 -rrb- . 
on 10 september 2015, lynne's website announced he had signed a contract to deliver an album of new elo music for columbia records marking the first time in 14 years new elo music would be released . 
earlier in 2001, lynne began working with george harrison on what would turn out to be harrison's final album ,  `` brainwashed '' . 
in 2012, walsh released his `` analog man '' album which was produced by lynne . 
in 2017, lynne was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame as a member of elo . 
he also produced four tracks on regina spektor's fifth album `` far '' ,  released 23 june 2009.
 '' ''the only reason jeff lynne ever joined the move was to form a new band . 
lynne also contributed three tracks to an album by duane eddy and `` falling in love '' on `` land of dreams '' for randy newman . 
dredd's entire face is never shown in the strip . 
published by dc comics in 1995, but a different version of dredd to that in the dc comics described above . 
judge dredd made his live action debut in 1995 in `` judge dredd '' ,  portrayed by sylvester stallone . 
in 1983 judge dredd made his american debut with his own series from publisher eagle comics ,  titled `` judge dredd '' . 
later he was portrayed by karl urban in the 2012 adaptation `` dredd '' . 
in 2130, dredd was diagnosed with cancer of the duodenum ,  though it was benign . 
senior judge joseph dredd and his brother rico dredd were cloned from the dna of chief judge fargo ,  the first chief judge ,  in 2066.
dc comics published an alternative version of judge dredd between 1994 and 1996, lasting 18 issues . 
this `` judge dredd '' would not be ready for the first issue of `` 2000 ad '' ,  launched in february 1977.
there have been a number of judge dredd storylines that have either significantly developed the dredd character or the fictional world ,  or which depict a story on a grand scale . 
so it isn't necessary for readers to see dredd's face ,  and i don't want you to '' . 
judge joseph dredd is a fictional character created by writer john wagner and artist carlos ezquerra . 
therefore dredd is over seventy years old ,  with sixty years of active service  -lrb-  2079–2141 -rrb- ,  and for almost thirty years dredd's age and fitness for duty were recurring plot points  -lrb-  in prog 1595  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- ,  dredd was diagnosed with benign cancer of the duodenum  -rrb-  . 
from the same publishers as `` 2000 ad '' ,  this was nevertheless a completely different version of dredd aimed at younger readers . 
although dredd holds his duty above every other priority ,  this devotion is not blind . 
in 2012 dredd was one of ten british comic characters commemorated in a series of stamps issued by the royal mail . 
time passes in the `` judge dredd '' strip in real time ,  so as a year passes in life ,  a year passes in the comic . 
james robert flynn frsnz  -lrb-  born 1934 -rrb- is a new zealand intelligence researcher . 
hay enrolled at brown in 1855.
hay was not a supporter of lincoln for president until after his nomination in 1860.
after 1881, hay did not again hold public office until 1897.
hay recalled an early encounter with lincoln:
hay began his part of the writing in 1876; the work was interrupted by illnesses of hay ,  nicolay ,  or family members ,  or by hay's writing of `` the bread-winners '' . 
hay sailed for paris at the end of june 1865.
john hay was sworn in as secretary of state on september 30, 1898.
hay had been concerned about the far east since the 1870s . 
hay became secretary of state the following year . 
seward offered hay a job as his private secretary ,  but hay declined ,  and returned home to warsaw . 
zeitz states that hay `` aggressively lobbied '' for the position . 
milton hay's firm was one of the most prestigious in illinois . 
hay remained disaffected from the republican party in the mid-1870s . 
hay and nicolay divided their responsibilities: nicolay tending to assist lincoln in his office and in meetings ,  while hay dealt with the correspondence ,  which was very large . 
taliaferro noted that `` hay would spend the rest of his life mourning lincoln  .  .  .  wherever hay went and whatever he did ,  lincoln would `` always '' be watching '' . 
hay wrote some poetry while at brown university ,  and more during the civil war . 
lincoln sent hay away from the white house on various missions . 
with his success as an editorial writer ,  hay's duties expanded . 
taliaferro states that reid never blamed hay ,  but kushner and sherrill recorded ,  `` reid was certain that he had been wronged '' by hay ,  and the announcement of hay's appointment nearly ended their 26-year friendship . 
john milton hay was born in salem ,  indiana ,  on october 8, 1838.
hay continued to devote much of his energy to republican politics . 
milton hay desired that his nephew go to washington as a qualified attorney ,  and john hay was admitted to the bar in illinois on february 4, 1861.
in its early days ,  hay described the war `` as necessary as it is righteous '' . 
hay formally issued his open door note on september 6, 1899.
according to kushner and sherrill ,  `` lincoln's death was for hay a personal loss ,  like the loss of a father  .  .  .  lincoln's assassination erased any remaining doubts hay had about lincoln's greatness . `` 
in 1902, hay wrote that when he died ,  `` i shall not be much missed except by my wife . `` 
there was not time to see all who wished to see hay on what he knew was his final visit . 
during his service as ambassador ,  hay attempted to advance the relationship between the u . s .  and britain . 
zeitz concurs ,  `` americans today understand abraham lincoln much as nicolay and hay hoped that they would . `` 
hay had little involvement in the crisis over cuba that culminated in the spanish–american war . 
early in his presidency ,  hay and nicolay requested and received permission from lincoln to write his biography . 
as secretary of state ,  it was hay's responsibility to put together a workable china policy . 
hay's salary of $17,000 `` did not even begin to cover the cost of their extravagant lifestyle '' . 
hay's stance endangered his hitherto sterling credentials in the republican party . 
hay resigned ,  spent the remainder of the summer in europe ,  then went home to warsaw . 
kushner and sherrill suggested that the differences between hay and roosevelt were more style than ideological substance . 
after lincoln was elected ,  nicolay ,  who continued as lincoln's private secretary ,  recommended that hay be hired to assist him at the white house . 
the deaths of his son and of mckinley were not the only griefs hay suffered in 1901—on september 26, john nicolay died after a long illness ,  as did hay's close friend clarence king on christmas eve . 
joy division have been dramatised in two biopics . 
that year grant gee directed the band documentary `` joy division '' . 
joy division were an english rock band formed in 1976 in salford ,  greater manchester . 
the suicide shocked the band and their management . 
gilbert had befriended the band and played guitar at a joy division performance when curtis had been unable to play . 
in 2005, both new order and joy division were inducted into the uk music hall of fame . 
sumner and hook formed the band after attending a sex pistols concert . 
joy division were scheduled to commence their first american tour in may 1980.
morris said that even without curtis's death ,  it was unlikely that joy division would have endured . 
joy division toured continental europe in january 1980.
joy division's style quickly evolved from their punk roots . 
billed as warsaw to ensure an audience ,  the band played their first gig as joy division on 25 january 1978 at pip's disco in manchester . 
sumner largely acted as the band's director ,  a role he continued in new order . 
bench has been married four times . 
for a time in the 1980s bench was a commercial spokesman for krylon paint ,  featuring a memorable catchphrase: `` i'm johnny bench ,  and this is johnny bench's bench . `` 
the year 1970 was bench's finest statistical season . 
bench struggled with ailing shoulders in 1976,
bench was the reds' catcher on april 30, 1969, when maloney pitched a no hitter against the
bench replied that anderson had better trade for niekro's catcher ,  too . 
bench called the unveiling of his statue his `` greatest moment . `` 
bench also won such awards as the lou gehrig award  -lrb-  1975 -rrb- ,  the babe ruth award  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  and the hutch award  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- . 
bench had another strong year in 1972, winning the mvp award for a second time . 
bench had 2,048 hits for a  . 267 career batting average with 389 home runs and 1,376 rbi during his 17-year major league career ,  all spent with the reds . 
jasmuheen has denied any responsibility for the deaths . 
 ,  five deaths had been directly linked to breatharianism and jasmuheen's publications . 
jasmuheen has written that `` if you haven't found the light that will nourish you ,  you may have the intention to become a breatharian ,  but in fact you may be putting yourself through food deprivation . 
jasmuheen was born in 1957 in new south wales ,  australia of post-war norwegian migrant parents . 
regarding her intake of food ,  jasmuheen is quoted by the correx archives as saying: `` generally not much at all . 
jasmuheen offered similar defence in response to the death of verity linn ,  who died of hypothermia and dehydration with lack of nutrition while practising inedia in scotland ,  her diary mentioning jasmuheen's teachings . 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s ,  jell-o's family-friendly reputation was slightly tarnished by jell-o shots and jell-o wrestling . 
in 1995, jell-o carried the tagline `` it's alive ! `` 
 ,  there were more than 110 products sold under the jell-o brand name . 
the original gelatin desserts are sometimes referred to as jello . 
 ,  there were over 420 million boxes of jell-o gelatin and over 1 billion jell-o cups sold in the united states each year . 
in 1923, the newly rechristened jell-o company launched d-zerta ,  an artificially sweetened version of jell-o . 
throughout the 1960s through the 1980s ,  jell-o's sales steadily decreased . 
the following are the flavors of jell-o products that are currently being produced:
comedian bill cosby is associated with jell-o and ,  more famously ,  jell-o pudding ,  and he appeared in many commercials promoting both . 
some jell-o illustrated advertisements were painted by maxfield parrish . 
 ,  leroy ,  new york ,  is known as the home of jell-o and has the only jell-o museum in the world ,  located on the main road through the small town . 
the jell-o plant in mason city ,  iowa ,  produces america's supply of ready to eat jell-o gelatin dessert and pudding cups . 
in 1934, sponsorship from jell-o made comedian jack benny the dessert's spokesperson . 
the stereotype of mormons loving jell-o does not appear to have a long history . 
on 6 december 2009, saviola scored through a chip shot against académica de coimbra in a 4–0 home win . 
on 30 june 2015, river plate announced that saviola had returned to the club . 
on 2 september 2014, saviola joined serie a club hellas verona fc . 
saviola returned to barcelona for 2006–07, playing in 18 league games ,  six as a starter ,  and netting five goals . 
saviola was sent on loan in the summer of 2004, moving to as monaco fc in ligue 1.
in 2001, aged 19, saviola moved abroad to play for fc barcelona in a £15 million transfer . 
he played 45 minutes in his first appearance ,  a 1–0 win at real zaragoza on 1 september . 
in the last hours of the 2012–13 summer transfer window ,  saviola agreed on a move to málaga cf . 
saviola starred in the 2001 edition of the fifa u-20 world cup ,  held in argentina . 
on 15 september 2012, saviola scored once and provided one assist in a 3−1 home win against levante ud . 
the military version of the ju a 48 was designated the ju k 47.
the junkers ju 87 or stuka  -lrb-  from `` sturzkampfflugzeug '' ,  `` dive bomber ''  -rrb-  was a german dive bomber and ground-attack aircraft . 
the ju 87 pilots experienced the visual impairments most during `` pull-up '' from a dive . 
the design of the ju 87 had begun in 1933 as part of the `` sturzbomber-programm '' . 
the new ,  more powerful ,  ju 87b model started to replace the ju 87a at this time . 
an estimated 6,500 ju 87s of all versions were built between 1936 and august 1944.
the ju 87 was a single-engined all-metal cantilever monoplane . 
in accordance with the aircraft certification centre for `` stress group 5 '' ,  the ju 87 had reached the acceptable structural strength requirements for a dive bomber . 
the ju 87 was capable of carrying a bomb ,  but only if not carrying the rear gunner/radio operator as ,  even with the jumo 210d ,  the ju 87 was still underpowered for operations with more than a bomb load . 
the ju 87 a-2 was retrofitted with the jumo 210da fitted with a two-stage supercharger . 
the fw 190f started to replace the ju 87 for day missions in 1943, but the ju 87 continued to be used as a night nuisance-raider until the end of the war . 
the stuka's design included several innovations ,  including automatic pull-up dive brakes under both wings to ensure that the aircraft recovered from its attack dive even if the pilot blacked out from the high g-forces . 
the stuka was in a class of its own . `` 
the stuka dived at a 60-90° angle ,  holding a constant speed of 500–600 km/h  -lrb-  350-370 mph  -rrb-  due to dive-brake deployment ,  which increased the accuracy of the ju 87's aim . 
the book of jarom is one of the books that make up the book of mormon . 
according to the text it was written by jarom ,  a descendant of jacob ,  the brother of the prophet nephi . 
the book of jarom is very short ,  only fifteen verses covering the years 399-361 bce . 
reeves's first directorial film ,  `` man of tai chi '' ,  premiered in 2013 with showings at the beijing film festival and cannes film festival . 
in 1994, reeves's career reached a new high as a result of his starring role in the action film `` speed . `` 
stoff has remained reeves's manager ,  and has co-produced many of his films . 
during his film career ,  reeves has engaged in several forms of artistic expression . 
the work was awarded in beijing and praised by recognized director of action genre films ,  john woo . 
he has also produced a documentary ,  `` side by side '' ,  and directed the martial arts film `` man of tai chi '' . 
reeves had a cameo in the action-comedy film `` keanu '' ,  in which he voiced the eponymous kitten . 
as the film had been mostly completed ,  they decided to have a scene where he voices the kitten . 
the 1999 science fiction-action hit `` the matrix '' ,  a film in which reeves had a starring role ,  was a box office success and attracted positive reviews . 
reeves's career choices after `` speed '' were eclectic: despite his successes ,  reeves continued to accept supporting roles and appear in experimental films . 
the ancestor of the koto was the chinese guzheng . 
a koto is typically made of paulownia wood . 
when the koto was first imported to japan ,  the native word `` koto '' was a generic term for any and all japanese stringed instruments . 
yatsuhashi kengyo is now known as the `` father of modern koto '' . 
the azumagoto or yamatogoto was called the wagon ,  the kin no koto was called the kin ,  and the sau no koto  -lrb-  sau being an older pronunciation of 箏  -rrb-  was called the sō or koto . 
for every part of the koto there is a traditional name which connects with the opinion that the body of a koto resembles that of a dragon . 
the body of a traditional koto is made of a wood called `` kiri '' . 
the koto of the chikuso was made for the tsukushigato tradition and only for blind men . 
june kuramoto of the jazz fusion group hiroshima was one of the first koto performers to popularize the koto in a non-traditional fusion style . 
as the thing sank ,  it went `` kluge '' . 
the jargon file further includes `` kluge around '' `` to avoid a bug or difficult condition by inserting a kluge '' ,  `` kluge up '' `` to lash together a quick hack to perform a task '' . 
on being drafted into the navy ,  murgatroyd gave his profession as `` kluge maker '' . 
it may instead derive from the mispronunciation of european surname kluge  -lrb-  be that german ,  dutch or scandinavian  -rrb-  . 
the term was in common enough use to appear in a fictional movie about the us space program . 
the `` kludge '' or `` kluge '' metaphor has been adapted in fields such as evolutionary neuroscience ,  particularly in reference to the human brain . 
the term `` kluge '' as an overcomplicated or obscure contraption dates back at least to 1947, as evidenced by the article in the `` new york folklore quarterly '' ,  but the term must have been in use long before that for the story to have any sense . 
a 1947 article in the `` new york folklore quarterly '' recorded the classic shaggy dog story `` 'murgatroyd the kluge maker' then current in the armed forces ,  in which a 'kluge' was a complex and puzzling artifact with a trivial function . `` 
however ,  `` kluge '' seems to have the sense of overcomplicated ,  while `` kludge '' has only the sense of poorly done . 
 ''kluge '' `` was common navy slang in the world war ii era for any piece of electronics that worked well on shore but consistently failed at sea '' . 
the jargon file  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
a kludge or kluge  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a workaround or quick-and-dirty solution that is clumsy ,  inelegant ,  inefficient ,  difficult to extend and hard to maintain . 
american yiddish speakers use '  -lrb-    -rrb-  to mean `` too smart by half '' ,  the reflected meaning of german '  -lrb-  `` clever ''  -rrb-  . 
the research psychologist gary marcus's book `` kluge: the haphazard construction of the human mind '' compares evolutionary kluges with engineering ones like manifold vacuum-powered windshield wipers – when you accelerated or drove uphill ,  `` your wipers slowed to a crawl ,  or even stopped working altogether . `` 
between 1975 and 1980, king crimson were inactive . 
fripp disbanded the group in 1974.
in june 1982, king crimson followed `` discipline '' with `` beat ''  -lrb-  the first king crimson album recorded with the same band line-up as the album preceding it  -rrb-  . 
in 1971, the new king crimson formation recorded `` islands '' . 
by october 1981, the band had opted to change their name to king crimson . 
king crimson are an english progressive rock band formed in london in 1968.
in the early 1990s ,  belew met with fripp in england with an interest in a reformed king crimson . 
in 2011, a band called jakszyk fripp collins  -lrb-  and subtitled `` a king crimson projekct ''  -rrb-  released an album called `` a scarcity of miracles '' . 
king crimson released their thirteenth album ,  `` the power to believe '' ,  in october 2003.
king crimson's next album ,  `` three of a perfect pair '' ,  was recorded in 1983 and released in march 1984.
in august 2012, fripp announced his retirement from the music industry ,  leaving the future of king crimson uncertain . 
king crimson began another hiatus after the 40th anniversary tour . 
despite this ,  a new king crimson formation was announced in 2007: fripp ,  belew ,  levin ,  mastelotto ,  and a new second drummer ,  gavin harrison ,  the first new member from the uk since 1972.
in 1981, king crimson recorded `` discipline '' with producer rhett davies . 
in december 2010, fripp wrote that the king crimson `` switch '' had been set to `` off '' ,  citing several reasons for this decision . 
