carey is an active episcopalian . 
carey began recording her second studio album ,  `` emotions '' ,  in 1991.
mariah carey was born in huntington ,  new york . 
as starr's friendship with carey grew ,  so did her interest in helping carey succeed in the industry . 
during early 1993, carey began working on her third studio album ,  `` music box '' . 
in japan ,  carey has the top four highest-selling albums of all time by a non-asian artist . 
in april 2003, carey announced she would be touring later in the year . 
carey was in a three-year relationship with singer luis miguel from 1998 to 2001.
mariah carey  -lrb-  born march 27, 1969 or 1970 -rrb- is an american singer and songwriter . 
while in high school ,  carey began writing songs with gavin christopher . 
carey is a philanthropist who has been involved with several charitable organizations . 
throughout her career ,  carey has sold more than 200 million records worldwide ,  making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time . 
during the spring of 1999, carey began working on the final album per her record contract with sony . 
carey began dating tommy mottola while recording `` music box '' ,  and married him on june 5, 1993.
in september 2018, carey announced plans to release her fifteenth studio album later in the year . 
with her following albums ,  carey began to take more initiative and control with her music ,  and started infusing more genres into her work . 
some have noted that unlike houston and dion ,  carey co-writes and produces her own songs . 
in april 2018, carey opened up about her struggle with bipolar ii disorder . 
in 2018, carey signed a worldwide deal with live nation entertainment . 
throughout 2004, carey focused on composing material for her tenth studio album ,  `` the emancipation of mimi ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- . 
in august 2014, cannon confirmed he and carey had separated a few months earlier . 
carey's vocal style and singing ability have significantly impacted popular and contemporary music . 
on february 3, 2017, carey released the single `` i don't '' featuring yg . 
the bbc broadcast other plays of his in 1954 and 1956.
in 2000, the bbc and wgbh boston co-produced a lavish miniseries ,  titled `` gormenghast '' ,  based on the first two books of the series . 
the peakes were given leave to visit england just before world war i in 1914 and returned to china in 1916.
a 1995 edition of all three completed gormenghast novels includes a very short fragment of the beginning of what would have been the fourth gormenghast novel ,  `` titus awakes '' ,  as well as a listing of events and themes he wanted to address in that and later gormenghast novels . 
in 1984, bbc radio 4 broadcast two 90-minute plays based on `` titus groan '' and `` gormenghast '' ,  adapted by brian sibley and starring sting as steerpike and freddie jones as the artist  -lrb-  narrator  -rrb-  . 
in 1983, the australian broadcasting corporation broadcast eight hour-long episodes for radio dramatising the complete gormenghast trilogy . 
his early career in the 1930s was as a painter in london ,  although he lived on the channel island of sark for a time . 
at the outbreak of world war ii he applied to become a war artist for he was keen to put his skills at the service of his country . 
he began writing `` titus groan '' at this time . 
this was the first to include the third book `` titus alone '' . 
a 30-minute tv short film `` a boy in darkness ''  -lrb-  also made in 2000 and adapted from peake's novella  -rrb-  was the first production from the bbc drama lab . 
gormenghast `` boy in darkness and other stories ''  -lrb-  2007, the correct text and five other pieces  -rrb- 
his work ,  especially the `` gormenghast '' series ,  became much better known and more widely appreciated after his death . 
martial arts may be categorized along a variety of criteria ,  including:
a relation `` l '' over the sets `` x '' ,  … ,  `` x '' is a subset of their cartesian product ,  written `` l '' ⊆ `` x '' × … × `` x '' . 
elements of a relation are more briefly denoted by using boldface characters ,  for example ,  the constant element a =  -lrb-  a ,  … ,  a  -rrb-  or the variable element x =  -lrb-  `` x '' ,  … ,  `` x ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''g '' -lrb-  `` l ''  -rrb-  is called the `` graph '' of `` l '' . 
a statement of the form `` a is in the relation `` l '' ``  or `` a satisfies `` l '' ``  is taken to mean that a is in `` l '' under the first definition and that a is in `` g '' -lrb-  `` l ''  -rrb-  under the second definition . 
in the idiom ,  this is expressed by saying that `` l '' is a  -lrb-  `` k '' + 1 -rrb--tuple . 
relations are classified according to the number of sets in the defining cartesian product ,  in other words ,  according to the number of terms following `` l '' . 
though von stein's report was never formally published ,  ley quoted von stein as writing:
the animal is said to be of a brownish-gray color with a smooth skin ,  its size is approximately that of an elephant; at least that of a hippopotamus . 
according to german adventurer lt .  paul gratz's account from 1911:the crocodile is found only in very isolated specimens in lake bangweulu ,  except in the mouths of the large rivers at the north . 
i did not succeed in shooting a `` nsanga '' ,  but on the island of mbawala i came by some strips of its skin . 
this gives rise to intuitionistic logic . 
the interpretation of negation is different in intuitionist logic than in classical logic . 
thus `` p '' is a stronger statement than `` not-not-p '' . 
intuitionistic logic substitutes constructability for abstract truth and is associated with a transition from the proof of model theory to abstract truth in modern mathematics . 
to an intuitionist ,  the claim that an object with certain properties exists is a claim that an object with those properties can be constructed . 
thus the connectives `` and '' and `` or '' of intuitionistic logic do not satisfy de morgan's laws as they do in classical logic . 
an example is the set of natural numbers , 
the mishnah consists of six orders  -lrb-  ' ,  singular '   -rrb-  ,  each containing 7–12 tractates  -lrb-  ' ,  singular ' ; lit . 
the `` mishnah '' consists of six orders  -lrb-  ' ,  singular '   -rrb-  ,  each containing 7–12 tractates  -lrb-  ' ,  singular ' ; lit . 
the supreme god of the proto-indo-european religion was the god * ''dyḗus pḥtḗr ``  . 
the oneness of god is one of the core teachings of the bahá'í faith . 
 ''tawhid '' constitutes the foremost article of the muslim profession of faith ,  `` there is no god but god ,  muhammad is the messenger of god . 
god in the bahá'í faith is taught to be a personal god ,  too great for humans to fully comprehend . 
it is through these divine intermediaries that humans can approach god ,  and through them god brings divine revelation and law . 
monotheism is distinguished from henotheism ,  a religious system in which the believer worships one god without denying that others may worship different gods with equal validity ,  and monolatrism ,  the recognition of the existence of many gods but with the consistent worship of only one deity . 
god communicates his will and purpose to humanity through intermediaries ,  known as manifestations of god ,  who are the prophets and messengers that have founded religions from prehistoric times up to the present day . 
in year 9  -lrb-  1344/1342 bce  -rrb-  ,  akhenaten declared a more radical version of his new religion ,  declaring aten not merely the supreme god of the egyptian pantheon ,  but the only god of egypt ,  with himself as the sole intermediary between the aten and the egyptian people . 
monotheism is defined as the belief in the existence of only one god that created the world ,  is all-powerful and intervenes in the world . 
aten was addressed by akhenaten in prayers ,  such as the `` great hymn to the aten '': `` o sole god beside whom there is none '' . 
unitarianism is a theological movement ,  named for its understanding of god as one person ,  in direct contrast to trinitarianism . 
as they traditionally profess a concept of monotheism with a singular person as god ,  judaism and islam reject the christian idea of monotheism . 
most modern christians believe the godhead is triune ,  meaning that the three persons of the trinity are in one union in which each person is also wholly god . 
the ancient slavs syncretized him with the germanic god thor and the biblical prophet elijah . 
the himba people of namibia practice a form of monotheistic panentheism ,  and worship the god mukuru . 
the `` puja '' of the `` murti '' is a way to communicate with the abstract one god  -lrb-  `` brahman ''  -rrb-  which creates ,  sustains and dissolves creation . 
in islam ,  god  -lrb-  allāh  -rrb-  is all-powerful and all-knowing ,  the creator ,  sustainer ,  ordainer and judge of the universe . 
the assertion of islam is that the message of god had been corrupted ,  distorted or lost over time and the quran was sent to muhammad in order to correct the lost message of the torah ,  new testament and prior scriptures from god . 
muay and british boxing . 
muay boran ,  and therefore muay thai ,  was originally called by more generic names such as `` toi muay '' or simply `` muay '' . 
in 2006, muay thai was included in sportaccord with ifma . 
used for both muay and british boxing . 
its president is elected at the world muay thai congress . 
the 1st descriptive use of the term “muay thai”
the history of muay thai can also be traced to the middle of the 18th century . 
meanwhile ,  mao recovered from tuberculosis . 
there continue to be disagreements on mao's legacy . 
in 1911, mao began middle school in changsha . 
in october 1966, mao's `` quotations from chairman mao tse-tung '' ,  known as the `` little red book '' ,  was published . 
but historians dispute the sincerity of mao's words . 
during the early 1960s ,  mao became concerned with the nature of post-1959 china . 
it was during this period that mao chose lin biao ,  who seemed to echo all of mao's ideas ,  to become his successor . 
mao was the son of a wealthy farmer in shaoshan ,  hunan . 
mao graduated in june 1919, ranked third in the year . 
mao zedong was born on december 26, 1893, in shaoshan village ,  hunan province ,  china . 
the extent of mao's knowledge of the severity of the situation has been disputed . 
since 1950, over 40 million people have visited mao's birthplace in shaoshan ,  hunan . 
in late 1924, mao returned to shaoshan ,  perhaps to recuperate from an illness . 
mao remains a controversial figure and there is little agreement over his legacy both in china and abroad . 
however ,  mao has many chinese critics ,  both those who live inside and outside china . 
mao zedong  -lrb-  ; december 26, 1893september 9, 1976 -rrb- ,  also known as chairman mao ,  was a chinese communist revolutionary who became the founding father of the people's republic of china ,  which he ruled as the chairman of the communist party of china from its establishment in 1949 until his death in 1976.
numerous posters ,  badges and musical compositions referenced mao in the phrase `` chairman mao is the red sun in our hearts ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  and a `` savior of the people ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
during his leadership ,  mao traveled outside china on only two occasions ,  both state visits to the soviet union . 
mao's body was later permanently interred in a mausoleum in beijing . 
mao also gave the impression that he might even welcome a nuclear war . 
mao gave contradicting statements on the subject of personality cults . 
historian daniel leese notes that in the 1950s mao's personality was hardening:
mao's poems and writings are frequently cited by both chinese and non-chinese . 
deng xiaoping ,  who was opposed to the great leap forward and the cultural revolution ,  has to a certain extent rejected mao's legacy ,  famously saying that mao was `` 70% right and 30% wrong '' . 
when mao stepped down as head of state on april 27, 1959, further diplomatic state visits and travels abroad were undertaken by president liu shaoqi rather than mao personally . 
on october 1, 1949, mao proclaimed the foundation of the people's republic of china  -lrb-  prc  -rrb-  ,  a single-party state controlled by the cpc . 
in the mid-1990s ,  mao zedong's picture began to appear on all new renminbi currency from the people's republic of china . 
in the afternoon of the fifth ,  when the great happy news of chairman mao giving mangoes to the capital worker and peasant mao zedong thought propaganda team reached the tsinghua university campus ,  people immediately gathered around the gift given by the great leader chairman mao . 
when mao first tasted mangoes in 1968 he was enthused ,  describing them as a `` spiritual time bomb '' . 
the television series biography stated: `` mao turned china from a feudal backwater into one of the most powerful countries in the world  .  .  . 
stalin had established himself as the successor of `` correct '' marxist thought well before mao controlled the communist party of china ,  and therefore mao never challenged the suitability of any stalinist doctrine  -lrb-  at least while stalin was alive  -rrb-  . 
in the article `` mao zedong and the famine of 1959–1960: a study in wilfulness '' ,  published in 2006 in `` the china quarterly '' ,  professor thomas p .  bernstein also discussed mao's change of attitudes during different phases of the great leap forward:
on the long march ,  mao's wife he zizen had been injured by a shrapnel wound to the head . 
mao's troops arrived at the yan'an soviet during october 1935 and settled in pao an ,  until spring 1936.
on september 17, chairman mao's body was taken in a minibus from the great hall of the people to maojiawan to the 305 hospital that liu zhisui directed ,  and mao's internal organs were preserved in formaldehyde . 
in 1969, mao declared the cultural revolution to be over ,  although various historians in and outside of china mark the end of the cultural revolution—as a whole or in part—in 1976, following mao's death and the arrest of the gang of four . 
mao himself claimed that a total of people were killed in attacks on `` counter-revolutionaries '' during the years 1950–1952.
mao's embalmed ,  cpc-flag-draped body lay in state at the great hall of the people for one week . 
censuses were carried out in china in 1953, 1964 and 1982.
mao claimed that he missed the july 1922 second congress of the communist party in shanghai because he lost the address . 
the most vulnerable section of china's population ,  around five per cent ,  were those whom mao called 'enemies of the people' . 
mass killings are not usually associated with mao and the great leap forward ,  and china continues to benefit from a more favourable comparison with cambodia or the soviet union . 
in february 1930, mao created the southwest jiangxi provincial soviet government in the region under his control . 
china itself has moved sharply away from maoism since mao's death ,  and most people outside of china who describe themselves as maoist regard the deng xiaoping reforms to be a betrayal of maoism ,  in line with mao's view of `` capitalist roaders '' within the communist party . 
mao also has a presence in china and around the world in popular culture ,  where his face adorns everything from t-shirts to coffee cups . 
some scholars believe that this shows mao's readiness to accept mass death on an immense scale . 
from this point onward ,  mao was the communist party's undisputed leader ,  even though he would not become party chairman until 1943.
the phrase `` long live chairman mao for ten thousand years '' was commonly heard during the era . 
mao and kissinger then agreed that their comments on women be removed from public records ,  prompted by a chinese official who feared that mao's comments might incur public anger if released . 
li zhisui ,  mao's physician ,  suggested that mao had initially seen the policy as a way of weakening opposition to him within the party and that he was surprised by the extent of criticism and the fact that it came to be directed at his own leadership . 
similar systems are also present in south africa and are overseen by the engineering council of south africa  -lrb-  ecsa  -rrb-  . 
he also invented the world's first known endless power-transmitting chain drive . 
a similar system is used in nepal . 
al-jazari is also the first known person to create devices such as the crankshaft and camshaft ,  which now form the basics of many mechanisms . 
during the islamic golden age  -lrb-  7th to 15th century  -rrb-  ,  muslim inventors made remarkable contributions in the field of mechanical technology . 
on the european continent ,  johann von zimmermann  -lrb-  1820–1901 -rrb- founded the first factory for grinding machines in chemnitz ,  germany in 1848.
monkey island is a series of adventure games . 
other islands in the region are considered under the umbrella of tri-island area as well ,  even though not directly governed by elaine include: lucre island ,  jambalaya island ,  scabb island ,  phatt island ,  hook island ,  skull island ,  knuttin atoll ,  blood island ,  spittle island and pinchpenny island . 
elaine moves from island to island at her convenience ,  though she considers her governor's mansion on mêlée island ,  the capital island of the area ,  as home . 
the gulf of melange has its own set of islands: flotsam island ,  the jerkbait islands  -lrb-  spinner cay ,  spoon island ,  roe island  -rrb-  ,  brillig island ,  boulder beach ,  isle of ewe ,  and the rock of gelato . 
monkey island and dinky island are not officially part of any island area ,  but nonetheless are central to the series' overall back-story and canon . 
each game's plot usually involves the mysterious monkey island and its impenetrable secrets . 
the main setting of the `` monkey island '' games is the `` tri-island area '' ,  a fictional archipelago in the caribbean . 
the monkey island series is known for its humor and `` player-friendly '' qualities . 
the cut-scene in which the revelation was made is called `` the real secret of monkey island '' . 
gilbert stated that he never told anyone what the true secret of monkey island is . 
the main islands of the tri-island area are mêlée island ,  booty island ,  and plunder island governed by elaine marley in place of her long lost grandfather ,  horatio torquemada marley . 
in the manual of the curse of monkey island ,  it is stated that guybrush falls victim to a hex implemented by lechuck . 
 ''tales of monkey island '' also released on playstation network as a bundle for us$20.00.
 ''the curse of monkey island '' is the only game in the series to feature this style of animation; subsequent games used 3d polygon animation . 
after the fourth entry ,  `` escape from monkey island '' ,  the franchise again went on hiatus ,  though numerous rumors persisted about a revival until the announcement of `` tales of monkey island '' by telltale games in early 2009.
 ''the secret of monkey island '' poked fun at rival company sierra's game-over screens . 
 ''monkey island i '' and `` ii '' were originally released on floppy discs with text dialog only . 
cardiff rfc won the match 33–26.
only the rugby ground and the cardiff athletic bowls club now use the name cardiff arms park . 
in 1819 cardiff cricket club was formed and by 1848 they had moved to their new home at the arms park . 
in 1876, the cardiff rfc was formed and soon after they also used the park . 
there was doubt about the future of the arms park after 2010 following the move of the cardiff blues to the cardiff city stadium . 
cardiff cricket club played their final game at the ground against lydney cricket club on 17 september 1966.
on 17 october 1970, the new north stand and the cardiff rfc ground was completed ,  the north stand cost just over £1 million . 
by 1912, the cardiff football ground ,  as it was then known ,  had a new south stand and temporary stands on the north ,  east and west ends of the ground . 
cardiff arms park  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the arms park and the bt sport cardiff arms park for sponsorship reasons from september 2014, is situated in the centre of cardiff ,  wales . 
the adjoining cardiff rugby club ground has also been used for association football . 
the cardiff arms park site was originally called the great park ,  a swampy meadow behind the cardiff arms hotel . 
by 7 october 1966, the first floodlit game was held at cardiff arms park ,  a game in which cardiff rfc beat the barbarians by 12 points to 8.
an agreement in principle was reached in december 2015 between the landlord of the stadium site  -lrb-  cardiff athletic club  -rrb-  and its tenant  -lrb-  cardiff blues  -rrb-  to give the club a 150-year lease on the stadium site . 
cardiff arms park is best known as a rugby union stadium ,  but cardiff athletic bowls club  -lrb-  cabc  -rrb-  was established in 1923, and ever since then ,  the club has used the arms park as its bowling green . 
kalashnikov's father ,  timofey aleksandrovich kalashnikov  -lrb-  1883–1930 -rrb- ,  was a peasant . 
kalashnikov continued hunting into his 90s . 
during his career ,  kalashnikov designed about 150 models of small weapons . 
from 1949, mikhail kalashnikov lived and worked in izhevsk ,  udmurtia . 
the title to the ak-47 trademark belonged to mikhail kalashnikov's family until 4 april 2016, when the kalashnikov concern won a lawsuit to invalidate the registration of the trademark . 
mikhail kalashnikov married twice ,  the first time to ekaterina danilovna astakhova of altai krai . 
they had 19 children ,  but only eight survived to adult age; kalashnikov was born 17th ,  and was close to death at age six . 
kalashnikov was born in kurya ,  altai governorate ,  russian sfsr ,  now altai krai ,  russia ,  as the seventeenth child of the 19 children of aleksandra frolovna kalashnikova  -lrb-  née kaverina  -rrb-  and timofey aleksandrovich kalashnikov ,  who were peasants . 
as a noun ,  the word mud is variously written mud ,  mud ,  and mud ,  depending on speaker and context . 
neil newell ,  an avid `` mud1 '' player ,  started programming his own mud called `` shades '' during christmas 1985, because `` mud1 '' was closed down during the holidays . 
a graphical mud is a mud that uses computer graphics to represent parts of the virtual world and its visitors . 
taking advantage of the flexibility of mud server software ,  some muds are designed for educational purposes rather than gaming or chat . 
within a mud's technical infrastructure ,  a mudlib  -lrb-  concatenation of `` mud library ''  -rrb-  defines the rules of the in-game world . 
numerous games are listed at various web portals ,  such as the mud connector . 
most muds restrict player versus player combat ,  often abbreviated as pk  -lrb-  player killing  -rrb-  . 
roleplaying muds ,  generally abbreviated as rp muds ,  encourage or enforce that players act out the role of their playing characters at all times . 
the original `` mud '' game was closed down in late 1987, reportedly under pressure from compuserve ,  to whom richard bartle had licensed the game . 
the games were retired commercially in 2000.
puns on the `` wet dirt '' meaning of `` mud '' are endemic ,  as with ,  for example ,  the names of the rom  -lrb-  rivers of mud  -rrb-  ,  muck ,  mush ,  and coffeemud codebases and the mud `` muddy waters '' . 
many muds were fashioned around the dice-rolling rules of the `` dungeons & dragons '' series of games . 
this style of game was also historically referred to within the mud genre as `` adventure games '' ,  but video gaming as a whole has developed a meaning of `` adventure game '' that is greatly at odds with this usage . 
social muds de-emphasize game elements in favor of an environment designed primarily for socializing . 
1985 saw the origin of a number of projects inspired by the original `` mud '' . 
seraphina brennan of `` massively '' wrote that the mud community was `` in decline '' as of 2009.
these included `` gods '' by ben laurie ,  a `` mud1 '' clone that included online creation in its endgame ,  and which became a commercial mud in 1988; and `` mirrorworld '' ,  a tolkienesque mud started by pip cordrey who gathered some people on a bbs he ran to create a `` mud1 '' clone that would run on a home computer . 
the first popular mud codebase was abermud ,  written in 1987 by alan cox ,  named after the university of wales ,  aberystwyth . 
 ''muslim '' is an arabic word meaning `` submitter ''  -lrb-  to god  -rrb-  . 
the ordinary word in english is `` muslim '' . 
in sunni islam ,  the shahada has two parts: `` la ilaha illa'llah ''  -lrb-  there is no god but god  -rrb-  ,  and `` muhammadun rasul allah ''  -lrb-  muhammad is the messenger of god  -rrb-  ,  which are sometimes referred to as the first `` shahada '' and the second `` shahada '' . 
to become a muslim and to convert to islam ,  it is essential to utter the `` shahada '' ,  one of the five pillars of islam ,  a declaration of faith and trust that professes that there is only one god ``  -lrb-  allah  -rrb- ``  and that muhammad is god's messenger . 
roleplaying is one of the primary activities of mushes ,  along with socializing . 
pennmush ,  tinymush ,  tinymux and rhostmush are all open-source mush servers . 
although mush servers do not impose strong administrative hierarchies ,  most mush games establish additional levels of management besides wizards . 
maintainers and developers of mush servers have traditionally shared ideas with one another ,  so most mush servers include concepts or code developed originally in other servers . 
gene flow is the exchange of genes between populations ,  which are usually of the same species . 
gene transfer between species includes the formation of hybrid organisms and horizontal gene transfer . 
other types of mutation occasionally create new genes from previously noncoding dna . 
novel genes are produced by several methods ,  commonly through the duplication and mutation of an ancestral gene ,  or by recombining parts of different genes to form new combinations with new functions . 
mutation can result in several different types of change in dna sequences; these can either have no effect ,  alter the product of a gene ,  or prevent the gene from functioning . 
during the process of dna replication ,  errors occasionally occur in the polymerization of the second strand . 
in organisms that use chromosomal crossover to exchange dna and recombine genes ,  errors in alignment during meiosis can also cause mutations . 
horizontal gene transfer is the transfer of genetic material from one organism to another organism that is not its offspring; this is most common among bacteria . 
chemical damage to dna occurs naturally as well ,  and cells use dna repair mechanisms to repair mismatches and breaks in dna—nevertheless ,  the repair sometimes fails to return the dna to its original sequence . 
mysql is written in c and c++ . 
a port of mysql to openvms also exists . 
mysql is a component of the lamp web application software stack  -lrb-  and others  -rrb-  ,  which is an acronym for `` linux ,  apache ,  mysql ,  perl/php/python '' . 
mysql was created by a swedish company ,  mysql ab ,  founded by david axmark ,  allan larsson and michael `` monty '' widenius . 
as a specific movement in the arts it is identified with developments in post–world war ii western art ,  most strongly with american visual arts in the 1960s and early 1970s . 
in 1962 the sidney janis gallery mounted `` the new realists '' ,  the first major pop art group exhibition in an uptown art gallery in new york city . 
marcel duchamp famously gave up `` art '' in favor of chess . 
by the late 1960s however ,  postminimalism ,  process art and arte povera also emerged as revolutionary concepts and movements that encompassed both painting and sculpture ,  via lyrical abstraction and the postminimalist movement ,  and in early conceptual art . 
these performances were intended as works of a new art form combining sculpture ,  dance ,  and music or sound ,  often with audience participation . 
during the late 1950s and 1960s artists with a wide range of interests began to push the boundaries of contemporary art . 
rereadings into abstract art by art historians such as linda nochlin ,  griselda pollock and catherine de zegher critically show ,  however ,  that pioneering women artists who produced major innovations in modern art had been ignored by official accounts of its history . 
in literature and visual art some modernists sought to defy expectations mainly in order to make their art more vivid ,  or to force the audience to take the trouble to question their own preconceptions . 
an example of how modernist art can be both revolutionary and yet be related to past tradition ,  is the music of the composer arnold schoenberg . 
playwrights commonly associated with the theatre of the absurd include samuel beckett  -lrb-  1906–1989 -rrb- ,  eugène ionesco  -lrb-  1909–1994 -rrb- ,  jean genet  -lrb-  1910–1986 -rrb- ,  harold pinter  -lrb-  1930–2008 -rrb- ,  tom stoppard  -lrb-  born 1937 -rrb- ,  alexander vvedensky  -lrb-  1904–1941 -rrb- ,  daniil kharms  -lrb-  1905–1942 -rrb- ,  friedrich dürrenmatt  -lrb-  1921–1990 -rrb- ,  alejandro jodorowsky  -lrb-  born 1929 -rrb- ,  fernando arrabal  -lrb-  born 1932 -rrb- ,  václav havel  -lrb-  1936–2011 -rrb- and edward albee  -lrb-  1928–2016 -rrb- . 
while the theory of combining multiple arts into one art is quite old ,  and has been revived periodically ,  the postmodern manifestation is often in combination with performance art ,  where the dramatic subtext is removed ,  and what is left is the specific statements of the artist in question or the conceptual statement of their action . 
the continuation of abstract expressionism ,  color field painting ,  lyrical abstraction ,  geometric abstraction ,  minimalism ,  abstract illusionism ,  process art ,  pop art ,  postminimalism ,  and other late 20th-century modernist movements in both painting and sculpture continued through the first decade of the 21st century and constitute radical new directions in those mediums . 
another trend in art which has been associated with the term postmodern is the use of a number of different media together . 
futurism is yet another modernist movement . 
minimalism describes movements in various forms of art and design ,  especially visual art and music ,  wherein artists intend to expose the essence or identity of a subject through eliminating all nonessential forms ,  features ,  or concepts . 
this facilitates consideration of specific reactions to the use of technology in the first world war ,  and anti-technological and nihilistic aspects of the works of diverse thinkers and artists spanning the period from friedrich nietzsche  -lrb-  1844–1900 -rrb- to samuel beckett  -lrb-  1906–1989 -rrb- . 
in this spirit ,  its innovations ,  like the stream-of-consciousness novel ,  atonal  -lrb-  or pantonal  -rrb-  and twelve-tone music ,  divisionist painting and abstract art ,  all had precursors in the 19th century . 
henry moore  -lrb-  1898–1986 -rrb- emerged after world war ii as britain's leading sculptor . 
in the arts and letters ,  two important approaches developed separately in france ,  beginning in the 1860s . 
some even argue that modernism in literature and art functioned to sustain an elite culture which excluded the majority of the population . 
the use of photography ,  which had rendered much of the representational function of visual art obsolete ,  strongly affected this aspect of modernism . 
in the late 1960s robert pincus-witten coined the term `` postminimalism '' to describe minimalist-derived art which had content and contextual overtones that minimalism rejected . 
rationalism has also had opponents in the philosophers søren kierkegaard  -lrb-  1813–55 -rrb- and later friedrich nietzsche  -lrb-  1844–1900 -rrb- ,  both of whom had significant influence on existentialism . 
important literary precursors of modernism were fyodor dostoyevsky  -lrb-  1821–1881 -rrb- ,  who wrote the novels `` crime and punishment ''  -lrb-  1866 -rrb- and `` the brothers karamazov ''  -lrb-  1880 -rrb-; walt whitman  -lrb-  1819–1892 -rrb- ,  who published the poetry collection `` leaves of grass ''  -lrb-  1855–1891 -rrb-; and august strindberg  -lrb-  1849–1912 -rrb- ,  especially his later plays ,  including the trilogy `` to damascus '' 1898–1901, `` a dream play ''  -lrb-  1902 -rrb- and `` the ghost sonata ''  -lrb-  1907 -rrb- . 
modern ideas in art also began to appear more frequently in commercials and logos ,  an early example of which ,  from 1916, is the famous london underground logo designed by edward johnston . 
the poets charles olson  -lrb-  1910–1970 -rrb- and j .  h .  prynne  -lrb-  born 1936 -rrb- are among the writers in the second half of the 20th century who have been described as late modernists . 
influential in the early days of modernism were the theories of sigmund freud  -lrb-  1856–1939 -rrb- . 
the first full-length expressionist play was `` the son '' by walter hasenclever ,  which was published in 1914 and first performed in 1916.
this was one of mcluhan's most frequent statements to and about those who disagreed with him . 
mcluhan biographer philip marchand called the recording `` the 1967 equivalent of a mcluhan video . `` 
mcluhan's coinage for this new social organization is the `` global village '' . 
in `` media manifestos '' ,  régis debray also takes issue with mcluhan's envisioning of the medium . 
mcluhan's `` archetype '' `` is a quoted extension ,  medium ,  technology or environment . `` 
in `` laws of media ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- ,  published posthumously by his son eric ,  mcluhan summarized his ideas about media in a concise tetrad of media effects . 
mcluhan proposed that media themselves ,  not the content they carry ,  should be the focus of study—popularly quoted as `` the medium is the message '' . 
paul levinson's 1999 book `` digital mcluhan '' explores the ways that mcluhan's work can be better understood through the lens of the digital revolution . 
mcluhan's most widely known work ,  `` understanding media: the extensions of man ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- ,  is a pioneering study in media theory . 
in mcluhan's terms ,  a cliché is a `` normal '' action ,  phrase ,  etc . 
some theorists have attacked mcluhan's definition and treatment of the word `` medium '' for being too simplistic . 
mcluhan was born on july 21, 1911, in edmonton ,  alberta ,  to elsie naomi  -lrb-  née hall  -rrb-  and herbert ernest mcluhan ,  both born in canada . 
mcluhan's first book ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1951 -rrb- ,  is a pioneering study in the field now known as popular culture . 
mcluhan also posits that there is a factor of interplay between the cliché and the archetype ,  or a `` doubleness '':
the moral valence of technology's effects on cognition is ,  for mcluhan ,  a matter of perspective . 
a third term of `` the global village '' that mcluhan and powers develop at length is the tetrad . 
mcluhan frequently quoted walter ong's `` ramus ,  method ,  and the decay of dialogue ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- ,  which evidently had prompted mcluhan to write `` the gutenberg galaxy '' . 
mcluhan designed the tetrad as a pedagogical tool ,  phrasing his laws as questions with which to consider any medium:
while some critics have taken issue with mcluhan's writing style and mode of argument ,  mcluhan himself urged readers to think of his work as `` probes '' or `` mosaics '' offering a toolkit approach to thinking about the media . 
an audio recording version of mcluhan's famous work was made by columbia records . 
finally ,  mcluhan described key points of change in how man has viewed the world and how these views were changed by the adoption of new media . 
in the first part of `` understanding media , ``  mcluhan also stated that different media invite different degrees of participation on the part of a person who chooses to consume a medium . 
mcluhan also started the journal `` explorations '' with anthropologist edmund `` ted '' carpenter . 
in `` the medium is the massage '' ,  mcluhan also rehashed the argument—which first appeared in the prologue to 1962's `` the gutenberg galaxy ''—that all media are `` extensions '' of our human senses ,  bodies and minds . 
mcluhan's `` the gutenberg galaxy '' won canada's highest literary award ,  the governor-general's award for non-fiction ,  in 1962.
mcluhan was named to the albert schweitzer chair in humanities at fordham university in the bronx for one year  -lrb-  1967–68 -rrb- . 
mcluhan claims that the ten thunders in `` wake '' represent different stages in the history of man:
it is distinct from single inheritance ,  where an object or class may only inherit from one particular object or class . 
in object-oriented programming  -lrb-  oop  -rrb-  ,  `` inheritance '' describes a relationship between two classes in which one class  -lrb-  the `` child '' class  -rrb-  `` subclasses '' the `` parent '' class . 
languages that allow only single inheritance ,  where a class can only derive from one base class ,  do not have the diamond problem . 
the `` diamond problem ''  -lrb-  sometimes referred to as the `` deadly diamond of death ''  -rrb-  is an ambiguity that arises when two classes b and c inherit from a ,  and class d inherits from both b and c .  if there is a method in a that b and c have overridden ,  and d does not override it ,  then which version of the method does d inherit: that of b ,  or that of c ? 
php uses traits classes to inherit specific method implementations . 
the intel 4004 was followed in 1972 by the intel 8008, the world's first 8-bit microprocessor . 
this processor had an 8-bit data bus and a 14-bit address bus . 
16-bit designs had only been on the market briefly when 32-bit implementations started to appear . 
intel's first 32-bit microprocessor was the iapx 432, which was introduced in 1981, but was not a commercial success . 
affordable 8-bit microprocessors with 16-bit addressing also led to the first general-purpose microcomputers from the mid-1970s on . 
the world's first single-chip fully 32-bit microprocessor ,  with 32-bit data paths ,  32-bit buses ,  and 32-bit addresses ,  was the at&t bell labs bellmac-32a ,  with first samples in 1980, and general production in 1982.
however ,  a 32-bit microprocessor may use less average power than an 8-bit microprocessor when the application requires certain operations such as floating-point math that take many more clock cycles on an 8-bit microprocessor than on a 32-bit microprocessor ,  so the 8-bit microprocessor spends more time in high-power operating mode . 
when manufactured in a similar process ,  8-bit microprocessors use less power when operating and less power when sleeping than 32-bit microprocessors . 
the most significant of the 32-bit designs is the motorola mc68000, introduced in 1979.
the four-phase systems al1 was an 8-bit bit slice chip containing eight registers and an alu . 
the 65816 16-bit microprocessor was the core of the apple iigs and later the super nintendo entertainment system ,  making it one of the most popular 16-bit designs of all time . 
the first multi-chip 16-bit microprocessor was the national semiconductor imp-16, introduced in early 1973.
an 8-bit version of the chipset was introduced in 1974 as the imp-8.
the first commercial ,  single chip ,  fully 32-bit microprocessor available on the market was the hp focus . 
during this time  -lrb-  early to mid-1980s  -rrb-  ,  national semiconductor introduced a very similar 16-bit pinout ,  32-bit internal microprocessor called the ns 16032  -lrb-  later renamed 32016 -rrb- ,  the full 32-bit version named the ns 32032.
the 16-bit intel x86 processors up to and including the 80386 do not include floating-point units  -lrb-  fpus  -rrb-  . 
while 64-bit microprocessor designs have been in use in several markets since the early 1990s  -lrb-  including the nintendo 64 gaming console in 1996 -rrb- ,  the early 2000s saw the introduction of 64-bit microprocessors targeted at the pc market . 
wdc pioneered the licensing of microprocessor designs ,  later followed by arm  -lrb-  32-bit  -rrb-  and other microprocessor intellectual property  -lrb-  ip  -rrb-  providers in the 1990s . 
intel `` upsized '' their 8080 design into the 16-bit intel 8086, the first member of the x86 family ,  which powers most modern pc type computers . 
a microprocessor is a general-purpose entity . 
32-bit processors have more digital logic than narrower processors ,  so 32-bit  -lrb-  and wider  -rrb-  processors produce more digital noise and have higher static consumption than narrower processors . 
nevertheless ,  trade-offs apply: running 32-bit arithmetic on an 8-bit chip could end up using more power ,  as the chip must execute software with multiple instructions . 
the intersil 6100 family consisted of a 12-bit microprocessor  -lrb-  the 6100 -rrb- and a range of peripheral support and memory ics . 
the empirical formula is often the same as the molecular formula but not always . 
a compound's empirical formula is a very simple type of chemical formula . 
for example ,  the molecule acetylene has molecular formula ch ,  but the simplest integer ratio of elements is ch . 
for network solids ,  the term formula unit is used in stoichiometric calculations . 
the molecular mass can be calculated from the chemical formula and is expressed in conventional atomic mass units equal to 1/12 of the mass of a neutral carbon-12  -lrb-  c isotope  -rrb-  atom . 
a molecule may be homonuclear ,  that is ,  it consists of atoms of one chemical element ,  as with oxygen  -lrb-  o  -rrb- ; or it may be heteronuclear ,  a chemical compound composed of more than one element ,  as with water  -lrb-  ho  -rrb-  . 
the molecular formula reflects the exact number of atoms that compose the molecule and so characterizes different molecules . 
for molecules with a complicated 3-dimensional structure ,  especially involving atoms bonded to four different substituents ,  a simple molecular formula or even semi-structural chemical formula may not be enough to completely specify the molecule . 
molecules are held together by either covalent bonding or ionic bonding . 
structural formulas may in turn be represented with a one-dimensional chemical name ,  but such chemical nomenclature requires many words and terms which are not part of chemical formulas . 
in the theory of western music ,  a mode is a type of musical scale coupled with a set of characteristic melodic behaviors . 
regarding the concept of mode as applied to pitch relationships generally ,  harold s .  powers proposed mode as a general term but limited for melody types ,  which were based on the modal interpretation of ancient greek octave species called `` tonos ''  -lrb-  τόνος  -rrb-  or `` harmonia ''  -lrb-  ἁρμονία  -rrb-  ,  with `` most of the area between  .  .  .  being in the domain of mode ''  . 
these subjects have both classical and quantum divisions of study . 
two central figures in the early modern age are galileo galilei and isaac newton . 
the field is yet less widely understood in terms of quantum theory . 
for everyday phenomena ,  however ,  newton’s three laws of motion remain the cornerstone of dynamics ,  which is the study of what causes motion . 
two main modern developments in mechanics are general relativity of einstein ,  and quantum mechanics ,  both developed in the 20th century based in part on earlier 19th-century ideas . 
in fact ,  in quantum mechanics ,  particles themselves are fields ,  as described theoretically by the wave function . 
in analogy to the distinction between quantum and classical mechanics ,  einstein's general and special theories of relativity have expanded the scope of newton and galileo's formulation of mechanics . 
the set is connected to a julia set ,  and related julia sets produce similarly complex fractal shapes . 
the mandelbrot set formula_18 is defined by a family of complex quadratic polynomials
the mandelbrot set is the set of values of `` c '' in the complex plane for which the orbit of 0 under iteration of the quadratic map
the mandelbrot set is the set of complex numbers formula_1 for which the function formula_2 does not diverge when iterated from formula_3, i . e .  ,  for which the sequence formula_4, formula_5, etc .  ,  remains bounded in absolute value . 
on the other hand ,  `` c '' = −1 gives the sequence 0, −1, 0, −1, 0,  .  .  .  ,  which is bounded ,  and so −1 belongs to the mandelbrot set . 
his daughter ami canaan mann is also a film director and producer . 
8 on their 25 greatest active film directors list . 
he is the son of grocers esther and jack mann . 
in an interview on the `` manhunter '' dvd ,  star william petersen comments that because mann is so focused on his creations ,  it takes several years for him to complete a film; petersen believes that this is why mann does not make films very often . 
in january 2015, it was reported in `` the new yorker '' that mann is developing a film about ferrari founder enzo ferrari . 
michael kenneth mann  -lrb-  born february 5, 1943 -rrb- is an american film director ,  screenwriter ,  and producer of film and television who is best known for his distinctive brand of stylized crime drama . 
in 2005, he received the bafta film award for co-producing `` the aviator '' . 
dante spinotti is a frequent cinematographer of mann's pictures . 
group 3 is labelled as group iiia in the older nomenclature  -lrb-  cas group iiib  -rrb-  . 
in older nomenclature the main-group elements are groups ia and iia ,  and groups iiib to 0  -lrb-  cas groups iiia to viiia  -rrb-  . 
when certain compounds are illuminated with high energy light ,  they emit light of a lower frequency . 
bright field microscopy is the simplest of all the light microscopy techniques . 
protein will also fluorescence at approximately 353 nm when excited with 280 nm light . 
differential interference contrast requires a polarized light source to function; two polarizing filters have to be fitted in the light path ,  one below the condenser  -lrb-  the polarizer  -rrb-  ,  and the other above the objective  -lrb-  the analyzer  -rrb-  . 
also ,  the light that is being detected is reflected and not transmitted as it is when dic is employed . 
superior and much more expensive is the use of interference contrast . 
in a homogeneous specimen ,  there is no difference between the two beams ,  and no contrast is being generated . 
dark field microscopy is a technique for improving the contrast of unstained ,  transparent specimens . 
the system consists of a special prism  -lrb-  nomarski prism ,  wollaston prism  -rrb-  in the condenser that splits light in an ordinary and an extraordinary beam . 
optical or light microscopy involves passing visible light transmitted through or reflected from the sample through a single lens or multiple lenses to allow a magnified view of the sample . 
to block the excitation light from reaching the observer or the detector ,  filter sets of high quality are needed . 
use of electrons ,  instead of light ,  allows for much higher resolution . 
the two major types of electron microscopes are transmission electron microscopes  -lrb-  tems  -rrb-  and scanning electron microscopes  -lrb-  sems  -rrb-  . 
in the early 20th century a significant alternative to the light microscope was developed ,  an instrument that uses a beam of electrons rather than light to generate an image . 
other major types of microscopes are the fluorescence microscope ,  the electron microscope  -lrb-  both the transmission electron microscope and the scanning electron microscope  -rrb-  and the various types of scanning probe microscopes . 
these microscopes have the same resolution limit as wide field optical ,  probe ,  and electron microscopes . 
scanning optical and electron microscopes ,  like the confocal microscope and scanning electron microscope ,  use lenses to focus a spot of light or electrons onto the sample then analyze the signals generated by the beam interacting with the sample . 
the performance of a light microscope depends on the quality and correct use of the condensor lens system to focus light on the specimen and the objective lens to capture the light from the specimen and form an image . 
as these microscopes do not use electromagnetic or electron radiation for imaging they are not subject to the same resolution limit as the optical and electron microscopes described above . 
one of the latest discoveries made about using an electron microscope is the ability to identify a virus . 
development of the transmission electron microscope was quickly followed in 1935 by the development of the scanning electron microscope by max knoll . 
the technique is based on the use of non-reflecting substrates for cross-polarized reflected light microscopy . 
midrash  -lrb-  ; ; pl .  ``  ''  -rrb- 
the word `` midrash '' occurs twice in the hebrew bible: 2 chronicles 13:22 `` in the `` midrash '' of the prophet iddo '' ,  and 24:27 `` in the `` midrash '' of the book of the kings '' . 
vanessa lovelace defines midrash as `` a jewish mode of interpretation that not only engages the words of the text ,  behind the text ,  and beyond the text ,  but also focuses on each letter ,  and the words left unsaid by each line . `` 
according to the encyclopaedia britannica ,  `` midrash was initially a philological method of interpreting the literal meaning of biblical texts . 
midrash also asks questions of the text; sometimes it provides answers ,  sometimes it leaves the reader to answer the questions . `` 
missouri is a state in the midwestern united states . 
the missouri river ,  after which the state is named ,  flows through the center of the state into the mississippi river ,  which makes up missouri's eastern border . 
the state is named for the missouri river ,  which was named after the indigenous missouri indians ,  a siouan-language tribe . 
missouri has been called the `` mother of the west '' and the `` cave state ''; however ,  missouri's most famous nickname is the `` show me state . `` 
other nicknames for missouri include `` the lead state '' ,  `` the bullion state '' ,  `` the ozark state '' ,  `` the mother of the west '' ,  `` the iron mountain state '' ,  and `` pennsylvania of the west '' . 
there is no official state nickname . 
north of the missouri river ,  the state is primarily rolling hills of the great plains ,  whereas south of the missouri river ,  the state is dominated by the oak-hickory central u . s .  hardwood forest . 
missouri's culture blends elements from the midwestern and southern united states . 
missouri is landlocked and borders eight different states as does its neighbor ,  tennessee . 
the state's population density 86.9 in 2009, is also closer to the national average  -lrb-  86.8 in 2009 -rrb- than any other state . 
missouri is home to a diversity of both flora and fauna . 
the two largest rivers are the mississippi  -lrb-  which defines the eastern boundary of the state  -rrb-  and the missouri river  -lrb-  which flows from west to east through the state  -rrb-  essentially connecting the two largest metros of kansas city and st .  louis . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of missouri was 6,083,672 on july 1, 2015, a 1.58% increase since the 2010 united states census . 
originally the state's western border was a straight line ,  defined as the meridian passing through the kawsmouth ,  the point where the kansas river enters the missouri river . 
after the secession of southern states began in 1861, the missouri legislature called for the election of a special convention on secession . 
humans have inhabited the land now known as missouri for at least 12,000 years . 
missouri played a central role in the westward expansion of the united states ,  as memorialized by the gateway arch . 
the counties that made up `` little dixie '' were those along the missouri river in the center of the state ,  settled by southern migrants who held the greatest concentration of slaves . 
moses is mentioned 502 times in the quran; passages mentioning moses include 2.49–61, 7.103–60, 10.75–93, 17.101–04, 20.9–97, 26.10–66, 27.7–14, 28.3–46, 40.23–30, 43.46–55, 44.17–31, and 79.15–25.
only god is worthy of worship in judaism . 
moses also appears in other religious texts such as the mishnah  -lrb-  c .  200 ce  -rrb-  ,  midrash  -lrb-  200–1200 ce  -rrb-  ,  and the quran  -lrb-  c .  610–653 -rrb- . 
moses is one of the most important of god's messengers in the bahá'í faith being designated a manifestation of god . 
in the book of deuteronomy ,  moses was called `` the man of god '' . 
they invite the hyksos to reinvade egypt ,  rule with them for 13 years – osarseph then assumes the name moses – and are then driven out . 
an epithet of moses in baha'i scriptures is the one who conversed with god . 
in his final act at sinai ,  god gave moses instructions for the tabernacle ,  the mobile shrine by which he would travel with israel to the promised land . 
god sent moses back to egypt to demand the release of the israelites from slavery . 
moses led the israelites to the border of egypt ,  but there god hardened the pharaoh's heart once more ,  so that he could destroy the pharaoh and his army at the red sea crossing as a sign of his power to israel and the nations . 
the israelites had settled in the land of goshen in the time of joseph and jacob ,  but a new pharaoh arose who oppressed the children of israel . 
the name of moses belongs to 1st millennium egyptian . 
there ,  on mount horeb ,  god appeared to moses as a burning bush ,  revealed to moses his name yhwh  -lrb-  probably pronounced yahweh  -rrb-  and commanded him to return to egypt and bring his chosen people  -lrb-  israel  -rrb-  out of bondage and into the promised land  -lrb-  canaan  -rrb-  . 
the princess made a grammatical mistake which is prophetic of his future role in legend ,  as someone who will `` draw the people of israel out of egypt through the waters of the red sea . `` 
he is said to have been raised in an oppressive household ,  and to have been known ,  in egypt ,  as a man who had committed murder – though he had done so in order to prevent an act of cruelty . 
chief among these philosophers ,  he says ,  was socrates who `` visited syria ,  and took from the children of israel the teachings of the unity of god and of the immortality of the soul . `` 
he is also an important prophet in christianity ,  islam ,  the bahá'í faith ,  and a number of other abrahamic religions . 
in josephus'  -lrb-  37 – c .  100 ce  -rrb-  `` antiquities of the jews '' ,  moses is mentioned throughout . 
in the moses story related by the quran ,  jochebed is commanded by god to place moses in an ark and cast him on the waters of the nile ,  thus abandoning him completely to god's protection . 
it recognized `` only one divine being whom no image can represent .  .  .  and the only way to approach this god is to live in virtue and in justice . `` 
the roman historian tacitus  -lrb-  c .  56–120 ce  -rrb-  refers to moses by noting that the jewish religion was monotheistic and without a clear image . 
the figure of osarseph in hellenistic historiography is a renegade egyptian priest who leads an army of lepers against the pharaoh and is finally expelled from egypt ,  changing his name to moses . 
after defeating the amalekites in rephidim ,  moses led the israelites to biblical mount sinai ,  where he was given the ten commandments from god ,  written on stone tablets . 
moses told the israelites that they were not worthy to inherit the land ,  and would wander the wilderness for forty years until the generation who had refused to enter canaan had died ,  so that it would be their children who would possess the land . 
nevertheless ,  like abraham ,  through the assistance of god ,  he achieved great things and gained renown even beyond the levant . 
the mississippi river is called the lower mississippi river from its confluence with the ohio river to its mouth at the gulf of mexico ,  a distance of about  . 
the mississippi river is known as the middle mississippi from the upper mississippi river's confluence with the missouri river at st .  louis ,  missouri ,  for to its confluence with the ohio river at cairo ,  illinois . 
on average ,  the mississippi has only 8% the flow of the amazon river . 
the mississippi river can be divided into three sections: the upper mississippi ,  the river from its headwaters to the confluence with the missouri river; the middle mississippi ,  which is downriver from the missouri to the ohio river; and the lower mississippi ,  which flows from the ohio to the gulf of mexico . 
other major tributaries of the upper mississippi include the crow river in minnesota ,  the chippewa river in wisconsin ,  the maquoketa river and the wapsipinicon river in iowa ,  and the illinois river in illinois . 
in addition to the ohio river ,  the major tributaries of the lower mississippi river are the white river ,  flowing in at the white river national wildlife refuge in east central arkansas; the arkansas river ,  joining the mississippi at arkansas post; the big black river in mississippi; and the yazoo river ,  meeting the mississippi at vicksburg ,  mississippi . 
apart from the missouri and meramec rivers of missouri and the kaskaskia river of illinois ,  no major tributaries enter the middle mississippi river . 
thus ,  by volume ,  the main branch of the mississippi river system at cairo can be considered to be the ohio river  -lrb-  and the allegheny river further upstream  -rrb-  ,  rather than the middle mississippi . 
the mississippi river empties into the gulf of mexico about downstream from new orleans . 
the widest point of the mississippi river is in the lower mississippi portion where it exceeds in width in several places . 
the mississippi river has the world's fourth-largest drainage basin  -lrb-  `` watershed '' or `` catchment ''  -rrb-  . 
the upper mississippi river is joined by the minnesota river at fort snelling in the twin cities; the st .  croix river near prescott ,  wisconsin; the cannon river near red wing ,  minnesota; the zumbro river at wabasha ,  minnesota; the black ,  la crosse ,  and root rivers in la crosse ,  wisconsin; the wisconsin river at prairie du chien ,  wisconsin; the rock river at the quad cities; the iowa river near wapello ,  iowa; the skunk river south of burlington ,  iowa; and the des moines river at keokuk ,  iowa . 
the upper mississippi runs from its headwaters to its confluence with the missouri river at st .  louis ,  missouri . 
men in black figure prominently in ufology and ufo folklore . 
several alleged encounters with the men in black have been reported by ufo researchers and enthusiasts . 
large numbers of monomers combine to form polymers in a process called polymerization . 
in 1967, it was discovered that mitochondria contained ribosomes . 
the number of mitochondria in a cell can vary widely by organism ,  tissue ,  and cell type . 
the endosymbiotic relationship of mitochondria with their host cells was popularized by lynn margulis . 
there are two hypotheses about the origin of mitochondria: endosymbiotic and autogenous . 
it also showed a second membrane inside the mitochondria that folded up in ridges dividing up the inner chamber and that the size and shape of the mitochondria varied from cell to cell . 
over time ,  the fractionation method was further developed ,  improving the quality of the mitochondria isolated ,  and other elements of cell respiration were determined to occur in the mitochondria . 
