he ordered the construction of a cathedral and became the first prince-bishop of livonia . 
as a consequence of the livonian war in the 16th century ,  the territory of livonia was reduced to the southern half of estonia and the northern half of latvia . 
bishop albert of riga  -lrb-  albert of buxhoeveden  -rrb-  founded the military order of the livonian brothers of the sword  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  in 1202; pope innocent iii sanctioned the establishment in 1204.
following their defeat by lithuania in the battle of saule in 1236, the surviving brothers merged into the teutonic order as an autonomous branch and became known as the livonian order . 
targeted therapy of lung cancer is growing in importance for advanced lung cancer . 
asbestos can cause a variety of lung diseases such as lung cancer . 
squamous-cell carcinoma causes about 30% of lung cancers . 
nearly 9% of lung cancers are large-cell carcinoma . 
smoking accounts for about 85% of lung cancer cases . 
radon was confirmed as a cause of lung cancer in the 1960s . 
about 8% of lung cancer is caused by inherited factors . 
lung cancer ,  also known as lung carcinoma ,  is a malignant lung tumor characterized by uncontrolled cell growth in tissues of the lung . 
lung cancer staging is an assessment of the degree of spread of the cancer from its original source . 
lung cancers are classified according to histological type . 
nearly 40% of lung cancers are adenocarcinoma ,  which usually comes from peripheral lung tissue . 
the first successful pneumonectomy for lung cancer was performed in 1933.
signs and symptoms which may suggest lung cancer include:
tobacco smoking is by far the main contributor to lung cancer . 
in the us ,  the lifetime risk of developing lung cancer is 8% in men and 6% in women . 
a 2014 review found that smoking cannabis doubled the risk of lung cancer . 
it is one of the factors affecting both the prognosis and the potential treatment of lung cancer . 
about 10% of people with lung cancer do not have symptoms at diagnosis; these cancers are incidentally found on routine chest radiography . 
outdoor air pollution is estimated to cause 1–2% of lung cancers . 
treatment for lung cancer depends on the cancer's specific cell type ,  how far it has spread ,  and the person's performance status . 
asbestos can also cause cancer of the pleura ,  called mesothelioma – which actually is different from lung cancer . 
numerous other substances ,  occupations ,  and environmental exposures have been linked to lung cancer . 
lung cancer stem cells are often resistant to conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy . 
lung cancer often appears as a solitary pulmonary nodule on a chest radiograph . 
for every 3–4 million cigarettes smoked ,  one lung cancer death can occur . 
similar to many other cancers ,  lung cancer is initiated by either the activation of oncogenes or the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes . 
as more damage accumulates ,  the risk of cancer increases . 
metastasis of lung cancer requires transition from epithelial to mesenchymal cell type . 
of all people with lung cancer in the us ,  16.8% survive for at least five years after diagnosis . 
this risk affects about 2.4 billion people worldwide ,  and it is believed to result in 1.5% of lung cancer deaths . 
from the 1960s ,  the rates of lung adenocarcinoma started to rise in relation to other kinds of lung cancer ,  partially due to the introduction of filter cigarettes . 
worldwide ,  lung cancer is the most-common cancer among men in terms of both incidence and mortality ,  and among women has the third-highest incidence ,  and is second after breast cancer in mortality . 
it was founded in 1944 as the successor to the united australia party  -lrb-  uap  -rrb-  . 
the liberal party of australia is a major centre-right political party in australia ,  one of the two major parties in australian politics ,  along with the centre-left australian labor party  -lrb-  alp  -rrb-  . 
the liberals' immediate predecessor was the united australia party  -lrb-  uap  -rrb-  . 
 ,  the island had a population of 180.
a small castle was built on the island in 1550.
the holy island of lindisfarne ,  also known simply as holy island ,  is a tidal island off the northeast coast of england ,  which constitutes the civil parish of holy island in northumberland . 
the reference was to saints aidan and cuthbert . 
the island measures from east to west and from north to south ,  and comprises approximately at high tide . 
the island of lindisfarne appears under the old welsh name `` medcaut '' in the 9th century `` historia brittonum '' . 
there is also a supposition that the nearby farne islands are fern like in shape and the name may have come from there . 
the name lindisfarne has an uncertain origin . 
similar gender disparity persists in two other regions ,  north africa  -lrb-  86% adult male literacy ,  70% adult female literacy  -rrb-  and south asia  -lrb-  77% adult male literacy ,  58% adult female literacy  -rrb-  . 
the aramaic alphabet also emerged sometime between 1200 and 1000 bce . 
sub-saharan africa ,  the region with the lowest overall literacy rates ,  also features the widest gender gap: just 52% of adult females are literate ,  and 68% among adult men . 
however ,  the gap between men and women would narrow from 1990 onwards ,  after the increase of male adult literacy rates at 80 per cent  -lrb-  see image  -rrb-  . 
for adults ,  the library might be the only source of a literacy program . 
approximately 120,000 adults in hillsborough county are illiterate or read below the fourth-grade level . 
through one-on-one tutoring ,  the organization works to help adult students reach at least the fifth-grade level . 
techniques such as directed listening and thinking activities can be used to aid children in learning how to read and reading comprehension . 
the consonantal system of the canaanite script inspired alphabetical developments in subsequent systems . 
when the israelites migrated to canaan between 1200 and 1001 bce ,  they also adopted a variation of the canaanite alphabet . 
from this same perspective ,  readers of alphabetic languages must understand the alphabetic principle to master basic reading skills . 
 -lrb-  also see: digital literacy .   -rrb- 
illiteracy persists to a greater extent in other regions: 2013 unesco institute for statistics  -lrb-  uis  -rrb-  data indicates adult literacy rates of only ,  67.55% in south asia and north africa ,  59.76% in sub-saharan africa . 
funding for both youth and adult literacy programs often comes from large international development organizations . 
public health research has thus increasingly concerned itself with the potential for literacy skills to allow women to more successfully access health care systems ,  and thereby facilitate gains in child health . 
according to 2013 uis data ,  the youth literacy rate  -lrb-  individuals ages 15 to 24 -rrb- is 84.03% in south asia and north africa ,  and 70.06% in sub-saharan africa . 
it was then that the new script  -lrb-  `` square hebrew ''  -rrb-  emerged and the older one rapidly died out . 
participating children show marked improvement in their reading and writing skills throughout the semester . 
using developments in behavioral science and technology ,  an interactive system  -lrb-  technology assisted reading acquisition ,  tara  -rrb-  would enable young pre-literate children to accurately perceive and learn properties of written language by simple exposure to the written form . 
the egyptian hieroglyphic writing system was the first notation system to have phonetic values . 
the 1990 world conference on education for all ,  held in jomtien ,  thailand ,  would bring attention to the literacy gender gap and prompt many developing countries to prioritize women's literacy . 
efforts to increase adult literacy often encompass other development priorities as well; for example ,  initiatives in ethiopia ,  morocco ,  and india have combined adult literacy programs with vocational skills trainings in order to encourage enrollment and address the complex needs of women and other marginalized groups who lack economic opportunity . 
according to goody ,  these cuneiform scripts may have influenced the development of the greek alphabet several centuries later . 
the key to literacy is reading development ,  a progression of skills which begins with the ability to understand spoken words and decode written words ,  and which culminates in the deep understanding of text . 
syllabic writing systems  -lrb-  such as japanese kana  -rrb-  use a symbol to represent a single syllable ,  and logographic writing systems  -lrb-  such as chinese  -rrb-  use a symbol to represent a morpheme . 
the earliest written notations in china date back to the shang dynasty in 1200 bce . 
dia ! 
dia ! 
by 14 january 2006, 210,000 local loop connections had been unbundled from bt operation under local loop unbundling . 
on 3 may 2006 the government announced it would require the unbundling of the local loop . 
hong kong is the only advanced economy that has withdrawn the mandatory local loop unbundling policy . 
the commerce commission recommended against local loop unbundling in late 2003 as telecom new zealand  -lrb-  now spark new zealand  -rrb-  offered a market-led solution . 
on 25 may 2006 the minister of communications of south africa dr ivy matsepe-casaburri established the local loop unbundling committee chaired by professor tshilidzi marwala to recommend the appropriate local loop unbundling models . 
this made carphone warehouse the third largest broadband provider and the largest llu operator with more than 150,000 llu customers . 
local loop unbundling  -lrb-  llu or llub  -rrb-  is the regulatory process of allowing multiple telecommunications operators to use connections from the telephone exchange to the customer's premises . 
the implementation of local loop unbundling is a requirement of european union policy on competition in the telecommunications sector and has been introduced ,  at various stages of development ,  in all member states  -lrb-  operators with significant market power shall publish  -lrb-  from 31 december 2000, and keep updated  -rrb-  a postreference offer for unbundled access to their local loops and related facilities . 
pursuant to the telecommunications act of 1996, the federal communications commission  -lrb-  fcc  -rrb-  requires that ilecs lease local loops to competitors  -lrb-  clecs  -rrb-  . 
llu has not been implemented in indian cities yet . 
leda and the swan is a story and subject in art from greek mythology in which the god zeus ,  in the form of a swan ,  seduces the mortal woman leda . 
cy twombly executed an abstract version of `` leda and the swan '' in 1962.
 ''leda and the swan '' is a sonnet by william butler yeats first published in the `` dial '' in 1923.
there is a reference to leda and the swan in dorothea benton frank's book `` all summer long '' published in 2016.
bristol museum and art gallery currently exhibits karl weschke's `` leda and the swan '' ,  painted in 1986.
in april 2012 an art gallery in london ,  england ,  was instructed by the police to remove a modern exhibit of leda and the swan . 
zeus ,  as the swan ,  only appears metaphorically . 
the winnipeg art gallery in canada has ,  in its permanent collection ,  a ceramic `` leda and the swan '' by japanese-born american artist akio takamori . 
like many artists ,  he imagines the beak penetrating leda's vagina . 
in the latter novel ,  the myth is brought to life in the form of a performance in which a frightened young girl is forced to act as leda in accompaniment with a large mechanical swan . 
 ,  it had over 46,000 local clubs and more than 1.7 million members  -lrb-  lions & leo  -rrb-  in 190 countries around the world . 
a claim of laches requires the following components: -lrb-  1 -rrb- a delay in bringing the action ,   -lrb-  2 -rrb- a delay that is unreasonable and  -lrb-  3 -rrb- that prejudices the defendant . 
even if the court denies equitable relief to a plaintiff because of laches ,  the plaintiff may still have a claim for legal relief if the statute of limitations has not run out . 
the courts have recognized the following causes of delay as reasonable:
the period of delay begins when the plaintiff knew ,  or reasonably ought to have known ,  that the cause of action existed; the period of delay ends only when the legal action is formally filed . 
unreasonable delay must prejudice the defendant . 
by contrast ,  it is `` not '' reasonable to delay a lawsuit to `` capitalize on the value of the infringer's labor '' . 
abbott's opinions differed from those of beecher . 
lyman abbott died on october 22, 1922 and was buried in the new windsor cemetery in cornwall-on-hudson ,  new york . 
lyman j .  abbott  -lrb-  december 18, 1835 – october 22, 1922 -rrb- was an american congregationalist theologian ,  editor ,  and author . 
lyman j .  abbott was born at roxbury ,  massachusetts on december 18, 1835, the son of the prolific author ,  educator and historian jacob abbott . 
roosevelt praised abbott for being “one of those men whose work and life give strength to all who believe in this country , ” and the new york herald recalled abbott’s ability to “convey his valuable opinions to the entire intellectual public . ” dr .  henry sloane coffin noted at a later memorial service ,  `` measured by the number of people he reached ,  dr .  abbott was unquestionably the greatest teacher of religion of this generation . ”
the utility of leap seconds is disputed . 
cloudflare was affected by the 2016 leap second . 
not all clocks implement leap seconds in the same manner as utc . 
other experimental schemes smear time in the vicinity of a leap second . 
after 1972, both clocks have been ticking in si seconds ,  so the difference between their readouts at any time is 10 seconds plus the total number of leap seconds that have been applied to utc  -lrb-  37 seconds   -rrb-  . 
instead of inserting a leap second at the end of the day ,  google servers implement a `` leap smear '' ,  extending seconds slightly over a time window prior to the leap second . 
the ntp packet includes a leap second flag ,  which informs the user that a leap second is imminent . 
since the introduction of leap seconds ,  the mean solar day has outpaced utc only for very brief periods ,  and has not triggered a negative leap second . 
unlike leap days ,  utc leap seconds occur simultaneously worldwide; for example ,  the leap second on december 31, 2005 23:59:60 utc was december 31, 2005 18:59:60  -lrb-  6:59:60 p . m .   -rrb-  in u . s .  eastern standard time and january 1, 2006 08:59:60  -lrb-  a . m .   -rrb-  in japan standard time . 
this left the receiver's time off by a second in the interim . 
the leap second compensates for this drift ,  by occasionally scheduling a utc day with or  -lrb-  in principle  -rrb-  si seconds . 
when it occurs ,  a positive leap second is inserted between second 23:59:59 of a chosen utc calendar date and second 00:00:00 of the following date . 
since that date ,  27 leap seconds have been inserted ,  the most recent on december 31, 2016 at 23:59:60 utc ,  so in 2018, utc lags behind tai by an offset of 37 seconds . 
older trimble gps receivers had a software flaw that would insert a leap second immediately after the gps constellation started broadcasting the next leap second insertion time  -lrb-  some months in advance of the actual leap second  -rrb-  ,  rather than waiting for the next leap second to happen . 
the effect of leap seconds on the commercial sector has been described as `` a nightmare '' . 
a leap second is a one-second adjustment that is occasionally applied to civil time coordinated universal time  -lrb-  utc  -rrb-  to keep it close to the mean solar time at greenwich ,  in spite of the earth's rotation slowdown and irregularities . 
therefore ,  time standards that change the date after precisely si seconds ,  such as the international atomic time  -lrb-  tai  -rrb-  ,  will get increasingly ahead of time standards tied to the mean solar day ,  such as greenwich mean time  -lrb-  gmt  -rrb-  . 
luca pacioli was born between 1446 and 1448 in the tuscan town of sansepolcro where he received an abbaco education . 
thus ,  he could be referred to as fra  -lrb-  'friar'  -rrb-  luca . 
the lower mainland is among the most diverse regions in canada . 
flooding can cover much of the lower mainland . 
the population of the lower mainland was up 9.2 percent from the 2006 census . 
as of the 2016 census ,  the population of the lower mainland totals 2,759,385:
in the spring of 2007, the lower mainland was on high alert for flooding . 
islands contained within rivers in the region are considered to be part of the lower mainland . 
there are two regional districts within the region ,  metro vancouver and the fraser valley . 
the lower mainland is considered to have a high vulnerability to flood risk . 
it also includes many unincorporated areas in the fraser valley and along the west side of the fraser canyon  -lrb-  the fraser canyon is not in the lower mainland  -rrb-  . 
they seem to have been well known even at the latter end of the 4th century ad . 
the railway was closed on 31 may 2003.
a museum within the former railway was opened in september 2017.
the post office railway ,  known as mail rail since 1987, is a narrow gauge ,  driverless underground railway in london that was built by the post office with assistance from the underground electric railways company of london ,  to move mail between sorting offices . 
the disused section was used as a store tunnel; some parts of it still have the track in place . 
the main line has a single diameter tube with two tracks . 
lulach's son máel snechtai was mormaer of moray ,  while óengus of moray was the son of lulach's daughter . 
lulach was the son of gruoch of scotland ,  from her first marriage to gille coemgáin ,  mormaer of moray ,  and thus the stepson of macbeth  -lrb-  mac bethad mac findlaích  -rrb-  . 
most law enforcement is conducted by some type of law enforcement agency ,  with the most typical agency fulfilling this role being the police . 
law enforcement agencies tend to be limited to operating within a specified jurisdiction . 
libido  -lrb-  ; colloquial: sex drive  -rrb-  is a person's overall sexual drive or desire for sexual activity . 
anemia is a cause of lack of libido in women due to the loss of iron during the period . 
however ,  men can also experience a decrease in their libido as they age . 
however ,  the levels of testosterone increase at menopause and this may be why some women may experience a contrary effect of an increased libido . 
testosterone is one of the hormones controlling libido in human beings . 
smoking ,  alcohol abuse ,  and the use of certain drugs can also lead to a decreased libido . 
freud viewed libido as passing through a series of developmental stages within the individual . 
a 2001 review found that on average ,  men have a higher desire for sex than women . 
some people purposefully attempt to decrease their libido through the usage of anaphrodisiacs . 
the municipality larissa has an area of  ,  the municipal unit larissa has an area of  ,  and the community larissa has an area of  . 
larissa lies on the river pineios . 
larissa receives of rain per year . 
sometimes a miscommunication will occur between the lead and follow . 
in many partner dances ,  the lead's steps differ from the follow's . 
for partner dancers ,  using weight transfers is a way for a lead to communicate a 'lead' for a dance step to a follow . 
if the lead wants to bring the follow close ,  the lead is to apply tension and draw the hand in and down toward the lead's own hip; to send the follow away ,  the lead would guide the hand toward the follow and add compression ,  signaling the move away . 
the lead in the dance will best support the follow by giving clear direction . 
for the lead and follow to interact with each other ,  communication needs to occur between the dance couple . 
the use of the forms of a lexeme is governed by rules of grammar; in the case of english verbs such as run ,  these include subject-verb agreement and compound tense rules ,  which determine which form of a verb can be used in a given sentence . 
the lord's prayer  -lrb-  also called the our father or pater noster  -rrb-  is a venerated christian prayer which ,  according to the new testament ,  jesus taught as the way to pray: two versions of this prayer are recorded in the gospels: a longer form within the sermon on the mount in the gospel of matthew ,  and a shorter form in the gospel of luke when `` one of his disciples said to him ,  'lord ,  teach us to pray ,  as john taught his disciples . ' ''
some christians ,  particularly protestants ,  conclude the prayer with a doxology ,  a later addendum appearing in some manuscripts of matthew . 
no source code of the program has yet been released . 
the love parade 2007 was planned for 7 july 2007 in berlin . 
finally in 2001, the courts ruled that the love parade had to be held as commercial event . 
the parade was held on the berlin kurfürstendamm  -lrb-  avenue  -rrb-  until 1996.
events scheduled for 2004 and 2005 in berlin and for 2009 in bochum were cancelled . 
the first love parade in caracas was held in june 2007 and gathered over 25,000 people . 
in 2008, the festival took place in dortmund on 19 july on the bundesstraße 1 under the motto `` highway of love '' . 
the love parade was initially held as a political demonstration to save costs; however it was organized by two companies set up just for the love parade . 
the love parade  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a popular electronic dance music festival and technoparade that originated in 1989 in west berlin ,  germany . 
the lost generation was the generation that came of age during world war i . 
hemingway believed the characters in `` the sun also rises '' may have been `` battered '' but were not lost . 
the term is also used in a broader context for the generation of young people who came of age during and shortly after world war i . 
hemingway thus credits the phrase to stein ,  who was then his mentor and patron . 
in his memoir `` a moveable feast ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- ,  published after hemingway's and stein's deaths ,  hemingway writes that stein heard the phrase from a french garage owner who serviced stein's car . 
in the mid-19th century ,  nationalism ,  socialism ,  democracy and anti-clericalism became features of the french left . 
those who opposed the war ,  such as vladimir lenin and rosa luxemburg ,  saw themselves as further to the left . 
in politics ,  the term `` left '' derives from the french revolution ,  as the anti-monarchist montagnard and jacobin deputies from the third estate generally sat to the left of the presiding member's chair in parliament ,  a habit which began in the french estates general of 1789.
the an/bqq-5 system was replaced by the an/bqq-10 system . 
the mk 1 ccs was replaced by the mk 2.
the mk 117 fcs ,  the first `` all digital '' fire control system replaced the mk 113.
the first 688 sub to be built with the mk 117 was  . 
the mk 113 runs on a uyk-7 computer . 
it incorporated the gyro static navigator into the system in replacement of the dmins of the earlier 688 class . 
there are 5 versions of the an/bqq-5 system ,  sequentially identified by letters a-e . 
the troops returned to rome . 
tarquin returned to camp . 
thomas heywood's play `` the rape of lucretia '' dates from 1607.
one of the first two consuls of the roman republic ,  lucius tarquinius collatinus was lucretia's husband . 
in the alternative version ,  she did not go to rome ,  but sent for her father and her husband asking them to bring one friend each . 
the monarchy was at an end ,  even while lucretia was still displayed in the forum . 
according to roman tradition ,  lucretia  -lrb-    -rrb-  or lucrece  -lrb-  ; died   -rrb-  was a noblewoman in ancient rome whose rape by sextus tarquinius  -lrb-  tarquin  -rrb-  ,  an etruscan king's son ,  was the cause of a rebellion that overthrew the roman monarchy and led to the transition of roman government from a kingdom to a republic . 
lucius tarquinius superbus ,  last king of rome ,  being engaged in the siege of ardea ,  sent his son ,  tarquin ,  on a military errand to collatia . 
the story of lucretia was a popular moral tale in the later middle ages . 
later ,  st .  augustine made use of the figure of lucretia in `` the city of god ''  -lrb-  published 426ad  -rrb-  to defend the honour of christian women who had been raped in the sack of rome and had not committed suicide . 
collatinus' wife ,  lucretia ,  daughter of spurius lucretius ,  prefect of rome ,  `` a man of distinction , ``  made sure that the king's son was treated as became his rank ,  although her husband was away at the siege . 
it began:
there are no contemporary sources; information regarding lucretia ,  her rape and suicide ,  and the consequence of this being the start of the roman republic ,  come from the later accounts of roman historian livy and greco-roman historian dionysius of halicarnassus . 
the lightweight directory access protocol  -lrb-  ldap   -rrb-  is an open ,  vendor-neutral ,  industry standard application protocol for accessing and maintaining distributed directory information services over an internet protocol  -lrb-  ip  -rrb-  network . 
a client starts an ldap session by connecting to an ldap server ,  called a directory system agent  -lrb-  dsa  -rrb-  ,  by default on tcp and udp port 389, or on port 636 for ldaps  -lrb-  ldap over ssl ,  see below  -rrb-  . 
ldap is based on a simpler subset of the standards contained within the x . 500 standard . 
in the early engineering stages of ldap ,  it was known as `` lightweight directory browsing protocol '' ,  or `` ldbp '' . 
in english ,  `` latino '' is used interchangeably with `` latin american '' . 
some authorities of american english maintain a distinction between the terms `` hispanic '' and `` latino '':
in latin america ,  the term `` latino '' is not a common endonym and as a demonym is restricted to the latin american-descended population of the united states . 
while brazilian americans are not included with hispanics and latinos in the government's census population reports ,  any brazilian american can report as being hispanic or latino since hispanic or latino origin is ,  like race or ethnicity ,  a matter of self-identification . 
when and why the latino identity came about is a more involved story . 
 ''latino '' as a category used in the united states may be understood as a shorthand for the spanish word `` latinoamericano ''  -lrb-  latin american in english  -rrb-  or the portuguese phrase `` latino americano '' ,  thus excluding speakers of spanish or portuguese from europe . 
it may be subdivided on linguistic grounds into hispanic america ,  portuguese america and french america . 
however ,  in france the term latin america was used with the opposite intention . 
the term `` latin america '' was first used in 1856 in a conference by the chilean politician francisco bilbao in paris . 
further investigations of the concept of latin america are by michel gobat in the `` american historical review '' ,  the studies of leslie bethell ,  and the monograph by mauricio tenorio-trillo ,  `` latin america: the allure and power of an idea ''  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- . 
lynx is also used to test web sites' performance . 
since lynx will take keystrokes from a text file ,  it is still very useful for automated data entry ,  web page navigation ,  and web scraping ,  thus lynx is used in some web crawlers . 
lynx is a customizable text-based web browser for use on cursor-addressable character cell terminals . 
online services that provide lynx's view of a given web page are available . 
because lynx does not support graphics ,  web bugs that track user information are not fetched; therefore ,  web pages can be read without the privacy concerns of graphic web browsers . 
unlike most web browsers ,  lynx does not support javascript or adobe flash ,  which some websites require to work correctly . 
l'hôpital's rule states that for functions and which are differentiable on an open interval except possibly at a point contained in  ,  if formula_1 formula_2 for all in with  ,  and formula_3 exists ,  then
if either or then although we have written `` x '' → `` c '' throughout ,  the limits may also be one-sided limits  -lrb-  `` x '' → `` c '' or `` x '' → `` c ''  -rrb-  ,  when is a finite endpoint of  . 
although the contribution of the rule is often attributed to l'hôpital ,  the theorem was first introduced to l'hôpital in 1694 by the swiss mathematician johann bernoulli . 
also which words to keep in and which not to include in a dictionary . 
the word `` lexicology '' derives from the greek λεξικόν `` lexicon '' ,  neut . 
lexicology is the part of linguistics that studies words . 
phraseology also investigates idioms . 
in this way ,  word roots have been found that can be traced all the way back to the origin of ,  for instance ,  the proto indo-european language . 
an allied science to lexicology is lexicography ,  which also studies words ,  but primarily in relation with dictionaries – it is concerned with the inclusion of words in dictionaries and from that perspective with the whole lexicon . 
questions that lexicographers are concerned with are for example the difficulties in defining what simple words such as 'the' mean ,  and how compound or complex words ,  or words with many meanings can be clearly explained . 
lake abitibi  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a lake in northeastern ontario and western quebec ,  canada . 
portions of lake abitibi's western shores and a section of the abitibi river are part of the abitibi-de-troyes provincial park . 
it was named the new state capital of michigan in 1847, ten years after michigan became a state . 
lansing is the capital of the u . s .  state of michigan . 
lansing is the centerpiece of a region of michigan known as mid-michigan or central michigan . 
being the state capital ,  many state government workers reside in the area . 
the grand river ,  the largest river in michigan ,  flows through downtown lansing ,  and the red cedar river ,  a tributary of the grand ,  flows through the campus of michigan state university to its confluence with the grand in lansing . 
it is the site of the michigan state capitol ,  the state supreme court ,  the court of appeals ,  a federal court ,  the library of michigan and historical center ,  and headquarters of four national insurance companies . 
michigan state university ,  thomas m .  cooley law school ,  and lansing community college are significant employers in the region . 
this figure includes two 425 agreements with alaiedon township and meridian township ,  and the four 425 agreements with delta township since 2000.
nearby michigan state university provides a source of volunteers for many of these programs . 
there was also concern with detroit's strong influence over michigan politics ,  being the state's largest city as well as the capital city . 
lansing is located in the south-central part of the lower peninsula of michigan ,  where the grand river meets the red cedar river . 
there would be no roads to this area for decades to come . 
at the state level ,  most of lansing is located in the 23rd district of the michigan senate ,  which has been represented by democratic state senator curtis hertel jr .  since 2015.
the thomas m .  cooley law school is the largest law school in the nation and is located in downtown lansing . 
the city's downtown is dominated by state government buildings ,  especially the state capitol; but downtown has also experienced recent growth in new restaurants ,  retail stores and residential developments . 
the stadium district was redeveloped using a grant from the michigan state housing development authority through the cool cities initiative . 
those who stayed quickly renamed the area `` lansing township '' in honor of their home village in new york . 
other major retail centers include eastwood towne center and frandor shopping center . 
other institutions of higher education include western michigan university  -lrb-  branch campus in delta township  -rrb-  ,  davenport university in downtown lansing ,  central michigan university  -lrb-  branch campus  -rrb-  ,  and great lakes christian college  -lrb-  campus in delta township  -rrb-  . 
under michigan law ,  425 agreements are only temporary land sharing agreements ,  and do not count as official annexations . 
the city also controls three non-contiguous tracts of land through 425 agreements  -lrb-  conditional land transfer agreements  -rrb-  with meridian charter township ,  delta charter township ,  and alaiedon township in ingham county to the southeast . 
the lansing area has two major malls: lansing mall and meridian mall . 
the city lies in the 67th ,  68th ,  71st ,  and 93rd districts of the michigan state house of representatives ,  represented by state representatives tom cochran  -lrb-  d-67 -rrb- ,  sarah anthony  -lrb-  d-68 -rrb- ,  tom barrett  -lrb-  r-71 -rrb- ,  and tom leonard  -lrb-  r-93 -rrb- . 
this divides leukemias into lymphoblastic or `` lymphocytic leukemias '' and myeloid or `` myelogenous leukemias '':
leukemia ,  also spelled leukaemia ,  is a group of cancers that usually begin in the bone marrow and result in high numbers of abnormal white blood cells . 
in most systems of measurement ,  the unit of length is a base unit ,  from which other units are derived . 
one of his responsa concerns the use of wine in the jewish community during the prohibition era . 
ginzberg began teaching talmud at the jewish theological seminary from its reorganization in 1902 until his death in 1953.
see jewish folklore and aggadah . 
many of ginzberg's orthodox jewish peers had deep reservations about his choice to work at jts . 
instead of just studying halakha ,  louis ginzberg wrote responsa ,  formal responses to questions of jewish law . 
the second child was a daughter ,  sophie ginzberg gould  -lrb-  1914-1985 -rrb- . 
many of his halakhic responsa are collected in `` the responsa of professor louis ginzberg , ``  ed . 
in 1913, louis marshall requested that ginzberg refute a blood libel charge in kiev based on jewish sources . 
left-arm unorthodox spin ,  also known as slow left arm chinaman ,  is a type of left arm wrist leg spin bowling in the sport of cricket . 
the ball turns away from the right-handed batsman ,  as if the bowler were an orthodox left-arm spinner . 
pope boniface viii proclaimed the canonization of louis in 1297; he is the only french king to be declared a saint . 
she continued to have a strong influence on the king until her death in 1252.
the cathedral saint-louis in versailles; the basilica of st .  louis ,  king of france completed in 1834 and the cathedral basilica of st .  louis completed in 1914, both in st .  louis ,  missouri; and the st .  louis cathedral ,  new orleans were also named for the king . 
louis ix  -lrb-  25 april 1214 – 25 august 1270 -rrb- ,  commonly known as saint louis ,  was king of france ,  the ninth from the house of capet ,  and is a canonized catholic and anglican saint . 
thailand: saint louis hospital ,  and saint louis church in sathon ,  bangkok were named after st . louis ,  the patron saint of the founder . 
also the cathedral of st louis in plovdiv ,  bulgaria ,  the church of st louis in moscow ,  russia ,  and rue saint louis of pondicherry . 
the name `` saint louis '' also exists as the `` saint louis neighbourhood '' and soi saint louis 1, 2 and 3 alley  -lrb-  soi sathon 11, 13 and 15, officially  -rrb-  ,  which are the area within the hospital . 
port-louis ,  the capital city of mauritius ,  as well as its cathedral are also named after st .  louis ,  who is the patron saint of the island . 
he is the only canonized king of france ,  and there are consequently many places named after him . 
he is honoured as co-patron of the third order of st .  francis ,  which claims him as a member of the order . 
a similar order ,  the sisters of st louis ,  was founded in juilly in 1842.
he was succeeded by his son ,  philip iii . 
much of what is known of louis's life comes from jean de joinville's famous `` life of saint louis '' . 
the apotheosis of st .  louis is an equestrian statue of the saint ,  by charles henry niehaus ,  that stands in front of the saint louis art museum in forest park . 
in 1230 the king forbade all forms of usury ,  defined at the time as any taking of interest . 
two other important biographies were written by the king's confessor ,  geoffrey of beaulieu ,  and his chaplain ,  william of chartres . 
st .  louis installed a house of the trinitarian order in his château of fontainebleau . 
linear b is a syllabic script that was used for writing mycenaean greek ,  the earliest attested form of greek . 
linear b consists of around 87 syllabic signs and over 100 ideographic signs . 
many of the signs are identical or similar to those in linear a; however ,  linear a encodes an as-yet unknown language ,  and it is uncertain whether similar signs had the same phonetic values . 
linear b has roughly 200 signs ,  divided into syllabic signs with phonetic values and ideograms with semantic values . 
in addition to the grid ,  the first edition of `` documents in mycenaean greek '' contained a number of other signs termed `` homophones '' because they appeared at that time to resemble the sounds of other syllables and were transcribed accordingly: `` pa '' and `` pa '' were presumed homophonous to `` pa '' . 
linear b does not consistently distinguish between voiced and unvoiced stop consonants  -lrb-  except in the dental series  -rrb-  and between aspirated and unaspirated stops even when these distinctions are phonemic in mycenaean greek . 
the `` q ''-series is used for monosyllables beginning with a class of consonants that disappeared from classical greek by regular phonetic change: the labialized velar consonants  -lrb-  see under mycenaean greek  -rrb-  . 
the application of linear b appears to have been confined to administrative contexts . 
it caused escoffier to note when he was asked to write the preface that he could `` see with my own eyes , ``  and `` montagné cannot hide from me the fact that he has used `` le guide '' as a basis for his new book ,  and certainly used numerous recipes . `` 
the first edition  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- was edited by prosper montagné ,  with prefaces by georges auguste escoffier and philéas gilbert . 
in 1648, anne and mazarin attempted to tax members of the ' . 
the queen also gave a partial catholic orientation to french foreign policy . 
during his childhood ,  he was taken care of by the governesses françoise de lansac and marie-catherine de senecey . 
just as the first '  -lrb-  the ' of 1648–1649 -rrb- ended ,  a second one  -lrb-  the ' of 1650–1653 -rrb- began . 
the ``  claimed to act on louis' behalf ,  and in his real interest against his mother and mazarin . 
unfortunately for anne ,  her partial victory depended on condé ,  who wanted to control the queen and destroy mazarin's influence . 
from that time until his death ,  mazarin was in charge of foreign and financial policy without the daily supervision of anne ,  who was no longer regent . 
by these means he became one of the most powerful french monarchs and consolidated a system of absolute monarchical rule in france that endured until the french revolution . 
louis xiv became friends with villeroy's young children ,  particularly françois de villeroy ,  and divided his time between the palais-royal and the nearby hotel de villeroy . 
louis began his personal rule of france in 1661, after the death of his chief minister ,  the italian cardinal mazarin . 
during this period ,  louis fell in love with mazarin's niece marie mancini ,  but anne and mazarin ended the king's infatuation by sending mancini away from court to be married in italy . 
she left the direction of the daily administration of policy to cardinal mazarin . 
it was headed by the highest-ranking french nobles ,  among them louis' uncle gaston ,  duke of orléans and first cousin anne marie louise d'orléans ,  duchess of montpensier ,  known as '; princes of the blood such as condé ,  his brother armand de bourbon ,  prince of conti ,  and their sister the duchess of longueville; dukes of legitimised royal descent ,  such as henri ,  duke of longueville ,  and françois ,  duke of beaufort; so-called `` foreign princes '' such as frédéric maurice ,  duke of bouillon ,  his brother marshal turenne ,  and marie de rohan ,  duchess of chevreuse; and scions of france's oldest families ,  such as françois de la rochefoucauld . 
queen anne had a very close relationship with the cardinal ,  and many observers believed that mazarin became louis xiv's stepfather by a secret marriage to queen anne . 
during louis' reign ,  france was the leading european power ,  and it fought three major wars: the franco-dutch war ,  the war of the league of augsburg ,  and the war of the spanish succession . 
41 '' k .  551.
he is best known for cataloguing the works of mozart and originating the 'k-numbers' by which they are known  -lrb-  `` k '' for `` köchel ''  -rrb-  . 
the prototype leo i was modelled closely on the cambridge edsac . 
he was succeeded as archbishop by mellitus ,  the bishop of london . 
laurence was revered as a saint after his death in 619.
all efforts to extend the church beyond kent encountered difficulties due to the attitude of king rædwald of east anglia ,  who had become the leading king in the south after æthelberht's death . 
bede makes a point of comparing augustine's action in consecrating laurence to saint peter's action of consecrating clement as bishop of rome during peter's lifetime ,  which the theologian j .  robert wright believes may be bede's way of criticising the practices of the church in his day . 
but `` leaf by niggle '' can also be interpreted as an illustration of tolkien's religious philosophy of creation and sub-creation . 
 ''leaf by niggle '' is often seen as an allegory of tolkien's own creative process ,  and ,  to an extent ,  of his own life . 
 ''leaf by niggle '' is a short story written by j .  r .  r .  tolkien in 1938–39 and first published in the `` dublin review '' in january 1945.
the sub-creation of works that echo the true creations of god is one way that mortals honour god . 
tolkien himself might have disagreed with an allegorical interpretation . 
an autobiographical interpretation places tolkien himself as niggle – in mundane matters as well as spiritual ones . 
the leet lexicon includes spellings of the word as `` 1337 '' or `` l33t '' . 
leet  -lrb-  or `` 1337 ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as eleet or leetspeak ,  is a system of modified spellings used primarily on the internet . 
text rendered in leet is often characterized by distinctive ,  recurring forms . 
clark shortly after revealed to her that he was superman . 
in `` earth 2 '' ,  lois lane is married to superman . 
she views clark as a friend and is unaware that he is superman . 
val-zod eventually becomes the new superman of earth 2.
dc comics had planned on lois and clark being married in 1993's `` superman vol . 
superman and many other heroes of earth 2 perished in the war . 
the publisher once again re-established the post- ''crisis '' superman as the principal superman in dc comics ,  along with his wife ,  lois lane ,  and their son ,  jonathan samuel kent . 
lois is the main character in the `` superman: lois lane '' #1 one-shot . 
lois had a series featured in `` the superman family ''  -lrb-  an anthology title started in the mid-1970s after the cancellation of `` superman's girl friend ,  lois lane '' and `` superman's pal ,  jimmy olsen ''  -rrb-  from 1974 to 1982.
while lois suspicious of superman's secret identity as early as `` superman '' #7  -lrb-  1940 -rrb- ,  her suspicions grew during the early silver age ,  with many stories in her series focusing on her attempts to prove superman and clark kent were one and the same . 
after clark kent joined the paper and superman debuted around the same time ,  lois found herself attracted to superman but displeased with her new journalistic competition in the form of kent . 
she engaged in more adventures without superman being involved and was much less interested in discovering superman's secret identity . 
lois gained her first series of stories  -lrb-  without superman  -rrb-  starting with `` superman '' #28  -lrb-  may–june 1944 -rrb- ,  `` lois lane ,  girl reporter '' ,  running in the `` superman '' comic book for a number of years ,  had lois defeating bad guys and getting front-page stories on her own ,  without any help from superman . 
lois' main interests in various late 1950s and 1960s stories became vying with her rival lana lang for superman's affections ,  attempting to prove clark kent and superman were one and the same or otherwise getting superman into marriage . 
jerry siegel and joe shuster first conceived lois lane in 1934, when they were still developing superman . 
lois lane made her debut in ``  ''action comics '' #1 ''  -lrb-  june 1938 -rrb- the first published superman story ,  and was one of the first female comic book characters introduced in the superhero comics . 
starting early as the 1940s ,  lois began to suspect that clark kent was superman ,  and started to make various attempts at uncovering his secret identity ,  all of which backfired because of superman's efforts . 
during the honeymoon ,  lois discovered that clark was indeed superman ,  and after recruiting the aid of the wizard ,  restored clark's memory . 
years later ,  lois and clark acted as parental figures for power girl ,  superman's cousin ,  after she arrived on earth . 
lois awakens from her coma but she does not seem to remember superman's identity . 
the now-married lois and clark appeared in a series of stories in `` the superman family '' #195 – #199 and #201 – #222 titled `` mr and mrs superman '' ,  which presented their further adventures early in their marriage . 
stories showed superman using various means to protect his secret identity from lois ,  including his superman robots or batman disguising himself as clark/superman . 
this sometimes ill-tempered rivalry remained the case until `` the adventures of superman '' #460–463 and `` action comics '' #650.
 ''lois lane '' became one of dc comics most popular titles ,  the third best-selling comic in 1962 and 1965.
after superman's death ,  lois gave kara the symbol from his uniform ,  which was then worn by kara in remembrance . 
in the miniseries `` convergence '' ,  which featured many post- ''crisis '' dc universe characters ,  including a married superman and his pregnant wife lois lane ,  deal with the impending birth of their child ,  as superman is called to protect the city . 
the linker also takes care of arranging the objects in a program's address space . 
for most compilers ,  each object file is the result of compiling one input source code file . 
when a program comprises multiple object files ,  the linker combines these files into a unified executable program ,  resolving the symbols as it goes along . 
in computing ,  a linker or link editor is a computer utility program that takes one or more object files generated by a compiler and combines them into a single executable file ,  library file ,  or another 'object' file . 
the legendre symbol is a function of `` a '' and `` p '' defined as
let `` p '' be an odd prime number . 
unaware of the attack ,  `` u-507 '' ,  `` u-506 '' ,  and `` cappellini '' continued to pick up survivors . 
 ''u-507 '' and `` u-506 '' received confirmation from headquarters of the attack on `` u-156 '' and were asked for the number of survivors rescued . 
 ''u-156 '' remained on the surface at the scene for the next two and a half days . 
the crew of the liberator were later awarded medals for the alleged sinking of `` u-156 '' ,  when they had in fact only sunk two lifeboats . 
the french cruiser picked up 52 survivors ,  all british ,  while still from the rendezvous point . 
the order given by richardson has been called a war crime . 
the `` laconia '' incident had far-reaching consequences . 
that same day ,  the british at freetown sent an ambiguous message to ascension informing them that three french ships from dakar were en route . 
the `` laconia '' incident was a series of events surrounding the sinking of a british troopship in the atlantic ocean on during world war ii ,  and an attack on the subsequent rescue attempts . 
he later claimed:
the b-24 killed dozens of `` laconia ''s survivors with bombs and strafing attacks ,  forcing `` u-156 '' to cast their remaining survivors into the sea and crash dive to avoid being destroyed . 
admiral erich raeder ordered dönitz to disengage the eisbär boats ,  which included hartenstein's `` u-156, '' and send them to cape town as per the original plan . 
a british officer also messaged the aircraft: `` raf officer speaking from german submarine ,  `` laconia '' survivors on board ,  soldiers ,  civilians ,  women ,  children . `` 
dönitz pointed out that the order itself was a direct result of this callousness and the attack on a rescue operation by us aircraft . 
 ''u-156 '' was soon crammed above and below decks with nearly 200 survivors ,  including five women ,  and had another 200 in tow aboard four lifeboats . 
theremin was interested in a role for the theremin in dance music . 
theremin abruptly returned to the soviet union in 1938.
theremin worked at the moscow conservatory of music for 10 years where he taught ,  and built theremins ,  electronic cellos and some terpsitones  -lrb-  another invention of theremin  -rrb-  . 
two years later ,  theremin conducted the first-ever electronic orchestra ,  featuring the theremin and other electronic instruments including a `` fingerboard '' theremin which resembled a cello in use  -lrb-  theremin was a cellist  -rrb-  . 
theremin set up a laboratory in new york in the 1930s ,  where he further refined the theremin and experimented with other inventions and new electronic musical instruments . 
at this time ,  theremin worked closely with fellow soviet émigré and theremin virtuoso clara rockmore  -lrb-  née reisenberg  -rrb-  . 
the day after ioffe's invitation ,  theremin started at the institute . 
after his `` release '' from the `` sharashka '' in 1947, theremin volunteered to remain working with the kgb until 1966.
further electronic music projects were banned ,  and theremin was summarily dismissed . 
theremin invented another listening device called the thing . 
however ,  during these investigations theremin was called up for world war i military service . 
in 1947, theremin was awarded the stalin prize for inventing this advance in soviet espionage technology . 
linear prediction is a mathematical operation where future values of a discrete-time signal are estimated as a linear function of previous samples . 
as `` leto phytia '' she was a mother-deity . 
leto was intensely worshipped in lycia ,  anatolia . 
leto's introduction into lycia was met with resistance . 
the name of leto's mother ,  `` phoebe ''  -lrb-   `` pure ,  bright ''  -rrb-  ,  is identical to the epithet of her son apollo ,   ,  throughout homer . 
leto was also worshipped in crete ,  whether one of `` certain cretan goddesses ,  or greek goddesses in their cretan form ,  influenced by the minoan goddess '' . 
another version ,  in the homeric hymn to delian apollo and in an orphic hymn ,  states that artemis was born before apollo ,  on the island of ortygia ,  and that she helped leto cross the sea to delos the next day to give birth there to apollo . 
hera banned leto from giving birth on `` terra firma '' ,  the mainland ,  any island at sea ,  or any place under the sun . 
there ,  herodotus was given to understand ,  the goddess whom greeks recognised as leto was worshipped in the form of wadjet ,  the cobra-headed goddess of lower egypt . 
niobe ,  a queen of thebes and wife of amphion ,  boasted of her superiority to leto because she had fourteen children  -lrb-  niobids  -rrb-  ,  seven sons and seven daughters ,  while leto had only two . 
then aguilar could interpret from mayan to spanish until marina learned spanish and could be the sole interpreter . 
it is not known whether marina was chosen because of a phonetic resemblance to her actual name ,  or chosen randomly from among common spanish names of the time . 
had la malinche not been part of the conquest of mexico for her linguistic gift ,  communication between the spanish and the indigenous would have been much harder . 
la malinche  -lrb-  ; c .  1496 or c .  1501 – c .  1529 -rrb- ,  known also as malinalli  ,  malintzin or doña marina  ,  was a nahua woman from the mexican gulf coast ,  who played a key role in the spanish conquest of the aztec empire ,  acting as an interpreter ,  advisor ,  and intermediary for the spanish conquistador ,  hernán cortés . 
la malinche  -lrb-  also known as malinalli ,  malintzin or doña marina  -rrb-  was born sometime between 1496 and 1501, in the region between the aztec-ruled valley of mexico and the maya states of the yucatán peninsula . 
the xicalango gave the child to the tabascans . before she was 20, she was renamed marina by spanish newcomers and called malintzin by other indigenous people . 
the historical figure of marina has been intermixed with aztec legends  -lrb-  such as `` la llorona '' ,  a ghost woman who weeps for her lost children  -rrb-  . 
they respected and trusted her and portrayed her in this light generations after the spanish conquest . 
in contrast with earlier parts of díaz del castillo's account ,  after marina's diplomacy began assisting cortés ,  the spanish were forced into combat on one more occasion . 
in 27 bc ,  the province was created . 
the etymology of the name of the lusitani  -lrb-  who gave the roman province their name  -rrb-  remains unclear . 
with lusitania  -lrb-  and asturia and gallaecia  -rrb-  ,  rome had completed the conquest of the iberian peninsula ,  which was then divided by augustus  -lrb-  25–20 bc or 16-13 bc  -rrb-  into the eastern and northern hispania tarraconensis ,  the southwestern `` hispania baetica '' and the western `` provincia lusitana '' . 
the lusitani are mentioned for the first time in livy  -lrb-  218 bc  -rrb-  and are described as fighting for the carthaginians; they are reported as fighting against rome in 194 bc ,  sometimes allied with celtiberian tribes . 
it was named after the lusitani or lusitanian people  -lrb-  an indo-european people  -rrb-  . 
in 179 bc ,  the `` praetor '' lucius postumius albinus celebrated a triumph over the lusitani ,  but in 155 bc ,  on the command of punicus  -lrb-  πουνίκου ,  perhaps a carthaginian  -rrb-  first and cesarus  -lrb-  καίσαρος  -rrb-  after ,  the lusitani reached gibraltar . 
one example of this type of route would be metro transit metro transit route 114 in minneapolis ,  mn . 
in public transit ,  a limited-stop bus ,  tram ,  or train service is a service that stops less frequently than local service . 
however ,  the non-stop portion of the route is typically shorter than that of an express route ,  and depending on the fare structure of the transit agency ,  a limited stop route may have a lower fare than an express route . 
there are forms of limited-stop bus service other than the traditional type characterized by only serving certain stops . 
another form of limited stop bus service includes local routes that may operate certain trips with limited or non-stop sections . 
 ''limburg mijn vaderland ''  -lrb-  limburg my fatherland  -rrb-  is the official anthem of both belgian and dutch limburg . 
limburgish is spoken by an estimated 1.6 million people in dutch limburg ,  belgian limburg ,  and germany . 
limburg has a highly distinctive character . 
although standard dutch is the official language ,  and the language most-used ,  limburg has its own dialect ,  called limburgish  -lrb-  dutch: `` limburgs ''  -rrb-  . 
limburg  -lrb-   ,  ; dutch and limburgish: ``  -lrb-  nederlands-  -rrb- limburg '';  ,    -rrb-  is the southernmost of the 12 provinces of the netherlands . 
dialects in the western part of limburg ,  surrounding weert ,  are influenced by the neighbouring dialects of southeast brabant ,  which means that the tone is more brabantic than in the rest of limburg . 
in south limburg ,  most people live in the urban agglomerations of maastricht ,  parkstad and sittard-geleen . 
the first inhabitants of whom traces have been found were neanderthals who camped in south limburg . 
it is important to note that the history given below is that of the region ,  the current province limburg of the netherlands . 
as such ,  the name of the new province derived from the old duchy of limburg that had existed until 1648 on the southern borders of the new province . 
it was decided that the historic connection to the town and duchy of limburg was to be restored ,  albeit only in name . 
binucleating ligands bind two metals . 
in complexes of non-innocent ligands ,  the ligand is bonded to metals via conventional bonds ,  but the ligand is also redox-active . 
a bridging ligand links two or more metal centers . 
non-innocent ligands bond with metals in such a manner that the distribution of electron density between the metal center and ligand is unclear . 
some ligands can bond to a metal center through the same atom but with a different number of lone pairs . 
spectator ligands influence the reactivity of the metal center to which they are bound . 
in general ,  ligands are viewed as electron donors and the metals as electron acceptors . 
unlike polydentate ligands ,  ambidentate ligands can attach to the central atom in two places . 
bulky ligands are used to control the steric properties of a metal center . 
cp is classified as an lx ligand . 
polyfunctional ligands ,  see especially proteins ,  can bond to a metal center through different ligand atoms to form various isomers . 
