brando cited `` burn ! `` 
during the 1970s ,  brando was considered `` unbankable '' . 
brando was raised a christian scientist . 
the 1960s saw brando's career take a downturn . 
brando was the first to bring a natural approach to acting on film . 
it was the last time brando acted in a stage play . 
brando's performance was glowingly reviewed by critics . 
marlon brando jr .   -lrb-  april 3, 1924 – july 1, 2004 -rrb- was an american actor and film director . 
by brando's own account ,  it may have been because of this film that his draft status was changed from 4-f to 1-a . 
brando was especially contemptuous of director henry koster . 
kazan let brando improvise and later expressed deep admiration for brando's instinctive understanding ,  saying:
evans told coppola that he had been thinking of brando for the part two years earlier ,  and puzo had imagined brando in the part when he wrote the novel and had actually written to him about the part ,  so coppola and evans narrowed it down to brando . 
brando's next film ,  `` julius caesar ''  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- ,  received highly favorable reviews . 
brando avoided military service during the korean war . 
in 2004, brando recorded voice tracks for the character mrs . 
brando's performance earned him a nomination for a best actor bafta ,  but the film bombed at the box office . 
brando's first screen role was a bitter paraplegic veteran in `` the men ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- . 
brando and simmons were paired together again in the film adaptation of the musical `` guys and dolls ''  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- . 
brando's revulsion with the film industry reportedly boiled over on the set of his next film ,  metro-goldwyn-mayer's remake of `` mutiny on the bounty '' ,  which was filmed in tahiti . 
in 1961, brando made his directorial debut in the western `` one-eyed jacks '' . 
in 1976, brando appeared in `` the missouri breaks '' with his friend jack nicholson . 
in the tv documentary `` the making of superman: the movie '' ,  brando explained:
brando acknowledged his professional decline ,  writing later ,  `` some of the films i made during the sixties were successful; some weren't . 
in 1973, brando was devastated by the death of his childhood best friend wally cox . 
meteorological phenomena are observable weather events that are explained by the science of meteorology . 
varāhamihira's classical work `` brihatsamhita '' ,  written about 500 ad ,  provides evidence of weather observation . 
it was not until after the elucidation of the laws of physics and more particularly ,  the development of the computer ,  allowing for the automated solution of a great many equations that model the weather ,  in the latter half of the 20th century that significant breakthroughs in weather forecasting were achieved . 
meitnerium is also predicted to be paramagnetic . 
in the periodic table ,  meitnerium is a d-block transactinide element . 
meitnerium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol mt and atomic number 109.
the naming of meitnerium was discussed in the element naming controversy regarding the names of elements 104 to 109, but `` meitnerium '' was the only proposal and thus was never disputed . 
meitnerium has no stable or naturally occurring isotopes . 
meitnerium is the seventh member of the 6d series of transition metals . 
the atomic radius of meitnerium is expected to be around 128 pm . 
in this convention ,  one thousand megabytes  -lrb-  1000 mb  -rrb-  is equal to one gigabyte  -lrb-  1 gb  -rrb-  ,  where 1 gb is one billion bytes . 
in this convention ,  one thousand and twenty-four megabytes  -lrb-  1024 mb  -rrb-  is equal to one gigabyte  -lrb-  1 gb  -rrb-  ,  where 1 gb is 1024 bytes . 
the parts that differentiate one person from another can be compressed to 4 mb . 
the number of distinct stereoisomers with the same diagram is bounded by 2, where `` c '' is the total number of chiral carbons . 
these are also referred to as epimers which have the different arrangement of −oh and −h groups at the asymmetric or chiral carbon atoms  -lrb-  this does not apply to those carbons having the carbonyl functional group  -rrb-  . 
for this reason ,  there are only three distinct 3-ketopentose stereoisomers ,  even though the molecule has two chiral carbons . 
simple monosaccharides have a linear and unbranched carbon skeleton with one carbonyl  -lrb-  c=o  -rrb-  functional group ,  and one hydroxyl  -lrb-  oh  -rrb-  group on each of the remaining carbon atoms . 
in a simple open-chain monosaccharide ,  every carbon is chiral except the first and the last atoms of the chain ,  and  -lrb-  in ketoses  -rrb-  the carbon with the keto group . 
most stereoisomers are themselves chiral  -lrb-  distinct from their mirror images  -rrb-  . 
each stereoisomer of a simple open-chain monosaccharide can be identified by the positions  -lrb-  right or left  -rrb-  in the fischer diagram of the chiral hydroxyls  -lrb-  the hydroxyls attached to the chiral carbons  -rrb-  . 
in these cyclic forms ,  the ring usually has 5 or 6 atoms . 
in aqueous solutions monosaccharides exist as rings if they have more than four carbons . 
by convention ,  the carbon atoms are numbered from 1 to `` x '' along the backbone ,  starting from the end that is closest to the c=o group . 
the constellation's brightest star is gamma microscopii of apparent magnitude 4.68, a yellow giant 2.5 times the sun's mass located 223 ± 8 light-years distant . 
depicting the eyepiece of the microscope is gamma microscopii ,  which—at magnitude of 4.68—is the brightest star in the constellation . 
nicknamed `` speedy mic '' ,  bo microscopii is a star with an extremely fast rotation period of 9 hours ,  7 minutes . 
hd 205739 is a yellow-white main sequence star of spectral type f7v that is around 1.22 times as massive and 2.3 times as luminous as the sun . 
the three stars are candidate members of the beta pictoris moving group ,  one of the nearest associations of stars that share a common motion through space . 
the ic 342/maffei group  -lrb-  also known as the ic 342 group or the maffei 1 group  -rrb-  is the nearest group of galaxies to the local group . 
the group is part of the virgo supercluster . 
note that karachentsev divides this group into two subgroups centered around ic 342 and maffei 1.
messier 81, messier 82, and ngc 3077 are all strongly interacting with each other . 
the m81 group is a galaxy group in the constellations ursa major and camelopardalis that includes the galaxies messier 81 and messier 82, as well as several other galaxies with high apparent brightnesses . 
however some metres have an overall rhythmic pattern to the line that cannot easily be described using feet . 
the metre of the old germanic poetry of languages such as old norse and old english was radically different ,  but was still based on stress patterns . 
iambic pentameter ,  a common metre in english poetry ,  is based on a sequence of five `` iambic feet '' or `` iambs '' ,  each consisting of a relatively unstressed syllable  -lrb-  here represented with `` × '' above the syllable  -rrb-  followed by a relatively stressed one  -lrb-  here represented with `` / '' above the syllable  -rrb-  — `` da-dum '' = `` × / '' :
moqed helped to hijack the plane and assisted hani hanjour in crashing the plane into the pentagon at 9:37 a . m .  ,  killing 189 people  -lrb-  64 on the plane and 125 on the ground  -rrb-  . 
on september 11, 2001, moqed boarded american airlines flight 77 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane so that it could be crashed into the pentagon . 
three days later he was seen on an atm camera with hani hanjour . 
a saudi ,  moqed was studying law at a university in saudi arabia before joining al-qaeda in 1999 and being chosen to participate in the 9/11 attacks . 
in the recovery process at the pentagon ,  remains of all five flight 77 hijackers were identified through a process of elimination ,  as not matching any dna samples for the victims ,  and put into custody of the fbi . 
a former law student ,  majed mashaan ghanem moqed  -lrb-   ,  ; also transliterated as moqued  -rrb-   -lrb-  june 18, 1977 – september 11, 2001 -rrb- was one of five hijackers of american airlines flight 77 as part of the september 11 attacks . 
this is called `` cutting a stencil . `` 
the stencil duplicator or mimeograph machine  -lrb-  often abbreviated to mimeo  -rrb-  is a low-cost duplicating machine that works by forcing ink through a stencil onto paper . 
the mimeograph process should not be confused with the spirit duplicator process . 
this sheet – which had now become a stencil – was placed on a blank sheet of paper ,  and ink rolled over it so that the ink oozed through the holes ,  creating a duplicate on the second sheet . 
in 1880 edison obtained a further patent ,  us 224,665: `` method of preparing autographic stencils for printing , ``  which covered the making of stencils using a file plate ,  a grooved metal plate on which the stencil was placed which perforated the stencil when written on with a blunt metal stylus . 
the image transfer medium was originally a stencil made from waxed mulberry paper . 
the process was commercialized and zuccato applied for a patent in 1895 having stencils prepared by typewriting . 
for printed copy ,  a stencil assemblage is placed in a typewriter . 
if further copies are desired at this point ,  another stencil must be made . 
unlike spirit duplicators  -lrb-  where the only ink available is depleted from the master image  -rrb-  ,  mimeograph technology works by forcing a replenishable supply of ink through the stencil master . 
stencils were also made with a thermal process; an infrared method similar to that used by early photocopiers . 
they have been found on the moon and mars . 
a few meteorites were found in antarctica between 1912 and 1964.
they were found in northern egypt and have been securely dated to 3200 bc . 
the oldest known iron artifacts are nine small beads hammered from meteoritic iron . 
in january 2018, researchers found that 4.5 billion-year-old meteorites found on earth contained liquid water along with prebiotic complex organic substances that may be ingredients for life . 
these expeditions have now brought the total number of well-described meteorites found in algeria and libya to more than 500.
in most cases ,  the largest meteorites in a shower are found farthest down-range in the strewn field . 
in the late 1960s ,  roosevelt county ,  new mexico in the great plains was found to be a particularly good place to find meteorites . 
at about the same time as meteorite concentrations were being discovered in the cold desert of antarctica ,  collectors discovered that many meteorites could also be found in the hot deserts of australia . 
meteorite falls may have been the source of cultish worship . 
meteorites are always named for the places they were found ,  usually a nearby town or geographic feature . 
meteorites from multiple falls ,  such as bjurbole ,  tagish lake ,  and buzzard coulee ,  have been found having fallen on lake and sea ice ,  perhaps suggesting that they were not hot when they fell . 
apart from meteorites fallen onto the earth ,  two tiny fragments of asteroids were found among the samples collected on the moon; these were the bench crater meteorite  -lrb-  apollo 12, 1969 -rrb- and the hadley rille meteorite  -lrb-  apollo 15, 1971 -rrb- . 
in march 2015, nasa scientists reported that ,  for the first time ,  complex organic compounds found in dna and rna ,  including uracil ,  cytosine and thymine ,  have been formed in the laboratory under outer space conditions ,  using starting chemicals ,  such as pyrimidine ,  found in meteorites . 
meteorites that are recovered after being observed as they transit the atmosphere and impact the earth are called meteorite falls . 
the first known modern case of a human hit by a space rock occurred on 30 november 1954 in sylacauga ,  alabama . 
a small number of meteorite falls have been observed with automated cameras and recovered following calculation of the impact point . 
several of the meteorites found recently are currently on display in the griffith observatory in los angeles . 
maciej płażyński  -lrb-  ; 10 february 1958 – 10 april 2010 -rrb- was a polish liberal-conservative politician . 
płażyński was born in młynary . 
in 2000, płażyński was awarded the order of merit of the italian republic ,  first class . 
mark bingham was born in 1970, the only child of mother alice hoagland and father gerald bingham . 
mark kendall bingham  -lrb-  may 22, 1970 – september 11, 2001 -rrb- was an american public relations executive who founded his own company ,  the bingham group . 
at the national 9/11 memorial ,  bingham and other passengers from flight 93 are memorialized at the south pool ,  on panel s-67.
bingham ,  along with the other passengers on flight 93, was posthumously awarded the arthur ashe courage award in 2002.
the eureka valley recreation center's gymnasium in san francisco was renamed the mark bingham gymnasium in august 2002.
upon graduation at the age of twenty-one ,  bingham came out as gay to his family and friends . 
nasal airflow may be added as an independent parameter to any speech sound . 
trilled affricates are also known . 
when a sound is not nasal ,  it is called `` oral . `` 
flaps  -lrb-  also called taps  -rrb-  are similar to very brief stops . 
trills involve the vibration of one of the speech organs . 
a motherboard  -lrb-  sometimes alternatively known as the main circuit board ,  system board ,  baseboard ,  planar board or logic board ,  or colloquially ,  a mobo  -rrb-  is the main printed circuit board  -lrb-  pcb  -rrb-  found in general purpose microcomputers and other expandable systems . 
this chipset determines ,  to an extent ,  the features and capabilities of the motherboard . 
a motherboard provides the electrical connections by which the other components of the system communicate . 
a typical desktop computer has its microprocessor ,  main memory ,  and other essential components connected to the motherboard . 
the proliferation of engravers during the 16th century spread mannerist styles more quickly than any previous styles . 
the word `` mannerism '' derives from the italian `` maniera '' ,  meaning `` style '' or `` manner '' . 
this is typical of the so-called `` stylish style '' or `` maniera '' in its maturity . 
it is considered a masterpiece of mannerist sculpture . 
as a mere frame it is extravagant: mannerist ,  in short . 
mannerism ,  also known as late renaissance ,  is a style in european art that emerged in the later years of the italian high renaissance around 1520, spreading by about 1530 and lasting until about the end of the 16th century in italy ,  when the baroque style largely replaced it . 
joachim wtewael  -lrb-  1566–1638 -rrb- continued to paint in a northern mannerist style until the end of his life ,  ignoring the arrival of the baroque ,  and making him perhaps the last significant mannerist artist still to be working . 
the new style developed between 1510 and 1520 either in florence ,  or in rome ,  or in both cities simultaneously . 
the examples of a rich and hectic decorative style at fontainebleau further disseminated the italian style through the medium of engravings ,  to antwerp and from there throughout northern europe from london to poland . 
from the late 1560s onwards ,  many buildings in valletta ,  the new capital city of malta ,  were designed by the architect girolamo cassar in the mannerist style . 
this period has been described as a `` natural extension '' of the art of andrea del sarto ,  michelangelo ,  and raphael . 
yet historians differ as to whether mannerism is a style ,  a movement ,  or a period; and while the term remains controversial it is still commonly used to identify european art and culture of the 16th century . 
the cities rome ,  florence ,  and mantua were mannerist centers in italy . 
an example of mannerist architecture is the villa farnese at caprarola . 
from the late 19th century on ,  art historians have commonly used the term to describe art that follows renaissance classicism and precedes the baroque . 
under oath ,  clinton denied having had `` a sexual affair '' ,  `` sexual relations '' ,  or `` a sexual relationship '' with lewinsky . 
in it she answered a studio audience's questions about her life and the clinton affair . 
clinton had also said ,  `` there is not a sexual relationship ,  an improper sexual relationship or any other kind of improper relationship '' which he defended as truthful on august 17, 1998 because of his use of the present tense ,  famously arguing `` it depends on what the meaning of the word 'is' is ''  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  he was not ,  at the time he made that statement ,  still in a sexual relationship with lewinsky  -rrb-  . 
clinton had previously been confronted with allegations of sexual misconduct during his time as governor of arkansas . 
the affair and its repercussions  -lrb-  which included clinton's impeachment  -rrb-  became known later as the clinton–lewinsky scandal . 
lewinsky did correspond in 2009 with scholar ken gormley ,  who was writing an in-depth study of the clinton scandals ,  maintaining that clinton had lied under oath when asked detailed and specific questions about his relationship with her . 
news of the clinton–lewinsky relationship broke in january 1998.
president bill clinton admitted to having had what he called an `` inappropriate relationship '' with lewinsky while she worked at the white house in 1995–1996.
clinton and lewinsky were both called before a grand jury; clinton testified via closed-circuit television ,  lewinsky in person . 
lewinsky stated that between november 1995 and march 1997, she had nine sexual encounters in the oval office with then-president bill clinton . 
according to her testimony ,  these involved fellatio and other sexual acts ,  but not sexual intercourse . 
when measuring vacuum ,  the working liquid may evaporate and contaminate the vacuum if its vapor pressure is too high . 
for most working fluids where a fluid exists in a closed system ,  gauge pressure measurement prevails . 
they have poor dynamic response because the fluid in the column may react slowly to a pressure change . 
fluid density and local gravity can vary from one reading to another depending on local factors ,  so the height of a fluid column does not define pressure precisely . 
units of pressure using unit conversion and the above formulas . 
hydrostatic gauges  -lrb-  such as the mercury column manometer  -rrb-  compare pressure to the hydrostatic force per unit area at the base of a column of fluid . 
because pressure was once commonly measured by its ability to displace a column of liquid in a manometer ,  pressures are often expressed as a depth of a particular fluid  -lrb-  `` e . g .  , ``  inches of water  -rrb-  . 
pressure measurement is the analysis of an applied force by a fluid  -lrb-  liquid or gas  -rrb-  on a surface . 
the abbreviation `` w . c . ``  or the words `` water column '' are often printed on gauges and measurements that use water for the manometer . 
although any fluid can be used ,  mercury is preferred for its high density  -lrb-  13.534 g/cm  -rrb-  and low vapour pressure . 
for very accurate readings ,  especially at very low pressures ,  a gauge that uses total vacuum as the zero point may be used ,  giving pressure readings in an absolute scale . 
liquid-column gauges consist of a column of liquid in a tube whose ends are exposed to different pressures . 
static pressure is uniform in all directions ,  so pressure measurements are independent of direction in an immovable  -lrb-  static  -rrb-  fluid . 
if the fluid being measured is significantly dense ,  hydrostatic corrections may have to be made for the height between the moving surface of the manometer working fluid and the location where the pressure measurement is desired ,  except when measuring differential pressure of a fluid  -lrb-  for example ,  across an orifice plate or venturi  -rrb-  ,  in which case the density ρ should be corrected by subtracting the density of the fluid being measured . 
but in 1875 after bourdon's patents expired ,  his company schaeffer and budenberg also manufactured bourdon tube gauges . 
the most documented form of dance during the middle ages is the carol also called the `` carole '' or `` carola '' and known from the 12th and 13th centuries in western europe in rural and court settings . 
in the german-speaking areas ,  this same type of choral dance was known as `` reigen '' . 
after the event ,  erika ,  largo ,  kimiko and piro are reunited ,  and they talk a bit with miho ,  who has shown up again after storming out following an argument with kenji earlier . 
largo is the comic's secondary protagonist ,  and the comic version of co-creator rodney caston . 
during the next nine days ,  piro and kimiko have made up and kimiko returned to both of her jobs ,  with them seeing little of each other . 
meanwhile ,  largo develops a relationship with hayasaka erika ,  piro's coworker at megagamers . 
the next morning ,  piro has been brought to jail ,  where he has been interrogated by police about miho's disappearance . 
the pair quickly follow miho and piro and await for them to leave the bath house . 
 ''megatokyo '' is divided into chapters . 
kimiko and miho are in the same diner ,  to which ed has sent an attack robot  -lrb-  kill-bot  -rrb-  against miho ,  since she has disrupted his attempts to destroy ping . 
piro ,  flustered ,  agrees ,  and promptly forgets about them . 
earlier in the story ,  piro had seen nanasawa kimiko at an anna miller's restaurant ,  where she is a waitress ,  after tsubasa brought him and largo there . 
piro ,  the protagonist ,  is an author surrogate of fred gallagher . 
gallagher has commented that piro is the focal point of emotional damage ,  while his friend ,  largo ,  takes the physical damage in the comic . 
the artwork and characterizations of `` megatokyo '' have received praise from such publications as `` the new york times '' and comics bulletin . 
set in a fictional version of tokyo ,  `` megatokyo '' portrays the adventures of piro ,  a young fan of anime and manga ,  and his friend largo ,  an american video game enthusiast . 
largo seems to have awkwardly blundered into a relatively successful relationship with hayasaka erika at the current time in the comic . 
the next morning ,  after kimiko departs ,  piro finds out she quit her voice acting job and tries to find her . 
after their eviction ,  piro begins work at `` megagamers '' ,  a store specializing in anime ,  manga ,  and video games . 
on the way back from the restaurant ,  kimiko is suffering from the aftermath of the scene and lashes out at piro on the subway ,  which causes him to walk off . 
medieval music was composed and ,  for some vocal and instrumental music ,  improvised for many different music genres  -lrb-  styles of music  -rrb-  . 
medieval music consists of songs ,  instrumental pieces ,  and liturgical music from about 500 a . d .  to 1400.
the rhythmic complexity that was realized in this music is comparable to that in the 20th century . 
the medieval motet developed during the renaissance music era  -lrb-  after 1400 -rrb- . 
during the medieval period the foundation was laid for the music notation and music theory practices that would shape western music into the norms that developed during the common-practice era ,  a period of shared music writing practices which encompassed the baroque music composers from 1600–1750, such as j . s . 
much of the music from the early medieval period is anonymous . 
the earliest medieval music did not have any kind of notational system . 
most of the music of `` ars nova '' was french in origin; however ,  the term is often loosely applied to all of the music of the fourteenth century ,  especially to include the secular music in italy . 
the ars nova ,  which means `` new art '' was an innovative style of writing music that served as a key transition from the medieval music style to the more expressive styles of the post-1400s renaissance music era . 
this was the period in which rhythmic notation first appeared in western music ,  mainly a context-based method of rhythmic notation known as the rhythmic modes . 
the beginning of the `` ars nova '' is one of the few clear chronological divisions in medieval music ,  since it corresponds to the publication of the `` roman de fauvel '' ,  a huge compilation of poetry and music ,  in 1310 and 1314.
this type of texture remained a feature of italian music in the popular 15th and 16th century secular genres as well ,  and was an important influence on the eventual development of the trio texture that revolutionized music in the 17th . 
demarcating the end of the medieval era and the beginning of the renaissance era ,  with regard to the composition of music ,  is difficult . 
as often seen at the end of any musical era ,  the end of the medieval era is marked by a highly manneristic style known as `` ars subtilior '' . 
the musical styles of léonin and pérotin influenced 20th century minimalist composers such as steve reich . 
the most obvious of these is the development of a comprehensive music notational system; however the theoretical advances ,  particularly in regard to rhythm and polyphony ,  are equally important to the development of western music . 
the schola cantorum basiliensis ,  university for old music in basel ,  switzerland ,  provides a full-time practical study course for the music of the middle ages . 
shortly ,  a similar christmas play was developed ,  musically and textually following the easter one ,  and other plays followed . 
chant  -lrb-  or plainsong  -rrb-  is a monophonic sacred  -lrb-  single ,  unaccompanied melody  -rrb-  form which represents the earliest known music of the christian church . 
the trouvères and troubadours shared similar musical styes ,  but the trouvères were generally noblemen . 
another important element of medieval music theory was the system by which pitches were arranged and understood . 
during the `` ars nova '' era ,  secular music acquired a polyphonic sophistication formerly found only in sacred music ,  a development not surprising considering the secular character of the early renaissance  -lrb-  while this music is typically considered `` medieval '' ,  the social forces that produced it were responsible for the beginning of the literary and artistic renaissance in italy—the distinction between middle ages and renaissance is a blurry one ,  especially considering arts as different as music and painting  -rrb-  . 
finally ,  purely instrumental music also developed during this period ,  both in the context of a growing theatrical tradition and for court performances for the aristocracy . 
the secular ballata ,  which became very popular in trecento italy ,  had its origins ,  for instance ,  in medieval instrumental dance music . 
most of the more than two thousand surviving trouvère songs include music ,  and show a sophistication as great as that of the poetry it accompanies . 
during the medieval period the foundation was laid for the notational and theoretical practices that would shape western music into the norms that developed during the common practice era . 
 ,  the most important type of maser is the hydrogen maser which is currently used as an atomic frequency standard . 
norman ramsey and his colleagues first conceived of the maser as a timing standard . 
gould originally proposed distinct names for devices that emit in each portion of the spectrum ,  including `` grasers ''  -lrb-  gamma ray lasers  -rrb-  ,  `` xasers ''  -lrb-  x-ray lasers  -rrb-  ,  `` uvasers ''  -lrb-  ultraviolet lasers  -rrb-  ,  ``  lasers ''  -lrb-  visible lasers  -rrb-  ,  `` irasers ''  -lrb-  infrared lasers  -rrb-  ,  `` masers ''  -lrb-  microwave masers  -rrb-  ,  and `` rasers ''  -lrb-  rf masers  -rrb-  . 
some water masers also emit radiation from a rotational transition at a frequency of 96 ghz . 
extremely powerful masers ,  associated with active galactic nuclei ,  are known as megamasers and are up to a million times more powerful than stellar masers . 
masers serve as high precision frequency references . 
for this reason charles townes suggested replacing `` microwave '' with the word `` molecular '' as the first word in the acronym `` maser '' . 
in 2004, he designed museum one of the leeum ,  samsung museum of art in seoul ,  south korea . 
his buildings are often made of brick ,  yet his use of material is wide ,  varied ,  and often unique . 
when caesar returned in late 45 bc ,  the civil war was over . 
the feud between caesar and pompey erupted into open confrontation by early 49 bc . 
antony also granted formal control over cyprus ,  which had been under egyptian control since 47 bc during the turmoil of caesar's civil war ,  to cleopatra in 40 bc as a gift for her loyalty to rome . 
in early 44 bc ,  julius caesar announced his intentions to invade parthia and restore roman power in the east . 
in november 43 bc ,  octavian ,  lepidus ,  and antony met near bononia . 
now secure on his throne ,  herod would rule the herodian kingdom until his death in 4 bc ,  and would be an ever-faithful client king of rome . 
the resulting instability ,  especially among caesar's veterans who would have benefited from the law ,  forced caesar to return to italy by october 47 bc . 
caesar managed to retreat to thessaly ,  with pompey in pursuit . 
octavian arrived in rome in may to claim his inheritance . 
antony remained on caesar's military staff until 50 bc ,  helping mopping-up actions across gaul to secure caesar's conquest . 
meanwhile ,  in rome ,  the triumvirate was no more . 
additionally ,  cleopatra left rome to return to egypt . 
antony was an infant at the time of lucius cornelius sulla's march on rome in 82 bc . 
in 42 bc ,  the roman east was composed of several directly controlled provinces and client kingdoms . 
during 33 and 32 bc ,  a propaganda war was fought in the political arena of rome ,  with accusations flying between sides . 
a member of the plebeian antonia gens ,  antony was born in rome on 14 january 83 bc . 
caesar's actions further strengthened roman control over the already roman-dominated kingdom . 
when antony died ,  octavian became uncontested ruler of rome . 
in 27 bc ,  octavian was granted the title of `` augustus , ``  marking the final stage in the transformation of the roman republic into an empire ,  with himself as the first roman emperor . 
during this time ,  the alliance among caesar ,  pompey ,  and crassus had effectively ended . 
while caesar was away in egypt ,  antony remained in rome to govern italy and restore order . 
as a symbol of their renewed alliance ,  antony married octavia ,  octavian's sister ,  in october 40 bc . 
antony fled rome ,  fearing for his life ,  and returned to caesar's camp on the banks of the rubicon river ,  the southern limit of caesar's lawful command . 
by the end of the year 49 bc ,  caesar ,  already the ruler of gaul ,  had captured italy ,  spain ,  sicily ,  and sardinia out of optimates control . 
in the summer of 41 bc ,  antony ,  to resassert roman power in the east ,  conquered palmyra on the roman-parthian border . 
with the triumvirate renewed in 38 bc ,  antony returned to athens in the winter with his new wife octavia ,  the sister of octavian . 
during the southern march ,  caesar placed antony as his second in command . 
surrounding himself with a bodyguard of over six thousand of caesar's veterans ,  antony presented himself as caesar's true successor ,  largely ignoring octavian . 
antony was a supporter of julius caesar ,  and served as one of his generals during the conquest of gaul and the civil war . 
the rise of the parthian empire in the 3rd century bc and rome's expansion into the eastern mediterranean during the 2nd century bc brought the two powers into direct contact ,  causing centuries of tumultuous and strained relations . 
a parthian army ,  led by orodes ii's eldest son pacorus ,  invaded syria in early 40 bc . 
antony was assigned rome's eastern provinces ,  including the client kingdom of egypt ,  then ruled by cleopatra vii philopator ,  and was given the command in rome's war against parthia . 
this pressure forced the triumvirs to meet with sextus in early 39 bc . 
manchester united won the league again in the 1999–2000 and 2000–01 seasons . 
from 2006–07 to 2013–14, the third kit was the previous season's away kit ,  albeit updated with the new club sponsor in 2006–07 and 2010–11, apart from 2008–09 when an all-blue kit was launch to mark the 40th anniversary of the 1967–68 european cup success . 
the club's third kit is often all-blue ,  this was most recently the case during the 2014–15 season . 
in the 1938–39 season ,  the last year of football before the second world war ,  the club finished 14th in the first division . 
by winning the uefa europa league in 2016–17, they became one of five clubs to have won all three main uefa club competitions ,  and the only english club to have won every competition available to them . 
the club's most recent trophy came in may 2017, with the 2016–17 uefa europa league . 
plumbing products manufacturer kohler became the club's first sleeve sponsor ahead of the 2018–19 season . 
the club holds the record for most top-division titles  -lrb-  20 -rrb- – including a record 13 premier league titles – and fa community shields  -lrb-  21 -rrb- . 
the west stand of old trafford – the `` stretford end '' – is the home end and the traditional source of the club's most vocal support . 
in an initial five-year deal worth £500,000, sharp electronics became the club's first shirt sponsor at the beginning of the 1982–83 season ,  a relationship that lasted until the end of the 1999–2000 season ,  when vodafone agreed a four-year ,  £30 million deal . 
manchester united was the highest-earning football club in the world for 2016–17, with an annual revenue of €676.3 million ,  and the world's most valuable football club in 2018, valued at £3.1 billion . 
during his time with the club ,  beckham's popularity across asia was integral to the club's commercial success in that part of the world . 
on 8 may 2013, ferguson announced that he was to retire as manager at the end of the football season ,  but would remain at the club as a director and club ambassador . 
additionally ,  manchester united-branded media services – such as the club's dedicated television channel ,  mutv – have allowed the club to expand its fan base to those beyond the reach of its old trafford stadium . 
after finishing as runner-up to chelsea in the 2009–10 season ,  united achieved a record 19th league title in 2010–11, securing the championship with a 1–1 away draw against blackburn rovers on 14 may 2011.
the devil stems from the club's nickname `` the red devils ''; it was included on club programmes and scarves in the 1960s ,  and incorporated into the club crest in 1970, although the crest was not included on the chest of the shirt until 1971.
the club's first kit manufacturer was umbro ,  until a five-year deal was agreed with admiral sportswear in 1975.
this was extended to 20 league titles in 2012–13, securing the championship with a 3–0 home win against aston villa on 22 april 2013.
the following season ,  with the club in danger of relegation by november ,  atkinson was dismissed . 
xerox parc later developed cedar ,  which was a superset of mesa . 
in mesa ,  all keywords are written in uppercase . 
mesa was the precursor to the programming language cedar . 
within xerox ,  mesa was eventually superseded by the cedar programming language . 
mesa was later adopted as the systems programming language for xerox's commercial workstations such as the xerox 8010  -lrb-  xerox star ,  dandelion  -rrb-  and xerox 6085  -lrb-  daybreak  -rrb-  ,  in particular for the pilot operating system . 
many mesa programmers and developers left xerox in 1985; some of them went to dec systems research center where they used their experience with mesa in the design of modula-2+ ,  and later of modula-3.
mesa is an algol-like language with strong support for modular programming . 
ficino was born at figline valdarno . 
when cosimo decided to refound plato's academy at florence he chose ficino as its head . 
following epithelial-mesenchymal transition ,  cells can migrate away from an epithelium and then associate with other similar cells in a new location . 
mesenchymal cells usually express other cadherin types such as n-cadherin . 
tissues can change their shape and separate into distinct layers via cell contractility . 
the process controls the organized spatial distribution of cells during the embryonic development of an organism . 
it is one of three fundamental aspects of developmental biology along with the control of cell growth and cellular differentiation ,  unified in evolutionary developmental biology  -lrb-  evo-devo  -rrb-  . 
a magical organization or magical order is an organization created for the practice of magic or to further the knowledge of magic among its members . 
the order was reworked by aleister crowley after he took control of the order in the early 1920s . 
the teachings of the order include enochian magic ,  christian mysticism ,  qabalah ,  hermeticism ,  the paganism of ancient egypt ,  theurgy ,  and alchemy . 
consequently ,  ibn mu'ammar forced ibn ʿabd al-wahhab to leave . 
after his return home ,  ibn ʿabd al-wahhab began to attract followers ,  including the ruler of 'uyayna ,  uthman ibn mu'ammar . 
ibn 'abd al-wahhab's teacher abdallah ibn ibrahim ibn sayf introduced the relatively young man to mohammad hayya al-sindhi in medina who belonged to the naqshbandi order  -lrb-  tariqa  -rrb-  of sufism and recommended him as a student . 
upon his expulsion from 'uyayna ,  ibn ʿabd al-wahhab was invited to settle in neighboring diriyah by its ruler muhammad bin saud . 
maine  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the new england region of the northeastern united states . 
the state of maine also has three constitutional officers  -lrb-  the secretary of state ,  the state treasurer ,  and the state attorney general  -rrb-  and one statutory officer  -lrb-  the state auditor  -rrb-  . 
in 2010, a study named maine as the least religious state in the united states . 
maine is the only state in the continental us to border only one other american state  -lrb-  new hampshire to the south and west  -rrb-  . 
maine has the highest percentage of french americans of any state . 
the state legislature in 2001 adopted a resolution establishing franco-american day ,  which stated that the state was named after the former french province of maine . 
maine is the easternmost state in the united states in both its extreme points and its geographic center . 
maine is one of seven states that do not have a lieutenant governor . 
the population density of the state is 41.3 people per square mile ,  making it the least densely populated state in new england ,  the american northeast ,  the eastern seaboard ,  of all of the states with an atlantic coastline and of all of the states east of the mississippi river . 
in 2011, 89.0% of all births in the state were to non-hispanic white parents . 
since 1860 there have been 16 counties in the state ,  ranging in size from  . 
the remainder of the state ,  including the north woods ,  is covered by the new england-acadian forests . 
maine is the least densely populated u . s .  state east of the mississippi river . 
 -lrb-  for more information see extreme points of the united states .   -rrb- 
the judicial branch is responsible for interpreting state laws . 
in state general elections ,  maine voters tend to accept independent and third-party candidates more frequently than most states . 
in january 2009, a new record low temperature for the state was set at big black river of  ,  tying the new england record . 
maine does not have an official language ,  but the most widely spoken language in the state is english . 
the state's record high temperature is  ,  set in july 1911, at north bridgton . 
on march 15, 1820, under the missouri compromise ,  it was admitted to the union as the 23rd state . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of maine was 1,329,328 on july 1, 2015, a 0.07% increase since the 2010 united states census . 
maine's original state capital was portland ,  maine's largest city ,  until it was moved to the more central augusta in 1832.
acadia national park is the only national park in new england . 
formal secession and formation of the state of maine as the 23rd state occurred on march 15, 1820, as part of the missouri compromise ,  which geographically limited the spread of slavery and enabled the admission to statehood of missouri the following year ,  keeping a balance between slave and free states . 
however ,  the northern ,  more rural areas of the state have experienced a slight decline in population in recent years . 
montana  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the northwestern united states . 
montana is one of the nine mountain states ,  located in the north of the region known as the western united states . 
the kootenai river in northwest montana is another major tributary of the columbia . 
montana has thousands of named rivers and creeks ,  of which are known for `` blue-ribbon '' trout fishing . 
it is the longest undammed ,  free-flowing river in the contiguous united states ,  and drains about a quarter of montana  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
there are some 3,000 named lakes and reservoirs in montana ,  including flathead lake ,  the largest natural freshwater lake in the western united states . 
through the missouri ,  these rivers ultimately join the mississippi river and flow into the gulf of mexico . 
other major reservoirs include hungry horse on the flathead river; lake koocanusa on the kootenai river; lake elwell on the marias river; clark canyon on the beaverhead river; yellowtail on the bighorn river ,  canyon ferry ,  hauser ,  holter ,  rainbow; and black eagle on the missouri river . 
between many mountain ranges are rich river valleys . 
it is the fourth largest state in the united states after alaska ,  texas ,  and california; it is the largest landlocked u . s .  state . 
the first commercial mt system for russian / english / german-ukrainian was developed at kharkov state university  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
according to a 1972 report by the director of defense research and engineering  -lrb-  ddr&e  -rrb-  ,  the feasibility of large-scale mt was reestablished by the success of the logos mt system in translating military manuals into vietnamese during that conflict . 
with the assistance of these techniques ,  mt has proven useful as a tool to assist human translators and ,  in a very limited number of cases ,  can even produce output that can be used as is  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  weather reports  -rrb-  . 
mt on the web started with systran offering free translation of small texts  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  followed by altavista babelfish ,  which racked up 500,000 requests a day  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- . 
for random variables that have no mean ,  such as the cauchy distribution ,  central moments are not defined . 
the `` n ''th moment about the mean  -lrb-  or `` n ''th central moment  -rrb-  of a real-valued random variable `` x '' is the quantity `` μ '' := e -lrb-  `` x '' − e ''x ''  -rrb-  ,  where e is the expectation operator . 
murad i conquered adrianople ,  renamed it to edirne ,  and in 1363 made it the new capital of the ottoman sultanate . 
murad i  -lrb-  ;  -lrb-  nicknamed hüdavendigâr ,  from persian: خداوندگار ,  `` khodāvandgār '' ,  `` the devotee of god '' – but meaning `` sovereign '' in this context  -rrb- ; 29 june 1326 – 15 june 1389 -rrb- was the ottoman sultan from 1362 to 1389.
he was a son of orhan and the valide nilüfer hatun . 
mehmed later made bayezid pasha his grand vizier  -lrb-  1413–1421 -rrb- . 
mehmed was born in 1386 or 1387 as the fourth son of sultan bayezid i  -lrb-    -rrb-  and one of his consorts ,  the slave girl devlet hatun . 
mehmed i  -lrb-  1379 – 26 may 1421 -rrb- ,  also known as mehmed çelebi  -lrb-   ,  `` the noble-born ''  -rrb-  or kirişci  -lrb-  from greek `` kyritzes '' ,  `` lord's son ''  -rrb-  ,  was the ottoman sultan from 1413 to 1421.
on 20 july 1402, his father bayezid was defeated in the battle of ankara by the turko-mongol conqueror and ruler timur . 
murad ii won the battle of varna in 1444 against jános hunyadi . 
finally ,  just as the fictional caliph’s ghazas were immortalized in `` battalname '' ,  murad ii’s battles and victories were also compiled and given the title `` the ghazas of sultan murad ''  -lrb-  `` gazavat- i sultan murad  -rrb- ``  . 
murad ii relinquished his throne in 1444 to his son mehmed ii ,  but a janissary revolt in the empire forced him to return . 
murad's reign was troubled by insurrection early on . 
murad ii then declared war against venice ,  the karamanid emirate ,  serbia and hungary . 
murad's reign was a time of financial stress for the ottoman state . 
numerous envoys and letters were exchanged between elizabeth i and sultan murad iii . 
this diplomacy would be continued under murad's successor mehmed iii ,  by both the sultan and safiye sultan alike . 
born in manisa on 4 july 1546, şehzade murad was the oldest son of sultan selim ii and afife nurbanu sultan . 
murad also furnished the content of `` kitabü’l-menamat ''  -lrb-  `` the book of dreams ''  -rrb-  ,  addressed to murad's spiritual advisory ,  şüca dede . 
he was succeeded by his son ahmed i as the new sultan . 
mehmed iii was an idle ruler ,  leaving government to his mother safiye sultan ,  the valide sultan . 
mehmed iii  -lrb-   ,  `` meḥmed-i sālis ''; ; 26 may 1566–21 december 1603 -rrb- was sultan of the ottoman empire from 1595 until his death in 1603.
in reward for his services at the war ,  cigalazade yusuf sinan pasha was made grand vizier in 1596.
none of mehmed's consorts are listed as `` haseki sultan '' in ottoman palace archives . 
mustafa i  -lrb-  ; ‎;24 june 1591 – 20 january 1639 -rrb- ,  called mustafa the saint  -lrb-  veli mustafa  -rrb-  during his second reign and often called mustafa the mad  -lrb-  deli mustafa  -rrb-  by modern historians ,  was the son of mehmed iii and was the sultan of the ottoman empire from 1617 to 1618 and from 1622 to 1623.
mustafa was sent along with his mother to the eski  -lrb-  old  -rrb-  palace . 
in fact ,  it was his mother halime sultan the de facto-co-ruler as valide sultan of the ottoman empire . 
until ahmed's death in 1617, mustafa lived in the old palace ,  along with his mother ,  and grandmother safiye sultan . 
his mother was halime sultan ,  an abkhazian lady . 
his mental condition unimproved ,  mustafa was a puppet controlled by his mother and brother-in-law ,  the grand vizier kara davud pasha . 
murad iv banned alcohol ,  tobacco ,  and coffee in istanbul . 
murad iv feared suffering the fate of his elder brother ,  osman ii  -lrb-  1618–22 -rrb- ,  and decided to assert his power . 
murad iv was for a long time under the control of his relatives and during his early years as sultan ,  his mother ,  kösem sultan ,  essentially ruled through him . 
a substantial amount of shirow's work has been released in art book or poster book format . 
 ''galgrease ''  -lrb-  published in `` uppers magazine '' ,  2002 -rrb- is the collected name of several erotic manga and poster books by shirow . 
two more volumes of `` appleseed '' followed before he began work on `` ghost in the shell '' . 
a musical saw ,  also called a singing saw ,  is a hand saw used as a musical instrument . 
there are also annual saw festivals in japan and china . 
sawists often use standard wood-cutting saws ,  although special musical saws are also made . 
a typical musical saw is wide at the handle end and wide at the tip . 
organized by paruz ,  53 musical saw players performed together . 
midi technology was standardized in 1983 by a panel of music industry representatives ,  and is maintained by the midi manufacturers association  -lrb-  mma  -rrb-  . 
the first midi synthesizers were the roland jupiter-6 and the prophet 600, both released in 1982.
midi also helped establish home recording . 
midi data can be transferred via midi cable ,  or recorded to a sequencer to be edited or played back . 
in 2016, the mma established the midi association  -lrb-  tma  -rrb-  to support a global community of people who work ,  play ,  or create with midi . 
the midi standard was unveiled by kakehashi and smith ,  who received technical grammy awards in 2013 for their work . 
microprogramming is still used in modern cpu designs . 
in a control store ,  however ,  the `` song '' is short and repeated continuously . 
in 1947, the design of the mit whirlwind introduced the concept of a control store as a way to simplify computer design and move beyond `` ad hoc '' methods . 
when the row is activated ,  it activates the control signals connected to it . 
microprograms consist of series of microinstructions ,  which control the cpu at a very fundamental level of hardware circuitry . 
wilkes coined the term microprogramming to describe this feature and distinguish it from a simple control store . 
to simultaneously control all processor's features in one cycle ,  the microinstruction is often wider than 50 bits; e . g .  ,  128 bits on a 360/85 with an emulator feature . 
described another way ,  the signals transmitted by the control store are being played much like a player piano roll . 
for example ,  in a relaxed layered system  -lrb-  as opposed to a strict layered system  -rrb-  a layer can also depend on all the layers below it . 
some also identify a separate layer called the business infrastructure layer  -lrb-  bi  -rrb-  ,  located between the business layer -lrb-  s  -rrb-  and the infrastructure layer -lrb-  s  -rrb-  . 
a layer is on top of another ,  because it depends on it . 
if the application architecture has no explicit distinction between the business layer and the presentation layer  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  the presentation layer is considered part of the business layer  -rrb-  ,  then a traditional client-server  -lrb-  two-tier  -rrb-  model has been implemented . 
for example ,  if the model view presenter pattern is used ,  the presenter sublayer might be used as an additional layer between the user interface layer and the business/application layer  -lrb-  as represented by the model sublayer  -rrb-  . 
the book `` domain driven design '' describes some common uses for the above four layers ,  although its primary focus is the domain layer . 
in the june 2014 top500 list ,  the number of supercomputers using myrinet interconnect was 1  -lrb-  0.2%  -rrb-  . 
according to myricom ,  141  -lrb-  28.2%  -rrb-  of the june 2005 top500 supercomputers used myrinet technology . 
myrinet was approved in 1998 by the american national standards institute for use on the vmebus as ansi/vita 26-1998. .  one of the earliest publications on myrinet is a 1995 ieee article . 
it was here that schaeffer began to experiment with creative radiophonic techniques using the sound technologies of the time  . 
tape editing brought a new technique called `` micro-editing '' ,  in which very tiny fragments of sound ,  representing milliseconds of time ,  were edited together ,  thus creating completely new sounds or structures  . 
speed variation was a powerful tool for sound design applications . 
one found one's self sitting in a small studio which was equipped with four loudspeakers—two in front of one—right and left; one behind one and a fourth suspended above . 
this system was also easily capable of producing artificial reverberation or continuous sounds  . 
before the late 1960s the musique concrète produced at grm had largely been based on the recording and manipulation of sounds ,  but synthesised sounds had featured in a number of works prior to the introduction of the coupigny . 
at the premiere of pierre schaeffer's `` symphonie pour un homme seul '' in 1951, a system that was designed for the spatial control of sound was tested . 
bayle has commented that the purpose of the acousmonium is to ``  ''substitute a momentary classical disposition of sound making ,  which diffuses the sound from the circumference towards the centre of the hall ,  by a group of sound projectors which form an 'orchestration' of the acoustic image '' ''  . 
grm was one of several theoretical and experimental groups working under the umbrella of the schaeffer-led service de la recherche at ortf  -lrb-  1960–74 -rrb- . 
by 1951 the work of schaeffer ,  composer-percussionist pierre henry ,  and sound engineer jacques poullin had received official recognition and the groupe de recherches de musique concrète ,  club d 'essai de la radiodiffusion-télévision française was established at rtf in paris ,  the ancestor of the ortf  . 
access to microphones ,  phonographs ,  and later magnetic tape recorders  -lrb-  created in 1939 and acquired by the schaeffer's groupe de recherche de musique concrète  -lrb-  research group on concrete music  -rrb-  in 1952 -rrb- ,  facilitated by an association with the french national broadcasting organization ,  at that time the radiodiffusion-télévision française ,  gave schaeffer and his colleagues an opportunity to experiment with recording technology and tape manipulation . 
by 1949 schaeffer's compositional work was known publicly as `` musique concrète ''  . 
in mathematics ,  a metric space is a set together with a metric on the set . 
the most familiar metric space is 3-dimensional euclidean space . 
algal life is widespread and very diverse under the ocean . 
a large proportion of all life on earth lives in the ocean . 
as on land ,  invertebrates make up a huge portion of all life in the sea . 
marine biology is the scientific study of marine life ,  organisms in the sea . 
marine habitats can be divided into coastal and open ocean habitats . 
reptiles which inhabit or frequent the sea include sea turtles ,  sea snakes ,  terrapins ,  the marine iguana ,  and the saltwater crocodile . 
the deepest recorded oceanic trench measured to date is the mariana trench ,  near the philippines ,  in the pacific ocean at  . 
the intertidal zone is also a good place to find plant life in the sea ,  where mangroves or cordgrass or beach grass might grow . 
two examples are fish larvae and sea stars  -lrb-  also called starfish  -rrb-  . 
much of the aphotic zone's energy is supplied by the open ocean in the form of detritus . 
most ocean life breeds in specific places ,  nests or not in others ,  spends time as juveniles in still others ,  and in maturity in yet others . 
large areas beneath the ocean surface still remain effectively unexplored . 
microscopic life undersea is incredibly diverse and still poorly understood . 
ipc can be synchronous or asynchronous . 
performance is therefore a potential issue in microkernel systems . 
start up  -lrb-  booting  -rrb-  of a microkernel-based system requires device drivers ,  which are not part of the kernel . 
to be effective ,  the ipc system must not only have low overhead ,  but also interact well with cpu scheduling . 
consequently ,  microkernel designs have been used for systems designed for high-security applications ,  including keykos ,  eros and military systems . 
a number of commercial multi-server systems exist ,  in particular the real-time systems qnx and integrity . 
the microkernel was intended to address this growth of kernels and the difficulties that resulted . 
a basic set of servers for a general-purpose microkernel includes file system servers ,  device driver servers ,  networking servers ,  display servers ,  and user interface device servers . 
while these results demonstrate that the poor performance of systems based on first-generation microkernels is not representative for second-generation kernels such as l4, this constitutes no proof that microkernel-based systems can be built with good performance . 
first-generation microkernels typically supported synchronous as well as asynchronous ipc ,  and suffered from poor ipc performance . 
other versions of l4 have switched to asynchronous ipc completely . 
early operating system kernels were rather small ,  partly because computer memory was limited . 
on most mainstream processors ,  obtaining a service is inherently more expensive in a microkernel-based system than a monolithic system . 
however ,  such a single-server system exhibits few ,  if any ,  of the advantages microkernels are supposed to provide by structuring operating system functionality into separate servers . 
traditional operating system functions ,  such as device drivers ,  protocol stacks and file systems ,  are typically removed from the microkernel itself and are instead run in user space . 
a key component of a microkernel is a good ipc system and virtual-memory-manager design that allows implementing page-fault handling and swapping in usermode servers in a safe way . 
a multihull is a ship ,  vessel ,  craft or boat with more than one hull . 
about 70 small waterplan area ships whose hulls have a smaller cross section at the waterplane than below the surface exist . 
the first multihull vessels were austronesian canoes . 
during 1999, oldfield released two albums . 
oldfield and fanny separated in 2013.
in 1994, he also had an asteroid ,  5656 oldfield ,  named after him . 
 ''tubular bells '' is oldfield's most famous work . 
in 2013 oldfield and york released a remix album titled `` tubular beats '' . 
over the years ,  oldfield has used a range of guitars . 
oldfield's latest album ,  `` return to ommadawn '' was released on 20 january 2017 and reached #4 in the uk album chart . 
in 1995, oldfield continued to embrace new musical styles by producing the celtic-themed album `` voyager '' . 
oldfield has released more than 20 albums with the most recent being a sequel to his 1975 album `` ommadawn '' titled `` return to ommadawn '' ,  released on 20 january 2017.
oldfield is a motorcycle fan and has five bikes . 
oldfield's parents were raymond oldfield ,  a general practitioner ,  and maureen liston ,  an irish nurse . 
in 2003, oldfield released `` tubular bells 2003 '' ,  a re-recording of the original `` tubular bells '' ,  on cd ,  and dvd-audio . 
oldfield suggested that it would be released `` in a couple of years '' . 
in 1974, oldfield played guitar on the critically acclaimed album `` rock bottom '' by robert wyatt . 
oldfield was also the reserve guitarist for the musical `` hair '' and played with alex harvey . 
a further seven albums have been reissued and compilation albums have been released such as `` two sides '' . 
oldfield's latest rock-themed album of songs ,  titled `` man on the rocks '' ,  was released on 3 march 2014 by virgin emi . 
on 12 april 2004 oldfield launched his next virtual reality project ,  `` maestro '' ,  which contains music from the `` tubular bells 2003 '' album and some new chillout melodies . 
in 1975, oldfield recorded a version of the christmas piece `` in dulci jubilo '' which charted at no . 
in this case the tree function calls the forest function by single recursion ,  but the forest function calls the tree function by multiple recursion . 
similarly a set of three or more functions that call each other can be called a set of mutually recursive functions . 
as a more general class of examples ,  an algorithm on a tree can be decomposed into its behavior on a value and its behavior on children ,  and can be split up into two mutually recursive functions ,  one specifying the behavior on a tree ,  calling the forest function for the forest of children ,  and one specifying the behavior on a forest ,  calling the tree function for the tree in the forest . 
as with directly recursive functions ,  a wrapper function may be useful ,  with the mutually recursive functions defined as nested functions within its scope if this is supported . 
in standard ml ,  the tree and forest data types can be mutually recursively defined as follows ,  allowing empty trees: just as algorithms on recursive data types can naturally be given by recursive functions ,  algorithms on mutually recursive data structures can be naturally given by mutually recursive functions . 
this can also be done without mutual recursion ,  for example by still having separate functions for each production rule ,  but having them called by a single controller function ,  or by putting all the grammar in a single function . 
using the standard ml data type above ,  the size of a tree  -lrb-  number of nodes  -rrb-  can be computed via the following mutually recursive functions: a more detailed example in scheme ,  counting the leaves of a tree: these examples reduce easily to a single recursive function by inlining the forest function in the tree function ,  which is commonly done in practice: directly recursive functions that operate on trees sequentially process the value of the node and recurse on the children within one function ,  rather than dividing these into two separate functions . 
this is a reference to the comedy sketch `` spam '' by monty python ,  the eponym of the language . 
in the following example the function name foo and the variable name bar are both metasyntactic variables . 
spam ,  ham ,  and eggs are the principal metasyntactic variables used in the python programming language . 
spam ,  ham ,  and eggs are the principal metasyntactic variables used in the python programming language . 
