puerto rico is mostly mountainous with large coastal areas in the north and south . 
puerto rico has lakes  -lrb-  none of them natural  -rrb-  and more than 50 rivers . 
lying about north of puerto rico in the atlantic ocean at the boundary between the caribbean and north american plates is the puerto rico trench ,  the largest and deepest trench in the atlantic . 
the archipelago of culebra ,  located east of puerto rico ,  north of vieques ,  and west of the virgin islands ,  is composed of the main island of culebra and 28 uninhabited islets . 
there are about 168 tree species in the tabonuco forest . 
the archipelago of puerto rico is located between the caribbean sea and the north atlantic ocean ,  east of the dominican republic and west of the virgin islands . 
as of 1998, 239 plants ,  16 birds and 39 amphibians/reptiles have been discovered that are endemic to the archipelago of puerto rico . 
forests of puerto rico are well represented by the flora of the luquillo experimental forest  -lrb-  lef  -rrb-  ,  a long term ecological research network site managed by the united states forest service and university of puerto rico . 
emigration has been a major part of puerto rico's recent history as well . 
during the 19th century large numbers of immigrants from spain ,  as well as numerous spaniards living in former spanish colonies in south america ,  also arrived in puerto rico  -lrb-  see spanish immigration to puerto rico  -rrb-  . 
this continued even as puerto rico's economy improved and its birth rate declined . 
under the constitution of puerto rico ,  puerto rico is described as a commonwealth and puerto ricans have a degree of administrative autonomy similar to that of a u . s .  state . 
2000, the puerto rico status resolution act to congress ,  requesting a process for voting to admit puerto rico as a state to be approved and a vote to ratify puerto rico as a state . 
the major differences between puerto rico and a state of the american union are:
puerto ricans may enlist in the u . s .  military . 
the application of the constitution to puerto rico is limited by the insular cases . 
the puerto rican nationalist party was founded in 1922.
since the 1898 invasion of puerto rico by the americans during the spanish–american war ,  politics in puerto rico have been significantly shaped by its status as territory of the united states . 
more than 1.2 million american citizens residing in puerto rico participated in the primaries . 
in order to control the costs of marine transport in puerto rico ,  the marine company `` sea land '' was bought to form `` navieras of puerto rico '' in 1974.
puerto rico has approximately the same degree of authority over its internal affairs as an american state . 
as a republican form of government ,  the government of the commonwealth of puerto rico is divided into three branches: executive ,  legislative and judicial ,  as established by the constitution of puerto rico . 
according to a december 2005, report by the president's task force on puerto rico's status ,  it is not possible `` to bind future  -lrb-  u . s .   -rrb-  congresses to any particular arrangement for puerto rico as a commonwealth '' . 
president obama was scheduled to briefly visit puerto rico on june 14, 2011.
politics in puerto rico revolve around a multi-party political system . 
puerto rico's elected governor and legislature control all other delegated internal affairs . 
the nature of puerto rico's political relationship with the united states is the subject of ongoing debate in puerto rico ,  in the united states ,  the united nations and the international community . 
the fifth governor was carlos romero barceló ,  a fierce supporter of annexation as the u . s .  state of puerto rico . 
on december 21, 2007, the bush administration's task force on puerto rico's status reiterated and confirmed that puerto rico continues to be a territory of the united states under the plenary powers of the u . s .  congress . 
despite the fact that the u . s .  federal government holds ultimate sovereignty over all u . s .  citizens and the territory of puerto rico ,  residents of puerto rico are without an effective voice in that government . 
governor muñoz marín inaugurated the new status called `` estado libre asociado ''—or ``  free associated state '' in english—and raised the puerto rican flag along with la borinqueña ,  the official anthem of puerto rico ,  for the first time on july 25, 1952—date in which puerto ricans celebrate the constitution of puerto rico  -lrb-  `` see also: '' holidays in puerto rico  -rrb-  . 
puerto rico has more latitude over its internal affairs than the u . s .  territories of guam ,  the u . s .  virgin islands ,  or american samoa . 
u . s .  citizens residing in puerto rico are counted in the decennial population census and in some other demographic studies carried out by the u . s .  census bureau ,  but are not included in the national totals since puerto rico is only a territory of the us . 
due to the status of puerto rico as a territory of the united states ,  its residents cannot vote in the u . s .  presidential elections . 
the following are current and former passenger and cargo airlines based in puerto rico or with flights to puerto rico:
transportation in puerto rico is heavily dependent on automobile transportation . 
the local government of puerto rico has requested several times to the u . s .  congress to exclude puerto rico from the jones act restrictions without success . 
puerto rico has an extensive system of roads and highways featuring tolled freeways  -lrb-  `` autopistas ''  -rrb-  . 
puerto rico has a total of 30 airports  -lrb-  3 of which are international  -rrb-  ,  including one in each of the smaller islands of vieques and culebra . 
there are several private marinas in puerto rico for boats and yachts ,  the largest being puerto del rey in fajardo and club naútico de ponce . 
the report ,  however ,  concluded that the effects of modifying the application of the jones act for puerto rico are highly uncertain for both puerto rico and the united states ,  particularly for the u . s .  shipping industry and the military preparedness of the united states . 
the united states coast guard has a significant presence in puerto rico . 
the coastal defense of puerto rico is the responsibility of the u . s .  navy from ships at sea ,  and the u . s .  coast guard . 
the us military installations in puerto rico are part of the us atlantic command  -lrb-  lantcom  -rrb-  . 
air force rotc programs are offered at the university of puerto rico - bayamon technological university college ,  the university of puerto rico - mayagüez ,  and the university of puerto rico - rio piedras . 
the local national guard also incorporates a branch of the u . s .  air national guard —known as the puerto rico air national guard— which performs missions equivalent to those of the air national guards of the u . s .  states . 
the u . s .  coast guard maintains presence at coast guard air station borinquen and coast guard station san juan . 
lnesc promotes military recruitment in educational service centers in several us cities and in puerto rico . 
some polyhedra are self-dual ,  meaning that the dual of the polyhedron is congruent to the original polyhedron . 
for every convex polyhedron ,  there exists a dual polyhedron having the dual of a convex polyhedron can be obtained by the process of polar reciprocation . 
cubes and pyramids are examples of convex polyhedra . 
altogether there are nine regular polyhedra: five convex and four star polyhedra . 
regular polyhedra are the most highly symmetrical . 
there are also four regular star polyhedra ,  known as the kepler–poinsot polyhedra after their discoverers . 
for some definitions of non-convex geometric polyhedra ,  there exist polyhedra whose abstract duals cannot be realized as geometric polyhedra under the same definition . 
a convex polyhedron is the convex hull of finitely many points ,  not all on the same plane . 
some polyhedra have two distinct sides to their surface . 
for example ,  the volume of a regular polyhedron can be computed by dividing it into congruent pyramids ,  with each pyramid having a face of the polyhedron as its base and the centre of the polyhedron as its apex . 
abstract polyhedra also have duals ,  which satisfy in addition that they have the same euler characteristic and orientability as the initial polyhedron . 
volumes of more complicated polyhedra may not have simple formulas . 
in certain fields of mathematics ,  the terms `` polytope '' and `` polyhedron '' are used in a different sense: a `` polyhedron '' is the generic object in any dimension  -lrb-  referred to as `` polytope '' in this wikipedia article  -rrb-  and `` polytope '' means a bounded polyhedron . 
a polyhedron is understood as a surface whose faces are polygons ,  a 4-polytope as a hypersurface whose facets  -lrb-  cells  -rrb-  are polyhedra ,  and so forth . 
with this terminology ,  a convex polyhedron is the intersection of a finite number of halfspaces and is defined by its sides while a convex polytope is the convex hull of a finite number of points and is defined by its vertices . 
the discovery of star polyhedra and other unusual constructions led to the idea of a polyhedron as a bounding surface ,  ignoring its interior . 
paleomaps are maps of continents and mountain ranges in the past based on plate reconstructions . 
extreme realism and strong realism are also known as exaggerated realism and moderate realism respectively . 
 ''aristotelian realism '' ,  on the other hand ,  is the view that universals are real entities ,  but their existence is dependent on the particulars that exemplify them . 
according to ockham ,  universals are just words/names that only exist in the mind and have no real place in the external world . 
one of the first nominalist critiques of plato's realism was that of diogenes of sinope ,  who said `` i've seen plato's cups and table ,  but not his cupness and tableness . `` 
plato believed there to be a sharp distinction between the world of perceivable objects and the world of universals or forms: one can only have mere opinions about the former ,  but one can have knowledge about the latter . 
nominalists assert that only individuals or particulars exist and deny that universals are real  -lrb-  i . e . 
realism was argued for by both thomas aquinas and duns scotus . 
the realist school claims that universals are real—they exist and are distinct from the particulars that instantiate them . 
he gives a number of reasons to reject all of these ,  but also dismisses a number of realist accounts . 
in metaphysics ,  the problem of universals refers to the question of whether properties exist ,  and if so ,  what they are . 
the problem was introduced to the medieval world by boethius ,  by his translation of porphyry's isagoge . 
the plea bargain  -lrb-  also plea agreement or plea deal  -rrb-  is any agreement in a criminal case between the prosecutor and defendant whereby the defendant agrees to plead guilty or nolo contendere to a particular charge in return for some concession from the prosecutor . 
this may mean that the defendant will plead guilty to a less serious charge ,  or to one of the several charges ,  in return for the dismissal of other charges; or it may mean that the defendant will plead guilty to the original criminal charge in return for a more lenient sentence . 
a plea bargain allows both parties to avoid a lengthy criminal trial and may allow criminal defendants to avoid the risk of conviction at trial on a more serious charge . 
songs which support the status quo do not qualify as protest songs . 
a protest song is a song that is associated with a movement for social change and hence part of the broader category of `` topical '' songs  -lrb-  or songs connected to current events  -rrb-  . 
commonly ,  protest songs in south korea are known as `` minjung gayo ''  -lrb-   ,  literally `` people's song ''  -rrb-  ,  and the genre of protest songs is called `` norae undong '' ,  literally `` song movement '' . 
protest songs are often situational ,  having been associated with a social movement through context . 
korean protest song has emerged on 1980s ,  especially before and after of the june democracy movement in 1987.
phil ochs once explained ,  `` a protest song is a song that's so specific that you cannot mistake it for bs . `` 
the starting point of korean protest songs is the music culture of korean students movements around 1970.
protest songs in poland were mostly associated with anti-communist movement and developed in the 1970s and 1980s . 
the main stream of korean protest songs in 1980's could divided in 3 period . 
many of the songs performed at the estonian laulupidu are protest songs ,  particularly those written during the singing revolution . 
protest song texts may have significant cognitive content . 
denisoff subdivided protest songs as either `` magnetic '' or `` rhetorical '' . 
these songs ,  although filipinized ,  rose to become another part of filipino protest music known as revolutionary songs that became popular during protests and campaign struggles . 
in thailand ,  protest songs are known as `` phleng phuea chiwit ''  -lrb-   ,  ; lit . 
i prefer the term 'revolutionary song' . 
denisoff saw the protest song tradition as originating in the `` psalms '' or songs of grassroots protestant religious revival movements ,  terming these hymns `` protest-propaganda '' ,  as well . 
after going through this period ,  protest song embraces not only the intellectuals but also the working-class population . 
despite this ,  the song ermutigung by wolf biermann became a widely popular protest song against the spu government . 
in the 1980s the anarchist rock band chumbawamba recorded several versions of traditional english protest songs as `` english rebel songs 1381–1914 '' . 
the digger movement was violently crushed ,  and so it is not surprising if few overt protest songs associated with it have survived . 
korean protest song called minjung-gayo reflects the will of crowd and voices of criticism of the day . 
the chinese version was also a rallying song of the students and workers at the tiananmen square protests of 1989.
from the revolutionary songs of the katipunan to the songs being sung by the new peoples army ,  filipino protest music deals with poverty ,  oppression as well as anti-imperialism and independence . 
chinese-korean cui jian's 1986 song `` nothing to my name '' was popular with protesters in tiananmen square . 
such songs have been known ,  strictly speaking ,  as songs of complaint rather than of protest ,  since they offered no solution or hint of rebellion against the status quo . 
india provided many examples of protest songs throughout its struggle for freedom from britain . 
the advent of industrialization in the 18th and early 19th centuries was accompanied by a series of protest movements and a corresponding increase in the number of topical social protest songs and ballads . 
in this period ,  music has taken a part of social movement . 
<nowiki>'people who're finding songs'노래를 찾는 사람들 is the music group writing korean protest songs in 1980~90s  -lrb-  known as 'nochatsa'노찾사  -rrb-  . 
the protest songs in portugal were mostly associated with the antifascist movement and developed chiefly among students and activists . 
spreading the criticism against pop music ,  a series of certain music culture which had such unique criticism of university students was established and it's the base of korean protest songs . 
it is the period that many songs composed as marching song with minor like 'the march for her'  -lrb-  hanguel : 임을 위한 행진곡  -rrb-  were being written and the number of the songs were increased massively from 1980 to 1984.
as labour became more organized songs were used as anthems and propaganda ,  for miners with songs such as `` the black leg miner '' ,  and for factory workers with songs such as `` the factory bell '' . 
in east germany ,  protesting against the state was often prohibited . 
other polish artists well known for writing protest songs include stanisław staszewski and przemysław gintrowski . 
these industrial protest songs were largely ignored during the first english folk revival of the later 19th and early 20th century ,  which had focused on songs that had been collected in rural areas where they were still being sung and on music education . 
after his departure from public enemy ,  griffin formed his own group ,  the last asiatic disciples . 
richard griffin  -lrb-  born august 1, 1960 -rrb- ,  better known by his stage name professor griff ,  is an american rapper ,  spoken word artist ,  lecturer and martial artist ,  currently residing in atlanta ,  he is a member of the hip hop group public enemy serving as the group's `` minister of information '' and head of the group security of the first world . 
griffin embraces a radical form of afrocentrism . 
when public enemy reformed ,  due to increasing attention from the press and pressure from def jam hierarchy ,  griffin was no longer with the band . 
3 -rrb- physicalism is true at a possible world `` w '' if and only if any world that is a physical duplicate of `` w '' is a positive duplicate of `` w '' . 
1 -rrb- physicalism is true at a possible world `` w '' if and only if any world that is a physical duplicate of `` w '' is also a duplicate of `` w simpliciter '' . 
2 -rrb- physicalism is true at a possible world `` w '' if and only if any world that is a `` minimal '' physical duplicate of `` w '' is a duplicate of `` w simpliciter '' . 
applied to the actual world  -lrb-  our world  -rrb-  ,  statement 1 above is the claim that physicalism is true at the actual world if and only if at `` every possible world '' in which the physical properties and laws of the actual world are instantiated ,  the non-physical  -lrb-  in the ordinary sense of the word  -rrb-  properties of the actual world are instantiated as well . 
applied in the same way ,  statement 2 is the claim that physicalism is true at a possible world `` w '' if and only if any world that is a physical duplicate of `` w ''  -lrb-  without any further changes  -rrb-  ,  is duplicate of `` w '' without qualification . 
unfortunately ,  statement 1 fails to capture even a necessary condition for physicalism to be true at a world `` w '' . 
this allows a world in which there are only physical properties to be counted as one at which physicalism is true ,  since worlds in which there is some extra stuff are `` not '' `` minimal '' physical duplicates of such a world ,  nor are they minimal physical duplicates of worlds that contain some non-physical properties that are metaphysically necessitated by the physical . 
daniel stoljar  -lrb-  2010 -rrb- objects to this response to the blockers problem on the basis that since the non-physical properties of `` w '' aren't instantiated at a world in which there is a blocker ,  they are not positive properties in chalmers'  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- sense ,  and so statement 3 will count `` w '' as a world at which physicalism is true after all . 
but while statement 2 overcomes the problem of worlds at which there is some extra stuff  -lrb-  sometimes referred to as the `` epiphenomenal ectoplasm problem ''  -rrb-  it faces a different challenge: the so-called `` blockers problem '' . 
physicalists hold that physicalism is true . 
to borrow a metaphor from saul kripke  -lrb-  1972 -rrb- ,  the truth of physicalism at the actual world entails that once god has instantiated or `` fixed '' the physical properties and laws of our world ,  then god's work is done; the rest comes `` automatically '' . 
the philosophy of perception is concerned with the nature of perceptual experience and the status of perceptual data ,  in particular how they relate to beliefs about ,  or knowledge of ,  the world . 
in the philosophy of language a proper name ,  for example the names of persons or places ,  is a name which is ordinarily taken to uniquely identify its referent in the world . 
philosophers such as john mcdowell have elaborated on frege's theory of proper names . 
he also notes that there are subjective elements of meaning in proper names ,  since they connect the bearer of a name with the sign of their own identity . 
the `` descriptive '' theory of proper names is the view that the meaning of a given use of a proper name is a set of properties that can be expressed as a description that picks out an object that satisfies the description . 
in 1973, tyler burge proposed a metalinguistic descriptivist theory of proper names which holds that names have the meaning that corresponds to the description of the individual entities to whom the name is applied . 
this puzzle suggests that there is something more to the meaning of the proper name than simply pointing out its referent . 
direct reference theory is similar to mill's theory in that it proposes that the only meaning of a proper name is its referent . 
prolog's single data type is the `` term '' . 
it has a purely logical subset ,  called `` pure prolog '' ,  as well as a number of extralogical features . 
prolog is a logic programming language associated with artificial intelligence and computational linguistics . 
the very first version of pgp included an encryption algorithm ,  bassomatic ,  developed by zimmermann . 
simon singh's `` the code book '' devotes an entire chapter to zimmermann and pgp . 
the goal of the organization is to work on a new protocol to replace pgp that will encrypt metadata ,  among other things that pgp is not capable of . 
after the government dropped its case without indictment in early 1996, zimmermann founded pgp inc .  and released an updated version of pgp and some additional related products . 
milton rokeach claimed that the defining difference between the left and right was that the left stressed the importance of equality more than the right . 
this puts left-wingers in the left quadrant ,  libertarians in the top ,  right-wingers in the right and what nolan originally named populists in the bottom . 
eysenck's political views related to his research: eysenck was an outspoken opponent of what he perceived as the authoritarian abuses of the left and right and accordingly he believed that with this t axis he had found the link between nazism and communism . 
placed on this chart ,  european union countries in continental europe come out on the top right ,  anglophone countries on the middle right ,  latin american countries on the bottom right ,  african ,  middle eastern and south asian countries on the bottom left and ex-communist countries on the top left . 
simply rotating eysenck's two factors 45 degrees renders the same factors of religionism and humanitarianism identified by ferguson in america . 
eysenck's conception of tough-mindedness has been criticized for a number of reasons . 
submitting this value questionnaire to the same process of factor analysis used by ferguson ,  eysenck drew out two factors ,  which he named `` radicalism ''  -lrb-  r-factor  -rrb-  and `` tender-mindedess ''  -lrb-  t-factor  -rrb-  . 
most long-standing spectra include a left wing ,  which originally referred to seating arrangements in the french parliament after the revolution  -lrb-  1789–1799 -rrb- . 
eysenck's dimensions of r and t were found by factor analyses of values in germany and sweden ,  france and japan . 
see for inglehart's national chart . 
thus the word `` left '' in american political parlance may refer to `` liberalism '' and be identified with the democratic party ,  whereas in a country such as france these positions would be regarded as relatively more right-wing ,  or centrist overall ,  and `` left '' is more likely to refer to `` socialist '' or `` social-democratic '' positions rather than `` liberal '' ones . 
the nolan chart was created by libertarian david nolan . 
the terms `` right '' and `` left '' refer to political affiliations originating early in the french revolutionary era of 1789–1799 and referred originally to the seating arrangements in the various legislative bodies of france . 
support for `` laissez-faire '' commerce and free markets were expressed by politicians sitting on the left because these represented policies favorable to capitalists rather than to the aristocracy ,  but outside parliamentary politics these views are often characterized as being on the right . 
the blood system continues to grow networks which allow the blood to flow around the embryo . 
the flow of fluids throughout the embryo begins at this stage . 
at this time ,  the embryo usually consists of 50 cells . 
a blastocoele is a small cavity on the center of the embryo ,  and the developing embryonary cells will grow around it . 
endocardial cells begin to form the myocardium . 
following this ,  a narrow line of cells appears on the surface on the embryo . 
paroxysmal attacks or paroxysms  -lrb-  from greek παροξυσμός  -rrb-  are a sudden recurrence or intensification of symptoms ,  such as a spasm or seizure . 
potatoes are occasionally referred to as `` irish potatoes '' or `` white potatoes '' in the united states ,  to distinguish them from sweet potatoes . 
there are about 5,000 potato varieties worldwide . 
in general ,  varieties are categorized into a few main groups based on common characteristics ,  such as russet potatoes  -lrb-  rough brown skin  -rrb-  ,  red potatoes ,  white potatoes ,  yellow potatoes  -lrb-  also called yukon potatoes  -rrb-  and purple potatoes . 
immature potatoes may be sold as `` creamer potatoes '' and are particularly valued for taste . 
potato growth is divided into five phases . 
the name `` spud '' for a small potato comes from the digging of soil  -lrb-  or a hole  -rrb-  prior to the planting of potatoes . 
potatoes are generally grown from `` seed potatoes , ``  tubers specifically grown to be free from disease and to provide consistent and healthy plants . 
while a normal potato tuber has 12–20 mg/kg of glycoalkaloid content ,  a green potato tuber contains 250–280 mg/kg and its skin has 1500–2200 mg/kg . 
the potato is a starchy ,  tuberous crop from the perennial nightshade `` solanum tuberosum '' . 
slightly older than creamer potatoes are `` new potatoes '' ,  which are also prized for their taste and texture and often come from the same varieties . 
potatoes that are good for making potato chips or potato crisps are sometimes called `` chipping potatoes '' ,  which means they meet the basic requirements of similar varietal characteristics ,  being firm ,  fairly clean ,  and fairly well-shaped . 
potatoes are usually cured after harvest to improve skin-set . 
another relative native to this region ,  `` solanum bulbocastanum '' ,  has been used to genetically engineer the potato to resist potato blight . 
potatoes are sensitive to heavy frosts ,  which damage them in the ground . 
correct potato husbandry can be an arduous task in some circumstances . 
waxy potato varieties produce two main kinds of potato starch ,  amylose and amylopectin ,  the latter of which is most industrially useful . 
portland not only remains white ,  but migration to portland is disproportionately white . 
in 2008, 12.6% of all commutes in portland were on public transit . 
the survey revealed that 80% of portlanders live within a half-mile to a park ,  and over 16% of portland's city area is parkland . 
portland is home to two major league sports franchises: the portland trail blazers of the nba and the portland timbers of major league soccer . 
in the 1980s and 1990s ,  radical skinhead groups flourished in portland . 
in portland ,  cycling is a significant mode of transportation . 
approximately 60% of oregon's population resides within the portland metropolitan area . 
portland's location is beneficial for several industries . 
the area's private schools include the northwest academy ,  portland jewish academy ,  rosemary anderson high school ,  portland adventist academy ,  portland lutheran school ,  the portland waldorf school ,  and trinity academy . 
the city of portland is governed by the portland city council ,  which includes the mayor ,  four commissioners ,  and an auditor . 
portland's main airport is portland international airport ,  about 20 minutes by car  -lrb-  40 minutes by max  -rrb-  northeast of downtown . 
portland is split among three u . s .  congressional districts . 
portland is approximately upriver from the pacific ocean on the columbia . 
portland is the largest city in the u . s .  state of oregon and the seat of multnomah county . 
portland's delegation to the oregon legislative assembly is entirely democratic . 
law enforcement is provided by the portland police bureau . 
metro also owns and operates the oregon convention center ,  oregon zoo ,  portland center for the performing arts ,  and portland metropolitan exposition center . 
summers in portland are warm to hot ,  dry ,  and sunny . 
portland's city park system has been proclaimed one of the best in america . 
at 6.3% ,  portland's african american population is three times the state average . 
portland indymedia is one of the oldest and largest independent media centers . 
in 2016, home prices in portland grew faster than in any other city in the united states . 
northeast portland is home to the lloyd district ,  alberta arts district ,  and the hollywood district . 
portland is home to a range of classical performing arts institutions ,  including the portland opera ,  the oregon symphony ,  and the portland youth philharmonic; the latter ,  established in 1924, was the first youth orchestra established in the united states . 
six public school districts and many private schools serve portland . 
both of oregon's senators ,  ron wyden and jeff merkley ,  are from portland and are also both democrats . 
other notable portland brewers include widmer brothers ,  bridgeport ,  portland brewing ,  hair of the dog ,  and hopworks urban brewery . 
portland experiences a temperate climate with both oceanic and mediterranean features . 
fire and emergency services are provided by portland fire & rescue . 
the steel industry's history in portland predates world war ii . 
multiple shallow ,  active fault lines traverse the portland metropolitan area . 
named after portland ,  maine ,  the oregon settlement began to be populated in the 1830s near the end of the oregon trail . 
two rival universities exist within portland city limits: the university of portland pilots and the portland state university vikings ,  both of whom field teams in popular spectator sports including soccer ,  baseball ,  and basketball . 
breweries are another major industry in portland ,  which is home to 85 breweries/microbreweries ,  the most of any city in the world . 
the city is also home to the oregon health & science university ,  as well as portland community college . 
the rocks of the portland area range in age from late eocene to more recent eras . 
tryon creek state natural area is one of three oregon state parks in portland and the most popular; its creek has a run of steelhead . 
portland is often awarded `` greenest city in america '' and similar designations . 
the willamette river ,  which flows north through downtown ,  serves as the natural boundary between east and west portland . 
the city held its first pride festival in 1975 on the portland state university campus . 
during this time ,  portland's population rose by over 150,000, largely attributed to recruited laborers . 
portland's south waterfront area has developed into a dense neighborhood of shops ,  condominiums ,  and apartments . 
pan and scan cuts out as much as half of the image . 
however ,  on some channels in some countries  -lrb-  such as the united kingdom  -rrb-  ,  films with an aspect ratio of more than 1.85:1 are panned and scanned to fit the broadcast 1.78:1 ratio . 
the vertical equivalent is known as `` tilt and scan '' or `` reverse pan and scan '' . 
often in a pan and scan telecast ,  a character will seem to be speaking offscreen ,  when what has really happened is that the pan and scan technique has cut his image out of the screen . 
pan and scan is a method of adjusting widescreen film images so that they can be shown in fullscreen proportions of a standard definition 4:3 aspect ratio television screen ,  often cropping off the sides of the original widescreen image to focus on the composition's most important aspects . 
one modern alternative to pan and scan is to directly adjust the source material . 
there is also an independent school plymouth college . 
since 1973 plymouth has been supplied water by south west water . 
to the west of the city is devonport ,  one of plymouth's historic quarters . 
since 2003, plymouth council has been undertaking a project of urban redevelopment called the `` vision for plymouth '' launched by the architect david mackay and backed by both plymouth city council and the plymouth chamber of commerce  -lrb-  pcc  -rrb-  . 
plymouth is the regional television centre of bbc south west . 
in the parliament of the united kingdom ,  plymouth is represented by the three constituencies of plymouth moor view ,  plymouth sutton and devonport and south west devon and within the european parliament as south west england . 
plymouth lies between the river plym to the east and the river tamar to the west; both rivers flow into the natural harbour of plymouth sound . 
the castle served to protect sutton pool ,  which is where the fleet was based in plymouth prior to the establishment of plymouth dockyard . 
other sports clubs include plymouth albion r . f . c . 
plymouth has about 150 churches and its roman catholic cathedral  -lrb-  1858 -rrb- is in stonehouse . 
plymouth is also home to plymouth marjons hockey club ,  with their 1st xi playing in the national league last season . 
built in 1815, union street was at the heart of plymouth's historical culture . 
the university of plymouth enrolls total students as of  -lrb-  largest in the uk out of   -rrb-  . 
plymouth is home to plymouth argyle f . c .  ,  who play in the third tier of english football league known as football league one . 
people from plymouth are known as plymothians or less formally as janners . 
the plymouth city museum and art gallery is operated by plymouth city council allowing free admission – it has six galleries . 
plymouth is served by plymouth hospitals nhs trust and the city's nhs hospital is derriford hospital north of the city centre . 
plymouth has the first known reference to jews in the south west from sir francis drake's voyages in 1577 to 1580, as his log mentioned `` moses the jew '' – a man from plymouth . 
the city's airport was plymouth city airport about north of the city centre . 
the settlement of plympton ,  further up the river plym than the current plymouth ,  was also an early trading port . 
in 1620 the pilgrim fathers set sail for the new world from plymouth ,  establishing plymouth colony – the second english colony in what is now the united states of america . 
there is a proposal to reopen the exeter to plymouth railway of the lswr which would connect cornwall and plymouth to the rest of the uk railway system on an all weather basis . 
plymouth was granted the dignity of lord mayor by king george v in 1935.
plymouth has a post-war shopping area in the city centre with substantial pedestrianisation . 
a number of other smaller cultural events taken place annually ,  including plymouth art weekender ,  plymouth fringe festival and illuminate festival . 
it has been designated as an official permanent monument to the bombing of plymouth during world war ii . 
during the first world war ,  plymouth was the port of entry for many troops from around the empire . 
throughout the 17th century plymouth had gradually lost its pre-eminence as a trading port . 
from the 2011 census ,  the office for national statistics published that plymouth's unitary authority area population was 256,384; 15,664 more people than that of the last census from 2001, which indicated that plymouth had a population of 240,720.
beckley point ,  at 78m / 20 floors ,  is plymouth's tallest building and was completed on 8 february 2018.
plymouth city council is formally twinned with: brest ,  france  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- ,  gdynia ,  poland  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  novorossiysk ,  russia  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- san sebastián ,  spain  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- and plymouth ,  united states  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- . 
plymouth is an important centre for watersports ,  especially scuba diving and sailing . 
ppp is specified in rfc 1661.
in computer networking ,  point-to-point protocol  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  is a data link layer  -lrb-  layer 2 -rrb- communications protocol used to establish a direct connection between two nodes . 
rfc 2516 describes point-to-point protocol over ethernet  -lrb-  pppoe  -rrb-  as a method for transmitting ppp over ethernet that is sometimes used with dsl . 
next ,  gimlin and patterson rounded up patterson's horses ,  which had run off in the opposite direction ,  downstream ,  before the filming began . 
patterson died of hodgkin's lymphoma in 1972.
grover krantz writes that `` patterson had the film developed as soon as possible . 
while patterson sought publicity ,  gimlin was conspicuous by his absence . 
patterson's brother-in-law al deatley claims not to remember where he took the film for development or where he picked it up . 
patterson had played high school football . 
though there was little scientific interest in the film ,  patterson was still able to capitalize on it . 
the patterson–gimlin film  -lrb-  also known as the patterson film or the pgf  -rrb-  is an american short motion picture of an unidentified subject which the filmmakers have said was a bigfoot . 
according to patterson and gimlin ,  they were the only witnesses to their brief encounter with what they claimed was a sasquatch . 
patterson estimated he was about 25 ft  -lrb-  7.6 m  -rrb-  away from the creature at his closest . 
daegling wrote ,  `` bigfoot advocates emphasize that patterson remained an active bigfoot hunter up until his death . `` 
al deatley estimated that his 50% of the film's profits amounted to $75,000.
patterson also appeared on broadcast interviews on local stations near where his film would be shown during his four-walling tour in 1968.
dahinden had  .  .  .  bought out gimlin ,  who himself had received nothing from patterson; and mason and radford ,  promised part of the profits by patterson ,  had nothing to show for their investment or efforts . `` 
prior to the october 1967 filming ,  patterson apparently visited los angeles on these occasions: merritt soon moved back to yakima and became patterson's neighbor ,  and later his collaborator on his bigfoot documentary . 
in may/june 1967 patterson began filming a docudrama or pseudo-documentary about cowboys being led by an old miner and a wise indian tracker on a hunt for bigfoot . 
patterson's book ,  `` do abominable snowmen of america really exist ? 
</poem>
with `` le cimetière marin '' and `` l'ébauche d'un serpent , ``  it is often considered one of the greatest french poems of the twentieth century . 
blood and time '' . 
in the book `` el laberinto de la soledad '' from octavio paz there are three verses of one of valéry's poems:  <poem> je pense ,  sur le bord doré de l’univers a ce gout de périr qui prend la pythonisse en qui mugit l’espoir que le monde finisse . 
he is buried in the cemetery of his native town ,  sète ,  the same cemetery celebrated in his famous poem `` le cimetière marin '' . 
there are ,  therefore ,  evident links with `` le cimetière marin '' ,  which is also a seaside meditation on comparably large themes . 
'le cimetière marin' is mentioned or indirectly implied or referred to in at least four of iris murdoch's novels ,  the unicorn ,  the time of the angels ,  the nice and the good and the sea ,  the sea . 
his poem ,  `` palme '' ,  inspired james merrill's celebrated 1974 poem `` lost in translation '' ,  and his cerebral lyricism also influenced the american poet ,  edgar bowers . 
valéry is best known as a poet ,  and he is sometimes considered to be the last of the french symbolists . 
in addition to his activities as a member of the académie française ,  he was also a member of the academy of sciences of lisbon ,  and of the `` front national des ecrivains '' . 
popular pianists might work as live performers  -lrb-  concert ,  theatre ,  etc . 
mozart could be considered the first `` concert pianist '' as he performed widely on the piano . 
what is a proverb ? 
proverbs come from a variety of sources . 
however ,  people will often quote only a fraction of a proverb to invoke an entire proverb ,  e . g . 
the changing of the definition of `` proverb '' is also noted in turkish . 
some authors have created proverbs in their writings ,  such a j . r . r . 
interpretation of proverbs is also affected by injuries and diseases of the brain ,  `` a hallmark of schizophrenia is impaired proverb interpretation . `` 
the portability of social security benefits is the ability of workers to preserve ,  maintain ,  and transfer acquired social security rights and social security rights in the process of being acquired from one private ,  occupational ,  or public social security scheme to another . 
international portability of social security benefits is achieved through bilateral or multilateral social security agreements between countries . 
each photon carries two distinct and independent forms of angular momentum of light . 
the quanta in a light wave are not spatially localized . 
the light orbital angular momentum of a particular photon can be any integer `` n '' ,  including zero . 
the photon has zero rest mass and always moves at the speed of light within a vacuum . 
if a photon did have non-zero mass ,  there would be other effects as well . 
remarkably ,  the uncertainty principle for charged ,  material particles `` requires '' the quantization of light into photons ,  and even the frequency dependence of the photon's energy and momentum . 
the photon is the gauge boson for electromagnetism ,  and therefore all other quantum numbers of the photon  -lrb-  such as lepton number ,  baryon number ,  and flavour quantum numbers  -rrb-  are zero . 
photons are emitted in many natural processes . 
the energy and momentum of a photon depend only on its frequency  -lrb-  `` ν ''  -rrb-  or inversely ,  its wavelength  -lrb-  `` λ ''  -rrb- :
since p points in the direction of the photon's propagation ,  the magnitude of the momentum is
by contrast ,  einstein's formula for photon momentum preserves the uncertainty principle; since the photon is scattered anywhere within the aperture ,  the uncertainty of momentum transferred equals
photons ,  like all quantum objects ,  exhibit wave-like and particle-like properties . 
the photon also carries a quantity called spin angular momentum that does not depend on its frequency . 
in empty space ,  the photon moves at `` c ''  -lrb-  the speed of light  -rrb-  and its energy and momentum are related by  ,  where `` p '' is the magnitude of the momentum vector p .  this derives from the following relativistic relation ,  with :
the `` siebold collection '' opened to the public in 1831.
as well ,  siebold's assistant and later successor ,  heinrich bürger  -lrb-  1806–1858 -rrb- ,  proved to be indispensable in carrying on siebold's work in japan . 
this work expanded siebold's scientific fame from japan to europe . 
after his return to europe ,  siebold tried to exploit his knowledge of japan . 
in 1826 siebold made the court journey to edo . 
siebold was ordered to return to batavia and from there he returned to europe . 
siebold kept trying to organise another voyage to japan . 
it left for batavia with 89 crates of siebold's salvaged botanical collection ,  but siebold himself remained behind in dejima . 
reportedly ,  siebold was not the easiest man to deal with . 
siebold is credited with the introduction of vaccination and pathological anatomy for the first time in japan . 
the japanese placed siebold under house arrest and expelled him from japan on 22 october 1829.
in 1858, the japanese government lifted the banishment of siebold . 
siebold settled in leiden ,  taking with him the major part of his collection . 
siebold wrote his ``  '' in collaboration with the german botanist joseph gerhard zuccarini  -lrb-  1797–1848 -rrb- . 
this degree of support of h by e has been called the logical probability of h given e ,  or the epistemic probability of h given e ,  or the inductive probability of h given e . 
the frequentist view has its own problems . 
if we denote by formula_2 the number of occurrences of an event formula_3 in formula_4 trials ,  then if formula_5 we say that `` formula_6.
bayesians point to the work of ramsey  -lrb-  p 182 -rrb- and de finetti  -lrb-  p 103 -rrb- as proving that subjective beliefs must follow the laws of probability if they are to be coherent . 
 -lrb-  p 157 -rrb- in other words ,  ramsey held that epistemic probabilities simply `` are '' degrees of rational belief ,  rather than being logical relations that merely `` constrain '' degrees of rational belief . 
rational people ,  in other words ,  may differ somewhat in their degrees of belief ,  even if they all have the same information . 
evidence casts doubt that humans will have coherent beliefs . 
the use of bayesian probability raises the philosophical debate as to whether it can contribute valid justifications of belief . 
gambling odds don't reflect the bookies' belief in a likely winner ,  so much as the other bettors' belief ,  because the bettors are actually betting against one another . 
subjectivists ,  also known as bayesians or followers of epistemic probability ,  give the notion of probability a subjective status by regarding it as a measure of the 'degree of belief' of the individual assessing the uncertainty of a particular situation . 
the differences between these interpretations are rather small ,  and may seem inconsequential . 
evidential probability ,  also called bayesian probability ,  can be assigned to any statement whatsoever ,  even when no random process is involved ,  as a way to represent its subjective plausibility ,  or the degree to which the statement is supported by the available evidence . 
then  -lrb-  ω ,  `` f '' ,  `` p ''  -rrb-  is a probability space ,  with sample space ω ,  event space `` f '' and probability measure `` p '' . 
the probability that any one of the events {1,6} ,  {3} ,  or {2,4} will occur is 5/6.
if the results that actually occur fall in a given event ,  that event is said to have occurred . 
the mutually exclusive event {5} has a probability of 1/6, and the event {1,2,3,4,5,6} has a probability of 1, that is ,  absolute certainty . 
probability is a way of assigning every `` event '' a value between zero and one ,  with the requirement that the event made up of all possible results  -lrb-  in our example ,  the event {1,2,3,4,5,6}  -rrb-  be assigned a value of one . 
any specified subset of these outcomes is called an event . 
a measurable function formula_6 between a probability space formula_7 and a measurable space formula_8 is called a discrete random variable provided that its image is a countable set . 
the cumulative distribution function is the antiderivative of the probability density function provided that the latter function exists . 
thus ,  the distribution of a random variable `` x '' is discrete ,  and `` x '' is called a discrete random variable ,  if
for a discrete random variable `` x '' ,  let `` u '' ,  `` u '' ,   .  .  .  be the values it can take with non-zero probability . 
the points where jumps occur are precisely the values which the random variable may take . 
the sample space may be the set of real numbers or a higher-dimensional vector space ,  or it may be a list of non-numerical values; for example ,  the sample space of a coin flip would be  . 
examples of random phenomena can include the results of an experiment or survey . 
the typical test construction procedures has following steps:
the modern test theory is based on latent trait model . 
the inter-correlation between two parallel forms of a test or scale is used as an estimate of parallel form reliability . 
cook starred in the lwt special `` peter cook & co . ``  in 1980.
cook was married three times . 
cook's comedy partnership with dudley moore led to `` not only .  .  . 
cook performed monologues and skits with terry jones . 
cook's acerbic commentary was a distinctive aspect of the programme . 
cook died from a gastrointestinal hemorrhage on 9 january 1995, aged 57.
parkinson later asked cook what his ambitions were ,  cook replied jocularly ``  .  .  .  in fact ,  my ambition is to shut you up altogether you see ! `` 
cook and moore hosted `` saturday night live '' on 24 january 1976 during the show's first season . 
cook became a favourite of the chat show circuit ,  but his own effort at hosting such a show for the bbc in 1971, `` where do i sit ? 
cook was declared the winner ,  his prize being to read the credits in the style of a new york cab driver – a character he had portrayed in `` peter cook & co . `` 
in 1988, cook appeared as a contestant on the improvisation comedy show `` whose line is it anyway ? `` 
he and martin lewis presented a two-night memorial for cook at the improv in los angeles ,  on 15 and 16 november 1995, to mark what would have been cook's 58th birthday . 
with `` the wrong box ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- and `` bedazzled ''  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- cook and moore began to act in films together . 
during one performance ,  macmillan was in the theatre and cook departed from his script and attacked him verbally . 
cook returned to britain and in 1973 married the actress and model judy huxtable . 
the voice and accent cook used for the character of stapleton are similar to those of cook's `` beyond the fringe '' colleague ,  alan bennett ,  and a book on cook's comedy ,  `` how very interesting '' ,  speculates that the characters cook plays in `` consequences '' are caricatures of the four `` beyond the fringe '' cast members – the alcoholic haig represents cook ,  the tremulous stapleton is bennett ,  the parodically jewish pepperman is miller ,  and the pianist blint represents moore . 
by the end of the 1960s ,  psychedelic rock was in retreat . 
emerging in the 1990s ,  stoner rock combined elements of psychedelic rock and doom metal . 
american folk singer bob dylan was a massive influence on mid 1960s rock music . 
graham would become a major figure in the growth of psychedelic rock ,  attracting most of the major psychedelic rock bands of the day to the fillmore . 
psychedelic rock is a diverse style of rock music inspired ,  influenced ,  or representative of psychedelic culture ,  which is centred around perception-altering hallucinogenic drugs . 
by this point ,  many surviving acts had moved away from psychedelia into either more back-to-basics `` roots rock '' ,  traditional-based ,  pastoral or whimsical folk ,  the wider experimentation of progressive rock ,  or riff-based heavy rock . 
while `` acid rock '' is sometimes deployed interchangeably with the term `` psychedelic rock '' ,  it also refers more specifically to the heavier and more extreme ends of the genre . 
the terms psychedelic rock and acid rock are often used interchangeably ,  but acid rock may be distinguished as a more extreme variation that was heavier ,  louder ,  relied on long jams ,  focused more directly on lsd ,  and made greater use of distortion . 
psychedelic rock ,  with its distorted guitar sound ,  extended solos and adventurous compositions ,  has been seen as an important bridge between blues-oriented rock and later heavy metal . 
1966 saw the media coverage of rock music change considerably as the music became reevaluated as a new form of art in tandem with the growing psychedelic community . 
the incredible string band's `` the 5000 spirits or the layers of the onion ''  -lrb-  july 1967 -rrb- developed their folk music into full blown psychedelia ,  which would be a major influence on psychedelic rock . 
author steve turner recognises the beatles' success in conveying an lsd-inspired worldview on `` revolver '' ,  particularly on `` tomorrow never knows '' ,  as having `` opened the doors to psychedelic rock  -lrb-  or acid rock  -rrb- ``  . 
following the lead of hendrix in rock ,  psychedelia began to influence african american musicians ,  particularly the stars of the motown label . 
in 1895, after a difficult first few years and near bankruptcy ,  the philipses brought in anton ,  gerard's younger brother by sixteen years . 
it moved to complete this in march 2015 to an investment group for $3.3 billion
in 1972, philips launched the world's first home video cassette recorder ,  in the uk ,  the n1500.
some pcj programs ,  such as `` happy station '' ,  continued on the new station . 
the philips works in eindhoven was bombed again by the raf on 30 march 1943.
this first factory has been adapted and is used as a museum . 
in 2018, the lighting products division known as philips lighting n . v .  was renamed signify n . v . 
phohi broadcast in dutch to the dutch east indies  -lrb-  now indonesia  -rrb-  while pcjj broadcast in english ,  spanish and german to the rest of the world . 
in 1991, the company's name was changed from n . v .  philips gloeilampenfabrieken to philips electronics n . v .  at the same time ,  north american philips was formally dissolved ,  and a new corporate division was formed in the us with the name philips electronics north america corp . 
in 2013, philips removed the word `` electronics '' from its name - becoming royal philips n . v .  on 13 november 2013, philips unveiled its new brand line `` innovation and you '' and a new design of its shield mark . 
on 29 january 2013, it was announced that philips had agreed to sell its audio and video operations to the japan-based funai electric for €150 million ,  with the audio business planned to transfer to funai in the latter half of 2013, and the video business in 2017.
in 1997, the company officers decided to move the headquarters from eindhoven to amsterdam along with the corporate name change to koninklijke philips electronics n . v .  ,  the latter of which was finalized on 16 march 1998.
after the war the company was moved back to the netherlands ,  with their headquarters in eindhoven . 
on 11 march 1927, philips went on the air with shortwave radio station pcjj  -lrb-  later pcj  -rrb-  which was joined in 1929 by sister station phohi  -lrb-  philips omroep holland-indië  -rrb-  . 
on 28 april 2014, philips agreed to sell their woox innovations subsidiary  -lrb-  consumer electronics  -rrb-  to gibson brands for $us135 million . 
the order contains about 160 families ,  which is the most of any order within the vertebrates . 
perciformes ,  also called the percomorpha or acanthopteri ,  is an order or superorder of ray-finned fish . 
there is only one baptism with the spirit ,  but there should be many infillings with the spirit throughout the believer's life . 
pentecostals believe that the baptism with the holy spirit is available to all christians . 
according to pentecostals ,  all manifestations of the spirit are to be judged by the church . 
the oil is a symbol of the holy spirit . 
it has also been described as `` a baptism into the love of god '' . 
sanctification cleansed the believer ,  but spirit baptism empowered for service . 
pentecostals expect certain results following baptism with the holy spirit . 
holiness pentecostal denominations include the church of god in christ ,  church of god  -lrb-  cleveland ,  tennessee  -rrb-  ,  and the pentecostal holiness church . 
pentecostalism or classical pentecostalism is a renewal movement within protestant christianity that places special emphasis on a direct personal experience of god through baptism with the holy spirit . 
they include the assemblies of god ,  the foursquare gospel church ,  and the open bible churches . 
there are pentecostal believers who have claimed to receive their baptism with the holy spirit while being water baptized . 
oneness pentecostals are nontrinitarian christians ,  believing in the oneness theology about god . 
while the baptism with the holy spirit is a definite experience in a believer's life ,  pentecostals view it as just the beginning of living a spirit-filled life . 
a notable exception is jesus' name pentecostalism ,  most adherents of which believe both water baptism and spirit baptism are integral components of salvation . 
pentecostals ,  with their background in the holiness movement ,  historically teach that baptism with the holy spirit ,  as evidenced by glossolalia ,  is the third work of grace ,  which follows the new birth  -lrb-  first work of grace  -rrb-  and entire sanctification  -lrb-  second work of grace  -rrb-  . 
before the 1960s ,  most non-pentecostal christians who experienced the pentecostal baptism in the holy spirit typically kept their experience a private matter or joined a pentecostal church afterward . 
in being born again ,  the believer is regenerated ,  justified ,  adopted into the family of god ,  and the holy spirit's work of sanctification is initiated . 
from romans 8:26–27, pentecostals believe that the spirit intercedes for believers through tongues; in other words ,  when a believer prays in an unknown tongue ,  the holy spirit is supernaturally directing the believer's prayer . 
the gifts of power are distinct from the vocal gifts in that they do not involve utterance . 
the major oneness churches include the united pentecostal church international and the pentecostal assemblies of the world . 
congregations may also corporately sing in tongues ,  a phenomenon known as singing in the spirit . 
no one person or group founded pentecostalism . 
pentecostals identify three distinct uses of the word `` baptism '' in the new testament:
the charismatic experiences found in pentecostalism have precedents in earlier movements in christianity . 
women were vital to the early pentecostal movement . 
figures such as dwight l .  moody and r .  a .  torrey began to speak of an experience available to all christians which would empower believers to evangelize the world ,  often termed `` baptism with the holy spirit '' . 
just as fruit should be evident in the life of every christian ,  pentecostals believe that every spirit-filled believer is given some capacity for the manifestation of the spirit . 
within this radical evangelicalism ,  expressed most strongly in the wesleyan—holiness and higher life movements ,  themes of restorationism ,  premillennialism ,  faith healing ,  and greater attention on the person and work of the holy spirit were central to emerging pentecostalism . 
this church later merged with another group forming the united pentecostal church international . 
it is received by having faith in god's promise to fill the believer and in yielding the entire being to christ . 
the word of knowledge is often defined as the ability of one person to know what god is currently doing or intends to do in the life of another person . 
for christians ,  this event commemorates the descent of the holy spirit upon the followers of jesus christ ,  as described in the second chapter of the acts of the apostles . 
the new assemblies of god would soon face a `` new issue '' which first emerged at a 1913 camp meeting . 
pangenesis was similar to ideas put forth by hippocrates ,  democritus and other pre-darwinian scientists in proposing that the whole of parental organisms participate in heredity  -lrb-  thus the prefix `` pan ''  -rrb-  . 
the largest land mammal of all time may have also been a proboscidean: `` palaeoloxodon namadicus '' ,  which may have weighed up to with a shoulder height of up to  ,  surpassing several sauropod dinosaurs  -lrb-  in height  -rrb-  . 
most families of proboscidea are now extinct ,  many since the end of the last glacial period . 
opinions differ whether the species `` p .  aethiopicus ,  p .  boisei '' and `` p .  robustus '' should be included within the genus `` australopithecus '' . 
for the most part the `` australopithecus '' species `` a .  afarensis '' ,  `` a .  africanus '' ,  and `` a .  anamensis '' either disappeared from the fossil record before the appearance of early humans or seem to have been the ancestors of `` homo habilis '' ,  yet `` p .  boisei '' and `` p .  aethiopicus '' continued to evolve along a separate path distinct and unrelated to early humans . 
the zinj question ultimately became part of the `` australopithecus ''/ ''paranthropus '' question  -lrb-  which only applied to the robust australopithecines  -rrb-  . 
 ''dear boy '' was found in context with oldowan tools and animal bones . 
the extra support in the big toe and extensive plantar aponeurosis shows that `` paranthropus '' had hyperextension of their toes for a `` toe-off '' gait cycle ,  characteristic of modern bipedalism in humans . 
species of `` paranthropus '' had smaller braincases than `` homo '' ,  yet they had significantly larger braincases than `` australopithecus '' . 
included within the tapiromorpha are the now extinct isectolophidae ,  a sister group of the ancylopoda-ceratomorpha group and thus the most primitive members of this relationship complex . 
the major lines of development include the following groups:
relationships within the large group of odd-toed ungulates are not fully understood . 
the perissodactyla appear relatively abruptly at the beginning of the lower paleocene before about 63 million years ago ,  both in north america and asia ,  in the form of phenacodontids and hyopsodontids . 
some researchers accept this assignment because of similar dental features ,  but there is also the view that a very basal position within the odd-toed ungulates places them rather in the group of `` titanotheriomorpha '' . 
originally ,  the chalicotheriidae were seen as members of hippomorpha ,  and presented as such in 1941.
to a lesser extent ,  horses and donkeys are also kept for their meat and their milk . 
the evolutionary development of perissodactyla is well documented in the fossil record . 
despite their very different appearances ,  they were recognized as related families in the 19th century by the zoologist richard owen ,  who also coined the order name . 
 ''condylarths '' can probably be considered the starting point for the development of the two groups ,  as they represent a heterogeneous group of primitive ungulates that mainly inhabited the northern hemisphere in the paleogene . 
richard owen  -lrb-  1804–1892 -rrb- quoted blainville in his study on fossil mammals of the isle of wight and introduced the name `` perissodactyla '' . 
generally seven players will play ,  and each player's hands are compared only against the dealer's hands . 
when the player and dealer both have a pair ,  the higher-ranked pair wins . 
there are 136 distinct hands  -lrb-  pairs of tiles  -rrb-  when the tiles of a pair are considered indistinguishable . 
second ,  any zero-zero tie is won by the dealer ,  regardless of the tiles in the two hands . 
however ,  if there is at least one pair among the tiles ,  there are only two distinct ways to form two hands . 
next ,  each player  -lrb-  including the dealer  -rrb-  is given one stack of tiles and must use them to form two hands of two tiles each . 
in mathematics ,  especially order theory ,  a partially ordered set  -lrb-  also poset  -rrb-  formalizes and generalizes the intuitive concept of an ordering ,  sequencing ,  or arrangement of the elements of a set . 
one familiar example of a partially ordered set is a collection of people ordered by genealogical descendancy . 
 -lrb-  b 7.1 -rrb-
 -lrb-  b 5 -rrb-
 -lrb-  b 7.1–8.2 -rrb-
the section known as `` the way of truth '' discusses that which is real and contrasts with the argument in the section called `` the way of opinion , ``  which discusses that which is illusory . 
he must learn all things ,  she tells him – both truth ,  which is certain ,  and human opinions ,  which are uncertain – for though one cannot rely on human opinions ,  they represent an aspect of the whole truth . 
parmenides claimed that there is no truth in the opinions of the mortals . 
the poem was originally divided into three parts:
erwin schrödinger identified parmenides' monad of the `` way of truth '' as being the conscious self in `` nature and the greeks '' . 
his philosophy is sometimes called neo parmenideism ,  and can be understood as an attempt to build a bridge between the poem on truth and the poem on opinion . 
cosmology originally comprised the greater part of his poem ,  him explaining the world’s origins and operations . 
this is generally considered one of the first digressions into the philosophical concept of being ,  and has been contrasted with heraclitus's statement that `` no man ever steps into the same river twice '' as one of the first digressions into the philosophical concept of becoming . 
the majority of pufferfish species are toxic and some are among the most poisonous vertebrates in the world . 
in mathematics ,  a partial function from `` x '' to `` y ''  -lrb-  sometimes written as or   -rrb-  is a function  ,  for some proper subset `` x '' of `` x '' . 
