the per capita gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  of mali was $820 in 1999.
current gdp per capita of mali registered a peak growth of 295% in the 1970s . 
private radio are required to be members of urtel ,  the radio union https://web . archive . org/web/20070312082256/http://urtel . radio . org . ml/ . 
radio broadcast stations: government funded: am 1, shortwave 1.
the state operated radio ,  is ortm  -lrb-  office de radiodiffusion au television de mali  -rrb-  ,  which operates 2 fm stations and 1 television station ,  with repeaters throughout the country . 
mali has one railroad ,  including 729 kilometers in mali ,  which runs from the port of koulikoro via bamako to the border with senegal and continues on to dakar . 
in the early 2000s ,  there also were plans to construct a new rail line between bamako and kouroussa and kankan in guinea . 
the mali air force  -lrb-  `` armée de l'air du mali ''  -rrb-  was founded in 1961 with french supplied military aid . 
mali effectively fell into civil war . 
and le monde-duniya du 12 avril 2012: les generaux du mali
as of january 16, 1961, mali's army totaled 1232 men . `` 
algeria ,  mauritania ,  niger ,  and mali will take part . 
the military of the republic of mali consists of the army  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  republic of mali air force  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and national guard  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the 4th military region is at kayes and the 5th military region is at timbuktu . 
the malian armed forces were initially formed by malian conscript and volunteer veterans of the french armed forces . 
the 512 regiment was reported within the 5th military region in 2004.
mali is active in regional organizations such as the african union . 
mali is active in regional organizations . 
malta does not have a property tax . 
traffic in malta drives on the left . 
malta adopted a policy of neutrality in 1980.
malta joined the european union on 1 may 2004.
zebbug is one of the oldest cities of malta ,  it also has one of the largest squares of malta . 
malta was considered an island of north africa for centuries . 
malta has been inhabited since approximately 5900 bc . 
malta  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially known as the republic of malta  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a southern european island country consisting of an archipelago in the mediterranean sea . 
the order of saint john  -lrb-  also known as the knights hospitaller ,  or the knights of malta  -rrb-  were the rulers of malta and gozo between 1530 and 1798.
malta is an archipelago in the central mediterranean  -lrb-  in its eastern basin  -rrb-  ,  some south of the italian island of sicily across the malta channel . 
the normans attacked malta in 1091, as part of their conquest of sicily . 
malta became independent on 21 september 1964  -lrb-  independence day  -rrb-  . 
malta remained under the byzantine empire until 870, when it fell to the arabs . 
there are small political parties in malta which have no parliamentary representation . 
he then sailed for egypt leaving a substantial garrison in malta . 
malta has of road ,   -lrb-  87.5 per cent  -rrb-  of which are paved and were unpaved  -lrb-  as of december 2003 -rrb- . 
according to eurostat ,  malta is composed of two larger urban zones nominally referred to as `` valletta ''  -lrb-  the main island of malta  -rrb-  and `` gozo '' . 
between 1915 and 1918, during the first world war ,  malta became known as `` the nurse of the mediterranean '' due to the large number of wounded soldiers who were accommodated in malta . 
these discussions are also undergoing between malta and libya for similar arrangements . 
malta joined the european union on 1 may 2004 and joined the eurozone on 1 january 2008.
occasionally in the media and official publications malta is referred to as a city-state . 
malta has been inhabited from around 5900 bc ,  since the arrival of settlers from the island of sicily . 
another conjecture suggests that the word `` malta '' comes from the phoenician word `` maleth '' ,  `` a haven '' ,  or 'port' in reference to malta's many bays and coves . 
the knights' reign ended when napoleon captured malta on his way to egypt during the in 1798.
following the european council of 21–22 june 2007, malta joined the eurozone on 1 january 2008.
malta has had a system of local government since 1993, based on the european charter of local self-government . 
malta ,  with area of and population of 0.4 million ,  is one of the most densely populated countries worldwide . 
this is achieved by emphasising the maintenance of malta's territorial waters and airspace integrity . 
phytogeographically ,  malta belongs to the liguro-tyrrhenian province of the mediterranean region within the boreal kingdom . 
in 2010, malta managed to privatise telecommunications ,  postal services ,  shipyards and shipbuilding . 
malta achieved its independence as the state of malta on 21 september 1964  -lrb-  independence day  -rrb-  after intense negotiations with the united kingdom ,  led by maltese prime minister george borġ olivier . 
malta has a long christian legacy and its archdiocese is claimed to be an apostolic see because paul the apostle was shipwrecked on `` melita '' ,  according to acts of the apostles ,  which is now widely taken to be malta . 
schooling is compulsory until age 16.
inhabited since prehistoric times ,  malta was first colonized by sicilians . 
malta was a long-time member of the non-aligned movement . 
the judicial system in malta comprises inferior courts ,  civil and criminal courts of appeal ,  and a constitutional court . 
according to the constitution ,  the president appoints the chief justice of malta and the judges of the superior courts on the advice of the prime minister of malta . 
turnout was 91% ,  with more than 53% voting `` yes '' . 
under its 1964 constitution ,  malta became a parliamentary democracy within the commonwealth . 
the 1996 elections resulted in the election of the labour party ,  by 8,000 votes ,  to replace the nationalists who had won in 1987 and 1992.
malta is divided into 68 elected local councils ,  with each council responsible for the administration of cities or regions of varying sizes . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated malta as `` full democracy '' in 2016.
on 1 may 2004 malta joined the eu and on 1 january 2008, the eurozone with the euro as the national currency . 
at 5.9% ,  malta has the sixth-lowest unemployment rate in the eu . 
by 1882, malta reached the height of its prosperity . 
malta adopted the euro currency on 1 january 2008.
from 2001 to 2004 the mean gdp real growth was 0.4% due to malta losing pace in tourism and other industries . 
malta is a highly industrialised ,  service-based economy . 
during the 1990s ,  malta's economic growth generally continued at a brisk pace . 
at the end of world war ii ,  malta's strategic importance had reached a low point . 
malta has 3,096 kilometres of road ,  2,704 km  -lrb-  87.3%  -rrb-  of which are paved and 392 km are unpaved as of 2008.
malta has been a member state of the commonwealth of nations since 1964, when it became an independent dominion under the name 'state of malta' . 
malta became a commonwealth republic on december 13, 1974, when the last governor-general of malta ,  sir anthony mamo became the first president of malta . 
spain claimed the islands in 1592, and the european powers recognized its sovereignty over the islands in 1874.
following papal mediation and german compensation of $4.5 million ,  spain reached an agreement with germany in 1885: the 1885 hispano-german protocol of rome . 
nuclear testing began in 1946 and concluded in 1958.
at the beginning of world war i ,  japan assumed control of the marshall islands . 
the us government formed the congress of micronesia in 1965, a plan for increased self-governance of pacific islands . 
the marshalls consist of 29 atolls and five isolated islands ,  which form two parallel groups—the `` ratak ''  -lrb-  sunrise  -rrb-  chain and the `` ralik ''  -lrb-  sunset  -rrb-  chain . 
the public school system provides education through grade 12, although admission to secondary school is selective . 
there is also a small presence of the ahmadiyya muslim community and the bahá'í faith . 
during mass deacidification an alkaline agent is deposited in the paper to neutralize existing acid and prevent further decay . 
barrow also invented an aqueous process to neutralize acid in paper while depositing an alkaline buffer that would retard the rate of decay . 
one technique proposed was to place books in an evacuated chamber ,  then introduce diethylzinc  -lrb-  dez  -rrb-  . 
mass deacidification is a term used in library and information science for one possible measure against the degradation of paper in old books  -lrb-  the so-called `` slow fires ''  -rrb-  . 
these are the results that the library of congress expected of an ideal mass deacidification treatment in 1994.
the welsh mile  -lrb-  ' or '  -rrb-  was 3 miles and 1470 yards long  -lrb-  6.17 km  -rrb-  . 
the `` u . s .  survey mile '' is 5,280 survey feet ,  or about 1,609.347 metres . 
in the united states ,  `` statute mile '' normally refers to the survey mile ,  about 3.219 mm  -lrb-   inch  -rrb-  longer than the international mile  -lrb-  the international mile is exactly 0.0002% less than the u . s .  survey mile  -rrb-  . 
the irish mile  -lrb-  ' or '  -rrb-  measured 2240 yards: approximately 1.27 statute miles or 2.048 kilometres . 
also arising from the roman mile is the `` milestone '' . 
the present international mile is usually what is understood by the unqualified term `` mile '' . 
the roman mile  -lrb-  ' ,   `` thousand paces '';  m . p . 
the average is about 6,076 feet  -lrb-  about 1,852 metres or 1.15 statute miles  -rrb-  . 
thus ,  the radar statute mile is 10.8 μs and the radar nautical mile is 12.4 μs . 
with qualifiers ,  `` mile '' is also used to describe or translate a wide range of units derived from or roughly equivalent to the roman mile ,  such as the nautical mile  -lrb-  now 1.852 km exactly  -rrb-  ,  the italian mile  -lrb-  roughly 1.852 km  -rrb-  ,  and the chinese mile  -lrb-  now 500 m exactly  -rrb-  . 
the modern english word `` mile '' derives from middle english ' and old english ' ,  which was cognate with all other germanic terms for `` miles '' . 
the international mile is precisely equal to  -lrb-  or  km as a fraction  -rrb-  . 
the nautical mile per hour is known as the knot . 
arnold's `` customs of london '' recorded a mile shorter than previous ones ,  coming to 0.947 international miles or 1.524 km . 
the term `` spam '' in the context of electronic communications is derived from this sketch . 
spam makers hormel ,  while never happy with the use of the word `` spam '' for junk email ,  have been supportive of monty python and their sketch . 
the word `` spam '' is uttered at least 132 times . 
 ''spam '' is a monty python sketch ,  first televised in 1970 and written by terry jones and michael palin . 
spam was a popular food during world war ii in the uk . 
the sketch is part of the company's spam museum in austin ,  minnesota ,  united states ,  and also mentioned in spam's on-can advertisements for the product's 70th anniversary in 2007 - although the date of the python sketch was incorrectly stated to be 1971 instead of 1970.
the `` dead parrot sketch '' ,  alternatively and originally known as the `` pet shop sketch '' or `` parrot sketch '' ,  is a sketch from `` monty python's flying circus '' . 
the `` dead parrot '' sketch was inspired by a `` car salesman '' sketch that palin and chapman had done in `` how to irritate people '' . 
at the end of the sketch ,  he demands of the smart-mouthed talking parrot on his shoulder ,  `` do you want to be an ex-parrot ? `` 
 ''dead parrot '' was voted the top alternative comedy sketch in a radio times poll . 
over the years ,  cleese and palin have done many versions of the `` dead parrot '' sketch for various television shows ,  record albums ,  and live performances . 
a joke dated ad 400, recently translated from greek ,  shows similarities to the parrot sketch . 
cleese and palin acted out the sketch during the python's reunion in the o2 in july 2014, monty python live  -lrb-  mostly  -rrb-  . 
he opened the performance by announcing this then saying `` i've had some funny requests; somebody from newark wanted me to do the dead parrot sketch '' . 
this version is included in the book and cd set `` the best british stand-up and comedy routines '' ,  along with a transcript of the sketch and the four yorkshiremen sketch . 
the `` monty python live at drury lane '' album features a live version of the sketch ,  which is slightly different from the tv version . 
the song was not part of the tv sketch; it first appeared on the monty python's 1973 album `` matching tie and handkerchief '' as a coda for the album version of the sketch . 
there is some debate over whether the sixth line is supposed to be `` schopenhauer and hegel '' or just `` wilhelm friedrich hegel '' . 
 ''bruces' philosophers song  -lrb-  bruces' song  -rrb- ``  is a popular monty python song written and composed by eric idle that was a feature of the group's stage appearances and its recordings . 
 ''the funniest joke in the world ''  -lrb-  also `` joke warfare '' and `` killer joke ''  -rrb-  is a `` monty python '' comedy sketch . 
the inspector leaves the flat with the joke but also dies from laughter . 
thus ,  the english version of the joke is never revealed to the audience . 
it is this joke that bob hope reads on the air ,  to no harmful effect whatsoever . 
the sketch is framed in a documentary style and opens with ernest scribbler  -lrb-  michael palin  -rrb-  ,  a british `` writer of jokes '' ,  creating the funniest joke in the world only to die laughing . 
lord dunsany's 1916 story `` the three infernal jokes '' ,  published in the collection `` tales of wonder '' ,  concerns jokes that kill those who hear them . 
ximénez shouts ,  with a particular and high-pitched emphasis on the first word: `` no-body expects the spanish inquisition ! `` 
this is a recurring sketch always predicated on an unrelated sketch in which one character mentions that they `` didn't expect a spanish inquisition ! 
ximénez decides to forget the introduction and has cardinal fang read out charges of heresy against the woman . 
the inquisition returns in a later sketch as an older woman  -lrb-  marjorie wilde  -rrb-  shares photographs with another woman  -lrb-  cleveland  -rrb-  ,  who rips them up as they are handed to her . 
lin has an older brother ,  the poet tan lin . 
maya lin was born in athens ,  ohio . 
lin chang-min ,  a hanlin of qing dynasty and the emperor's teacher ,  was the father of lin hui-yin and great-grandfather of maya lin . 
maya lin calls herself a `` designer , ``  rather than an `` architect . `` 
in 1995, lin completed `` wave field , ``  at the university of michigan . 
in 2000, lin re-emerged in the public life with a book ,  `` boundaries . `` 
in 2013, lin completed her largest work to date ,  `` a fold in the field '' . 
in 2007, lin installed `` above and below '' ,  an outdoor sculpture at the indianapolis museum of art in indiana . 
maya ying lin  -lrb-  born october 5, 1959 -rrb- is an american designer ,  architect ,  and artist who works in sculpture and land art . 
since around 2010, lin has been working on what she calls `` her final memorial , ``  the what is missing ? 
lin has designed other memorials and numerous public and private buildings ,  landscape design ,  and sculpture . 
originally ,  all books were in manuscript form . 
the traditional abbreviations are ms for manuscript and mss for manuscripts ,  while the forms ms .  ,  ms or ms .  for singular ,  and mss .  ,  mss or mss . 
technically ,  these are all inscriptions rather than manuscripts . 
from ancient texts to medieval maps ,  anything written down for study would have been done with manuscripts . 
the study of the writing ,  or `` hand '' in surviving manuscripts is termed palaeography . 
most surviving pre-modern manuscripts use the codex format  -lrb-  as in a modern book  -rrb-  ,  which had replaced the scroll by late antiquity . 
because they are books ,  pre-modern manuscripts are best described using bibliographic rather than archival standards . 
more specifically ,  a motion picture manuscript is called a screenplay; a television manuscript ,  a teleplay; a manuscript for the theatre ,  a stage play; and a manuscript for audio-only performance is often called a radio play ,  even when the recorded performance is disseminated via non-radio means . 
misogyny  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the hatred of ,  contempt for ,  or prejudice against women or girls . 
the antonym is midandrist . 
the island was then called `` jouanacaëra-matinino '' ,  which came from a mythical island described by the taínos of hispaniola . 
when columbus landed on the island in 1502, he christened the island as martinica; through the influence of the neighboring island of dominica  -lrb-  la dominique  -rrb-  ,  it came to be known as martinique . 
the last of the general council was josette manin . 
the last president of the regional council was serge letchimy . 
the court of appeal at fort-de-france also has jurisdiction over other countries such as french guiana . 
in martinique ,  the french system of justice is in force with there being two lower courts  -lrb-  `` tribunaux d’instance ''  -rrb-  ,  one higher court  -lrb-  `` tribunal de grande instance ''  -rrb-  ,  one administrative court ,  and a commercial court . 
the majority of the work force is employed in the service sector and in administration . 
from the 15th to the 19th century ,  european contact with mauritania was dominated by the trade for gum arabic . 
the european colonial powers of the 19th century had little interest in mauritania . 
in 1960, the republic of mauritania became independent of france . 
the islamization of mauritania was a gradual process that spanned more than 500 years . 
berbers moved south to mauritania beginning in the 3rd century ,  followed by arabs in the 8th century ,  subjugating and assimilating mauritania's original inhabitants . 
a leader of the 2005 coup ,  mohamed ould abdel aziz ,  was elected president in 2009.
president moktar ould daddah ,  originally helped to the post by the french ,  rapidly reformed mauritania into an authoritarian one-party state in 1964, with his new constitution . 
the history of french colonial policy in mauritania is closely tied to that of the other french possessions in west africa ,  particularly to that of senegal ,  on which mauritania was economically ,  politically ,  and administratively dependent until independence . 
mauritania broke off relations with rabat in protest ,  although ties were later restored . 
mauritania takes its name from the ancient berber kingdom and later roman province of mauretania ,  and thus ultimately from the mauri people ,  even though the respective territories do not overlap ,  historical mauritania being considerably further north than modern mauritania . 
the muslim conquest of the maghreb in the 7th and 8th centuries did not reach as far south ,  and islam came to mauritania only gradually ,  from about the 11th century ,  in the context of the wider islamization of the sudan and medieval arab slave trade . 
after world war ii ,  mauritania ,  along with the rest of french west africa ,  was involved in a series of reforms of the french colonial system ,  culminating in independence in 1960.
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 39.9% ,  57.4% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 2.7% was 65 years or older . 
see 2003 mauritania election
in august 2005, a military coup led by col .  ely ould mohamed vall ended maaouya ould sid'ahmed taya's 21 years of strong-arm rule . 
daddah was ousted in a bloodless coup on july 10, 1978.
president taya ,  who won elections in 1992 and 1997, first became chief of state through a december 12, 1984 bloodless coup which made him chairman of the committee of military officers that governed mauritania from july 1978 to april 1992.
mauritania achieved independence from france in 1960.
a committee of military officers governed mauritania from july 1978 to april 1992.
the election was won by sidi ould cheikh abdallahi ,  who was ousted by a military coup in 2008 and replaced by general mohamed ould abdel aziz . 
some u . s .  oil companies are alleged to be playing a part in mauritania's oil related corruption . 
discovered in 2002, chinguetti has proven reserves of about of oil . 
the disputed amendments were signed by former oil minister zeidane ould hmeida in february 2004 and march 2005.
in february 2006, the mauritanian government denounced amendments to an oil contract made by former leader maaouiya ould taya with woodside petroleum ,  an australian company . 
citizens of mauritania have various transportation methods . 
the 1ère région militaire is at nouadhibou ,  2nd military region is at zouerate ,  3rd military region is at atar ,  4ème région militaire may be at tidjikdja ,  5th military region headquarters is at néma ,  6th military region may be in the area of the capital ,  and the 7th military region may be at aleg . 
90 m-40a1 106mm ,  est 24 m-20 75mm  -rrb-  ,  est 48 rpg-7 knout ,  104 sams  -lrb-  est 100 sa-7 grail ,  and a reported 4 sa-9 gaskin  -rrb-  ,  and 82 towed anti-aircraft guns  -lrb-  14.5mm ,  including 12 zpu-4, zu-23-2, 37 mm automatic air defense gun m1939  -lrb-  61-k  -rrb-  ,  12 57 mm azp s-60, and 12 100mm ks-19s . 
saleh ould hanenna ,  a former army major ,  led the attempted 2003 mauritanian coup d'état in june 2003.
the army is 15,000 strong ,  according to the iiss ,  with six military regions ,  two camel corps battalions ,  one battalion of t-54/55 battle tanks ,  one armoured reconnaissance squadron ,  eight garrison infantry battalions ,  seven motorised infantry battalions ,  one commando/para battalion ,  3 artillery battalions ,  4 air defence batteries ,  one engineer company ,  and one guard battalion . 
the university of mumbai is one of the premier universities in india . 
mumbai is the financial ,  commercial and entertainment capital of india . 
air pollution is a major issue in mumbai . 
the navi mumbai municipal transport  -lrb-  nmmt  -rrb-  and thane municipal transport  -lrb-  tmt  -rrb-  also operate their buses in mumbai ,  connecting various nodes of navi mumbai and thane to parts of mumbai . 
mumbai consists of two distinct regions: mumbai city district and mumbai suburban district ,  which form two separate revenue districts of maharashtra . 
mumbai  -lrb-  ; formerly known as bombay  -rrb-  is the capital city of the indian state of maharashtra . 
mumbai is served by two major ports ,  mumbai port trust and jawaharlal nehru port trust ,  which lies just across the creek in navi mumbai . 
the `` mumbai darshan '' is a tourist bus service which explores numerous tourist attractions in mumbai . 
greater mumbai ,  an area of  ,  consisting of the mumbai city and mumbai suburban districts ,  extends from colaba in the south ,  to mulund and dahisar in the north ,  and mankhurd in the east . 
according to the 2011 census ,  the population of mumbai city was 12,479,608.
school of art is mumbai's oldest art institution . 
the mumbai monorail and mumbai metro have been built and are being extended in phases to relieve overcrowding on the existing network . 
 ,  mumbai had the highest number of internet users in india with 16.4 million users . 
mumbai's transport system has been categorised as one of the most congested in the world . 
the number of migrants to mumbai from outside maharashtra during the 1991–2001 decade was 1.12 million ,  which amounted to 54.8% of the net addition to the population of mumbai . 
the number of households in mumbai is forecast to rise from 4.2 million in 2008 to 6.6 million in 2020.
 ''bombay durpan '' ,  the first marathi newspaper ,  was started by balshastri jambhekar in mumbai in 1832.
the mumbai metropolitan region development authority  -lrb-  mmrda  -rrb-  is responsible for infrastructure development and planning of mumbai metropolitan region . 
mumbai is the commercial capital of india and has evolved into a global financial hub . 
although mumbai had prominently figured as the hub of economic activity of india in the 1990s ,  the mumbai metropolitan region is presently witnessing a reduction in its contribution to india's gdp . 
the first line of the mumbai metro opened in early june 2014.
water transport in mumbai consists of ferries ,  hovercrafts and catamarans . 
the mumbai leg of pro kabaddi is held at the nsci ,  worli . 
after india's independence in 1947, the territory of the bombay presidency retained by india was restructured into bombay state . 
mumbai has numerous newspaper publications ,  television and radio stations . 
mumbai had been a traditional stronghold and birthplace of the indian national congress ,  also known as the congress party . 
the indian badminton league  -lrb-  ibl  -rrb-  ,  now known as the premier badminton league is also visiting mumbai since it's inaugural edition in 2013 when the final was held in mumbai's national sports club of india . 
residents of mumbai call themselves `` mumbaikar '' ,  `` mumbaiite '' ,  `` bombayite '' or `` bombaiite '' . 
india's first underground water tunnel was completed in mumbai to supply water to the bhandup filtration plant . 
mumbai's culture is a blend of traditional festivals ,  food ,  music ,  and theatres . 
the municipal corporation of greater mumbai was ranked 9th out of 21 cities for best governance & administrative practices in india in 2014.
under colonial rule ,  tanks were the only source of water in mumbai ,  with many localities having been named after them . 
a resident of mumbai is called `` mumbaikar '' in marathi ,  in which the suffix `` kar '' means `` resident of '' . 
mumbai's bus services carried over 5.5 million passengers per day in 2008, which dropped to 2.8 million in 2015.
rugby is another growing sport in mumbai with league matches being held at the bombay gymkhana from june to november . 
every february ,  mumbai holds derby races at the mahalaxmi racecourse . 
among minority languages of maharashtra ,  hindi is spoken by 57.78% of the population of suburban mumbai ,  urdu by 32.21% and gujarati by 31.21% . 
mumbai has a zoo named jijamata udyaan  -lrb-  formerly victoria gardens  -rrb-  ,  which also harbours a garden . 
in 1988, miami had its first losing season  -lrb-  6–10 -rrb- since 1976, and finished 8–8 in 1989.
miami had a solid 10–6 season in 1998 with a career season for receiver o . j . 
in 2009 the dolphins again started off 0–2.
after a 5–3 start ,  the dolphins once again finished the 2014 season at 8–8 and missed the playoffs for a sixth consecutive season . 
in 1999, the team advanced to the playoffs with a 9–7 record . 
miami ended the season with three consecutive losses to finish 7–9 and out of the playoffs . 
miami rebounded from an injury-plagued 6–8 record in 1976 by winning ten or more games in four of the next five seasons . 
miami finished 10–6 after victories over buffalo and the jets . 
the dolphins finished the 2007 season with a 1–15 record ,  the worst in franchise history . 
ultimately ,  the season was a disappointment as the dolphins finished 6–10, third in the afc east . 
in 1972, the dolphins completed the only fully undefeated season in the nfl ,  winning all 14 regular season games ,  two playoff games and super bowl vii ,  defeating the washington redskins 14–7.
in super bowl vi ,  however ,  miami lost to the dallas cowboys 24–3.
in 1997, miami stumbled late and backed into the playoffs with a 9–7 season ,  losing to the new england patriots in the wild card round . 
miami and new england are also the only two franchises to have posted undefeated regular season records since the nfl-afl merger ,  with miami going 14–0 in 1972 and new england going 16–0 in 2007, but only the 1972 dolphins were able to win the super bowl . 
the dolphins finished 12–2 after the 1973 regular season and repeated as nfl champions ,  beating the minnesota vikings 24–7 in super bowl viii at rice stadium in houston . 
in 2008, the dolphins became the first team in nfl history to win their division and make a playoff appearance following a league-worst 1–15 season . 
however ,  the dolphins lost in the first round of the playoffs to the baltimore ravens ,  27–9.
 -lrb-  the broncos lost only two regular season games in 1998, one of which was to the dolphins .   -rrb- 
the team made its first super bowl appearance in super bowl vi ,  losing to the dallas cowboys ,  24–3.
they made the playoffs as a wild card in 1978, but lost in the first round to the houston oilers 17–9.
csonka returned to the dolphins in time for the 1979 season . 
after winning the division with a 10–6 record ,  the dolphins lost the divisional playoff 34–14 to the eventual super bowl champion pittsburgh steelers at three rivers stadium . 
that same season ,  the dolphins upset the 16–0 new england patriots on the road during week 3, handing the patriots' their first regular season loss since december 10, 2006, in which coincidentally ,  they were also beaten by the dolphins . 
in 1986, the dolphins ,  hampered by defensive struggles ,  stumbled to a 2–5 start and finished 8–8, missing the playoffs for the first time since 1980.
the 2004 off-season was disastrous for miami . 
m  -lrb-  named `` em ''   -rrb-  is the thirteenth letter of the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
the letter m is derived from the phoenician mem ,  via the greek mu  -lrb-  μ ,  μ  -rrb-  . 
moreover ,  for some distributions the mean is infinite . 
the `` arithmetic mean ''  -lrb-  or simply `` mean ''  -rrb-  of a sample formula_6, usually denoted by formula_1, is the sum of the sampled values divided by the number of items in the example
the mit license is a permissive free software license originating at the massachusetts institute of technology  -lrb-  mit  -rrb-  . 
because mit has used many licenses for software ,  the free software foundation considers `` mit license '' ambiguous . 
the `` mit license '' published by the open source initiative is the same as the `` expat license '' . 
the university of illinois/ncsa open source license combines text from both the mit and bsd licenses; the license grant and disclaimer are taken from the mit license . 
a number of different proprietary formulations of the alloy are sold under trade names such as `` mumetal '' ,  `` mumetall '' ,  and `` mumetal2 '' . 
the alloy has a low coercivity ,  near zero magnetostriction ,  and significant anisotropic magnetoresistance . 
mu-metal is a soft magnetic alloy with exceptionally high magnetic permeability . 
reagan also hosted `` the michael reagan show '' nationwide for most of the 2000s  -lrb-  decade  -rrb-  . 
he was adopted by ronald reagan and jane wyman shortly after his birth . 
reagan and his business partners were ordered to pay $662,500 in damages . 
in 1988, he wrote ,  with joe hyams ,  an autobiographical book `` michael reagan: on the outside looking in '' . 
he is the son of former u . s .  president ronald reagan  -lrb-  1911–2004 -rrb- and his first wife ,  actress jane wyman  -lrb-  1917–2007 -rrb- . 
reagan and his wife live in the toluca lake area of los angeles . 
the district attorney's office cleared reagan of both charges later that year . 
arrays can also be made with molecules other than dna . 
dna coding for a protein of interest is now inside a cell ,  and the protein can now be expressed . 
one of the most basic techniques of molecular biology to study protein function is molecular cloning . 
named after its inventor ,  biologist edwin southern ,  the southern blot is a method for probing for the presence of a specific dna sequence within a dna sample . 
gel electrophoresis is one of the principal tools of molecular biology . 
dna microarray is a collection of spots attached to a solid support such as a microscope slide where each spot contains one or more single-stranded dna oligonucleotide fragment . 
polymerase chain reaction  -lrb-  pcr  -rrb-  is an extremely versatile technique for copying dna . 
the total area of both islands is  . 
the archipelago consists of 16 islands and islets . 
under british rule ,  the island's name reverted to mauritius . 
the portuguese did not stay long as they were not interested in these islands . 
the chagos archipelago is composed of atolls and islands ,  and is located approximately 2200 kilometres north-east of the main island of mauritius . 
the island was under the administration of the french east india company which maintained its presence until 1767.
tromelin island lies 430 km northeast of mauritius . 
the twin islands of agalega are located some to the north of mauritius . 
the island also has a coral reef and extensive limestone deposits . 
mauritius  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of mauritius  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is an island nation in the indian ocean . 
the island was the only known home of the dodo ,  which ,  along with several other avian species ,  was made extinct by human activities relatively shortly after the island's settlement . 
diego garcia is in the south-east of the archipelago . 
the capital and largest city port louis is located on the main island of mauritius . 
laws governing the mauritian penal system are derived partly from french civil law and british common law . 
st .  brandon ,  also known as cargados carajos shoals ,  is located northeast of mauritius island . 
in 1507, portuguese sailors came to the uninhabited island and established a visiting base . 
in 1965, three years prior to the independence of mauritius ,  the uk split the chagos archipelago from mauritian territory ,  and the islands of aldabra ,  farquhar and desroches from the seychelles ,  to form the british indian ocean territory  -lrb-  biot  -rrb-  . 
during the same year ,  faster links were established with the island of rodrigues thanks to the wireless . 
the island of mauritius is divided into 20 constituencies that return three members each ,  while rodrigues is a single constituency that returns two members . 
from 1767 to 1810, except for a brief period during the french revolution when the inhabitants set up a government virtually independent of france ,  the island was controlled by officials appointed by the french government . 
the media and literature are primarily in french . 
more than 30,000 workers sacrificed a day's wage and came from all over the island to attend a giant meeting at the champ de mars . 
they found that:
the island of mauritius was uninhabited before its first recorded visit during the middle ages by arab sailors ,  who named it dina arobi . 
the first historical evidence of the existence of an island now known as mauritius is on a map produced by the italian cartographer alberto cantino in 1502.
just off the mauritian coast lie some 49 uninhabited islands and islets ,  several used as natural reserves for endangered species . 
the island of mauritius is relatively young geologically ,  having been created by volcanic activity some 8 million years ago . 
in 1598 a dutch squadron under admiral wybrand van warwyck landed at grand port and named the island `` mauritius '' after prince maurice van nassau of the dutch republic . 
the sovereignty of tromelin is disputed between mauritius and france as some of the islands such as st .  brandon ,  chagos ,  agalega and tromelin were not specifically mentioned in the treaty of paris . 
it is the first time that uk's conduct with regard to the chagos archipelago has been considered and condemned by any international court or tribunal . 
mauritius is also commonly known as `` maurice ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  and `` île maurice '' in french ,  `` moris ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  in mauritian creole . 
the first general elections were held on 9 august 1948 and were won by the labour party . 
the constitution of mauritius is written in english ,  while some laws ,  such as the civil code and criminal code are in french . 
mauritius and surrounding islands were known as the mascarene islands ilhas mascarenhas after pedro mascarenhas . 
the latter fared no better ,  but remained the last dutch governor of the island until it was abandoned in 1710.
seven pyramids have been identified on the island which are identical in construction to the pyramids of güímar found on the island of tenerife . 
those who landed on the island freely cut and took with them the precious heartwood of the ebony trees ,  then found in profusion all over the island . 
the medieval arab world called the indian ocean island region waqwaq . 
thus no permanent colony was established on the island by the portuguese . 
the island was not permanently inhabited for the first forty years after its `` discovery '' by the dutch ,  but in 1638 cornelius gooyer established the first permanent dutch settlement in mauritius with a garrison of twenty-five . 
white south africans 1.5%  -lrb-  22,000 -rrb- ,  live exclusively in coastal town of tamarin and black river region . 
small groups of foreign students from europe or the indian ocean region are also present . 
while within the mauritian social context ,  the main ethnic groups are refer to as the following: hindus or indians  -lrb-  north indian hindus  -rrb-  40%  -lrb-  520,000 -rrb- ,  residing all over the island ,  with higher concentration in the north . 
the executive branch being with the cabinet have 4 most powerful executive offices ,  prime minister ,  deputy prime minister and 2 offices of vice prime minister . 
the president is the head of state while the prime minister has full executive power and is the head of government who is assisted by a council of ministers . 
the council of ministers  -lrb-  cabinet  -rrb-  ,  responsible for the direction and control of the government ,  consists of the prime minister  -lrb-  head of government  -rrb-  ,  the leader of the majority party in the legislature ,  and about 24 ministers including one deputy prime minister and/or one vice prime minister . 
they have the executive power and authority over the cabinet and also help the prime minister in his tasks and responsibilities . 
in mauritius ,  prime minister enjoys significant power whereas the president has a mostly ceremonial role . 
mauritius ,  with its strong textile sector ,  has been well poised to take advantage of the africa growth and opportunity act  -lrb-  agoa  -rrb-  . 
mauritius is one of africa’s least corrupt countries . 
top sectors attracting fdi inflows from mauritius  -lrb-  from january 2000 to december ,  2005 -rrb- are electrical equipment ,  telecommunications ,  fuels ,  cement and gypsum products and services sector  -lrb-  financial and non-financial  -rrb-  . 
according to the government of dubai ,  the general outlook for the manufacturing sector is positive ,  as the country offers many opportunities to entrepreneurs across the various value chains but insufficient skilled labour and limited research and development will remain impediments to potentially higher growth in this sector . 
in the financial sector they have built a regulated and well-capitalised banking and financial system that protected it from toxic assets prior to the 2008 global financial crisis . 
the 1988 telecommunications act established the legal framework to cater for telecom services in a state-owned monopoly . 
this act also created the mauritius telecommunications authority  -lrb-  mta  -rrb-  as a regulatory body for the telecommunications sector . 
with the development of information and communications technologies ,  the telecommunications act of 1998 was replaced by the information and communication technologies act of 2001.
that same year ,  a x . 25 packet switched data exchange was also installed . 
the national computer board  -lrb-  ncb  -rrb-  was also set up in 1988 by the national board act  -lrb-  no 43 -rrb- to advise the government on the formulation of national policies for the development of the it sector and promote an it culture in the country . 
with the advent of the railways ,  and later of motorized transport ,  animal based transport systems declined on the island . 
the responsibility for the administration of the nta rests with the road transport commissioner . 
the national transport authority  -lrb-  nta  -rrb-  is the governmental department established under the road traffic act in 1980 whose main responsibility is the regulation and control of road transport in mauritius and rodrigues . 
the nta also has a board constituted under section 73 of the road traffic act . 
military advisers from india and united kingdom work with the smf ,  the coast guard ,  and the police helicopter unit ,  and mauritian police officers are trained in india ,  united kingdom and france . 
there also is a special supporting unit of 270 members trained in riot control . 
the country is also a member of the port management association of eastern and southern africa  -lrb-  pmaesa  -rrb-  . 
it is a member of the world trade organization ,  la francophonie ,  organisation of african unity ,  the southern africa development community ,  the indian ocean commission ,  comesa ,  and the recently formed indian ocean rim association . 
considered part of africa geographically ,  mauritius has friendly relations with other african states in the region ,  particularly south africa ,  by far its largest continental trading partner . 
comoros continues to claim the island ,  while criticising the french military base there . 
executive power is exercised by the french government . 
the term `` mayotte ''  -lrb-  or maore  -rrb-  may refer to all of the department's islands ,  of which the largest is known as maore  -lrb-    -rrb-  and includes maore's surrounding islands ,  most notably pamanzi  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or only to the largest island . 
mayotte also sends one deputy to the french national assembly and two senators to the french senate . 
in 1832, mayotte was conquered by andriantsoly ,  former king of iboina on madagascar; in 1833, it was conquered by the neighbouring sultanate of mwali  -lrb-  mohéli island in french  -rrb-  . 
in 1500, the maore or mawuti  -lrb-  contraction of the arabic جزيرة الموت jazīrat al-mawt – meaning island of death and corrupted to mayotte in french  -rrb-  sultanate was established on the island . 
the main island ,  grande-terre  -lrb-  or maore  -rrb-  ,  geologically the oldest of the comoro islands ,  is long and wide ,  and its highest point is mount benara ,  at above sea level . 
the following demographic statistics are from the cia world factbook ,  unless otherwise indicated . 
the head of government is president of the general council soibahadine ibrahim ramadani . 
the head of state is the president of france as represented by prefect frédéric veau . 
the mexican constitution of 1917, with significant amendments in the 1990s ,  still governs mexico . 
mexico continues to be constituted as a federated republic ,  under the mexican constitution of 1917.
mexico city was poorer per capita in 1876 than in 1821.
the aztec capital of tenochtitlan became the spanish capital mexico city ,  which was and remains the most populous city in mexico . 
the spanish attempts to reconquer mexico comprised episodes of war between spain and the newly born mexican nation . 
colonial mexico was part of the spanish empire and administered by the viceroyalty of new spain . 
a new era began in mexico following the fraudulent 1988 presidential elections . 
the mexica people arrived in the valley of mexico in 1248 ad . 
the first europeans to arrive in what is modern day mexico were the survivors of a spanish shipwreck in 1511.
france never made a profit in mexico and its mexican expedition grew increasingly unpopular . 
the mexican–american war took place in two theaters: the western  -lrb-  aimed at california  -rrb-  and central mexico  -lrb-  aimed at capturing mexico city  -rrb-  campaigns . 
mexico moved from being a target of ridicule to international pride . 
mexico is a major transit and drug-producing nation: an estimated 90% of the cocaine smuggled into the united states every year moves through mexico . 
mexico now had its own government ,  but iturbide quickly became a dictator . 
mexico has free-trade agreements with more than 40 countries ,  governing 90% of its foreign commerce . 
in 1428, the aztec led a war against their rulers from the city of azcapotzalco ,  which had subjugated most of the valley of mexico's peoples . 
the mexican general election ,  1988 was extremely important in mexican history . 
the mexican revolution is the chaotic period between 1910 and 1920 when mexicans fought to determine their future after the end of the díaz era . 
in response to a mexican massacre of a u . s .  army detachment in disputed territory ,  the u . s .  congress declared war on may 13, 1846; mexico followed suit on 23 may . 
the second group ,  called creoles ,  were people of spanish background but born in mexico . 
the nahua peoples began to enter central mexico in the 6th century ad . 
the spanish mining settlements and trunk lines to mexico city needed to be made safe for supplies to move north and silver to move to south ,  to central mexico . 
mexico was vulnerable to external shocks because of its weak banking system . 
by 1996, the economy was growing ,  and in 1997, mexico repaid ,  ahead of schedule ,  all u . s .  treasury loans . 
it is currently unclear whether 23,000-year-old campfire remains found in the valley of mexico are the earliest human remains uncovered so far in mexico . 
after independence ,  mexican politics was chaotic . 
the texas revolution or texas war of independence was a military conflict between mexico and settlers in the texas portion of the mexican state coahuila y tejas . 
mexico had few factories by 1880, but then industrialization took hold in the northeast ,  especially in monterrey . 
in addition to the four main groups ,  there were also some black africans in colonial mexico . 
the french intervention is the period when france invaded mexico  -lrb-  1861 -rrb- ,  nominally to collect on defaulted loans to the liberal government of benito juárez ,  but it went further and at the invitation of mexican conservatives seeking to restore monarchy in mexico set maximilian i on the mexican throne . 
the porfiriato is the era when army hero porfirio díaz held power as president of mexico almost continuously from 1876–1911.
mexico has a free market economy that recently entered the trillion-dollar class . 
the war ended with the treaty of guadalupe hidalgo ,  which stipulated that  -lrb-  1 -rrb- mexico must sell its northern territories to the us for us $15 million;  -lrb-  2 -rrb- the us would give full citizenship and voting rights ,  and protect the property rights of mexicans living in the ceded territories; and  -lrb-  3 -rrb- the us would assume $3.25 million in debt owed by mexico to americans . 
the history of mexico ,  a country in the southern portion of north america ,  covers a period of more than three millennia . 
from 1521, the spanish conquest of the aztec empire incorporated the region into the spanish empire ,  with new spain its colonial era name and mexico city the center of colonial rule . 
during the three centuries of colonial rule ,  fewer than 700,000 spaniards ,  most of them men ,  settled in mexico . 
the capture of tenochtitlan marked the beginning of a 300-year colonial period ,  during which mexico was known as `` new spain '' ruled by a viceroy in the name of the spanish monarch . 
the result is that drug cartels have now both more gun power ,  and more manpower due to the high unemployment in mexico . 
the first people to settle in mexico encountered a climate far milder than the current one . 
on july 1, 2012, enrique peña nieto was elected president of mexico with 38% of the vote . 
the war ended with a liberal victory ,  and liberal president benito juárez moved his administration to mexico city . 
immediately following the japanese attack on pearl harbor on december 7, 1941, mexico went on a war footing . 
maximilian's consort was empress carlota of mexico and they chose chapultepec castle as their home . 
mexico's defeat has been attributed to its problematic internal situation ,  one of disunity and disorganization . 
the mexican revolution was based on popular participation . 
la reforma was a period during the mid-19th century characterized by liberal reforms and the transformation of mexico into a nation-state . 
mexico's biggest contributions to the war effort were in vital war materiel and labor ,  particularly the bracero program ,  a guest-worker program in the u . s .  freeing men there to fight in the european and pacific theaters of war . 
the spanish conquest of yucatán is the much longer campaign ,  from 1551 to 1697, against the maya peoples of the maya civilization in the yucatán peninsula of present-day mexico and northern central america . 
mestizos ,  people of mixed european-indigenous ancestry ,  constitute the majority of mexico's population . 
the mexican-french monarchy set up administration in mexico city ,  governing from the national palace . 
after a protracted struggle  -lrb-  1810–21 -rrb- for independence ,  new spain became the sovereign nation of mexico ,  with the signing of the treaty of córdoba . 
he is remembered today as the father of mexican independence . 
major drug syndicates control the majority of drug trafficking in the country ,  and mexico is a significant money-laundering center . 
fiscal stability was achieved by josé yves limantour  -lrb-  1854–1935 -rrb- ,  secretary of finance of mexico from 1893 until 1910.
foreign powers had important economic and strategic interests in the outcome of power struggles in mexico ,  with united states involvement in the mexican revolution playing an especially significant role . 
the inhabitants of tejas declared the republic of texas independent from mexico on 2 march 1836 at washington-on-the-brazos . 
the most important source of wealth in the first years after the conquest of central mexico was the encomienda ,  a grant of the labor of a particular indigenous settlement to an individual spanish and his heirs . 
a third of all the natives of the valley of mexico succumbed to it within six months of spaniards arrival . 
common dates are 1861, after the liberal victory in the reform war; 1867, after the republican victory over the french intervention in mexico; and 1876 when porfirio díaz overthrew president sebastián lerdo de tejada . 
when it became clear in other parts of latin america that the u . s .  and mexico had substantially resolved their differences ,  the other latin american countries were more amenable to support the u . s .  and allied effort against the axis . 
although most latin american countries eventually entered the war on the allies' side ,  mexico and brazil were the only latin american nations that sent troops to fight overseas during world war ii . 
in mexico and throughout latin america ,  franklin roosevelt's `` good neighbor policy '' was necessary at such a delicate time . 
accounts written by the spanish at the time of their conquest  -lrb-  the `` conquistadores ''  -rrb-  and by indigenous chroniclers of the post-conquest period constitute the principal source of information regarding mexico at the time of the spanish conquest . 
the large and complex civilizations of mexico developed in the center and southern regions  -lrb-  with the southern region extending into what is now central america  -rrb-  in what has come to be known as mesoamerica . 
unlike other indigenous mexican societies ,  these civilizations  -lrb-  with the exception of the politically fragmented maya  -rrb-  extended their political and cultural reach across mexico and beyond . 
by 1519, the aztec capital ,  mexico-tenochtitlan ,  the site of modern-day mexico city ,  was one of the largest cities in the world ,  with an estimated population between 200,000 and 300,000.
after the war ,  washington discovered that a much easier railroad route to california lay slightly south of the gila river ,  in mexico . 
the mexican government conducts the largest independent illicit-crop eradication program in the world ,  but mexico continues to be the primary transshipment point for u . s . -bound cocaine from south america . 
the cristero war of 1926 to 1929 was a counter-revolution against the calles regime set off by his persecution of the catholic church in mexico and specifically the strict enforcement of the anti-clerical provisions of the mexican constitution of 1917 and the expansion of further anti-clerical laws . 
the situation became even more worrisome for the allies when major oil companies boycotted mexican oil following lázaro cárdenas' nationalization of the oil industry and expropriation of all corporate oil properties in 1938, which severed mexico's access to its traditional markets and led mexico to sell its oil to germany and italy . 
the war killed a tenth of the nation's population and drove many northern mexicans across the u . s .  border to escape the fighting . 
for three centuries mexico was part of the spanish empire ,  whose legacy is a country with a spanish-speaking ,  catholic and largely western culture . 
initially ,  the forces in northern mexico were united under the constitutionalist banner ,  with able revolutionary generals serving the civilian first chief carranza . 
in 1900, the mexican population was 13.6 million . 
with a population of over 123 million in 2017, mexico ranks as the 11th most populated country in the world . 
the population of each of these five states grew by more than one-third from 2000-2015, while the whole of mexico grew by 22.6% in this period . 
it was in 1997, that pri lost its absolute majority at the congress of the union ,  and in 2000 the first non-pri president was elected since 1929.
federal presidential elections were held on july 2, 2006 concurrent with the full renovation of both chambers of the congress of the union . 
the constituent states of the federation must also have a republican form of government based on a congressional system as established by their respective constitutions . 
throughout the 20th century ,  pri had an almost hegemonic power at the state and federal level ,  which slowly began to recede in the late 1980s . 
mexico's labor force is 52.8 million as of 2015.
the mexican peso is the currency  -lrb-  iso 4217: mxn; symbol: $  -rrb-  . 
compared against the us dollar ,  mexican peso has devalued over %7,500 since 1910.
after the slowdown of 2001 the country has recovered and has grown 4.2, 3.0 and 4.8 percent in 2004, 2005 and 2006, even though it is considered to be well below mexico's potential growth . 
unemployment rates are the lowest of all oecd member countries at 3.2 percent . 
in the period of 1981–1982 the international panorama changed abruptly: oil prices plunged and interest rates rose . 
annual economic growth between 1876 and 1910 averaged 3.3% . 
the system is currently composed of three main satellites: solidaridad 2, satmex 5 and satmex 6.
mexico's communication services market is among the largest in latin america ,  liberalized in the 1990s ,  with the landmark privatization of teléfonos de méxico  -lrb-  telmex  -rrb-  ,  a previously state-owned monopoly . 
in april 2009, the itesm  -lrb-  `` instituto tecnológico y de estudios superiores de monterrey ''  -rrb-  reported 25,217,500 users; 78% of personal computer internet access is broadband access .  ,  ranking ninth in the world . 
usage of radio ,  television and internet in mexico nowadays is prevalent . 
the foreign relations of mexico are directed by the president of the united mexican states and managed through the secretariat of foreign affairs . 
in addition ,  mexico favored the membership of canada in 1989 and belize and guatemala in 1991.
in addition ,  mexico does not recognize kosovo as an independent country . 
historically ,  mexico has remained neutral in international conflicts . 
mexico was the first latin american country to sign a partnership agreement with the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  ,  in 1997, composed by 15 members at the time . 
since april 1, mexico holds the rotative presidency of the unsc . 
mexico is the tenth largest contributor to the united nations  -lrb-  un  -rrb-  regular budgets . 
the new foreign policy called for an openness and an acceptance of criticism from the international community ,  and the increase of mexican involvement in foreign affairs . 
as a founding member of the organization of american states  -lrb-  oas  -rrb-  ,  mexico has actively participated in the intergovernmental organization . 
as a regional power and emerging market ,  mexico holds a significant global presence . 
micronesia is a region that includes approximately 2100 islands ,  with a total land area of  ,  the largest of which is guam ,  which covers  . 
the micronesia region encompasses five sovereign ,  independent nations—the federated states of micronesia ,  palau ,  kiribati ,  the marshall islands and nauru—as well as three u . s .  territories in the northern part: northern mariana islands ,  guam and wake island . 
that region was then called `` bessarabia '' . 
after 1918 bessarabia was under romanian jurisdiction for the next 22 years . 
the territory remained part of the soviet union after world war ii as the moldavian soviet socialist republic . 
after the russian revolution of 1905, a romanian nationalist movement started to develop in bessarabia . 
the name of the supreme soviet also was changed ,  to the moldovan parliament . 
these investments stopped in 1991 with the dissolution of the soviet union ,  when moldova became independent . 
starting 1993, moldova began to distance itself from romania . 
on 27 august 1991, following the coup's collapse ,  moldova declared its independence from the soviet union . 
on june 28, soviet troops crossed the dniester and occupied bessarabia ,  northern bukovina ,  and the hertza region . 
with the notable exception of transnistria ,  the territory of today's republic of moldova covers most of the historical region of bessarabia . 
in may 1991, the country's official name was changed to the republic of moldova  -lrb-  republica moldova  -rrb-  . 
the history of moldova can be traced to the 1350s ,  when the principality of moldavia ,  the medieval precursor of modern moldova and romania ,  was founded . 
the name of the principality originates from the moldova river . 
gurie grosu was the first metropolitan of bessarabia . 
after the establishment of the soviet union in december 1922, the soviet government moved in 1924 to establish the moldavian autonomous oblast on the lands to the east of the dniester river in the ukrainian ssr . 
in 1991 a part of the country declared independence as the republic of moldova . 
by april 1944, successful offensives of the soviet army occupied northern moldavia and transnistria ,  and by the end of august 1944 the entire territory was under soviet control ,  with soviet army units entering kishinev on 24 august 1944.
the first democratic elections to the moldavian ssr's supreme soviet were held on february 25, 1990.
the soviet republic created following annexation did not follow bessarabia's traditional border . 
the union was recognized by britain ,  france and italy ,  but not by the soviet government ,  which claimed the area as the bessarabian soviet socialist republic ,  and argued the union was made under conditions of romanian military occupation by a council that had not been elected by the people of bessarabia in elections . 
the first scheduled flights to chișinău started on 24 june 1926, on the route bucharest – galați – iași – chișinău . 
however ,  negotiations in moscow between the gagauz and transnistrian leadership ,  and the government of the soviet socialist republic of moldova failed . 
the relationship between moldova and russia deteriorated in november 2003 over a russian proposal for the solution of the transnistrian conflict ,  which moldovan authorities refused to accept because it stipulated a 20-year russian military presence in moldova . 
the danube touches the moldovan border at its southernmost tip ,  and forms the border for  . 
ungheni is the third largest city with 32,828, followed by cahul with 28,763, soroca with 22,196 and orhei with 21,065.
according to the 2014 census in transnistria ,  475,007 people lived in the breakaway transnistria ,  including the city of bender ,  and the other localities `` de facto '' controlled by transnistrian authorities . 
the moldovan parliament  -lrb-  `` parlamentul ''  -rrb-  has 101 members ,  elected for a four-year term by proportional representation . 
