poland joined nato in 1999.
in 1940–1941, some 325,000 polish citizens were deported by the soviet regime . 
the organizations forming the polish underground state that functioned in poland throughout the war were loyal to and formally under the polish government-in-exile ,  acting through its government delegation for poland . 
this process resulted in the creation of the modern polish state: the third polish republic ,  founded in 1989.
after all the killings and population transfers during and after the war ,  the country was 99% `` polish '' . 
from 1795 until 1918, no truly independent polish state existed ,  although strong polish resistance movements operated . 
 ''merkuriusz polski '' ,  the first polish newspaper ,  was published in 1661.
livonia in the far northeast was incorporated by poland in 1561 and poland entered the livonian war against russia . 
the hungarian revolution was intensely supported by the polish public . 
the polish people's referendum of june 1946 was arranged by the communist polish workers' party to legitimize its dominance in polish politics and claim widespread support for the party's policies . 
in protracted fighting in 1944 and 1945, the soviets and their polish allies defeated and expelled the german army from poland at a cost of over 600,000 soviet soldiers lost . 
although no sovereign polish state existed between 1795 and 1918, the idea of polish independence was kept alive throughout the 19th century . 
the polish ruling elites considered the soviets in some ways more threatening than the nazis . 
his youngest daughter jadwiga  -lrb-  d .  1399 -rrb- assumed the polish throne in 1384.
further significant jewish emigration followed events such as the polish october political thaw of 1956 and the 1968 polish political crisis . 
mazovia was finally fully incorporated into the polish crown in 1529.
 ''the government of soviet russia issued in august 1918 a decree strongly supportive of the independence of poland ,  but at that time no polish lands were under russian control . 
it gained little influence inside poland ,  but its spirit soon reappeared during world war ii ,  within the polish government-in-exile . 
the second polish republic ,  established in 1918, existed as an independent state until 1939, when nazi germany and the soviet union destroyed it in their invasion of poland at the beginning of world war ii . 
the number of polish citizens who died at the hands of the soviets is estimated at less than 100,000.
the name change from the polish republic was not officially adopted ,  however ,  until the proclamation of the constitution of the polish people's republic in 1952.
the polish right-wing insurgency faded after the amnesty of february 1947.
the polish people's republic  -lrb-  `` polska rzeczpospolita ludowa ''  -rrb-  was established under the rule of the communist polish united workers' party  -lrb-  pzpr  -rrb-  . 
in july 1944, the soviet red army and soviet-controlled polish people's army entered the territory of future postwar poland . 
the soviets withdrew their support for gomułka ,  who insisted on the use of force; he and his close associates were subsequently ousted from the polish politburo by the polish central committee . 
see also: history of the ukrainian minority in poland . 
poland has not adopted the euro currency ,  however . 
the polish academy of learning  -lrb-  an academy of sciences  -rrb-  was founded in kraków in 1872.
the first polish public library was the załuski library in warsaw ,  opened to the public in 1747.
according to the united states holocaust memorial museum ,  at least 3 million polish jews and at least 1.9 million non-jewish polish civilians were killed . 
after the polish royal line and piast junior branch died out in 1370, poland came under the rule of louis i of hungary of the capetian house of anjou ,  who presided over a union of hungary and poland that lasted until 1382.
the polish national anthem ,  `` poland is not yet lost '' ,  or `` dąbrowski's mazurka '' ,  was written in praise of his actions by józef wybicki in 1797.
this number would have likely been many times higher had poland entered into an alliance with germany in 1939, as advocated by some polish historians and others . 
attempts to reunite the polish lands gained momentum in the 13th century ,  and in 1295, duke przemysł ii of greater poland managed to become the first ruler since bolesław ii to be crowned king of poland . 
 ''h . `` east of the molotov-ribbentrop line ,  the population was 43% polish ,  33% ukrainian ,  8% belarusian and 8% jewish . 
the history of poland has its roots in the migrations of slavs ,  who established permanent settlements in the polish lands during the early middle ages . 
the westward advances of the soviet red army in 1944 and 1945 compelled nazi germany's forces to retreat from poland ,  which led to the establishment of a communist satellite state of the soviet union ,  known from 1952 as the polish people's republic . 
the response of the polish leadership to the last partition is a matter of historical debate . 
the process and the resulting document were seen as illegitimate by the anti-sanation opposition ,  but during world war ii ,  the polish government-in-exile recognized the april constitution in order to uphold the legal continuity of the polish state . 
the ruling pzpr was formed by the forced amalgamation in december 1948 of the communist polish workers' party  -lrb-  ppr  -rrb-  and the historically non-communist polish socialist party  -lrb-  pps  -rrb-  . 
in 1965, the conference of polish bishops issued the letter of reconciliation of the polish bishops to the german bishops ,  a gesture intended to heal bad mutual feelings left over from world war ii . 
in the warsaw pact ,  formed in 1955, the army of the polish people's republic was the second largest ,  after the soviet army . 
king casimir iii the great  -lrb-  r .  1333–70 -rrb- ,  władysław's son and the last of the piast rulers ,  strengthened and expanded the restored kingdom of poland ,  but the western provinces of silesia  -lrb-  formally ceded by casimir in 1339 -rrb- and most of polish pomerania were lost to the polish state for centuries to come . 
balcerowicz's policies also caused permanent damage to polish agriculture ,  an area in which he lacked expertise ,  and to the often successful and useful polish cooperative movement . 
on 1 september 1939, hitler ordered an invasion of poland ,  the opening event of world war ii . 
the polish first army ,  fighting alongside the soviet red army ,  entered a devastated warsaw on 17 january 1945.
the emerging polish state was internally divided ,  heavily war-damaged and economically dysfunctional . 
the first polish legislative election for the re-established sejm  -lrb-  national parliament  -rrb-  took place in january 1919.
the orthodox church hierarchy ,  banned in poland after the union of brest ,  was re-established in 1635.
the increasingly repressive policies of the partitioning powers led to resistance movements in partitioned poland ,  and in 1830 polish patriots staged the november uprising . 
gerhard weinberg has argued that the most significant polish contribution to world war ii was sharing its code-breaking results . 
in the 16th century ,  protestant reformation movements made deep inroads into polish christianity and the resulting reformation in poland involved a number of different denominations . 
the polish government-in-exile ,  lacking international recognition ,  remained in continuous existence until 1990.
corruption was held to be commonplace in the political culture of the early polish republic . 
price increases for essential consumer goods triggered the polish protests of 1970.
from the time of the tehran conference in late 1943, there was broad agreement among the three great powers  -lrb-  the united states ,  the united kingdom ,  and the soviet union  -rrb-  that the locations of the borders between germany and poland and between poland and the soviet union would be fundamentally changed after the conclusion of world war ii . 
the germans used the opportunity to carry out a brutal suppression of the forces of the pro-western polish underground . 
the greatest single undertaking of the polish resistance movement in world war ii and a major political event was the warsaw uprising that began on 1 august 1944.
the final push for independence of poland took place on the ground in october–november 1918.
poland was established as a state under the piast dynasty ,  which ruled the country between the 10th and 14th centuries . 
bolesław i's expansive rule overstretched the resources of the early polish state ,  and it was followed by a collapse of the monarchy . 
german-occupied poland was divided from 1939 into two regions: polish areas annexed by nazi germany directly into the german `` reich '' and areas ruled under a so-called general government of occupation . 
the rapidly growing population of poland within its new boundaries was ¾ agricultural and ¼ urban; polish was the primary language of only ⅔ of the inhabitants of the new country . 
mieszko's son ,  duke bolesław i the brave  -lrb-  r .  992–1025 -rrb- ,  established a polish church structure ,  pursued territorial conquests and was officially crowned the first king of poland in 1025, near the end of his life . 
independence stimulated the development of polish culture in the interbellum and intellectual achievement was high . 
the union of horodło of 1413 further defined the evolving relationship between the kingdom of poland and the grand duchy of lithuania . 
because of changing borders and the mass movements of people of various nationalities ,  the emerging communist poland ended up with a mainly homogeneous ,  ethnically polish population  -lrb-  97.6% according to the december 1950 census  -rrb-  . 
branded `` zionists '' ,  they were scapegoated and blamed for the unrest in march 1968, which eventually led to the emigration of much of poland's remaining jewish population  -lrb-  about 15,000 polish citizens left the country  -rrb-  . 
in an attempt to incapacitate polish society ,  the nazis and the soviets executed tens of thousands of members of the intelligentsia and community leadership during events such as the german ab-aktion in poland ,  operation tannenberg and the katyn massacre . 
according to an estimate by historian jan grabowski ,  about 50,000 of the 250,000 polish jews who escaped the nazis during the liquidation of ghettos survived without leaving poland  -lrb-  the remainder perished  -rrb-  . 
in 1993, the formerly soviet northern group of forces ,  a vestige of past domination ,  left poland . 
after the defeat of the november uprising ,  thousands of former polish combatants and other activists emigrated to western europe . 
many exiled poles could not return to the country for which they had fought because they belonged to political groups incompatible with the new communist regimes ,  or because they originated from areas of pre-war eastern poland that were incorporated into the soviet union  -lrb-  see polish population transfers  -lrb-  1944–1946 -rrb-  -rrb-  . 
the failure of the january uprising in poland caused a major psychological trauma and became a historic watershed; indeed ,  it sparked the development of modern polish nationalism . 
in the last case ,  poland was denied the city of danzig on the baltic coast . 
in the austrian partition ,  polish culture was openly cultivated ,  and in the prussian partition ,  there were high levels of education and living standards ,  but the russian partition remained of primary importance for the polish nation and its aspirations . 
the latest tribal undertaking ,  in greater poland ,  resulted in the formation of a lasting political structure in the 10th century that became the state of poland ,  one of the west slavic nations . 
 ''p . `` the polish sanation authorities were provoked by the independence-seeking organization of ukrainian nationalists  -lrb-  oun  -rrb-  . 
estimates of the number of polish civilian victims vary greatly ,  from tens to hundreds of thousands . 
houston has mild winters . 
houston had 303 homicides in 2015 and 302 homicides in 2016.
by 1890, houston was the railroad center of texas . 
houston is served by the `` houston chronicle '' ,  its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution . 
houston city council approved the houston bike plan in march 2017, at that time entering the plan into the houston code of ordinances . 
instead ,  there was no increase in houston's homicide rate between 2015 and 2016.
during the summer ,  temperatures in houston commonly reach over  . 
the houston area is a leading center for building oilfield equipment . 
however ,  from 2006 to 2016, violent crime is still down 12 percent in houston . 
four distinct state universities are located in houston . 
houston proper began to spread across the region . 
the houston area catholic schools are operated by the archdiocese of galveston-houston . 
houston is one of the country's largest hubs for human trafficking . 
houston is a flat marshy area where an extensive drainage system has been built . 
the coldest temperature officially recorded in houston was on january 18, 1930.
seventeen school districts exist within the city of houston . 
in the 1960s ,  downtown houston consisted of a collection of midrise office structures . 
of the 10 most populous u . s .  cities ,  houston has the most total area of parks and green space ,   . 
three community college districts have campuses in and around houston . 
the university of houston system's annual impact on the houston area's economy equates to that of a major corporation: $1.1 billion in new funds attracted annually to the houston area ,  $3.13 billion in total economic benefit ,  and 24,000 local jobs generated . 
many annual events celebrate the diverse cultures of houston . 
houston is home to 337 parks ,  including hermann park ,  terry hershey park ,  lake houston park ,  memorial park ,  tranquility park ,  sesquicentennial park ,  discovery green ,  buffalo bayou park and sam houston park . 
the city of houston has a strong mayoral form of municipal government . 
by 1860, houston had emerged as a commercial and railroad hub for the export of cotton . 
texas southern university was the first state university in houston ,  founded in 1927.
bayou bend is the former home of houston philanthropist ima hogg . 
the proportion of non-hispanic whites in houston has decreased significantly since 1970, when it was 62.4% . 
houston also hosts a number of graduate schools in law and healthcare . 
houston was incorporated in 1837 and adopted a ward system of representation shortly afterward in 1840.
in 1940, the u . s .  census bureau reported houston's population as 77.5% white and 22.4% black . 
compared with its metropolitan area ,  the city of houston's population has a higher proportion of minorities . 
the houston air route traffic control center is located at bush intercontinental . 
while houston has never been widely known for its music scene ,  houston hip-hop has become a significant ,  independent music scene that is influential nationwide . 
the eight-county greater houston metropolitan area contains over of roadway ,  of which 10% ,  or approximately  ,  is limited-access highway . 
in 2012, there was a 25 percent increase in ridership to 20,327 passengers embarking from the houston amtrak station . 
houston averaged 1.59 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.
the federal aviation administration and the state of texas selected the houston airport system as `` airport of the year '' in 2005, largely due to the implementation of a $3.1 billion airport improvement program for both major airports in houston . 
houston's bicycle sharing system started service with nineteen stations in may 2012.
houston hosts the annual houston college classic baseball tournament every february ,  the texas kickoff and bowl in september and december ,  respectively . 
greater houston's arterial road network is established at the municipal level ,  with the city of houston exercising planning control over both its incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction  -lrb-  etj  -rrb-  . 
 ,  2.5-inch and 3.5-inch hard disks were the most popular sizes . 
non-removable hdds were called `` fixed disk '' drives . 
the first production ibm hard disk drive ,  the 350 disk storage ,  shipped in 1957 as a component of the ibm 305 ramac system . 
data is stored on a hard drive in a series of logical blocks . 
a hard disk drive  -lrb-  hdd  -rrb-  ,  hard disk ,  hard drive ,  or fixed disk ,  is an electromechanical data storage device that uses magnetic storage to store and retrieve digital information using one or more rigid rapidly rotating disks  -lrb-  platters  -rrb-  coated with magnetic material . 
a modern hdd records data by magnetizing a thin film of ferromagnetic material on a disk . 
2.5-inch drives are actually 2.75″ wide . 
also ,  in 1962, ibm introduced the model 1311 disk drive ,  which was about the size of a washing machine and stored two million characters on a removable disk pack . 
known as fixed-head or head-per-track disk drives they were very expensive and are no longer in production . 
early hard disk drives wrote data at some constant bits per second ,  resulting in all tracks having the same amount of data per track but modern drives  -lrb-  since the 1990s  -rrb-  use zone bit recording – increasing the write speed from inner to outer zone and thereby storing more data per track in the outer zones . 
when using the c/h/s method to describe modern large drives ,  the number of heads is often set to 64, although a typical hard disk drive ,   ,  has between one and four platters . 
seek time is a measure of how long it takes the head assembly to travel to the track of the disk that contains data . 
as bit cell size decreases ,  more data can be put onto a single drive platter . 
the factors that limit the time to access the data on an hdd are mostly related to the mechanical nature of the rotating disks and moving heads . 
hdd price per byte improved at the rate of −40% per year during 1988–1996, −51% per year during 1996–2003, and −34% per year during 2003–2010.
the worst type of errors are silent data corruptions which are errors undetected by the disk firmware or the host operating system; some of these errors may be caused by hard disk drive malfunctions while others originate elsewhere in the connection between the drive and the host . 
like the first removable pack drive ,  the first `` winchester '' drives used platters in diameter . 
for example ,  a typical 1 tb hard disk with 512-byte sectors provides additional capacity of about 93 gb for the ecc data . 
modern hard disk drives appear to their host controller as a contiguous set of logical blocks ,  and the gross drive capacity is calculated by multiplying the number of blocks by the block size . 
ibm's first hard drive ,  the ibm 350, used a stack of fifty 24-inch platters and was of a size comparable to two large refrigerators . 
rotational latency is incurred because the desired disk sector may not be directly under the head when data transfer is requested . 
in 1962, the ibm 350 was superseded by the ibm 1301 disk storage unit ,  which consisted of 50 platters ,  each about -inch thick and 24 inches in diameter . 
even with this intercalation ,  the average hebrew calendar year is longer by about 6 minutes and 40 seconds than the current mean tropical year ,  so that every 216 years the hebrew calendar will fall a day behind the current mean tropical year; and about every 231 years it will fall a day behind the mean gregorian calendar year . 
the hebrew lunar year is about eleven days shorter than the solar year and uses the 19-year metonic cycle to bring it into line with the solar year ,  with the addition of an intercalary month every two or three years ,  for a total of seven times per 19 years . 
he argues that `` 'the holocaust' is an ideological representation of the nazi holocaust '' . 
according to finkelstein ,  his book is `` an anatomy and an indictment of the holocaust industry '' . 
according to finkelstein ,  this `` holocaust industry '' has corrupted jewish culture and the authentic memory of the holocaust . 
finkelstein replied to the allegations by novick on his homepage . 
for the first four years ,  the golden dawn was one cohesive group later known as `` the outer order '' or `` first order . `` 
much of the hierarchical structure for the golden dawn came from the societas rosicruciana in anglia ,  which was itself derived from the order of the golden and rosy cross . 
this group of adepts eventually became known as the second order . 
the third order was that of the `` secret chiefs '' ,  who were said to be highly skilled; they supposedly directed the activities of the lower two orders by spirit communication with the chiefs of the second order . 
in 1896 or 1897, westcott broke all ties to the golden dawn ,  leaving mathers in control . 
the foundational documents of the original order of the golden dawn ,  known as the cipher manuscripts ,  are written in english using the trithemius cipher . 
westcott appears to have been the initial driving force behind the establishment of the golden dawn . 
in 1901, w .  b .  yeats privately published a pamphlet titled `` is the order of r .  r .  & a .  c .  to remain a magical order ? `` 
the hermetic order of the golden dawn  -lrb-  ; or ,  more commonly ,  the golden dawn  -lrb-  `` aurora aurea ''  -rrb-   -rrb-  was an organization devoted to the study and practice of the occult ,  metaphysics ,  and paranormal activities during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
this hash function is perfect ,  as it maps each input to a distinct hash value . 
a hash function with minimal movement is especially useful in distributed hash tables . 
multiplicative hashing is a simple type of hash function often used by teachers introducing students to hash tables . 
when the hash function is used to store values in a hash table that outlives the run of the program ,  and the hash table needs to be expanded or shrunk ,  the hash table is referred to as a dynamic hash table . 
if the data to be hashed is small enough ,  one can use the data itself  -lrb-  reinterpreted as an integer  -rrb-  as the hashed value . 
extendible hashing uses a dynamic hash function that requires space proportional to `` n '' to compute the hash function ,  and it becomes a function of the previous keys that have been inserted . 
a hash function that is injective—that is ,  maps each valid input to a different hash value—is said to be perfect . 
a hash function is any function that can be used to map data of arbitrary size to data of a fixed size . 
when testing a hash function ,  the uniformity of the distribution of hash values can be evaluated by the chi-squared test . 
for example ,  a hash function well suited to indexing data will probably be a poor choice for a cryptographic hash function . 
thus ,  the hash function only hints at the record's location . 
continuity is desirable for hash functions only in some applications ,  such as hash tables used in nearest neighbor search . 
it is based on the use of hashing to compare strings . 
people who write complete hash table implementations choose a specific hash function—such as a jenkins hash or zobrist hashing—and independently choose a hash-table collision resolution scheme—such as coalesced hashing ,  cuckoo hashing ,  or hopscotch hashing . 
in cryptographic hash functions ,  a merkle–damgård construction is usually used . 
other types of data can also use this perfect hashing scheme . 
in those situations ,  one needs a hash function which takes two parameters—the input data `` z '' ,  and the number `` n '' of allowed hash values . 
see also unique permutation hashing . 
it is often desirable that the output of a hash function have fixed size  -lrb-  but see below  -rrb-  . 
one can adapt certain checksum or fingerprinting algorithms for use as hash functions . 
in many cases ,  one can design a special-purpose  -lrb-  heuristic  -rrb-  hash function that yields many fewer collisions than a good general-purpose hash function . 
a hash procedure must be deterministic—meaning that for a given input value it must always generate the same hash value . 
this can be accomplished by normalizing the input before hashing it ,  as by upper-casing all letters . 
some cryptographic hash functions ,  such as sha-1, have even stronger uniformity guarantees than checksums or fingerprints ,  and thus can provide very good general-purpose hashing functions . 
this algorithm has proven to be very fast and of high quality for hashing purposes  -lrb-  especially hashing of integer-number keys  -rrb-  . 
the approach run of the high jump may actually be more important than the take-off . 
the bar is then alternately lowered and raised until only one jumper succeeds at a given height . 
high jumpers must have a fast approach so it is crucial to work on speed and also speed endurance . 
the technique one uses for the jump must be almost flawless in order to have a chance of clearing a high bar . 
the high jump is a track and field event in which competitors must jump unaided over a horizontal bar placed at measured heights without dislodging it . 
the first recorded high jump event took place in scotland in the 19th century . 
it is important to train to leap upwards without first leaning into the bar ,  allowing the momentum of the j approach to carry the body across the bar . 
it is crucial for high jumpers to have strong lower bodies and cores ,  as the bar progressively gets higher ,  the strength of an athlete's legs  -lrb-  along with speed and technique  -rrb-  will help propel them over the bar . 
the approach angle is also critical for optimal height . 
his statement that he `` heard no one '' but `` questioned himself '' ,  can be placed alongside his statement that `` the things that can be seen ,  heard and learned are what i prize the most . `` 
heraclitus' life as a philosopher was interrupted by dropsy . 
his dates of birth and death are based on a life span of 60 years ,  the age at which diogenes says he died ,  with the floruit in the middle . 
in 1982, schmitt was defeated by democrat jeff bingaman . 
schmitt landed on the moon with commander gene cernan in december 1972.
as he returned to the lunar module before cernan ,  schmitt is the next-to-last person to have walked on the moon's surface . 
in december 1972, as one of the crew on board apollo 17, schmitt became the first member of nasa's first scientist-astronaut group to fly in space . 
he is also the last living crew member of apollo 17.
schmitt campaigned for fourteen months ,  and his campaign focused on the future . 
schmitt resigned from nasa in august 1975 in order to run for election to the united states senate as a member from new mexico . 
in the republican primary ,  held on june 1, 1976, schmitt defeated eugene peirce . 
schmitt is also involved in several civic projects ,  including the improvement of the senator harrison h .  schmitt big sky hang glider park in albuquerque ,  new mexico . 
gravity exerts a force on the hammer head . 
the hammer and pick are used as a symbol of mining . 
the hammer in the song `` if i had a hammer '' represents a relentless message of justice broadcast across the land . 
the term `` hammer '' also applies to a mechanism's part that delivers a blow ,  such as the hammer of a firearm or of a piano . 
in the hatchet ,  the flat hammer head may be secondary to the cutting edge of the tool . 
the handle of the hammer helps in several ways . 
dead blow hammers use special rubber or steel shot to absorb recoil energy ,  rather than bouncing the hammer head after impact . 
some hammers are one-piece designs made mostly of a single material . 
a hammer may cause significant injury if it strikes the body . 
a well-known symbol with a hammer in it is the hammer and sickle ,  which was the symbol of the former soviet union and is strongly linked to communism and early socialism . 
hammers are used for a wide range of driving ,  shaping ,  and breaking applications . 
hiragana and katakana are both kana systems . 
upon frederick's death ,  he was succeeded by his son ,  duke frederick ii ,  in 1105.
conrad's brother duke frederick ii died in 1147, and was succeeded in swabia by his son ,  duke frederick iii . 
after lothair's death in 1137, frederick's brother conrad was elected king as conrad iii . 
their son frederick i was appointed duke of swabia at hohenstaufen castle by the salian king henry iv of germany in 1079.
at the same time ,  duke frederick i was engaged to the king's approximately seventeen-year-old daughter ,  agnes . 
frederick's brother otto was elevated to the strasbourg bishopric in 1082.
conrad iv was succeeded as duke of swabia by his only son ,  two-year-old conradin . 
when king conrad iii died without adult heir in 1152, frederick also succeeded him ,  taking both german royal and imperial titles . 
by 1910, the pattern of british rule in the malay lands was established . 
british north borneo and brunei were also occupied . 
during the 19th century the malay sultans aligned themselves with the british empire ,  due to the benefits of associations with the british and the belief in superior british civilisation . 
initially ,  the british followed a policy of non-intervention in relations between the malay states . 
between the 7th and the 13th century ,  much of the malay peninsula was under the buddhist srivijaya empire . 
in 1824, british hegemony in malaya  -lrb-  before the name malaysia  -rrb-  was formalised by the anglo-dutch treaty ,  which divided the malay archipelago between britain and the netherlands . 
in 1607, the sultanate of aceh rose as the powerful and wealthiest state in the malay archipelago . 
in 1881, the british north borneo company was granted control of the territory of british north borneo ,  appointing a governor and legislature . 
the japanese had a racial policy just as the british did . 
johor's eclipse also left perak as the unrivalled leader of the malay states . 
the proto malays have a more diverse origin and had settled in malaysia by 1000 bc . 
in the first millennium ce ,  malays became the dominant race on the peninsula . 
the malay teacher's college had lectures and writings that nurtured malay nationalism and anti-colonialist sentiments . 
in 1888, what was left of brunei was made a british protectorate ,  and in 1891 another anglo-dutch treaty formalised the border between british and dutch borneo . 
there were numerous malay kingdoms in the 2nd and 3rd century ,  as many as 30, mainly based on the eastern side of the malay peninsula . 
in 1970 three quarters of malaysians living below the poverty line were malays ,  the majority of malays were still rural workers ,  and malays were still largely excluded from the modern economy . 
although muslims had passed through the malay peninsula as early as the 10th century ,  it was not until the 14th century that islam first firmly established itself . 
the malays remained politically fragmented throughout the malay archipelago ,  although a common culture and social structure was shared . 
the malayan union was thus established in 1946, and was dissolved in 1948 and replaced by the federation of malaya ,  which restored the autonomy of the rulers of the malay states under british protection . 
during the late 19th century the british also gained control of the north coast of borneo ,  where dutch rule had never been established . 
english traders had been present in malay waters since the 17th century . 
these advisors held power in everything except to do with malay religion and customs . 
but most malays were more concerned with defending themselves against the mcp which was mostly made up of chinese ,  than with demanding independence from the british; indeed ,  their immediate concern was that the british not leave and abandon the malays to the armed communists of the mpaja ,  which was the largest armed force in the country . 
in 1946, the united malays national organisation  -lrb-  umno  -rrb-  was founded by malay nationalists led by dato onn bin jaafar ,  the chief minister of johor . 
japanese invasion during world war ii ended british domination in malaysia . 
although the japanese argued that they supported malay nationalism ,  they offended malay nationalism by allowing their ally thailand to re-annex the four northern states ,  kedah ,  perlis ,  kelantan ,  and terengganu that had been surrendered to the british in 1909.
traditional malay society had great difficulty coping with both the loss of political sovereignty to the british and of economic power to the chinese . 
the outbreak of war in the pacific in december 1941 found the british in malaya completely unprepared . 
the malacca sultanate is commonly considered the first independent state in the peninsula . 
a fourth phase of foreign influence was immigration of chinese and indian workers to meet the needs of the colonial economy created by the british in the malay peninsula and borneo . 
by the start of the 16th century ,  with the malacca sultanate in the malay peninsula and parts of sumatra ,  the demak sultanate in java ,  and other kingdoms around the malay archipelago increasingly converting to islam ,  it had become the dominant religion among malays ,  and reached as far as the modern-day philippines ,  leaving bali as an isolated outpost of hinduism today . 
in the years before world war ii ,  the british were concerned with finding the balance between a centralised state and maintaining the power of the sultans in malaya . 
islam came to the malay archipelago through the arab and indian traders in the 13th century ,  ending the age of hinduism and buddhism . 
during the second world war ,  the jewish agency worked to establish a jewish army that would fight alongside the british forces . 
jewish population was concentrated in jerusalem ,  hebron ,  safed and tiberias ,  known in jewish tradition as the four holy cities . 
in 1896 theodor herzl published `` der judenstaat ''  -lrb-  `` the jewish state ''  -rrb-  ,  in which he asserted that the solution to growing antisemitism in europe  -lrb-  the so-called `` jewish question ''  -rrb-  was to establish a jewish state . 
the plan also called for the british to allow `` substantial '' jewish migration by 1 february 1948.
about 43% of the world's jews live in israel today ,  the largest jewish community in the world . 
on 14 may 1948, on the day the last british forces left from haifa ,  the jewish people's council gathered at the tel aviv museum and proclaimed the establishment of a jewish state in eretz israel ,  to be known as the state of israel . 
in june 1944 the british agreed to create a jewish brigade that would fight in italy . 
the principal non-zionist orthodox jewish  -lrb-  or haredi  -rrb-  party ,  agudat israel ,  recommended to unscop that a jewish state be set up after reaching a religious status quo agreement with ben-gurion regarding the future jewish state . 
the hasmonean dynasty of jewish priest-kings ruled judea with the pharisees ,  sadducees and essenes as the principal jewish social movements . 
in 351–2, another jewish revolt in the galilee erupted against a corrupt roman governor . 
in 495 mar-zutra ii  -lrb-  the exilarch  -rrb-  ,  set up an independent jewish city-state in what is now iraq . 
another jewish follower ,  peter is believed to have become the first pope . 
the british demanded that the number of jewish recruits match the number of arab recruits ,  but few arabs would fight for britain ,  and the palestinian leader ,  the mufti of jerusalem ,  allied with nazi germany . 
a jewish national movement ,  zionism ,  emerged in the late-19th century  -lrb-  partially in response to growing anti-semitism  -rrb-  ,  as part of which aliyah  -lrb-  jewish immigration  -rrb-  increased . 
by the end of world war ii ,  the jewish population of palestine had increased to 33% of the total population . 
the majority report of unscop proposed `` an independent arab state ,  an independent jewish state ,  and the city of jerusalem '' ,  the last to be under `` an international trusteeship system '' . 
tensions and attacks on jews around the roman empire led to a massive jewish uprising against rome from 115 to 117.
in 611, sassanid persia invaded the byzantine empire and ,  after a long siege ,  khosrau ii captured jerusalem in 614, with jewish help ,  including possibly the jewish himyarite kingdom in yemen . 
a jewish legion composed largely of zionist volunteers organized by jabotinsky and trumpeldor participated in the british invasion . 
following the ceasefire declaration ,  britain released over 2,000 jewish detainees it was still holding in cyprus and recognized the state of israel . 
jewish immigration and nazi propaganda contributed to the large-scale 1936–1939 arab revolt in palestine ,  a largely nationalist uprising directed at ending british rule . 
in britain ,  the government sought jewish support for the war effort for a variety of reasons including an erroneous antisemitic perception of `` jewish power '' over the ottoman empire's young turks movement ,  and a desire to secure american jewish support for us intervention on britain's behalf . 
sacred jewish texts written in palestine at this time are the gemara  -lrb-  400 -rrb- ,  the jerusalem talmud  -lrb-  500 -rrb- and the passover haggadah . 
the land of israel  -lrb-  also known as the holy land or palestine  -rrb-  is the birthplace of the jewish people ,  the place where the hebrew bible was composed and the birthplace of judaism and christianity . 
the general assembly's vote caused joy in the jewish community and discontent among the arab community . 
in 1099, the first crusade took jerusalem and established a catholic kingdom ,  known as the kingdom of jerusalem . 
the british empire was severely weakened by the war . 
special dispensation was granted for jewish citizens of the roman empire to pay a tax to the temple . 
from 1928, the democratically elected va'ad leumi  -lrb-  jewish national council or jnc  -rrb-  became the main institution of the palestine jewish community  -lrb-  `` yishuv ''  -rrb-  and included non-zionist jews . 
in 1870, an agricultural school ,  the mikveh israel ,  was founded near jaffa by the alliance israelite universelle ,  a french jewish association . 
augustus made judea a roman province in 6 ce ,  deposing the last jewish king ,  herod archelaus ,  and appointing a roman governor . 
over the next few hundred years this requirement became steadily more ingrained in jewish tradition . 
large numbers of jewish immigrants ,  many of them world war ii veterans and holocaust survivors ,  now began arriving in the new state of israel ,  and many joined the idf . 
hebrew newspapers and books were published ,  hebrew schools ,  jewish political parties and workers organizations were established . 
within three years  -lrb-  1948 to 1951 -rrb- ,  immigration doubled the jewish population of israel and left an indelible imprint on israeli society . 
in 131, the emperor hadrian renamed jerusalem `` aelia capitolina '' and constructed a temple of jupiter on the site of the former jewish temple . 
with millions of jews trying to leave europe and every country in the world closed to jewish migration ,  the british decided to close palestine . 
in 1933, the jewish agency and the nazis negotiated the ha'avara agreement  -lrb-  transfer agreement  -rrb-  ,  under which 50,000 jews would be transferred to palestine . 
in 1874, ottoman reforms led to the area of jerusalem gaining special status as the mutasarrifate of jerusalem . 
doña nasi's nephew ,  joseph nasi ,  was made governor of tiberias and he encouraged jewish settlement from italy . 
the plan was rejected outright by the palestinian arab leadership and they renewed the revolt ,  which caused the british to appease the arabs ,  and to abandon the plan as unworkable . 
in 1950 the knesset passed the law of return ,  which granted to all jews and those of jewish ancestry ,  and their spouses ,  the right to settle in israel and gain citizenship . 
to this day `` south '' dorm is the northernmost hmc dorm . 
south dorm is in the northwest corner of the quad . 
the official names for the dormitories of harvey mudd college are  -lrb-  listed in order of construction  -rrb- : until the addition of the linde and sontag dorms ,  atwood and case dorms were occasionally referred to as new dorm and new dorm ii; mildred e .  mudd hall and marks hall are almost invariably referred to as east dorm and south dorm . 
harvey mudd college  -lrb-  hmc  -rrb-  is a private residential undergraduate science and engineering college in claremont ,  california . 
the college is named after harvey seeley mudd ,  one of the initial investors in the cyprus mines corporation . 
the god of the israelites is described as ruling both heaven and earth  -lrb-    ,    -rrb-  . 
this reading is also supported by the use of the phrase `` heaven of heavens '' in verses such as  ,   ,  and and  . 
some believe in the possibility of a heaven on earth in a world to come . 
according to roman catholic teaching ,  mary ,  mother of jesus ,  is also said to have been assumed into heaven and is titled the queen of heaven . 
the resurrected jesus is said to have ascended to heaven where he now sits at the right hand of god and will return to earth in the second coming . 
heaven ,  or the heavens ,  is a common religious ,  cosmological ,  or transcendent place where beings such as gods ,  angels ,  spirits ,  saints ,  or venerated ancestors are said to originate ,  be enthroned ,  or live . 
according to the beliefs of some religions ,  heavenly beings can descend to earth or incarnate ,  and earthly beings can ascend to heaven in the afterlife ,  or in exceptional cases enter heaven alive . 
according to shi'ite sources ,  ali mentioned the names of the seven heavens as below:
one interpretation of `` heavens '' is that all the stars and galaxies  -lrb-  including the milky way  -rrb-  are all part of the `` first heaven '' ,  and `` beyond that six still bigger worlds are there , ``  which have yet to be discovered by scientists . 
descriptions of heaven in the new testament are more fully developed than those in the old testament ,  but are still generally vague . 
this belief is referenced in the first petition of the lord's prayer ,  taught by jesus to his disciples and recorded in both and : `` your kingdom come ,  your will be done ,  on earth as it is in heaven . `` 
the ancient hittites believed that some deities lived in heaven ,  while others lived in remote places on earth ,  such as mountains ,  where humans had little access . 
from 1912 to 1927, the territory of libya was known as italian north africa . 
on 24 december 1951, libya declared its independence as the united kingdom of libya ,  a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under king idris ,  libya's only monarch . 
the modern history of independent libya began in 1951.
libyan constitutional assembly elections took place in libya on 20 february 2014.
meanwhile ,  gaddafi asserted that he was still in libya and would not concede power to the rebels . 
the history of libya comprises six distinct periods: ancient libya ,  the roman era ,  the islamic era ,  ottoman rule ,  italian rule ,  and the modern era . 
these cities were in an area that was later called tripolis ,  or `` three cities '' ,  from which libya's modern capital tripoli takes its name . 
after the fall of gaddhafi ,  libya has been faced with internal struggles . 
for the next several decades ,  libya was under the purview of the ummayad caliph of damascus until the abbasids overthrew the ummayads in 750, and libya came under the rule of baghdad . 
after the libyan civil war ,  the national transitional council  -lrb-  ntc  -rrb-  has been responsible for the transition of the administration of the governing of libya . 
at least 30,000 libyans died in the civil war . 
the united states also maintained the large wheelus air base in libya . 
1951 also saw the enactment of the first libyan constitution . 
from 1943 to 1951, tripolitania and cyrenaica were under british administration ,  while the french controlled fezzan . 
in 630 bce ,  the ancient greeks colonized eastern libya and founded the city of cyrene . 
on 7 july 2012, libyans voted in their first parliamentary elections since the end of gaddafi's rule . 
after a successful invasion of tripoli by habsburg spain in 1510, and its handover to the knights of st .  john ,  the ottoman admiral sinan pasha finally took control of libya in 1551.
mahmoud jibril served as the ntc's `` de facto '' head of government from 5 march 2011 through the end of the war ,  but he announced he would resign after libya was declared to have been `` liberated '' from gaddafi's rule . 
the national transitional council had been plagued by internal divisions during its tenure as libya's interim governing authority . 
under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the allies ,  italy relinquished all claims to libya . 
the indus valley civilization  -lrb-  ivc  -rrb-  was a bronze age civilization  -lrb-  3300-1300 bce; mature period 2600–1900 bce  -rrb-  extending from present-day northwest pakistan to present-day northwest india and present-day northeast afghanistan . 
there are several other smaller ivc sites to be found in afghanistan as well . 
nevertheless ,  the region of nowadays afghanistan came under median rule for a short time . 
afghanistan fell to the achaemenid empire after it was conquered by darius i of persia . 
one of demetrius' successors ,  menander i ,  brought the indo-greek kingdom to its height between 165–130 bce ,  expanding the kingdom in afghanistan and pakistan to even larger proportions than demetrius . 
alexander the great arrived in the area of afghanistan in 330 bce after defeating darius iii of persia a year earlier at the battle of gaugamela . 
the history of afghanistan ,   -lrb-  ' ' ,  ' '  -rrb-  as a state began in 1747 with its establishment by ahmad shah durrani . 
buddhist doctrines are reported to have reached as far as balkh even during the life of the buddha  -lrb-  563 bce to 483 bce  -rrb-  ,  as recorded by husang tsang . 
in 1821, the greeks rose up against the ottoman empire . 
greeks in crete continued to stage regular revolts ,  and in 1897, the greek government under theodoros deligiannis ,  bowing to popular pressure ,  declared war on the ottomans . 
power then passed into the hands of a group of greek politicians ,  most of whom who had been commanders in the war of independence against the ottomans . 
they then transferred to egypt ,  where a greek government in exile was established . 
even more surprisingly ,  venizelos' liberal party lost the greek elections of november 1920, and in the greek plebescite of 1920, the greek people voted for the return of king constantine from exile after the sudden death of king alexander . 
greek politics in the 19th century was dominated by the `` national question . `` 
senior greek military officers then withdrew their support from the junta ,  which collapsed . 
greek nationalists continued to claim southern albania  -lrb-  which they called northern epirus  -rrb-  ,  home of a significant greek population  -lrb-  about 3%-12% in the whole of albania  -rrb-  ,  and the turkish-held islands of imvros and tenedos ,  where there were smaller greek minorities . 
the greek election of 1923 was held to form a national assembly with powers to draft a new constitution . 
in addition ,  as the commander-in-chief of the greek army during the balkan wars ,  his popularity was enormous ,  rivalled only by that of venizelos ,  his prime minister . 
at the urging of britain and king george ,  greece adopted the much more democratic greek constitution of 1864.
as a reward to the greeks for adopting a pro-british king ,  britain ceded the ionian islands to greece . 
in march 1913, an anarchist ,  alexandros schinas ,  assassinated king george in thessaloniki ,  and his son came to the throne as constantine i .  constantine was the first greek king born in greece and the first to be greek orthodox by birth . 
the greeks then asked britain to send queen victoria's son prince alfred as their new king ,  but this was vetoed by the other powers . 
when the crimean war broke out in 1854, greece saw an opportunity to gain ottoman-controlled territory that had large greek populations . 
a new generation of greek politicians was growing increasingly intolerant of king otto's continuing interference in government . 
another political issue in 19th-century greece was the greek language question . 
the greeks occupied thessaloniki just ahead of the bulgarians ,  and also took much of epirus with ioannina ,  as well as crete and the aegean islands . 
downgrading of greek government debt to junk bonds created alarm in financial markets . 
the rigged greek plebiscite of 1935 confirmed the regime change  -lrb-  with an unsurprising 97.88% of votes  -rrb-  ,  and king george ii returned . 
these austerity measures have proved extremely unpopular with the greek public ,  precipitating demonstrations and civil unrest . 
in the mountains of the greek mainland ,  in the meantime ,  several greek resistance movements sprang up ,  and by mid-1943, the axis forces controlled only the main towns and the connecting roads ,  while a `` free greece '' was set up in the mountains . 
finally ,  in august 1922, the turkish army shattered the greek front ,  and took smyrna in an operation that led to the disastrous great fire of smyrna . 
the history of modern greece covers the history of greece from the recognition of its autonomy from the ottoman empire by the great powers  -lrb-  great britain ,  france ,  and russia  -rrb-  in 1828, after the greek war of independence ,  to the present day . 
venizelos became prime minister in october 1910, ushering a period of 25 years where his personality would dominate greek politics . 
several thousand suspected communists and political opponents were imprisoned or exiled to remote greek islands . 
as a result ,  especially in the aftermath of the french revolution ,  liberal and nationalist ideas began to spread across the greek lands . 
part of this was due to the unpopularity of king george ii in greece itself ,  but despite efforts by greek politicians ,  british support ensured his retention at the head of the cairo government . 
the largest resistance group ,  the national liberation front  -lrb-  eam  -rrb-  ,  was controlled by the communist party of greece ,  as was the greek people's liberation army  -lrb-  elas  -rrb-  ,  led by aris velouchiotis ,  and a civil war soon broke out between it and non-communist groups such as the national republican greek league  -lrb-  edes  -rrb-  in those areas liberated from the germans . 
kapodistrias also negotiated with the great powers and the ottoman empire to establish the borders and degree of independence of the greek state; signed the peace treaty that ended the war of independence with the ottomans; introduced the `` phoenix '' ,  the first modern greek currency; organised local administration; and ,  in an effort to raise the living standards of the population ,  introduced the cultivation of the potato into greece . 
italian troops crossed the border on 28 october 1940, beginning the greco-italian war ,  but were stopped by a determined greek defence that ultimately drove them back into albania . 
the greek army evacuated not only anatolia ,  but also eastern thrace and the islands of imbros and tenedos in accordance with the terms of the treaty of lausanne  -lrb-  1923 -rrb- . 
the 1960s are part of the period 1953-72, during which greek economy developed rapidly and was structured within the scope of european and worldwide economic developments . 
driven mad by hera ,  heracles slew his own children . 
heracles was the greatest of hellenic chthonic heroes ,  but unlike other greek heroes ,  no tomb was identified as his . 
fear of hera's revenge led alcmene to expose the infant heracles ,  but he was taken up and brought to hera by his half-sister athena ,  who played an important role as protectress of heroes . 
heracles  -lrb-   ;  ,  `` hēraklês '' ,  glory/pride of `` hēra '' ,  `` hera ''  -rrb-  ,  born alcaeus  -lrb-   ,  `` alkaios ''  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  or alcides  -lrb-   ,  `` alkeidēs ''  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  was a divine hero in greek mythology ,  the son of zeus and alcmene ,  foster son of amphitryon . 
details of his cult were adapted to rome as well . 
heracles was both hero and god ,  as pindar says `` heroes theos ''; at the same festival sacrifice was made to him ,  first as a hero ,  with a chthonic libation ,  and then as a god ,  upon an altar: thus he embodies the closest greek approach to a `` demi-god '' . 
on the night the twins heracles and iphicles were to be born ,  hera ,  knowing of her husband zeus' adultery ,  persuaded zeus to swear an oath that the child born that night to a member of the house of perseus would become high king . 
there were ancient towns and cities that also adopted heracles as a patron deity ,  contributing to the spread of his cult . 
his twin mortal brother ,  son of amphitryon ,  was iphicles ,  father of heracles' charioteer iolaus . 
the `` bibliotheca ''  -lrb-  2.5.1–2.5.12 -rrb- gives the following order:
after performing in the short-lived washington ,  d . c .  band state of alert in 1980, rollins fronted the california hardcore punk band black flag from august 1981 until mid-1986.
the rollins band released `` the end of silence '' ,  rollins's first charting album . 
by 1983, rollins' stage persona was increasingly alienating him from the rest of black flag . 
in 1980, the washington punk band the extorts lost their frontman lyle preslar to minor threat . 
before black flag disbanded in august 1986, rollins had already toured as a solo spoken word artist . 
following the band's breakup ,  rollins established the record label and publishing company 2.13.61 to release his spoken word albums ,  and formed the rollins band ,  which toured with a number of lineups from 1987 until 2003, and during 2006.
in 1991, the rollins band signed a distribution deal with imago records and appeared at the lollapalooza festival; both improved the band's presence . 
in 1995, the rollins band's record label ,  imago records ,  declared itself bankrupt . 
hadrons are categorized into two families: baryons ,  made of an odd number of quarks – usually three quarks – and mesons ,  made of an even number of quarks—usually one quark and one antiquark . 
in other phases of matter the hadrons may disappear . 
most of the mass of ordinary matter comes from two hadrons ,  the proton and the neutron . 
hadrons have excited states known as resonances . 
his daughter ,  eriko hironaka ,  is also a mathematician and focuses on low-dimensional topology and geometric topology . 
the house of habsburg became extinct in the 18th century . 
the house of habsburg gathered dynastic momentum through the 11th ,  12th ,  and 13th centuries . 
the lorraine branch continues to exist to this day and its members use the habsburg name  -lrb-  example: otto von habsburg  -rrb-  . 
during debates ,  members may speak only if called upon by the speaker  -lrb-  or a deputy speaker ,  if the speaker is not presiding  -rrb-  . 
members may also make inquiries in writing . 
the speaker and the deputy speakers are always members of the house of commons . 
there are numerous qualifications that apply to members of parliament . 
at each lobby are two tellers  -lrb-  themselves members of the house  -rrb-  who count the votes of the members . 
the commons is an elected body consisting of 650 members known as members of parliament  -lrb-  mps  -rrb-  . 
in the case of grave disorder ,  the speaker may adjourn the house without taking a vote . 
once elected ,  members of parliament normally continue to serve until the next dissolution of parliament . 
since 1950, each member of parliament has represented a single constituency  -lrb-  also known as a seat  -rrb-  . 
the term `` member of parliament '' by modern convention means members of the house of commons . 
thus the parliament act 1911 came into effect ,  destroying the legislative equality of the two houses of parliament . 
speeches are addressed to the presiding officer ,  using the words `` mr speaker '' ,  `` madam speaker '' ,  `` mr deputy speaker '' ,  or `` madam deputy speaker '' . 
parliament normally sits for a maximum term of five years . 
whilst presiding ,  the speaker or deputy speaker wears ceremonial dress . 
the british parliament of today largely descends ,  in practice ,  from the parliament of england ,  although the 1706 treaty of union ,  and the acts of union that ratified the treaty ,  created a new parliament of great britain to replace the parliament of england and the parliament of scotland ,  with the addition of 45 mps and sixteen peers to represent scotland . 
in such circumstances there may not even have been an internal party leadership election ,  as the new leader may be chosen by acclaim ,  having no electoral rival  -lrb-  as in the case of both brown and may  -rrb-  . 
members of the house of lords may not serve in the house of commons ,  or even vote in parliamentary elections  -lrb-  just as the queen does not vote  -rrb- ; however ,  they are permitted to sit in the chamber during debates  -lrb-  unlike the queen ,  who cannot enter the chamber  -rrb-  . 
during times of national emergency ,  the house may also sit at weekends . 
members are elected to represent constituencies by first-past-the-post and hold their seats until parliament is dissolved . 
later still the acts of union 1800 brought about the abolition of the parliament of ireland and enlarged the commons at westminster with 100 irish members ,  creating the parliament of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . 
by a custom that prevailed even before the parliament acts ,  only the house of commons may originate bills concerning taxation or supply . 
at the beginning of each new parliamentary term ,  the house of commons elects one of its members as a presiding officer ,  known as the speaker . 
since 1989, they have also been broadcast on television ,  which is now handled by bbc parliament . 
the outcome of most votes is largely known beforehand ,  since political parties normally instruct members on how to vote . 
under the parliament act 1911, the lords' power to reject legislation was reduced to a delaying power . 
sittings of the house are open to the public ,  but the house may at any time vote to sit in private ,  which has occurred only twice since 1950.
the british parliament uses committees for a variety of purposes ,  e . g .  ,  for the review of bills . 
the overall objective is to be the player with the fewest points by the end of the game . 
the game of hearts as currently known originated with a family of related games called reversis ,  which became popular around 1750 in spain . 
hastings is a town and borough in east sussex on the south coast of england , 
countries vary widely in their approach to human rights and their record of human rights protection . 
its human rights duties stem from three documents:
the european convention on human rights defines and guarantees since 1950 human rights and fundamental freedoms in europe . 
the united nations human rights council ,  created at the 2005 world summit to replace the united nations commission on human rights ,  has a mandate to investigate violations of human rights . 
human rights expert philip alston argues:
the inter-americal court of human rights was established in 1979 with the purpose of enforcing and interpreting the provisions of the american convention on human rights . 
there are also emerging and secular forms of natural law theory that define human rights as derivative of the notion of universal human dignity . 
ancient peoples did not have the same modern-day conception of universal human rights . 
natural law theories base human rights on a `` natural '' moral ,  religious or even biological order which is independent of transitory human laws or traditions . 
the most common categorization of human rights is to split them into civil and political rights ,  and economic ,  social and cultural rights . 
there are no asia-wide organisations or conventions to promote or protect human rights . 
other theories hold that human rights codify moral behavior which is a human social product developed by a process of biological and social evolution  -lrb-  associated with hume  -rrb-  . 
the eu also has a separate human rights document; the charter of fundamental rights of the european union . 
civil and political rights are enshrined in articles 3 to 21 of the universal declaration of human rights and in the iccpr . 
human rights are `` the basic rights and freedoms to which all humans are entitled '' examples of rights and freedoms which are often thought of as human rights include civil and political rights ,  such as the right to life and liberty ,  freedom of expression ,  and equality before the law; and social ,  cultural and economic rights ,  including the right to participate in culture ,  the right to work ,  and the right to education . 
the arab charter on human rights  -lrb-  achr  -rrb-  was adopted by the council of the league of arab states on 22 may 2004.
there are many regional agreements and organizations promoting and governing human rights . 
the philosopher john finnis argues that human rights are justifiable on the grounds of their instrumental value in creating the necessary conditions for human well-being . 
in october 2009, the asean intergovernmental commission on human rights was inaugurated ,  and subsequently ,  the asean human rights declaration was adopted unanimously by asean members on 18 november 2012.
