in 1973, sharp corporation introduced the use of lcd displays for calculators ,  and then mass-produced tn lcd displays for watches in 1975.
the first color lcd televisions were developed as handheld televisions in japan . 
a liquid-crystal display  -lrb-  lcd  -rrb-  is a flat-panel display or other electronically modulated optical device that uses the light-modulating properties of liquid crystals . 
in 1990, under different titles ,  inventors conceived electro optical effects as alternatives to `` twisted nematic field effect lcds ''  -lrb-  tn- and stn- lcds  -rrb-  . 
lcds are used in a wide range of applications ,  including lcd televisions ,  computer monitors ,  instrument panels ,  aircraft cockpit displays ,  and indoor and outdoor signage . 
epson's vpj-700, released in january 1989, was the world's first compact ,  full-color lcd projector . 
latency is a time interval between the stimulation and response ,  or ,  from a more general point of view ,  a time delay between the cause and the effect of some physical change in the system being observed . 
assuming the above are done one after another ,  minimum plane turnaround time is:
audio latency is the delay between when an audio signal enters and when it emerges from a system . 
however ,  cleaning ,  refueling and loading the cargo can be done at the same time . 
latency is sometimes also called transport delay . 
network latency in a packet-switched network is measured as either one-way  -lrb-  the time from the source sending a packet to the destination receiving it  -rrb-  ,  or round-trip delay time  -lrb-  the one-way latency from source to destination plus the one-way latency from the destination back to the source  -rrb-  . 
the people involved in the turnaround are interested only in the time it takes for their individual tasks . 
on microsoft windows ,  it appears that the timing of commands to hardware is not exact . 
online games are sensitive to latency since fast response times to new events occurring during a game session are rewarded while slow response times may carry penalties . 
london regional transport was the transport authority from 29 june 1984 to 2 july 2000.
since 2000, the greater london authority has been the transport authority and the executive agency has been called transport for london; ending the 67-year use of the `` london transport '' name . 
the london transport executive  -lrb-  lte  -rrb-  was the transport authority from 1 january 1948 to 31 december 1962.
the history of public transport authorities in london details the various organisations that have been responsible for the public transport network in and around london ,  england from 1933 until 2000 and have used the london transport brand . 
there are many sources of light . 
the study of light and the interaction of light and matter is termed optics . 
for example ,  the speed of light in water is about 3/4 of that in vacuum . 
during the time it had `` stopped '' it had ceased to be light . 
the speed of light in a vacuum is defined to be exactly 299,792,458 m/s  -lrb-  approx . 
atoms emit and absorb light at characteristic energies . 
above the range of visible light ,  ultraviolet light becomes invisible to humans ,  mostly because it is absorbed by the cornea below 360 nm and the internal lens below 400 nm . 
light is electromagnetic radiation within a certain portion of the electromagnetic spectrum . 
different physicists have attempted to measure the speed of light throughout history . 
when a beam of light crosses the boundary between a vacuum and another medium ,  or between two different media ,  the wavelength of the light changes ,  but the frequency remains constant . 
the doubly unsaturated fatty acid linoleic acid as well as the triply unsaturated α-linolenic acid cannot be synthesized in mammalian tissues ,  and are therefore essential fatty acids and must be obtained from the diet . 
fatty acids ,  or fatty acid residues when they are part of a lipid ,  are a diverse group of molecules synthesized by chain-elongation of an acetyl-coa primer with malonyl-coa or methylmalonyl-coa groups in a process called fatty acid synthesis . 
lipids also form the basis of steroid hormones . 
examples of biologically important fatty acids include the eicosanoids ,  derived primarily from arachidonic acid and eicosapentaenoic acid ,  that include prostaglandins ,  leukotrienes ,  and thromboxanes . 
for a century ,  chemists regarded `` fats '' as only simple lipids made of fatty acids and glycerol  -lrb-  glycerides  -rrb-  ,  but new forms were described later . 
although the term `` lipid '' is sometimes used as a synonym for fats ,  fats are a subgroup of lipids called triglycerides . 
the fatty acids are typically saturated or mono-unsaturated with chain lengths from 16 to 26 carbon atoms . 
the process of lipid metabolism synthesizes and degrades the lipid stores and produces the structural and functional lipids characteristic of individual tissues . 
beta oxidation is the metabolic process by which fatty acids are broken down in the mitochondria or in peroxisomes to generate acetyl-coa . 
in 1947, divided lipids into `` simple lipids '' ,  with greases and waxes  -lrb-  true waxes ,  sterols ,  alcohols  -rrb-  ,  and `` complex lipids '' ,  with phospholipids and glycolipids . 
the terms lipoid ,  lipin ,  lipide and lipid have been used with varied meanings from author to author . 
the fatty acids may be subsequently converted to triglycerides that are packaged in lipoproteins and secreted from the liver . 
sterol lipids ,  such as cholesterol and its derivatives ,  are an important component of membrane lipids ,  along with the glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelins . 
typically ,  one or both of these hydroxyl groups are acylated with long-chain fatty acids ,  but there are also alkyl-linked and 1z-alkenyl-linked  -lrb-  plasmalogen  -rrb-  glycerophospholipids ,  as well as dialkylether variants in archaebacteria . 
this correspondence between lie groups and lie algebras allows one to study lie groups in terms of lie algebras . 
lie algebras were so termed by hermann weyl after sophus lie in the 1930s . 
smoothness of the group multiplication
in mathematics ,  a lie group  -lrb-  pronounced `` lee ''  -rrb-  is a group that is also a differentiable manifold ,  with the property that the group operations are smooth . 
a real lie group is a group that is also a finite-dimensional real smooth manifold ,  in which the group operations of multiplication and inversion are smooth maps . 
lie groups  -lrb-  and their associated lie algebras  -rrb-  play a major role in modern physics ,  with the lie group typically playing the role of a symmetry of a physical system . 
lake erie has a lake retention time of 2.6 years ,  the shortest of all the great lakes . 
the other feared the lake was being emptied . `` 
lake water is used for drinking purposes . 
the lake is dotted by distinct lighthouses . 
lake erie islands tend to be in the westernmost part of the lake and have different characters . 
there are numerous public parks around the lake . 
at its deepest point lake erie is deep . 
estimates vary about the fishing market for the great lakes region . 
here's an account of the day-long voyage over the lake:
lake erie  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the fourth-largest lake  -lrb-  by surface area  -rrb-  of the five great lakes in north america ,  and the eleventh-largest globally if measured in terms of surface area . 
these jurisdictions divide the surface area of the lake with water boundaries . 
there was concern in 2007 that snakehead fish could get into the great lakes area . 
the lake also supports a strong sport fishery . 
like the other great lakes ,  erie produces lake effect snow when the first cold winds of winter pass over the warm waters . 
the lake is also responsible for microclimates that are important to agriculture . 
lake erie is the shallowest of the great lakes because the ice was relatively thin and lacked erosion power when it reached that far south ,  according to one view . 
in addition ,  the great lakes institute of the university of windsor has experts who study issues such as lake sediment pollution and the flow of contaminants such as phosphorus . 
research into shipwrecks has been organized by the peachman lake erie shipwreck research center ,  or plesrc ,  located on the grounds of the great lakes historical society . 
situated below lake huron ,  erie's primary inlet is the detroit river . 
lake erie is home to one of the world's largest freshwater commercial fisheries . 
in winter when the lake freezes ,  many fishermen go out on the ice ,  cut holes ,  and fish . 
kayaking has become more popular along the lake ,  particularly in places such as put-in-bay ,  ohio . 
in the 1970s ,  patches of the lake were declared dead because of industrial waste as well as sewage from runoffs; as `` the new york times '' reporter denny lee wrote in 2004, `` the lake ,  after all ,  is where the rust belt meets the water . `` 
islands tend to be located in the western side of the lake and total 31 in number  -lrb-  13 in canada ,  18 in the u . s .   -rrb-  . 
in 2008, the great lakes historical society announced plans to survey the underwater battle site of the battle of lake erie in preparation for the bicentennial celebration of the battle in 2013.
the water quality deteriorated partially due to increasing levels of the nutrient phosphorus in both the water and lake bottom sediments . 
lake erie has a complex ecosystem with many species in constant interaction . 
the longest fish in lake erie is reportedly the sturgeon which can grow to ten feet long and weight 300 pounds ,  but it is an endangered species and mostly lives on the bottom of the lake . 
there were sightings of a magnificent frigatebird ,  a tropical bird with a two-metre wingspan ,  over the lake in 2008.
lake ontario is one of the five great lakes of north america . 
it is the only great lake not to border the state of michigan . 
over 2 million people live in lake ontario's american watershed . 
lake ontario is the easternmost of the great lakes and the smallest in surface area  -lrb-  7,340 sq mi ,  18,960 km  -rrb-  ,  although it exceeds lake erie in volume  -lrb-  393 cu mi ,  1,639 km  -rrb-  . 
the name ontario is derived from the huron word `` ontarí'io '' ,  which means `` great lake '' . 
when the cold winds of winter pass over the warmer water of the lake ,  they pick up moisture and drop it as lake effect snow . 
major rivers draining into lake ontario include the niagara river ,  don river ,  humber river ,  trent river ,  cataraqui river ,  genesee river ,  oswego river ,  black river ,  little salmon river ,  and the salmon river . 
the great lakes watershed is a region of high biodiversity ,  and lake ontario is important for its diversity of birds ,  fish ,  reptiles amphibians and plants . 
because of its great depth ,  the lake as a whole never freezes in winter ,  but an ice sheet covering between 10% and 90% of the lake area typically develops ,  depending on the severity of the winter . 
cities on the shores of lake michigan include: illinois
lake michigan is shared ,  from west to east ,  by the u . s .  states of wisconsin ,  illinois ,  indiana ,  and michigan . 
the warming of lake michigan was the subject of a report by purdue university in 2018.
some of the earliest human inhabitants of the lake michigan region were the hopewell indians . 
lake michigan is one of the five great lakes of north america and the only one located entirely within the united states . 
beyond mathematics ,  namesakes of fibonacci include the asteroid 6765 fibonacci and the art rock band the fibonaccis . 
there are many mathematical concepts named after fibonacci because of a connection to the fibonacci numbers . 
the date of fibonacci's death is not known ,  but it has been estimated to be between 1240 and 1250, most likely in pisa . 
in the `` liber abaci ''  -lrb-  1202 -rrb- ,  fibonacci introduced the so-called `` modus indorum ''  -lrb-  method of the indians  -rrb-  ,  today known as the hindu–arabic numeral system . 
fibonacci travelled with him as a young boy ,  and it was in bugia that he learned about the hindu–arabic numeral system . 
the lake is fed by over 200 rivers . 
lake superior  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  the largest of the great lakes of north america ,  is also the world's largest freshwater lake by surface area ,  and the third largest freshwater lake by volume . 
lake superior empties into lake huron via the st .  marys river and the soo locks . 
 -lrb-  though crater lake is the deepest lake in the united states and deeper than lake superior ,  crater lake's elevation is higher and consequently its deepest point is `` above '' sea level .   -rrb- 
because of its volume ,  lake superior has a retention time of 191 years . 
the largest island in lake superior is isle royale in the state of michigan . 
the lake's average surface elevation is above sea level . 
the shoreline of the lake stretches  -lrb-  including islands  -rrb-  . 
leipzig has a population of about 570,000.
during the 1930s and 1940s ,  music was prominent throughout leipzig . 
some of these correspond to outlying villages which have been annexed by leipzig . 
in 1933, a census recorded that over 11,000 jews were living in leipzig . 
nowadays ,  leipzig is an important economic center in germany . 
in the 19th century ,  leipzig was a centre of the german and saxon liberal movements . 
on 20 december 1937, after the nazis took control of the city ,  they renamed it reichsmessestadt leipzig ,  meaning the `` imperial trade fair city leipzig '' . 
the leipzig region was the arena of the 1813 battle of leipzig between napoleonic france and an allied coalition of prussia ,  russia ,  austria and sweden . 
like all other cities claimed by the nazis ,  leipzig was subject to aryanisation . 
the largest minorities  -lrb-  first and second generation  -rrb-  in leipzig by country of origin in 2017 are:
on 22 may 1930, carl friedrich goerdeler was elected mayor of leipzig . 
leipzig  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the most populous city in the federal state of saxony ,  germany . 
several thousand forced labourers were stationed in leipzig during the second world war . 
leipzig became one of the major cities of the german democratic republic  -lrb-  east germany  -rrb-  . 
oper leipzig has become one of the most prominent opera houses in germany . 
the leipzig gewandhaus orchestra ,  established in 1743, is one of the oldest symphony orchestras in the world . 
the allied ground advance into germany reached leipzig in late april 1945.
jewish studies were emphasized and much of the jewish community of leipzig became involved . 
some 64,000 apartments in leipzig were built in plattenbau buildings during the communist rule in east germany . 
the most recent stable version of limewire is 5.5.16.
as a result ,  neither the recording industry association of america  -lrb-  riaa  -rrb-  nor lime wire llc have the ability to disable older versions of limewire ,  unless the user chooses to upgrade to a newer version of limewire . 
until october 2010, lime wire llc ,  the new york city based developer of limewire ,  distributed two versions of the program: a basic free version ,  and an enhanced version ,  limewire pro ,  sold for a fee of us$21.95 with 6 months of updates ,  or around $35.00 with 1 year of updates . 
limewire was the second file sharing program after frostwire to support firewall-to-firewall file transfers ,  a feature introduced in version 4.2, which was released in november 2004.
versions of limewire prior to 5.5.10 can still connect to the gnutella network and users of these versions are still able to download files ,  even though a message is displayed concerning the injunction during the startup process of the software . 
from version 5.5.1, limewire has added a key activation ,  which requires the user to enter the unique key before activating the `` pro '' version of the software . 
on october 26, 2010, u . s .  federal court judge kimba wood issued an injunction enforcing limewire to prevent `` the searching ,  downloading ,  uploading ,  file trading and/or file distribution functionality ,  and/or all functionality '' of its software in `` arista records llc v .  lime group llc '' . 
the ability to distribute such malware and viruses has also been reduced in versions of limewire 5.0 and greater ,  with the program defaulting to not share or search for executable files . 
the exclusive features in limewire pro were also unlocked ,  and all security features installed by lime wire llc were removed . 
limewire is a discontinued free peer-to-peer file sharing  -lrb-  p2p  -rrb-  client for windows ,  os x ,  linux and solaris . 
 ''dooms master ''  -rrb-  . 
due to doom's undertakings that drive him away from latveria ,  the monarch is often absent . 
the administrative center is castle doom . 
however doom survives this and rules latveria for a time with a 'puppet' prime minister and robotic enforcers . 
latveria first appeared in `` fantastic four annual '' #2, published in 1964.
latveria is a fictional nation appearing in american comic books published by marvel comics . 
in this article we will denote the least common multiple of two integers `` a '' and `` b '' as lcm -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  . 
in arithmetic and number theory ,  the least common multiple ,  lowest common multiple ,  or smallest common multiple of two integers `` a '' and `` b '' ,  usually denoted by lcm -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  ,  is the smallest positive integer that is divisible by both `` a '' and `` b '' . 
st .  laurent was appointed a companion of the order of canada on 6 july 1967.
st-laurent and his cabinet oversaw canada's expanding international role in the postwar world . 
st-laurent won ,  and was sworn in as prime minister of canada on 15 november ,  making him canada's second french-canadian prime minister ,  after wilfrid laurier . 
louis stephen st .  laurent  -lrb-  `` saint-laurent '' or `` st-laurent '' in french ,  baptized louis-étienne st-laurent; 1 february 1882 – 25 july 1973 -rrb- was the 12th prime minister of canada ,  from 15 november 1948 to 21 june 1957.
st-laurent was the first prime minister to live in the present official residence of the prime minister of canada: 24 sussex drive ,  from 1951 to 1957, the end of his term in office . 
the house and grounds in compton where st .  laurent was born were designated a national historic site of canada in 1973.
st .  laurent was ranked #4 on a survey of the first 20 prime ministers  -lrb-  through jean chrétien  -rrb-  of canada done by canadian historians ,  and used by j .  l .  granatstein and norman hillmer in their book `` prime ministers: ranking canada's leaders '' . 
king came to regard st-laurent as his most trusted minister and natural successor . 
st-laurent led the liberals to another powerful majority in the 1953 federal election . 
st-laurent worked as a lawyer from 1905 to 1941, also becoming a professor of law at université laval in 1914.
st-laurent chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the supreme court of canada by the governor general:
it was this last project that was to sow the seeds that led to the downfall of the st-laurent government . 
in this role ,  st-laurent represented canada at the dumbarton oaks conference and san francisco conference that led to the founding of the united nations  -lrb-  un  -rrb-  . 
st-laurent's father ,  a compton shopkeeper ,  was a staunch supporter of the liberal party of canada and was particularly enamoured with sir wilfrid laurier . 
in 1944 richard leakey was born . 
leakey's books are listed below . 
he is also the father of paleoanthropologist richard leakey and the botanist colin leakey . 
leakey discoveries began to appear in the newspapers again . 
frida's site became flk ,  for frida leakey's karongo  -lrb-  `` gully ''  -rrb-  . 
in britain ,  the leakey children attended elementary school; in africa ,  they had a tutor . 
it was louis who began the leakey tradition of publishing in `` nature '' . 
louis leakey was married to mary leakey ,  who made the noteworthy discovery of fossil footprints at laetoli . 
louis's parents ,  harry  -lrb-  1868–1940 -rrb- and mary  -lrb-  may  -rrb-  bazett leakey  -lrb-  died 1948 -rrb- ,  were church of england missionaries in british east africa  -lrb-  now kenya  -rrb-  . 
at olduvai ,  mary set up camp 5 and began work with her own staff and associates . 
the geology of olduvai was known . 
his father was also a role model: canon leakey co-founded the east africa and uganda natural history society . 
leakey also played a major role in creating organizations for future research in africa and for protecting wildlife there . 
while the leakeys were at lake victoria ,  the kikuyu struck at the european settlers of the kenyan highlands ,  who seemed to have the upper hand and were insisting on a `` white '' government of a `` white '' africa . 
louis's cousin ,  nigel gray leakey ,  was a recipient of the victoria cross during world war ii . 
simpson had acquired what looked like ancient scrapers from a site in the calico hills and showed it to leakey . 
louis seymour bazett leakey  -lrb-  7 august 1903 – 1 october 1972 -rrb- was a kenyan paleoanthropologist and archaeologist whose work was important in demonstrating that humans evolved in africa ,  particularly through discoveries made at olduvai gorge with his wife ,  fellow paleontologist mary leakey . 
the geologist vance haynes had made three visits to the site in 1973 and had claimed that the artifacts found by leakey were naturally formed geofacts . 
in 1949 the kikuyu formed a secret society ,  the mau mau ,  which attacked settlers and especially loyalist kikuyu . 
several members of leakey's family became prominent scholars themselves . 
meeting mary in africa ,  he proceeded to olduvai with a small party . 
in 1922 the british had been awarded german east africa as part of the settlement of world war i . 
at that time he discovered the acheulean site of kariandusi ,  which he excavated in 1928.
richard left it in place . 
in philosophy and logic ,  the classical liar paradox or liar's paradox or antinomy of the liar is the statement of a liar that he or she is lying: for instance ,  declaring that `` i am lying '' . 
the epimenides paradox  -lrb-  circa 600 bc  -rrb-  has been suggested as an example of the liar paradox ,  but they are not logically equivalent . 
he analyzes this paradox together with the paradox of `` unsignifiability '' and explores the boundary between statements that are unproblematic in daily life and paradoxes . 
during the nazi occupation `` louchébem '' was used by parisian members of the resistance . 
louchébem or loucherbem  -lrb-    -rrb-  is parisian and lyonnaise butchers'  -lrb-  french `` boucher ''  -rrb-  slang ,  similar to pig latin and verlan . 
lederman was born in new york city ,  new york ,  to morris and minna  -lrb-  rosenberg  -rrb-  lederman . 
despite his jewish background ,  lederman was an atheist . 
lederman was also a member of the usa science and engineering festival's advisory board . 
in 1956, lederman worked on parity violation in weak interactions . 
in 1991, lederman became president of the american association for the advancement of science . 
lederman became a faculty member at columbia university ,  and he was promoted to full professor in 1958 as eugene higgins professor of physics . 
his grandfather was king pepin the younger . 
the final civil war of his reign was over . 
he was also king of aquitaine from 781.
if one of the subordinate kings died ,  he was to be succeeded by his sons . 
on his father's death in 814, he inherited the entire frankish kingdom and all its possessions  -lrb-  with the sole exception of italy ,  which remained within louis's empire ,  but under the direct rule of bernard ,  pepin's son  -rrb-  . 
in 823 judith gave birth to a son ,  who was named charles . 
pepin returned to aquitaine and judith – after being forced to humiliate herself with a solemn oath of innocence – to louis's court . 
soon lothair ,  with the support of pope gregory iv ,  whom he had confirmed in office without his father's support ,  joined the revolt in 833.
lothair ,  for the first time in a long time ,  allied with his father and pledged support at worms in exchange for a redivision of the inheritance . 
instead of treating his sons equally in status and land ,  he elevated his first-born son lothair above his younger brothers and gave him the largest part of the empire as his share . 
the birth of this son damaged the `` partition of aachen '' ,  as louis's attempts to provide for his fourth son met with stiff resistance from his older sons ,  and the last two decades of his reign were marked by civil war . 
later that year lothair fell ill; once again the events turned in louis favour . 
above all ,  the empire would not be divided: the emperor would rule supreme over the subordinate kings ,  whose obedience to him was mandatory . 
in the 830s his empire was torn by civil war between his sons ,  only exacerbated by louis's attempts to include his son charles by his second wife in the succession plans . 
then lothair finally set out with a large lombard army ,  but louis had promised his sons louis the german and pepin of aquitaine greater shares of the inheritance ,  prompting them to shift loyalties in favour of their father . 
blue phases are liquid crystal phases that appear in the temperature range between a chiral nematic phase and an isotropic liquid phase . 
liquid crystals  -lrb-  lcs  -rrb-  are a state of matter which has properties between those of conventional liquids and those of solid crystals . 
the ordering of liquid crystalline phases is extensive on the molecular scale . 
liquid crystals can be divided into thermotropic ,  lyotropic and metallotropic phases . 
one of the most common lc phases is the nematic . 
a large number of chemical compounds are known to exhibit one or several liquid crystalline phases . 
the chiral nematic phase exhibits chirality  -lrb-  handedness  -rrb-  . 
after his accidental discovery ,  reinitzer did not pursue studying liquid crystals further . 
the mass of a long gun is usually greater than that of a short gun ,  making the long gun more expensive to transport ,  and more difficult and tiring to carry . 
a long gun is a category of firearms with longer barrels than most other types . 
shotguns are long guns that are designed to fire many small projectiles at once . 
the law of constant proportion was given by joseph proust in 1794.
in chemistry ,  the law of definite proportion ,  sometimes called proust's law or the law of definite composition ,  or law of constant composition states that a given  chemical compound always contains its component elements in fixed ratio  -lrb-  by mass  -rrb-  and does not depend on its source and method of preparation . 
along with the law of multiple proportions ,  the law of definite proportions forms the basis of stoichiometry . 
limbo is one such theory . 
it does not use the word `` limbo '' . 
it then states: `` as regards children who have died without baptism ,  the church can only entrust them to the mercy of god ,  as she does in her funeral rites for them . 
the zoroastrian concept of `` hamistagan '' is similar to limbo . 
if heaven is a state of supernatural happiness and union with god ,  and hell is understood as a state of torture and separation from god then ,  in this view ,  the limbo of infants ,  although technically part of hell  -lrb-  the outermost part ,  `` limbo '' meaning `` outer edge '' or `` hem ''  -rrb-  is seen as a sort of intermediate state . 
however ,  limbo of the infants is not an official doctrine of the catholic church . 
the `` limbo of the patriarchs '' or `` limbo of the fathers ''  -lrb-  latin `` limbus patrum ''  -rrb-  is seen as the temporary state of those who ,  despite the sins they may have committed ,  died in the friendship of god but could not enter heaven until redemption by jesus christ made it possible . 
the council of trent in 1547 explicitly stated that baptism  -lrb-  or desire for baptism  -rrb-  was the means by which one is transferred `` from that state wherein man is born a child of the first adam ,  to the state of grace ,  and of the adoption of the sons of god ,  through the second adam ,  jesus christ ,  our saviour . 
in catholic theology ,  limbo  -lrb-  latin `` limbus '' ,  edge or boundary ,  referring to the `` edge '' of hell  -rrb-  is a doctrine concerning the afterlife condition of those who die in original sin without being assigned to the hell of the damned . 
this concept of limbo affirms that admittance to heaven is possible only through the intervention of jesus christ ,  but does not portray moses ,  etc . 
lethe ,  the river of forgetfulness ,  was one of the five rivers of the greek underworld ,  the other four being styx ,  acheron  -lrb-  the river of sorrow  -rrb-  ,  cocytus  -lrb-  the river of lamentation  -rrb-  and phlegethon  -lrb-  the river of fire  -rrb-  . 
in greek mythology ,  lethe  -lrb-  greek:  ,  `` lḗthē '';  ,    -rrb-  was one of the five rivers of the underworld of hades . 
lethe was also the name of the greek spirit of forgetfulness and oblivion ,  with whom the river was often identified . 
some ancient greeks believed that souls were made to drink from the river before being reincarnated ,  so they would not remember their past lives . 
the novel itself starts with the narration ,  by tristram ,  of his own conception . 
 ''tristram shandy '' did not last . `` 
the russian formalist writer viktor shklovsky regarded `` tristram shandy '' as the archetypal ,  quintessential novel ,  of which all other novels are mere subsets: ``  ''tristram shandy '' is the most typical novel of world literature . `` 
sterne's novel `` the life and opinions of tristram shandy ,  gentleman '' sold widely in england and throughout europe . 
the publication of `` tristram shandy '' made sterne famous in london and on the continent . 
although the story is more straightforward ,  `` a sentimental journey '' can be understood to be part of the same artistic project to which `` tristram shandy '' belongs . 
the success of the novel and its serialised nature also allowed many imitators to publish pamphlets concerning the shandean characters and other shandean-related material even while the novel was yet unfinished . 
the first decade of sterne's life was spent moving from place to place as his father was reassigned throughout ireland . 
he wrote as fast as he possibly could ,  composing the first 18 chapters between january and march 1759.
aspects of this trip to france were incorporated into sterne's second novel ,  `` a sentimental journey through france and italy '' . 
it is related to the linear b script ,  which succeeded the linear a and was used by the mycenaean civilization . 
linear a has hundreds of signs ,  believed to represent syllabic ,  ideographic ,  and semantic values in a manner similar to linear b . 
linear a is a writing system used by the minoans  -lrb-  cretans  -rrb-  from 2500 to 1450 bc . 
 ''maniac mansion '' was the first game to be published and developed by lucasfilm games . 
the first adventure game developed by lucasfilm games was ``  '' in 1986, based on the lucasfilm movie of the same name . 
the lucasfilm games group originally cooperated with atari ,  which helped fund the video game group's founding ,  to produce video games . 
it was founded in may 1982 by george lucas as lucasfilm games ,  the video game development group of his film company ,  lucasfilm . 
development of some other successful star wars games began during his management ,  like `` star wars republic commando '' and `` star wars battlefront '' . 
a video game titled `` traxion '' was announced . 
the early charter of lucasfilm games was to make experimental ,  innovative ,  and technologically advanced video games . 
the first products from the games group were unique action games like `` ballblazer '' in 1984, and `` rescue on fractalus ! ``  . 
lucasarts halted adventure game development for the next five years ,  focusing instead on their `` star wars '' games . 
in march 2005, lucasarts published ``  '' ,  the first game in the popular lego video game franchise by traveller's tales . 
on may 6, 2013, it was revealed that electronic arts would develop `` star wars '' games ,  through an exclusive multi-year license ,  for the core gaming market . 
development of games based on the `` star wars '' license will be carried out by electronic arts ,  through an exclusive license ,  for the core gaming market . 
the original lucasfilm games logo was based upon the existing lucasfilm movie logo . 
the first `` star wars '' game announced under electronic arts' exclusive license was `` star wars battlefront '' ,  a reboot of the  ,  developed by dice . 
on april 3, 2013, lucasfilm confirmed that lucasarts would cease to operate as a video game developer . 
even though lucasarts had created games based on other lucasfilm properties before  -lrb-  `` labyrinth '' ,  `` indiana jones ''  -rrb-  ,  they did not use the `` star wars '' license until the early 1990s: `` star wars '' games began appearing in the 1980s ,  but were developed by other companies for lucasarts because the license for the games had been sold before lucasarts was formed . 
though the group had spun out of lucasfilm ,  the video game development license for lucasfilm's `` star wars '' were held by atari at the time ,  forcing the group to start with original concepts; ron gilbert ,  one of the group's first employees ,  believed that if the lucasfilm games group had the rights for `` star wars '' from the start ,  they would have never branched into any new ip . 
during a 1990 reorganization of lucas companies ,  the lucasfilm games division was renamed lucasarts . 
the last game released through lucasarts as a subsidiary of an independent lucasfilm was `` angry birds star wars '' ,  a game that gave the `` angry birds '' characters costumes and abilities based on the original `` star wars '' trilogy . 
in the same year ,  lucasarts started to publish `` the adventurer '' ,  their own gaming magazine where one could read about their upcoming games and interviews with the developers . 
it is the last original adventure game the company has released . 
information that surfaced in march 2013 suggested that `` star wars '' games already in development ,  such as `` star wars 1313 '' and `` first assault '' ,  may have been put on hold in order to put more focus on ``  '' . 
on october 4, 2013, disney interactive announced ``  '' ,  a `` star wars '' game for mobile devices based on tiny tower . 
the game was to feature a number of minigames ,  and would support imported songs from the player's own mp3 library as well as the game's bundled collection . 
also in 2005, lucasarts released ``  '' ,  and one of their few non- ''star wars '' games ,  ``  '' ,  developed by pandemic studios . 
hearn's best-known louisiana works include:
 ''harper's '' sent hearn to the west indies as a correspondent in 1887.
in 1861, hearn's aunt ,  aware that hearn was turning away from catholicism ,  and at the urging of henry hearn molyneux ,  a relative of her late husband and a distant cousin of hearn ,  enrolled him at the institution ecclésiastique ,  a catholic church school in yvetot ,  france . 
there is also a cultural center named after hearn at the university of durham . 
george hearn died on 17 august 1850, two months after lafcadio's birth . 
in 1890, hearn went to japan with a commission as a newspaper correspondent ,  which was quickly terminated . 
hearn became fluent in french and would later translate into english the works of guy de maupassant ,  who coincidentally attended the school shortly after hearn's departure . 
selections of hearn's new orleans writings have been collected and published in several works ,  starting with `` creole sketches '' in 1924, and more recently in `` inventing new orleans: writings of lafcadio hearn . `` 
hearn was born in and named after the island of lefkada ,  one of the greek ionian islands ,  on 27 june 1850.
lafcadio never saw his father again: charles hearn died of malaria in the gulf of suez in 1866.
charles hearn ,  who had left lafcadio in the care of sarah brenane for the past 4 years ,  now appointed her as lafcadio's permanent guardian . 
in the united states ,  hearn is also known for his writings about the city of new orleans based on his ten-year stay in that city . 
hearn wrote enthusiastically of new orleans ,  but also wrote of the city's decay ,  `` a dead bride crowned with orange flowers '' . 
in behavior analysis ,  learning is the acquisition of a new behavior through conditioning and social learning . 
the term `` behaviorism '' was coined by john watson  -lrb-  1878–1959 -rrb- . 
john locke  -lrb-  1632–1704 -rrb- offered an answer to plato's question as well . 
some theories consider sleep to be an important factor in establishing well-organized long-term memories . 
synaptic consolidation is the process by which items are transferred from short-term to long-term memory . 
sleep plays a key function in the consolidation of new memories . 
the theory that sleep benefits memory retention is not a new idea . 
holtz found that not only does sleep affect consolidation of declarative memories ,  but also procedural memories . 
each noun follows one of the five declensions ,  but some irregular nouns have exceptions . 
the cardinal numbers 'one' ,  'two' ,  and 'three' also have their own declensions  -lrb-  `` ūnus '' has genitive `` -īus '' like a pronoun  -rrb-  ,  and there are also numeral adjectives such as 'a pair ,  two each' ,  which decline like ordinary adjectives . 
latin spelling ,  or latin orthography ,  is the spelling of latin words written in the scripts of all historical phases of latin from old latin to the present . 
the latin alphabet most resembles the greek alphabet around 540 bc ,  as it appears on the black-figure pottery of the time . 
the forms of the latin alphabet used during the classical period did not distinguish between upper case and lower case . 
in addition to regular verbs ,  which belong to one or other of the four conjugations ,  there are also a few irregular verbs ,  which have a different pattern of endings . 
the number of conjugations of regular verbs is usually said to be four . 
the present infinitive active form tells you what conjugation the verb is in . 
there also exist deponent and semi-deponent latin verbs  -lrb-  verbs with a passive form but active meaning  -rrb-  ,  as well as defective verbs  -lrb-  verbs in which some of the tenses are missing  -rrb-  . 
the second conjugation is characterized by the vowel `` ē '' ,  and can be recognized by the `` -eō '' ending of the first person present indicative and the `` -ēre '' ending of the present active infinitive form . 
as an adult ,  alcott was an abolitionist and a feminist . 
this felt ,  to alcott ,  to be a breaking up of their sisterhood . 
in `` little women '' ,  alcott based her heroine `` jo '' on herself . 
in 1996 alcott was inducted into the national women's hall of fame . 
alcott died of a stroke at age 55 in boston ,  on march 6, 1888, two days after her father's death . 
alcott was an abolitionist and a feminist and remained unmarried throughout her life . 
louisa may alcott was born on november 29, 1832, in germantown ,  which is now part of philadelphia ,  pennsylvania ,  on her father's 33rd birthday . 
generally ,  the lalr parser refers to the lalr -lrb-  1 -rrb- parser ,  just as the lr parser generally refers to the lr -lrb-  1 -rrb- parser . 
the lalr -lrb-  1 -rrb- parser is less powerful than the lr -lrb-  1 -rrb- parser ,  and more powerful than the slr -lrb-  1 -rrb- parser ,  though they all use the same production rules . 
in 1977, memory optimizations for the lr parser were invented but still the lr parser was less memory-efficient than the simplified alternatives . 
the standard example of an lr -lrb-  1 -rrb- grammar that cannot be parsed with the lalr -lrb-  1 -rrb- parser ,  exhibiting such a reduce/reduce conflict ,  is:
the lalr -lrb-  `` j ''  -rrb-  parsers are incomparable with ll -lrb-  `` k ''  -rrb-  parsers: for any `` j '' and `` k '' both greater than 0, there are lalr -lrb-  `` j ''  -rrb-  grammars that are not ll -lrb-  `` k ''  -rrb-  grammars and conversely . 
in computer science ,  an lalr parser or look-ahead lr parser is a simplified version of a canonical lr parser ,  to parse  -lrb-  separate and analyze  -rrb-  a text according to a set of production rules specified by a formal grammar for a computer language . 
broca's area and wernicke's area  -rrb-  refers to the areas of the brain which serve a particular function for speech processing and production . 
the differentiation of speech production into only two large sections of the brain  -lrb-  i . e . 
in summary ,  these early research efforts demonstrated that semantic and structural speech production takes place in different areas of the brain . 
an airfoil generates lift by exerting a downward force on the air as it flows past . 
for incompressible flow ,  the rate of volume flow  -lrb-  e . g . 
the upper streamtubes constrict as they flow up and around the airfoil . 
dynamic lift is distinguished from other kinds of lift in fluids . 
the ambient flow conditions which affect lift include the fluid density ,  viscosity and speed of flow . 
lift is proportional to the density of the air and approximately proportional to the square of the flow speed . 
the downward turning of the flow is not produced solely by the lower surface of the airfoil ,  and the air flow above the airfoil accounts for much of the downward-turning action . 
there are several ways to explain how an airfoil generates lift . 
the arrows ahead of the airfoil indicate that the flow ahead of the airfoil is deflected upward ,  and the arrows behind the airfoil indicate that the flow behind is deflected upward again ,  after being deflected downward over the airfoil . 
the airfoil shape and angle of attack work together so that the airfoil exerts a downward force on the air as it flows past . 
producing a lift force requires both downward turning of the flow and changes in flow speed consistent with bernoulli's principle . 
cambered airfoils will generate lift at zero angle of attack . 
this is why the air's mass is part of the calculation ,  and why lift depends on air density . 
the airfoil is said to be stalled . 
either can be used to explain lift . 
the total lift is thus the integral of the pressure ,  in the direction perpendicular to the farfield flow ,  over the airfoil surface . 
the asymmetric separation changes the effective shape of the cylinder as far as the flow is concerned such that the cylinder acts like a lifting airfoil with circulation in the outer flow . 
an airfoil is a streamlined shape that is capable of generating significantly more lift than drag . 
all of these features of the velocity field also appear in theoretical models for lifting flows . 
these deflections are also visible in the flow animation . 
an airfoil's maximum lift at a given airspeed is limited by boundary-layer separation . 
explanations based on increased flow speed and bernoulli's principle first try to establish that there is higher flow speed over the upper surface ,  but they fail to explain correctly what causes the flow to speed up:
leo entered constantinople on 25 march 717 and forced the abdication of theodosios iii ,  becoming emperor as leo iii . 
leo iii the isaurian ,  also known as the syrian  -lrb-  ; 685 – 18 june 741 -rrb- ,  was byzantine emperor from 717 until his death in 741 who founded the isaurian dynasty . 
artabasdus was betrothed to anna ,  daughter of leo as part of the agreement . 
in 718 he suppressed a rebellion in sicily and in 719 did the same on behalf of the deposed emperor anastasios ii . 
the emperor also undertook some reorganization of the theme structure by creating new themata in the aegean region . 
the lombard historian paul the deacon wrote in the `` historia langobardorum '' that the lombards descended from a small tribe called the `` winnili '' ,  who dwelt in southern scandinavia  -lrb-  `` scadanan ''  -rrb-  before migrating to seek new lands . 
their legacy is also apparent in the regional name lombardy  -lrb-  in the north of italy  -rrb-  . 
according to this view langobardi would signify “inhabitants of the long bord of the river;” and traces of their name are supposed still to occur in such names as bardengau and bardewick in the neighborhood of the elbe . 
the fullest account of lombard origins ,  history ,  and practices is the `` historia langobardorum ''  -lrb-  `` history of the lombards ''  -rrb-  of paul the deacon ,  written in the 8th century . 
thor again commands loki to be silent ,  threatens loki with mjöllnir ,  and says he will send loki to hel ,  below the gates of nágrind . 
loki  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  is a god in norse mythology . 
in the second of the two stanzas ,  loki is referred to as `` lopt '' . 
the etymology of the name `` loki '' has been extensively debated . 
the god heimdallr says that loki is drunk and witless ,  and asks loki why he won't stop speaking . 
loki ends the poetic verses of `` lokasenna '' with a final stanza:
loki appears in both prose and the first six stanzas of the poem `` reginsmál '' . 
loki reminds frigg that he is responsible for the death of her son baldr . 
loki's consumption of a woman's heart is otherwise unattested . 
loki is sent to retrieve the gold ,  and loki goes to the goddess rán ,  borrows her net ,  and then goes back to the andvara-falls . 
loki states that this is because `` freyja '' had not slept for eight nights in her eagerness . 
loki comes out of the woods ,  and meets eldir outside of the hall . 
the `` prose edda '' book `` gylfaginning '' tells various myths featuring loki ,  including loki's role in the birth of the horse sleipnir and loki's contest with logi ,  fire personified . 
in the poem `` fjölsvinnsmál '' ,  a stanza mentions loki  -lrb-  as `` lopt ''  -rrb-  in association with runes . 
thor arrives ,  and tells loki to be silent ,  referring to him as an `` evil creature , ``  stating that with his hammer mjöllnir he will silence loki by hammering his head from his shoulders . 
early in the evening ,  the disguised loki and thor meet with þrymr and the assembled jötnar . 
loki looks over the gold that andvari possesses ,  and after andvari hands over all of his gold ,  andvari holds on to but a single ring; the ring andvarinaut ,  which loki also takes . 
common lisp is a successor to maclisp . 
common lisp and scheme represent two major streams of lisp development . 
other events include the european common lisp meeting ,  the european lisp symposium and an international lisp conference . 
today ,  the best known general-purpose lisp dialects are clojure ,  common lisp ,  and scheme . 
quicklisp is a library manager for common lisp . 
the result was a working lisp interpreter which could be used to run lisp programs ,  or more properly ,  `` evaluate lisp expressions '' . 
the name `` lisp '' derives from `` list processor '' . 
this led to the creation of lisp machines: dedicated hardware for running lisp environments and programs . 
in 1994, ansi published the common lisp standard ,  `` ansi x3.226-1994 information technology programming language common lisp '' . 
dan weinreb lists in his survey of common lisp implementations eleven actively maintained common lisp implementations . 
there are several new dialects of lisp: arc ,  hy ,  nu ,  liskell ,  and lfe  -lrb-  lisp flavored erlang  -rrb-  . 
the first complete lisp compiler ,  written in lisp ,  was implemented in 1962 by tim hart and mike levin at mit . 
after having declined somewhat in the 1990s ,  lisp has experienced a resurgence of interest after 2000.
other settlements are lost with few or no clues to their decline . 
machu picchu is a pre-columbian inca site situated on a mountain ridge above the urubamba valley in peru . 
lost cities generally fall into two broad categories: those where all knowledge of the city's existence was forgotten before it was rediscovered ,  and those whose memory was preserved in myth ,  legend ,  or historical records but whose location was lost or at least no longer widely recognized . 
elizabeth agassiz wrote ,  at the strait: ' . 
a main-belt asteroid named 2267 agassiz is also named in association with louis agassiz . 
agassiz continued his lectures for the lowell institute . 
agassiz needed financial support to continue his work . 
in 1837, agassiz proposed that the earth had been subjected to a past ice age . 
an ancient glacial lake that formed in the great lakes region of north america ,  lake agassiz ,  is named after him ,  as are mount agassiz in california's palisades ,  mount agassiz ,  in the uinta mountains ,  agassiz peak in arizona and in his native switzerland ,  the agassizhorn in the bernese alps . 
agassiz's engagement for the lowell institute lectures precipitated the establishment ,  in 1847, of the lawrence scientific school at harvard university ,  with agassiz as its head . 
agassiz is known for his regimen of observational data gathering and analysis . 
in 1832, agassiz was appointed professor of natural history at the university of neuchâtel . 
agassiz was influenced by philosophical idealism and the scientific work of georges cuvier . 
an elementary school called the agassiz elementary school in minneapolis ,  minnesota existed from 1922–1981.
during his tenure at harvard ,  agassiz studied the effect of the last ice age on north america . 
agassiz found that his palaeontological analyses required a new ichthyological classification . 
li bai ,  li po ,  li bo ,  ri haku have been all used in the west ,  but are all written with the same characters . 
li is known to have married four times . 
wu yun's praise of li bai led emperor xuanzong  -lrb-  born li longji and also known as emperor minghuang  -rrb-  to summon li to the court in chang'an . 
this is reflected in the dozen or so du fu poems to or about li bai ,  which survive ,  and the one from li bai directed toward du fu which remains . 
thus ,  combining the family name with the courtesy name ,  his name appears in variants such as `` li taibo '' ,  `` li taibai '' ,  `` li tai-po '' ,  among others . 
the new emperor daizong named li bai the registrar of the left commandant's office in 762.
in 742, wu yun was summoned by the emperor to attend the imperial court ,  where his praise of li bai was great . 
emperor xuanzong employed him as a translator ,  as li bai knew at least one non-chinese language . 
when the emperor ordered li bai to the palace ,  he was often drunk ,  but quite capable of performing on the spot . 
also , most chinese people believe that li bai was actually born in jiangyou , though that was not true . 
about 700 ad the kvalsund ship was built . 
snekkjas were one of the most common types of ship . 
the average speed of viking ships varied from ship to ship ,  but lay in the range of and the maximum speed of a longship under favourable conditions was around  . 
the visual representation of how the drakkar ship could have looked can be found on the bergen seal from 1299 shows a ship with a dragonhead at either end ,  as do several of the ships on viking age . 
where long timber was not available or the ship was very long ,  the planks were butt-joined ,  although overlapping scarf joints fixed with nails were also used . 
the sutton hoo longship ,  sometimes referred to as the ghost ship of the wulflings ,  is about maximum beam and built about 625 ad . 
since the discovery of the original longships in the 1800s ,  many boat builders have built viking ship replicas . 
the longships were characterized as a graceful ,  long ,  narrow and light ,  with a shallow-draft hull designed for speed . 
no true dragon ship ,  as defined by the sagas ,  has been found by archaeological excavation . 
the sail was held in place by the mast which was up to tall . 
at the height of viking expansion into dublin and jorvik 875–954 ad the longship reached a peak of development such as the gokstad ship 890.
even though no longship sail has been found ,  accounts and depictions verify that longships had square sails . 
alamanni was born in florence . 
luigi alamanni  -lrb-  sometimes spelt alemanni  -rrb-   -lrb-  6 march 149518 april 1556 -rrb- was an italian poet and statesman . 
in this book ,  alamanni is present as a loyal friend of the host ,  and is mentioned to be the youngest of ruccelai's friends present . 
after the death of francis ,  alamanni enjoyed the confidence of his successor henry ii ,  and in 1551 was sent by him as his ambassador to genoa . 
aleman served as the bishop of maguelonne from 1418 until his archepiscopal elevation at which point he was later named a cardinal . 
