a second parliament was called later the same year ,  and became known as the long parliament . 
failure to resolve the issues before the long parliament led to armed conflict between parliament and charles i in late 1642, the beginning of the english civil war . 
cromwell was one of the signatories of king charles i's death warrant in 1649, and he dominated the short-lived commonwealth of england as a member of the rump parliament  -lrb-  1649–1653 -rrb- . 
cromwell became the member of parliament for huntingdon in the parliament of 1628–1629, as a client of the montagu family of hinchingbrooke house . 
after the execution of the king ,  a republic was declared ,  known as the `` commonwealth of england '' . 
one of his major victories in ireland was diplomatic rather than military . 
on 20 april 1653, he dismissed the rump parliament by force ,  setting up a short-lived nominated assembly known as barebone's parliament before being invited by his fellow leaders to rule as lord protector of england  -lrb-  which included wales at the time  -rrb-  ,  scotland ,  and ireland from 16 december 1653.
he served as lord protector of the commonwealth of england ,  scotland ,  and ireland from 1653 until his death ,  acting simultaneously as head of state and head of government of the new republic . 
cromwell led a parliamentary invasion of ireland from 1649–50.
parliament had planned to re-conquer ireland since 1641 and had already sent an invasion force there in 1647.
cromwell also led a campaign against the scottish army between 1650 and 1651.
after the dissolution of the barebones parliament ,  john lambert put forward a new constitution known as the instrument of government ,  closely modelled on the heads of proposals . 
in june 1647, a troop of cavalry under cornet george joyce seized the king from parliament's imprisonment . 
the failure to conclude a political agreement with the king led eventually to the outbreak of the second english civil war in 1648, when the king tried to regain power by force of arms . 
marston moor secured the north of england for the parliamentarians ,  but failed to end royalist resistance . 
as the lord protector he was paid £100,000 a year . 
he was succeeded as lord protector by his son richard . 
cromwell famously stressed the quest to restore order in his speech to the first protectorate parliament at its inaugural meeting on 3 september 1654.
cromwell was away on campaign from the middle of 1649 until 1651, and the various factions in parliament began to fight amongst themselves with the king gone as their `` common cause '' . 
england's american colonies in this period consisted of the new england confederation ,  the providence plantation ,  the virginia colony and the maryland colony . 
cromwell left ireland in may 1650 and several months later invaded scotland after the scots had proclaimed charles i's son charles ii as king . 
the following year ,  charles ii and his scottish allies made a desperate attempt to invade england and capture london while cromwell was engaged in scotland . 
<poem style= ''margin:0.3em auto; text-align:center; ''> near to this place was buried on 25 march 1960 the head of oliver cromwell lord protector of the common- wealth of england ,  scotland & ireland ,  fellow commoner of this college 1616-7</poem>
it was designed to check the powers of the executive ,  to set up regularly elected parliaments ,  and to restore a non-compulsory episcopalian settlement . 
cromwell had two key objectives as lord protector . 
cromwell therefore returned to england from youghal on 26 may 1650 to counter this threat . 
cromwell then marched north to deal with a pro-royalist scottish army  -lrb-  the engagers  -rrb-  who had invaded england . 
the parliamentarian conquest of ireland dragged on for almost three years after cromwell's departure . 
his troops were commanded by charles worsley ,  later one of his major generals and one of his most trusted advisors ,  to whom he entrusted the mace . 
at the critical battle of naseby in june 1645, the new model army smashed the king's major army . 
in may 1641, for example ,  it was cromwell who put forward the second reading of the annual parliaments bill and later took a role in drafting the root and branch bill for the abolition of episcopacy . 
bismarck accelerated the `` kulturkampf '' . 
in march 1884, bismarck declared:
in 1849, bismarck was elected to the `` landtag '' . 
france was bismarck's main problem . 
in december 1897, wilhelm visited bismarck for the last time . 
the letter ,  however ,  was published only after bismarck's death . 
in 1871, bismarck was raised to the rank of `` fürst ''  -lrb-  prince  -rrb-  . 
jonathan steinberg says of bismarck's achievements to this point: the scale of bismarck's triumph cannot be exaggerated . 
bismarck launched an anti-catholic `` kulturkampf ''  -lrb-  `` culture struggle ''  -rrb-  in prussia in 1871.
over the next twelve years ,  bismarck ,  moltke and roon transformed prussia; bismarck would later refer to this period as `` the most significant of my life '' . 
in 1851, frederick william iv appointed bismarck as prussia's envoy to the diet of the german confederation in frankfurt . 
bismarck's conflict with the legislators intensified in the coming years . 
military success brought bismarck tremendous political support in prussia . 
on 23 september 1862, wilhelm appointed bismarck minister president and foreign minister . 
bismarck acted immediately to secure the unification of germany . 
bismarck resigned at wilhelm ii's insistence on 18 march 1890, at the age of seventy-five . 
bismarck also repeated his emphatic warning against any german military involvement in balkan disputes . 
in february 1888, during a bulgarian crisis ,  bismarck addressed the reichstag on the dangers of a european war:
in that year bismarck was given the title of count  -lrb-  `` graf ''  -rrb-  of bismarck-schönhausen . 
bismarck was succeeded as imperial chancellor and minister president of prussia by leo von caprivi . 
jonathan steinberg said of bismarck's creation of the german empire that: the first phase of his great career had been concluded . 
in 1862, king wilhelm i appointed bismarck as minister president of prussia ,  a position he would hold until 1890, with the exception of a short break in 1873.
despite his lengthy stay abroad ,  bismarck was not entirely detached from german domestic affairs . 
no one again openly challenged bismarck in foreign policy matters until his resignation . 
some in the german military clamored for a preemptive war with russia; bismarck refused ,  stating: `` preemptive war is like committing suicide for fear of death . `` 
the regent soon replaced bismarck as envoy in frankfurt and made him prussia's ambassador to the russian empire . 
bismarck was the dominant figure in the new arrangement; as foreign minister of prussia ,  he instructed the prussian deputies to the bundesrat . 
otto eduard leopold ,  prince of bismarck ,  duke of lauenburg  -lrb-  born von bismarck-schönhausen; ; 1 april 1815 – 30 july 1898 -rrb- ,  known as otto von bismarck  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a conservative prussian statesman who dominated german and european affairs from the 1860s until 1890 and was the first chancellor of the german empire between 1871 and 1890.
in 1847 bismarck ,  aged thirty-two ,  was chosen as a representative to the newly created prussian legislature ,  the ``  '' . 
the new german nation excluded austria ,  which had been prussia's main opponent for predominance among the german states . 
bismarck's diplomacy of `` realpolitik '' and powerful rule at home gained him the nickname the `` iron chancellor '' . 
bismarck was sixteen years older than friedrich; before the latter became terminally ill ,  bismarck did not expect he would live to see wilhelm ascend to the throne and thus had no strategy to deal with him . 
bismarck's government had to submit three draft bills before it could get one passed by the reichstag in 1884.
after russia's victory over the ottoman empire in the russo-turkish war of 1877–78, bismarck helped negotiate a settlement at the congress of berlin . 
bismarck also worked behind the scenes to break the continental labour council on which wilhelm had set his heart . 
bismarck had at first tried to rouse the peasants of his estate into an army to march on berlin in the king's name . 
cowper left olney for nearby weston underwood in 1786.
the olney hymns were written primarily with these poor and under-educated people in mind . 
the olney hymns were first published in february 1779 and are the combined work of curate john newton  -lrb-  1725–1807 -rrb- and his poet friend ,  william cowper  -lrb-  1731–1800 -rrb- . 
there is no evidence to show that either newton or cowper wrote any music to accompany the hymns . 
the `` olney hymns '' are subdivided into three books: book i ,  on select texts of scripture; book ii ,  on occasional subjects; and ,  book iii ,  on the progress and changes of the spiritual life . 
the buckinghamshire town from which the hymns get their name ,  olney ,  was ,  at the time of first publication ,  a market town of about 2,000 people . 
for example ,  haeckel proposed that the pharyngeal grooves between the pharyngeal arches in the neck of the human embryo not only roughly resembled gill slits of fish ,  but directly represented an adult `` fishlike '' developmental stage ,  signifying a fishlike ancestor . 
haeckel produced several embryo drawings that often overemphasized similarities between embryos of related species . 
it was formulated in the 1820s by étienne serres based on the work of johann friedrich meckel ,  after whom it is also known as meckel–serres law . 
darwin's view was that embryos resembled each other ,  since they shared a common ancestor ,  which presumably had a similar embryo ,  but that development did not necessarily recapitulate phylogeny: in his view ,  there was no reason to suppose that an embryo at any stage resembled an adult of any ancestor . 
but these embryonic pharyngeal arches ,  grooves ,  pouches ,  and slits in human embryos can not at any stage carry out the same function as the gills of an adult fish . 
modern evolutionary developmental biology  -lrb-  evo-devo  -rrb-  follows von baer ,  rather than darwin ,  in pointing to active evolution of embryonic development as a significant means of changing the morphology of adult bodies . 
darwin supposed further that embryos were subject to less intense selection pressure than adults ,  and had therefore changed less . 
the rise of the huns around 370 overwhelmed the gothic kingdoms . 
a period of instability then ensued ,  tempting the eastern roman emperor justinian to declare war on the ostrogoths in 535 in an effort to restore the former western provinces of the roman empire . 
of gothic literature in the gothic language we have the bible of ulfilas and some other religious writings and fragments . 
a faction of the gothic nobility pointed out that their own king witiges ,  who had just lost ,  was something of a weakling and they would need a new one . 
nevertheless ,  according to roman historian procopius of caesarea ,  the ostrogothic population was allowed to live peacefully in italy with their rugian allies under roman sovereignty . 
the picture of theodoric's rule is drawn for us in the state papers drawn up ,  in his name and in the names of his successors ,  by his roman minister cassiodorus . 
mentioned in several sources up to the third century ad when they apparently split into at least two groups ,  the greuthungi in the east and tervingi in the west ,  the two gothic tribes shared many aspects ,  especially recognizing a patron deity the romans named mars . 
of special gothic histories ,  besides that of jordanes ,  already so often quoted ,  there is the gothic history of isidore ,  archbishop of seville ,  a special source of the history of the visigothic kings down to suinthila  -lrb-  621-631 -rrb- . 
while none of the eastern germanic languages are still spoken ,  gothic is the only one with `` continuous texts '' remaining . 
as soon as belisarius was gone ,  the remaining ostrogoths elected a new king named totila . 
in 493, theodoric the great established a kingdom in italy . 
theodoric sought to revive roman culture and government and in doing so ,  profited the italian people . 
every ordered field is a formally real field . 
a preordered field is a field equipped with a preordering `` p '' . 
in mathematics ,  an ordered field is a field together with a total ordering of its elements that is compatible with the field operations . 
even undecidable problems ,  such as the halting problem ,  can be used . 
for example ,  if the problem is a decision problem for a set `` a '' of natural numbers ,  the oracle machine supplies the oracle with a natural number ,  and the oracle responds with `` yes '' or `` no '' stating whether that number is an element of `` a '' . 
she has been re-socialised to live with other orangutans . 
estimates between 2000 and 2003 found 7,300 sumatran orangutans and between 45,000 and 69,000 bornean orangutans remain in the wild . 
bornean orangutans have 48 diploid chromosomes . 
a male orangutan has an arm span of about  . 
orangutans are also known to blow raspberries . 
orangutans communicate with various sounds . 
sumatran orangutan populations declined by 80% in 75 years . 
the sumatran orangutan genome was sequenced in january 2011.
orangutans live a more solitary lifestyle than the other great apes . 
orangutans were known to the native people of sumatra and borneo for millennia . 
genomic comparisons show that the tapanuli orangutan separated from the sumatran orangutan about 3.4 million years ago . 
this preference was also found in an experimental study of captive orangutans  -lrb-  `` p .  pygmaeus ''  -rrb-  . 
typically ,  orangutans live for over 30 years in both the wild and captivity . 
orangutans are among the most intelligent non-human primates . 
orangutans build nests specialized for both day or night use . 
genetic diversity was found to be lower in bornean orangutans  -lrb-  `` p .  pygmaeus ''  -rrb-  than in sumatran ones  -lrb-  `` p .  abelii ''  -rrb-  ,  despite the fact that borneo is home to six or seven times as many orangutans as sumatra . 
orangutans are the most arboreal of the great apes and spend most of their time in trees . 
the orangutans  -lrb-  also spelled orang-utan ,  orangutang ,  or orang-utang  -rrb-  are three extant species of great apes native to indonesia and malaysia . 
wild orangutans  -lrb-  `` p .  pygmaeus wurmbii ''  -rrb-  in tuanan ,  borneo ,  were reported to use tools in acoustic communication . 
orangutans in sumatra occasionally eat slow lorises . 
orangutans also use plants of the genus `` commelina '' as an anti-inflammatory balm . 
the present range of tapanuli orangutans is thought to be close to the point where ancestral orangutans first entered what is now indonesia from mainland asia . 
together with a long lactation period ,  orangutans also have a long birth interval . 
this is the first albino orangutan the organisation has seen in 25 years of activity . 
male orangutans play almost no role in raising the young . 
in november 2017 it was reported that a third species had been identified ,  the tapanuli orangutan  -lrb-  `` p .  tapanuliensis ''  -rrb-  . 
offa is a legendary king of the angles in the genealogy of the kings of mercia presented in the `` anglo-saxon chronicle '' . 
he has been identified with uffo  -lrb-  also `` uffe ,  uffi of jutland ''  -rrb-  ,  a legendary danish king in the `` gesta danorum '' by saxo grammaticus . 
a binary resonance ratio in this article should be interpreted as the `` ratio of number of orbits '' completed in the same time interval ,  rather than as the `` ratio of orbital periods '' ,  which would be the inverse ratio . 
in the case of resonance relationships among three or more bodies ,  either type of ratio may be used  -lrb-  in such cases the smallest whole-integer ratio sequences are not necessarily reversals of each other  -rrb-  and the type of ratio will be specified . 
an open-wheel car  -lrb-  formula car ,  or often single-seater car in british english  -rrb-  is a car with the wheels outside the car's main body ,  and usually having only one seat . 
driving an open-wheel car is substantially different from driving a car with fenders . 
open-wheeled racing is among the fastest in the world . 
even on tight non-oval street circuits such as the grand prix of toronto ,  open-wheel indy cars attain speeds of  . 
class 1 world powerboat championship . 
p1 superstock is a single class powerboat race series . 
offshore powerboat racing is a type of racing by ocean-going powerboats ,  typically point-to-point racing . 
powerboat p1 management ltd is the rights-holder for p1 superstock and also owns the rights to powerboat p1 world championship and p1 aqua x . 
in the usa ,  offshore powerboat racing is led by the apba/uim and consists of races hosted by opa racing ,  oss ,  and p1.
in most of the world ,  offshore powerboat racing is led by the union internationale motonautique  -lrb-  uim  -rrb-  regulated class 1 and powerboat gps  -lrb-  formerly known as powerboat p1 -rrb- . 
during the powerboat p1 world championship era ,  which spanned 2003 to 2009, there was 40% more horsepower on a p1 starting grid than formula 1.
nash was born in rye ,  new york ,  the son of mattie  -lrb-  chenault  -rrb-  and edmund strudwick nash . 
throughout his life ,  nash loved to rhyme . 
in 1934, nash moved to baltimore ,  maryland ,  where he remained until his death in 1971.
he returned as a teacher to st .  george's for one year before returning to new york . 
frederic ogden nash  -lrb-  august 19, 1902 – may 19, 1971 -rrb- was an american poet well known for his light verse ,  of which he wrote over 500 pieces . 
a regular octahedron is the dual polyhedron of a cube . 
ole christensen rømer  -lrb-  ; 25 september 1644 – 19 september 1710 -rrb- was a danish astronomer who in 1676 made the first quantitative measurements of the speed of light . 
rømer was born on 25 september 1644 in århus to merchant and skipper christen pedersen  -lrb-  died 1663 -rrb- ,  and anna olufsdatter storm  -lrb-   – 1690 -rrb- ,  daughter of a well-to-do alderman . 
in 1681, rømer returned to denmark and was appointed professor of astronomy at the university of copenhagen ,  and the same year he married anne marie bartholin ,  the daughter of rasmus bartholin . 
iago now persuades othello to be suspicious of cassio and desdemona . 
othello sees this ,  and iago convinces him that cassio received the handkerchief from desdemona . 
othello confronts desdemona ,  and then strangles her in their bed . 
there is no consensus over othello's ethnic origin . 
james o'neill also alternated the roles of othello and iago with booth . 
iago plants the handkerchief in cassio's lodgings ,  then tells othello to watch cassio's reactions while iago questions him . 
there also have been over a dozen film adaptations of `` othello '' . 
brabantio has no option but to accompany othello to the duke's residence ,  where he accuses othello of seducing desdemona by witchcraft . 
othello  -lrb-  `` the tragedy of othello ,  the moor of venice  -rrb- ``  is a tragedy by william shakespeare ,  believed to have been written in 1603.
enraged and hurt ,  othello resolves to kill his wife and tells iago to kill cassio . 
iago hates othello for promoting a younger man named cassio above him ,  whom iago considers less capable a soldier than himself ,  and tells roderigo that he plans to use othello for his own advantage . 
meanwhile ,  iago sneaks away to find othello and warns him that brabantio is coming for him . 
although its title suggests that the tragedy belongs primarily to othello ,  iago plays an important role in the plot . 
othello was frequently performed as an arab moor during the 19th century . 
there have been many differing views on the character of othello over the years . 
 ''othello '' possesses an unusually detailed performance record . 
osteoporosis is a disease where increased bone weakness increases the risk of a broken bone . 
the term `` established osteoporosis '' is used when a broken bone due to osteoporosis has occurred . 
osteoporosis itself has no symptoms; its main consequence is the increased risk of bone fractures . 
caffeine is not a risk factor for osteoporosis . 
the office is headed by the high commissioner for human rights ,  who co-ordinates human rights activities throughout the un system and acts as the secretariat of the human rights council in geneva ,  switzerland . 
79 -rrb- ,  the ohchr and the centre for human rights were consolidated into a single ohchr on 15 september 1997.
opening statements in mcveigh's trial began on april 24, 1997.
the card was later used as evidence during mcveigh's trial . 
the oklahoma city bombing was a domestic terrorist truck bombing on the alfred p .  murrah federal building in downtown oklahoma city ,  oklahoma ,  united states on april 19, 1995.
four days later ,  on april 23, 1995, clinton spoke from oklahoma city . 
mcveigh's execution was the first federal execution in 38 years . 
mcveigh believed that the bomb attack had a positive impact on government policy . 
mcveigh later decided to bomb a federal building as a response to the raids . 
mcveigh approached fortier and asked him to assist with the bombing project ,  but he refused . 
michael revealed that mcveigh had chosen the date ,  and lori testified that she created the false identification card mcveigh used to rent the ryder truck . 
the investigation led to the separate trials and convictions of mcveigh ,  nichols ,  and fortier . 
mcveigh's sister jennifer was accused of illegally mailing bullets to mcveigh ,  but she was granted immunity in exchange for testifying against him . 
mcveigh then added a dual-fuse ignition system accessible from the truck's front cab . 
leseuer reported the incident to the fbi immediately after rejecting mcveigh's request . 
after finishing the truck bomb ,  the two men separated; nichols returned home to herington and mcveigh traveled with the truck to junction city . 
in october 1994, mcveigh showed michael fortier and his wife ,  lori ,  a diagram he had drawn of the bomb he wanted to build . 
on april 14, 1995, mcveigh paid for a motel room at the dreamland motel in junction city ,  kansas . 
those who expressed sympathy for mcveigh typically described his deed as an act of war ,  as in the case of gore vidal's essay `` the meaning of timothy mcveigh '' . 
on april 17–18, 1995, mcveigh and nichols removed the bomb supplies from their storage unit in herington ,  kansas ,  where nichols lived ,  and loaded them into a ryder rental truck . 
mcveigh entered oklahoma city at 8:50 a . m .  at 8:57 a . m .  ,  the regency towers apartments' lobby security camera that had recorded nichols's pickup truck three days earlier recorded the ryder truck heading towards the murrah federal building . 
in the decade following the bombing ,  there was criticism of oklahoma public schools for not requiring the bombing to be covered in the curriculum of mandatory oklahoma history classes . 
several witnesses claimed to have seen a second suspect ,  who did not resemble nichols ,  with mcveigh . 
while mcveigh's requests for a bulletproof vest or transport by helicopter were denied ,  authorities did use a helicopter to transport him from perry to oklahoma city . 
mcveigh's original plan had been to detonate the bomb at 11:00 a . m .  ,  but at dawn on april 19, 1995, he decided instead to destroy the building at 9:00 a . m .  as he drove toward the murrah federal building in the ryder truck ,  mcveigh carried with him an envelope containing pages from `` the turner diaries '' – a fictional account of white supremacists who ignite a revolution by blowing up the fbi headquarters at 9:15 one morning using a truck bomb . 
children were also affected through the loss of parents in the bombing . 
mcveigh's later response to the range of casualties was: `` i didn't define the rules of engagement in this conflict . 
mcveigh and nichols purchased or stole the materials they needed to manufacture the bomb ,  which they stored in rented sheds . 
within 90 minutes of the explosion ,  mcveigh was stopped by oklahoma highway patrolman charlie hanger for driving without a license plate and arrested for illegal weapons possession . 
mcveigh was represented by a defense counsel team of six principal attorneys led by stephen jones . 
a resident of kingman ,  arizona ,  mcveigh considered targets in missouri ,  arizona ,  texas ,  and arkansas . 
the church ,  the statue ,  and the sculpture are not part of the oklahoma city memorial . 
mohammed bin laden divorced hamida soon after osama bin laden was born . 
osama bin laden's full name ,  osama bin mohammed bin awad bin laden ,  means `` osama ,  son of mohammed ,  son of awad ,  son of laden '' . 
according to bin laden's son omar bin laden ,  the family's hereditary surname is `` al-qahtani ''  -lrb-   ,  `` āl-qaḥṭānī ''  -rrb-  ,  but bin laden's father ,  mohammed bin laden ,  never officially registered the name . 
 ''mohammed '' refers to bin laden's father mohammed bin laden; `` awad '' refers to his grandfather ,  awad bin aboud bin laden ,  a kindite hadhrami tribesman; `` laden '' refers not to bin laden's great-grandfather ,  who was named aboud ,  but to aboud's father ,  laden ali al-qahtani . 
the arabic linguistic convention would be to refer to him as `` osama '' or `` osama bin laden '' ,  not `` bin laden '' alone ,  as `` bin laden '' is a patronymic ,  not a surname in the western manner . 
bin laden was raised as a devout sunni muslim . 
bin laden was described as soft-spoken and mild-mannered in demeanor . 
osama bin mohammed bin awad bin laden  -lrb-   ,  '; march 10, 1957 – may 2, 2011 -rrb- ,  also rendered usama bin ladin ,  was a founder of the pan-islamic militant organization  . 
bin ladens father was mohammed bin awad bin laden ,  a saudi millionaire from hadhramaut ,  yemen and the founder of the construction company ,  saudi binladin group . 
nasser al-bahri ,  who was bin laden's personal bodyguard from 1997–2001, details bin laden's personal life in his memoir . 
the word `` ontogeny '' comes from the greek ὄν ,  `` on ''  -lrb-  gen .  ὄντος ,  `` ontos ''  -rrb-  ,  i . e . 
ontogeny is a useful field of study in many disciplines ,  including developmental biology ,  developmental psychology ,  developmental cognitive neuroscience ,  and developmental psychobiology . 
the term ontogeny has also been used in cell biology to describe the development of various cell types within an organism . 
in 2006, a new nearby star cluster was discovered associated with the 4th magnitude star mu ophiuchi . 
in april 2010, the naked-eye star ζ ophiuchi was occulted by the asteroid 824 anastasia . 
ophiuchus contains several star clusters ,  such as ic 4665, ngc 6633, m9, m10, m12, m14, m19, m62, and m107, as well as the nebula ic 4603-4604.
other bright stars in the constellation include β ophiuchi ,  cebalrai  -lrb-  `` dog of the shepherd ''  -rrb- </ref> and λ ophiuchi ,  or marfik  -lrb-  `` the elbow ''  -rrb-  . 
after owain's death ,  there was little resistance to english rule . 
nothing certain is known of owain after 1412.
the names and number of owain glyndŵr's siblings cannot be certainly known . 
owain glyndŵr  -lrb-  ; c .  1359 – c .  1415 -rrb- ,  or owain glyn dŵr ,  was a welsh ruler and the last native welshman to hold the title prince of wales  -lrb-  `` tywysog cymru ''  -rrb-  . 
at the same time ,  the english changed their strategy . 
in the late 1390s ,  a series of events began to push owain towards rebellion ,  in what was later to be called the welsh revolt ,  the glyndŵr rising or  -lrb-  within wales  -rrb-  the last war of independence . 
owain married margaret hanmer ,  also known by her welsh name marred ferch dafydd ,  daughter of sir david hanmer of hanmer ,  early in his life . 
the traditional spelling in english is owen glendower  -lrb-   . 
that owain glyndŵr had another brother gruffudd is likely; that he possibly had a third ,  maredudd ,  is suggested by one reference . 
the bard iolo goch  -lrb-  `` red iolo ''  -rrb-  ,  himself a welsh lord ,  visited him in the 1390s and wrote a number of odes to owain ,  praising owain's liberality ,  and writing of sycharth ,  `` rare was it there / to see a latch or a lock . `` 
in june 1402, owain defeated an english force led by sir edmund mortimer at the battle of bryn glas ,  and mortimer was captured . 
owain had additional illegitimate children: david ,  gwenllian ,  ieuan ,  and myfanwy . 
1405 was the `` year of the french '' in wales . 
in 2006, adrien jones ,  the president of the owain glyndŵr society ,  said ,  `` four years ago we visited a direct descendant of glyndŵr ,  a john skidmore ,  at kentchurch court ,  near abergavenny . 
owain remained free ,  but he had lost his ancestral home and was a hunted prince . 
octans is a faint constellation located in the deep southern sky . 
octans was one of 14 constellations created by french astronomer nicolas louis de lacaille during his expedition to the cape of good hope ,  and was originally named `` l’octans de reflexion ''  -lrb-  “the reflecting octant”  -rrb-  in 1752, after he had observed and catalogued almost 10,000 southern stars during a two-year stay at the cape of good hope . 
karate originated in okinawa . 
the public schools in okinawa are overseen by the okinawa prefectural board of education . 
okinawa prefecture constitutes 0.6 percent of japan's land surface ,  yet  ,  75 percent of all usfj bases were located on okinawa ,  and u . s .  military bases occupied 18 percent of the main island . 
the us military bases on okinawa became a focal point for anti-vietnam war sentiment . 
okinawa hosts about two-thirds of the 50,000 american forces in japan although the islands account for less than one percent of total lands in japan . 
on december 21, 2016, 10,000 acres of okinawa northern training area was returned to japan . 
okinawa has many types of private schools . 
the 1995 rape of a 12-year-old girl by u . s .  servicemen triggered large protests in okinawa . 
the vietnam war highlighted the differences between the united states and okinawa ,  but showed a commonality between the islands and mainland japan . 
 ,  some 8,000 u . s .  marines were removed from the island and relocated to guam . 
near the end of world war ii ,  in 1945, the us army and marine corps invaded okinawa with 185,000 troops . 
eleven cities are located within the okinawa prefecture . 
gyokusendo is an extensive limestone cave in the southern part of okinawa's main island . 
in 1972, the u . s .  government handed over the islands to japanese administration . 
currently about 26,000 u . s .  troops are based in the prefecture . 
okinawan feelings about the u . s .  military are complex ,  and some of the resentment towards the u . s .  bases is directed towards the government in tokyo ,  perceived as being insensitive to okinawan needs and using okinawa to house bases not desired elsewhere in japan . 
however ,  on january 24, 2016, sleet was reported in nago on okinawa island for the first time on record . 
on june 25, 2018 okinawa residents held a protest demonstration at sea against scheduled land reclamation work for the relocation of a u . s .  military base within japan's southernmost island prefecture . 
although okinawa prefecture comprises just 0.6 percent of japan's total land mass ,  about 75 percent of all united states military personnel stationed in japan are assigned to installations in the prefecture . 
in 1969, chemical weapons leaked from the us storage depot at chibana in central okinawa ,  under operation red hat . 
there are 10 colleges/universities in okinawa ,  including the university of the ryukyus ,  the only national university in the prefecture ,  and the okinawa institute of science and technology ,  a new international research institute . 
this consecrated oil is used for anointing the sick . 
the importance and antiquity of olive oil can be seen in the fact that the english word `` oil '' derives from c .  1175, `` olive oil '' ,  from anglo-fr . 
the flavor of these oils varies considerably and a particular oil may be more suited for a particular dish . 
one parameter used to characterise an oil is its acidity . 
greece is the third largest producer of olive oil . 
fresh oil ,  as available in an oil-producing region ,  tastes noticeably different from the older oils available elsewhere . 
olive oil is a usual offering to churches and cemeteries . 
the roman catholic ,  orthodox and anglican churches use olive oil for the oil of catechumens  -lrb-  used to bless and strengthen those preparing for baptism  -rrb-  and oil of the sick  -lrb-  used to confer the sacrament of anointing of the sick or unction  -rrb-  . 
when extra virgin olive oil is heated above  ,  depending on its free fatty acid content ,  the unrefined particles within the oil are burned . 
besides food ,  olive oil has been used for religious rituals ,  medicines ,  as a fuel in oil lamps ,  soap-making ,  and skin care application . 
choosing a cold-pressed olive oil can be similar to selecting a wine . 
olive oil has a long history of being used as a home skincare remedy . 
this makes it unclear what percentage of the olive oil is really of italian origin . 
after the first year ,  olive oil is more suitable for cooking than serving raw . 
these presses are estimated to have had output of between 1,000 and 3,000 tons of olive oil per season . 
the olive tree ,  `` olea europaea '' ,  is an evergreen tree or shrub native to the mediterranean ,  asia ,  and africa . 
hundreds of cultivars of the olive tree are known . 
also in multiple other languages the word for `` oil '' ultimately derives from the name of this tree and its fruit . 
'pendolino' olive trees are used extensively as pollenizers in large olive tree groves . 
all seven trees continue to produce olives . 
olive trees in the groves around the mediterranean sea are centuries old ,  with some dated to 2000 years . 
other trees in the towns of amioun appear to be at least 1,500 years old . 
the olive tree ,  `` olea europaea '' ,  has been cultivated for olive oil ,  fine wood ,  olive leaf ,  and the olive fruit . 
the tree and its fruit give their name to the plant family ,  which also includes species such as lilacs ,  jasmine ,  `` forsythia '' ,  and the true ash trees  -lrb-  `` fraxinus ''  -rrb-  . 
in this way ,  an olive tree can live for centuries or even millennia . 
the word `` oil '' originally meant `` olive oil '' ,  from ' ,   -lrb-  ' ,  `` olive oil ''  -rrb-  . 
the olive tree itself ,  as well as olive oil and olives ,  play an important role in the bible . 
the olive tree and olive oil are mentioned seven times in the quran ,  and the olive is praised as a precious fruit . 
the olive tree is one of the first plants mentioned in the hebrew bible  -lrb-  the christian old testament  -rrb-  ,  and one of the most significant . 
some italian olive trees are believed to date back to ancient rome  -lrb-  8th century bc to 5th century ad  -rrb-  ,  although identifying progenitor trees in ancient sources is difficult . 
muhammad is reported to have said: `` take oil of olive and massage with it – it is a blessed tree ''  -lrb-  sunan al-darimi ,  69:103 -rrb- . 
in situations where extreme cold has damaged or killed the olive tree ,  the rootstock can survive and produce new shoots which in turn become new trees . 
it still gives fruit  -lrb-  about per year  -rrb-  ,  which is made into olive oil . 
an olive tree in west athens ,  named `` plato's olive tree '' ,  is thought to be a remnant of the grove where plato's academy was situated ,  making it an estimated 2,400 years old . 
the word `` olive '' derives from latin '  -lrb-  `` olive fruit '' ,  `` olive tree ''  -rrb-  ,  possibly through etruscan 𐌄𐌋𐌄𐌉𐌅𐌀  -lrb-  eleiva  -rrb-  from the archaic proto-greek form *ἐλαίϝα  -lrb-  *elaíwa  -rrb-   -lrb-  classic greek ' ,  `` olive fruit '' ,  `` olive tree ''  -rrb-  . 
an estimated 865 million olive trees are in the world today  -lrb-  as of 2005 -rrb- ,  and the vast majority of these are found in mediterranean countries ,  with traditionally marginal areas accounting for no more than 25% of olive-planted area and 10% of oil production . 
where the olive is carefully cultivated ,  as in languedoc and provence ,  the trees are regularly pruned . 
he was the second emperor of the year of the four emperors . 
otho's first acts as emperor showed that he was not unmindful of these facts . 
otho  -lrb-  ; ; 28 april 32 – 16 april 69 ad  -rrb-  was roman emperor for three months ,  from 15 january to 16 april 69 ad . 
after this ,  otho decided to strike a bold blow . 
otho's ashes were placed within a modest monument . 
galba was childless and far advanced in years ,  and otho ,  encouraged by the predictions of astrologers ,  aspired to succeed him . 
it has been thought that otho's suicide was committed in order to steer his country from the path to civil war . 
a member of a noble etruscan family ,  otho was initially a friend and courtier of the young emperor nero until he was effectively banished to the governorship of the remote province of lusitania in 58 ad following his wife poppaea sabina's affair with nero . 
writing during the reign of the emperor domitian  -lrb-  ad 81–96 -rrb- ,  the roman poet martial expressed his admiration for otho's choice to spare the empire from civil war through sacrificing himself:
after his death ,  his two sons divided his fiefs ,  forming the pitigliano and the second southern line . 
the rise of the orsini did not stop after nicholas' death . 
his son giannantonio  -lrb-  march 25, 1569 – 1613 -rrb- sold pitigliano to tuscany ,  in exchange for the marquisate of monte san savino . 
the orsini were related to the bobone family existing in rome in the 11th century . 
the index of refraction of a medium is related to the speed ,   ,  of light in that medium by where is the speed of light in vacuum . 
where is a constant for any two materials and a given colour of light . 
in physical optics ,  light is considered to propagate as a wave . 
in the leftmost figure above ,  the x and y components of the light wave are in phase . 
a vector model must also be used to model polarised light . 
refraction occurs when light travels through an area of space that has a changing index of refraction; this principle allows for lenses and the focusing of light . 
in geometrical optics ,  light is considered to travel in straight lines ,  while in physical optics ,  light is considered as an electromagnetic wave . 
where `` n '' is the index of refraction and `` c '' is the speed of light in a vacuum . 
diffraction is the process by which light interference is most commonly observed . 
thus ,  blue light ,  with its higher refractive index ,  is bent more strongly than red light ,  resulting in the well-known rainbow pattern . 
in such situations ,  snell's law describes the resulting deflection of the light ray:
in the 13th century in medieval europe ,  english bishop robert grosseteste wrote on a wide range of scientific topics ,  and discussed light from four different perspectives: an epistemology of light ,  a metaphysics or cosmogony of light ,  an etiology or physics of light ,  and a theology of light ,  basing it on the works aristotle and platonism . 
as light travels down an optical fibre ,  it undergoes total internal reflection allowing for essentially no light to be lost over the length of the cable . 
light waves are now generally treated as electromagnetic waves except when quantum mechanical effects have to be considered . 
some phenomena depend on the fact that light has both wave-like and particle-like properties . 
the simplest physical models of diffraction use equations that describe the angular separation of light and dark fringes due to light of a particular wavelength  -lrb-  λ  -rrb-  . 
the wavelength of visible light waves varies between 400 and 700 nm ,  but the term `` light '' is also often applied to infrared  -lrb-  0.7–300 μm  -rrb-  and ultraviolet radiation  -lrb-  10–400 nm  -rrb-  . 
most optical phenomena can be accounted for using the classical electromagnetic description of light . 
where `` θ '' is the angular resolution ,  `` λ '' is the wavelength of the light ,  and `` d '' is the diameter of the lens aperture . 
when a ray of light hits the boundary between two transparent materials ,  it is divided into a reflected and a refracted ray . 
malus' law ,  which is named after étienne-louis malus ,  says that when a perfect polariser is placed in a linear polarised beam of light ,  the intensity ,  `` i '' ,  of the light that passes through is given by
the discovery of this phenomenon when passing light through a prism is famously attributed to isaac newton . 
some media have an index of refraction which varies gradually with position and ,  therefore ,  light rays in the medium are curved . 
a device which produces converging or diverging light rays due to refraction is known as a `` lens '' . 
more rigorous models ,  involving the modelling of both electric and magnetic fields of the light wave ,  are required when dealing with the detailed interaction of light with materials where the interaction depends on their electric and magnetic properties . 
because light is an electromagnetic wave ,  other forms of electromagnetic radiation such as x-rays ,  microwaves ,  and radio waves exhibit similar properties . 
newtonian optics was generally accepted until the early 19th century when thomas young and augustin-jean fresnel conducted experiments on the interference of light that firmly established light's wave nature . 
this model would not rule out a big bang ,  but would allow for a dark sky even if the big bang had not occurred . 
thus the more shells ,  the more light; and with infinitely many shells ,  there would be a bright night sky . 
thus the total light received from the second shell is the same as the total light received from the first shell . 
the redshift hypothesised in the big bang model would by itself explain the darkness of the night sky even if the universe were infinitely old . 
while dark clouds could obstruct the light ,  these clouds would heat up ,  until they were as hot as the stars ,  and then radiate the same amount of light . 
so the finite age of the stars does not explain the paradox . 
the term `` occultism '' derives from the older term `` occult '' ,  much as the term `` esotericism '' derives from the older term `` esoteric '' . 
the term `` occult '' has also been used as a substantivized adjective as `` the occult '' ,  a term that has been particularly widely used among journalists and sociologists . 
the earliest known usage of the term `` occultism '' is in the french language ,  as `` l'occultisme '' . 
over the course of its history ,  the term `` occultism '' has been used in various different ways . 
hanegraaff noted that this etic usage of the term would be independent of emic usages of the term employed by occultists and other esotericists themselves . 
various twentieth-century writers on the subject used the term `` occultism '' in different ways . 
the terms `` esoteric '' and `` arcane '' can also be used to describe the occult ,  in addition to their meanings unrelated to the supernatural . 
in his 1871 book `` primitive culture '' ,  the anthropologist edward tylor used the term `` occult science '' as a synonym for `` magic '' . 
the term `` occult sciences '' was used in the 16th century to refer to astrology ,  alchemy ,  and natural magic . 
from that point on ,  use of the term `` occult science -lrb-  s  -rrb- ``  implied a conscious polemic against mainstream science . 
the name `` oklahoma '' comes from the choctaw phrase `` okla '' `` humma '' ,  literally meaning `` red people '' . 
 ''oklahoma '' later became the de facto name for oklahoma territory ,  and it was officially approved in 1890, two years after the area was opened to white settlers . 
the term `` loxbridge ''  -lrb-  referring to london ,  oxford ,  and cambridge  -rrb-  is also sometimes used ,  and was also adopted as the name of the ancient history conference now known as `` ampah '' . 
thackeray's `` pendennis ''  -lrb-  1850 -rrb- also introduced the term `` camford '' as another combination of the university names – `` he was a camford man and very nearly got the english prize poem '' – although this term has never achieved the same degree of usage as `` oxbridge '' . 
a notable exception is japan's cambridge and oxford society ,  probably arising from the fact that the cambridge club was founded there first ,  and also had more members than its oxford counterpart when they amalgamated in 1905.
osman i or osman gazi  -lrb-  ; ; died 1323/4 -rrb- ,  sometimes transliterated archaically as othman ,  was the leader of the ottoman turks and the founder of the ottoman dynasty . 
according to later ottoman tradition ,  osman's ancestors were descendants of the kayı tribe of oghuz turks . 
osman may thus have adopted the more prestigious muslim name later in his life . 
osman's last campaign was against the city of bursa . 
it is very difficult for historians to determine what is factual and what is legendary about the many stories the ottomans told about osman and his exploits ,  and the ottoman sources do not always agree with each other . 
the exact date of osman's birth is unknown ,  and very little is known about his early life and origins due to the scarcity of sources and the many myths and legends which came to be told about him by the ottomans in later centuries . 
born in söğüt around 1281, orhan was the first son of osman i .  orhan's grandfather ,  ertuğrul gazi ,  named his grandson after orhan alp . 
orhan was said to have been greatly affected by the death of his son . 
each of these two contestants for power was continually soliciting orhan's aid against the other ,  and orhan supported whichever side would benefit the ottomans . 
orhan was the longest living and one of the longest reigning of the future ottoman sultans . 
orhan gazi  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-   -lrb-  c .  1281 – march 1362 -rrb- was the second bey of the nascent ottoman sultanate  -lrb-  then known as the ottoman beylik or emirate  -rrb-  from 1323/4 to 1362.
some historical articles claim that when orhan was 20 years old ,  his father sent him to the small ottoman province of nakihir ,  but orhan returned to the ottoman capital ,  sogut ,  in 1309.
sultan osman gazi died in either 1323 or 1324, and orhan succeeded him . 
in 1356 orhan and theodora's son ,  khalil ,  was abducted somewhere on the bay of izmit . 
orhan died soon after ,  likely from natural causes . 
orhan also occupied the lands of the karasids of balıkesir and the ahis of ankara . 
in the early stages of his reign ,  orhan focused his energies on conquering most of northwestern anatolia . 
a series of civil wars surrounding the ascension of the nine-year-old byzantine emperor john v palaiologos greatly benefited orhan . 
osman ii  -lrb-   `` ‘osmān-i sānī ''; 3 november 1604 – 20 may 1622 -rrb- ,  commonly known in turkey as genç osman  -lrb-  `` osman the young '' in english  -rrb-  ,  was the sultan of the ottoman empire from 1618 until his death by regicide on 20 may 1622.
osman ii ascended the throne at the age of 14 as the result of a coup d'état against his uncle mustafa i `` the intestable ''  -lrb-  1617–18, 1622–23 -rrb- . 
the name is from the moon of uranus ,  oberon . 
oberon is still maintained by wirth and the latest language change is dated may 8, 2016.
opengl is an evolving api . 
the opengl specification describes an abstract api for drawing 2d and 3d graphics . 
in addition to being language-independent ,  opengl is also cross-platform . 
all extensions are collected in ,  and defined by ,  the opengl registry . 
within a planetary system ,  planets ,  dwarf planets ,  asteroids and other minor planets ,  comets ,  and space debris orbit the system's barycenter in elliptical orbits . 
in the case of planets orbiting a star ,  the mass of the star and all its satellites are calculated to be at a single point called the barycenter . 
for example ,  `` perigee '' and `` apogee '' are the lowest and highest parts of an orbit around earth ,  while `` perihelion '' and `` aphelion '' are the closest and farthest points of an orbit around the sun .   -rrb- 
to a close approximation ,  planets and satellites follow elliptic orbits ,  with the central mass being orbited at a focal point of the ellipse ,  as described by kepler's laws of planetary motion . 
this contrasts with leg spin ,  in which the ball spins from leg to off and which is bowled with a very different action . 
while the orthodox spinner has the same action as an off-spinner ,  the ball itself spins in the opposite direction  -lrb-  akin to a right arm leg spinner  -rrb-  . 
o canada ! 
o canada ! 
 ''o canada ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the national anthem of canada . 
<poem>o canada ! 
o canada ,  we stand on guard for thee . 
o canada ,  we stand on guard for thee . 
o canada ,  we stand on guard for thee . </poem>
o canada ,  we stand on guard for thee . </poem> <poem style= ''margin-left:1em; float:left; ''>bilingual version 2
<poem style= ''float:left; margin-left:1em; ''> english lyrics o canada ! 
oberlin college is a private liberal arts college in oberlin ,  ohio . 
in addition to oberlin conservatory ,  oberlin has musical opportunities available for amateur musicians and students in the college . 
oberlin students publish a wide variety of periodicals . 
oberlin's museum has a unique art rental program . 
oberlin's founders bragged that `` oberlin is peculiar in that which is good , ``  and the college has long been associated with progressive causes . 
outside of osca ,  other oberlin co-ops include the bike co-op ,  pottery co-op ,  and swap: the oberlin book co-op . 
on friday ,  may 8, 2015, the oberlin baseball team won the championship of the ncac . 
the championship was the first for oberlin as a baseball team since it joined the ncac in 1984.
in january 2016, hundreds of oberlin alumni signed a letter to the oberlin administration stating that this protest was one example of anti-semitism on the campus . 
in 2011, oberlin began its most recent attempt to feature a cheerleading squad . 
 -lrb-  in 1896, fairchild returned to the oberlin leadership as acting president ,  serving until 1898.  -rrb- 
oberlin's football team was the first team coached by john heisman ,  who led the team to a 7–0 record in 1892.
in 1835 oberlin became one of the first colleges in the united states to admit african-americans ,  and the first to admit women in 1837.
another aspect of oberlin's academics is the winter term during january . 
oberlin college was also prominent in sending christian missionaries abroad . 
oberlin college was one of only 43 institutions to receive a grade of gold in stars . 
in 1970, oberlin made the cover of `` life '' as one of the first colleges in the country to have co-ed dormitories . 
the african americans of oberlin and those attending oberlin college `` have experienced intense challenges and immense accomplishments since their joint founding in 1833.
henry churchill king  -lrb-  1858–1934 -rrb- became oberlin's sixth president in 1902.
from 2001 to 2016, north hosted `` war stories with oliver north '' on fox news . 
during his tenure at the nsc ,  north managed a number of missions . 
in 1983, north received his promotion to lieutenant colonel ,  which would be his last . 
north was born in san antonio ,  texas ,  on october 7, 1943, the son of ann theresa  -lrb-  née clancy  -rrb-  and oliver clay north ,  a u . s .  army major . 
the danish railway museum is the national railway museum of denmark ,  the largest such museum in scandinavia . 
the university of southern denmark was established in 1966.
odense is one of denmark's oldest cities . 
odense  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the third-largest city in denmark . 
ansgars church was the first church to be built in odense since the middle ages . 
odense teater ,  first established in 1796, is denmark's second oldest theatrical enterprise and one of the country's three main theatres . 
in the middle ages ,  a number of churches and monasteries were built in the town . 
the odense music library contains denmark's largest collection of phonograms . 
in 2005 the city celebrated the 200th anniversary of the birth of hans christian andersen . 
st alban's church ,  built in the neogothic style and consecrated in 1908, is the roman catholic church of odense . 
there is a 25 hectare forest on the northern part of the island while the southern part consists of coastal meadows . 
odense is the see of the bishop of funen . 
the open-air the funen village museum  -lrb-  `` den fynske landsby ''  -rrb-  tries to emulate what country life was like in denmark at the time of andersen's life and contains houses of historical odense . 
the university of southern denmark  -lrb-  `` syddansk universitet ''  -rrb-  was established in 1998 as a merger of odense university ,  the southern denmark business school  -lrb-  `` handelshøjskole syd ''  -rrb-  ,  the southern engineering school  -lrb-  `` ingeniørhøjskole syd ''  -rrb-  and the south jutland university centre  -lrb-  `` sydjysk universitetscenter ''  -rrb-  . 
until the beginning of the danish industrial revolution ,  odense was also the second-largest city in modern denmark ,  but has in recent times been overtaken by aarhus . 
it is the principal hospital for the northern part of funen but also takes patients from all over denmark ,  as it has highly specialized units within hand replantation surgery and special neuro-radiological intervention . 
the church was the work of peder vilhelm jensen-klint who went on to design copenhagen's grundtvig's church . 
in 1247 odense was burned by abel of denmark during conflicts with his brother king erik iv . 
odense symphony orchestra  -lrb-  odense symfoniorkester  -rrb-  ,  one of denmark's five regional orchestras ,  was formally established in 1946.
a period of stagnation ensued until the end of the 18th century . 
established in 1988, denmark's major commercial television channel tv 2 is based in odense . 
the brandts museum of photographic art  -lrb-  museet for fotokunst  -rrb-  in odense is the only national danish art museum dedicated specifically to photographic art . 
located in a courtyard of half-timbered houses ,  the museum also has exhibits on funen's ancient history ,  as well as odense in the middle ages and the renaissance . 
the hans christian andersen children’s hospital ,  part of the ouh ,  is the only paediatric department on the island of funen ,  and also conducts research into nutrition and gastrointestinal diseases ,  asthma and allergies ,  hormonal diseases and others . 
from the 1840s ,  the city enjoyed a period of rapid expansion beyond its traditional boundaries ,  becoming denmark's second largest city . 
odense is situated in the northeastern centre of the island of funen . 
each page begins with the characters ,  `` oggs '' ,  to identify the file as ogg format . 
the ogg vorbis project started in 1993.
the format consists of chunks of data each called an `` ogg page '' . 
before 2007, the  . ogg filename extension was used for all files whose content used the ogg container format . 
ogg is a free ,  open container format maintained by the xiph . org foundation . 
obelix is asterix's closest friend  -lrb-  they even have the same birthday—although this is inconsistent with the comic `` obelix and co . ``  ,  where only obelix's birthday is celebrated  -rrb-  . 
although he has his own house ,  obelix is occasionally shown staying overnight at asterix's . 
like asterix ,  obelix is a bachelor ,  but he is easily smitten by a pretty face . 
obelix  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a cartoon character and protagonist in the french comic book series asterix . 
obelix's favourite food is roast wild boar which he usually hunts with asterix ,  but he has a voracious appetite ,  and will try eating nearly anything with few exceptions; in `` asterix and obelix all at sea '' and `` asterix in britain '' he seems to not like boiled boar . 
obelix owns the quarry where he chisels the menhirs himself . 
