heterarchy is one such form . 
an overlapping hierarchy is a branching hierarchy in which at least one object has two parent objects . 
moreover ,  each of these levels inherit all the properties of their children . 
to distinguish which is subject and which object ,  `` inverse markers '' are used if the object outranks the subject . 
a hierarchy is typically depicted as a pyramid ,  where the height of a level represents that level's status and width of a level represents the quantity of items at that level relative to the whole . 
objects with the same property value are grouped together ,  and each of those resulting levels is referred to as a class . 
in a branching hierarchy ,  one or more objects has a degree of 2 or more  -lrb-  and therefore the minimum degree is 2 or higher  -rrb-  . 
furthermore ,  the entities found at each level are `` autonomous '' . 
they will keep opening files within the folders until the designated file is located . 
an organizational chart is the diagram of a hierarchy within an organization ,  and is depicted in tree form below . 
in an organizational context ,  the following terms are often used related to hierarchies:
in plain english ,  a hierarchy can be thought of as a set in which: the first requirement is also interpreted to mean that a hierarchy can have no circular relationships; the association between two objects is always transitive . 
the second requirement asserts that a hierarchy must have a leader or root that is common to all of the objects . 
direct–inverse languages such as cree and mapudungun distinguish subject and object on verbs not by different subject and object markers ,  but via a hierarchy of persons . 
categorization in this way yields two broad classes: `` linear '' and `` branching '' . 
visual hierarchy is also important for proper organization of files on computers . 
a hierarchy can also be both subsumptive `` and '' compositional . 
degree of branching refers to the number of direct subordinates or children an object has  -lrb-  in graph theory ,  equivalent to the number of other vertices connected to via outgoing arcs ,  in a directed graph  -rrb-  a node has . 
for example ,  a graduate student can have two co-supervisors to whom the student reports directly and equally ,  and who have the same level of authority within the university hierarchy  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  they have the same position or tenure status  -rrb-  . 
health sciences – are those sciences which focus on health ,  or health care ,  as core parts of their subject matter . 
in the modern 24-hour clock ,  counting the hours starts at midnight ,  and hours are numbered from 0 to 23.
the time of day is typically expressed in english in terms of hours . 
 ''babylonian hours '' ,  as used on modern sundials ,  divide the day and night into 24 equal hours ,  reckoned from the time of sunrise . 
sunrise marked the beginning of the first hour ,  the middle of the day was at the end of the sixth hour and sunset at the end of the twelfth hour . 
the talmudic hour is one twelfth of time elapsed from sunrise to sunset ,  day hours therefore being longer than night hours in the summer; in winter they reverse . 
in the modern 12-hour clock ,  counting the hours starts at midnight and restarts at noon . 
until 1968 saudi arabia used the system of counting 24 equal hours with the first hour starting at sunset . 
the night was eventually also divided into 12 hours . 
the use of 24 hours for the entire day meant hours varied much less and the clocks needed to be adjusted only a few times a month . 
the islamic day begins at sunset . 
the ancient greeks and romans originally divided the day into 12 hours and the night into 3 or 4 night watches . 
it is most well known as the day in the hour of minutes ,  as the ancient egyptians referred to it . 
in so-called `` italian time '' ,  `` italian hours '' ,  or `` old czech time '' ,  the first hour started with the sunset angelus bell  -lrb-  or at the end of dusk ,  i . e .  ,  half an hour after sunset ,  depending on local custom and geographical latitude  -rrb-  . 
the indic day began at sunrise . 
hezekiah  -lrb-    -rrb-  was ,  according to the hebrew bible ,  the son of ahaz and the 13th king of judah . 
there are several types of haemophilia: haemophilia a ,  haemophilia b ,  haemophilia c ,  `` parahaemophilia '' ,  and `` acquired haemophilia a '' . 
factor viii is used in haemophilia a and factor ix in haemophilia b . 
it is estimated that about 2500 canadians have haemophilia a ,  and about 500 canadians have haemophilia b . 
haemophilia is rare ,  with only about 1 instance in every 10,000 births  -lrb-  or 1 in 5,000 male births  -rrb-  for haemophilia a and 1 in 50,000 births for haemophilia b . 
it is not currently an accepted treatment for haemophilia . 
a pregnant woman with a history of haemophilia in her family can test for the haemophilia gene . 
clotting factors are usually not needed in mild haemophilia . 
a non-genetic form of haemophilia is caused by autoantibodies against factor viii and so is known as `` acquired haemophilia a '' . 
individuals with less than 1% active factor are classified as having severe haemophilia ,  those with 1-5% active factor have moderate haemophilia ,  and those with mild haemophilia have between 5-40% of normal levels of active clotting factor . 
in those with severe haemophilia ,  gene therapy may reduce symptoms to those that a mild or moderate person with haemophilia might have . 
about 30% of cases of haemophilia b are the result of a spontaneous gene mutation . 
there are numerous different mutations which cause each type of haemophilia . 
haemophilia can be diagnosed before ,  during or after birth if there is a family history of the condition . 
it was claimed that rasputin was successful at treating tsarevich alexei's haemophilia . 
a blood test will also be able to identify whether a child has haemophilia a or b ,  and how severe it is . 
mild haemophilia may only be discovered later ,  usually after an injury or a dental or surgical procedure . 
not only regular sugars can be found in hemicellulose ,  but also their acidified form ,  for instance glucuronic acid and galacturonic acid can be present . 
hemicelluloses are synthesised from sugar nucleotides in the cell's golgi apparatus . 
hemicellulose found in hardwood trees is predominantly xylan with some glucomannan ,  while in softwoods it is mainly rich in galactoglucomannan and contains only a small amount of xylan . 
unlike cellulose ,  hemicelluloses consist of shorter chains – 500–3,000 sugar units as opposed to 7,000–15,000 glucose molecules per polymer in cellulose . 
 ''hillbilly music '' was at one time considered an acceptable label for what is now known as country music . 
when the country music association was founded in 1958, the term `` hillbilly music '' gradually fell out of use . 
some refer to this event as the equivalent of a `` woodstock '' for mountain music . 
the music industry merged hillbilly music ,  western swing ,  and cowboy music ,  to form the current category c&w ,  country and western . 
by the late-1940s ,  radio stations started to use the `` hillbilly music '' label . 
the `` hillbilly music '' categorization covers a wide variety of musical genres including bluegrass ,  country ,  western ,  and gospel . 
the appalachian mountains were settled in the 18th century by settlers primarily from the province of ulster in ireland . 
some artists  -lrb-  notably hank williams  -rrb-  and fans were offended by the `` hillbilly music '' label . 
the show is devoted to playing a mix of old-time music ,  bluegrass ,  and traditional country and western . 
the hillbilly stereotype is considered to have had a traumatizing effect on some in the appalachian region . 
it is known as the paso de cortés . 
he missed the first two expeditions ,  under the orders of francisco hernández de córdoba and then juan de grijalva ,  sent by diego velázquez to mexico in 1518.
estrada sent diego de figueroa to the south . 
a few days after cortés's return from his expedition ,  ponce de león suspended cortés from his office of governor of new spain . 
in 1511, cortés accompanied diego velázquez de cuéllar ,  an aide of the governor of hispaniola ,  in his expedition to conquer cuba . 
so in 1566, his body was sent to new spain and buried in the church of san francisco de texcoco ,  where his mother and one of his sisters were buried . 
meanwhile ,  velázquez sent another expedition ,  led by pánfilo de narváez ,  to oppose cortés ,  arriving in mexico in april 1520 with 1,100 men . 
in mexico ,  one of cortés's lieutenants pedro de alvarado ,  committed the `` massacre in the great temple '' ,  triggering a local rebellion . 
remaining in mexico between 1530 and 1541, cortés quarreled with nuño beltrán de guzmán and disputed the right to explore the territory that is today california with antonio de mendoza ,  the first viceroy . 
from 1521 to 1524, cortés personally governed mexico . 
velázquez and fonseca persuaded the regent to appoint a commissioner  -lrb-  a `` juez de residencia '' ,  luis ponce de león  -rrb-  with powers to investigate cortés's conduct and even arrest him . 
the first `` carta de relación '' is available online at the university of wisconsin . 
in the years following the conquest more critical accounts of the spanish arrival in mexico were written . 
cortés returned to mexico in 1530 with new titles and honors ,  but with diminished power . 
his enmity with the governor of cuba ,  diego velázquez de cuéllar ,  resulted in the recall of the expedition at the last moment ,  an order which cortés ignored . 
the franciscans arrived in may 1524, a symbolically powerful group of twelve known as the twelve apostles of mexico ,  led by fray martín de valencia . 
from 1524 to 1526, cortés headed an expedition to honduras where he defeated cristóbal de olid ,  who had claimed honduras as his own under the influence of the governor of cuba diego velázquez . 
his paternal great-grandfather was rodrigo de monroy y almaraz ,  5th lord of monroy . 
in motolinia's 1555 response to dominican bartolomé de las casas ,  he praises cortés . 
governor diego velázquez continued to be a thorn in his side ,  teaming up with bishop juan rodríguez de fonseca ,  chief of the spanish colonial department ,  to undermine him in the council of the indies . 
cortés' personal account of the conquest of mexico is narrated in his five letters addressed to charles v .  these five letters ,  the `` cartas de relación '' ,  are cortés' only surviving writings . 
cortés's wife catalina súarez arrived in new spain around summer 1522, along with her sister and brother . 
cortés managed the founding of new cities and appointed men to extend spanish rule to all of new spain ,  imposing the `` encomienda '' system in 1524.
as time went on ,  relations between cortés and governor velázquez became strained . 
in 1518, velázquez put cortés in command of an expedition to explore and secure the interior of mexico for colonization . 
cortés sailed for spain in 1528 to appeal to king charles . 
there is another statue by sebastián aparicio ,  in cuernavaca ,  was in a hotel `` el casino de la selva '' . 
cortés's legitimate daughters were doña maria ,  doña catalina ,  and doña juana . 
hernán cortés de monroy y pizarro altamirano ,  marquis of the valley of oaxaca  -lrb-  ; ; 1485 – december 2, 1547 -rrb- was a spanish `` conquistador '' who led an expedition that caused the fall of the aztec empire and brought large portions of what is now mainland mexico under the rule of the king of castile in the early 16th century . 
he had to repay velázquez for the ships he destroyed . 
on returning to mexico ,  cortés found the country in a state of anarchy . 
the `` segunda carta de relacion '' ,  bearing the date of october 30, 1520, appeared in print at seville in 1522.
he died in castilleja de la cuesta ,  seville province ,  on december 2, 1547, from a case of pleurisy at the age of 62.
herstory is a term for history written from a feminist perspective ,  emphasizing the role of women ,  or told from a woman's point of view . 
though initially blind to the truth of matters thanks to her relations with urquhart ,  mattie eventually deduces that urquhart is responsible for o'neill's death and is behind the unfortunate downfalls of collingridge and all of urquhart's rivals . 
mattie looks for urquhart at the point when it seems his victory is certain . 
urquhart frequently talks through the camera to the audience ,  breaking the fourth wall . 
urquhart resolves to oust collingridge ,  with encouragement from his wife ,  elizabeth  -lrb-  diane fletcher  -rrb-  . 
michael dobbs did not envision writing the second and third books ,  as urquhart dies at the end of the first novel . 
richardson has a shakespearean background and said he based his characterisation of urquhart on shakespeare's portrayal of richard iii . 
she ,  like hoover ,  would never marry; both were completely devoted to the bureau . 
when hoover went to the bureau of investigation  -lrb-  its original title; it became the f . b . i . 
 ''put that damn thing on miss gandy's desk where it belongs , ``  hoover would declare . 
watt determined that a pony could lift an average per minute over a four-hour working shift . 
horsepower  -lrb-  hp  -rrb-  is a unit of measurement of power  -lrb-  the rate at which work is done  -rrb-  . 
watt defined and calculated the horsepower as 32,572 ft⋅lbf/min ,  which was rounded to an even 33,000 ft⋅lbf/min . 
the idea was later used by james watt to help market his improved steam engine . 
james watt and matthew boulton standardized that figure at per minute the next year . 
in 1888, the new county of london was established ,  administered by the london county council . 
xenophobia was rampant in london ,  and increased after the 1580s . 
18th-century london was dogged by crime . 
the first railway to be built in london was a line from london bridge to greenwich ,  which opened in 1836.
from 1863, the first lines of the london underground were constructed . 
due to this outward expansion ,  in 1965 the old county of london  -lrb-  which by now only covered part of the london conurbation  -rrb-  and the london county council were abolished ,  and the much larger area of greater london was established with a new greater london council  -lrb-  glc  -rrb-  to administer it ,  along with 32 new london boroughs . 
19th-century london was transformed by the coming of the railways . 
one of the most famous events of 19th-century london was the great exhibition of 1851.
the population of london reached an all-time peak of 8.6 million in 1939.
having occupied london ,  william was crowned king in westminster abbey . 
london seems to have come under direct mercian control in the 730s . 
public hangings were common in london ,  and were popular public events . 
trade in london was organised into various guilds ,  which effectively controlled the city ,  and elected the lord mayor of the city of london . 
the london plan ,  published by the mayor of london in 2004, estimated that the population would reach 8.1 million by 2016, and continue to rise thereafter . 
king athelstan held many meetings of the `` witan '' in london and issued laws from there ,  while king æthelred the unready issued the laws of london there in 978.
during the reformation ,  london was the principal early centre of protestantism in england . 
up until 1750, london bridge was the only crossing over the thames ,  but in that year westminster bridge was opened and ,  for the first time in history ,  london bridge ,  in a sense ,  had a rival . 
london's suburbs expanded outside the boundaries of the county of london ,  into the neighbouring counties of essex ,  hertfordshire ,  kent ,  middlesex and surrey . 
in 2000, london-wide government was restored ,  with the creation of the greater london authority  -lrb-  gla  -rrb-  by tony blair's government ,  covering the same area of greater london . 
this left london as the only large metropolis in the world without a central administration . 
london's jewish community was forced to leave england by the expulsion by edward i in 1290.
from this point ,  the city of london began to develop its own unique local government . 
the outward expansion of london was slowed by the war ,  and the introduction of the metropolitan green belt . 
the general meeting-place of londoners in the day-time was the nave of old st .  paul's cathedral . 
like the rest of the country ,  london suffered severe unemployment during the great depression of the 1930s . 
the history of london ,  the capital city of england and the united kingdom ,  extends over 2000 years . 
london's expansion beyond the boundaries of the city was decisively established in the 17th century . 
before the reformation ,  more than half of the area of london was the property of monasteries ,  nunneries and other religious houses . 
many famous buildings and landmarks of london were constructed during the 19th century including:
during the 19th century ,  london was transformed into the world's largest city and capital of the british empire . 
trade increased steadily during the middle ages ,  and london grew rapidly as a result . 
during the georgian period london spread beyond its traditional limits at an accelerating pace . 
a norse saga tells of a battle when king æthelred returned to attack danish-occupied london . 
many tradesmen from different countries came to london to trade goods and merchandise . 
in 604 king saeberht of essex converted to christianity and london received mellitus ,  its first post-roman bishop . 
the thames barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect london against tidal surges from the north sea . 
at some time between ad 180 and ad 225, the romans built the defensive london wall around the landward side of the city . 
calendars of the world have often been set by observations of the sun and moon  -lrb-  marking the day ,  month and year  -rrb-  ,  and were important to agricultural societies ,  in which the harvest depended on planting at the correct time of year ,  and for which the nearly full moon was the only lighting for night-time travel into city markets . 
julius caesar instigated calendar reform in 46 bce and introduced what is now called the julian calendar ,  based upon the 365  day year length originally proposed by the 4th century bce greek astronomer callippus . 
the haber process ,  also called the haber–bosch process ,  is an artificial nitrogen fixation process and is the main industrial procedure for the production of ammonia today . 
the haber process relies on catalysts that accelerate the scission of this triple bond . 
the process converts atmospheric nitrogen  -lrb-  n  -rrb-  to ammonia  -lrb-  nh  -rrb-  by a reaction with hydrogen  -lrb-  h  -rrb-  using a metal catalyst under high temperatures and pressures:
before the development of the haber process ,  ammonia had been difficult to produce on an industrial scale ,  with early methods such as the birkeland–eyde process and frank–caro process all being highly inefficient . 
unreacted hydrogen and nitrogen gases are then returned to the reaction vessel to undergo further reaction . 
synthetic ammonia from the haber process was used for the production of nitric acid ,  a precursor to the nitrates used in explosives . 
haber ,  with his assistant robert le rossignol ,  developed the high-pressure devices and catalysts needed to demonstrate the haber process at laboratory scale . 
hot or not is a rating site that allows users to rate the attractiveness of photos submitted voluntarily by others . 
'hot or not' was a significant influence on the people who went on to create the social media sites facebook and youtube . 
on july 31, 2008, hot or not launched hot or not gossip and a baresi rate box  -lrb-  a `` hot meter ''  -rrb-  – a subdivision to expand their market ,  run by former radio dj turned celebrity blogger zack taylor . 
the next enhanced format developed by itu-t vceg  -lrb-  in partnership with mpeg  -rrb-  after h . 263 was the h . 264 standard ,  also known as avc and mpeg-4 part 10.
h . 263 was developed as an evolutionary improvement based on experience from h . 261, the previous itu-t standard for video compression ,  and the mpeg-1 and mpeg-2 standards . 
mpeg-4 part 2 is h . 263 compatible in the sense that basic `` baseline '' h . 263 bitstreams are correctly decoded by an mpeg-4 video decoder . 
histones h2a ,  h2b ,  h3 and h4 are known as the core histones ,  while histones h1/h5 are known as the linker histones . 
five major families of histones exist: h1/h5, h2a ,  h2b ,  h3, and h4.
in modern post-feudal states the nominal top of the hierarchy still remains the head of state ,  which may be a president or a constitutional monarch ,  although in many modern states the powers of the head of state are delegated among different bodies . 
however ,  hierarchy may become dismantled by abuse of power . 
in many democracies ,  the people are considered to be the notional top of the hierarchy ,  over the head of state; in reality ,  the people's power is restricted to voting in elections . 
with all levels of an organization having access to information and communication via digital means ,  power structures align more as a wirearchy ,  enabling the flow of power and authority to be based not on hierarchical levels ,  but on information ,  trust ,  credibility ,  and a focus on results . 
in the work of diverse theorists such as william james  -lrb-  1842–1910 -rrb- ,  michel foucault  -lrb-  1926–1984 -rrb- and hayden white ,  important critiques of hierarchical epistemology are advanced . 
he made his first radio broadcast in may 1944 on a variety show aimed at the services . 
with the success of `` the goon show '' ,  secombe developed a dual career as both a comedy actor and a singer . 
he would go on to star in his own television show ,  `` the harry secombe show '' ,  which debuted on christmas day 1968 on bbc 1 and ran for thirty-one episodes until 1973.
 -lrb-  1968 -rrb- – and ,  in his later years ,  was a presenter of television shows incorporating hymns and other devotional songs . 
sir harry donald secombe ,  cbe  -lrb-  8 september 1921 – 11 april 2001 -rrb- was a welsh comedian ,  actor and singer . 
but secombe would have the last laugh: upon milligan's own death the following year ,  a recording of secombe singing was played at spike's memorial service . 
the couple were married from 1948 until his death ,  and had four children:
he is also fondly remembered at the london welsh centre ,  where he opened the bar on st patrick's day  -lrb-  17 march  -rrb-  1971.
the original trade name of heroin is typically used in non-medical settings . 
heroin ,  also known as diamorphine among other names ,  is an opioid most commonly used as a recreational drug for its euphoric effects . 
the team won the serie a championship in 1984–85.
in 2004–05, things looked much brighter for the team . 
after eliminating rimini in the semi-finals  -lrb-  1–0; 0–0 -rrb- verona lost the final to pescara  -lrb-  2–2 on home soil and 0–1 in the return match  -rrb-  and were condemned to a fourth-straight year of third division football . 
during the 2015–16 season ,  verona hadn't won a single match since the beginning of the campaign until the club edged atalanta 2–1 on 3 february 2016 in a win at home; coming twenty-three games into the season . 
by the 1907–08 season ,  hellas was playing against regional teams and an intense rivalry with vicenza that lasts to this day was born . 
in the 1975–76 season ,  the team had a successful run in the coppa italia ,  eliminating highly rated teams such as torino ,  cagliari and internazionale from the tournament . 
consequently ,  verona were relegated from serie a . 
for the 2008–09 season ,  verona appointed former sassuolo and piacenza manager gian marco remondina with the aim to win promotion to serie b . 
further disappointment followed in the 1983–84 season when the team again reached the coppa italia final ,  only to lose the cup in the final minutes of the return match against defending serie a champions roma
after first being promoted to serie a for one season in 1957–58, in 1959, the team merged with another city rival  -lrb-  called hellas  -rrb-  and commemorated its beginnings by changing its name to hellas verona ac . 
hellas verona football club ,  commonly known simply as hellas verona and locally as verona or hellas ,  is a professional italian football club ,  based in verona ,  in the region of veneto ,  that currently plays in serie b . 
after a 2–0 home victory ,  hellas then travelled to turin to play juventus but were defeated 3–0 after extra time . 
a 2–1 away loss in the first leg at la spezia was followed by a 0–0 home tie ,  and verona were relegated to serie c1 after 64 years of play in the two highest divisions . 
within mahayana buddhism ,  there were a variety of interpretations as to whom or to what the term `` hinayana '' referred . 
 ''hīnayāna ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a sanskrit term literally meaning the `` inferior vehicle '' . 
modern buddhist scholarship has deprecated the pejorative term ,  and uses instead the term `` nikaya buddhism '' to refer to early buddhist schools . 
hīnayāna was often contrasted with `` mahāyāna '' ,  which means the `` great vehicle '' . 
most western scholars regard the theravada school to be one of the hinayana schools referred to in mahayana literature ,  or regard hinayana as a synonym for theravada . 
according to jan nattier ,  it is most likely that the term hīnayāna postdates the term mahāyāna and was only added at a later date due to antagonism and conflict between the bodhisattva and śrāvaka ideals . 
xuanzang further writes ,  `` the mahāvihāravāsins reject the mahāyāna and practice the hīnayāna ,  while the abhayagirivihāravāsins study both hīnayāna and mahāyāna teachings and propagate the `` tripiṭaka '' . `` 
bogart once said:
jack warner wanted bogart to get his stage name ,  but bogart declined it . 
he reminded the gathered mourners about bogart:
bogart's father ,  belmont ,  was a cardiopulmonary surgeon . 
 ''the african queen '' was the first technicolor film to star bogart . 
bogart filed for divorce from methot in february 1945.
the press accurately dubbed them `` the battling bogarts '' . 
bogart then signed a contract with the fox film corporation for $750 a week . 
the enormous success of `` casablanca '' redefined bogart's career . 
eagerly ,  huston accepted bogart as his sam spade . 
bogart worked well with ida lupino ,  and her relationship with him was close ,  provoking jealousy from bogart's wife ,  mayo . 
bogart sold his interest in santana to columbia for over $1 million in 1955.
in the film's trailer ,  bogart is repeatedly mentioned first ,  but robinson's name is listed above bogart's in a cast list at the trailer's end . 
the film cemented a strong personal and professional connection between bogart and huston . 
bogart fell into a coma and died on the next day . 
jean-luc godard's `` breathless ''  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- was the first film to pay tribute to bogart . 
bogart performed in his final films for warners ,  `` chain lightning ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- and `` the enforcer ''  -lrb-  1951 -rrb- . 
bogart had a lifelong disgust for the pretentious ,  fake or phony . 
 ''today ,  we mark another chapter in the bogart legacy . 
it was rumored bogart attempted to enlist but was turned down because of his age . 
humphrey deforest bogart  -lrb-  ; december 25, 1899january 14, 1957 -rrb- was an american film and stage actor . 
bogart became a first-time father at age 49 when bacall gave birth to stephen humphrey bogart on january 6, 1949, during the filming of `` tokyo joe '' . 
bogart began acting in broadway shows after world war i . 
while filming ,  bogart was still torn between his new love and his sense of duty to his marriage . 
robert e .  sherwood remained a close friend of bogart's . 
the character even mimics some of bogart's personal habits ,  including twice ordering bogart's favorite meal of ham and eggs . 
the suspenseful `` dark passage ''  -lrb-  1947 -rrb- was bogart and bacall's next pairing . 
a heavy smoker and drinker ,  bogart developed esophageal cancer . 
bogart was born on christmas day 1899 in new york city ,  the eldest child of belmont deforest bogart  -lrb-  1867–1934 -rrb- and maud humphrey  -lrb-  1868–1940 -rrb- . 
in spite of his success ,  warner bros .  had no interest in making bogart a top star . 
bogart then had a minor supporting role in `` bad sister '' with bette davis in 1931.
bogart met lauren bacall while filming `` to have and have not ''  -lrb-  1944 -rrb- ,  a loose adaptation of the ernest hemingway novel . 
something of a parody of `` the maltese falcon '' ,  `` beat the devil '' was their final film for bogart and john huston . 
in some 19th or 20th century contexts ,  the term may refer specifically to paintings of scenes from secular history ,  rather than those from religious narratives ,  literature or mythology . 
the term covers large paintings in oil on canvas or fresco produced between the renaissance and the late 19th century ,  after which the term is generally not used even for the many works that still meet the basic definition . 
history painting was the dominant form of academic painting in the various national academies in the 18th century ,  and for most of the 19th ,  and increasingly historical subjects dominated . 
an influential formulation of the hierarchy of genres ,  confirming the history painting at the top ,  was made in 1667 by andré félibien ,  a historiographer ,  architect and theoretician of french classicism became the classic statement of the theory for the 18th century:celui qui fait parfaitement des païsages est au-dessus d'un autre qui ne fait que des fruits ,  des fleurs ou des coquilles . 
other artists depicted scenes ,  regardless of when they occurred ,  in classical dress and for a long time ,  especially during the french revolution ,  history painting often focused on depictions of the heroic male nude . 
history painting may be used interchangeably with historical painting ,  and was especially so used before the 20th century . 
il faut pour cela passer d'une seule figure à la représentation de plusieurs ensemble ; il faut traiter l'histoire & la fable ; il faut représenter de grandes actions comme les historiens ,  ou des sujets agréables comme les poëtes ; & montant encore plus haut ,  il faut par des compositions allégoriques ,  sçavoir couvrir sous le voile de la fable les vertus des grands hommes ,  & les mystères les plus relevez . 
if the plane intersects both halves of the double cone but does not pass through the apex of the cones ,  then the conic is a hyperbola . 
humayun's other brother ,  kamran mirza ,  had repeatedly sought to have humayun killed . 
humayun's other brother ,  kamran mirza ,  marched from his territories in the punjab ,  ostensibly to aid humayun . 
mirza was to become a bitter rival of humayun . 
humayun now prepared to take kabul ,  ruled by his brother kamran mirza . 
sher shah destroyed the structure and no further work was done on it after humayun's restoration . 
all that shah tahmasp asked for was that ,  if humayun's forces were victorious ,  kandahar would be his . 
when humayun returned to agra ,  he found that all three of his brothers were present . 
humayun lost mughal territories to sher shah suri ,  but regained them 15 years later with safavid aid . 
when humayun came to the throne of the mughal empire ,  several of his brothers revolted against him . 
humayun decided it would be wise to withdraw still further . 
once again humayun turned toward kandahar where his brother kamran mirza was in power ,  but he received no help and had to seek refuge with the shah of persia . 
with this persian safavid aid humayun took kandahar from askari mirza after a two-week siege . 
shortly after humayun had marched on gujarat ,  sher shah suri saw an opportunity to wrest control of agra from the mughals . 
when kamran returned to lahore ,  humayun ,  with his other brothers askari and hindal ,  marched to meet sher shah east of agra at the battle of kannauj on 17 may 1540.
in 1777, the number of electors was reduced to eight when the elector palatine inherited bavaria . 
 ''kurfürsten '' ,   ,    -rrb-  of the holy roman empire ,  or electors for short ,  were the members of the electoral college that elected the holy roman emperor . 
the pope wrote that the seven electors were those who had just voted in the election of 1257, which resulted in the election of two kings . 
when the duke of bavaria replaced the elector palatine in 1623, he assumed the latter's office of arch-steward . 
none of the new electors ,  however ,  had an opportunity to cast votes ,  as the holy roman empire was abolished in 1806, and the new electorates were never confirmed by the emperor . 
although the elector of saxony was personally catholic ,  the electorate itself remained officially protestant ,  and the elector even remained the leader of the protestant body in the reichstag . 
the dignity of elector carried great prestige and was considered to be second only to that of king or emperor . 
the other electors refused to allow two princes from the same dynasty to have electoral rights ,  so a heated rivalry arose between the count palatine and the duke of bavaria over who should hold the wittelsbach seat . 
the congress of vienna accepted the electors of bavaria ,  württemberg ,  and saxony as kings ,  along with the newly created grand dukes . 
once an individual swore to abide by the electoral capitulation ,  he assumed the office of king of the romans . 
after charles v ,  all individuals chosen by the electors were merely `` emperors elect '' . 
the electoral college is known to have existed by 1152, but its composition is unknown . 
the individual chosen by the electors assumed the title `` king of the romans '' ,  though he actually reigned in germany . 
later he controlled the rko film studio . 
however ,  the aircraft was not completed until after the end of world war ii . 
the hercules was the world's largest flying boat ,  the largest aircraft made from wood ,  and ,  at  ,  had the longest wingspan of any aircraft  -lrb-  the next largest wingspan was about   -rrb-  . 
in one year ,  hughes spent an estimated $11 million at the hotel . 
according to noah dietrich ,  hughes made a $10,000,000 profit from the sale of the theaters ,  and made a profit of $1,000,000 from his 7 year ownership of rko . 
hughes aircraft company ,  a division of hughes tool company ,  was founded by hughes in 1932, in a rented corner of a lockheed aircraft corporation hangar in burbank ,  california ,  to build the h-1 racer . 
hughes was involved in another near-fatal aircraft accident on july 7, 1946, while performing the first flight of the prototype u . s .  army air forces reconnaissance aircraft ,  the xf-11, near hughes airfield at culver city ,  california . 
after the boeing 707 was announced ,  hughes opted to pursue a more unique jet aircraft for twa and approached convair in late 1954.
in 1954, hughes transferred hughes aircraft to the foundation ,  which paid hughes tool co .  $18,000,000 for the assets . 
however ,  he abandoned this plan around 1958, and in the interim ,  negotiated new contracts for 707 and convair 880 aircraft and engines totaling $400 million . 
production dwindled to 9 pictures that first year hughes was in control ,  while before ,  rko averaged 30 per year . 
the studio lots in hollywood and culver city were sold to desilu productions later that year for $6.15 million . 
during the 1940s to the late 1950s ,  the hughes tool company ventured into the film industry when it obtained partial ownership of the rko companies which included rko pictures ,  rko studios ,  a chain of movie theaters known as rko theatres and a network of radio stations known as the rko radio network . 
the 2006 film `` the hoax '' ,  starring richard gere ,  is also based on these events . 
the howard hughes medical institute's new board of trustees sold hughes aircraft in 1985 to general motors for $5.2 billion ,  allowing the institute to grow dramatically . 
hughes formed the hughes aircraft company in 1932, hiring numerous engineers and designers . 
the h-1 racer was donated to the smithsonian . 
he also revealed that hughes' unpredictable mood swings made him wonder if the film would ever be completed . 
hughes used one personally ,  and the other 5 he let twa operate . 
originally known as summa corporation ,  the howard hughes corporation was formed in 1972 when the oil tools business of hughes tool company ,  then owned by howard hughes jr .  ,  was floated on the new york stock exchange under the hughes tool name . 
 -lrb-  the hercules is no longer the longest nor heaviest aircraft ever built; both of those titles are currently held by the antonov an-225 `` mriya '' .   -rrb- 
injuries from numerous aircraft crashes caused hughes to spend much of his later life in pain ,  and he eventually became addicted to codeine ,  which he injected intramuscularly . 
the financing of twa's jet orders precipitated the end of hughes' relationship with noah dietrich ,  and ultimately hughes's ouster from control of twa . 
hughes spent $3.5 million to make the flying film `` hell's angels ''  -lrb-  1930 -rrb- . 
his first film ,  `` swell hogan '' directed by ralph graves ,  was a disaster . 
hughes sent the plane to houston ,  where it sat for many years . 
records locate the birthplace of howard hughes as either humble or houston ,  texas . 
today ,  his legacy is maintained through the howard hughes medical institute and the howard hughes corporation . 
the h-1 racer featured a number of design innovations: it had retractable landing gear  -lrb-  as boeing monomail had five years before  -rrb-  ,  and all rivets and joints set flush into the body of the aircraft to reduce drag . 
since hughes wanted to focus primarily on his aircraft manufacturing and twa holdings during the korean war years ,  hughes offered to buy out all other stockholders in order to dispense with their distractions . 
in 1958, hughes told his aides that he wanted to screen some movies at a film studio near his home . 
howard hughes' alias ,  john t .  conover ,  was used when his body arrived at a morgue in houston on the day of his death . 
hughes was reported to have died on april 5, 1976, at 1:27 p . m .  on board an aircraft owned by robert graf and piloted by jeff abrams . 
hoek van holland strand ,  the terminus ,  is closest to the beach . 
the hook of holland  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a town in the southwestern corner of holland  -lrb-  hence the name; `` hoek '' means `` corner ''  -rrb-  ,  at the mouth of the new waterway shipping canal into the north sea . 
the berghaven is a small harbour on the new waterway where the rotterdam and europort pilots are based . 
the schiedam–hoek van holland railway is a 24-kilometre branch line from schiedam centrum station via vlaardingen and maassluis . 
their son ,  john ,  was born in 1650.
hugh's son ,  john binning ,  married hanna keir ,  who was born in ireland . 
hugh binning was born two years after charles i ascended to the thrones of england ,  ireland ,  and scotland . 
hugh binning was the son of john binning and margaret m'kell . 
hugh binning  -lrb-  1627–1653 -rrb- was a scottish philosopher and theologian . 
binning was born in scotland during the reign of charles i ,  ordained in the  -lrb-  presbyterian  -rrb-  church of scotland and died during the time of oliver cromwell and the commonwealth of england . 
when cromwell sent troops to scotland ,  he was also attempting to dis-establish presbyterianism and the church of scotland ,  binning spoke against cromwell's act . 
the acts of union 1707 integrated scotland and england to form the kingdom of great britain; the acts of union 1800 integrated ireland to form united kingdom of great britain and ireland . 
there is little documentation about john after his wife's death . 
home was on the panel of judges in the joseph knight case which ruled that there could be no slavery in scotland . 
it is the northernmost coastal town within essex . 
harwich is a town in essex ,  england and one of the haven ports ,  located on the coast with the north sea to the east . 
avercamp was deaf and mute and was known as `` de stomme van kampen ''  -lrb-  the mute of kampen  -rrb-  . 
hendrick avercamp  -lrb-  january 27, 1585  -lrb-  bapt .   -rrb- 
baldung’s fascination with witchcraft lasted to the end of his career . 
baldung was the first artist to heavily incorporate witches and witchcraft into his artwork  -lrb-  his mentor albrecht dürer had sporadically included them but not as prominently as baldung would  -rrb-  . 
beginning in 1503, baldung was an apprentice for the most well renowned german artist of the day: albrecht dürer . 
baldung's prints ,  though düreresque ,  are very individual in style ,  and often in subject . 
in 1509, when baldung’s apprenticeship was complete ,  he moved back to strasbourg and became a citizen there . 
throughout his life ,  baldung painted numerous portraits ,  known for their sharp characterizations . 
moving from the left side of the bass bridge to the right side of the treble bridge is analogous to moving from the right side of the treble bridge to the left side of the treble bridge . 
most of the time ,  one side is left as bare wood while the other side may be covered in leather or a softer material such as piano felt . 
the whole pattern can be shifted up by three courses ,  so that instead of a d-major scale one would have a g-major scale ,  and so on . 
a dulcimer usually has two bridges ,  a bass bridge near the right and a treble bridge on the left side . 
the shift from the bass bridge to the treble bridge is required because the bass bridge's fourth string g is the start of the lower tetrachord of the g scale . 
in the usual construction ,  playing them on the left side gives a note a fifth higher than playing them on the right of the bridge . 
humanae vitae  -lrb-  latin: `` of human life ''  -rrb-  is an encyclical written by pope paul vi and dated 25 july 1968.
 ,  about 85.5% of all wikipedia articles are contained within non-english wikipedia versions . 
in january 2002, 90% of all wikipedia articles were in english . 
china again blocked wikipedia in october 2005.
the english wikipedia passed 100,000 articles in 2003, while the next largest edition ,  the german wikipedia ,  passed 10,000.
in april 2008, the 10-millionth wikipedia article was created ,  and by the end of the year the english wikipedia exceeded 2.5 million articles . 
a `` time '' article listed wikipedia among 2009's best websites . 
the wikipedia project has grown rapidly in the course of its life ,  at several levels . 
in 2005, wikipedia became the most popular reference website on the internet ,  according to hitwise ,  with the english wikipedia alone exceeding 750,000 articles . 
in march 2000, the nupedia project was started . 
2002 saw the end of funding for wikipedia from bomis and the departure of larry sanger . 
nonetheless ,  wikipedia was rated as one of the top five global brands of 2006.
the english wikipedia gained its one-millionth article ,  jordanhill railway station ,  on 1 march 2006.
wales stated in december 2008 that he made wikipedia's first edit ,  a test edit with the text `` hello ,  world ! 
hydropower or water power  -lrb-  from  ,  `` water ''  -rrb-  is power derived from the energy of falling water or fast running water ,  which may be harnessed for useful purposes . 
in si units ,  the power is:
technological advances had moved the open water wheel into an enclosed turbine or water motor . 
at the beginning of the industrial revolution in britain ,  water was the main source of power for new inventions such as richard arkwright's water frame . 
the power available from falling water can be calculated from the flow rate and density of water ,  the height of fall ,  and the local acceleration due to gravity . 
each unit of water can do an amount of work equal to its weight times the head . 
other breeds have a partially closed stud book ,  but still allow certain infusions from other breeds . 
more than 300 horse breeds exist in the world today . 
breed registries also differ as to their acceptance or rejection of breeding technology . 
for example ,  a registered thoroughbred or arabian must have two registered parents of the same breed . 
moderators are unable to see who cast votes or alter votes other than their own . 
the site is run by the bakesperson ,  jutta ,  and a small group of volunteer moderators who can contribute ideas themselves and have rights to delete ideas ,  annotations and links provided by other users . 
same dam  -rrb-  or who are by the same sire . 
the male parent of a horse ,  a stallion ,  is commonly known as the `` sire '' and the female parent ,  the mare ,  is called the `` dam '' . 
similarly ,  the `` breeder '' ,  is the person who owned or leased the mare at the time of foaling . 
anestrus – occurring in the majority of ,  but not all ,  mares – prevents the mare from conceiving in the winter months ,  as that would result in her foaling during the harshest part of the year ,  a time when it would be most difficult for the foal to survive . 
heterosexuality is romantic attraction ,  sexual attraction or sexual behavior between persons of the opposite sex or gender . 
diamond concluded that `` although sexual attractions appear fairly stable ,  sexual identities and behaviors are more fluid . `` 
the relationship between biology and sexual orientation is a subject of research . 
often ,  sexual orientation and sexual orientation identity are not distinguished ,  which can impact accurately assessing sexual identity and whether or not sexual orientation is able to change; sexual orientation identity can change throughout an individual's life ,  and may or may not align with biological sex ,  sexual behavior or actual sexual orientation . <ref name= ''concordance/discordance in so ''></ref> while the centre for addiction and mental health and american psychiatric association state that sexual orientation is innate ,  continuous or fixed throughout their lives for some people ,  but is fluid or changes over time for others ,  the american psychological association distinguishes between sexual orientation  -lrb-  an innate attraction  -rrb-  and sexual orientation identity  -lrb-  which may change at any point in a person's life  -rrb-  . 
heterosexism is a form of bias or discrimination in favor of opposite-sex sexuality and relationships . 
most sexual reproduction in the animal world is facilitated through opposite-sex sexual activity ,  although there are also animals that reproduce asexually ,  including protozoa and lower invertebrates . 
the adjective `` heterosexual '' is used for intimate relationships or sexual relations between male and female . 
sexual orientation change efforts are methods that aim to change sexual orientation ,  used to try to convert homosexual and bisexual people to heterosexuality . 
according to a 2008 poll ,  85% of britons have only opposite-sex sexual contact while only 94% of britons identify themselves as heterosexual . 
in a brief by the council for responsible genetics ,  it was stated that sexual orientation is not fixed either way ,  and on the discourse over sexual orientation: `` noticeably missing from this debate is the notion ,  championed by kinsey ,  that human sexual expression is as variable among people as many other complex traits . 
the demographics of sexual orientation are difficult to establish due to a lack of reliable data . 
heteroflexibility is a form of a sexual orientation or situational sexual behavior characterized by minimal homosexual activity in an otherwise primarily heterosexual orientation that is considered to distinguish it from bisexuality . 
the considerable `` nature and nurture '' debate exists over whether predominantly biological or psychological factors produce sexual orientation in humans ,  or whether both significantly factor into sexual orientation . 
according to the american psychological association  -lrb-  apa  -rrb-  ,  there are numerous theories about the origins of a person's sexual orientation ,  but some believe that `` sexual orientation is most likely the result of a complex interaction of environmental ,  cognitive and biological factors , ``  and that genetic factors play a `` significant role '' in determining a person's sexuality . 
no major mental health professional organization has sanctioned efforts to change sexual orientation and virtually all of them have adopted policy statements cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation . 
the building has a circular floor plan . 
the building is now the 20th tallest building in hong kong . 
hopewell centre  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a  ,  64-storey skyscraper at 183 queen's road east ,  in wan chai ,  hong kong island in hong kong . 
there are post offices in harwich port ,  south harwich ,  west harwich ,  and east harwich . 
the cdps in harwich are harwich center ,  harwich port  -lrb-  including south harwich  -rrb-  ,  east harwich and northwest harwich  -lrb-  including west harwich ,  north harwich ,  and pleasant lake  -rrb-  . 
these are also referred to as the harwiches . 
there are also many beaches in west harwich and south harwich . 
supermarkets in harwich include a shaw's star market on the harwich port/west harwich border and another stop & shop in east harwich . 
the harwich antique center west harwich is a large group shop that features over 40 dealers . 
in the summer ,  the town is host to the harwich mariners of the cape cod baseball league . 
harwich is on the southern side of cape cod ,  just west of the southeastern corner . 
route 124 leads from harwich center to brewster ,  and route 137 cuts through east harwich leading from chatham to brewster . 
harwich's schools are part of the monomoy regional school district . 
the noaa fleet also uses a hull classification symbol system ,  which it also calls `` hull numbers , ``  for its ships . 
hull numbers are assigned by classification . 
the combination of symbol and hull number identifies a modern navy ship uniquely . 
if a ship's hull classification symbol begins with `` w '' ,  it is a ship of the united states coast guard . 
the coast and geodetic surveys system persisted after the creation of noaa in 1970, when noaa took control of the surveys fleet ,  but noaa later changed to its modern hull classification system . 
the u . s .  navy instituted its modern hull classification system on 17 july 1920, doing away with section patrol numbers ,  `` identification numbers '' ,  and the other numbering systems described above . 
the sp and id numbers were used parenthetically after each boat's or ship's name to identify it; although this system pre-dated the modern hull classification system and its numbers were not referred to at the time as `` hull codes '' or `` hull numbers , ``  it was used in a similar manner to today's system and can be considered its precursor . 
generally ,  each noaa hull number is written with a space between the letter and the three-digit number ,  as in ,  for example ,  or  . 
the writ is available where there is no other adequate remedy . 
then ,  as now ,  the writ of `` habeas corpus '' was issued by a superior court in the name of the sovereign ,  and commanded the addressee  -lrb-  a lower court ,  sheriff ,  or private subject  -rrb-  to produce the prisoner before the royal courts of law . 
the writ of `` habeas corpus '' is known as `` the great and efficacious writ in all manner of illegal confinement '' . 
the writ of `` habeas corpus '' is one of what are called the `` extraordinary '' ,  `` common law '' ,  or `` prerogative writs '' ,  which were historically issued by the english courts in the name of the monarch to control inferior courts and public authorities within the kingdom . 
the full name of the writ is often used to distinguish it from similar ancient writs ,  also named `` habeas corpus '' . 
in the republic of ireland ,  the writ of `` habeas corpus '' is available at common law and under the habeas corpus acts of 1782 and 1816.
the writ of `` habeas corpus '' as a procedural remedy is part of australia's english law inheritance . 
the wording of the writ of `` habeas corpus '' implies that the prisoner is brought to the court for the legality of the imprisonment to be examined . 
these are the opening words of writs in 14th century anglo-french documents requiring a person to be brought before a court or judge ,  especially to determine if that person is being legally detained . 
habeas corpus  -lrb-  ; medieval latin meaning literally `` that you have the body ''  -rrb-  is a recourse in law through which a person can report an unlawful detention or imprisonment to a court and request that the court order the custodian of the person ,  usually a prison official ,  to bring the prisoner to court ,  to determine whether the detention is lawful . 
the article guarantees that `` no citizen shall be deprived of his personal liberty save in accordance with law '' and outlines a specific procedure for the high court to enquire into the lawfulness of any person's detention . 
article 40.4.2° provides that a prisoner ,  or anyone acting on his behalf ,  may make a complaint to the high court  -lrb-  or to any high court judge  -rrb-  of unlawful detention . 
he had also been at ceuta . 
until henry's time ,  cape bojador remained the most southerly point known to europeans on the desert coast of africa . 
in 1425, his second brother the infante peter ,  duke of coimbra ,  made a tour of europe . 
the first explorations followed not long after the capture of ceuta in 1415.
alvise cadamosto explored the atlantic coast of africa and discovered several islands of the cape verde archipelago between 1455 and 1456.
king john i founded the house of aviz . 
in 1434, gil eanes ,  the commander of one of henry's expeditions ,  became the first european known to pass cape bojador . 
in 1498, vasco da gama became the first european sailor to reach india by sea . 
his objectives included finding the source of the west african gold trade and the legendary christian kingdom of prester john ,  and stopping the pirate attacks on the portuguese coast . 
henry was 21 when he and his father and brothers captured the moorish port of ceuta in northern morocco . 
the first contacts with the african slave market were made by expeditions to ransom portuguese subjects enslaved by pirate attacks on portuguese ships or villages . 
no other advantages are known at this time in using stem cells derived from one method over stem cells derived from the other . 
human cloning is the creation of a genetically identical copy  -lrb-  or clone  -rrb-  of a human . 
cells produced with scnt ,  or ipscs could eventually be used in stem cell therapy ,  or to create organs to be used in transplantation ,  known as regenerative medicine . 
creating induced pluripotent stem cells  -lrb-  `` ipscs ''  -rrb-  is a long and inefficient process . 
in 2011, scientists at the new york stem cell foundation announced that they had succeeded in generating embryonic stem cell lines ,  but their process involved leaving the oocyte's nucleus in place ,  resulting in triploid cells ,  which would not be useful for cloning . 
depending on the method used ,  reprogramming of adult cells into ipscs for implantation could have severe limitations in humans . 
in somatic cell nuclear transfer  -lrb-  `` scnt ''  -rrb-  ,  the nucleus of a somatic cell is taken from a donor and transplanted into a host egg cell ,  which had its own genetic material removed previously ,  making it an enucleated egg . 
reproductive cloning would involve making an entire cloned human ,  instead of just specific cells or tissues . 
china and vietnam were also centres of metalworking . 
as the qin began to weaken ,  various factions began to fight for control of china . 
since 1029 bce ,  the zhou dynasty  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  had existed in china and it would continue to until 258 bce . 
a new powerful dynasty began to rise in the 580s ,  amongst the divided factions of china . 
china was the largest economy in the world for much of the time ,  followed by india until the 18th century . 
by 1227, the mongols had conquered the western xia kingdom northwest of china . 
the roman empire would later control parts of western asia . 
in mainland china ,  the people's republic of china was established by the communist party ,  with mao zedong as its state chairman . 
the russian empire began to expand into asia from the 17th century ,  and would eventually take control of all of siberia and most of central asia by the end of the 19th century . 
china saw its status reduced by what it perceived as parasitic trade with westerners . 
by 1368, zhu yuanzhang had claimed himself hongwu emperor and established the ming dynasty of china . 
the chalcolithic period  -lrb-  or copper age  -rrb-  began about 4500 bce ,  then the bronze age began about 3500 bce ,  replacing the neolithic cultures . 
the religions of hinduism and buddhism ,  which began in indian sub-continent ,  were an important influence on south ,  east and southeast asia . 
the communist government in china was defined by the party cadres . 
the mongol empire conquered a large part of asia in the 13th century ,  an area extending from china to europe . 
the black death ,  which would later ravage western europe ,  had its beginnings in asia ,  where it wiped out large populations in china in 1331.
within two decades all of china belonged to the manchu and the qing dynasty was established . 
today china ,  india ,  south korea ,  japan and russia play important roles in world economics and politics . 
by 600 bce ,  india had been divided into 17 regional states that would occasionally feud amongst themselves . 
with the heian period  -lrb-  from 794 to 1185 -rrb- came a decline of imperial power . 
nevertheless ,  the zhou dynasty eventually disintegrated as the local nobles began to gain more power and their conflict devolved into the warring states period ,  from 402 to 201 bce . 
japan's medieval history began with the asuka period ,  from around 600 to 710.
by 1644, the northern manchu people had conquered china and established a foreign dynasty—the qing dynasty—once more . 
by the late 18th century ,  both internal and external issues began to arise in qing china's politics ,  society ,  and economy . 
asia's history would feature major developments seen in other parts of the world ,  as well as events that would affect those other regions . 
the olmec civilization was the first mesoamerican civilization ,  beginning around 1600-1400 bc and ending around 400 bc . 
the olmec civilization emerged around 1200 bce in mesoamerica and ended around 400 bce . 
the zapotec emerged around 1500 years bce . 
teotihuacan  -lrb-  4th century bce - 7/8th century ce  -rrb-  was both a city ,  and an empire of the same name ,  which ,  at its zenith between 150 and the 5th century ,  covered most of mesoamerica . 
the oldest known civilization of the americas was established in the norte chico region of modern peru . 
the prehistory of the americas  -lrb-  north ,  south ,  and central america ,  and the caribbean  -rrb-  begins with people migrating to these areas from asia during the height of an ice age . 
the purepecha civilization emerged around 1000 ce in mesoamerica  . 
the norte chico civilization began to decline around 1800 bc as more powerful centers appeared to the south and north along its coast ,  and to the east within the andes mountains . 
the netherlands settled new netherland  -lrb-  administrative centre new amsterdam - now new york  -rrb-  ,  some caribbean islands and parts of northern south america . 
cultural traits brought by the first immigrants later evolved and spawned such cultures as iroquois on north america and pirahã of south america . 
the toltec were a nomadic people ,  dating from the 10th - 12th century ,  whose language was also spoken by the aztecs . 
chavín civilization spanned from 900 bce to 300 bce . 
groups of people may also have traveled into north america on shelf or sheet ice along the northern pacific coast . 
the few agreements achieved to date are the origin from central asia ,  with widespread habitation of the americas during the end of the last glacial period ,  or more specifically what is known as the late glacial maximum ,  around 16,000 – 13,000 years before present . 
the aztec having started to build their empire around 14th century found their civilization abruptly ended by the spanish conquistadors . 
the lithic stage or `` paleo-indian period '' ,  is the earliest classification term referring to the first stage of human habitation in the americas ,  covering the late pleistocene epoch . 
olmec influences continued to appear in many later mesoamerican civilizations . 
