the ensuing union between sweden and norway lasted until 1905, when a grandson of the incumbent king of denmark was elected as king of norway; his direct descendants still reign in norway . 
margaret became regent of denmark and norway when olaf died in 1387, leaving her without an heir . 
the kalmar union  -lrb-  danish ,  norwegian and ;   -rrb-  was a personal union that from 1397 to 1523 joined under a single monarch the three kingdoms of denmark ,  sweden  -lrb-  then including most of finland's populated areas  -rrb-  ,  and norway ,  together with norway's overseas dependencies  -lrb-  then including iceland ,  greenland ,  the faroe islands and the northern isles  -rrb-  . 
in 1376 olav inherited the crown of denmark from his maternal grandfather as king oluf iii ,  with his mother as guardian; when haakon vi died in 1380, olaf also inherited the crown of norway . 
krav maga  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` lit . `` 
the root word `` krav ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  means `` combat '' and `` maga ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  means `` contact '' . 
there are several organizations teaching variations of krav maga internationally . 
 ''the captain and the kids '' expanded as a daily strip during the 1930s ,  but it had only a short run . 
the king and his people ,  also in both strips ,  were now polynesian rather than african . 
 ''the captain and the kids '' also introduced some new characters . 
captain bloodshot is a pint-sized pirate rival of john silver's . 
after a series of legal battles between 1912 and 1914, dirks left the hearst organization and began a new strip ,  first titled hans and fritz and then the captain and the kids . 
 ''the katzenjammer kids '' was so popular that it became two competing comic strips and the subject of a lawsuit . 
the katzenjammer kids is an american comic strip created by rudolph dirks in 1897, and later drawn by harold knerr for 35 years  -lrb-  1914 to 1949 -rrb- . 
in chemistry ,  a ketone  -lrb-  alkanone  -rrb-  is an organic compound with the structure rc -lrb-  =o  -rrb- r' ,  where r and r' can be a variety of carbon-containing substituents . 
a ketene is an organic compound of the form r′r″c=c=o . 
one of the most numerous kinds of kistvaen are the dartmoor kistvaens . 
a kistvaen or cistvaen is a tomb or burial chamber formed from flat stone slabs in a box-like shape . 
robinson's work often features scientists as heroes . 
robinson was born in waukegan ,  illinois . 
in 2009, robinson was an instructor at the clarion workshop . 
robinson and his wife have two sons . 
robinson's work often explores alternatives to modern capitalism . 
in 1982 robinson earned a ph . d .  in english from the uc san diego . 
in 1978 robinson moved to davis ,  california to take a break from his graduate studies at uc san diego . 
the origin of the welsh name `` arthur '' remains a matter of debate . 
arthur is a central figure in the legends making up the matter of britain . 
arthur has also been used as a model for modern-day behaviour . 
in recent years the portrayal of arthur as a real hero of the 5th century has also made its way into film versions of the arthurian legend ,  most notably the tv series' `` arthur of the britons ''  -lrb-  1972–73 -rrb- and `` the legend of king arthur ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- ,  and the feature films `` king arthur ''  -lrb-  2004 -rrb- and `` the last legion ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
even so ,  he found little to say about a historical arthur . 
the historical basis for king arthur has long been debated by scholars . 
however ,  this may not say anything about the origin of the name `` arthur '' ,  as `` artōrius '' would regularly become `` art -lrb-  h  -rrb- ur '' when borrowed into welsh . 
the end of the middle ages brought with it a waning of interest in king arthur . 
the earliest literary references to arthur come from welsh and breton sources . 
arthur's name also occurs in early poetic sources such as `` y gododdin '' . 
the romance arthur has become popular in film and theatre as well . 
the other text that seems to support the case for arthur's historical existence is the 10th-century `` annales cambriae '' ,  which also link arthur with the battle of badon . 
retellings and reimaginings of the romance tradition are not the only important aspect of the modern legend of king arthur . 
improving on the basic z2 machine ,  he built the z3 in 1941.
the z2 was a revised version of the z1 using telephone relays . 
there is a replica of the z3, as well as the original z4, in the deutsches museum in munich . 
while working on his z4 computer ,  zuse realised that programming in machine code was too complicated . 
between 1987 and 1989, zuse recreated the z1, suffering a heart attack midway through the project . 
the deutsches technikmuseum in berlin has an exhibition devoted to zuse ,  displaying twelve of his machines ,  including a replica of the z1 and several of zuse's paintings . 
a request by his co-worker helmut schreyer—who had helped zuse build the z3 prototype in 1938—for government funding for an electronic successor to the z3 was denied as `` strategically unimportant '' . 
now ,  he knew they would . 
two other player gambling affairs marked landis's early years as commissioner . 
landis's expulsion of the eight men remains in force . 
one of the most controversial aspects of landis's commissionership is the question of race . 
at the start of landis's commissionership ,  the minor league teams were for the most part autonomous of the major leagues; in fact the minor leagues independently chose to accept landis's rule . 
landis's attempts to crack down on `` covering up '' provoked the only time he was ever sued by one of his owners . 
landis's documented actions on race are inconsistent . 
even before the black sox scandal had been resolved ,  landis acted to clean up other gambling cases . 
at the time of landis's appointment as commissioner ,  it was common for professional baseball players to supplement their pay by participating in postseason `` barnstorming '' tours ,  playing on teams which would visit smaller cities and towns to play games for which admission would be charged . 
the criminal trial of the black sox indictees began in early july 1921.
the trial began on april 1, 1918.
to the surprise of many ,  the reds defeated the white sox ,  five games to three  -lrb-  during 1919–21, the world series was a best-of-nine affair  -rrb-  . 
he never missed an all-star game in his lifetime; his final public appearance was at the 1944 all-star game in pittsburgh . 
taylor spink ,  gresham thought landis `` had something on the ball '' and believed that landis's shorthand skills would be of use . 
in total ,  landis banned eighteen players from the game . 
soon after landis's appointment ,  he surprised the major league owners by requiring that they disclose their minor league interests . 
the indians were able to pull ahead and win the pennant ,  taking the american league championship by two games over chicago . 
and once prospectively crooked players knew that honest players would no longer shield them ,  `` the scandals stopped '' . 
the 1919 world series between the chicago white sox and cincinnati reds was much anticipated ,  as the nation attempted to return to normalcy in the postwar period . 
landis took full jurisdiction over the world series ,  as a contest between representatives of the two major leagues . 
he was able to continue ,  but the incident caused landis to order that world series games and all-star games be played with six umpires . 
the all-star game began in 1933; landis had been a strong supporter of the proposal for such a contest ,  and after the first game remarked ,  `` that's a grand show ,  and it should be continued . `` 
in 1920, judge landis was a leading candidate when american league and national league team owners ,  embarrassed by the black sox scandal and other instances of players throwing games ,  sought someone to rule over baseball . 
a number of authors say that landis banned major league play against black teams for fear the white teams would lose ,  though they ascribe various dates for this action ,  and the dodgers are known to have played black teams in and around their havana spring training base as late as 1942.
a lifelong baseball fan ,  landis often slipped away from the courthouse for a white sox or cubs game . 
landis's courtroom ,  room 627 in the chicago federal building ,  was ornate and featured two murals; one of king john conceding magna carta ,  the other of moses about to smash the tablets of the ten commandments . 
a canadian court later awarded the child to ryan . 
the owners heard robeson out ,  but at landis's suggestion ,  did not ask him any questions or begin any discussion with him . 
landis's decision allowed the icc to take action against railroads which gave rebates . 
the great stellated dodecahedron shares its vertices with the dodecahedron . 
within this scheme the small stellated dodecahedron is just the `` stellated dodecahedron '' . 
the star spans 14 meters ,  and consists of an icosahedron and a dodecahedron inside a great stellated dodecahedron . 
the great dodecahedron and great icosahedron have convex polygonal faces ,  but pentagrammic vertex figures . 
a dissection of the great dodecahedron was used for the 1980s puzzle alexander's star . 
in geometry ,  a kepler–poinsot polyhedron is any of four regular star polyhedra . 
the other three kepler–poinsot polyhedra share theirs with the icosahedron . 
the great icosahedron is one of the stellations of the icosahedron . 
poinsot did not know if he had discovered all the regular star polyhedra . 
the small and great stellated dodecahedron can be seen as a regular and a great dodecahedron with their edges and faces extended until they intersect . <br> the pentagon faces of these cores are the invisible parts of the star polyhedra's pentagram faces . <br> for the small stellated dodecahedron the hull is formula_5 times bigger than the core ,  and for the great it is formula_6 times bigger . 
the great stellated dodecahedron is a faceting of the dodecahedron . <br> the three others are facetings of the icosahedron . 
kraków had a recorded population of 767,348 in 2017.
in 1038, kraków became the seat of the polish government . 
kraków is a major centre of education . 
the planty park is the best-known park in kraków . 
in 2000, kraków was named european capital of culture . 
there are about 40 parks in kraków including dozens of gardens and forests . 
in 1495, king john i albert expelled the jews from the city walls of kraków; they moved to kazimierz  -lrb-  now a district of kraków  -rrb-  . 
the metropolitan city of kraków is known as the city of churches . 
the old town district of kraków is home to about 6,000 historic sites ,  and more than 2,000,000 works of art . 
more specifically ,  the kraków ghetto deportation occurred from 1 to 8 june 1942.
kraków is referred to by various names in different languages . 
the kraków city council has 43 elected members ,  one of whom is the mayor ,  or president of kraków ,  elected every four years . 
the city's principal concert hall and the home of the kraków philharmonic orchestra is the kraków philharmonic  -lrb-  `` filharmonia krakowska ''  -rrb-  built in 1931.
also ,  the katowice international airport is located or about 75 minutes from kraków . 
kraków  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  ,  also spelled cracow or krakow ,  is the second largest and one of the oldest cities in poland . 
austrian rule in kraków ended in 1918 when the polish liquidation committee assumed power . 
the name of kraków is traditionally derived from krakus  -lrb-  krak ,  grakch  -rrb-  ,  the legendary founder of kraków and a ruler of the tribe of lechitians . 
by the early 17th century the kraków population had reached 28,000 inhabitants . 
there are five nature reserves in kraków with a total area of 48.6 ha . 
kraków is twinned ,  or maintains close relations ,  with 34 cities around the world:
there are five nature reserves in kraków ,  with a combined area of ca . 
the oldest neighborhoods of kraków were incorporated into the city before the late-18th century . 
in the same year ,  unesco placed kraków old town on the first-ever list of world heritage sites . 
kraków is one of the few medieval towns in poland that does not have a historic ratusz town hall in its main square ,  because it has not survived the partitions of poland . 
the current divisions were introduced by the kraków city hall on 19 april 1995.
kraków is one of poland's most important economic centres and the economic hub of the lesser poland  -lrb-  małopolska  -rrb-  region . 
prior to march 1991, the city had been divided into four quarters which still give a sense of identity to kraków – the towns of podgórze ,  nowa huta ,  and krowodrza which were amalgamated into the city of kraków as it expanded ,  and the ancient town centre of kraków itself . 
kraków was named the official european capital of culture for the year 2000 by the european union . 
at the start of the nazi occupation ,  approximately 200,000 jews lived within the kraków district . 
the orchestra of the royal city of kraków  -rrb-  ,  the polish radio choir of kraków ,  `` organum '' academic choir ,  the mixed mariański choir  -lrb-  `` mieszany chór mariański ''  -rrb-  ,  kraków academic choir of the jagiellonian university ,  the kraków chamber choir ,  `` amar corde '' string quartet ,  `` consortium iagellonicum '' baroque orchestra of the jagiellonian university ,  brass band of t .  sendzimir steelworks ,  and `` camerata '' chamber orchestra of radio kraków . 
the new working-class ,  drawn by the industrialization of kraków ,  contributed to rapid population growth . 
fin de siècle kraków evolved into a modern metropolis; running water and electric streetcars were introduced in 1901, and between 1910 and 1915, kraków and its surrounding suburban communities were gradually combined into a single administrative unit called greater kraków  -lrb-  '  -rrb-  . 
the rivers and their valleys along with bodies of water are some of the most interesting natural wonders of kraków . 
the city's full official name is  ,  which can be translated as `` royal capital city of kraków '' . 
kraków is home to jagiellonian university ,  one of the oldest universities in the world and traditionally poland's most reputable institution of higher learning . 
after the war ,  under the polish people's republic ,  the intellectual and academic community of kraków was put under complete political control . 
kathleen kenyon was born in london ,  england ,  in 1906.
 ''the first event was the refinement of stratigraphic techniques that kathleen kenyon's dig at jericho catalyzed . 
the british school of archaeology in jerusalem ,  amalgamated within the council for british research in the levant  -lrb-  cbrl  -rrb-  in 1998, was officially renamed the kenyon institute on 10 july 2003 in honour of kathleen kenyon . 
the kathleen kenyon archaeology collection ,  a collection of kenyon's books and papers purchased from her estate in 1984, is housed at baylor university in waco ,  texas . 
consequently ,  kenyon's work has been cited to support the minimalist school of biblical archaeology . 
in 1934 kenyon was closely associated with the wheelers in the foundation of the institute of archaeology of university college london . 
in the years 1931 to 1934 kenyon worked simultaneously at samaria ,  then under the administration of the british mandate for palestine ,  with john crowfoot and grace crowfoot . 
jerusalem was the center of education in the kingdom . 
during baldwin i's reign ,  the kingdom expanded even further . 
there was still some uncertainty about what to do with the new kingdom . 
for the next hundred years ,  the kingdom of jerusalem clung to life as a tiny kingdom hugging the syrian coastline . 
upon the death of the pro-western emperor manuel in 1180, the kingdom of jerusalem lost its most powerful ally . 
although the kingdom had essentially been restored ,  the lombard war continued to occupy the kingdom's nobility . 
there were an unknown number of muslim slaves living in the kingdom . 
most of the army of jerusalem marched north with philip ,  raymond iii ,  and bohemond iii to attack hama ,  and saladin took the opportunity to invade the kingdom . 
the  -lrb-  latin  -rrb-  kingdom of jerusalem was a crusader state established in the southern levant by godfrey of bouillon in 1099 after the first crusade . 
in the cities ,  muslims and eastern christians were free ,  although no muslims were permitted to live in jerusalem itself . 
meanwhile ,  schemes were hatched to reconquer jerusalem through egypt . 
over the next few months saladin easily overran the entire kingdom . 
in 1183 a general tax was levied throughout the kingdom ,  which was unprecedented in jerusalem and almost all of medieval europe to that point . 
baldwin died without heirs in 1118, during a campaign against egypt ,  and the kingdom was offered to his brother eustace iii of boulogne ,  who had accompanied baldwin and godfrey on the crusade . 
when baldwin died childless in 1162, a year after his mother melisende ,  the kingdom passed to his brother amalric ,  who renewed the alliance negotiated by baldwin . 
the dispute between the two factions in the kingdom affected the election of a new patriarch in 1180.
his nephew baldwin was paraded in public ,  wearing his crown as baldwin v .  baldwin iv finally succumbed to his leprosy in may 1185.
it is impossible to give an accurate estimate of the population of the kingdom . 
with the fall of ruad in 1303, the kingdom of jerusalem lost its final outpost on the levantine coast ,  its possession closest to the holy land now being cyprus . 
raymond himself refused to do so and left for tripoli; baldwin of ibelin also refused ,  gave up his fiefs ,  and left for antioch . 
in march ,  frederick crowned himself in the church of the holy sepulchre ,  but because of his excommunication and the interdict jerusalem was never truly reincorporated into the kingdom ,  which continued to be ruled from acre . 
arab-andalusian geographer and traveler ibn jubayr ,  who was hostile to the franks ,  described the muslims living under the christian crusaders' kingdom of jerusalem in the late 12th-century:
soon afterwards ,  philip of flanders arrived in jerusalem on pilgrimage; he was baldwin iv's cousin ,  and the king offered him the regency and command of the army ,  both of which philip refused ,  although he objected to the appointment of raynald as regent . 
fulk was an experienced crusader and had brought military support to the kingdom during a pilgrimage in 1120.
the failure of the second crusade had dire long-term consequences for the kingdom . 
their son ,  the future baldwin iii ,  was named co-heir by his grandfather . 
baldwin v's rule ,  with raymond of tripoli as regent and his great-uncle joscelin of edessa as his guardian ,  was short . 
as compensation ,  richard sold guy the island of cyprus ,  which richard had captured on the way to acre ,  although guy continued to claim the throne of jerusalem until his death in 1194.
because the nobles tended to live in jerusalem rather than on estates in the countryside ,  they had a larger influence on the king than they would have had in europe . 
frederick then imprisoned john's sons as hostages to guarantee john's support for his crusade . 
john died in 1236 and the war was taken up by his son balian of beirut and his nephew philip of montfort . 
for the next seven centuries ,  up to today ,  a veritable multitude of european monarchs have used the title of king of jerusalem . 
after meeting in acre in june ,  the crusading kings louis vii of france and conrad iii of germany agreed with melisende ,  baldwin iii and the major nobles of the kingdom to attack damascus . 
the inexperienced guy led the frankish army against saladin's incursions into the kingdom ,  but neither side made any real gains ,  and guy was criticized by his opponents for not striking against saladin when he had the chance . 
the sport was invented by dutch school teacher nico broekhuysen in 1902.
korfball  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a ball sport ,  with similarities to netball and basketball . 
the sport is also very popular in belgium and taiwan ,  and is played in many other countries . 
rapid urbanization had made kabul the world's 75th largest city . 
kabul is known for its gardens ,  bazaars ,  and palaces . 
in 1990, bacon had two successful roles . 
however ,  bacon doesn't appear in ``  ''  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- . 
the experience solidified bacon's passion for the arts . 
bacon has become associated with the concept of interconnectedness  -lrb-  as in social networks  -rrb-  ,  having been popularized by the game `` six degrees of kevin bacon '' . 
kevin norwood bacon  -lrb-  born july 8, 1958 -rrb- is an american actor and musician . 
the measure of proximity to bacon has been mathematically formalized as the bacon number and can be referenced at websites including oracle of bacon ,  which is in turn based upon internet movie database data . 
in bacon's next project he starred opposite elizabeth perkins in `` he said ,  she said '' . 
on july 15, 2010, it was confirmed that bacon would appear in matthew vaughn's ``  '' . 
bacon was previously in a five-year relationship with actress tracy pollan ,  in the 1980s . 
kevin formed a band called the bacon brothers with his brother ,  michael . 
by 1991, bacon began to give up the idea of playing leading men in big-budget films and to remake himself as a character actor . 
bacon made his debut as a director with the television film `` losing chase ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  which was nominated for three golden globe awards ,  and won one . 
bacon ,  the youngest of six children ,  was born and raised in a close-knit family in philadelphia . 
dome-switch keyboards are also called direct-switch keyboards . 
there are two types of membrane-based keyboards ,  flat-panel membrane keyboards and full-travel membrane keyboards:
these were used on ibm pc keyboards . 
dome-switch keyboards are a hybrid of flat-panel membrane and mechanical-switch keyboards . 
full-travel membrane-based keyboards are the most common computer keyboards today . 
each key on a mechanical-switch keyboard contains a complete switch underneath . 
keycaps are used on full-travel keyboards . 
also known as photo-optical keyboard ,  light responsive keyboard ,  photo-electric keyboard ,  and optical key actuation detection technology . 
the keyboard driver also tracks the shift ,  alt and control state of the keyboard . 
computer keyboards can be classified by the switch technology that they use . 
when striking a keyboard key ,  the key oscillates  -lrb-  or bounces  -rrb-  against its contacts several times before settling . 
both are common switch technologies used in mass market keyboards today . 
unicomp also repairs old ibm and lexmark keyboards . 
the history of the high kick in asian martial arts is difficult to trace . 
a kick is a physical strike using the leg ,  in unison usually with an area of the knee or lower using the foot ,  heel ,  tibia ,  ball of the foot ,  blade of the foot ,  toes or knee  -lrb-  the latter is also known as a knee strike  -rrb-  . 
the best known of these sports is association football ,  also known as soccer . 
mihdhar and hazmi moved out of the parkwood apartments at the end of may 2000, and mihdhar transferred registration for the toyota corolla to hazmi . 
the cia did not inform the fbi when it learned that mihdhar and hazmi had entered the united states ,  and mihdhar was not placed on any watchlists until late august 2001.
mihdhar and hazmi took flight lessons on may 5, 2000, at the sorbi flying club in san diego ,  with mihdhar flying an aircraft for 42 minutes . 
mihdhar was born in saudi arabia and fought in the bosnian war during the 1990s . 
mihdhar was seated in seat 12b ,  next to moqed . 
the cia was aware of mihdhar and hazmi's involvement with al-qaeda ,  having been informed by saudi intelligence during a 1999 meeting in riyadh . 
once selected ,  mihdhar and hazmi were sent to the mes aynak training camp in afghanistan . 
in late 2000, mihdhar was back in saudi arabia ,  staying with a cousin in mecca . 
mihdhar was placed on a cia watchlist on august 21, 2001, and a note was sent on august 23 to the department of state and the immigration and naturalization service  -lrb-  ins  -rrb-  suggesting that mihdhar and hazmi be added to their watchlists . 
mihdhar listed the los angeles sheraton as his intended destination . 
on january 5, 2000, mihdhar traveled to kuala lumpur ,  where he joined hazmi ,  attash and yemeni ,  who were all arriving from pakistan . 
in early february 2000, mihdhar and hazmi rented an apartment at the parkwood apartments complex in the clairemont mesa area of san diego ,  and mihdhar purchased a used 1988 toyota corolla . 
upon arriving in san diego ,  california ,  mihdhar and hazmi were to train as pilots ,  but spoke english poorly and did not do well with flight lessons . 
kilo is a decimal unit prefix in the metric system denoting multiplication by one thousand  -lrb-  10 -rrb- . 
little is known of utamaro's life . 
little is known of utamaro's life . 
utamaro was recognized as a master in his own age . 
kitagawa utamaro  -lrb-  ;  – 31 october 1806 -rrb- was a japanese artist . 
the reference to the `` japanese influence '' among these artists often refers to the work of utamaro . 
records have not survived of what sort of punishment utamaro received . 
kitagawa utamaro's work is known worldwide ,  and he generally is regarded as one of the half-dozen greatest `` ukiyo-e '' artists of all time . 
french artist-collectors of utamaro's work included monet ,  degas ,  gauguin ,  and toulouse-lautrec
utamaro's early `` bijin-ga '' follow closely the example of kiyonaga . 
forgeries and reprints of utamaro's work are common; he produced a large body of work ,  but his earlier ,  more popular works are difficult to find in good condition . 
utamaro produced more than two thousand prints during his working career ,  amongst which are over 120 `` bijin-ga '' print series . 
utamaro then went on to produce several series of well-known works ,  all featuring women of the yoshiwara district . 
the earliest surviving copy ,  the `` ukiyo-e kōshō '' ,  wrote of utamaro:
after 1820 he produced his work under the name `` kitagawa tetsugorō '' . 
annan recommended security council expansion and a host of other un reforms . 
annan supported sending a un peacekeeping mission to darfur ,  sudan . 
annan said that his surname rhymes with `` cannon '' in english . 
beginning in 1998, annan convened an annual un `` security council retreat '' with the 15 states' representatives of the council . 
in september 2016, annan was appointed to lead a un commission to investigate the rohingya crisis . 
in 2005, annan included the doctrine of `` responsibility to protect '' in his report `` larger freedom '' . 
as the secretary-general ,  annan reformed the un bureaucracy; worked to combat hiv/aids ,  especially in africa; and launched the un global compact . 
in 2001, its centennial year ,  the nobel committee decided that the peace prize was to be divided between the un and annan . 
soon after taking office in 1997, annan released two reports on management reform . 
in 1962, kofi annan started working as a budget officer for the world health organization ,  an agency of the united nations  -lrb-  un  -rrb-  . 
annan served as the chair of the global commission on elections ,  democracy and security . 
kofi annan was born in the kofandros section of kumasi in the gold coast  -lrb-  now ghana  -rrb-  on 8 april 1938.
in 1998, annan was deeply involved in supporting the transition from military to civilian rule in nigeria . 
regarding the un human rights council ,  annan said `` declining credibility '' had `` cast a shadow on the reputation of the united nations system . 
in 2000, annan issued a report entitled: `` we the peoples: the role of the united nations in the 21st century '' . 
annan attempted to engage the united nations to resolve the matter ,  but failed . 
annan also worked with several arab and muslim countries on women's rights and other topics . 
on 19 september 2006, annan gave a farewell address to world leaders gathered at the un headquarters in new york ,  in anticipation of his retirement on 31 december . 
after his service as un secretary-general ,  annan took up residence in geneva and worked in a leading capacity on various international humanitarian endeavors . 
in 2007, annan established the kofi annan foundation ,  an independent ,  not-for-profit organization that works to promote better global governance and strengthen the capacities of people and countries to achieve a fairer ,  more peaceful world . 
annan was fluent in english ,  french ,  akan ,  and some kru languages as well as other african languages . 
on 31 january 2006, annan outlined his vision for a comprehensive and extensive reform of the un in a policy speech to the united nations association uk . 
goebel is the only governor of a u . s .  state to have been assassinated while in office . 
the state also stocked wild turkeys in the 1950s . 
its major internal rivers include the kentucky river ,  tennessee river ,  cumberland river ,  green river and licking river . 
kentucky is the 37th most extensive and the 26th most populous of the 50 united states . 
kentucky was one of the border states during the american civil war . 
central kentucky ,  the bluegrass region ,  was the area of the state with the most slave owners . 
kentucky  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  officially the commonwealth of kentucky ,  is a state located in the east south-central region of the united states . 
the other two states officially called `` commonwealths '' are massachusetts and pennsylvania . 
kentucky is the only u . s .  state to have a continuous border of rivers running along three of its sides—the mississippi river to the west ,  the ohio river to the north ,  and the big sandy river and tug fork to the east . 
kentucky is one of only five states that elects its state officials in odd-numbered years  -lrb-  the others being louisiana ,  mississippi ,  new jersey ,  and virginia  -rrb-  . 
kentucky's northern border is formed by the ohio river and its western border by the mississippi river . 
kentucky borders seven states ,  from the midwest and the southeast . 
kentucky is one of four u . s .  states to officially use the term `` commonwealth '' . 
only missouri and tennessee ,  both of which border eight states ,  touch more . 
today ,  less than 9% of the state's total population is african-american . 
kentucky is one of the 32 states in the united states that sanctions the death penalty for certain murders defined as heinous . 
additionally ,  in 1948, the kentucky general assembly established the kentucky state police ,  making it the 38th state to create a force whose jurisdiction extends throughout the given state . 
kentucky's two u . s . 
kentucky has a non-contiguous part known as kentucky bend ,  at the far west corner of the state . 
kentucky has more navigable miles of water than any other state in the union ,  other than alaska . 
the executive branch is headed by the governor who serves as both head of state and head of government . 
kentucky has an expansive park system ,  which includes one national park ,  two national recreation areas ,  two national historic parks ,  two national forests ,  two national wildlife refuges ,  45 state parks ,  of state forest ,  and 82 wildlife management areas . 
the commonwealth term was used in citizen petitions submitted between 1786 and 1792 for the creation of the state . 
unlike federal judges ,  who are usually appointed ,  justices serving on kentucky state courts are chosen by the state's populace in non-partisan elections . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of kentucky was 4,454,189 on july 1, 2017, a 2.6% increase since the 2010 united states census . 
the kurtosis is the fourth standardized moment ,  defined as where `` μ '' is the fourth central moment and σ is the standard deviation . 
the standard measure of kurtosis ,  originating with karl pearson ,  is based on a scaled version of the fourth moment of the data or population . 
his final film ,  2006's `` inugamis '' ,  a remake of ichikawa's own 1976 film `` the inugami family '' ,  was entered into the 29th moscow international film festival . 
it was at toho that he met natto wada . 
after tokyo olympiad wada retired from screenwriting ,  and it marked a significant change in ichikawa's films from that point onward . 
ichikawa was born in ise ,  mie prefecture as giichi ichikawa  -lrb-  市川儀一  -rrb-  . 
ichikawa's films are marked with a certain darkness and bleakness ,  punctuated with sparks of humanity . 
karel van het reve  -lrb-  19 may 1921 – 4 march 1999 -rrb- was a dutch writer ,  translator and literary historian ,  teaching and writing on russian literature . 
the very common chinese loanword `` rāmen '' ,  written in katakana as  ,  is rarely written with its kanji  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
similarly ,  difficult-to-read kanji such as `` gan ''  -lrb-  `` cancer ''  -rrb-  are often written in katakana or hiragana . 
words with difficult-to-read kanji are sometimes written in katakana  -lrb-  hiragana is also used for this purpose  -rrb-  . 
most computers in that era used katakana instead of kanji or hiragana for output . 
katakana with `` dakuten '' or `` handakuten '' follow the `` gojūon '' kana without them . 
there are some exceptions ,  such as  -lrb-    -rrb-  or  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  where japanese words written in katakana use the elongation mark ,  too . 
katakana are used to indicate the `` on'yomi ''  -lrb-  chinese-derived readings  -rrb-  of a kanji in a kanji dictionary . 
katakana is also used to denote the fact that a character is speaking a foreign language ,  and what is displayed in katakana is only the japanese `` translation '' of his or her words . 
katakana are characterized by short ,  straight strokes and sharp corners . 
a small version of the katakana for `` ya '' ,  `` yu '' or `` yo ''  -lrb-  ャ ,  ュ or ョ respectively  -rrb-  may be added to katakana ending in `` i '' . 
in addition to the usual display forms of characters ,  katakana has a second form ,   -lrb-  there are no kanji  -rrb-  . 
both katakana and hiragana usually spell native long vowels with the addition of a second vowel kana . 
katakana are also often  -lrb-  but not always  -rrb-  used for transcription of japanese company names . 
standard and voiced iteration marks are written in katakana as ヽ and ヾ respectively . 
there are rare instances where the opposite has occurred ,  with kanji forms created from words originally written in katakana . 
before becoming a manga artist ,  asamiya graduated from the tokyo designer school ,  then worked as a character designer for a number of anime series ,  and even designed models for some of the later godzilla films  -lrb-  1980s  -rrb-  . 
his two most successful and popular manga series to-date are `` martian successor nadesico '' and `` silent möbius '' . 
the kitáb-i-aqdas or aqdas is the central book of the bahá'í faith written by bahá'u'lláh ,  the founder of the religion ,  in 1873.
bahá'u'lláh had manuscript copies sent to bahá'ís in iran some years after the revelation of the `` kitáb-i-aqdas '' in 1873, and in 1890–91  -lrb-  1308 ah ,  47 be  -rrb-  he arranged for the publication of the original arabic text of the book in bombay ,  india . 
while it is the core text on laws of the religion ,  it is not the exclusive source of laws in the religion ,  nor of bahá'u'lláh's own writings ,  and complementarily the reader is told explicitly to not view the text as a `` mere code of laws '' . 
kuala lumpur is home to the parliament of malaysia . 
kuala lumpur is pluralistic and religiously diverse . 
football is one of the most popular sports in kuala lumpur . 
kuala lumpur is a hub for cultural activities and events in malaysia . 
kuala lumpur is the cultural ,  financial ,  and economic centre of malaysia . 
kuala lumpur's eleven districts serve as administrative subdivisions under the kuala lumpur city hall authority . 
the geography of kuala lumpur is characterised by the huge klang valley . 
the first municipal election in kuala lumpur was held on 16 february 1952.
in 2015, the kuala lumpur street circuit was constructed to host the kuala lumpur city grand prix motor racing event . 
kuala lumpur holds the malaysia international gourmet festival annually . 
there is another park in the close vicinity to kuala lumpur i . e . 
kuala lumpur hosted the official asian basketball championship in 1965, 1977 and 1985.
kuala lumpur  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the federal territory of kuala lumpur  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or commonly known as kl ,  is the national capital and largest city in malaysia . 
it is unknown who founded or named the settlement called kuala lumpur . 
kuala lumpur means `` muddy confluence '' in malay; `` kuala '' is the point where two rivers join together or an estuary ,  and `` lumpur '' means `` mud '' . 
kuala lumpur is the most populous city in malaysia ,  with a population of 1.76 million in the city proper  . 
the city also the home of kuala lumpur fa ,  which plays in the malaysia super league . 
the area that is defined as kuala lumpur expanded considerably in the 20th century . 
kuala lumpur is at the forefront of the convergence of media ,  art ,  culture and communications . 
the annual malaysia open super series badminton tournament is held in kuala lumpur . 
however ,  some sections of the political bodies still remain in kuala lumpur . 
in 1896, kuala lumpur was chosen as the capital of the newly formed federated malay states . 
the third chinese kapitan of kuala lumpur ,  yap ah loy ,  was appointed in 1868.
kuala lumpur has numerous parks ,  gardens and open spaces for recreational purposes . 
it has also been proposed that kuala lumpur was originally named pengkalan lumpur  -lrb-  `` muddy landing place ''  -rrb-  in the same way that klang was once called pengkalan batu  -lrb-  `` stone landing place ''  -rrb-  ,  but became corrupted into kuala lumpur . 
kuala lumpur is also one of the stages of the tour de langkawi cycling race . 
located in the centre of selangor state ,  kuala lumpur was a territory of selangor state government . 
the lake gardens ,  a botanical garden ,  is the first recreational park created in kuala lumpur . 
kansas state has more than 400 student organizations . 
the state legislature established the state's land-grant college in manhattan on january 13, 1863.
kansas state university  -lrb-  ksu  -rrb-  ,  commonly shortened to kansas state or k-state ,  is a public research university with its main campus in manhattan ,  kansas ,  united states . 
it was formally renamed as `` kansas state university '' in 1959.
the main campus of kansas state university in manhattan now covers  . 
the effort to establish the school began in 1861, the year that kansas was admitted to the united states . 
 ''alma mater '' is the name of the official school song of kansas state university . 
k-state is the third-oldest school in the big 12 conference and the oldest public institution of higher learning in the state of kansas . 
kansas state was involved in early experimentation with television and radio broadcasts . 
finally ,  upon the third attempt on february 16, 1863, the state accepted manhattan's offer to donate the blue mont college building and grounds and established the state's land-grant college at the site – the institution that would become kansas state university . 
k-state has twelve residence halls on campus: boyd hall ,  ford hall ,  goodnow hall ,  haymaker hall ,  marlatt hall ,  moore hall ,  west hall ,  putnam hall ,  van zile hall ,  and the new wefald hall ,  completed in 2016.
kansas state university ,  originally named kansas state agricultural college ,  was founded in manhattan on february 16, 1863, during the american civil war ,  as a land-grant institution under the morrill act . 
branch campuses are in salina and olathe . 
his last day was april 22, 2016, as he was selected as washington state university's next president . 
on june 15, 2009, kirk schulz became the 13th president of kansas state university . 
initially ,  this campus was referred to as kansas state university – salina ,  but on october 14, 2014, the kansas board of regents approved a name change to kansas state university polytechnic campus . 
it was the coldest mls cup game on record . 
in 2000, their first full season under bob gansler ,  the wizards opened the season on a 12-game unbeaten streak . 
the wizards finished the 1999 season with a record of 8–24, which put them in last place in the western conference once again . 
the team won the 2017 lamar hunt u . s .  open cup ,  defeating the new york red bulls 2–1 in the final . 
after the season ,  the team's veteran leader ,  preki announced his retirement . 
in the 2006 season ,  the wizards just missed out on a playoff berth with a loss to the new york red bulls on the final day of the regular season ,  finishing with a 10–14–8 record . 
the club dedicated its 2007 season to lamar hunt ,  who had died in december 2006.
kc was given a lifeline in the 58th minute as josh wolff scored the first penalty kick in mls cup history ,  but kc lost the 2004 mls cup final 3–2.
facing the columbus crew ,  the wizards earned a 1–1 tie in game 1 of the first round series ,  but with a 2–0 loss in game 2 the wizards lost the aggregate series 3–1.
the franchise has won the mls cup twice  -lrb-  2000, 2013 -rrb- ,  the supporters' shield in 2000, and the u . s .  open cup in 2004, 2012, 2015 and 2017.
the order was intended to be a mutual benefit society . 
to prove that good catholics could also be good americans ,  during world war i the knights supported the war effort and the troops . 
although its first councils were all in connecticut ,  the order spread throughout new england and the united states . 
there are over 1.9 million members around the world . 
fewer than 18 percent of knights join the fourth degree ,  which is optional . 
michael j .  mcgivney ,  an irish-american catholic priest ,  founded the knights of columbus in new haven ,  connecticut . 
pope john paul i's first audience with a layman was with supreme knight dechant ,  and pope john paul ii met with dechant three days after his installation . 
pope john paul ii referred to the order as the `` strong right arm of the church '' for their support of the church ,  as well as for their philanthropic and charitable efforts . 
in this way ,  a blade formally attributed as a wakizashi due to length may be informally discussed between individuals as a tanto because the blade was made during an age where tanto were popular and the wakizashi as a companion sword to katana did not yet exist . 
tally writes of vonnegut's work:
vonnegut published his first novel ,  `` player piano '' ,  in 1952.
on december 22, vonnegut was captured with about 50 other american soldiers . 
meanwhile ,  vonnegut's personal life was disintegrating . 
vonnegut enrolled at shortridge high school in indianapolis in 1936.
kurt vonnegut jr .   -lrb-  ; november 11, 1922april 11, 2007 -rrb- was an american writer . 
in the mid-1960s ,  vonnegut contemplated abandoning his writing career . 
kurt vonnegut jr .  was born on november 11, 1922, in indianapolis ,  indiana . 
vonnegut's works have evoked ire on several occasions . 
vonnegut has inspired numerous posthumous tributes and works . 
a book composed of vonnegut's unpublished pieces ,  `` armageddon in retrospect '' ,  was compiled and posthumously published by vonnegut's son mark in 2008.
numerous scholarly works have examined vonnegut's writing and humor . 
at times ,  vonnegut was disgruntled by the personal nature of his detractors' complaints . 
 ''player piano '' draws upon vonnegut's experience as an employee at ge . 
in `` player piano '' ,  vonnegut originates many of the techniques he would use in his later works . 
after graduating from shortridge in 1940, vonnegut enrolled at cornell university in ithaca ,  new york . 
in rinzai a gradual succession of koans is studied . 
the inzan-school uses its own internally generated list of koans . 
in chinese chán and korean seon ,  various koan can be used for the hua-tou practice . 
in the rinzai zen school ,  which uses kōans extensively ,  the teacher certification process includes an appraisal of proficiency in using that school's extensive kōan curriculum . 
koan practice starts with the `` shokan '' ,  or `` first barrier '' ,  usually the mu-koan or the koan `` what is the sound of one hand clapping ? `` 
japanese zen ,  both rinzai and sōtō ,  took over the use of koan-study and commenting . 
in japanese sōtō-zen ,  the use of koans has been abandoned since the late eighteenth and nineteenth century . 
in the rinzai-school ,  the sanbo kyodan ,  and the white plum asanga ,  koan practice starts with the assignment of a `` hosshi '' or `` break-through koan '' ,  usually the mu-koan or `` the sound of one hand clapping '' . 
in sōtō-zen ,  koan commentary was not linked to seated meditation . 
the answers are also given by the master ,  to be memorized by the student . 
a  -lrb-  ;  ,  ; `` gong-an '';   -rrb-  is a story ,  dialogue ,  question ,  or statement which is used in zen practice to provoke the `` great doubt '' and to practice or test a student's progress in zen . 
in chinese chán and korean seon ,  the primary form of koan-study is `` kanhua '' ,  `` reflection on the koan '' ,  also called hua tou ,  `` word head '' . 
the continuous pondering of the break-through koan  -lrb-  `` shokan ''  -rrb-  or hua tou ,  `` word head '' ,  leads to kensho ,  an initial insight into `` seeing the  -lrb-  buddha-  -rrb- nature . 
similarly ,  zen kōan collections are public records of the notable sayings and actions of zen masters and disciples attempting to pass on their teachings . 
this is ordinary karma . `` 
karma is an important concept in taoism . 
 ''karma '' and `` karmaphala '' are fundamental concepts in buddhism . 
karma ,  also refers to a conceptual principle that originated in india ,  often descriptively called the principle of karma ,  sometimes as the karma theory or the law of karma . 
this life is likened to a field in which our karma is the seed . 
a bad action creates bad karma ,  as does bad intent . 
the concept of karma in hinduism developed and evolved over centuries . 
the effect of karma need not be immediate; the effect of karma can be later in one's current life ,  and in some schools it extends to future lives . 
the theory of karma is often presented in the context of `` samskaras '' . 
the karma doctrine of taoism developed in three stages . 
a common theme to theories of karma is its principle of causality . 
the second theme common to karma theories is ethicization . 
the earliest clear discussion of the karma doctrine is in the upanishads . 
reichenbach suggests that the theories of karma are an ethical theory . 
difficulty in arriving at a definition of `` karma '' arises because of the diversity of views among the schools of hinduism; some ,  for example ,  consider karma and rebirth linked and simultaneously essential ,  some consider karma but not rebirth essential ,  and a few discuss and conclude karma and rebirth to be flawed fiction . 
karma is a basic concept ,  rebirth is a derivative concept ,  so suggests creel; karma is a fact ,  asserts yamunacharya ,  while reincarnation is a hypothesis; in contrast ,  hiriyanna suggests rebirth is a necessary corollary of karma . 
good intent and good deeds contribute to good karma and future happiness ,  while bad intent and bad deeds contribute to bad karma and future suffering . 
the key points where the theory of karma in jainism can be stated as follows:
david wolpe compared `` midah k'neged midah '' to karma . 
such peak experiences are hypothetically devoid of any karma  -lrb-  nirvana or moksha  -rrb-  . 
the consequence or effects of one's karma can be described in two forms: `` phalas '' and `` samskaras '' . 
the order was founded in 1119 and was active until about 1312.
pope clement v disbanded the order in 1312 under pressure from king philip . 
all three classes of brother wore the order's red cross . 
the last grand master was jacques de molay ,  burned at the stake in paris in 1314 by order of king philip iv . 
the order of the knights templar arguably qualifies as the world's first multinational corporation . 
the templars were organized as a monastic order similar to bernard's cistercian order ,  which was considered the first effective international organization in europe . 
templar organizations simply changed their name ,  from knights templar to the renown `` order of christ '' and also a parallel `` supreme order of christ of the holy see '' in which both are considered the successors . 
the templars were closely tied to the crusades; when the holy land was lost ,  support for the order faded . 
the poor fellow-soldiers of christ and of the temple of solomon  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the order of solomon's temple ,  the knights templar or simply the templars ,  were a catholic military order recognised in 1139 by the papal bull `` omne datum optimum '' . 
as for the leaders of the order ,  the elderly grand master jacques de molay ,  who had confessed under torture ,  retracted his confession . 
no precise numbers exist ,  but it is estimated that at the order's peak there were between 15,000 and 20,000 templars ,  of whom about a tenth were actual knights . 
in 1305, the new pope clement v ,  based in avignon ,  france ,  sent letters to both the templar grand master jacques de molay and the hospitaller grand master fulk de villaret to discuss the possibility of merging the two orders . 
the sovereign military order of the temple of jerusalem is a self-styled order established in 1804 and `` accredited as a nongovernmental organization ngo  -rrb-  by the un in 2001. ''
bernard de clairvaux and founder hugues de payens devised a specific code of conduct for the templar order ,  known to modern historians as the latin rule . 
with its clear mission and ample resources ,  the order grew rapidly . 
kazaa media desktop  -lrb-  once stylized as `` kazaa '' ,  but later usually written `` kazaa ''  -rrb-  started as a peer-to-peer file sharing application using the fasttrack protocol licensed by joltid ltd .  and operated as kazaa by sharman networks . 
the pattern of the kimono can determine in which season it should be worn . 
today ,  kimono are most often worn by women ,  particularly on special occasions . 
traditionally ,  kimonos are sewn by hand; even machine-made kimonos require substantial hand-stitching . 
kimonos are often worn for important festivals and formal occasions as formal clothing . 
the formal kimono was replaced by the more convenient western clothes and `` yukata '' as everyday wear . 
kimonos are traditionally made from a single bolt of fabric called a `` tan '' . 
kimonos for men should fall approximately to the ankle without tucking . 
kingston is the location of kingston university and kingston college . 
kingston is about above sea level . 
sport in kingston is promoted and encouraged by sport kingston ,  an organisation funded by the royal borough of kingston . 
the growth and development of kingston polytechnic and its transformation into kingston university has made kingston a university town . 
in 2005, kingston was 24th with £864 million . 
kingston upon thames formed an ancient parish in the kingston hundred of surrey . 
kingston is also served by the a240, the a307  -lrb-  portsmouth road  -rrb-  ,  a308 and a310.
kingston has been covered in literature ,  film and television . 
kingston regatta takes place on the river at the town in july . 
kingston upon thames ,  frequently known as kingston ,  is an area of southwest london ,  england ,  southwest of charing cross . 
an earlier writer born in kingston was john cleland . 
the a3 road runs from central london towards kingston before by-passing the town to the east . 
in 2016, kingston upon thames has been twinned with jaffna in sri lanka . 
kingston also is home to tiffin school ,  the tiffin girls' school and kingston grammar school ,  all of which have large catchment areas across greater london and surrey . 
fine art is also a prominent feature in the history of kingston . 
