interstitial cystitis  -lrb-  ic  -rrb-  ,  also known as bladder pain syndrome  -lrb-  bps  -rrb-  ,  is a type of chronic pain that affects the bladder . 
pelvic pain experienced by those with ic typically worsens with filling of the urinary bladder and may improve with urination . 
research has shown a proliferation of nerve fibers is present in the bladders of people with ic which is absent in the bladders of people who have not been diagnosed with ic . 
when they fire ,  they release substances called neuropeptides that induce a cascade of reactions that cause pain in the bladder wall . 
ici formed ici pharmaceuticals in 1957.
ici subsidiary ,  called duperial from 1928 to 1995, when it was renamed to ici . 
the areas of concern regarding the ici uk pension scheme were addressed by ici and akzonobel . 
in 1962, ici developed the controversial herbicide ,  paraquat . 
in 2008, it was acquired by akzonobel ,  which immediately sold parts of ici to henkel ,  and integrated ici's remaining operations within its existing organisation . 
a fire at the ici new zealand store in mount wellington ,  auckland ,  on 21 december 1984, killed an ici employee and caused major health concerns . 
ici operated a number of chemical sites around the world . 
dutch firm akzonobel  -lrb-  owner of crown berger paints  -rrb-  bid £7.2 billion  -lrb-  €10.66 billion or $14.5 billion  -rrb-  for ici in june 2007.
in 1940, ici started british nylon spinners as a joint venture with courtaulds . 
however ,  a subsequent bid for £8 billion  -lrb-  €11.82 billion  -rrb-  was accepted by ici in august 2007, pending approval by regulators . 
alger was the pilot for the inaugural air mail flight carrying mail from england to australia for the first time on the short empire flyingboat `` castor '' for imperial airways' empires air routes ,  in 1937.
there was opportunity for sightseeing from the air and at stops . 
in april 1931 an experimental london-australia air mail flight took place; the mail was transferred at the dutch east indies ,  and took 26 days in total to reach sydney . 
the first london to hong kong passengers departed london on 14 march 1936 following the establishment of a branch from penang to hong kong . 
in 1934 the government began negotiations with imperial airways to establish a service  -lrb-  empire air mail scheme  -rrb-  to carry mail by air on routes served by the airline . 
sydney was visited on 26 june ,  canberra on 28 june and melbourne on 29 june . 
the empire air mail programme started in july 1937, delivering anywhere for 1 d . /oz . 
the land operations were based at croydon airport to the south of london . 
on his return cobham was awarded the air force cross for his services to aviation . 
thereafter the only ial aircraft operating 'north of watford' were charter flights . 
therefore ,  a person whose mental disorder is not in dispute is determined to be sane if the court decides that despite a `` mental illness '' the defendant was responsible for the acts committed and will be treated in court as a normal defendant . 
in `` ford v .  wainwright '' 477 u . s .  399  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- ,  the us supreme court upheld the common law rule that the insane cannot be executed . 
little is known about the criminal justice system and the mentally ill:
in `` foucha v .  louisiana ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- the supreme court of the united states ruled that a person could not be held `` indefinitely '' . 
in the united states ,  a criminal defendant may plead insanity in federal court ,  and in the state courts of every state except for idaho ,  kansas ,  montana ,  and utah . 
those found to have been not guilty by reason of mental disorder or insanity are generally then required to undergo psychiatric treatment in a mental institution ,  except in the case of temporary insanity  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
the strict m'naghten standard for the insanity defense was widely used until the 1950s and the case of `` durham v .  united states '' case . 
as an alternative to the insanity defense ,  some jurisdictions permit a defendant to plead guilty but mentally ill .  a defendant who is found guilty but mentally ill may be sentenced to mental health treatment ,  at the conclusion of which the defendant will serve the remainder of his or her sentence in the same manner as any other defendant . 
the guidelines for the `` m'naghten rules '' ,  state ,  `` inter alia '' ,  and evaluating the criminal responsibility for defendants claiming to be insane were settled in the british courts in the case of daniel m'naghten in 1843.
the m'naghten rule was embraced with almost no modification by american courts and legislatures for more than 100 years ,  until the mid-20th century . 
it originated in the `` m'naghten rule '' ,  and has been reinterpreted and modernized through more recent cases ,  such as `` people v .  serravo '' . 
in australia there are nine law units . 
several cases have ruled that persons found not guilty by reason of insanity may not withdraw the defense in a habeas petition to pursue an alternative ,  although there have been exceptions in other rulings . 
while the proper sphere for this determination is in a court of law ,  this is practically ,  and most frequently ,  made by physicians in the clinical setting . 
there have been at least five major ice ages in the earth's history  -lrb-  the huronian ,  cryogenian ,  andean-saharan ,  karoo ice age ,  and the current quaternary ice age  -rrb-  . 
the causes of ice ages are not fully understood for either the large-scale ice age periods or the smaller ebb and flow of glacial–interglacial periods within an ice age . 
matthias kuhle's geological theory of ice age development was suggested by the existence of an ice sheet covering the tibetan plateau during the ice ages  -lrb-  last glacial maximum ?   -rrb-  . 
ice and snow increase earth's albedo ,  i . e . 
in the terminology of glaciology ,  `` ice age '' implies the presence of extensive ice sheets in both northern and southern hemispheres . 
there is strong evidence that the milankovitch cycles affect the occurrence of glacial and interglacial periods within an ice age . 
the quaternary glaciation / quaternary ice age started about 2.58 million years ago at the beginning of the quaternary period when the spread of ice sheets in the northern hemisphere began . 
all that remains of the continental ice sheets are the greenland and antarctic ice sheets and smaller glaciers such as on baffin island . 
outside these ages ,  the earth seems to have been ice free even in high latitudes . 
within the ice ages  -lrb-  or at least within the current one  -rrb-  ,  more temperate and more severe periods occur . 
an ice age is a long period of reduction in the temperature of the earth's surface and atmosphere ,  resulting in the presence or expansion of continental and polar ice sheets and alpine glaciers . 
the term late cenozoic ice age is used to include this early phase . 
there are three main types of evidence for ice ages: geological ,  chemical ,  and paleontological . 
the ice age continues until the reduction in weathering causes an increase in the greenhouse effect . 
despite the difficulties ,  analysis of ice core and ocean sediment cores has shown periods of glacials and interglacials over the past few million years . 
also ,  the reduction in forests caused by the ice's expansion increases albedo . 
the definition of the quaternary as beginning 2.58 ma is based on the formation of the arctic ice cap . 
ice sheets that form during glaciations cause erosion of the land beneath them . 
earth is currently in the quaternary glaciation ,  known in popular terminology as the ice age . individual pulses of cold climate are termed `` glacial periods ''  -lrb-  or ,  alternatively ,  `` glacials '' ,  `` glaciations '' ,  or `` glacial stage '' ,  or colloquially `` ice ages ''  -rrb-  ,  and intermittent warm periods are called `` interglacials '' ,  with both climatic pulses are being part of the quaternary or other periods in earth's history . 
this mitigates the albedo feedback ,  as does the lowering in sea level that accompanies the formation of ice sheets . 
during his childhood ,  langmuir was influenced by his older brother ,  arthur langmuir . 
irving langmuir was born in brooklyn ,  new york ,  on january 31, 1881.
irving langmuir  -lrb-  ; january 31, 1881 – august 16, 1957 -rrb- was an american chemist and physicist . 
under section 10-lrb- b  -rrb-  of the 1934 act ,  sec rule 10b-5, prohibits fraud related to securities trading . 
in 1997, the u . s .  supreme court adopted the misappropriation theory of insider trading in `` united states v .  o'hagan '' ,  521 u . s .  642, 655  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- . 
legal trades by insiders are common ,  as employees of publicly traded corporations often have stock or stock options . 
u . s .  insider trading prohibitions are based on english and american common law prohibitions against fraud . 
much of the development of insider trading law has resulted from court decisions . 
it states that anyone who misappropriates information from his or her employer and trades on that information in `` any '' stock  -lrb-  either the employer's stock or the company's competitor stocks  -rrb-  may be guilty of insider trading . 
insider trading ,  or similar practices ,  are also regulated by the sec under its rules on takeovers and tender offers under the williams act . 
in 1909, well before the securities exchange act was passed ,  the united states supreme court ruled that a corporate director who bought that company's stock when he knew the stock's price was about to increase committed fraud by buying but not disclosing his inside information . 
insider trading is the trading of a public company's stock or other securities  -lrb-  such as bonds or stock options  -rrb-  by individuals with access to nonpublic information about the company . 
in the united states in addition to civil penalties ,  the trader may also be subject to criminal prosecution for fraud or where sec regulations have been broken ,  the u . s .  department of justice  -lrb-  doj  -rrb-  may be called to conduct an independent parallel investigation . 
a newer view of insider trading ,  the misappropriation theory ,  is now accepted in u . s .  law . 
section 15 of the securities act of 1933 contained prohibitions of fraud in the sale of securities ,  later greatly strengthened by the securities exchange act of 1934.
in 1968, the second circuit court of appeals advanced a `` level playing field '' theory of insider trading in `` sec v .  texas gulf sulphur co . ``  the court stated that anyone in possession of inside information must either disclose the information or refrain from trading . 
the nationalists did not take madrid until the very end of the war ,  in march 1939, when they marched in unopposed . 
on 11 march ,  the nationalist army broke the front of the republican army . 
at dawn on 10 march ,  the nationalists closed in ,  and by noon ,  the garibaldi battalion counterattacked . 
on 13 november ,  the 1,550-man strong xii international brigade ,  made up of the thälmann battalion ,  the garibaldi battalion and the andré marty battalion ,  deployed . 
they were stopped by iii and iv brigades of the spanish republican army . 
one company was captured by ruse ,  when nationalists advanced among their ranks singing `` the internationale '' . 
from spring 1937 onwards ,  many battalions contained one spanish volunteer company  -lrb-  about 150 men  -rrb-  . 
by this time there were about an estimated 10,000 foreign volunteers still serving in spain for the republican side ,  and about 50,000 foreign conscripts for the nationalists  -lrb-  excluding another 30,000 moroccans  -rrb-  . 
after the failed assault on the jarama ,  the nationalists attempted another assault on madrid ,  from the north-east this time . 
one of the strategic positions in madrid was the casa de campo . 
the international brigades  -lrb-    -rrb-  were paramilitary units set up by the communist international to assist the popular front government of the second spanish republic during the spanish civil war . 
on 9 november 1936, the xi international brigade – comprising 1,900 men from the edgar andré battalion ,  the commune de paris battalion and the dabrowski battalion ,  together with a british machine-gun company — took up position at the casa de campo . 
on 17 february ,  the republican army counter-attacked . 
further nationalist attempts after christmas to encircle madrid met with failure ,  but not without extremely violent combat . 
about 32,000 people volunteered to defend the spanish republic . 
up to the point where the food is processed by irradiation ,  the food is processed in the same way as all other food . 
food irradiation is the process of exposing food and food packaging to ionizing radiation . 
all of the rules involved in processing food are applied to all foods before they are irradiated . 
the us defines irradiated foods as foods in which the irradiation causes a material change in the food ,  or a material change in the consequences that may result from the use of the food . 
irradiated food does not become radioactive . 
food irradiation is permitted by over 60 countries ,  with about 500,000 metric tons of food annually processed worldwide . 
under section 409 of the federal food ,  drug ,  and cosmetic act ,  irradiation of prepackaged foods requires premarket approval for not only the irradiation source for a specific food but also for the food packaging material . 
these directives only control food irradiation for food retail and their conditions and controls are not applicable to the irradiation of food for patients requiring sterile diets . 
the changes in quality and nutrition depend on the degree of treatment and may vary greatly from food to food . 
the u . s .  food and drug administration and the u . s .  department of agriculture have approved irradiation of the following foods and purposes:
it is impossible for food irradiators to induce radiation in a product . 
irradiation reduces the risk of infection and spoilage ,  does not make food radioactive ,  and the food is shown to be safe ,  but it does cause chemical reactions that alter the food and therefore alters the chemical makeup ,  nutritional content ,  and the sensory qualities of the food . 
as of 2010, the quantities of foods irradiated in asia ,  the eu and the us were 285,200, 9,300, and 103,000 tons . 
in total ,  103 000 tonnes of food products were irradiated on mainland united states in 2010.
compounds known as free radicals form when food is irradiated . 
because of the single market of the ec any food ,  even if irradiated ,  must be allowed to be marketed in any other member state even if a general ban of food irradiation prevails ,  under the condition that the food has been irradiated legally in the state of origin . 
the european union monitors the market to determine the quantity of irradiated foods ,  if irradiated foods are labeled as irradiated ,  and if the irradiation is performed at approved facilities . 
the indirect effects of irradiation are the concerns and benefits of irradiation that are related to how making food irradiation a common process will change the world ,  with emphasis on the system of food production . 
irradiation can also alter the nutritional content and flavor of foods ,  much like cooking . 
food irradiation primarily extends the shelf-life of irradiated foods by effectively destroying organisms responsible for spoilage and foodborne illness and inhibiting sprouting . 
irradiation is used to create safe foods for people at high risk of infection ,  or for conditions where food must be stored for long periods of time and proper storage conditions are not available . 
some who advocate against food irradiation argue the safety of irradiated food is not scientifically proven because there are a lack of long-term studies in spite of the fact that hundreds of animal feeding studies of irradiated food ,  including multigenerational studies ,  have been performed since 1950.
these effects include cumulative impacts to pathogens ,  people ,  and the environment due to the reduction of food quality ,  the transportation and storage of radioactive goods ,  and destruction of pathogens ,  changes in the way we relate to food and how irradiation changes the food production and shipping industries . 
the codex alimentarius represents the global standard for irradiation of food ,  in particular under the wto-agreement . 
iuds are also `` not '' associated with birth defects . 
expulsion: sometimes the copper iud can be spontaneously expelled from the uterus . 
iuds ,  by contrast ,  do `` not '' protect against stis or pid . 
it was first discovered in 1976 that the copper iud could be used as a form of emergency contraception  -lrb-  ec  -rrb-  . 
removal of the copper iud should also be performed by a qualified medical practitioner . 
magnetic resonance imaging may cause dislocation of a copper iud ,  and it is therefore recommended to check the location of the iud both before and after mri . 
the island was once the site of a resort community . 
the park is made up of isle royale itself and approximately 400 smaller islands ,  along with any submerged lands within of the surrounding islands  -lrb-  16usc408g  -rrb-  . 
because numerous small islands surround isle royale ,  ships were once guided through the area by lighthouses at passage island ,  rock harbor ,  rock of ages ,  and isle royale lighthouse on menagerie island . 
the two main rock assemblages found on the island include the portage lake volcanics and the copper harbor conglomerate ,  both precambrian in age . 
the greenstone ridge is a high ridge in the center of the island and carries the longest trail in the park ,  the greenstone ridge trail ,  which runs from one end of the island to the other . 
isle royale ,  the largest island in lake superior ,  is over in length and wide at its widest point . 
in the mid-1840s ,  a report by douglass houghton ,  michigan's first state geologist ,  set off a copper boom in the state ,  and the first modern copper mines were opened on the island . 
the slovak air force's air operations centre is located at sliač air base and reports to caoc uedem . 
the french air force's air operations centre is located at mont verdun air base and reports to caoc uedem . 
the spanish air force's combined air operations centre  -lrb-  caoc 8 -rrb- at torrejón air base was deactivated in 2013 and replaced at same location by caoc torrejon ,  which took over the functions of caoc 5, caoc 7, caoc 8 and caoc 10.
the hellenic air force's combined air operations centre  -lrb-  caoc 7 -rrb- at larissa air base was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities transferred to the caoc torrejón in spain . 
the german air force's combined air operations centre  -lrb-  caoc 2 -rrb- in uedem was deactivated in 2008 and reactivated as caoc uedem in 2013.
the hungarian air force's air operations centre is located in veszprém and reports to caoc uedem . 
the romanian air force's air operations centre is headquartered in bucharest and reports to caoc torrejón . 
the iceland air defense system's control and reporting centre is at keflavik air base and reports to caoc uedem in germany . 
the royal netherlands air force's air operations centre is located at nieuw-milligen and reports to caoc uedem . 
allied air command  -lrb-  aircom  -rrb-  is the central command of all nato air forces on the european continent . 
the bulgarian air force's air sovereignty operations centre is located in sofia and reports to caoc torrejón . 
the royal norwegian air force's combined air operations centre  -lrb-  caoc 3 -rrb- in reitan was deactivated in 2008 and its responsibilities were transferred to the combined air operations centre finderup  -lrb-  caoc f  -rrb-  . 
the turkish air force's combined air operations centre  -lrb-  caoc 6 -rrb- in eskisehir was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities were transferred to caoc torrejón in spain . 
the portuguese air force's combined air operations centre  -lrb-  caoc 10 -rrb- in lisbon was deactivated in 2013 and its responsibilities were transferred to caoc torrejón in spain . 
a nation may have a visibles balance surplus but this can be offset by a larger deficit in the invisibles balance  -lrb-  creating a balance of trade deficit overall  -rrb-  – if ,  for example ,  there are large payments made to foreign businesses for invisibles such as shipping or tourism . 
government transfers may involve loans made or official aid given to foreign countries ,  while transfers made by ngo's include money designated for charitable work within foreign countries ,  respectively . 
in a similar way ,  a nation may also have a surplus 'balance of trade' because it exports more than it imports but a negative  -lrb-  or deficit  -rrb-  'balance of payments' because ,  it has a much greater shortfall in transfers of capital . 
and ,  just as easily ,  a deficit in the 'balance of trade' may be offset by a larger surplus in capital transfers from overseas to produce a balance of payments surplus overall . 
the invisible balance or balance of trade on services is that part of the balance of trade that refers to services and other products that do not result in the transfer of physical objects . 
reducible complexity . 
the mousetrap is not irreducibly complex after all . 
the argument from irreducible complexity is a descendant of the teleological argument for god  -lrb-  the argument from design or from complexity  -rrb-  . 
irreducible complexity is one of two main arguments used by intelligent design proponents ,  the other being specified complexity . 
irreducible complexity is at its core an argument against evolution . 
behe argues that the theory that irreducibly complex systems could not have evolved can be falsified by an experiment where such systems are evolved . 
the precursors of complex systems ,  when they are not useful in themselves ,  may be useful to perform other ,  unrelated functions . 
irreducible complexity is not an argument that evolution does not occur ,  but rather an argument that it is `` incomplete '' . 
notably ,  the nas has rejected professor behe's claim for irreducible complexity .  .  . `` 
he first used the term `` irreducible complexity '' in his 1996 book `` darwin's black box '' ,  to refer to certain complex biochemical cellular systems . 
however ,  critics view irreducible complexity as a special case of the `` complexity indicates design '' claim ,  and thus see it as an argument from ignorance and as a god-of-the-gaps argument . 
behe uses the mousetrap as an illustrative example of this concept . 
in his 2008 book `` only a theory '' ,  biologist kenneth r .  miller challenges behe's claim that the mousetrap is irreducibly complex . 
he extended his work on biological complexity into a general theory of systems in a book titled `` general systems theory '' . 
one can compare a mousetrap with a cat in this context . 
intelligent design advocates argue that irreducibly complex systems must have been deliberately engineered by some form of intelligence . 
while testifying during the 2005 `` kitzmiller v .  dover area school district '' trial ,  behe conceded that there are no peer-reviewed papers supporting his claims that complex molecular systems ,  like the bacterial flagellum ,  the blood-clotting cascade ,  and the immune system ,  were intelligently designed nor are there any peer-reviewed articles supporting his argument that certain complex molecular structures are `` irreducibly complex . `` 
the intelligent design argument focuses on the functionality to catch mice . 
thus ,  seemingly irreducibly complex structures are merely `` very complex '' ,  or they are simply misunderstood or misrepresented . 
the irreducible complexity argument assumes that the necessary parts of a system have always been necessary ,  and therefore could not have been added sequentially . 
behe and others have suggested a number of biological features that they believe may be irreducibly complex . 
in explicating his definition of `` irreducible complexity '' he notes that: an irreducibly complex system cannot be produced directly  -lrb-  that is ,  by continuously improving the initial function ,  which continues to work by the same mechanism  -rrb-  by slight ,  successive modifications of a precursor system ,  because any precursor to an irreducibly complex system that is missing a part is by definition nonfunctional . 
irreducible complexity  -lrb-  ic  -rrb-  is the idea that certain biological systems cannot evolve by successive small modifications to pre-existing functional systems through natural selection . 
irreducible complexity may not actually exist in nature ,  and the examples given by behe and others may not in fact represent irreducible complexity ,  but can be explained in terms of simpler precursors . 
an early concept of irreducibly complex systems comes from ludwig von bertalanffy  -lrb-  1901-1972 -rrb- ,  an austrian biologist . 
researchers have proposed potentially viable evolutionary pathways for allegedly irreducibly complex systems such as blood clotting ,  the immune system and the flagellum - the three examples behe proposed . 
the process of blood clotting or coagulation cascade in vertebrates is a complex biological pathway which is given as an example of apparent irreducible complexity . 
the degree of irreducible complexity is the number of unselected steps in the pathway . 
this was also the case in south arabia ,  as attested in a south arabian inscription from al-jawf . 
the encroachment of northern arab tribes to south arabia also introduced northern arab deities into the region . 
the civilizations of south arabia is considered to have the most developed pantheon in the arabian peninsula . 
in the muzdalifah region near mecca ,  the god quzah ,  who is a god of rains and storms ,  was worshipped . 
jewish agriculturalists lived in the region of eastern arabia . 
al-lāt's cult was spread in syria and northern arabia . 
religion in pre-islamic arabia included polytheism ,  christianity ,  judaism ,  and iranian religions . 
dhu’l-khalasa was an oracular god and was also worshipped by the bajila and khatham tribes . 
the worship of the hermonian gods leucothea and theandrios was spread from phoenicia till arabia . 
in north arabia ,  `` ginnaye '' were known from palmyrene inscriptions as “the good and rewarding gods” and were probably related to the `` jinn '' of west and central arabia . 
anbay was an oracular god of qataban and also the spokesman of amm . 
zoroastrianism was also present in eastern arabia and persian-speaking zoroastrians lived in the region . 
various other deities were venerated in the area by specific tribes ,  such as the god suwa' by the banu hudhayl tribe and the god nuhm by the muzaynah tribe . 
al-lāt ,  al-‘uzzá and manāt were common names used for multiple goddesses across arabia . 
the main areas of christian influence in arabia were on the north eastern and north western borders and in what was to become yemen in the south . 
the god ashar was represented on a stele in dura-europos alongside another god sa'd . 
the syrian god baalshamin was also worshipped by safaitic tribes and is mentioned in safaitic inscriptions . 
the pre-islamic arabian religions were polytheistic ,  with many of the deities' name known . 
before conversion to christianity ,  the aksumites followed a polytheistic religion that was similar to that of southern arabia . 
iranian religions existed in pre-islamic arabia on account of sasanian military presence along the persian gulf and south arabia and on account of trade routes between the hejaz and iraq . 
the name of nrw who is mentioned in aksum inscriptions is related to that of the south arabian god nawraw ,  a deity of stars . 
one of the most frequent titles of the god almaqah was `` lord of awwam '' . 
the main source of religion in pre-islamic south arabia are of inscriptions ,  which number in thousands ,  as well as the quran ,  complemented by archaeological evidence . 
until about the fourth century ,  almost all inhabitants of arabia practiced polytheistic religions . 
representation of deities in animal-form was common in south arabia ,  such as the god sayin from hadhramaut ,  who was represented as either an eagle fighting a serpent or a bull . 
in south arabia ,  `` mndh’t '' were anonymous guardian spirits of the community and the ancestor spirits of the family . 
in pre-islamic times ,  the population of eastern arabia consisted of christianized arabs  -lrb-  including abd al-qays  -rrb-  and aramean christians among other religions . 
no iconic representation or idol of allah is known to have existed . 
after the battle ,  which probably occurred around 565, the quraysh became a dominant force in western arabia ,  receiving the title `` god's people ''  -lrb-  `` ahl allah ''  -rrb-  according to islamic sources ,  and formed the cult association of `` ḥums '' ,  which tied members of many tribes in western arabia to the kaaba . 
in edessa ,  the solar deity was the primary god around the time of the roman emperor julian and this worship was presumably brought in by migrants from arabia . 
both the ghassanids and the christians in the south adopted monophysitism . 
blood sacrifice was definitely practiced in south arabia ,  but few allusions to the practice are known ,  apart from some minaean inscriptions . 
each kingdom's central temple was the focus of worship for the main god and would be the destination for an annual pilgrimage ,  with regional temples dedicated to a local manifestation of the main god . 
the three chief goddesses of meccan religion were al-lat ,  al-‘uzzá ,  and manāt ,  who were called the daughters of allah . 
the kaaba ,  whose environs were regarded as sacred  -lrb-  `` haram ''  -rrb-  ,  became a national shrine under the custodianship of the quraysh ,  the chief tribe of mecca ,  which made the hejaz the most important religious area in north arabia . 
the worship of pakidas ,  a nabataean god ,  is attested at gerasa alongside hera in an inscription dated to the first century a . d .  while an arabian god is also attested by three inscriptions dated to the second century . 
muhammad's father's name was `` ʿabd-allāh '' ,  meaning `` the servant of allah '' . 
the midianites ,  a people referred to in the book of genesis and located in north-western arabia ,  may have worshipped yahweh . 
they were held in 1887, 1894, 1897, 1902, 1907, 1911, 1921, 1923, 1926, 1930, 1932 and 1937.
all the conferences were held in london ,  the seat of the empire ,  except for the 1894 and 1932 conferences which were held in ottawa ,  the capital of the senior dominion of the crown . 
the iro's first director general was william hallam tuck ,  succeeded by j .  donald kingsley on 31 july 1949.
also ,  because of disagreements between the western allies and the soviet union ,  the iro only worked in areas controlled by western armies of occupation . 
of all the children ,  isabella was considered to have been the favourite . 
in 1480, at the age of six ,  isabella was betrothed to francesco ,  the heir to the marquess of mantua . 
isabella was a very well educated young woman . 
it was during the journey with her mother that isabella acquired the art of diplomacy and statecraft . 
in the year of ferrante's birth ,  isabella travelled to naples with her mother . 
international standards are technical standards developed by international standards organizations . 
after the war ,  isa was approached by the recently formed united nations standards coordinating committee  -lrb-  unscc  -rrb-  with a proposal to form a new global standards body . 
international standards may be used either by direct application or by a process of modifying an international standard to suit local conditions . 
henry maudslay developed the first industrially practical screw-cutting lathe in 1800, which allowed for the standardisation of screw thread sizes for the first time . 
the iso 4217 code list is used in banking and business globally . 
the uss  -lrb-  same day  -rrb-  code is not in use any longer ,  and was removed from the list of active iso 4217 codes in march 2014.
consequently ,  iso 4217 can use `` x '' codes for non-country-specific currencies without risk of clashing with future country codes . 
the following is a list of active codes of official iso 4217 currency names . 
for example ,  usd  -lrb-  united states dollar  -rrb-  has code 840 which is also the numeric code for the us  -lrb-  united states  -rrb-  . 
there is also a three-digit code number assigned to each currency ,  in the same manner as there is also a three-digit code number assigned to each country as part of iso 3166.
the irgun  -lrb-  ; full title: ' ,  lit . 
as members of an underground armed organization ,  irgun personnel did not normally call irgun by its name ,  but rather used other names . 
the number of members of the irgun varied from a few hundred to a few thousand . 
the irgun's new anthem then became the third verse of the `` betar song '' ,  by ze'ev jabotinsky . 
yamamoto practiced calligraphy . 
yamamoto would eventually die in one of these aircraft . 
yamamoto was born in nagaoka ,  niigata . 
yamamoto was promoted to admiral on november 15, 1940.
as yamamoto had planned ,  the first air fleet of six carriers commenced hostilities against the americans on december 7, 1941, launching 353 aircraft against pearl harbor in two waves . 
yamamoto's plan for midway island has been the subject of much criticism . 
yamamoto was responsible for a number of innovations in japanese naval aviation . 
to guard against failure ,  yamamoto initiated two security measures . 
yamamoto argued for a decisive offensive strike in the east to finish off the us fleet ,  but the more conservative naval general staff officers were unwilling to risk it . 
in 1916, isoroku was adopted into the yamamoto family  -lrb-  another family of former nagaoka samurai  -rrb-  and took the yamamoto name . 
unbeknownst to admiral yamamoto ,  the us had learned of japanese plans thanks to the code breaking of japanese naval code d  -lrb-  known to the us as jn-25 -rrb- . 
after graduating from the imperial japanese naval academy in 1904, yamamoto served on the armored cruiser during the russo-japanese war . 
yamamoto's staff cremated his remains at buin and his ashes were returned to tokyo aboard the battleship  ,  yamamoto's last flagship . 
afterwards ,  first fleet  -lrb-  one light carrier ,  seven battleships ,  three cruisers and 13 destroyers  -rrb-  ,  in conjunction with elements of second fleet ,  would mop up remaining us surface forces and complete the destruction of the us pacific fleet . 
in naval matters ,  yamamoto opposed the building of the super-battleships and as an unwise investment of resources . 
yonai was certain that if yamamoto remained ashore ,  he would be killed before the year 1939 ended . 
with the us fleet largely neutralized at pearl harbor ,  yamamoto's combined fleet turned to the task of executing the larger japanese war plan devised by the imperial japanese army  -lrb-  ija  -rrb-  and navy general staff . 
yamamoto's plan for midway island was an extension of his efforts to knock the us pacific fleet out of action long enough for japan to fortify its defensive perimeter in the pacific island chains . 
in january 1941, yamamoto went even further and proposed a radical revision of japanese naval strategy . 
two-dimensional ir is also possible as discussed below . 
big molecules have many peaks in their ir spectra . 
simple diatomic molecules have only one bond and only one vibrational band . 
an alternate method for acquiring spectra is the `` dispersive '' or `` scanning monochromator '' method . 
the infrared spectrum of a sample is recorded by passing a beam of infrared light through the sample . 
more complex molecular structures lead to more absorption bands and more complex spectra . 
it is typical to record spectrum of both the sample and a `` reference '' . 
the plates are transparent to the infrared light and do not introduce any lines onto the spectra . 
fourier transform infrared  -lrb-  ftir  -rrb-  spectroscopy is a measurement technique that allows one to record infrared spectra . 
where `` k '' is the spring constant for the bond ,  `` c '' is the speed of light ,  and `` μ '' is the reduced mass of the a–b system:
the simplest and most important or `` fundamental '' ir bands arise from the excitations of normal modes ,  the simplest distortions of the molecule ,  from the ground state with vibrational quantum number v = 0 to the first excited state with vibrational quantum number v = 1.
alternatively ,  the entire wavelength range is measured using a fourier transform instrument and then a transmittance or absorbance spectrum is generated using a dedicated procedure . 
liquid samples can be sandwiched between two plates of a salt  -lrb-  commonly sodium chloride ,  or common salt ,  although a number of other salts such as potassium bromide or calcium fluoride are also used  -rrb-  . 
as described above ,  the sample's spectrum is always compared to a reference . 
irenaeus' presentation of christ as the new adam is based on paul's christ-adam parallel in romans 5:12–21.
irenaeus is also the earliest attestation that the gospel of john was written by john the apostle ,  and that the gospel of luke was written by luke ,  the companion of paul . 
irenaeus sees christ as the new adam ,  who systematically `` undoes '' what adam did: thus ,  where adam was disobedient concerning god's edict concerning the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil ,  christ was obedient even to death on the wood of a tree . 
to counter his gnostic opponents ,  irenaeus significantly develops paul's presentation of christ as the last adam . 
irenaeus emphasizes the importance of christ's reversal of adam's action . 
like ireneaus ,  tertullian describes how christ's virgin birth parallels adam's creation from virgin earth . 
the notion that the second adam saved the first adam was advocated not only by irenaeus ,  but also by gregory thaumaturgus ,  which suggests that it was popular in the early church . 
a third theme in both paul’s and irenaeus’s conceptions of salvation is the sacrifice of christ being necessary for the new life given to humanity in the triumph over evil . 
valentinian gnosticism was one of the major forms of gnosticism that irenaeus opposed . 
in addition to reversing the wrongs done by adam ,  irenaeus thinks of christ as `` recapitulating '' or `` summing up '' human life . 
the physical creation of adam and christ is emphasized by irenaeus to demonstrate how the incarnation saves humanity's physical nature . 
according to the valentinian gnostics ,  there are three classes of human beings . 
this indicates that the concept of mary as the new eve was known in both the eastern and western church during the second and third centuries . 
irenaeus is the first of the church fathers to consider the mystic number 666.
in response to this gnostic view of christ ,  irenaeus emphasized that the word became flesh and developed a soteriology that emphasized the significance of christ's material body in saving humanity ,  as discussed in the sections above . 
irenaeus emphasizes that it is through christ's reversal of adam's action that humanity is saved ,  rather than considering the redemption to occur in a cultic or juridical way . 
part of the process of recapitulation is for christ to go through every stage of human life ,  from infancy to old age ,  and simply by living it ,  sanctify it with his divinity . 
irenaeus is also known as one of the first theologians to use the principle of apostolic succession to refute his opponents . 
and he expected the millennial kingdom to begin with the second coming of christ to destroy the wicked and inaugurate ,  for the righteous ,  the reign of the kingdom of god during the seventh thousand years ,  the millennial sabbath ,  as signified by the sabbath of creation week . 
in refuting gnostic claims that jesus preached for only one year after his baptism ,  irenaeus used the `` recapitulation '' approach to demonstrate that by living beyond the age of thirty christ sanctified even old age . 
similarly ,  death and suffering appear as evils ,  but without them we could never come to know god . 
he is recognized as a saint in the catholic church on 28 june ,  and in the eastern orthodox church on 23 august . 
for irenaeus ,  paul's presentation of the old law  -lrb-  the mosaic covenant  -rrb-  in this passage indicates that the old law revealed humanity's sinfulness but could not save them . 
irenaeus cited the new testament approximately 1000 times . 
reconciliation is also a theme of paul’s that irenaeus stresses in his teachings on salvation . 
irenaeus held to the old jewish tradition that the first six days of creation week were typical of the first six thousand years of human history ,  with antichrist manifesting himself in the sixth period . 
mental health triage may be used in an emergency room to make a determination about potential risk and apply treatment protocols . 
other jurisdictions have broader criteria . 
criteria for civil commitment are established by laws which vary between nations . 
laura's law ,  kendra's law  -rrb-  . 
united nations general assembly resolution 46/119, `` principles for the protection of persons with mental illness and the improvement of mental health care , ``  is a non-binding resolution advocating certain broadly drawn procedures for the carrying out of involuntary commitment . 
in 1927, after the execution of sacco and vanzetti in the united states ,  a demonstrator named aurora d'angelo was sent to a mental health facility for psychiatric evaluation after she participated in a rally in support of the anarchists . 
the first reference to the nature of microscopic forces is found in alexis clairaut's work `` theorie de la figure de la terre '' . 
the investigation of intermolecular forces starts from macroscopic observations which indicate the existence and action of forces at a molecular level . 
this list of internet top-level domain  -lrb-  tld  -rrb-  extensions contains top-level domains ,  which are those domains in the dns root zone of the domain name system of the internet . 
idealism believes consciousness and mind to be the origin of the material world and aims to explain the existing world according to these principles . 
subjective idealists like george berkeley are anti-realists in terms of a mind-independent world ,  whereas transcendental idealists like immanuel kant are strong skeptics of such a world ,  affirming epistemological and not metaphysical idealism . 
it is not the world that shapes the mind but the mind that gives reason to the world ,  so the mind alone is the source of all reason ,  having an inner light ,  an innate moral goodness and understanding of what is good . 
while some writers like jay garfield hold that vasubandhu is a metaphysical idealist ,  others see him as closer to an epistemic idealist like kant who holds that our knowledge of the world is simply knowledge of our own concepts and perceptions of a transcendental world . 
the earliest extant arguments that the world of experience is grounded in the mental derive from india and greece . 
foster's latest defense of his views  -lrb-  phenomenalistic idealism  -rrb-  is in his book `` a world for us: the case for phenomenalistic idealism '' . 
there are various sub schools of vedanta ,  like advaita vedanta  -lrb-  non-dual  -rrb-  ,  vishishtadvaita and bhedabheda vedanta  -lrb-  difference and non-difference  -rrb-  . 
there is a modern scholarly disagreement about whether yogacara buddhism can be said to be a form of idealism . 
as a rule ,  transcendental idealists like kant affirm idealism's epistemic side without committing themselves to whether reality is `` ultimately '' mental; objective idealists like plato affirm reality's metaphysical basis in the mental or abstract without restricting their epistemology to ordinary experience; and subjective idealists like berkeley affirm both metaphysical and epistemological idealism . 
collier was influenced by `` an essay towards the theory of the ideal or intelligible world '' by cambridge platonist john norris  -lrb-  1701 -rrb- . 
yogacara thought was also promoted in china ,  by chinese philosophers and translators like xuanzang . 
idealism as a form of metaphysical monism holds that consciousness ,  not matter ,  is the ground of all being . 
the australian philosopher david stove harshly criticized philosophical idealism ,  arguing that it rests on what he called `` the worst argument in the world '' . 
with the neoplatonist plotinus ,  wrote nathaniel alfred boll `` there even appears ,  probably for the first time in western philosophy ,  `` idealism '' that had long been current in the east even at that time ,  for it taught .  .  .  that the soul has made the world by stepping from eternity into time .  .  . ``  . 
the order of inheritance is set out in : a man's sons inherit first ,  daughters if no sons ,  brothers if he has no children ,  and so on . 
if there were no living sons and no descendants of any previously living sons ,  daughters inherit . 
philo of alexandria and josephus also comment on the jewish laws of inheritance ,  praising them above other law codes of their time . 
if the eldest surviving son is not the firstborn son ,  he is not entitled to the double portion . 
the inheritance may be either under the terms of a will or by intestate laws if the deceased had no will . 
often ,  racial or religious minorities and individuals from socially disadvantaged backgrounds receive less inheritance and wealth . 
individuals with a substantial amount of wealth and inheritance often intermarry with others of the same social class to protect their wealth and ensure the continuous transmission of inheritance across generations; thus perpetuating a cycle of privilege . 
dynastic wealth is monetary inheritance that is passed on to generations that didn't earn it . 
the first form of inheritance is the inheritance of cultural capital  -lrb-  i . e . 
they also agreed that the firstborn son must receive a double portion of his father's estate . 
the inheritance is patrilineal . 
the distribution of the inherited wealth has varied greatly among different cultures and legal traditions . 
in the eastern orthodox church it is observed on 20 december . 
the synaxarium of the coptic orthodox church of alexandria places it on the 24th of the coptic month of koiak  -lrb-  which is also the 24 day of the fourth month of tahisas in the synaxarium of the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church  -rrb-  ,  corresponding in three years out of every four to 20 december in the julian calendar ,  which currently falls on 2 january of the gregorian calendar . 
ignatius' feast day was kept in his own antioch on 17 october ,  the day on which he is now celebrated in the catholic church and generally in western christianity ,  although from the 12th century until 1969 it was put at 1 february in the general roman calendar . 
a call sign can be any number of letters and numerals but each country must only use call signs that begin with the characters allocated for use in that country . 
the international telecommunication union  -lrb-  itu  -rrb-  allocates call sign prefixes for radio and television stations of all types . 
unavailable: under present itu guidelines the following call sign prefixes shall not be allocated . 
the pc keyboard changed over the years ,  often at the launch of new ibm pc versions . 
the ibm pc layout ,  particularly the model m ,  has been extremely influential ,  and today most keyboards use some variant of it . 
the keyboard for ibm pc-compatible computers is standardized . 
 ''giulio cesare '' made port visits in the levant in 1919 and 1920.
repairs to `` giulio cesare '' were completed by the end of august and both ships unsuccessfully attempted to intercept british convoys to malta in august and september . 
after the war ,  `` giulio cesare '' was allocated to the soviet union as part of the war reparations . 
giulio cesare was one of three dreadnought battleships built for the royal italian navy  -lrb-  `` regia marina ''  -rrb-  in the 1910s . 
both `` giulio cesare '' and her sister ship ,   ,  participated in the battle of calabria in july 1940, when the former was lightly damaged . 
in service her maximum speed was about and she had a range of at a speed of  . 
as a part of preparations for the war ,  `` vikrant '' was assigned to the eastern naval command ,  then to the eastern fleet . 
the navy has named its first home-built carrier ins `` vikrant '' in honour of ins `` vikrant ''  -lrb-  r11 -rrb- . 
following decommissioning in 1997, the ship was earmarked for preservation as a museum ship in mumbai . 
 ''vikrant '' was commissioned as the first aircraft carrier of the indian navy and played a key role in enforcing the naval blockade of east pakistan during the indo-pakistani war of 1971.
on 23 july ,  `` vikrant '' sailed off to cochin in company with the western fleet . 
nanda and hiranandani proved to be instrumental in taking `` vikrant '' to war . 
the ships were similar ,  but each varied depending on the requirements of the country to which the ship was sold . 
 ''vikrant '' displaced at standard load and at deep load . 
during the indo-pakistani war of 1965, `` vikrant '' was in dry dock refitting ,  and did not see any action . 
during her service ,  ins `` vikrant '' embarked four squadrons of the naval air arm of the indian navy:
ins `` vikrant  -lrb-  from sanskrit विक्रांत `` vikrānta '' ,  `` courageous ''  -rrb-  was a of the indian navy . 
by the 1590s ,  a number of dutch companies were formed to finance trading expeditions in asia . 
the spanish were expelled from brunei in 1579 after they attacked in 1578.
ming dynasty china defeated the dutch east india company in the sino-dutch conflicts . 
 -lrb-  `` see '' history of taiwan  -rrb-  further ,  the dutch east india company trade post on dejima  -lrb-  1641–1857 -rrb- ,  an artificial island off the coast of nagasaki ,  was for a long time the only place where europeans could trade with japan . 
western imperialism in asia as presented in this article pertains to western european entry into what was first called the east indies . 
western european rulers determined to find new trade routes of their own . 
the spanish first set foot on borneo in brunei . 
portuguese viceroy albuquerque  -lrb-  1509–1515 -rrb- resolved to consolidate portuguese holdings in africa and asia ,  and secure control of trade with the east indies and china . 
european exploration of asia started in ancient roman times . 
the energies of castile  -lrb-  later ,  the `` unified '' spain  -rrb-  ,  the other major colonial power of the 16th century ,  were largely concentrated on the americas ,  not south and east asia ,  but the spanish did establish a footing in the far east in the philippines . 
the portuguese soon acquired a monopoly over trade in the indian ocean . 
outside the east indies ,  the dutch east india company colonies or outposts were also established in persia  -lrb-  iran  -rrb-  ,  bengal  -lrb-  now bangladesh and part of india  -rrb-  ,  mauritius  -lrb-  1638-1658/1664-1710 -rrb- ,  siam  -lrb-  now thailand  -rrb-  ,  guangzhou  -lrb-  canton ,  china  -rrb-  ,  taiwan  -lrb-  1624–1662 -rrb- ,  and southern india  -lrb-  1616–1795 -rrb- . 
similarly ,  one trit with equiprobable values contains formula_3  -lrb-  about 1.58496 -rrb- bits of information because it can have one of three values . 
the basic idea of information theory is the more one knows about a topic ,  the less new information one is apt to get about it . 
consider the example of a coin toss . 
formula_9 is itself a random variable . 
english text has between 0.6 and 1.3 bits of entropy per character of the message . 
if one were to transmit sequences comprising the 4 characters 'a' ,  'b' ,  'c' ,  and 'd' ,  a transmitted message might be 'abaddcab' . 
besides its ithaca campus ,  ithaca college has also operated satellite campuses in other cities . 
ithaca college is a private ,  nonsectarian ,  liberal arts college in ithaca ,  new york . 
ithaca college recently remodeled the hill center in 2013.
ithaca was previously a member of the empire 8 conference . 
former programs include the ithaca college antigua program and the ithaca college walkabout down under program in australia . 
additionally ,  there is an ithaca college washington semester program ,  and a recently launched ithaca college new york city center . 
ithaca college's current campus was built in the 1960s on south hill . 
some cornell-affiliated greek organizations actively recruit ithaca college students . 
cortland had won the cortaca jug six years in a row until ithaca broke the streak in 2017.
individual differences are essential whenever we wish to explain how individuals differ in their behavior . 
this approach is applied because psychological research depends upon statistical controls that are only defined upon groups of people . 
a specific area of i/o research in group behavior is the team dynamics and team effectiveness . 
i/o psychologists are also concerned with organizational change . 
i/o research has examined the harm workplace aggression does to team performance . 
to model job performance ,  researchers have attempted to define a set of dimensions that are common to all jobs . 
the minimum requirement for working as an i/o psychologist is a master's degree . 
an i/o psychologist would typically use information from the job analysis to determine a job's performance dimensions ,  and then construct a rating scale to describe each level of performance for the job . 
i/o researchers employ quantitative statistical methods . 
i/o psychologists are concerned with occupational health and well-being . 
the i/o psychology and organizational behavior have manifested some overlap . 
as described above ,  i/o psychologists are trained in the scientist–practitioner model . 
job satisfaction is often thought to reflect the extent to which a worker likes his or her job ,  or individual aspects or facets of jobs . 
from the 1980 to 2010s other changes in i/o psychology took place . 
i/o research has found that interpersonal aggressive behaviours is associated with worse team performance . 
i/o psychologists must evaluate evidence regarding the extent to which selection tools predict job performance . 
there are many different sets of competencies for different specializations within i/o psychology and i/o psychologists are versatile behavioral scientists . 
three forms of productive behavior that i/o psychologists often evaluate include job performance ,  organizational citizenship behavior  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  ,  and innovation . 
an emerging area of i/o research in the area of team leadership is in leading virtual teams ,  where people in the team are geographically-distributed across various distances and sometimes even countries . 
the forms of counterproductive behavior with the most empirical examination are ineffective job performance ,  absenteeism ,  job turnover ,  and accidents . 
organizational citizenship behaviors  -lrb-  ocbs  -rrb-  are another form of workplace behavior that i/o psychologists are involved with . 
job performance represents behaviors employees engage in while at work which contribute to organizational goals . 
a fundamental question in team task design is whether or not a task is even appropriate for a team . 
in order to enhance a team's morale and problem-solving skills ,  i/o psychologists help the groups to build their self-confidence ,  group cohesiveness ,  and working effectiveness . 
job characteristic theory identifies core job dimensions that affect motivation ,  satisfaction ,  performance ,  etc . 
individual goals must be consistent with team goals in order for a team to be effective . 
the `` industrial '' side of i/o psychology originated in research on individual differences ,  assessment ,  and the prediction of work performance . 
i/o psychology is also concerned with the relation of occupational stress to career advancement . 
when a given task is appropriate for a team ,  task design can play a key role in team effectiveness . 
i/o psychologists typically work with human resource specialists to design  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  recruitment processes and  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  personnel selection systems . 
because organizational employees are frequently structured in the form of teams ,  leaders need to be aware of the potential benefits and pitfalls of working in teams ,  how teams develop ,  how to satisfy team members' needs ,  and ultimately how to bring about team effectiveness and performance . 
teams also function in dynamic multi-team environments . 
industrial and organizational psychologists consider innovation ,  more often than not ,  a variable of less importance and often a counter-productive one to include in conducting job performance appraisals when irrelevant to the major job functions for which a given job exists . 
the preamble to the constitution of the international council of unitarians and universalists reads:
the international council of unitarians and universalists  -lrb-  icuu  -rrb-  is an umbrella organization founded in 1995 bringing together many unitarian ,  universalist ,  and unitarian universalist organizations . 
it is the last processor of the itanium family . 
intel announced the official name of the processor ,  `` itanium '' ,  on october 4, 1999.
hp and intel brought the next-generation itanium 2 processor to market a year later . 
intel later posted itanium 9500 reference manual . 
itanium  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a family of 64-bit intel microprocessors that implement the intel itanium architecture  -lrb-  formerly called ia-64 -rrb- . 
in march 2005, intel announced that it was working on a new itanium processor ,  codenamed `` tukwila '' ,  to be released in 2007.
the itanium architecture originated at hewlett-packard  -lrb-  hp  -rrb-  ,  and was later jointly developed by hp and intel . 
intel released a new itanium 2 family member ,  codenamed `` madison '' ,  in 2003.
the itanium 9500 series processor ,  codenamed `` poulson '' ,  is the follow-on processor to tukwila and was released on november 8, 2012.
the icd is maintained by the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  ,  which is the directing and coordinating authority for health within the united nations system . 
the icd is currently the most widely used statistical classification system for diseases in the world . 
the icd is revised periodically and is currently in its 10th revision . 
it was eventually replaced by icd-10, the version currently in use by the who and most countries . 
the icd is published by the who and used worldwide for morbidity and mortality statistics ,  reimbursement systems ,  and automated decision support in health care . 
icd-11 is a major step forward ,  because it has the necessary terminological and ontological elements for seamless use in digital health . 
publication of icd-9 without ip restrictions in a world with evolving electronic data systems led to a range of products based on icd-9, such as medra or the read directory . 
in mathematics ,  and specifically in abstract algebra ,  an integral domain is a nonzero commutative ring in which the product of any two nonzero elements is nonzero . 
in computing ,  interrupt latency is the time that elapses from when an interrupt is generated to when the source of the interrupt is serviced . 
interrupt latency may be affected by microprocessor design ,  interrupt controllers ,  interrupt masking ,  and the operating system's  -lrb-  os  -rrb-  interrupt handling methods . 
minimum interrupt latency is largely determined by the interrupt controller circuit and its configuration . 
only one passage in the quran prescribes a strictly legal position . 
regarding the qur'an's treatment of same-sex acts ,  kugle says that `` where the qur'an treats same-sex acts ,  it condemns them only so far as they are exploitive or violent . `` 
lgbt in islam is influenced by the religious ,  legal ,  social ,  and cultural history of the nations with a sizable muslim population ,  along with specific passages in the quran and hadith ,  statements attributed to the islamic prophet muhammad . 
there are also several groups within islam around the world who support lgbt rights and lgbt muslims . 
the quran terms this an abomination  -lrb-    -rrb-  unprecedented in the history of the world:
overall ,  ali says that `` there is no one muslim perspective on anything . `` 
societies in islam have recognized `` both erotic attraction and sexual behavior between members of the same sex . `` 
the quran cites the story of the `` people of lot '' destroyed by the wrath of god because they engaged in lustful carnal acts between men . 
in her 2016 book ,  kecia ali observes that `` contemporary scholars disagree sharply about the qur'anic perspective on same-sex intimacy . `` 
abdessamad dialmy in his 2010 article ,  `` sexuality and islam , ``  addressed `` sexual norms defined by the sacred texts  -lrb-  koran and sunna  -rrb-  . `` 
regarding interpreting the qur'an ,  kugle notes that `` it is always human beings who speak for the qur'an '' and `` they always interpret its words '' and `` interpretation is always ambiguous and contested . `` 
then kugle continues ,  `` the implication of this verse is that no muslim is better than another , ``  even `` a gay or lesbian muslim . `` 
documented instances of prosecution for homosexual acts are rare ,  and those which followed legal procedure prescribed by islamic law are even rarer . 
some quranic verses describing the paradise refer to `` immortal boys ''  -lrb-  56:17, 76:19 -rrb- or `` young men ''  -lrb-  52:24 -rrb- who serve wine to the blessed . 
according to traditional islamic law ,  homosexual activity cannot occur in a legal manner because it takes place outside of marriage and between partners of the same sex . 
kugle quotes the qur'an: `` o people ,  we created you all from a male and a female and made you into different communities and tribes so that you would come to know one another acknowledging that the most noble among you is the one most aware of god . `` 
