carson was illiterate . 
carson was married three times . 
about 1842, carson met josefa jaramillo . 
life for carson as a mountain man was not easy . 
carson had several encounters with the blackfeet . 
carson married singing grass . 
carson disliked the apaches as well . 
carson searched far and wide for the navajo . 
kit carson park in escondido ,  california is named for him . 
carson's notions about indians softened over the years . 
the first story about carson's adventures was printed in 1847.
carson's home in taos ,  new mexico is today a museum called the kit carson home and museum . 
carson discovered a book about himself in the apache camp . 
over time ,  historical analysis of carson shifted again . 
in 1856, carson told his life story to someone who wrote it down . 
lindsay carson had a scots-irish presbyterian background . 
in 1845, carson guided frémont on their third and last expedition . 
carson was born in kentucky on christmas eve ,  1809.
in the 1840s ,  carson was hired as a guide by john c .  frémont . 
christopher houston carson  -lrb-  december 24, 1809 – may 23, 1868 -rrb- ,  better known as kit carson ,  was an american frontiersman . 
in 1843, carson agreed to join frémont's second expedition . 
carson lived with mathew kinkead ,  a trapper and explorer who had served with carson's older brothers during the war of 1812.
making-out-road left carson to travel with her people through the west . 
at the age of nineteen ,  carson began his career as a mountain man . 
carson wanted to take a winter break from the campaign . 
in 1841, carson married a cheyenne woman named making-out-road . 
one of carson's best known adventures took place during this war . 
carson has been widely depicted in film and television series . 
in july 1853, carson was in northern nevada ,  with 7,000 sheep from santa fe . 
in 1847, general william tecumseh sherman met kit carson in monterey ,  california . 
in 1842, carson guided frémont across the oregon trail to south pass ,  wyoming . 
carson was nineteen when he set off with ewing young's expedition to the rocky mountains in 1829.
between 1827 and 1829, carson worked as cook ,  translator ,  and wagon driver in the southwest . 
an `` orange kipper '' is a kipper that has been dyed orange . 
their `` kippered snacks '' ,  are smoked and salted ,  undyed . 
mallaig ,  once the busiest herring port in europe ,  is famous for its traditionally smoked kippers ,  as well as stornoway kippers and loch fyne kippers . 
as a verb ,  `` kippering ''  -lrb-  `` to kipper ''  -rrb-  means to preserve by rubbing with salt or other spices before drying in the open air or in smoke . 
kippers produced in the isle of man are exported around the world . 
a kipper is also sometimes referred to as a `` red herring '' ,  although particularly strong curing is required to produce a truly red kipper . 
the manx word for kipper is  ,  literally `` red herring ''; the irish term is `` scadán dearg '' with the same meaning . 
the kipsigis have a circular view of life . 
the ceremony may take up to three hours . 
a childless elderly widow may 'wed' a young woman for support . 
one may not marry the children of a man of the same generation . 
marriage is strictly exogamous ,  no male may marry a woman of his clan or `` oret '' . 
kipsigis men undergo circumcision at about 14 years of age . 
women and children may be called to kokwet meetings to give evidence but otherwise do not attend . 
the kipsigis know that all human life is cyclical . 
hunters use a hunting knife ,  soldiers use the combat knife ,  scouts ,  campers ,  and hikers carry a pocket knife; there are kitchen knives for preparing foods  -lrb-  the chef's knife ,  the paring knife ,  bread knife ,  cleaver  -rrb-  ,  table knives  -lrb-  butter knives and steak knives  -rrb-  ,  weapons  -lrb-  daggers or switchblades  -rrb-  ,  knives for throwing or juggling ,  and knives for religious ceremony or display  -lrb-  the kirpan  -rrb-  . 
a knockout  -lrb-  abbreviated to ko or k . o .   -rrb- 
both tko's and corner retirements are counted as knockouts in a fighter's record . 
a technical knockout  -lrb-  tko or t . k . o . 
a knockdown triggers a count by the referee  -lrb-  normally to 10 -rrb-; if the fighter fails the count ,  then the fight is ended as a ko . 
in fighting games such as `` street fighter '' and `` tekken '' ,  a draw is counted as a loss for both players . 
a tko only occurs if the fight is stopped during a round . 
some of the areas within the kalahari are seasonal wetlands ,  such as the makgadikgadi pans of botswana . 
these regions are termed kalahari acacia-baikiaea woodlands at0709.
in an area of about 600,000 km in the south and west of the kalahari ,  the vegetation is mainly xeric savanna . 
in the kalahari ,  there are two main mechanisms of atmospheric circulation ,  dominated by the kalahari high anticyclone:
the kalahari desert is a large semi-arid sandy savanna in southern africa extending for  ,  covering much of botswana ,  parts of namibia and regions of south africa . 
the kalahari is home to many migratory birds and animals . 
due to its low aridity ,  the kalahari supports a variety of flora . 
katanga's area encompassed  . 
msiri ,  the king of katanga ,  held out against both ,  but eventually katanga was subsumed by the belgian congo . 
the breakaway state of katanga existed from 1960 to 1963.
the democratic republic of congo produces `` more than 3 percent of the world’s copper and half its cobalt ,  most of which comes from katanga '' . 
kathmandu is the headquarters of the surrounding kathmandu district . 
indigenous kathmandu newar people of the valley . 
kathmandu is in the northwestern part of the kathmandu valley to the north of the bagmati river and covers an area of  . 
there is no officially defined agglomeration of kathmandu . 
the municipality of kathmandu was upgraded to incorporated in 1994.
kathmandu is the most important industrial and commercial centre in nepal . 
to bhaktapur ,  and nearly covers the entire kathmandu valley . 
kathmandu municipal corporation  -lrb-  kmc  -rrb-  is the chief nodal agency for the administration of kathmandu . 
70% of the total population residing in kathmandu are aged between 15 and 59.
kathmandu is and has been for many years the centre of nepal's history ,  art ,  culture and economy . 
electricity in kathmandu is regulated and distributed by the nea nepal electricity authority . 
the gorkha kingdom ended the malla confederation after the battle of kathmandu in 1768.
kathmandu is famous for lokta paper and pashmina shawls . 
the city stands at an elevation of approximately above sea level in the bowl-shaped kathmandu valley of central nepal . 
the ancient history of kathmandu is described in its traditional myths and legends . 
kathmandu is home to a number of museums and art galleries ,  including the national museum of nepal and the natural history museum of nepal . 
archaeological excavations in parts of kathmandu have found evidence of ancient civilisations . 
kathmandu and its valley are in the `` deciduous monsoon forest zone ''  -lrb-  altitude range of   -rrb-  ,  one of five vegetation zones defined for nepal . 
during the later part of the malla era ,  kathmandu valley comprised four fortified cities: kantipur ,  lalitpur ,  bhaktapur ,  and kirtipur . 
according to data from 2011, the major religions in kathmandu city are hinduism 81.3% ,  buddhism 9% ,  muslim 4.4% and other 5.2% . 
the pond is one of kathmandu's most famous landmarks and is known for its religious and aesthetic significance . 
an ancient canal once flowed from nagarjuna hill through balaju to kathmandu; this canal is now extinct . 
historic areas of kathmandu were devastated by a 7.8 magnitude earthquake on 25 april 2015 and are in the process of reconstruction . 
the colophons of ancient manuscripts ,  dated as late as the 20th century ,  refer to kathmandu as `` kāṣṭhamaṇḍap mahānagar '' in nepal mandala . 
kathmandu  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` yei '' ,  nepali pronunciation:   -rrb-  is the capital city and largest city of nepal with a population of 1.5 million in the city proper ,  and 3 million in its wider urban agglomeration across the kathmandu valley ,  which includes the towns of lalitpur ,  kirtipur ,  madhyapur thimi ,  bhaktapur making the total population roughly 2.5 million people and the municipalities across kathmandu valley . 
kington magna is a village and civil parish in the blackmore vale in the english county of dorset ,  situated about south-west of the town of gillingham ,  in the north dorset administrative district . 
the parish covers about and ,  as well as the main village ,  includes the small settlement of nyland in the west . 
a kiosk  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a small ,  separated garden pavilion open on some or all sides . 
an electronic kiosk  -lrb-  or computer kiosk or interactive kiosk  -rrb-  houses a computer terminal that often employs custom kiosk software designed to function while preventing users from accessing system functions . 
in the western hemisphere and in english-speaking countries ,  a `` kiosk '' is also a booth with an open window on one side . 
the knowbot information service  -lrb-  kis  -rrb-  ,  also known as netaddress ,  is an internet user search engine that debuted in december 1989.
variations on the phrase include: `` keep it simple ,  silly '' ,  `` keep it short and simple '' ,  `` keep it simple and straightforward '' ,  `` keep it small and simple '' and `` keep it stupid simple '' . 
kiss ,  a backronym for `` keep it simple ,  stupid '' ,  is a design principle noted by the u . s .  navy in 1960.
while popular usage has transcribed it for decades as `` keep it simple ,  stupid '' ,  johnson transcribed it as `` keep it simple stupid ''  -lrb-  no comma  -rrb-  ,  and this reading is still used by many authors . 
the klamath people lived in the area around the upper klamath lake and the klamath ,  williamson ,  and sprague rivers . 
dentalium shells were common among the klamath prior to colonization . 
traditionally there were several cultural subdivisions among the klamath ,  based on the location of their residency within the klamath basin . 
the klamath spoke one dialect of the klamath–modoc language - the northern or `` fi-ukshikni '' dialect ,  the other - the `` southern '' dialect being spoken by the modoc people ,  who lived south of the klamath . 
today klamath people are enrolled in the federally recognized tribes:
leslie spier has detailed some of the winter settlement patterns for klamath as follows:
the klamath use apocynum cannabinum as a fiber and eat the roots of lomatium canbyi . 
for input and output ,  the klerer-may system used a friden flexowriter modified to allow half-line motions for subscripts and superscripts . 
frames in kl-one are called concepts . 
all concepts ,  except the top concept  -lrb-  usually thing  -rrb-  ,  must have at least one super class . 
keino was born in kipsamo ,  nandi district ,  kenya . 
on 27 august 1965, keino lowered the 3000 m world record by over 6 seconds to 7:39.6 in his first attempt at the distance . 
in the next commonwealth games ,  keino won the 1500 metres and was third in the 5000 metres . 
rasmussen was born in jakobshavn ,  greenland ,  the son of a danish missionary ,  the vicar christian rasmussen ,  and an inuit–danish mother ,  lovise rasmussen  -lrb-  née fleischer  -rrb-  . 
in 1910, rasmussen and friend peter freuchen established the thule trading station at cape york  -lrb-  `` qaanaaq ''  -rrb-  ,  greenland ,  as a trading base . 
the fourth thule expedition  -lrb-  1919–1920 -rrb- was in east greenland where rasmussen spent several months collecting ethnographic data near angmagssalik . 
for the next seven years rasmussen traveled between greenland and denmark giving lectures and writing . 
the first thule expedition  -lrb-  1912, rasmussen and freuchen  -rrb-  aimed to test robert peary's claim that a channel divided peary land from greenland . 
this game was not the `` invention '' of the forward pass ,  but it was the first major contest in which a team used the forward pass regularly throughout the game . 
the team went undefeated and was a national champion ,  though the championship is not recognized by notre dame . 
the 1928 team lost to national champion georgia tech . 
both the 1929 and the 1930 teams went undefeated and were national champions . 
in gipp ,  rockne had an ideal handler of the forward pass . 
knute kenneth rockne  -lrb-   ; march 4, 1888 – march 31, 1931 -rrb- was a norwegian-american football player and coach at the university of notre dame . 
rockne was not the first coach to use the forward pass ,  but he helped popularize it nationally . 
rockne helped to popularize the forward pass and made the notre dame fighting irish a major factor in college football . 
the 1919 team had rockne handle the line and gus dorais handle the backfield . 
the kariba dam is a double curvature concrete arch dam in the kariba gorge of the zambezi river basin between zambia and zimbabwe . 
since zambia's independence ,  two dams have been built on the kafue river: the kafue gorge dam and the itezhi-tezhi dam . 
the dam forms lake kariba which extends for and holds of water . 
on 3 october 2014 the bbc reported that “the kariba dam is in a dangerous state . 
the kariba dam controls 90% of the total runoff of the zambezi river ,  thus changing the downstream ecology dramatically . 
the kariba dam is now owned and operated by the zambezi river authority ,  which is jointly and equally owned by zimbabwe and zambia . 
the kariba dam project was planned by the government of the federation of rhodesia and nyasaland ,  or central african federation  -lrb-  caf  -rrb-  . 
he is the father of british novelist martin amis . 
sir kingsley william amis ,  cbe  -lrb-  16 april 1922 – 22 october 1995 -rrb- was an english novelist ,  poet ,  critic ,  and teacher . 
with `` the anti-death league ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  amis begins to show some of the experimentation – with content ,  if not with style – which would mark much of his work in the 1960s and 1970s . 
although he worked hard and earned in 1947 a first in english ,  he had by then decided to give much of his time to writing . 
amis was married a second time ,  to the novelist elizabeth jane howard from 1965 to 1983, with whom he had no children . 
in one of his memoirs ,  amis wrote: `` now and then i become conscious of having the reputation of being one of the great drinkers ,  if not one of the great drunks ,  of our time '' . 
martin wrote the memoir `` experience '' about the life ,  charm ,  and decline of his father . 
amis's prodigious output would not have been possible without this kind of self-discipline . 
as a young man at oxford ,  amis joined the communist party . 
amis's first marriage ,  of fifteen years ,  was to hilary bardwell ,  daughter of a civil servant ,  by whom he had two sons and one daughter: philip amis ,  a graphics designer; martin amis ,  a novelist; and sally amis ,  who died in 2000.
it also includes a further 31 archaic hiragana in the kana extended-a block . 
the difference in usage between hiragana and katakana is stylistic . 
the hiragana range in unicode is u+3040  .  .  .  u+309f ,  and the katakana range is u+30a0  .  .  .  u+30ff . 
characters u+3095 and u+3096 are hiragana small `` ka '' and small `` ke '' ,  respectively . 
katakana with a few additions is also used to write ainu . 
kana are the basis for collation in japanese . 
kana can be written in small form above or next to lesser-known kanji in order to show pronunciation; this is called furigana . 
the knights of the lambda calculus is a semi-fictional organization of expert lisp and scheme hackers . 
at one point in the anime ,  lain is seen with code displayed on her handheld device that appears to be lisp . 
kornshell complies with posix . 2, shell and utilities ,  command interpreter  -lrb-  ieee std 1003.2-1992.  -rrb- 
the original kornshell ,   ,  became the default shell on aix in version 4, with ksh93 being available separately . 
kornshell is backward-compatible with the bourne shell and includes many features of the c shell ,  inspired by the requests of bell labs users . 
the kilt first appeared as the great kilt ,  the ' or belted plaid ,  during the 16th century ,  and is gaelic in origin . 
kilts have also been adopted as female wear for some sports . 
the kqml message format and protocol can be used to interact with an intelligent system ,  either by an application program ,  or by another intelligent system . 
kqml's `` communication facilitators '' coordinate the interactions of other agents to support knowledge sharing . 
at that rally ,  soliah said that her fellow sla members had been:
sara jane olson  -lrb-  born kathleen ann soliah on january 16, 1947 -rrb- was a member of the symbionese liberation army  -lrb-  sla  -rrb-  in the 1970s . 
soliah went underground and became a fugitive for 23 years . 
olson served her time at the central california women's facility in chowchilla . 
soliah was indicted in 1976 for setting the police bombs along with five other sla members ,  but vanished before the trial could commence . 
shortly after her arrest ,  soliah legally changed her name to her alias ,  sara jane olson . 
in february 1976, a grand jury indicted soliah in the bombing case . 
olson was released on parole from the central california women's facility in chowchilla on march 17, 2008.
soliah was accused of planting the bombs in an attempt to avenge the sla members who had died a year earlier in the standoff with la police . 
now a fugitive ,  founding sla member emily harris disguised herself and visited soliah ,  who was on the job at a bookstore . 
in a letter to california governor arnold schwarzenegger ,  minnesota governor tim pawlenty also protested olson being allowed to return to minnesota . 
the actual origin of the email was mcvax ,  one of the first european sites on the internet . 
keflavík  -lrb-  pronounced  ,  meaning `` driftwood bay ''  -rrb-  is a town in the reykjanes region in southwest iceland . 
the climate of keflavík is subarctic with cool summers and moderately cold winters . 
in iceland ,  keflavík was renowned as a rich source of musicians during the 1960s and 70s ,  and is therefore also known as `` bítlabærinn '' or `` the beatle town '' . 
this practice became known as  . 
parry has a variable dedicated to him in the geek code ,  the `` kibo number '' ,  describing how far a particular person is from direct contact with kibo . 
he became known on usenet for grepping all occurrences of the term `` kibo ''—whether intended to refer to kibo himself or not—and replying ,  often in a fanciful manner . 
more than 35 bird species have been recorded from kiritimati . 
at western discovery ,  kiritimati was uninhabited . 
kiritimati ,  or christmas island ,  is a pacific ocean raised coral atoll in the northern line islands . 
during the cold war there was some nuclear weapons testing in the kiritimati area . 
the main villages of kiritimati are banana ,  tabwakea ,  and london ,  which are located along the main road on the northern tip of the island ,  and poland ,  which is across the main lagoon to the south . 
in addition to the main island ,  there are several smaller ones . 
kiritimati comprises over 70% of the total land area of kiribati ,  a country encompassing 33 pacific atolls and islands . 
vaskess bay is a large bay which extends along the southwest coast of kiritimati island . 
there are 18 species of seabirds breeding on the island ,  and kiritimati is one of the most important breeding grounds anywhere in the world for several of these:
kiritimati's roughly lagoon opens to the sea in the northwest; burgle channel  -lrb-  the entrance to the lagoon  -rrb-  is divided into the northern cook island passage and the southern south passage . 
the ministry of the line and phoenix islands is located in london . 
the island has the greatest land area of any coral atoll in the world ,  about ; its lagoon is roughly the same size . 
nuclear tests were conducted on and around kiritimati by the united kingdom in the late 1950s ,  and by the united states in 1962.
consequently ,  kiritimati is one of the rather few places close to the equator which have an effectively arid climate . 
</poem>
 -lrb-  crewe manuscript  -rrb-  </poem>
 ''kubla khan; or ,  a vision in a dream: a fragment '' is a poem written by samuel taylor coleridge ,  completed in 1797 and published in 1816.
a note written on the back of the crewe manuscript by coleridge gave a shorter and slightly different description of how the poem was written than the version published in 1816.
coleridge described how he wrote the poem in the preface to his collection of poems ,  `` christabel ,  kubla khan ,  and the pains of sleep '' ,  published in 1816: in the summer of the year 1797, the author ,  then in ill health ,  had retired to a lonely farm house between porlock and linton ,  on the exmoor confines of somerset and devonshire . 
<poem> so twice six miles of fertile ground  with walls and towers were compass'd round . 
there are several similarities between kashubian and polish . 
during the kashubian diaspora of 1855-1900, 115,700 kashubians emigrated to north america ,  with around 15,000 emigrating to brazil . 
like polish ,  kashubian includes about 5% loanwords from german  -lrb-  such as ``  '' `` art ''  -rrb-  . 
kashubian or cassubian  -lrb-  kashubian: ' ,  ' ,  ';  ,  ' ,  ``  ''  -rrb-  is a west slavic lect belonging to the lechitic subgroup along with polish and silesian . 
the recognition means that heavily populated kashubian localities have been able to have road signs and other amenities with polish and kashubian translations on them . 
he was the first priest to introduce catholic liturgy in kashubian . 
the spelling and the grammar of polish words written in kashubian ,  which is most of its vocabulary ,  is highly unusual ,  making it difficult for native polish speakers to comprehend written text in kashubian . 
richard kim milford  -lrb-  february 7, 1951 – june 16, 1988 -rrb- ,  known professionally as kim milford ,  was an american actor ,  singer-songwriter ,  and composer . 
milford attended new trier high school . 
milford first appeared at the stock theatre in chicago at age 10.
kesey was diagnosed with diabetes in 1992.
kesey was arrested in la honda ,  california ,  for possession of marijuana in 1965.
kesey was born in la junta ,  colorado ,  to dairy farmers geneva  -lrb-  née smith  -rrb-  and frederick a .  kesey . 
kesey was born in la junta ,  colorado ,  and grew up in springfield ,  oregon ,  graduating from the university of oregon in 1957.
in 1998, health problems began to weaken kesey ,  starting with a stroke that year . 
according to stone ,  stegner `` saw kesey .  .  .  as a threat to civilization and intellectualism and sobriety '' and continued to reject kesey's stegner fellowship applications for the 1959–60 and 1960–61 terms . 
on august 14, 1997, kesey and his pranksters attended a phish concert in darien lake ,  new york . 
kesey originally was involved in creating the film ,  but left two weeks into production . 
a member of beta theta pi throughout his studies ,  kesey graduated from the university of oregon with a b . a . 
despite this ,  faye kesey has stated that her husband was generally supportive of the film and pleased that it was made . 
kesey had a football scholarship for his freshman year ,  but switched to the university of oregon wrestling team as a better fit for his build . 
during his woodrow wilson fellowship year ,  kesey wrote `` zoo '' ,  a novel about the beatniks living in the north beach community of san francisco ,  but it was never published . 
the total number of dwellings in kandahar is 61,902.
kandahar is the regional hub in southern afghanistan ,  close to the border with pakistan . 
the arghandab river runs along the west of kandahar . 
the region around kandahar is one of the oldest known human settlements . 
in 1747, ahmad shah durrani ,  founder of the durrani dynasty ,  made kandahar the capital of the afghan empire . 
kandahar is connected to kabul by the kabul-kandahar highway and to herat by the kandahar-herat highway . 
kandahar was regarded as important to the mughal empire because it was one of the gateways to india ,  and mughal control over kandahar helped to prevent foreign intrusions . 
kandahar was named `` alexandria '' ,  a name given to cities that alexander founded during his conquests . 
kandahar international airport serves as southern afghanistan's main airport for domestic and international flights . 
by 1776, his eldest son timur shah had transferred afghanistan's main capital from kandahar to kabul ,  where the durrani legacy continued . 
tamerlane's descendant ,  babur ,  the founder of the mughal empire ,  annexed kandahar in 1508.
ahmad shah durrani ,  chief of the durrani tribe ,  gained control of kandahar and made it the capital of his new afghan empire in october 1747.
by 2011, kandahar became known as the assassination city of afghanistan after witnessing many target killings . 
they were again forced to withdraw a few years later ,  despite winning the battle of kandahar . 
pakistan plans to build a railroad track from the pakistani town of chaman to kandahar which will connect afghan railways with pakistan railways . 
in 1540 martin luther expelled caspar schwenckfeld from silesia . 
between 1511 and 1523, schwenckfeld served the duchy of liegnitz as an adviser to duke charles i  -lrb-  1511–1515 -rrb- ,  duke george i  -lrb-  1515–1518 -rrb- ,  and duke frederick ii  -lrb-  1518–1523 -rrb- . 
schwenckfeld was born in ossig near liegnitz ,  silesia now osiek ,  near legnica ,  poland ,  to noble parents in 1489.
in 1518 or 1519, schwenckfeld experienced an awakening that he called a `` visitation of god . `` 
schwenckfeld came to reformation principles through thomas müntzer and andreas karlstadt . 
the kitt peak national observatory  -lrb-  kpno  -rrb-  is a united states astronomical observatory located on kitt peak of the quinlan mountains in the arizona-sonoran desert on the tohono o'odham nation ,  west-southwest of tucson ,  arizona . 
kitt peak hosts an array of programs for the public to take part in ,  including:
kitt peak was selected by its first director ,  aden b .  meinel ,  in 1958 as the site for a national observatory under contract with the national science foundation  -lrb-  nsf  -rrb-  and was administered by the association of universities for research in astronomy . 
stockhausen wrote 370 individual works . 
stockhausen was influential within pop and rock music as well . 
stockhausen's fame is also reflected in works of literature . 
throughout his career ,  stockhausen excited controversy . 
in 1960, stockhausen returned to the composition of vocal music  -lrb-  for the first time since `` gesang der jünglinge ''  -rrb-  with `` carré '' for four orchestras and four choirs  . 
in 1998, he founded the stockhausen courses ,  which are held annually in kürten  . 
since the mid-1950s ,  stockhausen had been developing concepts of spatialization in his works ,  not only in electronic music ,  such as the 5-channel `` gesang der jünglinge ''  -lrb-  1955–56 -rrb- and `` telemusik ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  and 4-channel `` kontakte ''  -lrb-  1958–60 -rrb- and `` hymnen ''  -lrb-  1966–67 -rrb- . 
from 1947 to 1951, stockhausen studied music pedagogy and piano at the hochschule für musik köln  -lrb-  cologne conservatory of music  -rrb-  and musicology ,  philosophy ,  and germanics at the university of cologne . 
in the 1950s and early 1960s ,  stockhausen published a series of articles that established his importance in the area of music theory . 
his orchestral composition `` sub-kontur ''  -lrb-  1974–75 -rrb- quotes the formula of stockhausen's `` inori ''  -lrb-  1973–74 -rrb- ,  and he has also acknowledged the influence of `` momente '' on this work  . 
stockhausen began to compose in earnest only during his third year at the conservatory  . 
on 29 december 1951, in hamburg ,  stockhausen married doris andreae  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  . 
german electronic pioneers kraftwerk also say they studied with stockhausen  ,  and icelandic vocalist björk has acknowledged stockhausen's influence  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  . 
the `` momente '' score ,  published just before stockhausen's death in 2007, won this prize for the ninth time  . 
together with eimert ,  stockhausen edited the journal ``  die reihe '' from 1955 to 1962  . 
stockhausen was born in burg mödrath ,  the `` castle '' of the village of mödrath . 
in the early 1990s ,  stockhausen reacquired the licenses to most of the recordings of his music he had made to that point ,  and started his own record company to make this music permanently available on compact disc  . 
he is known for his groundbreaking work in electronic music ,  for introducing controlled chance  -lrb-  aleatory techniques or aleatoric musical techniques  -rrb-  into serial composition ,  and for musical spatialization . 
four of stockhausen's children became professional musicians  -lrb-  kurtz 1992, 202 -rrb- ,  and he composed some of his works specifically for them . 
the french writer michel butor acknowledges that stockhausen's music `` taught me a lot '' ,  mentioning in particular the electronic works `` gesang der jünglinge '' and `` hymnen ''  . 
amongst the numerous honours and distinctions that were bestowed upon stockhausen are:
in a climate where music mattered less than political ideology ,  some critics held that stockhausen was too élitist ,  while others complained he was too mystical  . 
as a result of the reaction to the press report of stockhausen's comments ,  a four-day festival of his work in hamburg was canceled . 
igor stravinsky expressed great ,  but not uncritical ,  enthusiasm for stockhausen's music in the conversation books with robert craft  -lrb-  e . g .  ,    -rrb-  and for years organised private listening sessions with friends in his home where he played tapes of stockhausen's latest works  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  . 
in a short essay describing stockhausen's influence on his own work ,  richard barrett concludes that `` stockhausen remains the composer whose next work i look forward most to hearing ,  apart from myself of course '' and names as works that have had particular impact on his musical thinking `` mantra '' ,  `` gruppen '' ,  `` carré '' ,  `` klavierstück x '' ,  `` inori '' ,  and `` jubiläum ''  . 
macleod was born in stornoway ,  scotland on 2 august 1954.
kanem was located at the southern end of the trans-saharan trade route between tripoli and the region of lake chad . 
kanem was located at the southern end of the trans-saharan trade route between tripoli and the region of lake chad . 
the origins of kanem are unclear . 
but even in bornu ,  the sayfawa dynasty's troubles persisted . 
over time ,  the intermarriage of the kanembu and bornu peoples created a new people and language ,  the kanuri . 
kanem-bornu under aluma was strong and wealthy . 
according to a more accepted theory ,  the kingdom of kanem began forming around 700 ad under the nomadic tebu-speaking kanembu . 
the kanem–bornu empire was an empire that existed in modern chad and nigeria . 
around that time ,  fulani people ,  invading from the west ,  were able to make major inroads into bornu . 
chernenko was also chairman of the presidium of the supreme soviet from 11 april 1984 until his death . 
additionally ,  chernenko was terminally ill himself . 
chernenko became the third soviet leader to die in less than three years . 
in 1960, after brezhnev was named chairman of the presidium of the supreme soviet  -lrb-  titular head of state of the soviet union  -rrb-  ,  chernenko became his chief of staff . 
konstantin ustinovich chernenko  -lrb-  ;  ,  24 september 1911 – 10 march 1985 -rrb- was a soviet politician and the fifth general secretary of the communist party of the soviet union . 
chernenko represented a return to the policies of the late brezhnev era . 
chernenko's first marriage produced a son ,  albert ,  who became a noted soviet legal theorist . 
after the death of a soviet leader it was customary for his successors to open his safe . 
in november 1984 chernenko met with britain's labour party leader ,  neil kinnock . 
in early 1984, chernenko was hospitalised for over a month but kept working by sending the politburo notes and letters . 
the komondor is built for livestock guarding . 
komondor females on average weigh between and komondor males weigh on average between  . 
the komondor  -lrb-  in hungarian ,  the plural form of komondor is `` komondorok ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the hungarian sheepdog ,  is a large ,  white-coloured hungarian breed of livestock guardian dog with a long ,  corded coat . 
the coat of the komondor takes about two and a half days to dry after a bath . 
the minimum height of female komondors is at the withers ,  with an average height of  . 
romania is the only country that requires komondors to be muzzled . 
the color should be a mixture of grey and black and some white as well . 
ears should be very dark - almost black . 
coat must not part down the back . 
the keeshond  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a medium-sized dog with a plush ,  two-layer coat of silver and black fur with a ruff and a curled tail . 
the us 'krags' were chambered for the rimmed `` cartridge ,  caliber 30, u . s .  army '' ,  round ,  also known as the  . 30 u . s .  ,   . 30 army ,  or  . 30 government ,  and ,  more popularly ,  by its civilian name ,  the  . 30-40 krag . 
the krag–jørgensen is a repeating bolt action rifle designed by the norwegians ole herman johannes krag and erik jørgensen in the late 19th century . 
a distinctive feature of the krag–jørgensen action is its magazine . 
as with the  . 30-30 winchester ,  it is the use of black powder nomenclature that leads to the incorrect assumption that the  . 30-40 krag was once a black powder cartridge . 
the m1903 springfield that replaced the krags had a magazine cutoff ,  as did the smle  -lrb-  lee–enfield  -rrb-  until 1915.
danish krags were given the german identification code scharfschützen-gewehr 312-lrb- d  -rrb-  . 
the eruption destroyed two-thirds of the island of krakatoa . 
in 1927, a fourth island ,  anak krakatau ,  or `` child of krakatoa '' ,  emerged from the caldera formed in 1883.
krakatoa ,  or krakatau  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a caldera in the sunda strait between the islands of java and sumatra in the indonesian province of lampung . 
in economics ,  kondratiev waves  -lrb-  also called supercycles ,  great surges ,  long waves ,  k-waves or the long economic cycle  -rrb-  are hypothesized cycle-like phenomena in the modern world economy . 
long wave theory is not accepted by most academic economists . 
understanding the cause and effect of kondratiev waves is a useful academic discussion and tool . 
the historian eric hobsbawm also wrote of the theory: `` that good predictions have proved possible on the basis of kondratiev long waves—this is not very common in economics—has convinced many historians and even some economists that there is something in them ,  even if we don't know what . ”
tylecote  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- devoted a chapter to demographics and the long cycle . 
although kondratiev himself made little differentiation between cause and effect ,  obvious points emerge intuitively . 
kondratiev identified three phases in the cycle: expansion ,  stagnation ,  and recession . 
stark also began to work as a fashion model ,  particularly for norman parkinson . 
kathleen norris stark  -lrb-  born april 26, 1956 -rrb- ,  better known as koo stark ,  is an american photographer and actress ,  known for her relationship with prince andrew . 
pictures by stark have appeared in `` country life '' and other magazines . 
stark's parents were wilbur stark  -lrb-  1912–1995 -rrb- ,  a writer and producer ,  and kathi norris  -lrb-  1919–2005 -rrb- ,  a writer and television presenter in new york city . 
stark continues to live in london and is a member of the chelsea arts club . 
koo stark attended the hewitt school in new york and the glendower preparatory school in kensington ,  london . 
a leica user ,  stark has said her camera transcends mere function and is a personal friend . 
of working with her in the 1976 film `` emily '' ,  actor victor spinetti later wrote `` i found koo stark to be an enchanting girl and terribly bright and interesting '' . 
kliment yefremovich voroshilov  -lrb-   ,  `` kliment jefremovič vorošilov '';  ,  `` klyment okhrimovyč vorošylov ''  -rrb-  ,  popularly known as klim voroshilov  -lrb-   ,  `` klim vorošilov ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  4 february 1881 – 2 december 1969 -rrb- ,  was a prominent soviet military officer and politician during the stalin era . 
in 1996, yamaguchi established the always dream foundation for children . 
yamaguchi went on to successfully defend her world title that same year . 
yamaguchi made a fitness video with the california raisins in 1993 called `` hip to be fit: the california raisins and kristi yamaguchi '' . 
kristi yamaguchi turned professional after the 1991–92 competitive season . 
kristi yamaguchi received the inspiration award at the 2008 asian excellence awards . 
kristi yamaguchi was born on july 12, 1971, in hayward ,  california ,  to jim yamaguchi ,  a dentist ,  and carole  -lrb-  née doi  -rrb-  ,  a medical secretary . 
yamaguchi and her siblings ,  brett and lori ,  grew up in fremont ,  california . 
in 2008, yamaguchi became the celebrity champion in the sixth season of `` dancing with the stars '' . 
his choral work `` polish requiem '' was written in the 1980s ,  with penderecki expanding it in 1993 and 2005.
penderecki was born in dębica ,  to tadeusz penderecki ,  a lawyer ,  and zofia  -lrb-  `` née '' wittgenstein  -rrb-  . 
born in dębica to a lawyer ,  penderecki studied music at jagiellonian university and the academy of music in kraków . 
penderecki continued to write pieces that explored the sacred in music . 
in 1968 penderecki received state prize 1st class . 
on graduating from the academy of music in kraków in 1958, penderecki took up a teaching post at the academy . 
the krugerrand  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a south african coin ,  first minted on 3rd july ,  1967 to help market south african gold and produced by the south african mint . 
by 1980 the krugerrand accounted for 90% of the global gold coin market . 
proof coins have 220 while bullion coins have 160.
the krugerrand was introduced in 1967 as a vehicle for private ownership of gold . 
during the bull market in gold of the 1970s ,  the gold krugerrand quickly became the primary choice for gold-investors worldwide . 
visitors to south africa can export up to 15 coins by declaring the items to the south african revenue service . 
serbian historiography accepted the theory that karađorđe's ancestors came from vasojevići . 
when they last reigned they were called the royal house of yugoslavia . 
the family claimed descent from the vasojevići tribe  -lrb-  in montenegro  -rrb-  and had emigrated in the late 1730s or early 1740s . 
the karadjordjević family initially was a serbian royal house ,  then the royal house of `` the serbs ,  croats and slovenes '' and then the royal house of yugoslavia . 
his son ,  karl wilhelm böttiger  -lrb-  15 august 1790 - 26 november 1862; not to be confused with the swedish writer carl wilhelm böttiger  -rrb-  ,  was a historian and biographer of his father . 
in 1832 böttiger was elected a member of the french institute . 
his pupil ,  who edited many of böttiger's works after his death ,  was the german classicist karl julius sillig . 
braun invented the phased array antenna in 1905.
braun died in his house in brooklyn ,  before the war ended in 1918.
braun's british patent on tuning was used by marconi in many of his tuning patents . 
braun contributed significantly to the development of radio and television technology: he shared the 1909 nobel prize in physics with guglielmo marconi `` for their contributions to the development of wireless telegraphy '' . 
the khunjerab pass is the highest paved international border crossing in the world and the highest point on the karakoram highway . 
the choice of khunjerab pass for karakoram highway was decided in 1966: china citing the fact that mintaka would be more susceptible to air strikes recommended the steeper khunjerab pass instead . 
malevich responded that art can advance and develop for art's sake alone ,  saying that `` art does not need us ,  and it never did '' . 
from 1896 to 1904 kazimir malevich lived in kursk . 
malevich's works are held in several major art museums ,  including the state tretyakov gallery in moscow ,  and in new york ,  the museum of modern art and the guggenheim museum . 
another major collection of malevich works is held by the state museum of contemporary art in thessaloniki . 
subsequently ,  malevich even wrote a series of articles in ukrainian about art . 
french art historian andrei nakov ,  who re-established malevich's birth year as 1879  -lrb-  and not 1878 -rrb- ,  has argued for restoration of the polish spelling of malevich's name . 
kazimir severinovich malevich  -lrb-   – may 15, 1935 -rrb- was a russian avant-garde artist and art theorist ,  whose pioneering work and writing had a profound influence on the development of non-objective ,  or abstract art ,  in the 20th century . 
in 1989, the stedelijk museum in amsterdam held the west’s first large-scale malevich retrospective ,  including its own paintings and works from the collection of russian art critic nikolai khardzhiev . 
critics derided malevich's art as a negation of everything good and pure: love of life and love of nature . 
in the 1990s ,  the ownership claims of museums to many malevich works began to be disputed by his heirs . 
in 1927, malevich traveled to warsaw where he was given a hero's welcome . 
kaifu became the 76th prime minister of japan in august 1989.
on august 10, 1991, kaifu became the first leader of a major country to make an official visit to china and break china's diplomatic isolation after the tiananmen square incident of june 4, 1989.
hitomaro was born into the kakinomoto clan ,  an offshoot of the ancient  . 
hitomaro acted as a court poet during the reigns of empress jitō and emperor monmu . 
the sole early source for the life of the poet kakinomoto no hitomaro is the `` man'yōshū '' . 
based on hitomaro's poetic activities during empress jitō's reign ,  there are a few possibilities for where hitomaro was serving at tenmu's court . 
an unknown member of the tajihi clan wrote a response to yosami in the persona of hitomaro ,  very clearly connecting hitomaro's death to the sea . 
watase speculates that hitomaro came to court in the service of the in response to an imperial edict in 673.
this adds up to a total figure of close to 500 poems directly associated with hitomaro . 
hitomaro's final poem gives the strong impression that he met his death in the mountains . 
kakinomoto no hitomaro  -lrb-  柿本 人麻呂 or 柿本 人麿; –   -rrb-  was a japanese `` waka '' poet and aristocrat of the late asuka period . 
as discussed above ,  the death of hitomaro appears to have already taken on some legendary characteristics . 
karl ernst ritter von baer edler von huthorn  -lrb-   –   -rrb-  was a baltic german scientist and explorer . 
baer is also known in russia as karl maksímovich ber  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the virginia state legislature passed it on december 24, 1798.
the virginia resolutions contemplate joint action by the states . 
james madison wrote the virginia resolution . 
madison later strongly denied that individual states have the right to nullify federal law . 
kentucky's resolution 1 stated:
in january 1800, the virginia general assembly passed the report of 1800, a document written by madison to respond to criticism of the virginia resolution by other states . 
according to madison states could override not only the congressional acts ,  but also the decisions of the supreme court:
the virginia resolution did not refer to `` nullification '' ,  but instead used the idea of `` interposition '' by the states . 
however ,  in the same document madison explicitly argued that the states retain the ultimate power to decide about the constitutionality of the federal laws ,  in `` extreme cases '' such as the alien and sedition act . 
measures would be taken ,  hamilton hinted to an ally in congress ,  `` to act upon the laws and put virginia to the test of resistance '' . 
the virginia resolution introduced the idea that the states may `` interpose '' when the federal government acts unconstitutionally ,  in their opinion:
the kentucky resolutions of 1799, while claiming the right of nullification ,  did not assert that individual states could exercise that right . 
the virginia resolution of 1798 also relied on the compact theory and asserted that the states have the right to determine whether actions of the federal government exceed constitutional limits . 
mack sennett continued to use the keystone cops intermittently through the 1920s . 
in the `` this is your life '' tv tribute to mack sennett ,  several sennett alumni ran on stage dressed as keystone cops . 
the idea for the keystone cops came from hank mann ,  who also played police chief tehiezel in the first film before being replaced by ford sterling . 
their first film was `` hoffmeyer's legacy ''  -lrb-  1912 -rrb- but their popularity stemmed from the 1913 short `` the bangville police '' starring mabel normand . 
mel brooks directed a car chase scene in the keystone cops' style in his comedy film `` silent movie '' . 
the short ,  filmed in 1914, stars ford sterling ,  mack swain ,  edgar kennedy ,  and al st .  john and includes a previously unknown appearance of charlie chaplin as a keystone kop . 
the initial design of the koenigsegg cc was penned down by christian von koenigsegg . 
on 9 september 2009, koenigsegg announced that baic was going to join as a minority stakeholder in koenigsegg . 
later the koenigsegg one:1 held this record ,  with a power-to-weight ratio of /hp . 
in 2007, koenigsegg premiered the ccxr ,  a biofuel/flex-fuel version of the ccx . 
initially ,  koenigsegg automotive was based in olofström . 
the koenigsegg badge was designed in 1994 by jacob låftman ,  based on the heraldic coat of arms of the koenigsegg family . 
in march 2009 the koenigsegg ccxr was listed by `` forbes '' as one of `` the world's most beautiful cars '' . 
when it was introduced ,  the koenigsegg ccxr held the power-to-weight ratio record for production cars ,  with a power-to-weight ratio of /hp . 
koenigsegg also is working on a camless piston engine for the regera . 
in december 2010 the koenigsegg agera won the bbc top gear hypercar of the year award . 
on august 29, 1944, soviet troops reached the border of east prussia . 
east prussia was an important centre of german culture . 
in year 1824, shortly before its merger with west prussia ,  the population of east prussia was 1,080,000 people . 
the memel territory  -lrb-  klaipėda region  -rrb-  ,  formerly part of north-eastern east prussia as well as lithuania minor ,  was annexed by lithuania in 1923.
the region was added as an exclave to the russian sfsr; since 1946 it has been known as the kaliningrad oblast . 
kaliningrad oblast  -lrb-   ,  `` kaliningradskaya oblast ''  -rrb-  ,  often referred to as the kaliningrad region in english ,  or simply kaliningrad ,  is a federal subject of the russian federation that is located on the coast of the baltic sea . 
in 1957, an agreement was signed and later came into force which delimited the border between poland and the soviet union . 
three years after the annexation by the russian soviet federative socialist republic ,  the remaining two-thirds of east prussia was annexed by poland and is today organised into the warmian-masurian province . 
kenneth left at least two sons ,  constantine and  ,  who were later kings ,  and at least two daughters . 
in the reign of kenneth ii  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  when the chronicle of the kings of alba was compiled ,  the annalist wrote:
that kenneth was a gael is not widely rejected ,  but modern historiography distinguishes between kenneth as a gael by culture and/or in ancestry ,  and kenneth as a king of gaelic  . 
other gaels ,  such as and  ,  the sons of fergus ,  were identified among the pictish king lists ,  as were angles such as talorcen son of eanfrith ,  and britons such as bridei son of beli . 
kenneth's origins are uncertain ,  as are his ties ,  if any ,  to previous kings of the picts or  . 
although later traditions provided details of his reign and death ,  kenneth's father alpin is not listed as among the kings in the  ,  which provides the following sequence of kings leading up to kenneth:
kenneth macalpin  -lrb-  medieval gaelic:  ,  modern gaelic: '; 810 – 13 february 858 -rrb- ,  known in most modern regnal lists as kenneth i ,  was a king of the picts who ,  according to national myth ,  was the first king of scots . 
in fall 2008, alexander was cast as a lead character in the hbo drama pilot ,  `` treme '' ,  that premiered on april 11, 2010.
in 2015, she was nominated for a primetime emmy award for outstanding guest actress in a drama series for her performance . 
alexander also received critical acclaim for her leading performance in the hbo miniseries `` the corner '' in 2000.
she began her career as a dancer in the 1980s and was a choreographer for whitney houston's world tour from 1988 to 1992.
the kpd meeting in berlin was held in secret . 
she was a german communist ,  a major in soviet military intelligence and an experienced agent who had worked with richard sorge's spy ring in the far east . 
fuchs returned to edinburgh in january ,  and resumed working for born . 
in august 1939, elisabeth committed suicide by throwing herself from a train ,  leaving emil to raise young klaus . 
emil julius klaus fuchs  -lrb-  29 december 1911 – 28 january 1988 -rrb- was a german theoretical physicist and atomic spy who ,  in 1950, was convicted of supplying information from the american ,  british ,  and canadian manhattan project to the soviet union during and shortly after the second world war . 
after the second world war broke out in europe ,  he was interned on the isle of man ,  and later in canada . 
gerhard ,  karin ,  elisabeth and kittowski established a car rental agency in berlin ,  which they used to smuggle jews and opponents of the government out of germany . 
they became known as the `` red foxes '' ,  fuchs being the german word for fox . 
stanislavski created the first studio on  . 
in 1933, stanislavski worked on the second half of `` an actor's work '' . 
stanislavski would develop this use of improvisation in his work with his first studio . 
late in 1910, gorky invited stanislavski to join him in capri ,  where they discussed actor training and stanislavski's emerging `` grammar '' . 
the 'system' cultivates what stanislavski calls the `` art of experiencing ''  -lrb-  to which he contrasts the `` art of representation ''  -rrb-  . 
two english-language biographies have been published: david magarshack's `` stanislavsky: a life ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- and jean benedetti's `` stanislavski: his life and art ''  -lrb-  1988, revised and expanded 1999 -rrb- . 
nemirovich disapproved of what he described as the malign influence of meyerhold on stanislavski's work at this time . 
as a child ,  stanislavski was interested in the circus ,  the ballet ,  and puppetry . 
stanislavski chose not to attend university ,  preferring to work in the family business . 
 ''the best analysis of a play '' ,  stanislavski argued ,  `` is to take action in the given circumstances . `` 
stanislavski wrote that `` there is nothing more tedious than an actor's biography '' and that `` actors should be banned from talking about themselves '' . 
while the new policy would have disastrous consequences for the soviet avant-garde ,  the mat and stanislavski's 'system' were enthroned as exemplary models . 
with the arrival of socialist realism in the ussr ,  the mat and stanislavski's 'system' were enthroned as exemplary models . 
with a greater focus on pedagogical work than the first studio ,  the second studio provided the environment in which stanislavski developed the training techniques that would form the basis for his manual `` an actor's work ''  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- . 
stanislavski's lifelong relationship with vsevolod meyerhold began during these rehearsals; by the end of june ,  meyerhold was so impressed with stanislavski's directorial skills that he declared him a genius . 
stanislavski arranged a curriculum of four years of study that focused exclusively on technique and method—two years of the work detailed later in `` an actor's work '' and two of that in `` an actor's work on a role '' . 
borrowing a term from henry irving ,  stanislavski called this the `` perspective of the role '' . 
while on holiday in august 1926, stanislavski began to develop what would become `` an actor's work '' ,  his manual for actors written in the form of a fictional student's diary . 
stanislavski and nemirovich closed the theatre and embarked on the company's first tour outside of russia . 
the lasting significance of stanislavski's early work at the mat lies in its development of a naturalistic performance mode . 
once the students were acquainted with the training techniques of the first two years ,  stanislavski selected `` hamlet '' and `` romeo and juliet '' for their work on roles . 
vladimir lenin ,  who became a frequent visitor to the mat after the revolution ,  praised stanislavski as `` a real artist '' and indicated that ,  in his opinion ,  stanislavski's approach was `` the direction the theatre should take . `` 
his `` affective memory '' contributed to the technique that stanislavski would come to call `` emotion memory '' . 
later ,  stanislavski further elaborated the 'system' with a more physically grounded rehearsal process that came to be known as the `` method of physical action '' . 
while recuperating in nice at the end of 1929, stanislavski began a production plan for shakespeare's `` othello '' . 
a significant influence on the development of the 'system' came from stanislavski's experience teaching and directing at his opera studio ,  which was founded in 1918.
the two editors—hapgood with the american edition and gurevich with the russian—made conflicting demands on stanislavski . 
stanislavski was buried in the novodevichy cemetery in moscow ,  not far from the grave of anton chekhov . 
increasingly interested in `` experiencing the role '' ,  stanislavski experimented with maintaining a characterisation in real life . 
khartoum is home to the largest airport in sudan ,  khartoum international airport . 
khartoum  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital and largest city of sudan . 
it will replace the current airport in khartoum as sudan's main airport . 
the origin of the word ,  `` khartoum '' ,  is uncertain . 
the city is the capital of the state of khartoum . 
one of sudan's largest refineries is located in northern khartoum . 
khartoum is the main location for most of sudan's top educational bodies . 
in 1977, the first oil pipeline between khartoum and the port of sudan was completed . 
in the 21st century ,  khartoum developed based on sudan's oil wealth  -lrb-  although the independence of south sudan in 2011 affected the economy of sudan negatively  -rrb-  . 
the african union summit of 16–24 january 2006 was held in khartoum . 
divided by the two rivers nile ,  khartoum is a tripartite metropolis with an estimated overall population of over five million people ,  consisting of khartoum proper ,  and linked by bridges to khartoum north  -lrb-  ; '  -rrb-  and omdurman  -lrb-  ; '  -rrb-  to the west . 
α-ketoglutaric acid  -lrb-  2-oxoglutaric acid  -rrb-  is one of two ketone derivatives of glutaric acid . 
the amino groups of amino acids are attached to it  -lrb-  by transamination  -rrb-  and carried to the liver where the urea cycle takes place . 
β-ketoglutaric acid varies only by the position of the ketone functional group ,  and is much less common . 
the equation `` i '' -lrb-  `` r ''   -rrb-  = `` s ''  -lrb-  `` y ''   -rrb-  had been accepted by the classics ,  who had viewed it as the condition of equilibrium between supply and demand for investment funds and as determining the interest rate  -lrb-  see the classical theory of interest  -rrb-  . 
the equilibrium values `` ŷ ''  of total income and `` r̂ ''  of interest rate are then given by the point of intersection of the two curves . 
in keynes's more complicated liquidity preference theory  -lrb-  presented in chapter 15 -rrb- the demand for money depends on income as well as on the interest rate and the analysis becomes more complicated . 
as hicks put it ,  ‘monetary means will not force down the rate of interest any further’ . 
money supply ,  saving and investment combine to determine the level of income as illustrated in the diagram ,  where the top graph shows money supply  -lrb-  on the vertical axis  -rrb-  against interest rate . 
it has generally been considered that the rate of interest would not fall below a certain limit ,  often seen as zero or a slightly negative number . 
keynes viewed the money supply as one of the main determinants of the state of the real economy . 
the first proposition would ascribe to us an absolute and rigid dogma ,  would it not ? `` 
if we follow keynes's initial account under which liquidity preference depends only on the interest rate `` r '' ,  then the `` lm ''  curve will be horizontal . 
hicks showed how to analyze keynes' system when liquidity preference is a function of income as well as of the rate of interest . 
it is therefore difficult to see whether ,  and in what way ,  his results would differ for a different wage rate; nor is it entirely clear what he thought on the matter . 
under the classical theory the wage rate is determined by the marginal productivity of labour ,  and as many people will be employed as are willing to take work at that rate . 
keynesian economics  -lrb-   ; sometimes called keynesianism  -rrb-  are the various macroeconomic theories about how in the short run – and especially during recessions – economic output is strongly influenced by aggregate demand  -lrb-  total demand in the economy  -rrb-  . 
keynesian economics developed during and after the great depression ,  from the ideas presented by john maynard keynes in his 1936 book ,  `` the general theory of employment ,  interest and money '' . 
keynes set forward the ideas that became the basis for keynesian economics in his main work ,  `` the general theory of employment ,  interest and money ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- . 
the red curves in the same diagram show what the propensities to save will be for different incomes `` y '' ; and the income `` ŷ ''  corresponding to the equilibrium state of the economy must be the one for which the implied level of saving at the established interest rate is equal to `` î '' . 
an increase in the money supply ,  according to keynes's theory ,  will lead to a drop in the interest rate and to an increase in the amount of investment which can be profitably undertaken ,  bringing with it an increase in total income . 
keynesian economists generally argue that ,  as aggregate demand is volatile and unstable ,  a market economy will often experience inefficient macroeconomic outcomes in the form of economic recessions  -lrb-  when demand is low  -rrb-  and inflation  -lrb-  when demand is high  -rrb-  . 
macroeconomics is the study of the factors applying to an economy as a whole ,  such as the overall price level ,  the interest rate ,  and the level of employment  -lrb-  or equivalently ,  of income/output measured in real terms  -rrb-  . 
so liquidity preference can be written `` l ''  -lrb-  `` r ''  -rrb-  and in equilibrium is proportional to the externally fixed money supply `` m̂ '' . 
although keynes rejects the classical explanation of unemployment based on wage rigidity it is not clear what effect the wage rate has on unemployment in his own system . 
if the economy is in a position such that the liquidity preference curve is almost vertical ,  as must happen as the lower limit on `` r ''  is approached ,  then a change in the money supply `` m̂ ''  will make almost no difference to the equilibrium rate of interest `` r̂ ''  or ,  unless there is compensating steepness in the other curves ,  to the resulting income `` ŷ '' . 
the same amount of work is done by the body when decelerating from its current speed to a state of rest . 
during the napoleonic wars ,  the regiment saw action in the peninsular war . 
the regiment was renumbered the 60th  -lrb-  royal american  -rrb-  regiment in february 1757 when the 50th  -lrb-  shirley's  -rrb-  and 51st  -lrb-  pepperrell's  -rrb-  foot regiments were removed from the british army roll after their surrender at fort oswego . 
the 3rd and 4th battalions were disbanded in june 1783.
a 7th battalion was eventually raised as a rifle battalion specifically for service in the american war of 1812.
two additional battalions of the regiment  -lrb-  the 3rd and 4th battalions  -rrb-  were raised in england in 1775, principally of men recruited from england and hanover in 1775 for service in the american revolutionary war . 
the king's royal rifle corps was an infantry rifle regiment of the british army that was originally raised in british north america as the royal american regiment during the phase of the seven years' war in north america known as 'the french and indian war . '
not all languages using clicks as phonemes are considered khoisan . 
a haiǁom language is listed in most khoisan references . 
all khoisan languages but two are indigenous to southern africa and belong to three language families . 
khoisan languages are best known for their use of click consonants as phonemes . 
damin is an invented ritual language ,  and has nothing to do with khoisan . 
before the bantu expansion ,  khoisan languages ,  or languages like them ,  were likely spread throughout southern and eastern africa . 
genetically ,  the hadza people are unrelated to the khoisan peoples of southern africa ,  and their closest relatives may be among the pygmies of central africa . 
anthony traill noted the khoisan languages' extreme variation . 
in 1950, paxinou resumed her stage career . 
katina paxinou  -lrb-  ; 17 december 1899or c . 1900 – 22 february 1973 -rrb- was a greek film and stage actress . 
the outbreak of world war ii found her in the united kingdom and she later moved to the united states ,  where she made her film debut in `` for whom the bell tolls ''  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- and won the academy award for best supporting actress and the golden globe award for best supporting actress . 
paxinou made several appearances on the broadway stage and television as well . 
she started her stage career in greece in 1928 and was one of the founding members of the national theatre of greece in 1932.
the sanskrit word for kashmir was ``  '' . 
kashmir is the northernmost geographical region of the indian subcontinent . 
since 1947, the greater region of jammu and kashmir has been embroiled in a territorial dispute between india ,  pakistan and china—with india controlling approximately 43% of the land area of the region and 70% of its population . 
ksr produced two models of supercomputer ,  the ksr1 and ksr2.
the first ksr1 system was installed in 1991.
the ksr-1 chipset was fabricated by sharp corporation while the ksr-2 chipset was built by hewlett-packard . 
in the ksr design ,  all of the memory was treated as cache . 
ksr used a proprietary processor because 64-bit processors were not commercially available . 
when the 64-bit dec alpha was introduced in 1992, it ran at up to 192 mhz and 192 mflops ,  while the 1992 ksr2 ran at 40 mhz and 80 mflops . 
