public pressure on begin to resign increased . 
menachem begin  -lrb-   `` menaḥem begin ''  -lrb-    -rrb- ; ; `` menakhem volfovich begin ''; 16 august 1913 – 9 march 1992 -rrb- was an israeli politician ,  founder of likud and the sixth prime minister of israel . 
begin resented his being portrayed as a belligerent dissident . 
begin's funeral took place in jerusalem that afternoon . 
in november 1948, begin visited the us on a campaigning trip . 
begin also repeatedly threatened to declare independence if the jewish agency did not do so . 
begin agreed the irgun soldiers would be fully integrated with the idf and not kept in separate units . 
the decision to attack was hotly contested within begin's government . 
begin '' ,  written by gabriel emanuel and starring actor dani shteg ,  opened at the menahem begin heritage center in jerusalem in july ,  2013.
while prime minister ,  yehuda avner served as begin's speech writer . 
during the 1950s begin was banned from entering the united kingdom ,  as the british government regarded him as `` leader of the notorious terrorist organisation irgun ''
as prime minister ,  begin presided over various reforms in the domestic field . 
on 17 may 1977 the likud ,  headed by begin ,  won the knesset elections by a landslide ,  becoming the biggest party in the knesset . 
during the holocaust ,  begin's father was among the 5,000 brest jews rounded up by the nazis at the end of june 1941.
begin had studied the irish war of independence and the indian independence movement ,  and ,  while planning the rebellion with irgun commanders ,  devised a strategy of leverage he believed would force the british out . 
we must decide whether to hand over power to begin or to order him to cease his separate activities . 
in the summer of 1945, as it became clear that the british were not planning on establishing a jewish state and would not allow significant jewish immigration to palestine ,  jewish public opinion shifted decisively against the british ,  and the jewish authorities sent feelers to the irgun and lehi to discuss an alliance . 
one of the fiercest confrontations between begin and ben-gurion revolved around the reparations agreement between israel and west germany ,  signed in 1952.
begin retained some political influence in the likud party ,  which he used to influence it behind the scenes . 
in terms of social justice ,  however ,  the legacy of the begin government was arguably a questionable one . 
intense negotiations between representatives of the provisional government  -lrb-  headed by ben-gurion  -rrb-  and the irgun  -lrb-  headed by begin  -rrb-  followed the departure of `` altalena '' from france . 
much later in life ,  begin would record and reflect upon his experiences in the interrogations and life in the camp in his memoir `` white nights '' . 
throughout the period of the rebellion against the british and the civil war against the arabs ,  begin lived openly under a series of assumed names ,  often while sporting a beard . 
in august 1948, begin and members of the irgun high command emerged from the underground and formed the right-wing political party herut  -lrb-  `` freedom ''  -rrb-  party . 
all these weakened the labor camp and finally allowed begin to capture the center stage of israeli politics . 
ben-gurion reported on the meetings which had preceded the arrival of the `` altalena '' ,  and was adamant in his demand that begin surrender and hand over all of the weapons:
under the u . s .  internal revenue code ,  a forward triangular merger is taxed as if the target company sold its assets to the shell company and then liquidated ,  whereas a reverse triangular merger is taxed as if the target company's shareholders sold their stock in the target company to the buyer . 
from a legal point of view ,  a merger is a legal consolidation of two entities into one entity ,  whereas an acquisition occurs when one entity takes ownership of another entity's stock ,  equity interests or assets . 
a deal may be euphemistically called a `` merger of equals '' if both ceos agree that joining together is in the best interest of both of their companies ,  while when the deal is unfriendly  -lrb-  that is ,  when the management of the target company opposes the deal  -rrb-  it may be regarded as an `` acquisition '' . 
after due diligence is complete ,  the parties may proceed to draw up a definitive agreement ,  known as a `` merger agreement '' ,  `` share purchase agreement '' or `` asset purchase agreement '' depending on the structure of the transaction . 
corporate acquisitions can be characterized for legal purposes as either `` asset purchases '' in which the seller sells business assets to the buyer ,  or `` equity purchases '' in which the buyer purchases equity interests in a target company from one or more selling shareholders . 
a reverse merger occurs when a privately held company  -lrb-  often one that has strong prospects and is eager to raise financing  -rrb-  buys a publicly listed shell company ,  usually one with no business and limited assets . 
the u . s .  government's interest in microsoft began in 1992 with an inquiry by the federal trade commission over whether microsoft was abusing its monopoly on the pc operating system market . 
underlying these disputes were questions over whether microsoft had manipulated its application programming interfaces to favor ie over third-party web browsers ,  microsoft's conduct in forming restrictive licensing agreements with original equipment manufacturers  -lrb-  oems  -rrb-  ,  and microsoft's intent in its course of conduct . 
by 1984 microsoft was one of the most successful software companies ,  with $55 million in 1983 sales . 
all lines of constant bearing  -lrb-  rhumbs or loxodromes—those making constant angles with the meridians  -rrb-  are represented by straight segments on a mercator map . 
because the linear scale of a mercator map increases with latitude ,  it distorts the size of geographical objects far from the equator and conveys a distorted perception of the overall geometry of the planet . 
the name and explanations given by mercator to his world map  -lrb-  : `` new and augmented description of earth corrected for the use of sailors ''  -rrb-  show that it was expressly conceived for the use of marine navigation . 
the king midas who ruled phrygia in the late 8th century bc is known from greek and assyrian sources . 
there are many ,  and often contradictory ,  legends about the most ancient king midas . 
labraid repented of all the barbers he had put to death and admitted his secret . 
the most famous king midas is popularly remembered in greek mythology for his ability to turn everything he touched into gold . 
herodotus says that croesus regarded the phrygian royal house as `` friends '' but does not mention whether the phrygian royal house still ruled as  -lrb-  vassal  -rrb-  kings of phrygia . 
however ,  homer does not mention midas or gordias ,  while instead mentioning two other phrygian kings ,  mygdon and otreus . 
gold was perhaps not the only metallic source of midas' riches: `` king midas ,  a phrygian ,  son of cybele ,  first discovered black and white lead '' . 
another king midas ruled phrygia in the late 8th century bc ,  up until the sacking of gordium by the cimmerians ,  when he is said to have committed suicide . 
misandry can manifest itself in numerous ways ,  including sexual discrimination ,  denigration of men ,  violence against men ,  and sexual objectification of men . 
misandry  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the hatred of ,  contempt for ,  or prejudice against men or boys . 
the piece was part of a promotion for his book `` man ,  interrupted: why young men are struggling & what we can do about it '' . 
in a study of 488 college students regarding ambivalent sexism towards men ,  researchers found that women who did not identify as feminists were more likely to be hostile towards men than self-identified feminists ,  but also more likely to hold benevolent views towards men . 
hooks has theorized previously that this demonization led to an unnecessary rift between the men's movement and the women's movement . 
johnson asserts that culture offers no comparable anti-male ideology to misogyny and that `` people often confuse men as individuals with men as a dominant and privileged category of people '' and that `` given the reality of women's oppression ,  male privilege ,  and men's enforcement of both ,  it's hardly surprising that `` every '' woman should have moments where she resents or even hates 'men' '' . 
she argued it was a misandrist position to consider men ,  as a class ,  to be irreformable or rapists . 
stanford university professor philip zimbardo writing for psychology today ,  argued that there was an empathy gap between young men and young women ,  with young women receiving more empathy and sympathy ,  and that young men were sometimes demonized and given conflicting messages about acceptable behavior and that this contributed to negative effects such as high young male suicide rates . 
the author bell hooks has discussed the issue of `` man hating '' during the early period of women's liberation as a reaction to patriarchal oppression and women who have had bad experiences with men in non-feminist social movements . 
let `` r '' be a ring and let `` g '' be a monoid . 
we have that α -lrb-  `` r ''  -rrb-  commutes with β -lrb-  `` g ''  -rrb-  for all `` r '' in `` r '' and `` g '' in `` g '' . 
the magic lantern would prove to be a perfect successor . 
the magic lantern can be seen as a further development of camera obscura . 
movement of projected images was also possible by moving the magic lantern itself . 
there are many gaps and uncertainties in the magic lantern's recorded history . 
several types of projection systems existed before the invention of the magic lantern . 
one of christiaan huygens' contacts imagined how athanasius kircher would use the magic lantern: `` if he would know about the invention of the lantern he would surely frighten the cardinals with specters . `` 
some lanterns ,  including those of christiaan huygens and jan van musschenbroek ,  used 3 lenses . 
prominent dutch scientist christiaan huygens ,  is nowadays widely accepted as the true inventor of the magic lantern . 
this can be seen as an indication that the very first magic lantern demonstrations may already have included projections of simple animations . 
although the popularity of magic lanterns waned after the introduction of movies in the 1890s ,  they remained a common medium until slide projectors came into widespread use during the 1950s . 
the magic lantern was not only a direct ancestor of the motion picture projector as a means for visual storytelling ,  but it could itself be used to project moving images . 
in 1664 parisian engineer pierre petit wrote to huygens to ask for some specifications of the lantern ,  because he was trying to construct one after seeing the lantern of `` the dane ''  -lrb-  probably walgensten  -rrb-  . 
pieter was the brother of jan van musschenbroek ,  the maker of an outstanding magic lantern with excellent lenses and a diaphragm  -lrb-  see illustration above  -rrb-  . 
the magic lantern used a concave mirror in back of a light source to direct as much of the light as possible through a small rectangular sheet of glass—a `` lantern slide ''—on which was the image to be projected ,  and onward into a lens at the front of the apparatus . 
lynch was nominated for an academy award for best director for the film . 
another recurring element in lynch's films is his experimentation with sound . 
it is the second david lynch film in this line of blu-rays after `` the elephant man '' . 
it was named best picture by the new york film critics circle at the 2001 new york film critics circle awards and online film critics society . 
in the british film institute's 2012 sight & sound poll ,  `` mulholland drive '' was ranked the 28th greatest film ever made . 
in the british film institute's 2012 `` sight & sound '' poll ,  `` mulholland drive '' was ranked the 28th greatest film ever made . 
he gave the film the tagline `` a love story in the city of dreams '' . 
 ''mulholland drive '' premiered at the 2001 cannes film festival in may to major critical acclaim . 
badalamenti ,  who was nominated for awards from the american film institute  -lrb-  afi  -rrb-  and the british academy of film and television arts  -lrb-  bafta  -rrb-  for his work on the film ,  also has a cameo as an espresso aficionado and mobster . 
the script was later rewritten and expanded when lynch decided to transform it into a feature film . 
the first portion of the film that establishes the characters of betty ,  rita and adam presents some of the most logical filmmaking of lynch's career . 
special features in later versions and overseas versions of the dvd include a lynch interview at the cannes film festival and highlights of the debut of the film at cannes . 
in 2016, `` mulholland drive '' was named as the greatest film of the 21st century in a poll conducted by bbc culture . 
 ''the guardian '' asked six well-known film critics for their own perceptions of the overall meaning in `` mulholland drive '' . 
 ''mulholland drive '' was not without its detractors . 
 ''mulholland drive '' has been compared with billy wilder's film noir classic `` sunset boulevard ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- ,  another tale about broken dreams in hollywood ,  and early in the film rita is shown crossing sunset boulevard at night . 
in 2011, online magazine `` slate '' named `` mulholland drive '' in its piece on `` new classics '' as the most enduring film since 2000.
actress sherilyn fenn stated in a 2014 interview that the original idea came during the filming of `` twin peaks '' ,  as a spin-off film for her character of audrey horne . 
david lynch uses various methods of deception in `` mulholland drive '' . 
roche concludes that `` mulholland drive '' is a mystery film not because it allows the audience to view the solution to a question ,  but the film itself is a mystery that is held together `` by the spectator-detective's desire to make sense '' of it . 
one film analyst ,  jennifer hudson ,  writes of him ,  `` like most surrealists ,  lynch's language of the unexplained is the fluid language of dreams . `` 
an analysis of the film in terms of the lesbian as a tragic figure notes the media response to the film: `` reviewers rhapsodized in particular and at length about the film's sex scenes ,  as if there were a contest to see who could enjoy this representation of female same-sex desire the most . `` 
the story follows several other vignettes and characters ,  including a hollywood film director  -lrb-  theroux  -rrb-  . 
the following year ,  `` mulholland drive '' was named as the greatest film of the 21st century in a poll conducted by bbc culture . 
film theorist david roche writes that lynch films do not simply tell detective stories ,  but rather force the audience into the role of becoming detectives themselves to make sense of the narratives ,  and that `` mulholland drive '' ,  like other lynch films ,  frustrates `` the spectator's need for a rational diegesis by playing on the spectator's mistake that narration is synonymous with diegesis '' . 
the gospel of mary is the only surviving gospel named after a woman and it provides important information about the role of women in the early church . 
although the gospel of mark ,  the earliest surviving gospel ,  does not mention mary magdalene until jesus's crucifixion ,  the gospel of luke provides a brief summary of her role during his ministry:
the first part of the gospel deals with jesus's parting words to his followers after a post-resurrection appearance . 
all four canonical gospels agree that mary magdalene ,  along with several other women ,  watched jesus's crucifixion from a distance . 
all four canonical gospels ,  as well as the apocryphal gospel of peter ,  agree that jesus's body was taken down from the cross and buried by a man named joseph of arimathea . 
simon peter said to them: let mary go forth from among us ,  for women are not worthy of the life . 
because mary is listed as one of the women who were supporting jesus's ministry financially ,  she must have been relatively wealthy . 
peter said to mary ,  `` sister we know that the savior loved you more than the rest of woman . 
the earliest and most reliable sources about her life are the three synoptic gospels of mark ,  matthew ,  and luke ,  which were all written during the first century ad . 
casey argues that the reason for this abrupt ending may be because the gospel of mark is an unfinished first draft . 
first ,  it describes an appearance by jesus to mary magdalene alone  -lrb-  as in the gospel of john  -rrb-  ,  followed by brief descriptions of him appearing to the two disciples on the road to emmaus  -lrb-  as in the gospel of luke  -rrb-  and to the eleven remaining disciples  -lrb-  as in the gospel of matthew  -rrb-  . 
the gospel of john therefore portrays mary magdalene as the first apostle ,  the apostle sent `` to '' the apostles . 
mary magdalene's role in the resurrection narrative is greatly increased in the account from the gospel of john . 
the gospel of luke lists mary as one of the women who traveled with jesus and helped support his ministry `` out of their resources '' ,  indicating that she was probably relatively wealthy . 
saint mary magdalene ,  sometimes called simply the magdalene ,  was a jewish woman who ,  according to the four canonical gospels ,  traveled with jesus as one of his followers and was a witness to his crucifixion ,  burial ,  and resurrection . 
that is why he loved her more than us . `` 
the statement that mary had been possessed by seven demons is repeated in  ,  part of the `` longer ending '' of that gospel – this is not found in the earliest manuscripts ,  and is actually a second-century addition to the original text ,  possibly based on the gospel of luke . 
for every woman who makes herself male shall enter into the kingdom of heaven . 
the gospel of philip ,  dating from the second or third century ,  survives in part among the texts found in nag hammadi in 1945.
in his apostolic letter `` mulieris dignitatem ''  -lrb-  `` on the dignity and vocation of women '' ,  parts 67–69 -rrb- dated august 15, 1988, pope john paul ii dealt with the easter events in relation to the women being present at the tomb after the resurrection ,  in a section entitled 'first witnesses of the resurrection':
when jesus rebukes him for this ,  he bases his response on the same premise ,  stating that mary and all faithful women like her will `` become '' men and that salvation is therefore open to all ,  even those who are presently women . 
in the gnostic gospels ,  mary magdalene's closeness to jesus results in tension with the other disciples ,  particularly simon peter . 
n .  t .  wright states that `` it is ,  frankly ,  impossible to imagine that the women at the tomb were inserted into the tradition after paul's day . `` 
casey challenges this argument ,  contending that the women at the tomb are not legal witnesses ,  but rather heroines in line with a long jewish tradition . 
the gospel of thomas ,  usually dated to the late first or early second century ,  was among the ancient texts discovered in the nag hammadi library in 1945.
the eastern orthodox church has never identified mary magdalene with mary of bethany or the `` sinful woman '' who anoints jesus in luke 7:36–50 and has always taught that mary was a virtuous woman her entire life ,  even before her conversion . 
the unnamed `` sinful woman '' in is never identified as a prostitute and ,  in jewish society at the time the gospel was written ,  `` sinful '' could have simply meant that she `` did not assiduously observe the law of moses '' . 
he does conclude later ,  however ,  that mary magdalene must have been one of the people who had an experience in which she thought she saw the risen jesus ,  citing her prominence in the gospel resurrection narratives and her absence everywhere else in the gospels as evidence . 
the gospel of philip uses cognates of `` koinônos '' and coptic equivalents to refer to the literal pairing of men and women in marriage and sexual intercourse ,  but also metaphorically ,  referring to a spiritual partnership ,  and the reunification of the gnostic christian with the divine realm . 
the mention of her sister martha suggests a connection with the aforementioned woman in luke . 
in the gospel of luke ,  jesus visits the home of two sisters named mary and martha ,  living in an unnamed village . 
only in this account is the woman identified as mary ,  with the earlier reference in establishing her as the sister of martha and lazarus . 
the woman's name is not given in the gospels of matthew and mark ,  but the event is likewise placed in bethany ,  specifically at the home of one simon the leper ,  a man whose significance is not explained elsewhere in the gospels . 
29 july is the date of her commemoration also in the calendar of saints of the lutheran church  -lrb-  together with martha and lazarus  -rrb- ; and in the calendar of saints of the episcopal church and the church of england  -lrb-  together with martha  -rrb-  . 
a similar anointing is described in the gospel of luke as occurring at the home of one simon the pharisee in which a woman who had been sinful all her life ,  and who was crying ,  anointed jesus' feet and ,  when her tears started to fall on his feet ,  she wiped them with her hair . 
in the account of the raising of lazarus ,  jesus meets with the sisters in turn: martha followed by mary . 
john ,  however ,  clearly identifies mary of bethany with the woman who anointed christ's feet  -lrb-  12; cf . 
she is commemorated in the eastern orthodox and byzantine rite eastern catholic churches with her sister martha on 4 june ,  as well as on the sunday of the myrrhbearers  -lrb-  the third sunday of pascha  -rrb-  . 
from his adoption of the nation of islam in 1952 until he broke with it in 1964, malcolmx promoted the nation's teachings . 
on march8, 1964, malcolmx publicly announced his break from the nation of islam . 
by march 1964, malcolmx had grown disillusioned with the nation of islam and its leader elijah muhammad . 
reactions to malcolmx's assassination were varied . 
during 1955, malcolmx continued his successful recruitment of members on behalf of the nation of islam . 
malcolmx is widely regarded as the second most influential leader of the nation of islam after elijah muhammad . 
throughout 1964, as his conflict with the nation of islam intensified ,  malcolmx was repeatedly threatened . 
during 1962 and 1963, events caused malcolmx to reassess his relationship with the nation of islam ,  and particularly its leader ,  elijah muhammad . 
malcolmx was equally critical of the civil rights movement . 
many whites and some blacks were alarmed by malcolmx and the statements he made during this period . 
when the reporter told him it seemed to be ,  malcolmx told him ,  `` then i'm for it . `` 
after his parole in august 1952, malcolmx visited elijah muhammad in chicago . 
many cities have renamed streets after malcolmx . 
in late 1948, little wrote to elijah muhammad ,  the leader of the nation of islam . 
by the late 1950s ,  malcolmx was using a new name ,  malcolm shabazz or malik el-shabazz ,  although he was still widely referred to as malcolmx . 
in the weeks after he left the nation of islam ,  several sunni muslims encouraged malcolmx to learn about their faith . 
malcolmx later said that white violence killed four of his father's brothers . 
on february19, 1965, malcolmx told interviewer gordon parks that the nation of islam was actively trying to kill him . 
malcolmx was buried at ferncliff cemetery in hartsdale ,  new york . 
the movement could then bring its complaints before the united nations ,  where malcolmx said the emerging nations of the world would add their support . 
malcolmx has been described as one of the greatest and most influential african americans in history . 
malcolmx had by now become a media favorite ,  and some nation members believed he was a threat to muhammad's leadership . 
malcolmx mentored and guided louisx  -lrb-  later known as louis farrakhan  -rrb-  ,  who eventually became the leader of the nation of islam . 
earl grant ,  one of malcolmx's associates who was present at the assassination ,  later wrote:
except for his autobiography ,  malcolmx left no published writings . 
malcolmx argued for the affirmative ,  and interest in the debate was so high that it was televised nationally by the bbc . 
while he was a member of the nation of islam ,  malcolmx taught its beliefs ,  and his statements often began with the phrase `` the honorable elijah muhammad teaches us that .  .  . ``  it is virtually impossible now to discern whether malcolmx's personal beliefs at the time diverged from the teachings of the nation of islam . 
the black power movement ,  the black arts movement ,  and the widespread adoption of the slogan `` black is beautiful '' can all trace their roots to malcolmx . 
in september 1960, at the united nations general assembly in new york city ,  malcolmx was invited to the official functions of several african nations . 
malcolmx said that islam was the `` true religion of black mankind '' and that christianity was `` the white man's religion '' that had been imposed upon african americans by their slave-masters . 
after returning to the u . s .  ,  malcolmx addressed a wide variety of audiences . 
on february 21, 1965, he was assassinated by three members of the nation of islam . 
in 1953, the fbi began surveillance of him ,  turning its attention from malcolmx's possible communist associations to his rapid ascent in the nation of islam . 
while the civil rights movement fought against racial segregation ,  malcolmx advocated the complete separation of blacks from whites . 
in the last months of his life ,  however ,  malcolmx began to reconsider his support for black nationalism after meeting northern african revolutionaries who ,  to all appearances ,  were white . 
malcolmx was clearly a product of the hate and violence invested in the negro's blighted existence in this nation . 
a few days later farrakhan denied that he `` ordered the assassination '' of malcolmx ,  although he again acknowledged that he `` created the atmosphere that ultimately led to malcolmx's assassination '' . 
in the late 1960s ,  increasingly radical black activists based their movements largely on malcolmx and his teachings . 
in cities around the world ,  malcolmx's birthday  -lrb-  may19 -rrb- is commemorated as malcolm x day . 
later malcolmx recalled feeling that the white world offered no place for a career-oriented black man ,  regardless of talent . 
after leaving the nation of islam ,  malcolmx announced his willingness to work with leaders of the civil rights movement ,  though he advocated some changes to their policies . 
freedb clients can also access musicbrainz data through the freedb protocol by using the musicbrainz to freedb gateway service ,  mb2freedb . 
a separate application ,  such as musicbrainz picard ,  must be used for this . 
musicbrainz is a project that aims to create an open data music database that is similar to the freedb project . 
besides collecting metadata about music ,  musicbrainz also allows looking up recordings by their acoustic fingerprint . 
the mennonite church usa  -lrb-  mcusa  -rrb-  and the mennonite church canada are the resulting denominations of the 2002 merger of the  -lrb-  general assembly  -rrb-  mennonite church and the general conference mennonite church . 
the `` russian mennonites ''  -lrb-  german: `` russlandmennoniten ''  -rrb-  today are of german language ,  tradition and ethnicity . 
some expelled congregations were affiliated both with the mennonite church and the general conference mennonite church . 
today the majority of traditional russian mennonites uses standard german in church and for reading and writing . 
prior to emigration to america ,  anabaptists in europe were divided between those of dutch/north german and swiss/south german background . 
conservative mennonite groups ,  who speak pennsylvania german ,  plautdietsch  -lrb-  low german  -rrb-  ,  or bernese german fit well into the definition of an ethnic group ,  while more liberal groups and converts in developing countries do not . 
the vast majority of anabaptists of swiss/south german ancestry today lives in the us and canada ,  while the largest group of dutch/north german anabaptists are the russian mennonites ,  who live today mostly in latin america . 
over the centuries many amish individuals and whole churches left the amish and became mennonites again . 
beginning in 1989, a series of consultations ,  discussions ,  proposals ,  and sessions led to the unification of two north american bodies  -lrb-  the `` mennonite church & general conference mennonite church ''  -rrb-  and the related canadian conference of mennonites in canada into the mennonite church usa and the mennonite church canada in 2000.
larger groups of dutch/north german mennonites came to north america from the russian empire after 1873, especially to kansas and manitoba . 
mennonite church canada is a conference of mennonites in canada ,  with head offices in winnipeg ,  manitoba . 
some of the followers of zwingli's reformed church thought that requiring church membership beginning at birth was inconsistent with the new testament example . 
many of the modern churches are descended from those groups that abandoned traditional mennonite practices . 
in later years ,  other schisms among amish resulted in such groups as the old order amish ,  new order amish ,  kauffman amish mennonites ,  conservative mennonite conference and biblical mennonite alliance . 
these immigrants ,  along with the amish of northern new york state ,  formed the nucleus of the apostolic christian church in the united states . 
in the early 18th century ,  100,000 germans from the palatinate emigrated to pennsylvania ,  where they became known collectively as the pennsylvania dutch  -lrb-  from the anglicization of `` deutsch '' or german .   -rrb- 
a trickle of north german mennonites began the migration to america in 1683, followed by a much larger migration of swiss/south german mennonites beginning in 1707.
the mcc participates in the canadian council of churches ,  the evangelical fellowship of canada ,  and the mennonite world conference . 
the local register stack provides each subroutine with its own rl local registers ,  designated by $0 through  . 
mmix uses ieee 754 floating-point numbers . 
mmix is a big-endian 64-bit reduced instruction set computer  -lrb-  risc  -rrb-  ,  with 256 64-bit general-purpose registers ,  32 64-bit special-purpose registers ,  fixed-length 32-bit instructions and a 64-bit virtual address space . 
the maastricht treaty  -lrb-  officially the treaty on european union  -rrb-  was signed on 7 february 1992 by the members of the european community in maastricht ,  netherlands to further european integration . 
today it is one of two treaties forming the constitutional basis of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  ,  the other being the treaty on the functioning of the european union . 
the signing of the treaty of maastricht took place in maastricht ,  netherlands ,  on 7 february 1992.
in 2005 magdeburg celebrated its 1200th anniversary . 
magdeburg has been destroyed twice in its history . 
the archbishopric of magdeburg was founded in 968 at the synod of ravenna; adalbert of magdeburg was consecrated as its first archbishop . 
in june 2013 magdeburg was hit by record breaking flooding . 
visitors from many countries began to trade with magdeburg . 
from 1949 until german reunification on 3 october 1990, magdeburg belonged to the german democratic republic . 
in the 13th century ,  magdeburg became a member of the hanseatic league . 
in fact ,  the troped clausulas that were the forerunner of the motet were originally called `` motelli ''  -lrb-  from the french `` mot '' ,  `` word ''  -rrb-  ,  soon replaced by the term `` moteti '' . 
in western music ,  a motet is a mainly vocal musical composition ,  of highly diverse form and style ,  from the late medieval era to the present . 
robert's poem was rewritten and continued in prose in the 13th century as the `` estoire de merlin '' ,  also called the vulgate `` merlin `` or prose `` merlin '' . 
geoffrey's `` prophetiae '' do not reveal much about merlin's background . 
later medieval works also deal with the merlin legend . 
geoffrey dealt with merlin again in his third work ,  `` vita merlini '' . 
he goes on to add new episodes that tie merlin with king arthur and his predecessors . 
the name `` merlin '' is derived from the welsh `` myrddin '' ,  the name of the bard who was one of the chief sources for the later legendary figure . 
merchants have been known for as long as humans have engaged in trade and commerce . 
a merchant is a person who trades in commodities produced by other people . 
since his release from prison ,  milken has funded medical research . 
michael robert milken  -lrb-  born july 4, 1946 -rrb- is an american financier and philanthropist . 
a mentat is a fictional type of human ,  presented in frank herbert's science fiction `` dune '' universe . 
to be a mentat may be a profession in itself ,  or the discipline may be added to other roles . 
in `` god emperor of dune ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- ,  leto ii outlaws the mentat order and crushes any renegade training schools he finds . 
in 1886, crown prince rudolf of austria ,  only son of emperor franz joseph i of austria and empress elisabeth ,  and heir to the austro-hungarian crown ,  acquired the manor and transformed it into a hunting lodge . 
the position of the main cross in the chapel is supposed to be where the bed of rudolf and vetsera was situated . 
since the most commonly encountered keyboard instrument is the piano ,  the keyboard layout is often referred to as the `` piano keyboard '' . 
simpler electronic keyboards have switches under each key . 
in a typical keyboard layout ,  `` black note '' keys have uniform width ,  and `` white note '' keys have uniform width and uniform spacing at the front of the keyboard . 
other examples of variations in keyboard design include the jankó keyboard and the chromatic keyboard systems on the chromatic button accordion and bandoneón . 
a musical keyboard is the set of adjacent depressible levers or keys on a musical instrument . 
advanced electronic keyboards may provide hundreds of key touch levels and have 88 keys ,  as most pianos do . 
there are some examples of a musical keyboard layout used for non-musical devices . 
jeffrey bada ,  himself miller's student ,  inherited the original equipment from the experiment when miller died in 2007.
this suggests the origin of significant amounts of amino acids may have occurred on earth even with an atmosphere containing carbon dioxide and nitrogen . 
the formaldehyde ,  ammonia ,  and hcn then react by strecker synthesis to form amino acids and other biomolecules:
most of the natural amino acids ,  hydroxyacids ,  purines ,  pyrimidines ,  and sugars have been made in variants of the miller experiment . 
after miller's death in 2007, scientists examining sealed vials preserved from the original experiments were able to show that there were actually well over 20 different amino acids produced in miller's original experiments . 
miller's experiment was therefore a remarkable success at synthesizing complex organic molecules from simpler chemicals ,  considering that all life uses just 20 different amino acids . 
researches also observed slightly different adsorption preferences for different amino acids ,  and postulated that ,  if coupled to a diluted solution of mixed amino acids ,  such preferences could lead to sequencing . 
in a 1996 interview ,  stanley miller recollected his lifelong experiments following his original work and stated: `` just turning on the spark in a basic pre-biotic experiment will yield 11 out of 20 amino acids . `` 
this has been used to infer an origin of life outside of earth: the panspermia hypothesis . 
the miller–urey experiment  -lrb-  or miller experiment  -rrb-  was a chemical experiment that simulated the conditions thought at the time to be present on the early earth ,  and tested the chemical origin of life under those conditions . 
in boolean logic ,  the majority function  -lrb-  also called the median operator  -rrb-  is a function from `` n '' inputs to one output . 
the majority function produces `` 1 '' when more than half of the inputs are 1; it produces `` 0 '' when more than half the inputs are 0.
a majority gate returns true if and only if more than 50% of its inputs are true . 
if the term `` −1/2 '' is omitted ,  the formula can be used for a function that breaks ties in favor of ones . 
a monolithic kernel is an operating system architecture where the entire operating system is working in kernel space . 
this modularity of the operating system is at the binary  -lrb-  image  -rrb-  level and not at the architecture level . 
modern sources sometimes refer to the greco-roman religion as `` roman mithraism '' or `` western mithraism '' to distinguish it from persian worship of mithra . 
the mysteries were popular among the roman military . 
the term `` mithraism '' is a modern convention . 
for the 1984 model year ,  the front-wheel-drive chrysler minivans were introduced . 
ford and general motors followed by introducing minivans of their own  -lrb-  the 1985 chevrolet astro/gmc safari and 1986 ford aerostar  -rrb-  ,  both with `` conventional '' rear-wheel drive . 
in north america ,  the term `` minivan '' derives from comparison to traditional full-size vans ,  including the ford e-series ,  dodge ram van ,  and the chevrolet van . 
in 1972, designers at ford motor company developed the ford carousel prototype as a variant of the upcoming redesign of the 1975 ford e-series . 
while imported from japan ,  the 1989-1998 mazda mpv was the first japanese-brand minivan developed specifically for north america  -lrb-  with a european-style hinged rear door instead of a sliding door  -rrb-  . 
thompson died in 1903.
currently ,  one of the ingredients of moxie is `` gentian root extractives '' ,  which may contribute to the drink's unique flavor . 
moxie's flavor is unique ,  a sweet drink with a bitter aftertaste . 
after a few years ,  thompson added soda water to the formula and changed the product's name to `` beverage moxie nerve food '' . 
these manifestos may offer a reflection or rethinking of some aspect of education or teaching and learning . 
educational manifestos are documents proposing a change or changes to a current education system . 
educational manifestos include personal or group beliefs about what is important or right in education ,  make statements about the current state of education ,  differentiate common terms in education ,  and make suggestions for changing current education systems . 
in 2004, moore reunited with her `` dick van dyke show '' castmates for a reunion `` episode '' called `` the dick van dyke show revisited '' . 
in 1961, carl reiner cast moore in `` the dick van dyke show '' ,  a weekly series based on reiner's own life and career as a writer for sid caesar's television variety show `` your show of shows '' ,  telling the cast from the outset that it would run for no more than five years . 
in 2006, moore guest-starred as christine st .  george ,  a high-strung host of a fictional tv show ,  on three episodes of fox sitcom `` that '70s show '' . 
after six years of ratings in the top 20, the show slipped to number 39 during season seven . 
mary tyler moore  -lrb-  december 29, 1936 – january 25, 2017 -rrb- was an american actress ,  known for her roles in the television sitcoms `` the mary tyler moore show ''  -lrb-  1970–1977 -rrb- ,  in which she starred as mary richards ,  a single woman working as a local news producer in minneapolis ,  and `` the dick van dyke show ''  -lrb-  1961–1966 -rrb- ,  in which she played laura petrie ,  a former dancer turned westchester homemaker ,  wife and mother . 
in 1981 she won the golden globe award for best actress in a drama for that role . 
due to her roles on both `` the mary tyler moore show '' and `` the dick van dyke show '' ,  in which her characters often broke from stereotypical images of women and pushed gender norms ,  moore became a cultural icon and served as an inspiration for many younger actresses ,  professional women ,  and feminists . 
 ''the mary tyler moore show '' became a touchpoint of the women's movement for its portrayal of an independent working woman ,  which challenged the traditional woman's role in marriage and family . 
moore was born in brooklyn ,  new york ,  to george tyler moore  -lrb-  1913–2006 -rrb- ,  a clerk ,  and his wife marjorie hackett  -lrb-  1916–1992 -rrb- . 
during season six of `` the mary tyler moore show '' ,  moore appeared in a musical/variety special for cbs titled `` mary's incredible dream '' ,  which featured ben vereen . 
in the mid-1990s ,  moore had a cameo and a guest-starring role as herself on two episodes of `` ellen '' . 
in february 1981, moore was nominated for the academy award for best actress for her role in the drama film `` ordinary people '' but lost to sissy spacek for her role in `` coal miner's daughter '' . 
in 1970, after having appeared earlier in a pivotal one-hour musical special called `` dick van dyke and the other woman '' ,  moore and husband grant tinker successfully pitched a sitcom centered on moore to cbs . 
remey traveled extensively to promote the bahá'í faith during the ministry of `abdu'l-bahá . 
shoghi effendi recorded that remey and his bahá'í companion ,  howard struven ,  were the first bahá'ís to circle the globe teaching the religion . 
remey lived for some time in washington ,  d . c .  ,  in the 1930s and 1940s . 
remey signed a unanimous declaration of the hands that shoghi effendi had died `` without having appointed his successor '' . 
another of remey's followers ,  leland jensen  -lrb-  d .  1996 -rrb- ,  who made several religious claims of his own ,  formed a sect known as the bahá'ís under the provisions of the covenant following remey's death; he believed that remey was the adopted son of abdu'l-baha ,  and that remey's adopted son joseph pepe was the third guardian . 
all those that accept mason remey as the second guardian do not accept the universal house of justice established in 1963.
 ''the more stuff in it ,  the busier the work of art ,  the worse it is . 
in visual arts ,  music ,  and other mediums ,  minimalism is an art movement that began in post–world war ii western art ,  most strongly with american visual arts in the 1960s and early 1970s . 
in the wake of those exhibitions and a few others the art movement called `` minimal art '' emerged . 
this movement was criticized by modernist formalist art critics and historians . 
john pawson is a british minimalist architect; his design concepts are soul ,  light ,  and order . 
luis barragán is an exemplary modern minimalist designer . 
art begins with the getting rid of nature . `` 
minimalistic design has been highly influenced by japanese traditional design and architecture . 
abbas kiarostami is also considered a creater of minimalistic films . 
with regard to home design ,  more attractive `` minimalistic '' designs are not truly minimalistic because they are larger ,  and use more expensive building materials and finishes . 
there have been some further constructions of what i wrote that go over into preposterousness: that i regard flatness and the inclosing of flatness not just as the limiting conditions of pictorial art ,  but as criteria of aesthetic quality in pictorial art; that the further a work advances the self-definition of an art ,  the better that work is bound to be . 
in minimalist architecture ,  design elements strive to convey the message of simplicity . 
minimalism in visual art ,  generally referred to as `` minimal art '' ,  `` literalist art '' and `` abc art '' emerged in new york in the early 1960s as new and older artists moved toward geometric abstraction; exploring via painting in the cases of frank stella ,  kenneth noland ,  al held ,  ellsworth kelly ,  robert ryman and others; and sculpture in the works of various artists including david smith ,  anthony caro ,  tony smith ,  sol lewitt ,  carl andre ,  dan flavin ,  donald judd and others . 
the term `` minimal music '' was derived around 1970 by michael nyman from the concept of minimalism ,  which was earlier applied to the visual arts . 
minimalism was also a reaction against the painterly subjectivity of abstract expressionism that had been dominant in the new york school during the 1940s and 1950s . 
minimalist architecture became popular in the late 1980s in london and new york ,  where architects and fashion designers worked together in the boutiques to achieve simplicity ,  using white elements ,  cold lighting ,  large space with minimum objects and furniture . 
minimalist architectural designers focus on the connection between two perfect planes ,  elegant lighting ,  and the void spaces left by the removal of three-dimensional shapes in an architectural design . 
in the `` inductor magneto '' ,  the magnet is rotated and the coil remains stationary . 
an ignition magneto ,  or high tension magneto ,  is a magneto that provides current for the ignition system of a spark-ignition engine ,  such as a petrol engine . 
as the magnet moves with respect to the coil ,  the magnetic flux linkage of the coil changes . 
in the type known as a `` shuttle magneto '' ,  the engine rotates a coil of wire between the poles of a magnet . 
magneto ignition was introduced on the 1899 daimler phönix . 
because the magneto has low voltage output at low speed ,  starting an engine is more difficult . 
hodgson is credited for devising the show's concept . 
hodgson is overseeing the writing . 
as part of its live show events for 2016, rifftrax presented a `` mst3k '' reunion at a live show in minneapolis in june 2016.
in addition to the show's fandom ,  a number of celebrities have expressed their love for the show . 
hodgson and mallon provided a seven-minute demo reel ,  which led to the network greenlighting `` mst3k '' as one of the first two shows picked up by the new network . 
during the 2017 `` turkey day '' marathon ,  hodgson announced that netflix had greenlit a twelfth season of `` mst3k '' . 
 ''mst3k '' ran for three more seasons on the sci-fi channel . 
while the show was on sci-fi ,  one thanksgiving day marathon of `` mst3k '' was held during its first season ,  but lacked any new interstitial material . 
the development of the show's theme song would lead to establishing elements for the show's ongoing premise ,  with hodgson now portraying himself as the character joel robinson . 
 ''mst3k ''s riffing style to poke fun at bad movies ,  films ,  and tv shows ,  have been used in other works . 
the various cast and crew from the show's broadcast run have continued to produce comedy works following the show . 
the shows later moved to off-network syndication . 
during hodgson's period on the show ,  the final sketch aboard the `` satellite '' often included reading of fan mail from the `` mst3k fan club . `` 
the reactions of those parodied by `` mst3k '' have been mixed . 
the network cancelled `` mst3k '' after a six-episode seventh season . 
hodgson and ray also toured in late 2018 as part of a 30th anniversary of `` mst3k '' in a similar format to the 2017 tour . 
in 2004, the show was listed as in a featured `` tv guide '' article ,  `` 25 top cult shows ever ! 
the 2017 turkey day was hosted by hodgson ,  ray and felicia day ,  and concluded with a surprise announcement that the show had been renewed on netflix for another season . 
as of june 1, 2018, the show has been removed from comet's schedule . 
the show's theme song ,  the `` love theme from mystery science theater 3000 '' ,  was written by hodgson and weinstein ,  which helped to cement some of the broader narrative elements of the show ,  such as the mads and joel being part of an experiment . 
during this time a fan club was set up and the show held its first live show at scott hansen's comedy gallery in minneapolis ,  to a crowd of over 600.
both old movies and music inspired several of the show's character names as developed by hodgson . 
other related projects by the `` mst3k '' crew following the show's end include: in 2000, most of the cast of the sci-fi era of the show collaborated on a humor website ,  timmy big hands ,  that closed in 2001.
rex reason ,  star of `` this island earth '' ,  made appearances at several `` mst3k '' events and credits `` mst3k '' with introducing the film to a new generation . 
starting in 2010, hodgson had been trying to bring back `` mst3k '' ,  spurred on by fan appreciation of the cast and crew 25 years since the show's premiere and the success of his `` cinematic titanic '' project . 
hodgson felt the kickstarter approach was necessary so that the show's style and approach would be determined by fans rather than through a network if he had sought traditional broadcast funding ,  as well as to demonstrate the demand for the show through a successful campaign . 
hodgson had been trying to also bring back both beaulieu and conniff for this season ,  but could not work out the logistics in time . 
jeff lieberman ,  director of `` squirm '' ,  was also quite angry at the `` mst3k '' treatment of his film . 
in 2012, the show was listed as #3 in `` entertainment weekly ''s `` 25 best cult tv shows from the past 25 years '' ,  with the comment that ``  ''mst3k '' taught us that snarky commentary can be way more entertaining than the actual media . `` 
by the show's sixth season in 1996, comedy central had started creating an identity for its network under new leadership of doug herzog ,  which would lead to successful shows like `` the daily show '' ,  `` win ben stein's money '' and `` south park '' ,  leaving `` mst3k '' as an oddity on the network taking up limited program space . 
weinstein left the show after the first comedy channel season ,  reportedly in disagreement with hodgson about moving toward using scripted rather than ad-libbed jokes . 
the first `` mst3k '' live event was held on june 5 and 6, 1989 at the comedy gallery in minneapolis . 
hodgson aimed to follow in the pattern of what made for fan-favorite episodes from the original series ,  borrowing equally from the joel and mike eras; he noted there were about 30 episodes that he and fans universally agreed were the show's best ,  and expected to use these as templates as the basis of the new show . 
hodgson believed that the revival would need a wholly new cast ,  considering that the cast had completely turned over in the original series . 
in 2013, joel hodgson and trace beaulieu reprised their roles as joel robinson and crow t .  robot for cameo appearances in the fourth season of `` arrested development '' . 
music radio is a radio format in which music is the main broadcast content . 
the most popular format in the u . s .  is country music ,  but rock music sells the most . 
radio drama and comedy continue ,  often on public radio . 
these can be applied to all types of music . 
others followed suit and today music radio is the norm . 
the original formulaic radio format was top 40 music ,  now known within the industry as contemporary hit radio or `` chr '' . 
most music stations have djs that play music from a playlist determined by the program director ,  arranged by blocks of time . 
the radio station provides programming to attract listeners . 
music drives radio technology ,  including wide-band fm ,  modern digital radio systems such as digital radio mondiale ,  and even the rise of internet radio and music streaming services  -lrb-  such as pandora and spotify  -rrb-  . 
progressive rock radio  -lrb-  not to be confused with the progressive rock music genre  -rrb-  was freeform in style but constrained so that some kind of rock music was what was always or almost always played . 
many music stations in the united states perform news and timechecks only sparingly ,  preferring to put more music on the air . 
today ,  there are popular top 40 stations such as whtz-z100/new york city ,  102.7 kiis-fm/los angeles ,  and cbs radio's amp radio brand . 
some stations emphasize music ,  and reduce gags and call-ins in this period . 
jingles are radio's equivalent of neon signs . 
mmorpgs are played throughout the world . 
massively multiplayer online role-playing games  -lrb-  mmorpgs  -rrb-  are a combination of role-playing video games and massively multiplayer online games in which a very large number of players interact with one another within a virtual world . 
a system for recording the games data at regular intervals ,  without stopping the game ,  is also important . 
mmorpgs are distinguished from single-player or small multi-player online rpgs by the number of players able to interact together ,  and by the game's persistent world  -lrb-  usually hosted by the game's publisher  -rrb-  ,  which continues to exist and evolve while the player is offline and away from the game . 
debate rages in various gaming media over the long-term effect of video game overuse . 
in addition ,  the development team will need to have expertise with the fundamentals of game design: world-building ,  lore and game mechanics ,  as well as what makes games fun . 
mmorpgs generally have game moderators or game masters  -lrb-  frequently referred to as gms or `` mods ''  -rrb-  ,  who may be paid employees or unpaid volunteers who attempt to supervise the world . 
instance dungeons ,  sometimes shortened to `` instances '' ,  are game areas that are `` copied '' for individual players or groups ,  which keeps those in the instance separated from the rest of the game world . 
relationships formed in mmorpgs can often be just as intense as relationships formed between friends or partners met outside the game ,  and often involve elements of collaboration and trust between players . 
this business model is alternately called `` pay for perks '' or `` freemium '' ,  and games using it often describe themselves with the term `` free-to-play '' . 
depending on the number of players and the system architecture ,  an mmorpg might actually be run on multiple separate servers ,  each representing an independent world ,  where players from one server cannot interact with those from another; `` world of warcraft '' is a prominent example ,  with each separate server housing several thousand players . 
the multiplication of whole numbers may be thought as a repeated addition; that is ,  the multiplication of two numbers is equivalent to adding as many copies of one of them ,  the `` multiplicand '' ,  as the value of the other one ,  the `` multiplier '' . 
in arithmetic ,  multiplication is often written using the sign `` × '' between the terms; that is ,  in infix notation . 
the multiplier can be written first and multiplicand second  -lrb-  though the custom can vary by culture  -rrb- ; both can be called `` factors '' . 
malt is germinated cereal grains that have been dried in a process known as `` malting '' . 
malting is the process of converting barley or other cereal grains into malt for use in brewing ,  distilling ,  or in foods and takes place in a maltings ,  sometimes called a malthouse ,  or a malting floor . 
malt granules are the dried liquid extract from malt used in the brewing or distilling process . 
the term `` malt '' refers to several products of the process: the grains to which this process has been applied ,  for example malted barley; the sugar ,  heavy in maltose ,  derived from such grains ,  such as the baker's malt used in various cereals; or a product based on malted milk ,  similar to a malted milkshake  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  `` malts ''  -rrb-  . 
malt extract ,  also known as extract of malt ,  is a sweet ,  treacly substance used as a dietary supplement . 
malt extract is frequently used in the brewing of beer . 
the concentrated wort is called malt extract . 
the enzymes are deactivated by heating the malt . 
masonry is the building of structures from individual units ,  which are often laid in and bound together by mortar; the term `` masonry '' can also refer to the units themselves . 
in 1940 mickey appeared in his first feature-length film ,  `` fantasia '' . 
in the 1950s ,  mickey became more known for his appearances on television ,  particularly with `` the mickey mouse club '' . 
mickey's circular design is most noticeable in his ears . 
many television series have centered on mickey ,  such as the abc shows `` mickey mouse works ''  -lrb-  1999–2000 -rrb- ,  `` disney's house of mouse ''  -lrb-  2001–2003 -rrb- ,  disney channel's `` mickey mouse clubhouse ''  -lrb-  2006–2016 -rrb- ,  and `` mickey and the roadster racers ''  -lrb-  2017–  -rrb-  . 
each of mickey's hands has only three fingers and a thumb . 
the 1983 short film `` mickey's christmas carol '' marked the theatrical debut of wayne allwine as mickey mouse ,  who was the official voice of mickey from 1977 until his death in 2009.
mickey has recently been announced to star in two films . 
mickey mouse is a funny animal cartoon character and the mascot of the walt disney company . 
although moore himself was nervous at first about changing mickey ,  walt disney liked the new design and told moore `` that's the way i want mickey to be drawn from now on . `` 
mickey was the main character for the series '' mm mickey mouse mystery magazine '' ,  published in italy from 1999 to 2001.
in 1935, disney began to phase out the mickey mouse clubs ,  due to administration problems . 
iwan also became the first voice actor to portray mickey during disney’s rebranding of the character ,  providing the vocal effects of mickey in `` epic mickey '' as well as his voice in ``  '' and the remake of `` castle of illusion '' . 
jimmy macdonald took over the role in 1946, but walt provided mickey's voice again from 1955 to 1959 for `` the mickey mouse club '' television series on abc . 
about this time ,  story artists at disney were finding it increasingly difficult to write material for mickey . 
mickey was redesigned by animator fred moore which was first seen in `` the pointer ''  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- . 
beginning in 1930, mickey has also been featured extensively as a comic strip character . 
also in 1935, walt would receive a special award from the league of nations for creating mickey . 
 ''the opry house ''  -lrb-  march 28, 1929 -rrb- was the first time in which mickey wore his white gloves . 
mickey's dog pluto first appeared as mickey's pet in `` the moose hunt ''  -lrb-  1931 -rrb- after previously appearing as minnie's dog `` rover '' in `` the picnic ''  -lrb-  1930 -rrb- . 
in august 2018, abc television announced a two-hour prime time special ,  `` mickey's 90th spectacular '' ,  in honor of mickey's 90th birthday . 
in august 2018, abc television announced a two-hour prime time special ,  `` mickey's 90th spectacular '' ,  in honor of mickey's 90th birthday . 
from 10 july 1925, until his death in 1969, meher baba was silent . 
as a result ,  meher baba emerged as `` one of the enthusiasms of the '30s '' . 
on 31 january 1969, meher baba died at his home in meherazad . 
meher baba was an irani born in pune ,  india to a zoroastrian family . 
in the 1930s and 1940s ,  meher baba worked extensively with masts ,  persons `` intoxicated with god '' . 
pete townshend of the who ,  who became a follower of baba ,  dedicated his 1969 rock-opera `` tommy '' to meher baba in the record's gatefold . 
his early followers gave him the name meher baba  -lrb-  compassionate father  -rrb-  . 
in 1949 baba began an enigmatic period that he called the new life . 
in 1931, meher baba made the first of many visits to the west ,  where he attracted followers . 
in 1922, meher baba and his followers established manzil-e-meem  -lrb-  house of the master  -rrb-  in bombay  -lrb-  now mumbai  -rrb-  . 
meher baba ended the new life in february 1952 and once again began a round of public appearances throughout india and the west . 
on 30 september 1954 meher baba gave his final declaration message ,  in which he made enigmatic predictions . 
from the east-west gathering of 1962 onward ,  baba's health deteriorated . 
the avatar meher baba charitable trust ,  established by meher baba in 1959, maintains his tomb and pilgrimage facilities ,  as well as a free school and dispensary ,  a cataract clinic ,  and a veterinary clinic . 
thus meher baba offers many suggestions that keep one moving towards god-realization . 
one of the best known of these masts ,  known as mohammed mast ,  lived at meher baba's encampment at meherabad until his death in 2003.
baba related that there are 56 incarnate god-realized souls on earth at any given time . 
meher baba's silence has remained a mysterious issue as much among his followers as with the rest of the world . 
during the 1920s ,  meher baba opened a school ,  hospital and dispensary at meherabad .  ,  all three free and open to all castes and faiths . 
in the 1930s ,  meher baba began a period of extensive world travel and took several trips to europe and the united states . 
in a radar set ,  the magnetron's waveguide is connected to an antenna . 
the first major improvement was the split-anode magnetron ,  also known as a negative-resistance magnetron . 
the great advance in magnetron design was the resonant cavity magnetron or electron-resonance magnetron ,  which works on entirely different principles . 
in this form ,  approximately one billion magnetrons are in use today . 
however ,  the two-pole magnetron ,  also known as a split-anode magnetron ,  had relatively low efficiency . 
in the post-war era the magnetron became less widely used in the radar role . 
the modern magnetron is a fairly efficient device . 
several characteristics of the magnetron's output make radar use of the device somewhat problematic . 
an early form of magnetron was invented by h .  gerdien in 1910.
there is also a considerable electrical hazard around magnetrons ,  as they require a high voltage power supply . 
in 1910 hans gerdien of the siemens corporation invented a magnetron . 
the magnetron remains in widespread use in roles which require high power ,  but where precise control over frequency and phase is unimportant . 
the magnetron is a self-oscillating device requiring no external elements other than a power supply . 
all magnetrons contain a small amount of thorium mixed with tungsten in their filament . 
centimetric radar ,  made possible by the cavity magnetron ,  allowed for the detection of much smaller objects and the use of much smaller antennas . 
the magnetron was one of the few devices able to generate signals in the microwave band and it was the only one that was able to produce high power at centimeter wavelengths . 
since then ,  many millions of cavity magnetrons have been manufactured; while some have been for radar the vast majority have been for microwave ovens . 
the compact cavity magnetron tube drastically reduced the size of radar sets so that they could be more easily installed in night-fighter aircraft ,  anti-submarine aircraft and escort ships . 
to these two systems ,  the carolingian monarchs added a third ,  the `` aprisio '' ,  which linked manorialism with feudalism . 
in the generic plan of a medieval manor from `` shepherd's historical atlas '' ,  the strips of individually worked land in the open field system are immediately apparent . 
the word derives from traditional inherited divisions of the countryside ,  reassigned as local jurisdictions known as manors or seigneuries; each manor being subject to a lord  -lrb-  french `` seigneur ''  -rrb-  ,  usually holding his position in return for undertakings offered to a higher lord  -lrb-  see feudalism  -rrb-  . 
the other was a use of `` precaria '' or benefices ,  in which land was held conditionally  -lrb-  the root of the english word `` precarious ''  -rrb-  . 
for example ,  when a grand new house was required by the new owner of harlaxton manor ,  lincolnshire ,  in the 1830s ,  the site of the existing manor house at the edge of its village was abandoned for a new one ,  isolated in its park ,  with the village out of view . 
margaret mitchell was a southerner and a lifelong resident and native of atlanta ,  georgia . 
margaret mitchell spent her early childhood on jackson hill ,  east of downtown atlanta . 
however ,  for margaret ,  her grandmother was a great source of `` eye-witness information '' about the civil war and reconstruction in atlanta prior to her death in 1934.
margaret's father was not in favor of corporal punishment in school . 
mitchell would later recall what her mother had said to her:
mitchell's former jackson hill home was destroyed in the great atlanta fire of 1917.
margaret was raised in an era when children were `` seen and not heard '' . 
having no sisters to play with ,  margaret said she was a boy named jimmy until she was fourteen . 
in 1913 she wrote two stories with civil war settings; one includes her notation that `` 237 pages are in this book '' . 
her first story ,  `` atlanta girl sees italian revolution '' ,  by margaret mitchell upshaw ,  appeared on december 31, 1922.
mitchell wrote a romance novella ,  `` lost laysen '' ,  when she was fifteen years old  -lrb-  1916 -rrb- . 
clifford henry was the great love of margaret mitchell's life ,  according to her brother . 
after his death ,  she inherited property on jackson street where margaret's family lived . 
an avid reader ,  young margaret read `` boys' stories '' by g . a . 
soon after the riot ,  margaret's family decided to move away from jackson hill . 
a collection of articles written by mitchell for `` the atlanta journal '' was republished in book form . 
while the great war carried on in europe  -lrb-  1914–1918 -rrb- ,  margaret mitchell attended atlanta's washington seminary  -lrb-  now the westminster schools  -rrb-  ,  a `` fashionable '' private girls' school with an enrollment of over 300 students . 
mamie had been twenty-one years old and sis was thirteen when the civil war began . 
during the time mitchell worked for the `` atlanta journal '' ,  she wrote 129 feature articles ,  85 news stories ,  and several book reviews . 
while margaret and her mother were in new york in september 1918 preparing for margaret to attend college ,  stephens wired his father that he was safe after his ship had been torpedoed en route to new york from france . 
margaret munnerlyn mitchell  -lrb-  november 8, 1900 – august 16, 1949 -rrb- was an american novelist and journalist who wrote under the name peggy mitchell . 
jackson hill was an old ,  affluent part of the city . 
on july 4, 1925, 24-year-old margaret mitchell and 29-year-old john marsh were married in the unitarian-universalist church . 
1, which they affectionately named `` the dump ''  -lrb-  now the margaret mitchell house and museum  -rrb-  . 
some fish ,  both bony fish  -lrb-  osteichthyes  -rrb-  and jawless fish  -lrb-  agnatha  -rrb-  ,  undergo metamorphosis . 
these insects either have hemimetabolous development ,  and undergo an incomplete or partial metamorphosis ,  or holometabolous development ,  which undergo a complete metamorphosis ,  including a pupal or resting stage between the larval and adult forms . 
while ametabolous insects show very little difference between larval and adult forms  -lrb-  also known as `` direct development ''  -rrb-  ,  both hemimetabolous and holometabolous insects have significant morphological and behavioral differences between larval and adult forms ,  the most significant being the inclusion ,  in holometabolus organisms ,  of a pupal or resting stage between the larval and adult forms . 
the european eel has a number of metamorphoses ,  from the larval stage to the leptocephalus stage ,  then a quick metamorphosis to glass eel at the edge of the continental shelf  -lrb-  eight days for the japanese eel  -rrb-  ,  two months at the border of fresh and salt water where the glass eel undergoes a quick metamorphosis into elver ,  then a long stage of growth followed by a more gradual metamorphosis to the migrating phase . 
most other bony fish undergo metamorphosis from embryo to larva  -lrb-  fry  -rrb-  and then to the juvenile stage during absorption of the yolk sac ,  because after that phase the individual needs to be able to feed for itself . 
in holometabolous insects ,  immature stages are called larvae and differ markedly from adults . 
insects which undergo holometabolism pass through a larval stage ,  then enter an inactive state called pupa  -lrb-  called a `` chrysalis '' in butterfly species  -rrb-  ,  and finally emerge as adults . 
among the bony fish ,  mechanisms are varied . 
in hemimetabolous insects ,  immature stages are called nymphs . 
