the most famous of these ossianic poems was `` fingal '' ,  written in 1762.
the first partial polish translation of ossian was made by ignacy krasicki in 1793.
his friend niels gade devoted his first published work ,  the concert overture `` efterklange af ossian ''  -lrb-  `` echoes of ossian ''  -rrb-  written in 1840, to the same subject . 
ossian was especially popular in danish art ,  but also found in germany and the rest of scandinavia . 
scottish author hugh blair's 1763 `` a critical dissertation on the poems of ossian '' upheld the work's authenticity against johnson's scathing criticism and from 1765 was included in every edition of `` ossian '' to lend the work credibility . 
ossian  -lrb-  ; irish gaelic/scottish gaelic: `` oisean ''  -rrb-  is the narrator and purported author of a cycle of epic poems published by the scottish poet james macpherson from 1760.
national library of scotland has 327 books and associated materials in its ossian collection . 
scottish gaelic texts society ,  edinburgh ,  1939.  -rrb- 
he went so far as to write a poem entitled `` homer and ossian '' ,  of which the first verse reads:
these were girodet's painting of 1801–02 `` ossian receiving the ghosts of the french heroes '' ,  and `` ossian evoking ghosts on the edge of the lora ''  -lrb-  1801 -rrb- ,  by françois pascal simon gérard . 
by 1800 ossian was translated into spanish and russian ,  with dutch following in 1805, and polish ,  czech and hungarian in 1827–33.
perhaps the strongest evidence that macpherson's 'ossian' was not a total fabrication is to be found in the oldest extant scottish manuscript in gaelic known as the `` book of the dean of lismore ''  -lrb-  1512 -rrb- . 
a fragment by novalis ,  written in 1789, refers to ossian as an inspired ,  holy and poetical singer . 
another pupil of david ,  jean-auguste-dominique ingres ,  was to depict ossianic scenes over most of his long career . 
in mathematics an operand is the object of a mathematical operation ,  i . e . 
the order of magnitude of a number is ,  intuitively speaking ,  the number of powers of 10 contained in the number . 
examples of numbers of different magnitudes can be found at orders of magnitude  -lrb-  numbers  -rrb-  . 
an order of magnitude is an approximate measure of the number of digits that a number has in the commonly-used base-ten number system . 
generally ,  the order of magnitude of a number is the smallest power of 10 used to represent that number . 
the table below enumerates the order of magnitude of some numbers in light of this definition:
other orders of magnitude may be calculated using bases other than 10.
 ''occam 2.1 '' was the last of the series of occam language developments contributed by inmos . 
occam is an imperative procedural language  -lrb-  such as pascal  -rrb-  . 
with this revision ,  occam became a language able to express useful programs ,  whereas occam 1 was more suited to examining algorithms and exploring the new language  -lrb-  however ,  the occam 1 compiler was written in occam 1, so there is an existence proof that reasonably sized ,  useful programs could be written in occam 1, despite its limits  -rrb-  . 
this will read data from channels c1 or c2  -lrb-  whichever is ready  -rrb-  and pass it into a merged channel . 
it is named after philosopher william of ockham for whom occam's razor is named . 
the bolsheviks created a revolutionary military committee within the petrograd soviet ,  led by the soviet's president ,  trotsky . 
soviet historiography of the october revolution is intertwined with soviet historical development . 
the revolution was led by the bolsheviks ,  who used their influence in the petrograd soviet to organize the armed forces . 
on 16 july ,  spontaneous demonstrations of workers and soldiers began in petrograd ,  demanding that power be turned over to the soviets . 
with the petrograd soviet now in control of government ,  garrison and proletariat ,  the second all russian congress of soviets held its opening session on the day ,  while trotsky dismissed the opposing mensheviks and the socialist revolutionaries  -lrb-  sr  -rrb-  from congress . 
the bolsheviks dissolved the constituent assembly in january 1918, when it came into conflict with the soviets . 
with kornilov defeated ,  the bolsheviks' popularity in the soviets grew significantly ,  both in the central and local areas . 
on its first and only day in session ,  the constituent assembly came into conflict with the soviets ,  and it rejected soviet decrees on peace and land ,  resulting in the constituent assembly being dissolved the next day by order of the congress of soviets . 
on 1 november 1917  -lrb-  14 november new style  -rrb-  ,  there was an appeal to anti-bolsheviks throughout russia to join the new government of the people ,  with the bolsheviks winning even more support from the russian people . 
lenin confidently claimed that there is `` not a shadow of hesitation in the masses of petrograd ,  moscow and the rest of russia '' towards bolshevik rule . 
on 25 october  -lrb-  7 november new style  -rrb-  1917, bolsheviks led their forces in the uprising in petrograd  -lrb-  now st .  petersburg ,  then capital of russia  -rrb-  against the kerensky provisional government . 
as the revolution was not universally recognized ,  there followed the struggles of the russian civil war  -lrb-  1917–22 -rrb- and the creation of the soviet union in 1922.
the european powers recognized the soviet union in the early 1920s and began to engage in business with it after the new economic policy  -lrb-  nep  -rrb-  was implemented . 
on 31 october 1917  -lrb-  13 november new style  -rrb-  ,  the bolsheviks gained control of moscow after a week of bitter street-fighting . 
the bolsheviks won a majority in the soviets of briansk ,  samara ,  saratov ,  tsaritsyn ,  minsk ,  kiev ,  tashkent ,  and other cities . 
a coalition of anti-bolshevik groups attempted to unseat the new government in the russian civil war from 1918 to 1922.
during the late soviet period ,  the opening of select soviet archives during glasnost sparked innovative research that broke away from some aspects of marxism–leninism ,  though the key features of the orthodox soviet view remained intact . 
the october revolution  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially known in soviet literature as the great october socialist revolution  -lrb-   ,  '  -rrb-  ,  and commonly referred to as red october ,  the october uprising ,  the bolshevik revolution ,  or the bolshevik coup ,  was a revolution in russia led by the bolsheviks and vladimir lenin that was instrumental in the larger russian revolution of 1917.
soviet government archives show that parties of bolshevik operatives sent from the smolny institute by lenin took over all critical centers of power in petrograd in the early hours of the first night without a significant number of shots fired . 
the second congress of soviets consisted of 670 elected delegates; 300 were bolshevik and nearly a hundred were left socialist-revolutionaries ,  who also supported the overthrow of the alexander kerensky government . 
on 20 december 1917  -lrb-  2 january 1918 new style  -rrb-  ,  the cheka was created by the decree of vladimir lenin . 
the transfer of power was not without disagreement . 
during the cold war ,  western historiography of the october revolution developed in direct response to the assertions of the soviet view . 
soviet historians of the october revolution interpreted the revolution with regard to establishing the legitimacy of marxist ideology ,  and also the bolshevik government . 
opole voivodeship is bordered by lower silesian voivodeship to the west ,  greater poland and łódź voivodeships to the north ,  silesian voivodeship to the east ,  and the czech republic  -lrb-  olomouc region and moravian-silesian region  -rrb-  to the south . 
the voivodeship lies in southwestern poland ,  the major part on the silesian lowland  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
opole voivodeship was created on january 1, 1999, out of the former opole voivodeship and parts of częstochowa voivodeship ,  pursuant to the polish local government reforms adopted in 1998.
old norse was divided into three dialects: old west norse ,  old east norse ,  and old gutnish . 
of the modern languages ,  icelandic is the closest to old norse . 
old norse has had nasalized versions of all nine vowel places . 
old icelandic was very close to old norwegian ,  and together they formed the old west norse dialect ,  which was also spoken in settlements in ireland ,  scotland ,  the isle of man and northwest england ,  and in norse settlements in normandy . 
the modern descendants of the old west norse dialect are the west scandinavian languages of icelandic ,  faroese ,  norwegian and the extinct norn language of orkney and shetland; the descendants of the old east norse dialect are the east scandinavian languages of danish and swedish . 
old english is one of the west germanic languages ,  and its closest relatives are old frisian and old saxon . 
this is regarded as marking the end of the old english era ,  as during this period the english language was heavily influenced by anglo-norman ,  developing into a phase known now as middle english . 
old english  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  or anglo-saxon ,  is the earliest historical form of the english language ,  spoken in england and southern and eastern scotland in the early middle ages . 
perhaps around 85 per cent of old english words are no longer in use ,  but those that survived are basic elements of modern english vocabulary . 
open clusters are a crucial step in this sequence . 
the older open clusters tend to contain more yellow stars . 
it is common for two or more separate open clusters to form out of the same molecular cloud . 
some open clusters contain hot blue stars which seem to be much younger than the rest of the cluster . 
open clusters range from very sparse clusters with only a few members to large agglomerations containing thousands of stars . 
because of their high density ,  close encounters between stars in an open cluster are common . 
open clusters are key objects in the study of stellar evolution . 
rr lyrae variables are too old to be associated with open clusters ,  and are instead found in globular clusters . 
because most if not all stars form clustered ,  star clusters are to be viewed the fundamental building blocks of galaxies . 
an open cluster is a group of up to a few thousand stars that were formed from the same giant molecular cloud and have roughly the same age . 
the wild duck cluster ,  m11, is an example . 
when a hertzsprung-russell diagram is plotted for an open cluster ,  most stars lie on the main sequence . 
the closest open clusters can have their distance measured directly by one of two methods . 
the first color-magnitude diagrams of open clusters were published by ejnar hertzsprung in 1911, giving the plot for the pleiades and hyades star clusters . 
open clusters have been found only in spiral and irregular galaxies ,  in which active star formation is occurring . 
another reason given by current pdvsa management is that with rising crude oil prices ,  it has been found that mixing or diluting orinoco bitumen  -lrb-  extra-heavy oil  -rrb-  with a lighter crude oil can make this blend more profitable as a crude oil on the world market than by selling it as orimulsion . 
like coal and oil ,  bitumen occurs naturally and is obtained from the world's largest deposit in the orinoco belt in venezuela . 
the deposit is estimated to be more than 1,300 billion barrels  -lrb-  190 billion m  -rrb-  of bitumen ,  an amount approximately equivalent to the world's estimated proven oil reserves . 
some of oxford's lyric works have survived . 
oxford is not known to have been mentioned again in this context . 
some oxfordians argue that this was another play written by oxford ,  based on the exaggerated role it gave to the 11th earl of oxford . 
it is in this passage that oxford appears on a list of poets . 
some oxfordians argue that `` the famous victories '' was written by oxford ,  based on the exaggerated role it gave to the 11th earl of oxford . 
the oxfordian theory of shakespeare authorship contends that edward de vere ,  17th earl of oxford ,  wrote the plays and poems traditionally attributed to william shakespeare . 
several other contemporary authors name oxford as a poet ,  and puttenham himself quotes one of oxford's verses elsewhere in the book ,  referring to him by name as the author ,  so oxfordians misread puttenham . 
oxford was born in 1550, and was between 40 and 53 years old when he presumably would have written the sonnets . 
oxfordians also believe other texts refer to the edward de vere as a concealed writer . 
despite this ,  oxfordians list numerous incidents in oxford's life that they say parallel those in many of the shakespeare plays . 
if new shakespearian plays were being written especially for presentation at the blackfriars' theatre after 1608, they could not have been written by edward de vere . 
oxfordians claim that flattering treatment of oxford's ancestors in shakespeare's history plays is evidence of his authorship . 
oxford was related to several noted literary figures . 
looney also notes that in `` richard iii '' ,  when the future henry vii appears ,  the same earl of oxford is `` by his side; and it is oxford who ,  as premier nobleman ,  replies first to the king's address to his followers '' . 
in may 1573, in a letter to lord burghley ,  two of oxford's former employees accused three of oxford's friends of attacking them on `` the highway from gravesend to rochester . `` 
scholars point to a poem written circa 1620 by a student at oxford ,  william basse ,  that mentioned the author shakespeare died in 1616, which is the year shakespeare deceased and not edward de vere . 
non-oxfordian writers do not see any evidence of partiality for the de vere family in the plays . 
the strange ,  difficult ,  contradictory man who emerges as the real shakespeare ,  edward de vere ,  17th earl of oxford ,  is not just plausible but fascinating and wholly believable . ”
oxfordians also believe that rev . 
ramon jiménez has credited oxford with such plays as `` the true tragedy of richard iii '' and `` edmund ironside '' . 
against the oxford theory are several references to shakespeare ,  later than 1604, which imply that the author was then still alive . 
as with other candidates for authorship of shakespeare's works ,  oxford's supporters have attributed numerous non-shakespearian works to him . 
anderson contends that shakespeare refers to the latest scientific discoveries and events through the end of the 16th century ,  but `` is mute about science after de vere’s oxford’s death in 1604 '' . 
ogburn's efforts secured oxford the place as the most popular alternative candidate . 
in testimony before the venetian inquisition ,  edward de vere was said to be fluent in italian . 
critics point out that six of the nine poets listed had appeared in print under their own names long before 1589, including a number of oxford's poems in printed miscellanies ,  and the first poem published under oxford's name was printed in 1572, 17 years before puttenham's book was published . 
in a letter written by looney in 1933, he mentions that allen and ward were `` advancing certain views respecting oxford and queen eliz . 
oxfordians also note that when de vere travelled through venice ,  he borrowed 500 crowns from a baptista nigrone . 
four contemporary critics praise oxford as a poet and a playwright ,  three of them within his lifetime:
j .  thomas looney found john de vere ,  13th earl of oxford is `` hardly mentioned except to be praised '' in `` henry vi ,  part three ''; the play ahistorically depicts him participating in the battle of tewkesbury and being captured . 
oxfordians see a parallel with oxford's life ,  as oxford's father died at the age of 46 on 3 august 1562, although not before making a will six days earlier ,  and his stepmother remarried within 15 months ,  although exactly when is unknown . 
oxfordians believe the reason so many of the `` late plays '' show evidence of revision and collaboration is because they were completed by other playwrights after oxford's death . 
oxford was noted for his literary and theatrical patronage ,  garnering dedications from a wide range of authors . 
in either case ,  neither oxford nor anyone else is identified as a hidden writer or one that used a pseudonym . 
group theories with oxford as the principal author or creative `` master mind '' were also proposed by gilbert standen in `` shakespeare authorship ''  -lrb-  1930 -rrb- ,  gilbert slater in `` seven shakespeares ''  -lrb-  1931 -rrb- and montagu william douglas in `` lord oxford and the shakespeare group ''  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- . 
according to daniel wright ,  these combined passages confirm that oxford was one of the concealed writers in the elizabethan court . 
some oxfordians have identified titles or descriptions of lost works from oxford's lifetime that suggest a thematic similarity to a particular shakespearian play and asserted that they were earlier versions . 
sobran suggests that the so-called procreation sonnets were part of a campaign by burghley to persuade southampton to marry his granddaughter ,  oxford's daughter elizabeth de vere ,  and says that it was more likely that oxford would have participated in such a campaign than that shakespeare would know the parties involved or presume to give advice to the nobility . 
 ''comical oxymoron '' is a term for the claim ,  for comical effect ,  that a certain phrase or expression is an oxymoron  -lrb-  called `` opinion oxymorons '' by lederer  -lrb-  1990 -rrb-  -rrb-  . 
the greek compound word ``  '' ,  which would correspond to the latin formation ,  does not seem to appear in any known ancient greek works prior to the formation of the latin term . 
an oxymoron  -lrb-  usual plural oxymorons ,  more rarely oxymora  -rrb-  is a rhetorical device that uses an ostensible self-contradiction to illustrate a rhetorical point or to reveal a paradox . 
however ,  the explicit advertisement of the use of oxymorons opened up a sliding scale of less than obvious construction ,  ending in the `` opinion oxymorons '' such as `` business ethics '' . 
one of the greatest accomplishments of the oss during world war ii was its penetration of nazi germany by oss operatives . 
at the height of its influence during world war ii ,  the oss employed almost 24,000 people . 
growing involvement of the oss with coastal infiltration and water-based sabotage eventually led to creation of the oss maritime unit . 
the names of all 13,000 oss personnel and documents of their oss service ,  previously a closely guarded secret ,  were released by the us national archives on august 14, 2008.
oss officer archimedes patti played a central role in oss operations in french indochina and met frequently with ho chi minh in 1945.
oss soldiers were primarily inducted from the united states armed forces . 
oss proved especially useful in providing a worldwide overview of the german war effort ,  its strengths and weaknesses . 
through this process information about the nazi regime made its way to macfarland and the oss in istanbul and eventually to washington . 
while the oss `` dogwood-chain '' produced a lot of information ,  its reliability was increasingly questioned by british intelligence . 
the oss espionage and sabotage operations produced a steady demand for highly specialized equipment . 
the office of strategic services  -lrb-  oss  -rrb-  was a wartime intelligence agency of the united states during world war ii ,  and a predecessor to the central intelligence agency  -lrb-  cia  -rrb-  . 
oda nobunaga was born on june 23, 1534, in the owari domain ,  and was given the childhood name of  . 
although nobunaga was nobuhide's legitimate heir ,  some of the oda clan were divided against him . 
in 1557, nobunaga's brother ,  nobuyuki ,  was defeated in the siege of suemori by ikeda nobuteru . 
member since 1866 -rrb- . 
in the late soviet union the cpsu incorporated the communist parties of the 15 constituent republics  -lrb-  the communist branch of the russian sfsr was established in 1990 -rrb- . 
the same terminology  -lrb-  `` raikom '' ,  etc .   -rrb- 
the organization of the communist party of the soviet union was nominally based on the principles of democratic centralism . 
the oromos are the largest ethnic group in ethiopia  -lrb-  34.5% of the population  -rrb-  and in ethiopia there are 25,488,344 oromos . 
the harla were assimilated by the oromo in ethiopia . 
the oromo people  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` ’oromo ''  -rrb-  are an ethnic group inhabiting ethiopia . 
oromos too enslaved other ethnic groups . 
the oromo language is divided into four main linguistic varieties: borana-arsi-guji oromo ,  eastern oromo ,  orma and west central oromo . 
in 1973, oromo discontent with their position led to the formation of the oromo liberation front  -lrb-  olf  -rrb-  ,  which began political agitation in the oromo areas . 
each caste in the oromo society had a designated name . 
the oromo speak the oromo language as a mother tongue  -lrb-  also known as `` afaan oromoo '' and `` oromiffa ''  -rrb-  . 
other oromo people reached high positions in the emerging ethiopia . 
according to amnesty international ,  there is a sweeping repression in the oromo region of ethiopia . 
most oromos do not have political unity today due to their historical roles in the ethiopian state and the region ,  the spread-out movement of different oromo clans ,  and the differing religions inside the oromo nation . 
the oromo traditionalists state that those who rose to powerful positions did so by rejecting their `` oromo-ness '': rejecting their culture and adopting the other culture . 
some modern authors such as gemetchu megerssa have proposed the concept of `` oromumma '' ,  or `` oromoness '' as a cultural common between oromo people . 
onesimos nesib was a founder of the oromo modern literature . 
the word oromo is derived from `` ilm orma '' meaning `` children of oromo '' ,  or `` sons of men '' ,  or `` person ,  stranger '' . 
these oromo confederations were originally based on southern parts of ethiopia ,  but started moving north in the 16th century in what is termed as the `` great oromo migration '' . 
according to `` ethnologue '' ,  there are around 17,465,900 oromo speakers worldwide . 
barentu/barentoo or  -lrb-  older  -rrb-  baraytuma is the other moiety of the oromo people . 
ethiopia declared a state of emergency in response to oromo and amhara protests in october 2016.
oromo ,  along with sidama ,  were the main targets for slaves before the 16th-century . 
both peaceful integration and violent competition between oromos and other neighboring ethnicities such as the amhara ,  sidama ,  afar and the somali affected politics within the oromo community . 
in some accounts ,  the relationship between the two largest ethnic groups of ethiopia ,  oromo and amhara ,  has been described as `` abyssinian feudal colonialism '' . 
oromos today are concentrated in the oromia region in central ethiopia ,  which is the largest region in the country in terms of both population and size . 
in certain regions ,  some oromo groups formed an alliance and cooperated with amhara-tirgrean authorities . 
alessandro portelli is an italian oral historian . 
the belarusian oral history archive project also provides material based on oral history recordings . 
in britain ,  the oral history society has played a key role in facilitating and developing the use of oral history . 
oral historians in different countries have approached the collection ,  analysis ,  and dissemination of oral history in different modes . 
while oral tradition is an integral part of ancient southeast asian history ,  oral history is a relatively recent development . 
oral history has become an international movement in historical research . 
in 1948, allan nevins ,  a columbia university historian ,  established the columbia oral history research office ,  now known as the columbia center for oral history ,  with a mission of recording ,  transcribing ,  and preserving oral history interviews . 
all this oral history program can be used at www . terraememoria . usc . gal with 2100 interviene and 800 hours of récords . 
a more complete account of the history of oral history in britain and northern ireland can be found at `` making oral history '' on the institute of historical research's website . 
many state and local historical societies have oral history programs . 
writers who use oral history have often discussed its relationship to historical truth . 
the middle east often requires oral history methods of research ,  mainly because of the relative lack in written and archival history and its emphasis on oral records and traditions . 
however ,  it should also be noted that there are many ways of creating oral histories and carrying out the study of oral history even within individual national contexts . 
other oral historians have drawn on portelli's analysis of memory ,  identity ,  and the construction of history . 
oral histories are also used in many communities to document the experiences of survivors of tragedies . 
archaeologists sometimes conduct oral history interviews to learn more about unknown artifacts . 
contemporary oral history involves recording or transcribing eyewitness accounts of historical events . 
blackburn draws most of his examples of oral history as a vehicle for “history from above” from malaysia and singapore . 
the modern concept of oral history was developed in the 1940s by allan nevins and his associates at columbia university . 
an oncogene is a gene that has the potential to cause cancer . 
most normal cells will undergo a programmed form of rapid cell death  -lrb-  apoptosis  -rrb-  when critical functions are altered and malfunctioning . 
in tumor cells ,  they are often mutated or expressed at high levels . 
a proto-oncogene is a normal gene that could become an oncogene due to mutations or increased expression . 
many cancer drugs target the proteins encoded by oncogenes . 
in practice ,  ofdm has become used in combination with such coding and interleaving ,  so that the terms cofdm and ofdm co-apply to common applications . 
ofdm is a frequency-division multiplexing  -lrb-  fdm  -rrb-  scheme used as a digital multi-carrier modulation method . 
operator overloading is syntactic sugar ,  and is used because it allows programming using notation nearer to the target domain and allows user-defined types a similar level of syntactic support as types built into a language . 
operator overloading does not change the expressive power of a language  -lrb-  with functions  -rrb-  ,  as it can be emulated using function calls . 
other contemporary proposals for reconciling the stories of creation in genesis with the scientific evidence included the `` interval theory '' or gap theory of creation ,  in which a large interval of time passed in between the initial creation of the universe and the beginning of the six days of creation . 
this appears to suggest that events after the creation have changed the `` virtual history '' we now see ,  including the fossils: the past president of the missouri association for creation has said:
though gosse's original omphalos hypothesis specifies a popular creation story ,  others have proposed that the idea does not preclude creation as recently as five minutes ago ,  including memories of times before this created `` in situ '' . 
the idea was widely rejected in the 19th century ,  when gosse published his book . 
hebblethwaite also suggests that god necessarily had to create certain elements of the universe in combination with the creation of man:
various supporters of young earth creationism have given different explanations for their belief that the universe is filled with false evidence of the universe's age ,  including a belief that some things needed to be created at a certain age for the ecosystems to function ,  or their belief that the creator was deliberately planting deceptive evidence . 
this idea is sometimes called last thursdayism by its opponents ,  as in `` the world might as well have been created last thursday . `` 
origen was an extremely prolific writer . 
origen was born in either 185 or 186 ad in alexandria . 
not only christians ,  but also pagans took a fascination with origen . 
origen is often seen as the first major christian theologian . 
origen's `` on the first principles '' was the first ever systematic exposition of christian theology . 
the `` hexapla '' was the cornerstone of the great library of caesarea ,  which origen founded . 
origen of alexandria  -lrb-   184 – 253 -rrb- ,  also known as origen adamantius ,  was an early christian scholar ,  ascetic ,  and theologian who was born and spent the first half of his career in alexandria . 
origen significantly contributed to the development of the idea of the trinity . 
origen is a church father and is widely regarded as one of the most important christian theologians of all time . 
at the same time ,  origen's other disciple theognostus of alexandria taught that the father and the son were `` of one substance '' . 
epiphanius asked john ,  the bishop of jerusalem to condemn origen as a heretic . 
peter of antioch and eustathius of antioch also criticized origen as heretical . 
meanwhile ,  in 397, rufinus published a latin translation of origen's `` on first principles '' . 
there are 205, and possibly 279, homilies of origen that are extant either in greek or in latin translations . 
demetrius died in 232, within less than a year after origen's departure from alexandria . 
origen himself rarely mentions clement in his own writings and ,  when he does ,  it is usually to correct him . 
in 394, epiphanius wrote to john of jerusalem ,  again asking for origen to be condemned ,  insisting that origen's writings denigrated human sexual reproduction and accusing him of having been an encratite . 
when he was eighteen years old ,  origen was appointed as a catechist at the catechetical school of alexandria . 
origen also studied the entire new testament ,  but especially the epistles of the apostle paul and the gospel of john ,  the writings which origen regarded as the most important and authoritative . 
upon learning of origen's ordination ,  demetrius was outraged and issued a condemnation declaring that origen's ordination by a foreign bishop was an act of insubordination . 
both orthodox and heterodox theologians claimed to be following in the tradition origen had established . 
the most prominent advocate of origen during the renaissance was the dutch humanist scholar desiderius erasmus  -lrb-  1466 – 1536 -rrb- ,  who regarded origen as the greatest of all christian authors and wrote in a letter to john eck that he learned more about christian philosophy from a single page of origen than from ten pages of augustine . 
origen refuted these teachings ,  arguing that the soul is immortal and can never die . 
origen's subordinationism may have developed out of his efforts to defend the unity of god against the gnostics . 
between 232–235, while in caesarea in palestine ,  origen wrote `` on prayer '' ,  of which the full text has been preserved in the original greek . 
therefore ,  origen had declared that satan was only morally reprobate ,  not absolutely reprobate . 
origen writes that jesus was `` the firstborn of all creation who assumed a body and a human soul . `` 
around the same time ,  john cassian ,  a semipelagian monk ,  introduced origen's teachings to the west . 
the papyri discovered at tura in 1941 contained the greek texts of two previously unknown works of origen . 
origen was an ardent believer in free will and he adamantly rejected the valentinian idea of election . 
american shipyards constructed `` oliver hazard perry ''-class ships for the u . s .  navy and the royal australian navy  -lrb-  ran  -rrb-  . 
the `` oliver hazard perry '' class is a class of guided missile frigates named after the u . s .  commodore oliver hazard perry ,  the hero of the naval battle of lake erie . 
the `` oliver hazard perry ''-class frigates were to have been eventually replaced by littoral combat ships by 2019.
the last nine ships of the class had new remotely operated 25 mm mk 38 mod 2 naval gun systems installed on platforms over the old mk 13 launcher magazine . 
 ''oliver hazard perry ''-class frigates made worldwide news during the 1980s . 
although the per-ship costs rose greatly over the period of production ,  all 51 ships planned for the u . s .  navy were built . 
on may 11, 2009, the first international frigate working group met in mayport naval station to discuss maintenance ,  obsolescence and logistics issues regarding `` oliver hazard perry ''-class ships of the u . s .  and foreign navies . 
the `` oliver hazard perry ''-class ships were produced in long `` short-hull ''  -lrb-  flight i  -rrb-  and long `` long-hull ''  -lrb-  flight iii  -rrb-  variants . 
the u . s .  coast guard harvested weapons systems components from decommissioned navy `` perry ''-class frigates to save money . 
on april 18, 1988, was accompanying the cruiser and frigate when they came under attack from the iranian gunboat which fired a u . s .  made harpoon missile at the ships . 
during the 2014–15 season ,  it was announced that murray had cancer . 
in 1996–97, his first season ,  the club qualified for the playoffs in the last game of the season ,  and nearly defeated the buffalo sabres in the first round . 
the ottawa senators  -lrb-    -rrb-  are a professional ice hockey team based in ottawa ,  ontario . 
during the 2006–07 and 2007–08 seasons ,  several games were only available in video on pay-per-view or at local movie theatres in the ottawa area . 
on december 12, 1990, the nhl approved a new franchise for firestone's group ,  to start play in the 1992–93 season . 
in 2009–10, the senators were a  . 500 team ,  until going on a team-record 11-game winning streak in january . 
in a final change ,  just before the 2005–06 season ,  the team traded long-time player marian hossa for dany heatley . 
the nhl team was unsuccessful in st .  louis and planned to return to ottawa ,  but the nhl decided instead to suspend the franchise and transfer the players to other nhl teams . 
the new senators' first home arena was the ottawa civic centre ,  located on bank street ,  where they played from the 1992–93 season to january of the 1995–96 season; their last game was new year's eve ,  1995, versus the tampa bay lightning . 
the 2006–07 senators thus became the first ottawa team to be in the stanley cup final since 1927 and the city was swept up in the excitement . 
at the time of murray's comments the team was eight games under  . 500 and 14 points out of a playoff position after 49 games . 
on april 10, 2016, the day after the final game of the 2015–16 season ,  murray announced his resignation as manager and that he would continue in an advisory role with the club . 
for 2008–09, murray hired craig hartsburg to coach the senators . 
in 2006–07, the senators reached the stanley cup finals after qualifying for the playoffs in nine consecutive seasons . 
martin would guide the team to another good regular season but again would lose in the first round of the playoffs ,  leading to martin's dismissal as management felt that a new coach was required for playoff success . 
as the 1995–96 season began ,  star centre alexei yashin refused to honour his contract and did not play . 
the new team hired former nhl player mel bridgman ,  who had no previous nhl management experience ,  as its first general manager in 1992.
on april 18, 2008, the club announced its final attendance figures for 2007–08.
founded and established by ottawa real estate developer bruce firestone ,  the team is the second nhl franchise to use the ottawa senators name . 
sportsnet east held english regional rights to the sens prior to the 2014–15 season . 
a full-size orchestra may sometimes be called a `` symphony orchestra '' or `` philharmonic orchestra '' . 
the term `` concert orchestra '' may also be used ,  as in the bbc concert orchestra and the rté concert orchestra . 
the terms `` symphony orchestra '' and `` philharmonic orchestra '' may be used to distinguish different ensembles from the same locality ,  such as the london symphony orchestra and the london philharmonic orchestra . 
the 20th-century orchestra was far more flexible than its predecessors . 
the orchestra ,  depending on the size ,  contains almost all of the standard instruments in each group . 
amateur orchestras include those made up of students from an elementary school or a high school ,  youth orchestras ,  and community orchestras; the latter two typically being made up of amateur musicians from a particular city or region . 
in chinese ,  oolong teas are also known as `` qingcha ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  or `` dark green teas '' . 
some of the better known cliff teas are:
different styles of oolong tea can vary widely in flavor . 
according to the `` anxi '' theory ,  oolong tea had its origin in the anxi oolong tea plant ,  which was discovered by a man named sulong ,  wulong ,  or wuliang . 
the okapi conservation project was established in 1987 to protect okapi populations . 
the leopard is the main predator of the okapi . 
the okapi's typical lifespan is 20 to 30 years . 
okapis inhabit canopy forests at altitudes of  . 
the okapi inhabits canopy forests at altitudes of  . 
the okapi is a medium-sized giraffid ,  standing tall at the shoulder . 
the okapi shows several adaptations to its tropical habitat . 
okapis are primarily diurnal ,  but may be active for a few hours in darkness . 
okapis are primarily diurnal ,  but may be active for a few hours in darkness . 
the side of the ovary closest to the fallopian tube is connected to it by infundibulopelvic ligament ,  and the other side points downwards attached to the uterus via the ovarian ligament . 
the ovary is an organ found in the female reproductive system that produces an ovum . 
opium was banned completely in 1799, and this prohibition continued until 1860.
in 1909, the international opium commission was founded ,  and by 1914, 34 nations had agreed that the production and importation of opium should be diminished . 
opium production continued under the babylonians and egyptians . 
between 400 and 1200 ce ,  arab traders introduced opium to china ,  and to india by 700.
following china's defeat in the second opium war in 1858, china was forced to legalize opium and began massive domestic production . 
global regulation of opium began with the stigmatization of chinese immigrants and opium dens in san francisco ,  california . 
the standard medical use of opium persisted well into the 19th century . 
the opium trade under the chinese communist party was important to its finances in the 1940s . 
this association of opium with sex continued in china until the end of the 19th century . 
mitsubishi and mitsui were involved in the opium trade during the japanese occupation of china . 
indeed ,  turkey supplied the west with opium long before china and india . 
recreational use of opium elsewhere in the world remained rare into late in the 19th century ,  as indicated by ambivalent reports of opium usage . 
during this time of popularity ,  users called opium `` god's own medicine '' . 
opium addiction in the later 19th century received a hereditary definition . 
during the 18th century ,  opium was found to be a good remedy for nervous disorders . 
opium  -lrb-  poppy tears ,  with the scientific name: `` lachryma papaveris ''  -rrb-  is the dried latex obtained from the opium poppy  -lrb-  scientific name: `` papaver somniferum ''  -rrb-  . 
today ,  opium is regulated by the drug enforcement administration under the controlled substances act . 
soldiers returning home from the crusades in the eleventh century brought opium with them . 
there were no legal restrictions on the importation or use of opium in the united states until the san francisco opium den ordinance ,  which banned dens for public smoking of opium in 1875, a measure fueled by anti-chinese sentiment and the perception that whites were starting to frequent the dens . 
for the illegal drug trade ,  the morphine is extracted from the opium latex ,  reducing the bulk weight by 88% . 
if the ratio between the performance of an online algorithm and an optimal offline algorithm is bounded ,  the online algorithm is called competitive . 
thus insertion sort is an online algorithm . 
the name `` ozone '' derives from `` ozein ''  -lrb-  ὄζειν  -rrb-  ,  the greek verb for smell ,  referring to ozone's distinctive smell . 
in even more specific context ,  this can also name the non-radical singlet ground state ,  whereas the diradical state is named `` trioxidanediyl '' . 
the trivial name `` ozone '' is the most commonly used and preferred iupac name . 
care should be taken to avoid confusing the name of the group for the context-specific name for ozone given above . 
a half century later ,  christian friedrich schönbein noticed the same pungent odour and recognized it as the smell often following a bolt of lightning . 
ozone is colourless or pale blue gas  -lrb-  blue when liquefied  -rrb-  ,  slightly soluble in water and much more soluble in inert non-polar solvents such as carbon tetrachloride or fluorocarbons ,  in which it forms a blue solution . 
seaside air was considered to be healthy because of its believed ozone content; but the smell giving rise to this belief is in fact that of halogenated seaweed metabolites . 
the orchid flower ,  like most flowers of monocots ,  has two whorls of sterile elements . 
along with the asteraceae ,  they are one of the two largest families of flowering plants . 
orchid flowers with abnormal numbers of petals or lips are called peloric . 
the root caps of terrestrial orchids are smooth and white . 
some orchids have single flowers ,  but most have a racemose inflorescence ,  sometimes with a large number of flowers . 
the leaves of some orchids are considered ornamental . 
the jewel orchid  -lrb-  `` ludisia discolor ''  -rrb-  is grown more for its colorful leaves than its white flowers . 
the normal form of the sepals can be found in `` cattleya '' ,  where they form a triangle . 
in the other subfamilies ,  which comprise the great majority of orchids ,  the anther  -lrb-  3 -rrb- carries two pollinia . 
some sympodial terrestrial orchids ,  such as `` orchis '' and `` ophrys '' ,  have two subterranean tuberous roots . 
obsidian can be found in locations which have experienced rhyolitic eruptions . 
intrusive formation of obsidian may occur when felsic lava cools along the edges of a dike . 
obsidian is the rock formed as a result of quickly cooled lava ,  which is the parent material . 
 ''otaku '' is derived from a japanese term for another person's house or family  -lrb-   `` otaku ''  -rrb-  . 
 '' ,  focuses on the american side of the otaku culture . 
the economic impact of otaku has been estimated to be as high as ¥2 trillion  -lrb-  $18 billion  -rrb-  . 
japan-based `` tokyo otaku mode '' ,  a place for news relating to otaku ,  has been liked on facebook almost 10 million times . 
the term was also popularized by william gibson's 1996 novel `` idoru '' ,  which references otaku . 
nri's 2005 study also put forth five archetypes of otaku . 
or the rumbaugh object modeling technique is both a set of diagrams and a process model for developing object-oriented systems . 
it is common to equate the modeling language and the modeling methodology . 
the graphic shows the evolution of one of the most important object modeling language standards: the unified modeling language  -lrb-  uml  -rrb-  . 
the object management group then picked up and took over ownership of the uml . 
tolkien had not intended to write a sequel to `` the hobbit '' . 
tolkien suggests that fairy stories allow the reader to review his own world from the `` perspective '' of a different world . 
in his essay ,  tolkien cites a large range of works by other authors: fiction ,  mythology and academic works . 
the fiction and mythology includes: tolkien also quotes from his own poem `` mythopoeia '' . 
 ''on fairy-stories '' is an essay by j .  r .  r .  tolkien which discusses the fairy-story as a literary form . 
in `` otaku no video '' ,  the garage kit otaku was given the pseudonym `` sato hiroshi '' for the interview . 
at fanimecon 2003, hiroshi sato ,  an animator and another gainax member ,  mentioned that he had been in one of the interviews in `` otaku no video '' . 
a controversial and humorous part of `` otaku no video '' was the inclusion of live-action documentary excerpts ,  titled `` a portrait of an otaku '' . 
the lutheran churches teach that original sin `` is a root and fountain-head of all actual sins . `` 
eastern orthodoxy accepts the doctrine of ancestral sin: `` original sin is hereditary . 
the effects of adam's sin according to the catholic encyclopedia are:
the `` catechism of the catholic church '' explains that in `` yielding to the tempter ,  adam and eve committed a `` personal sin '' ,  but this sin affected `` the human nature '' that they would then transmit in a `` fallen state ''  .  .  .  original sin is called `` sin '' only in an analogical sense: it is a sin `` contracted '' and not `` committed ''—a state and not an act ''  -lrb-  `` catechism of the catholic church '' ,  404 -rrb- . 
the stain of original sin is removed through the sacrament of baptism . 
the church has always held baptism to be for the remission of sins including the original sin ,  and ,  as mentioned in `` catechism of the catholic church '' ,  403, infants too have traditionally been baptized ,  though not guilty of any actual personal sin . 
 ''in other words ,  human beings do not bear any 'original guilt' from adam and eve's particular sin . `` 
original sin ,  also called ancestral sin ,  is a christian belief in the state of sin in which humanity has existed since the fall of man ,  stemming from adam and eve's rebellion in eden ,  namely the sin of disobedience in consuming the forbidden fruit from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil . 
the eastern orthodox version of `` original sin '' is the view that sin originates with the devil ,  `` for the devil sinneth from the beginning  -lrb-  1 john iii . 
martin luther  -lrb-  1483–1546 -rrb- asserted that humans inherit adamic guilt and are in a state of sin from the moment of conception . 
in the theology of the catholic church ,  original sin is the absence of original holiness and justice into which humans are born ,  distinct from the actual sins that a person commits . 
the council of trent  -lrb-  1545–1563 -rrb- ,  while not pronouncing on points disputed among catholic theologians ,  condemned the teaching that in baptism the whole of what belongs to the essence of sin is not taken away ,  but is only cancelled or not imputed ,  and declared the concupiscence that remains after baptism not truly and properly `` sin '' in the baptized ,  but only to be called sin in the sense that it is of sin and inclines to sin . 
adam and eve transmitted to their descendants human nature wounded by their own first sin and hence deprived of original holiness and justice; this deprivation is called `` original sin '' . 
the `` catechism of the catholic church '' says: by his sin adam ,  as the first man ,  lost the original holiness and justice he had received from god ,  not only for himself but for all humans . 
the view of the eastern orthodox church varies on whether mary is free of all actual sin or concupiscence . 
most of the taliban fled to pakistan . 
the us made a five-point ultimatum to the taliban:
it has been suggested that the taliban and bin laden had very close connections . 
the u . s .  government used the term `` operation enduring freedom – afghanistan '' to officially describe the war in afghanistan ,  from the period between 7 october 2001 and 31 december 2014.
see the article afghanistan war order of battle for the current disposition of coalition forces in afghanistan . 
the battle of tora bora ,  involving u . s .  ,  british and northern alliance forces took place in december 2001 to further destroy the taliban and suspected al-qaeda in afghanistan . 
the term `` oef-a '' typically refers to the phase of the war in afghanistan from 2001 to 2014.
the war continued in the south of the country ,  where the taliban retreated to kandahar . 
the u . s . -led coalition initially removed the taliban from power and seriously crippled al-qaeda and associated militants in afghanistan . 
seizing upon a power vacuum after the soviets withdrew from afghanistan after their invasion ,  the taliban had the role of government from 1996–2001.
the conduct of u . s .  forces was criticised in a report entitled `` enduring freedom – abuses by u . s . 
later on the same day ,  united states and british forces initiated military action against the taliban ,  bombing taliban forces and al-qaeda terrorist training camps . 
financial links between jemaah islamiyah and other terrorist groups ,  such as abu sayyaf and al-qaeda ,  have been found to exist . 
on 31 december 2014, operation enduring freedom - afghanistan concluded ,  and was succeeded by operation freedom's sentinel on 1 january 2015.
operation enduring freedom most commonly refers to the u . s . -led combat mission in afghanistan ,  which is a nato military alliance between the united states ,  united kingdom and afghanistan . 
on 20 september 2001, the u . s .  stated that osama bin laden was behind the 11 september attacks in 2001.
operation enduring freedom – afghanistan ,  which was a joint u . s .  ,  u . k .  ,  and afghan operation ,  was separate from the international security assistance force  -lrb-  isaf  -rrb-  ,  which was an operation of north atlantic treaty organization nations including the u . s .  and the u . k . 
a number of programming contests reward the most creatively obfuscated code ,  such as the international obfuscated c code contest and the obfuscated perl contest . 
writing and reading obfuscated source code can be a brain teaser . 
ötzi's copper axe was of particular interest . 
high levels of both copper particles and arsenic were found in ötzi's hair . 
in october 2013, it was reported that 19 modern tyrolean men were descendants of ötzi ,  or of a close relative of ötzi . 
this ,  along with ötzi's copper axe blade ,  which is 99.7% pure copper ,  has led scientists to speculate that ötzi was involved in copper smelting . 
g-l91 is now mostly found in south corsica . 
the strain found in ötzi's gut is most similar to three modern individuals from northern india; the strain itself is ,  of course ,  older than the modern northern indian strain . 
ruff proposes that this may indicate that ötzi was a high-altitude shepherd . 
in may 2012, scientists announced the discovery that ötzi still had intact blood cells . 
the leather loincloth and hide coat were made from sheepskin . 
ötzi wore a cloak made of woven grass and a coat ,  a belt ,  a pair of leggings ,  a loincloth and shoes ,  all made of leather of different skins . 
ötzi was found on 19 september 1991 by two german tourists ,  at an elevation of on the east ridge of the fineilspitze in the ötztal alps on the austrian–italian border . 
in addition ,  among ötzi's possessions were berries ,  two birch bark baskets ,  and two species of polypore mushrooms with leather strings through them . 
in addition ,  two people came forward to claim that they were part of the same mountaineering party that came across ötzi and discovered the body first:
ötzi apparently had whipworm  -lrb-  `` trichuris trichiura ''  -rrb-  ,  an intestinal parasite . 
of the 156 u-boats that surrendered to the allies at the end of the war ,  116 were scuttled as part of operation deadlight . 
several u-boats escaped operation deadlight . 
operation deadlight was the code name for the royal navy operation to scuttle german u-boats surrendered to the allies after the defeat of germany near the end of world war ii . 
the order of the eastern star is a masonic appendant body open to both men and women . 
the emblem of the order is a five-pointed star with the white ray of the star pointing downwards towards the manger . 
committees formed at that time created the `` ritual of the order of the eastern star '' in more or less its current form . 
layer 1 is the lowest layer in this model . 
a layer serves the layer above it and is served by the layer below it . 
the original version of the model defined seven layers . 
two instances at the same layer are visualized as connected by a `` horizontal '' connection in that layer . 
osi had two major components ,  an `` abstract model '' of networking ,  called the basic reference model or seven-layer model ,  and a set of specific protocols . 
the recommendation x . 200 describes seven layers ,  labeled 1 to 7.
in morocco ,  julia is watching a card game . 
walter turns out to be julia  -lrb-  bonny's  -rrb-  old lover and partner billy . 
holding off as long as possible ,  julia finally pens a letter to her sister . 
as walter holds a knife to her throat ,  luis shoots and wounds him ,  with julia finishing him off . 
luis finds julia and discovers she is actually working with walter and that she and luis are staying at the same hotel . 
in 1921 hammerstein joined the lambs club . 
he's about `` allegro '' , ``  hammerstein's most experimental musical . 
he had three children: william hammerstein  -lrb-  1918–2001 -rrb- and alice hammerstein mathias by his first wife ,  and james hammerstein by his second wife ,  with whom he also had a stepdaughter ,  susan blanchard . 
hammerstein was the lyricist and playwright in his partnerships; his collaborators wrote the music . 
oscar greeley clendenning hammerstein ii was born in new york city ,  the son of alice hammerstein  -lrb-  née nimmo  -rrb-  and theatrical manager william hammerstein . 
hammerstein contributed the lyrics to 850 songs ,  according to `` the complete lyrics of oscar hammerstein ii '' ,  edited by amy asch . 
after hammerstein's death ,  `` the sound of music '' was adaped as a 1965 film ,  which won the academy award for best picture . 
hammerstein married his first wife ,  myra finn ,  in 1917; the couple divorced in 1929.
the oscar hammerstein award for lifetime achievement in musical theatre is presented annually . 
throughout the rest of his college career ,  hammerstein wrote and performed in several varsity shows . 
jespersen was a professor of english at the university of copenhagen from 1893 to 1925, and served as rector of the university in 1920–21.
jens otto harry jespersen  -lrb-  ; 16 july 1860 – 30 april 1943 -rrb- was a danish linguist who specialized in the grammar of the english language . 
otto jespersen was born in randers in jutland . 
jespersen was an important figure in the international language movement . 
cosmoglotta a began publication again in 1946 after originally planning to do so from 1945.
much of the early success for occidental in this period came from the office's new central location ,  along with the efforts of engelbert pigal  -lrb-  also from austria  -rrb-  whose article `` li ovre de edgar de wahl ''  -lrb-  the work of edgar de wahl  -rrb-  which led to interest in occidental from users of the ianguage ido . 
in de wahl's opinion it was always preferable to opt for a productive suffix than to be forced to coin new words from completely new radicals later on . 
one of the earliest users of the language esperanto ,  edgar de wahl encountered it for the first time in 1888 and remained a fervent supporter of the language for a number of years where he collaborated with zamenhof on the design of the language and translated one of the first works into esperanto: `` princidino mary '' ,  published in 1889 originally under the name princino mary . 
in the year 1999 the first yahoo ! 
alphonse matejka wrote in cosmoglotta that de wahl `` always claimed a minimum of autonomy for his language and bitterly fought against all propositions that intended to augment the naturality of the language only by blindly imitating the romance languages ,  or as de wahl said crudely in one of his letters to me ,  `` by aping french or english '' '' . 
this readability and simplified grammar along with the regular appearance of the magazine cosmoglotta made occidental popular in europe during the 15 years before world war ii . 
the years from 1935 to 1939 were particularly active for cosmoglotta ,  during which a second edition was produced along with the original cosmoglotta: cosmoglotta b which focused on more linguistic issues ,  reports of occidental in the news and financial updates . 
whether these proposed changes would have taken place is not known ,  as berger left his position as editor of cosmoglotta soon after and eventually joined interlingua . 
the most recent edition of the magazine cosmoglotta is volume 323, published at the end of 2017.
osiris  -lrb-   ,  from egyptian `` wsjr '' ,  coptic   -rrb-  is the god of the afterlife ,  the underworld ,  and rebirth in ancient egyptian religion . 
through syncretism with iah ,  he is also the god of the moon . 
 ''osiris '' is a latin transliteration of the ancient greek  ,  which in turn is the greek adaptation of the original name in the egyptian language . 
the orthodox bahá'í faith is a small bahá'í sect that formed in 1960 by mason remey ,  and subsequently was the name used by joel marangella after he claimed to be remey's successor . 
all of the members of the 1966 nsauhg accepted marangella's claim . 
membership data of the orthodox bahá'ís is scarce . 
in 1962 remey gave marangella a sealed envelope ,  with instructions to open it when the time was right . 
1  -lrb-  one ,  also called unit ,  unity ,  and  -lrb-  multiplicative  -rrb-  identity  -rrb-  is a number ,  numeral ,  and glyph . 
the electron transport chain carries both protons and electrons ,  passing electrons from donors to acceptors ,  and transporting protons across a membrane . 
during oxidative phosphorylation ,  electrons are transferred from electron donors to electron acceptors such as oxygen ,  in redox reactions . 
the energy released by electrons flowing through this electron transport chain is used to transport protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane ,  in a process called `` electron transport '' . 
this enzyme mediates the final reaction in the electron transport chain and transfers electrons to oxygen ,  while pumping protons across the membrane . 
cytochrome c oxidase ,  also known as `` complex iv '' ,  is the final protein complex in the electron transport chain . 
the start of the reaction ,  and indeed of the entire electron chain ,  is the binding of a nadh molecule to complex i and the donation of two electrons . 
unlike coenzyme q ,  which carries two electrons ,  cytochrome c carries only one electron . 
this enzyme transfers electrons directly from ubiquinol to oxygen . 
nadh-coenzyme q oxidoreductase ,  also known as `` nadh dehydrogenase '' or `` complex i '' ,  is the first protein in the electron transport chain . 
electron transfer flavoprotein-ubiquinone oxidoreductase  -lrb-  etf-q oxidoreductase  -rrb-  ,  also known as `` electron transferring-flavoprotein dehydrogenase '' ,  is a third entry point to the electron transport chain . 
as the electrons pass through this complex ,  four protons are pumped from the matrix into the intermembrane space . 
succinate is also oxidized by the electron transport chain ,  but feeds into the pathway at a different point . 
atp synthase is a massive protein complex with a mushroom-like shape . 
succinate-q oxidoreductase ,  also known as `` complex ii '' or `` succinate dehydrogenase '' ,  is a second entry point to the electron transport chain . 
the electron transport pathways produced by these alternative nadh and ubiquinone oxidases have lower atp yields than the full pathway . 
some bacterial electron transport chains use different quinones ,  such as menaquinone ,  in addition to ubiquinone . 
within the inner mitochondrial membrane ,  the lipid-soluble electron carrier coenzyme q10  -lrb-  q  -rrb-  carries both electrons and protons by a redox cycle . 
although the transfer of four electrons and four protons reduces oxygen to water ,  which is harmless ,  transfer of one or two electrons produces superoxide or peroxide anions ,  which are dangerously reactive . 
within proteins ,  electrons are transferred between flavin cofactors ,  iron–sulfur clusters ,  and cytochromes . 
as only one of the electrons can be transferred from the qh donor to a cytochrome c acceptor at a time ,  the reaction mechanism of complex iii is more elaborate than those of the other respiratory complexes ,  and occurs in two steps called the q cycle . 
however ,  if levels of oxygen fall ,  they switch to an oxidase that transfers only one proton per electron ,  but has a high affinity for oxygen . 
an example of an old fashioned-influenced cocktail is the american trilogy . 
these old fashioned cocktail recipes are literally for cocktails done the old-fashioned way . 
the whiskey old fashioned recipe specifies the following  -lrb-  with a jigger being   -rrb- :
the old fashioned ,  developed during the 19th century and given its name in the 1880s ,  is an iba official cocktail . 
the first use of the name `` old fashioned '' for a bourbon whiskey cocktail was said to have been at the pendennis club ,  a gentlemen's club founded in 1881 in louisville ,  kentucky . 
the original old fashioned recipe would have showcased the whiskey available in america in the 19th century: irish ,  bourbon or rye whiskey . 
the old fashioned is the cocktail of choice of don draper ,  the lead character on the `` mad men '' television series ,  set in the 1960s . 
we are 'god's' means according to this view . 
omnipotence is the quality of having unlimited power . 
the tao is understood to have inexhaustible power ,  yet that power is simply another aspect of its weakness . 
this view is known as dipolar theism . 
thomas aquinas acknowledged difficulty in comprehending the deity's power: `` all confess that god is omnipotent; but it seems difficult to explain in what his omnipotence precisely consists: for there may be doubt as to the precise meaning of the word 'all' when we say that god can do all things . 
all the above stated claims of power are each based on scriptural grounds and upon empirical human perception . 
so presuming there is a god-like entity consciently taking actions ,  we cannot comprehend the limits of a deity's powers . 
the word `` omnipotence '' derives from the latin term ``  ''omni potens '' '' ,  meaning `` all-powerful '' instead of `` infinite power '' implied by its english counterpart . 
