the covalent chemical bonds are formed when the carboxyl group of one amino acid reacts with the amino group of another . 
peptides are distinguished from proteins on the basis of size ,  and as an arbitrary benchmark can be understood to contain approximately 50 or fewer amino acids . 
  -rrb-  ,  the size boundaries that distinguish peptides from polypeptides and proteins are not absolute: long peptides such as amyloid beta have been referred to as proteins ,  and smaller proteins like insulin have been considered peptides . 
these will then be used to make antibodies in a rabbit or mouse against the protein . 
peptide fragments refer to fragments of proteins that are used to identify or quantify the source protein . 
peptides have recently been used in the study of protein structure and function . 
if the biologically active tracer molecule chosen for pet is fludeoxyglucose  -lrb-  fdg  -rrb-  ,  an analogue of glucose ,  the concentrations of tracer imaged will indicate tissue metabolic activity as it corresponds to the regional glucose uptake . 
however ,  it would subsequently emerge that the planet x theory was mistaken . 
in 2006, pluto was reclassified as a dwarf planet by the international astronomical union . 
lowell's greatest contribution to planetary studies came during the last decade of his life ,  which he devoted to the search for planet x ,  a hypothetical planet beyond neptune . 
in 1930 clyde tombaugh ,  working at the lowell observatory ,  discovered pluto near the location expected for planet x . 
although lowell was better known for his observations of mars ,  he also drew maps of the planet venus . 
from 1914 to 1916, a telescope on loan from sproul observatory was used to search for planet x .  lowell did not discover pluto but later lowell observatory  -lrb-  observatory code 690 -rrb- would photograph pluto in march and april 1915, without realizing at the time that it was not a star . 
pluto's mass could not be determined until 1978, when its satellite charon was discovered . 
for the last 23 years of his life astronomy ,  lowell observatory ,  and his and others' work at his observatory were the focal points of his life . 
although lowell's theories of the martian canals ,  of surface features on venus ,  and of planet x are now discredited ,  his practice of building observatories at the position where they would best function has been adopted as a principle . 
the pavane ,  pavan ,  paven ,  pavin ,  pavian ,  pavine ,  or pavyn  -lrb-  it . 
this origin is consistent with the equivalent form ,  `` paduana '' . 
the word `` pavane '' is most probably derived from italian `` danza padovana ''  ,   ,  meaning `` dance typical of padua ''  -lrb-  similar to bergamask ,  `` dance from bergamo ''  -rrb- ; `` pavan '' is a dialectal/old form for the modern italian adjective `` padovano ''  -lrb-  = from padua  -rrb-  . 
although the dance is often associated with spain  ,  it was `` almost certainly of italian origin ''  . 
project production management is the application of operations management to the delivery of capital projects . 
product-based planning is a structured approach to project management ,  based on identifying all of the products  -lrb-  project deliverables  -rrb-  that contribute to achieving the project objectives . 
the primary challenge of project management is to achieve all of the project goals within the given constraints . 
the initiating processes determine the nature and scope of the project . 
earned value management  -lrb-  evm  -rrb-  extends project management with techniques to improve project monitoring . 
traditionally  -lrb-  depending on what project management methodology is being used  -rrb-  ,  project management includes a number of elements: four to five project management process groups ,  and a control system . 
in 1969, the project management institute  -lrb-  pmi  -rrb-  was formed in the usa . 
the goal is to increase the flow of projects in an organization  -lrb-  throughput  -rrb-  . 
several models of iterative and incremental project management have evolved ,  including agile project management ,  dynamic systems development method ,  extreme project management ,  and innovation engineering® . 
the project production management framework is based on a project as a production system view ,  in which a project transforms inputs  -lrb-  raw materials ,  information ,  labor ,  plant & machinery  -rrb-  into outputs  -lrb-  goods and services  -rrb-  . 
while the phased approach works well for small ,  well-defined projects ,  it often results in challenge or failure on larger projects ,  or those that are more complex or have more ambiguities ,  issues and risk . 
whose `` phase '' is now formula_6.
two oscillators that have the same frequency and different phases have a phase difference ,  and the oscillators are said to be out of phase with each other . 
phase shift is any change that occurs in the phase of one quantity ,  or in the phase difference between two or more quantities . 
this symbol: formula_1 is sometimes referred to as a `` phase shift '' or `` phase offset '' because it represents a `` shift '' from zero phase . 
phase comparison is a comparison of the phase of two waveforms ,  usually of the same nominal frequency . 
a phase comparison can be made by connecting two signals to a two-channel oscilloscope . 
simple cases include the centered box  -lrb-  `` x = 0 ``   -rrb-  and the shifted box  -lrb-  `` x = l/2 ``   -rrb-  . 
where formula_4 is the reduced planck constant ,  formula_5 is the mass of the particle ,  formula_6 is the imaginary unit and formula_7 is time . 
the simplest form of the particle in a box model considers a one-dimensional system . 
peter f .  hamilton was born in rutland ,  england on 2 march 1960.
peter f .  hamilton  -lrb-  born 2 march 1960 -rrb- is a british author . 
introduced next is young would-be space captain joshua calvert . 
syrinx and calvert both participate ,  their ships and skills aiding each other considerably ,  to the tyrathca home system then to the location of the `` god '' . 
the weapon is used to destroy a gas giant world ,  also destroying possessed starships controlled by the capone organization . 
syrinx travels to the world of atlantis ,  a world covered by water ,  inhabited by floating `` islands '' which themselves are sentient . 
adamists are the larger of the two groups ,  and consider themselves to be `` normal '' humans . 
louise and her sister ,  aided by the possesser fletcher christian  -lrb-  one of the few possessers who are not universally sadistic or evil  -rrb-  find their way to earth in search of calvert . 
in the 27th century humans have colonised nearly 900 worlds ,  have living ,  sentient starships as well as the conventional kind ,  and are also living in asteroid communities and in large ,  living space stations . 
calvert ,  having visited lalonde ,  unwittingly gives the possessed dexter  -lrb-  who later torments his possessing soul into returning him full access to his own body while keeping all of the possessors powers  -rrb-  a ride to the world of norfolk . 
in a climactic final scene as calvert fights a space battle above ,  the mercenaries valiantly sacrifice themselves defending the survivors from the hordes of the possessed until they are extracted by space plane . 
adamist religions reject this as an attempt to avoid god's judgment on the soul after death ,  and it is this which is the root cause of the schism between the adamist and edenist cultures . 
pope boniface i  -lrb-  ; died 4 september 422 -rrb- was pope from 28 december 418 to his death in 422.
the proposed council of spoleto was canceled ,  and on 3 april 419, emperor honorius recognized boniface as the rightful pope . 
the new pope and his supporters remained at the church until sunday ,  29 december ,  for the formal ordination customarily took place on a sunday . 
pope boniface iii  -lrb-  ; d .  12 november 607 -rrb- was the pope from 19 february 607 to his death on 12 november that same year . 
pope boniface iv  -lrb-  ; d .  8 may 615 -rrb- was pope from 25 september 608 to his death in 615.
 -lrb-  his death is listed as either 8 may or 25 may 615 by these same two authorities .   -rrb- 
in 610, mellitus ,  the first bishop of london ,  went to rome `` to consult the pope on important matters relative to the newly established english church '' . 
pope boniface v  -lrb-  ; d .  25 october 625 -rrb- was pope from 23 december 619 to his death in 625.
he was succeeded by pope honorius i . 
crescentius ,  brother of the late pope john xiii ,  led an insurrection and with the help of many unhappy romans ,  kidnapped pope benedict vi . 
the death of pope john xiv meant that boniface was the only remaining pope ,  and so he once again took a hold of the papal throne . 
benedict died on 10 july 983.
boniface vii's first papal reign was a short one . 
pope boniface viii  -lrb-  ; born benedetto caetani ,  c .  1230 – 11 october 1303 -rrb- was pope from 24 december 1294 to his death in 1303.
boniface viii was a pope who put forward some of the strongest claims of any pope to temporal as well as spiritual power . 
some of these are enumerated in a bull by pope martin iv ,  in which he bestowed the deaconry of s .  nicolas in carcere on cardinal benedetto caetani . 
boniface had no choice but to contest philip's demands ,  informing philip that `` god has set popes over kings and kingdoms . `` 
the pope then announced that he was reserving the whole matter to his own judgment . 
benedetto also accompanied cardinal ottobono fieschi ,  the future pope adrian v ,  to england . 
after the papacy had been removed to avignon in 1309, pope clement v ,  under extreme pressure from king philip iv ,  consented to a posthumous trial . 
at orvieto ,  on 12 april 1281, pope martin iv created benedetto caetani cardinal deacon of saint nicholas in carcere . 
benedetto caetani was born in anagni ,  some southeast of rome . 
either way ,  celestine v vacated the throne and benedetto caetani was elected in his place as pope ,  taking the name boniface viii . 
today ,  he is probably best remembered for his feuds with king philip iv of france ,  who caused the pope's death ,  and dante alighieri ,  who placed the pope in the eighth circle of hell in his `` divine comedy '' ,  among the simoniacs . 
he was granted a canonry at the cathedral in the family's stronghold of anagni ,  with the permission of pope alexander iv . 
on 26 february 1265, only eleven days after his coronation ,  the new pope ,  pope clement iv wrote to cardinal simon ,  telling him to break off negotiations and travel immediately to provence ,  where he would receive further instructions . 
after king edward i of england invaded scotland and forced the abdication of the scottish king john balliol ,  the deposed king was released into the custody of pope boniface on condition that he remain at a papal residence . 
he organized the first catholic `` jubilee '' year to take place in rome and declared that both spiritual and temporal power were under the pope's jurisdiction ,  and that kings were subordinate to the power of the roman pontiff . 
the pope also appointed cardinal jean le moine as apostolic legate to king philip ,  to attempt to find some resolution of the impasse that had developed; he was granted the specific power of absolving king philip from excommunication . 
pope boniface ix remained in the city nonetheless . 
during the reign of boniface ix two jubilees were celebrated at rome . 
boniface ix was born c .  1350 in naples as piero tomacelli cybo; one brother was andrea . 
pope boniface ix  -lrb-  ; c .  1350 – 1 october 1404, born pietro cybo tomacelli   -rrb-  was head of the catholic church and ruler of the papal states from 2 november 1389 to his death in 1404.
in 1403 boniface ix made the best of it by approving the deposition and recognizing rupert . 
genes that encode peroxin proteins include: pex1, pex2  -lrb-  pxmp3 -rrb- ,  pex3, pex5, pex6, pex7, pex10, pex11a ,  pex11b ,  pex11g ,  pex12, pex13, pex14, pex16, pex19, pex26, pex28, pex30, and pex31.
also ,  ubiquitination appears to be crucial for the export of pex5 from the peroxisome ,  to the cytosol . 
 ''pex '' genes encode the protein machinery  -lrb-  `` peroxins ''  -rrb-  required for proper peroxisome assembly ,  as described above . 
a major function of the peroxisome is the breakdown of very long chain fatty acids through beta oxidation . 
peroxisomes contain oxidative enzymes ,  such as d-amino acid oxidase and uric acid oxidase . 
the first reactions in the formation of plasmalogen in animal cells also occur in peroxisomes . 
this is why i am here today ,  close to yugoslavia ,  close to serbia ,  close to slobodan milošević '' . 
members of the council's major parties stated they would vote against awarding the prize to handke ,  resulting in the prize being withdrawn . 
in 2006 his nomination for the heinrich heine prize caused a scandal ,  and the prize was withdrawn due to his political views . 
in 2006, handke was nominated for the heinrich heine prize ,  but the prize money of €50,000 had to be approved by the city council of düsseldorf . 
in 2014, handke was awarded the international ibsen award ,  which caused some calls for the jury to resign . 
handke has written many scripts for films . 
here ,  there are four energy levels ,  energies `` e '' ,  `` e '' ,  `` e '' ,  `` e '' ,  and populations `` n '' ,  `` n '' ,  `` n '' ,  `` n '' ,  respectively . 
assume there are a group of `` n '' atoms ,  each of which is capable of being in one of two energy states: either the number of these atoms which are in the ground state is given by `` n '' ,  and the number in the excited state `` n '' . 
we assume that `` e '' < `` e '' < `` e ''; that is ,  the energy of level 2 lies between that of the ground state and level 3.
initially ,  the system of atoms is at thermal equilibrium ,  and the majority of the atoms will be in the ground state ,  i . e .  ,  `` n '' ≈ `` n '' ,  `` n '' ≈ `` n '' ≈ 0.
the energies of each level are such that `` e '' < `` e '' < `` e '' < `` e '' . 
again consider a group of `` n '' atoms ,  this time with each atom able to exist in any of three energy states ,  levels 1, 2 and 3, with energies `` e '' ,  `` e '' ,  and `` e '' ,  and populations `` n '' ,  `` n '' ,  and `` n '' ,  respectively . 
if atoms are in the excited state ,  spontaneous decay events to the ground state will occur at a rate proportional to `` n '' ,  the number of atoms in the excited state . 
at best ,  an equal population of the two states ,  `` n '' = `` n '' = `` n ''/2, can be achieved ,  resulting in optical transparency but no net optical gain . 
in this system ,  the pumping transition p excites the atoms in the ground state  -lrb-  level 1 -rrb- into the pump band  -lrb-  level 4 -rrb- . 
this level likewise has a fast ,  non-radiative decay rb into the ground state . 
if the higher energy state has a greater population than the lower energy state  -lrb-  `` n '' < `` n ''  -rrb-  ,  then the emission process dominates ,  and light in the system undergoes a net increase in intensity . 
in practice ,  most lasers are `` four-level lasers '' ,  described below . 
the rate of absorption is proportional to the radiation intensity of the light ,  and also to the number of atoms currently in the ground state ,  `` n '' . 
by 1453, uccello was married to tommasa malifici . 
the sources for paolo uccello’s life are few: giorgio vasari’s biography ,  written 75 years after paolo’s death ,  and a few contemporary official documents . 
paolo uccello  -lrb-  ; 1397 – 10 december 1475 -rrb- ,  born paolo di dono ,  was an italian painter and mathematician who was notable for his pioneering work on visual perspective in art . 
by 1424, paolo was earning his own living as a painter . 
his nickname `` uccello '' came from his fondness for painting birds . 
despite his leave from florence ,  interest in uccello did not diminish . 
paolo painted `` the lives of the church fathers '' in the cloisters of the church of san miniato ,  which sat on a hill overlooking florence . 
the study that had produced the 1969 revision of the general roman calendar stated that there were no grounds for his consideration as a martyr ,  and he is not presented as such in the `` roman martyrology '' . 
there is some conjecture that he was a martyr in rome ,  a conjecture that entered earlier editions of the `` roman breviary '' . 
pope pius i  -lrb-  died c .  155 -rrb- is said to have been the bishop of rome from c .  140 to his death c .  154, according to the `` annuario pontificio '' . 
he was crowned pope on 3 september 1458.
pope pius ii  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  born enea silvio bartolomeo piccolomini  -lrb-  ; 18 october 1405 – 14 august 1464 -rrb- was pope from 19 august 1458 to his death in 1464.
in spite of suffering from a fever ,  pope pius ii left rome for ancona in the hope of increasing the morale of the crusading army . 
pius ii was one of the most prominent authors of his period . 
pope pius ii inaugurated an unusual urban project ,  perhaps the first city planning exercise in modern europe . 
according to michael de la bédoyère ,  `` the new pope ,  pius ii ,  was expected to inaugurate an even more liberal and paganised era in the vatican . 
his longest and most enduring work is the story of his life ,  the `` commentaries '' ,  which is the only autobiography ever written by a reigning pope . 
he later served as bishop of siena . 
she was the mother of william randolph hearst and wife of george hearst . 
phoebe hearst funded the hearst library in anaconda montana in 1898.
in 1901, phoebe hearst founded the university of california museum of anthropology ,  later renamed phoebe a .  hearst museum of anthropology in 1992, in celebration of the museum's ninth decade . 
the william randolph hearst foundation continues to fund projects at mount vernon in her memory . 
pope pius iv  -lrb-  31 march 1499 – 9 december 1565 -rrb- ,  born giovanni angelo medici ,  was pope from 25 december 1559 to his death in 1565.
piccolomini ,  a member of the house of piccolomini was born in sarteano on 29 may 1439 as the fourth child of nanno todeschini and laudomia piccolomini ,  the sister of aeneas silvius piccolomini who was pope pius ii . 
piccolomini was made the archdeacon of brabant in cambrai in 1462 and he held that until 1503.
pope pius ii made his nephew a cardinal on 5 march 1460 in siena and he was made the cardinal-deacon of san eustachio . 
he was also made the legate to perugia in 1488 and he left in 1489.
piccolomini was also the legate to rome and the rest of the papal states in 1464 when his uncle left for ancona . 
pope pius v was beatified by pope clement x in the year 1672, and was later canonized by pope clement xi  -lrb-  1700–21 -rrb- on 22 may 1712.
pope pius v  -lrb-  17 january 1504 – 1 may 1572 -rrb- ,  born antonio ghislieri  -lrb-  from 1518 called michele ghislieri ,  o . p . 
pius v created 21 cardinals in three consistories including felice piergentile who would become pope sixtus v . 
pius v died on 1 may 1572 of what is believed to be cancer . 
pius v declared thomas aquinas a doctor of the church . 
before michele ghislieri could return to his episcopate ,  pope pius iv died . 
under pope pius iv  -lrb-  1559–65 -rrb- he became bishop of mondovi in piedmont . 
pius v is often credited with the origin of the pope's white garments ,  supposedly because after his election pius continued to wear his white dominican habit . 
in 1556 he was made bishop of sutri by pope paul iv and was selected as inquisitor of the faith in milan and lombardy . 
pius v canonized one saint during his reign: ivo of chartres on 18 december 1570.
on 8 january 1566, ghislieri ,  with the influential backing of charles borromeo ,  was elected to the papal throne ,  taking the name pope pius v .  he was crowned ten days later ,  on his 62nd birthday by the protodeacon . 
pci interrupt lines are level-triggered . 
note ,  this does not apply to pci express . 
pci express does not have physical interrupt lines at all . 
in addition ,  there are pci latency timers that are a mechanism for pci bus-mastering devices to share the pci bus fairly . 
the pci-sig introduced the serial pci express in  . 
the mapping of pci interrupt lines onto system interrupt lines ,  through the pci host bridge ,  is implementation-dependent . 
conventional pci and pci-x are sometimes called parallel pci in order to distinguish them technologically from their more recent successor pci express ,  which adopted a serial ,  lane-based architecture . 
the pci bus arbiter performs bus arbitration among multiple masters on the pci bus . 
conventional pci ,  often shortened to pci ,  is a local computer bus for attaching hardware devices in a computer . 
on july 28, 2017, iso 32000-2:2017  -lrb-  pdf 2.0 -rrb- was published . 
pdf was standardized as an open format ,  iso 32000, in 2008, and no longer requires any royalties for its implementation . 
many of them are also not supported by popular third-party implementations of pdf . 
almost as complex as postscript itself is its handling of fonts . 
postscript uses the point as its unit of length . 
for this reason postscript interpreters are occasionally called postscript raster image processors ,  or rips . 
the character `` % '' is used to introduce comments in postscript programs . 
type 3 fonts allowed for all the sophistication of the postscript language ,  but without the standardized approach to hinting . 
the first version of the postscript language was released to the market in 1984.
the cid-keyed font format can be used with the type 1 font format for standard cid-keyed fonts ,  or type 2 for cid-keyed opentype fonts . 
as a general convention ,  every postscript program should start with the characters `` % ! ps '' as an interpreter directive so that all devices will properly interpret it as postscript . 
at the time ,  the technology for including these hints in fonts was carefully guarded ,  and the hinted fonts were compressed and encrypted into what adobe called a `` type 1 font ''  -lrb-  also known as `` postscript type 1 font '' ,  `` ps1 '' ,  `` t1 '' or `` adobe type 1 ''  -rrb-  . 
some basic ,  inexpensive laser printers do not support postscript ,  instead coming with drivers that simply rasterize the platform's native graphics formats rather than converting them to postscript first . 
postscript went beyond the typical printer control language and was a complete programming language of its own . 
postscript is a turing-complete programming language ,  belonging to the concatenative group . 
on high-end printers ,  postscript processors remain common ,  and their use can dramatically reduce the cpu work involved in printing documents ,  transferring the work of rendering postscript images from the computer to the printer . 
at about this time they were visited by steve jobs ,  who urged them to adapt postscript to be used as the language for driving laser printers . 
there are also a number of commercial postscript interpreters ,  such as teletype co . 's t-script . 
however ,  it is possible to write computer programs in postscript just like any other programming language . 
competitive pole vaulting began using solid ash poles . 
poles are manufactured with ratings corresponding to the vaulter's maximum weight . 
because pole stiffness and length are important factors to a vaulter's performance ,  it is not uncommon for an elite vaulter to carry as many as ten poles to a competition . 
the equipment and rules for pole vaulting are similar to the high jump . 
as the pole slides into the back of the box the pole begins to bend and the vaulter continues up and forward ,  leaving the trail leg angled down and behind . 
the swing continues until the hips are above the head and the arms are pulling the pole close to the chest; from there the vaulter shoots their legs up over the cross bar while keeping the pole close . 
each vaulter gets one attempt at each height until one makes and one misses . 
once the vaulter enters the competition ,  they can choose to pass heights . 
the pole vault crossbar has evolved from a triangular aluminum bar to a round fiberglass bar with rubber ends . 
therefore ,  two poles rated at the same weight are not necessarily the same stiffness . 
initially ,  vaulting poles were made from stiff materials such as bamboo or aluminum . 
the party of european socialists  -lrb-  pes  -rrb-  is a social-democratic european political party . 
along with the socialist group in the european parliament ,  the founding members of the pes were:
the party's english name is `` party of european socialists '' . 
the youth organisation of the pes is the young european socialists . 
in 1961, the socialists in the european parliament attempted to produce a common 'european socialist programme' but this was neglected due to the applications of britain ,  denmark ,  ireland and norway to join the european community . 
in 1992, with the european community becoming the european union and with the treaty of maastricht establishing the framework for political parties at a european level ,  the confederation of socialist parties voted to transform itself into the party of european socialists . 
they may also be joined by the president of the european parliament  -lrb-  if a pes member  -rrb-  ,  a pes european commissioner and a representative from associate parties and organisations . 
the sodium salt of phenol ,  sodium phenoxide ,  is far more water-soluble . 
phenol is easily neutralized by sodium hydroxide forming sodium phenate or phenolate ,  but being weaker than carbonic acid ,  it cannot be neutralized by sodium bicarbonate or sodium carbonate to liberate carbon dioxide . 
phenol is reduced to benzene when it is distilled with zinc dust ,  or when phenol vapour is passed over granules of zinc at 400 °c:
phenol is weakly acidic and at high phs gives the phenolate anion cho  -lrb-  also called phenoxide  -rrb- : compared to aliphatic alcohols ,  phenol is about 1 million times more acidic ,  although it is still considered a weak acid . 
the worldwide phenol market is estimated to be valued at usd 31.73 billion by 2025.
phenol exhibits keto-enol tautomerism with its unstable keto tautomer cyclohexadienone ,  but only a tiny fraction of phenol exists as the keto form . 
phenol is an aromatic organic compound with the molecular formula choh . 
protagoras is credited with the philosophy of relativism ,  which he discusses in his work ,  `` truth ''  -lrb-  also known as `` refutations ''  -rrb-  . 
protagoras also was a proponent of agnosticism . 
the deliberate destruction of his works also is mentioned by cicero . 
protagoras  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  was a pre-socratic greek philosopher and is numbered as one of the sophists by plato . 
protagoras also was known as a teacher who addressed subjects connected to virtue and political life . 
he also is believed to have created a major controversy during ancient times through his statement that ,  `` man is the measure of all things '' ,  interpreted by plato to mean that there is no absolute truth ,  but that which individuals deem to be the truth . 
nonetheless ,  very few fragments from protagoras have survived ,  although he is known to have written several different works: `` antilogiae '' and `` truth '' . 
aristotle also says that protagoras worked on the classification and proper use of grammatical gender . 
most puritans of this period were non-separating and remained within the church of england; separatists who left the church of england altogether were numerically much fewer . 
puritans ,  then ,  were distinguished for being `` more intensely protestant than their protestant neighbors or even the church of england '' . 
most congregational puritans remained within the church of england ,  hoping to reform it according to their own views . 
puritans were dissatisfied with the limited extent of the english reformation and with the church of england's toleration of certain practices associated with the roman catholic church . 
as a result ,  the church of england never developed a complete presbyterian hierarchy . 
the westminster assembly was called in 1643, assembling clergy of the church of england . 
the puritans were english protestants in the 16th and 17th centuries who sought to `` purify '' the church of england of roman catholic practices ,  maintaining that the church of england had not been fully reformed and needed to become more protestant . 
the dissenters divided themselves from all christians in the church of england and established their own separatist congregations in the 1660s and 1670s . 
like the episcopalians ,  the presbyterians agreed that there should be a national church but one structured on the model of the church of scotland . 
in addition ,  these puritans called for a renewal of preaching ,  pastoral care and christian discipline within the church of england . 
the church of england of the interregnum  -lrb-  1649–60 -rrb- was run along presbyterian lines but never became a national presbyterian church ,  such as existed in scotland ,  and england was not the theocratic state which leading puritans had called for as `` godly rule '' . 
furthermore ,  the sacraments would only be administered to those in the church covenant . 
in england ,  the standards were contested by independents up to 1660.
 ''non-separating puritans '' were dissatisfied with the reformation of the church of england but remained within it ,  advocating for further reform; they disagreed among themselves about how much further reformation was possible or even necessary . 
the lambeth articles of 1595, a high-water mark for calvinism within the church of england ,  failed to receive royal approval . 
the palestinian territories refers to the gaza strip and the west bank  -lrb-  including east jerusalem  -rrb-  . 
palestinian legislative elections took place on 25 january 2006.
though condemning israel over attacks on gaza ,  the palestinian authority erected no actions during the conflict of israel with hamas . 
the palestinian authority was created by the gaza–jericho agreement ,  pursuant to the 1993 oslo accords . 
we will give the palestinian authority helicopters and also communication equipment . `` 
however ,  in a speech in 2016 president abbas said that `` the palestinian authority exists and it is here , ``  and `` the palestinian authority is one of our achievements and we won’t give it up . `` 
the gaza–jericho agreement was signed on 4 may 1994 and included an israeli withdrawal from the jericho area and partially from the gaza strip ,  and detailed the creation of the palestinian authority and the palestinian civil police force . 
following arafat's death on 11 november 2004, rawhi fattouh ,  leader of the palestinian legislative council became acting president of the palestinian authority as provided for in article 54-lrb- 2 -rrb- of the authority's basic law and palestinian elections law . 
elections for a new palestinian legislative council  -lrb-  plc  -rrb-  were scheduled for july 2005 by acting palestinian authority president rawhi fattuh in january 2005.
the palestinian authority became responsible for civil administration in some rural areas ,  as well as security in the major cities of the west bank and the gaza strip . 
since 2007 gaza has been governed by the hamas government in gaza . 
the politics of the palestinian authority take place within the framework of a semi-presidential multi-party republic ,  with the palestinian legislative council  -lrb-  plc  -rrb-  ,  an executive president ,  and a prime minister leading a cabinet . 
on 18 july 2004, united states president george w .  bush stated that the establishment of a palestinian state by the end of 2005 was unlikely due to instability and violence in the palestinian authority . 
on 10 may 2004, the palestinian cabinet announced that municipal elections would take place for the first time . 
diana's granddaughter ,  charlotte elizabeth diana  -lrb-  born 2015 -rrb- ,  and her niece ,  charlotte diana  -lrb-  born 2012 -rrb- ,  are named after her . 
before and after her death ,  diana has been depicted in contemporary art . 
diana ,  princess of wales  -lrb-  born diana frances spencer; 1 july 1961 – 31 august 1997 -rrb- ,  was a member of the british royal family . 
diana was seven years old when her parents divorced . 
diana gave her sons wider experiences than was usual for royal children . 
the second documentary ,  `` diana ,  7 days '' ,  aired on 27 august on bbc and focused on diana's death and the subsequent outpouring of grief . 
the concert for diana at wembley stadium was held on 1 july 2007.
actresses who have portrayed diana include serena scott thomas  -lrb-  in ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  julie cox  -lrb-  in `` princess in love ''  -rrb-  ,  amy seccombe  -lrb-  in ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  genevieve o'reilly  -lrb-  in ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  nathalie brocker  -lrb-  in `` the murder of princess diana ''  -rrb-  ,  and naomi watts  -lrb-  in `` diana ''  -rrb-  . 
diana also left her butler paul burrell around $80,000 in cash . 
in 2012, `` time '' included diana on its all-time 100 fashion icons list . 
in a speech after her death ,  then-prime minister tony blair referred to diana as the `` people's princess '' . 
 ''rosa '' 'princess of wales' ,  a white blend rose cultivar ,  is named in honour of diana . 
diana made her debut as a sloane ranger in 1979 with a gown by regamus . 
versace also points out that `` she doesn't think that anyone ,  before or after her ,  has done for fashion what diana did '' . 
by contrast ,  diana's relationship with her estranged stepmother reportedly improved in the years before her death in 1997.
catherine walker was among diana's favorite designers with whom she worked to create her `` royal uniform '' . 
diana wore a dress valued at £9,000 with a 25-foot  -lrb-  7.62-metre  -rrb-  train . 
the spencers were hoping for a boy to carry on the family line ,  and no name was chosen for a week ,  until they settled on diana frances ,  after her mother and after lady diana spencer ,  a many-times-great-aunt who was also a prospective princess of wales . 
the queen mother gave diana a sapphire and diamond brooch as an engagement present . 
diana was a fashion icon whose style was emulated by women around the world . 
haypost also issued a postage stamp commemorating diana in armenia at the same year . 
in 1998, azermarka issued postage stamps commemorating diana in azerbaijan . 
diana was initially home-schooled under the supervision of her governess ,  gertrude allen . 
posthumously ,  as in life ,  she is most popularly referred to as `` princess diana '' ,  a title not formally correct and one she never held . 
diana was an inspiration for off-white's spring 2018 show at paris fashion week in 2017.
on 30 august 1961, diana was baptised at st .  mary magdalene church ,  sandringham . 
the diana ,  princess of wales memorial fund was established after her death and was granted intellectual property rights over her image . 
vine asserted her own abiding attraction to `` the beauty and the tragedy of diana's life '' . 
diana also excelled in swimming and diving ,  and studied ballet and tap dance . 
diana frances spencer was born on 1 july 1961, in park house ,  sandringham ,  norfolk . 
in march 1997, diana visited south africa ,  where she met with president nelson mandela . 
in 1975, after her father inherited the title of earl spencer ,  she became known as lady diana spencer . 
released as a single in 1997, the global proceeds from the song have gone to diana's charities . 
the diana princess of wales health education and media centre in noida ,  india ,  was opened in her honour in november 1999, funded by the diana princess of wales memorial fund to give social support to the people affected by leprosy and disability . 
sally bedell smith characterised diana as unpredictable ,  egocentric ,  and possessive . 
diana had become what prime minister tony blair called the `` people's princess '' ,  an iconic national figure . 
in 2018, diana ranked fifteenth on the `` bbc history '''s poll of 100 women who changed the world . 
the term plough ,  as used today ,  was not common until 1700.
the earliest ploughs were wheelless ,  and the romans used a wheelless plough called the `` aratrum '' ,  but celtic peoples began using wheeled ploughs during the roman era . 
modern competitions take place for ploughing enthusiasts like the national ploughing championships in ireland . 
a logic satisfying this principle is called a two-valued logic or bivalent logic . 
in classical two-valued logic both the law of excluded middle and the law of non-contradiction hold . 
the intended semantics of classical logic is bivalent ,  but this is not true of every semantics for classical logic . 
it is not the same as the law of excluded middle ,  however ,  and a semantics may satisfy that law without being bivalent . 
suidger was the bishop of bamberg . 
pope clement ii  -lrb-  ; born suidger von morsleben; died 9 october 1047 -rrb- ,  was pope from 25 december 1046 until his death in 1047.
his is the only tomb of a pope north of the alps . 
in 1040, he became bishop of bamberg . 
pope clement iii  -lrb-  ; 1130 – 20 march 1191 -rrb- ,  born paulino  -lrb-  or paolo  -rrb-  scolari ,  reigned from 19 december 1187 to his death . 
in april 1189, clement made peace with the emperor frederick i barbarossa . 
the crisis was acute when the pope died in the latter part of march 1191.
in his 1267 letter written from viterbo ,  the pope wrote:
pope clement iv  -lrb-  ; 23 november 1190 – 29 november 1268 -rrb- ,  born gui foucois  -lrb-  ; or '  -rrb-  and also known as guy le gros '''  -lrb-  french for `` guy the fat '';   -rrb-  ,  was bishop of le puy  -lrb-  1257–1260 -rrb- ,  archbishop of narbonne  -lrb-  1259–1261 -rrb- ,  cardinal of sabina  -lrb-  1261–1265 -rrb- ,  and pope from 5 february 1265 until his death . 
in february 1265 clement summoned thomas aquinas to rome to serve as papal theologian . 
in 1264, clement iv renewed the prohibition of the talmud promulgated by gregory ix ,  who had it publicly burnt in france and in italy . 
pope clement v  -lrb-  ; c .  1264 – 20 april 1314 -rrb- ,  born raymond bertrand de got  -lrb-  also occasionally spelled `` de guoth '' and `` de goth ''  -rrb-  ,  was pope from 5 june 1305 to his death in 1314.
for his part ,  clement v absolved all the participants in the abduction of boniface at anagni . 
in pursuance of the king's wishes ,  clement v in 1311 summoned the council of vienne ,  which refused to convict the templars of heresy . 
pope clement vi  -lrb-  ; 1291 – 6 december 1352 -rrb- ,  born pierre roger ,  was pope from 7 may 1342 to his death in 1352.
clement is said to have replied ,  `` our predecessors did not know how to be pope . `` 
cardinal roger chose the regnal name clement vi . 
later in the year ,  in paris in the prés des clercs ,  the king received the cross personally from the hands of archbishop roger . 
pope clement was also involved in disputes with king edward iii of england as a result of the latter's encroachments on ecclesiastical jurisdiction . 
one of the greatest ways in which a pope can reward his supporters is to raise them to the cardinalate . 
on 3 december 1328 peter roger was named bishop of arras ,  in which capacity he became a royal councilor of king philip vi . 
his brother guillaume became seigneur de chambon ,  thanks to his wife's dowry ,  and ,  with the benefit of his papal brother's influence on king philip vi ,  became vicomte de beaufort . 
clement vi had the misfortune to be on the papal throne when the black death first struck europe in 1347.
on 14 april 1335, pierre roger's friend and patron ,  cardinal pierre de mortemart died ,  naming pierre roger as one of the executors of his testament . 
perhaps feeling the pressure of mortality ,  having lost no fewer than six cardinals in the year 1348 alone ,  pope clement vi named a new cardinal on 29 may 1348, his nephew and namesake ,  pierre roger de beaufort ,  who was not yet eighteen years old . 
pierre roger was called to avignon through the influence of his friend and protector ,  cardinal pierre de mortemart  -lrb-  who was named a cardinal on 18 december 1327 -rrb- ,  both of whom were close to king charles iv . 
pierre roger was created a cardinal priest by pope benedict xii  -lrb-  1334–1342 -rrb- on 18 december 1338, in his only consistory for the creation of cardinals . 
corrupted data can also be distributed on p2p networks by modifying files that are already being shared on the network . 
they are said to form a peer-to-peer network of nodes . 
peer-to-peer networks generally implement some form of virtual overlay network on top of the physical network topology ,  where the nodes in the overlay form a subset of the nodes in the physical network . 
in p2p networks ,  clients both provide and use resources . 
a peer-to-peer network is designed around the notion of equal `` peer '' nodes simultaneously functioning as both `` clients '' and `` servers '' to the other nodes on the network . 
many file peer-to-peer file sharing networks ,  such as gnutella ,  g2, and the edonkey network popularized peer-to-peer technologies . 
also ,  because the role of all peers in the network is the same ,  unstructured networks are highly robust in the face of high rates of `` churn ''—that is ,  when large numbers of peers are frequently joining and leaving the network . 
notable distributed networks that use dhts include bittorrent's distributed tracker ,  the kad network ,  the storm botnet ,  yacy ,  and the coral content distribution network . 
in this sense ,  the community of users in a p2p network is completely responsible for deciding what content is available . 
 ''unstructured peer-to-peer networks '' do not impose a particular structure on the overlay network by design ,  but rather are formed by nodes that randomly form connections to each other . 
there are both advantages and disadvantages in p2p networks related to the topic of data backup ,  recovery ,  and availability . 
in israel ,  the prime minister's executive office is officially titled the `` prime minister's office '' in english ,  but the original hebrew term can also be translated as the prime minister's ministry . 
in the russian constitution the prime minister is actually titled `` chairman of the government '' while the irish prime minister is called the  -lrb-  which is rendered into english as `` prime minister ''  -rrb-  ,  and in israel he is `` rosh hamemshalah '' meaning `` head of the government '' . 
it is at this point that a modern style of prime minister begins to emerge . 
some states ,  however ,  do have a term of office of the prime minister linked to the period in office of the parliament . 
as well as being head of government ,  a prime minister may have other roles or posts—the prime minister of the united kingdom ,  for example ,  is also first lord of the treasury and minister for the civil service . 
in many cases ,  though commonly used ,  `` prime minister '' is not the official title of the office-holder; the spanish prime minister is the president of the government  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
india's constitution  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of india . 
pakistan's constitution  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of pakistan . 
in parliamentary systems a prime minister may enter into office by several means . 
japan's constitution  -lrb-  1946 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of japan . 
malaysia's constitution  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of malaysia . 
norway's constitution  -lrb-  1814 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of norway
thailand's constitution  -lrb-  1932 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of thailand . 
in pakistan ,  the prime minister is referred to as `` wazir-e-azam '' ,  meaning `` grand vizier '' . 
the prime minister's executive office is usually called the office of the prime minister in the case of the canada and other commonwealth countries ,  it is called cabinet office in united kingdom . 
malta's constitution  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of malta . 
the position ,  power and status of prime ministers differ depending on the age of the constitution . 
a prime minister is the head of a cabinet and the leader of the ministers in the executive branch of government ,  often in a parliamentary or semi-presidential system . 
france's constitution  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- lists the powers ,  functions and duties of the prime minister of france . 
in almost all states with a presidential system of government ,  the president exercises the functions of head of state and head of government ,  i . e . 
the president is a common title for the head of state in most republics . 
in the united states the president has always been both `` head of state '' and `` head of government '' and has always had the title of president . 
a second system is the semi-presidential system ,  also known as the french model . 
only a tiny minority of modern republics do not have a single head of state . 
however ,  the most common modern usage is as the title of a head of state in a republic . 
however ,  the lord president alone was not head of state ,  because that office was vested in the council as a whole . 
once the united states adopted the title of `` president '' for its republican head of state ,  many other nations followed suit . 
the spectrum of power has included presidents-for-life and hereditary presidencies to ceremonial heads of state . 
the modern usage of the term `` president '' to designate a single person who is the head of state of a republic can be traced directly to the united states constitution of 1787, which created the office of president of the united states . 
a variation of the parliamentary republic is a system with an executive president in which the president is the head of state and the government but unlike a presidential system ,  is elected by and accountable to a parliament ,  and referred to as president . 
in 2003, the band once again reformed . 
afterward ,  the band members once again went their own ways . 
the band released six studio albums during its twenty-three-year existence . 
throughout 1995, 1996 and 1997, the band made worldwide tours to support their first two albums . 
in october 2008, `` lump '' was released on the video game `` rock band 2 '' . 
the band broke up because sir mix-a-lot wanted to take the band in a harder ,  more electronic direction ,  but finn and dederer were not interested . 
in november 2013, the band started a pledgemusic project in order to release a new studio album . 
in november 2007, the band's next album ,  `` these are the good times people '' ,  was announced; it was released on march 11, 2008.
finn played drums for several bands ,  including nevada bachelors ,  the fastbacks and love battery ,  his original band . 
dederer has played live with the band in concerts in seattle on occasion . 
this performance is not available on any of their albums . 
the president of the united states  -lrb-  potus  -rrb-  is the head of state and head of government of the united states of america . 
the president's salary is set by congress ,  and under of the constitution ,  may not be increased or reduced during his or her current term of office . 
congress finished work on the articles of confederation to establish a perpetual union between the states in november 1777 and sent it to the states for ratification . 
according to of the constitution ,  the president may convene either or both houses of congress . 
to serve as president ,  one must:
if the vice president and cabinet contest this claim ,  it is up to congress ,  which must meet within two days if not already in session ,  to decide the merit of the claim . 
one of the most important of all executive powers is the president's role as commander-in-chief of the united states armed forces . 
john tyler served in the provisional congress of the confederate states during the civil war and was elected to the confederate house of representatives ,  but died before that body first met . 
as of there are four living former u . s .  presidents . 
this is followed by a state dinner given by the president which is held in the state dining room later in the evening . 
as a result of the date change ,  the first term  -lrb-  1933–37 -rrb- of both men had been shortened by days . 
the president also has the power to nominate federal judges ,  including members of the united states courts of appeals and the supreme court of the united states . 
in july 1776, during the american revolutionary war ,  the thirteen colonies ,  acting jointly through the second continental congress ,  declared themselves to be 13 independent sovereign states ,  no longer under british rule . 
under the articles ,  which took effect on march 1, 1781, the congress of the confederation was a central political authority without any legislative power . 
for a candidate to win ,  he or she must receive the votes of an absolute majority of states  -lrb-  currently 26 of 50 -rrb- . 
conservative commentator george will wrote of an `` increasingly swollen executive branch '' and `` the eclipse of congress '' . 
the presentment clause requires that any bill passed by congress must be presented to the president before it can become law . 
in the 20th century ,  critics charged that too many legislative and budgetary powers that should have belonged to congress had slid into the hands of presidents . 
in `` clinton v .  city of new york '' ,   ,  the u . s .  supreme court ruled such a legislative alteration of the veto power to be unconstitutional . 
additionally ,  gerald ford ,  who served out the last two years and five months of nixon's second term ,  sought a full term ,  but was defeated by jimmy carter in the 1976 election . 
on the first monday after the second wednesday in december ,  about six weeks after the election ,  the electors convene in their respective state capitals  -lrb-  and in washington d . c .   -rrb-  to vote for president and ,  on a separate ballot ,  for vice president . 
the u . s .  secret service is charged with protecting the president and the first family . 
moreover ,  congress can overturn an executive order though legislation  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  congressional review act  -rrb-  . 
additionally ,  the president may attempt to have congress alter proposed legislation by threatening to veto that legislation unless requested changes are made . 
presidents may use their predecessors as emissaries to deliver private messages to other nations or as official representatives of the united states to state funerals and other important foreign events . 
in contemporary times ,  the president is looked upon as one of the world's most powerful political figures and as the leader of the only remaining global superpower . 
the power of the presidency has grown substantially since its formation ,  as has the power of the federal government as a whole . 
the inner beliefs of the presidents are much more difficult to establish than church membership . 
four presidents are affiliated with unitarian churches ,  and a fifth  -lrb-  jefferson  -rrb-  was an exponent of ideas now commonly associated with unitarianism . 
on the other hand ,  there are several presidents who considered themselves aligned with a particular church ,  but who withheld from formal affiliation for a time . 
james buchanan ,  for instance ,  held himself allied with the presbyterian church ,  but refrained from joining it until he left office . 
two presidents were quakers  -lrb-  herbert hoover and richard nixon  -rrb-  and information about their religion is harder to come by . 
st .  john's episcopal church  -lrb-  built 1815-1816 -rrb- just across lafayette square and north of the white house ,  is the church nearest to the white house ,  and its services have been attended at least once by nearly every president since james madison  -lrb-  1809–1817 -rrb- . 
while many presidents did not formally join a church until quite late in life ,  there is a genre of tales of deathbed conversions . 
professional peer review is common in the field of health care ,  where it is usually called `` clinical peer review '' . 
peer review can be categorized by the type of activity and by the field or profession in which the activity occurs ,  e . g .  ,  medical peer review . 
to an outsider ,  the anonymous ,  pre-publication peer review process is opaque . 
many other professional fields have some level of peer review process: accounting ,  law ,  engineering  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  software peer review ,  technical peer review  -rrb-  ,  aviation ,  and even forest fire management . 
the prime minister of australia is the head of government of australia . 
the deputy prime minister most commonly becomes acting prime minister in those circumstances . 
most of the prime minister's power derives from being the head of government . 
as of 1 july 2018, australia's prime minister is paid a total salary of $538,460.
only one prime minister who had left the federal parliament ever returned . 
in may 2018, the australian prime minister was reportedly the highest paid leader in the oecd . 
in 2017, prime minister malcolm turnbull said the pass should be available only to former prime ministers ,  though he would not use it when he was no longer pm . 
whilst in office ,  the prime minister has two official residences . 
at the simplest ,  an index fund is implemented by purchasing securities in the same proportion as in the stock market index . 
investment funds that employ passive investment strategies to track the performance of a stock market index are known as index funds . 
passive management is most common on the equity market ,  where index funds track a stock market index ,  but it is becoming more common in other investment types ,  including bonds ,  commodities and hedge funds . 
similarly ,  vanguard stated in 2018 that index funds own `` 15% of the value of all global equities '' . 
the bull market of the 1990s helped spur the growth in indexing observed over that decade . 
the bank of america estimated in 2017 that 37 percent of the value of u . s .  funds  -lrb-  not including privately held assets  -rrb-  were in passive investments such as index funds and index etfs . 
giulio de' medici appeared on the world stage in march 1513, when his cousin giovanni de' medici was elected pope ,  taking the name leo x . 
like his cousin pope leo x ,  clement was considered too generous to his medici relatives ,  draining the vatican treasuries . 
pope clement vii  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-   -lrb-  26 may 1478 – 25 september 1534 -rrb- ,  born giulio di giuliano de' medici ,  was head of the catholic church and ruler of the papal states from 19 november 1523 to his death on 25 september 1534.
giulio de' medici's life began under tragic circumstances . 
in 1533, johann widmanstetter  -lrb-  alternately called john widmanstad  -rrb-  ,  a secretary of pope clement vii ,  explained the copernican system to the pope and two cardinals . 
as for the arts ,  clement vii is remembered for having been the patron of benvenuto cellini . 
following adrian vi's death on 14 september 1523, medici overcame the opposition of the french king and finally succeeded in being elected pope clement vii in the next conclave  -lrb-  19 november 1523 -rrb- . 
elected in 1523 at the end of the italian renaissance ,  clement vii came to the papacy with a high reputation as a statesman ,  having served with distinction as chief advisor to both pope leo x  -lrb-  1513-1521 -rrb- and pope adrian vi  -lrb-  1522-1523 -rrb- . 
in parliament ,  bishop john fisher was the pope's champion . 
the pope responded to the marriage by excommunicating both henry and cranmer from the catholic church . 
unlike julius ii ,  however ,  clement vii kept his beard until his death in 1534.
regardless of his paternity ,  throughout alessandro's brief life ,  giulio — as pope clement vii — showed him great favoritism ,  elevating alessandro over ippolito de medici to become florence's first hereditary monarch ,  despite the latter's comparable qualifications . 
while medici’s strategy of shifting alliances to liberate the church  -lrb-  and later italy  -rrb-  from foreign domination proved disastrous during his reign as pope clement vii ,  during the reign of leo x it skillfully maintained a balance of power among the competing international factions then seeking to influence the church . 
“the most unfortunate of the popes , ” clement vii’s reign was marked by a rapid succession of political ,  military ,  and religious struggles — many long in the making — which had far-reaching consequences for christianity and world politics . 
pope clement viii  -lrb-  ; 24 february 1536 – 5 march 1605 -rrb- ,  born ippolito aldobrandini ,  was pope from 2 february 1592 to his death in 1605.
clement viii tightened measures against the jewish inhabitants of his territories . 
clement viii himself lent the emperor valuable assistance in men and money . 
clement viii was as vigorous as pope sixtus v  -lrb-  1585–90 -rrb- in crushing banditry in the papal provinces of umbria and the marche and in punishing the lawlessness of the roman nobility . 
coffee aficionados often claim that the spread of its popularity among catholics is due to pope clement viii's influence . 
pope clement viii participated personally in the final phases of the trial ,  inviting the cardinals in charge of the case to proceed with the verdict . 
clement viii died at the age of 69 in 1605 and his remains now rest in the santa maria maggiore . 
the peloponnesian war  -lrb-  431–404 bc  -rrb-  was an ancient greek war fought by the delian league led by athens against the peloponnesian league led by sparta . 
the peloponnesian war reshaped the ancient greek world . 
the spartan strategy during the first war ,  known as the archidamian war  -lrb-  431–421 bc  -rrb-  after sparta's king archidamus ii ,  was to invade the land surrounding athens . 
in the battle ,  the athenians obliterated the spartan fleet ,  and succeeded in re-establishing the financial basis of the athenian empire . 
the overall effect of the war in greece proper was to replace the athenian empire with a spartan empire . 
bury remarks ,  the peloponnesians would have considered it the `` attic war '' . 
the athenians crushed the revolt ,  and peace was maintained . 
after the battle of aegospotami ,  sparta took over the athenian empire and kept all of its tribute revenues for itself; sparta's allies ,  who had made greater sacrifices for the war effort than had sparta ,  got nothing . 
undeterred ,  a majority of the spartan assembly voted to declare that the athenians had broken the peace ,  essentially declaring war . 
the more immediate events that led to war involved athens and corinth . 
following the defeat of the athenians in sicily ,  it was widely believed that the end of the athenian empire was at hand . 
in 459 bc ,  athens took advantage of a war between its neighbors megara and corinth ,  both spartan allies ,  to conclude an alliance with megara ,  giving the athenians a critical foothold on the isthmus of corinth . 
the war was officially ended by the thirty years' peace ,  signed in the winter of 446/5 bc . 
as the preeminent athenian historian ,  thucydides ,  wrote in his influential `` history of the peloponnesian war '' ,  `` the growth of the power of athens ,  and the alarm which this inspired in lacedaemon ,  made war inevitable . `` 
as pope ,  clement ix continued his interest in the arts . 
pope clement ix  -lrb-  ; 28 january 1600 – 9 december 1669 -rrb- ,  born giulio rospigliosi ,  was pope from 20 june 1667 to his death in 1669.
on 20 june 1667, he was elected as pontiff and took the pontifical name of `` clement ix '' . 
clement ix confirmed the cultus of margaret of savoy on 9 october 1669.
clement ix worked to strengthen venetian defences against the turks on the island of crete . 
pope clement x  -lrb-  ; 13 july 1590 – 22 july 1676 -rrb- ,  born emilio bonaventura altieri ,  was pope from 29 april 1670 to his death in 1676.
after the funeral of pope clement ix ,  sixty-two electors entered into conclave on 20 december 1669.
in 1676, gianlorenzo bernini sculpted one of his final statues ,  a bust of clement x . 
pope alexander vii  -lrb-  1655–67 -rrb- confided to him a mission to poland . 
altieri received a doctorate in law from the roman college in 1611.
clement xi was a patron of the arts and of science . 
pope clement xi  -lrb-  ; 23 july 1649 – 19 march 1721 -rrb- ,  born giovanni francesco albani ,  was pope from 23 november 1700 to his death in 1721.
clement xi created a total of 70 cardinals in 15 consistories . 
in 1713 clement xi issued the bull `` unigenitus '' in response to the spread of the jansenist heresy . 
pope clement xi shunned nepotism and though his nephew annibale was appointed a cardinal ,  it was only through personal merit . 
clement xi extended the feast of our lady of the rosary to the universal church of the roman rite in 1716.
clement xi also was key in the decision to allow cats back into christian homes after they were seen as overtly pagan symbols . 
clement xi died in rome on 19 march 1721 at 12:45pm and was buried in the pavement of st .  peter's basilica rather than in an ornate tomb like those of his predecessors . 
the pan flute is an end-blown flute . 
the pan flute is named after pan ,  the greek god of nature and shepherds often depicted with such an instrument . 
according to the fundamental principle for pan flutes ,  the frequency and the length of the tube are inversely proportional . 
the pan flute's tubes are stopped at one end ,  at which the standing wave is reflected giving a note an octave lower than that produced by an open pipe of equal length . 
in the twentieth century grid ,  electrical power was largely generated by burning fossil fuel . 
food  -lrb-  which is made by the same process as fossil fuels  -rrb-  is a form of energy stored in chemical form . 
during 2014 and 2015, a new major php version was developed ,  which was numbered php 7.
the foundation of php is a php branch that was originally dubbed `` php next generation ''  -lrb-  `` phpng ''  -rrb-  . 
after a vote ,  the name php 7 was chosen . 
many high-profile open-source projects ceased to support php 4 in new code as of february 5, 2008, because of the gophp5 initiative ,  provided by a consortium of php developers promoting the transition from php 4 to php 5.
beginning on june 28, 2011, the php development team implemented a timeline for the release of new versions of php . 
php 7 also included new language features . 
php: hypertext preprocessor  -lrb-  or simply php  -rrb-  is a server-side scripting language designed for web development . 
the standard php interpreter ,  powered by the zend engine ,  is free software released under the php license . 
on may 22, 2000, php 4, powered by the zend engine 1.0, was released . 
because of major internal changes in phpng ,  it must receive a new major version number of php ,  rather than a minor php 5 release ,  according to php's release process . 
the mascot of the php project is the `` elephpant '' ,  a blue elephant with the php logo on its side ,  designed by vincent pontier in 1998.
php originally stood for `` personal home page '' ,  but it now stands for the recursive initialism `` php: hypertext preprocessor '' . 
php 4 is no longer under development nor will any security updates be released . 
in greek mythology ,  priam  -lrb-  ; ancient greek: πρίαμος ,  `` príamos '' ,    -rrb-  was the legendary king of troy during the trojan war . 
neoptolemus then drags priam to the altar and there kills him too . 
in book 3 of homer's `` iliad '' ,  priam tells helen of troy that he once helped king mygdon of phrygia in a battle against the amazons . 
