the romans expanded from arabia to britannia . 
the neolithic reached central europe in the 6th millennium bc and parts of northern europe in the 5th and 4th millenniums bc . 
in the eastern part the dominant state was the remaining eastern roman empire . 
while proclaiming the rebirth of the republic ,  he had ushered in the transfer of the roman state from a republic to an empire ,  the roman empire ,  which lasted for more than four centuries until the fall of the western roman empire . 
in italy ,  theodoric the great began the cultural romanization of the new world he had constructed . 
in 395 theodosius i ,  who had made christianity the official religion of the roman empire ,  would be the last emperor to preside over a united roman empire . 
around 29,000 bc a new technology/culture appeared in the western region of europe: the gravettian . 
the indo-european migrations started at around c .  4200 bc . 
evidence of permanent settlement dates from the 8th millennium bc in the balkans . 
in western europe ,  germanic peoples became more powerful in the remnants of the former western roman empire and established kingdoms and empires of their own . 
during the neolithic era  -lrb-  starting at c .  7000 bc .   -rrb- 
at the same time at the north ruled the thracian odrysian kingdom between the 5th century bc and the 1st century ad . 
the british historian edward gibbon argued in `` the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire ''  -lrb-  1776 -rrb- that the romans had become decadent ,  they had lost civic virtue . 
greek wisdom passed into roman institutions ,  as athens itself was absorbed under the banner of the senate and people of rome – spqr . 
the greeks and the romans left a legacy in europe which is evident in european languages ,  thought ,  visual arts and law . 
the beginning of the 11th century bc opened a new context ,  that of the protogeometric ,  the beginning of the geometric period ,  the `` greek dark ages '' of traditional historiography . 
much of greek learning was assimilated by the nascent roman state as it expanded outward from italy ,  taking advantage of its enemies' inability to unite: the only challenge to roman ascent came from the phoenician colony of carthage ,  and its defeats in the three punic wars marked the start of roman hegemony . 
the viking age ,  a period of migrations of scandinavian peoples ,  occurred from the late 8th century to the middle 11th century . 
thus ,  while one might agree that there is no belief one can hold come what may ,  there are some for which there is ample practical ground to `` hold more stubbornly at least '' . 
hold come what may is a phrase popularized by logician willard van orman quine . 
shorter haiku are very much more common in 21st century english haiku writing . 
in 1973, the haiku society of america noted that the norm for writers of haiku in english was to use 17 syllables ,  but they also noted a trend toward shorter haiku . 
in japanese ,  haiku are traditionally printed in a single vertical line while haiku in english often appear in three lines to parallel the three phrases of japanese haiku . 
kigo are not always included in non-japanese haiku or by modern writers of japanese `` free-form '' haiku . 
he never filmed the project . 
it is one of two films directed by hawks that are lost films . 
in addition to his career as a film director ,  howard hawks either wrote or supervised the writing for most of his films . 
a versatile film director ,  hawks explored many genres such as comedies ,  dramas ,  gangster films ,  science fiction ,  film noir ,  and westerns . 
wood named hawks's `` rio bravo '' as his top film of all time . 
in the 1950s ,  eugene archer ,  a film fan ,  was planning on writing a book on important american film directors such as john ford . 
studio interference on both films led hawks to walk out on his mgm contract without completing either film himself . 
hawks was a versatile director whose career includes comedies ,  dramas ,  gangster films ,  science fiction ,  film noir ,  and westerns . 
some critics limit hawks by his action films ,  describing hawks as a director who produced films with a `` masculine bias '' ,  however action scenes in hawks's films were often left to second-unit directors and hawks actually preferred to work indoors . 
 ''paid to love '' is notable in hawks's filmography ,  because it was a highly stylized ,  experimental film . 
after making the world war ii film `` air force '' in 1943 starring john garfield ,  hawks did two films with real-life lovers humphrey bogart and lauren bacall . 
howard winchester hawks  -lrb-  may 30, 1896december 26, 1977 -rrb- was an american film director ,  producer and screenwriter of the classic hollywood era . 
hawks has been considered by some film critics to be an auteur both because of his recognizable style and frequent use of specific thematic elements ,  and because of his attention to all aspects of his films ,  not merely directing . 
although he mainly dismissed his early work ,  hawks praised this film in later interviews . 
hitler invaded the soviet union in june 1941.
in 962, otto i became the first holy roman emperor of the holy roman empire ,  the medieval german state . 
under occupation by the allies ,  german territories were split up ,  austria was again made a separate country ,  denazification took place ,  and the cold war resulted in the division of the country into democratic west germany and communist east germany . 
in greek mythology ,  hades ,  the god of the underworld ,  was the first-born son of the titans cronus and rhea . 
the `` di inferi '' were a collective of underworld divinities . 
he was also referred to as `` zeus katachthonios ''  -lrb-  ζεὺς καταχθόνιος  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` the zeus of the underworld '' ,  by those avoiding his actual name ,  as he had complete control over the underworld . 
hades  -lrb-  ; `` hádēs ''; ἅιδης `` háidēs ''  -rrb-  ,  in the ancient greek religion and myth ,  is the god of the dead and the king of the underworld ,  with which his name became synonymous . 
see also eridanos . 
it is during this time ,  when persephone is down in the underworld with her husband ,  that winter falls upon the earth ,  `` an aspect of sadness and mourning . `` 
he spent most of the time in his dark realm . 
in roman mythology ,  the entrance to the underworld located at avernus ,  a crater near cumae ,  was the route aeneas used to descend to the realm of the dead . 
in older greek myths ,  the realm of hades is the misty and gloomy abode of the dead  -lrb-  also called erebus  -rrb-  where all mortals go when they die . 
demeter ,  however ,  suspects that persephone may have eaten food while down in the underworld ,  and so she questions persephone ,  saying:
hades ruled the underworld and was therefore most often associated with death and feared by men ,  but he was not death itself — it is thanatos ,  son of nyx and erebus ,  who is the actual personification of death ,  although euripides' play ``  ''alkestis '' '' states fairly clearly that thanatos and hades were one and the same deity ,  and gives an interesting description of hades as being dark-cloaked and winged; moreover ,  hades was also referred to as `` hesperos theos ''  -lrb-  `` god of death & darkness ''  -rrb-  . 
the etruscan god aita and the roman gods dis pater and orcus were eventually taken as equivalent to hades and merged into pluto ,  a latinization of plouton  -lrb-  ``  ,  ploútōn ''  -rrb-  ,  itself a euphemistic title often given to hades . 
west argues instead for an original meaning of `` the one who presides over meeting up '' from the universality of death . 
hades ,  as the god of the dead ,  was a fearsome figure to those still living; in no hurry to meet him ,  they were reluctant to swear oaths in his name ,  and averted their faces when sacrificing to him . 
gnu hurd is the multiserver microkernel written as part of gnu . 
from early on ,  the hurd was developed to use gnu mach as the microkernel . 
in further discussion hurd developers realised that coyotos  -lrb-  as well as other similar kernels  -rrb-  are not suitable for hurd . 
development of the hurd has proceeded slowly . 
on august 20, 2015, amid the google summer of code ,  it was announced that gnu guix had been ported to gnu hurd . 
gnu hurd consists of a set of protocols and server processes  -lrb-  or daemons ,  in unix terminology  -rrb-  that run on the gnu mach microkernel . 
health care reform typically attempts to:
health care reform is a general rubric used for discussing major health policy creation or changes—for the most part ,  governmental policy that affects health care delivery in a given place . 
in the united states ,  the debate regarding health care reform includes questions of a right to health care ,  access ,  fairness ,  sustainability ,  quality and amounts spent by government . 
a 2008 article in the journal health affairs suggested that the dutch health system ,  which combines mandatory universal coverage with competing private health plans ,  could serve as a model for reform in the us . 
russian prime minister vladimir putin announced a large-scale health care reform in 2011 and pledged to allocate more than 300 billion rubles  -lrb-  $10 billion  -rrb-  in the next few years to improve health care in the country . 
uniform law commission ,  sponsored by the national conference of commissioners on uniform state laws has not submitted a uniform act or model legislation regarding health care insurance or health care reform . 
both hawaii and massachusetts have implemented some incremental reforms in health care ,  but neither state has complete coverage of its citizens . 
the netherlands has introduced a new system of health care insurance based on risk equalization through a risk equalization pool . 
mayhew was the grandfather of audrey mayhew allen  -lrb-  b . 
some of the london street traders did not like the way mayhew wrote about them . 
he was born in london ,  one of seventeen children of joshua mayhew . 
in 1842 mayhew contributed to the pioneering illustrated london news . 
on 17 july 1841 mayhew cofounded punch magazine . 
the `` punch '' years gave mayhew the opportunity to meet talented illustrators who he later employed to work from daguerreotypes on `` london labour and the london poor '' . 
most interstellar hydrogen is in the form of atomic hydrogen because the atoms can seldom collide and combine . 
antihydrogen  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the antimatter counterpart to hydrogen . 
hydrogen can react spontaneously and violently at room temperature with chlorine and fluorine to form the corresponding hydrogen halides ,  hydrogen chloride and hydrogen fluoride ,  which are also potentially dangerous acids . 
hydrogen is a chemical element with symbol h and atomic number 1.
the electrolysis of water is a simple method of producing hydrogen . 
a molecular form called protonated molecular hydrogen  -lrb-    -rrb-  is found in the interstellar medium ,  where it is generated by ionization of molecular hydrogen from cosmic rays . 
throughout the universe ,  hydrogen is mostly found in the atomic and plasma states ,  with properties quite different from those of molecular hydrogen . 
hydrogen is often produced using natural gas ,  which involves the removal of hydrogen from hydrocarbons at very high temperatures ,  with about 95% of hydrogen production coming from steam reforming around year 2000.
hydrogen has three naturally occurring isotopes ,  denoted  ,  and  . 
nasa has investigated the use of atomic hydrogen as a rocket propellant . 
hydrogen gas is produced by some bacteria and algae and is a natural component of flatus ,  as is methane ,  itself a hydrogen source of increasing importance . 
the universal emergence of atomic hydrogen first occurred during the recombination epoch . 
hydrogen is the only element that has different names for its isotopes in common use today . 
by contrast ,  the positive hydrogen molecular ion  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a rare molecule in the universe . 
they are the source of the important 21 cm hydrogen line in astronomy at 1420 mhz . 
electrolysis of brine to yield chlorine also produces hydrogen as a co-product . 
hydrogen gas forms explosive mixtures with air in concentrations from 4–74% and with chlorine at 5–95% . 
hydrogen is sometimes produced and consumed in the same industrial process ,  without being separated . 
many metals such as zirconium undergo a similar reaction with water leading to the production of hydrogen . 
there are nine known isotopes of helium ,  but only helium-3 and helium-4 are stable . 
helium-6 and helium-8 are known to exhibit a nuclear halo . 
from 2002 to 2007 helium prices doubled . 
 ,  the united states national helium reserve accounted for 30 percent of the world's helium . 
liquid helium below its lambda point  -lrb-  called `` helium ii ''  -rrb-  exhibits very unusual characteristics . 
while balloons are perhaps the best known use of helium ,  they are a minor part of all helium use . 
helium-3 is present on earth only in trace amounts . 
most helium on earth is a result of radioactive decay . 
most extraterrestrial helium is found in a plasma state ,  with properties quite different from those of atomic helium . 
an estimated deposit of helium was found in tanzania in 2016.
by 1949, commercial quantities of grade a 99.95% helium were available . 
helium ii also exhibits a creeping effect . 
for large-scale use ,  helium is extracted by fractional distillation from natural gas ,  which can contain as much as 7% helium . 
in the `` fountain effect '' ,  a chamber is constructed which is connected to a reservoir of helium ii by a sintered disc through which superfluid helium leaks easily but through which non-superfluid helium cannot pass . 
helium  -lrb-  from   -rrb-  is a chemical element with symbol he and atomic number 2.
helium produced between 1930 and 1945 was about 98.3% pure  -lrb-  2% nitrogen  -rrb-  ,  which was adequate for airships . 
the nucleus of the helium-4 atom is identical with an alpha particle . 
one industrial application for helium is leak detection . 
helium is named for the greek titan of the sun ,  helios . 
once precooled below this temperature ,  helium can be liquefied through expansion cooling . 
this is necessary for applications requiring liquid helium and also allows helium suppliers to reduce the cost of long distance transportation ,  as the largest liquid helium containers have more than five times the capacity of the largest gaseous helium tube trailers . 
van der waals compounds of helium can also be formed with cryogenic helium gas and atoms of some other substance ,  such as lihe and he . 
under high pressures helium can form compounds with various other elements . 
the thermal conductivity of helium ii is greater than that of any other known substance ,  a million times that of helium i and several hundred times that of copper . 
helium is commercially available in either liquid or gaseous form . 
in simple chemistry ,  as per valence bond theory ,  the carbon atom must follow the ``  ''4-hydrogen rule '' '' ,  which states that the maximum number of atoms available to bond with carbon is equal to the number of electrons that are attracted into the outer shell of carbon . 
hydrocarbons can be gases  -lrb-  e . g . 
in terms of shells ,  carbon consists of an incomplete outer shell ,  which comprises 4 electrons ,  and thus has 4 electrons available for covalent or dative bonding . 
all of the halogens have been observed to react with hydrogen to form hydrogen halides . 
hydrogen iodide ,  like other hydrogen halides ,  is toxic . 
these reactions are in the form of:
all halogens form binary compounds with hydrogen known as the hydrogen halides: hydrogen fluoride  -lrb-  hf  -rrb-  ,  hydrogen chloride  -lrb-  hcl  -rrb-  ,  hydrogen bromide  -lrb-  hbr  -rrb-  ,  hydrogen iodide  -lrb-  hi  -rrb-  ,  and hydrogen astatide  -lrb-  hat  -rrb-  . 
all of the hydrogen halides are irritants . 
however ,  hydrogen iodide and hydrogen astatide can split back into their constituent elements . 
iodine and astatine only partially react with hydrogen ,  forming equilibria . 
hydrochloric acid ,  hydrobromic acid ,  hydroiodic acid ,  and hydroastatic acid are all strong acids ,  but hydrofluoric acid is a weak acid . 
sodium's reaction with chlorine is in the form of:
a home page or a start page is the initial or main web page of a website or a browser . 
a home page also refers to the first page that appears upon opening a web browser ,  sometimes called the start page ,  although the home page of a website can be used as a start page . 
a personal web page is also commonly called a home page ,  although such websites can contain many pages . 
the majority of websites have a home page with underlying content pages ,  although some websites contain only a single page . 
this may in turn be referred to as the `` personal home page '' . 
the show's final season  -lrb-  `` hee haw silver ''  -rrb-  was hosted by clark alone . 
 ''hee haw '''s appeal ,  however ,  was not limited to a rural audience . 
some of the most popular sketches and segments on `` hee haw '' included ,  but were not limited to:
hee haw is an american television variety show featuring country music and humor with the fictional rural `` kornfield kounty '' as a backdrop . 
during the show's peak in popularity ,  `` hee haw '' often competed in syndication against `` the lawrence welk show '' ,  a long-running abc program which had also been canceled in 1971, also in an attempt to purge the networks of older demographic-leaning programs . 
during the summer of 1992, a decision was made to end first-run production ,  and instead air highlights of the show's earlier years in a revamped program called `` hee haw silver ''  -lrb-  as part of celebrating the show's 25th season  -rrb-  . 
as part of the promotions for its dvd products ,  time-life also compiles and syndicates a half-hour clip show series ,  `` the hee haw collection '' . 
silverman's view won out ,  and cbs canceled the rural shows in summer 1971.
the show was inspired by `` rowan & martin's laugh-in '' ,  the major difference being that `` hee haw '' was far less topical ,  and was centered on country music and rural culture . 
in contexts where the base is not clear ,  hexadecimal numbers can be ambiguous and confused with numbers expressed in other bases . 
this way ,  the negative number −42 can be written as ffff ffd6 in a 32-bit cpu register  -lrb-  in two's-complement  -rrb-  ,  as c228 0000 in a 32-bit fpu register or c045 0000 0000 0000 in a 64-bit fpu register  -lrb-  in the ieee floating-point standard  -rrb-  . 
hexadecimal is used in the transfer encoding base16, in which each byte of the plaintext is broken into two 4-bit values and represented by two hexadecimal digits . 
in mathematics and computing ,  hexadecimal  -lrb-  also base 16, or hex  -rrb-  is a positional numeral system with a radix ,  or base ,  of 16.
a histogram can be thought of as a simplistic kernel density estimation ,  which uses a kernel to smooth frequencies over the bins . 
a histogram is an accurate representation of the distribution of numerical data . 
if the bins are of equal size ,  a rectangle is erected over the bin with height proportional to the frequency—the number of cases in each bin . 
the state of hawaii derives its name from the name of its largest island ,  hawaii . 
hawaii was admitted as a u . s .  state on august 21, 1959.
by 1901, over 5,000 puerto ricans were living in hawaii . 
according to the 2010 united states census ,  hawaii had a population of 1,360,301.
hawaii island has the second-highest point among the world's islands . 
over 120,000  -lrb-  8.8%  -rrb-  hispanic and latino americans live in hawaii . 
hawaii is the only state to have never recorded sub-zero fahrenheit temperatures . 
during the 1850s ,  measles killed a fifth of hawaii's people . 
hawaii  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is the 50th and most recent state to have joined the united states ,  having received statehood on august 21, 1959.
in 1887, kalākaua was forced to sign the 1887 constitution of the kingdom of hawaii . 
hawaii is the 8th-smallest and the 11th-least populous ,  but the 13th-most densely populated of the 50 u . s .  states . 
the third group of foreigners to arrive in hawaii were from china . 
the center of population of hawaii is located between the two islands of o'ahu and moloka'i . 
his sister ,  queen liliuokalani ,  succeeded him; she was the last monarch of hawaii . 
in 1970, the census bureau reported hawaii's population was 38.8% white and 57.7% asian and pacific islander . 
english and hawaiian are listed as hawaii's official languages in the state's 1978 constitution ,  in article xv ,  section 4.
several areas in hawaii are under the protection of the national park service . 
hawaii has the highest percentage of asian americans and multiracial americans and the lowest percentage of white americans of any state . 
a somewhat divisive political issue arose in 1978 when the constitution of the state of hawaii added hawaiian as a second official state language . 
after europeans and mainland americans first arrived during the kingdom of hawaii period ,  the overall population of hawaii ,  until that time composed solely of indigenous hawaiians ,  fell dramatically . 
large numbers of native hawaiians have moved to las vegas ,  which has been called the `` ninth island '' of hawaii . 
the newest volcano ,  lōihi seamount ,  is located south of the coast of hawaii island . 
according to linguists pukui and elbert ,  `` elsewhere in polynesia ,  hawaii or a cognate is the name of the underworld or of the ancestral home ,  but in hawaii ,  the name has no meaning '' . 
the hawaiian language word `` hawaii '' is very similar to proto-polynesian * ''sawaiki '' ,  with the reconstructed meaning `` homeland '' . 
the hawaiian islands were formed by volcanic activity initiated at an undersea magma source called the hawaii hotspot . 
a hearse is a vehicle used to carry the dead in a coffin/casket . 
the hungarian endonym is `` magyarország '' ,  composed of `` magyar ''  -lrb-  'hungarian'  -rrb-  and `` ország ''  -lrb-  'country'  -rrb-  . 
the first hungarian bible translation was completed in 1439.
some 600,000 hungarians were deported to soviet labor camps ,  where at least 200,000 died . 
during the napoleonic wars and afterwards ,  the hungarian diet had not convened for decades . 
over the centuries ,  they were fully assimilated into the hungarian population . 
after some 150 years of wars with the hungarians and other states ,  the ottomans gained a decisive victory over the hungarian army at the battle of mohács in 1526, where king louis ii died while fleeing . 
king matthias died without lawful sons ,  and the hungarian magnates procured the accession of the pole vladislaus ii  -lrb-  1490–1516 -rrb- ,  supposedly because of his weak influence on hungarian aristocracy . 
after 8 years of war with the habsburg empire ,  the hungarian kuruc army lost the last main battle at trencsén  -lrb-  1708 -rrb- . 
in addition to the over 600,000 hungarian jews killed , <ref name= ''ind09/96 ''></ref> as many as 280,000 other hungarians were raped ,  murdered and executed or deported for slave labor by czechoslovaks ,  soviet red army troops ,  and yugoslavs . 
lake balaton and lake hévíz ,  the largest lake in central europe and the largest thermal lake in the world ,  respectively ,  are in transdanubia as well . 
on 15 march 1848, mass demonstrations in pest and buda enabled hungarian reformists to push through a list of 12 demands . 
hungary formally entered world war ii as an axis power on 26 june 1941, declaring war on the soviet union after unidentified planes bombed kassa ,  munkács ,  and rahó . 
the austro-hungarian empire collapsed after world war i ,  and the subsequent treaty of trianon established hungary's current borders ,  resulting in the loss of 71% of its territory ,  58% of its population ,  and 32% of ethnic hungarians . 
it came under habsburg rule at the turn of the 18th century ,  and later joined austria to form the austro–hungarian empire ,  a major european power . 
the `` duna-tisza köze '' and `` tiszántúl '' are characterized mainly by the great hungarian plain  -lrb-  `` alföld ''  -rrb-  ,  which stretches across most of the eastern and southeastern areas of the country . 
between 1703 and 1711, there was a large-scale uprising led by francis ii rákóczi ,  who after the dethronement of the habsburgs in 1707 at the diet of ónod ,  took power provisionally as the ruling prince of hungary for the wartime period ,  but refused the hungarian crown and the title `` king '' . 
in the 21st century ,  hungary is a middle power and has the world's 57th largest economy by nominal gdp ,  as well as the 58th largest by ppp ,  out of 191 countries measured by imf . 
in 1241–1242, the kingdom received a major blow with the mongol  -lrb-  tatar  -rrb-  invasion . 
following the defeat of nazi germany ,  hungary became a satellite state of the soviet union . 
józsef antall became the first democratically elected prime minister since world war ii . 
hungary joined the european union in 2004 and has been part of the schengen area since 2007.
after a second ,  briefer period of soviet military occupation ,  jános kádár ,  nagy's former minister of state ,  was chosen by the soviet leadership to head the new government and chair the new ruling socialist workers' party  -lrb-  mszmp  -rrb-  . 
the latter work is now lost . 
his work was forgotten until it was rediscovered in the late 19th century . 
thompson's work was also significant because of the way he defined `` class . `` 
the first of these works were the `` nihon shoki '' ,  compiled by prince toneri in 720.
the extent to which historians are influenced by their own groups and loyalties – such as to their nation state – is a debated question . 
polybius  -lrb-   –   -rrb-  wrote on the rise of rome to world prominence ,  and attempted to harmonize the greek and roman points of view . 
among the many italians who contributed to this were leonardo bruni  -lrb-  c .  1370–1444 -rrb- ,  francesco guicciardini  -lrb-  1483–1540 -rrb- ,  and cesare baronio  -lrb-  1538–1607 -rrb- . 
r .  h .  tawney was an early historian working in this tradition . 
e .  p .  thompson pioneered the study of history from below in his work ,  `` the making of the english working class '' ,  published in 1963.
he was one of the first historians to rise above the narrow nineteenth-century notion that `` history is past politics and politics current history . 
his 'whiggish convictions' are spelled out in his first chapter:
ranke also rejected the 'teleological approach' to history ,  which traditionally viewed each period as inferior to the period which follows . 
in his main work `` histoire de france ''  -lrb-  1855 -rrb- ,  french historian jules michelet  -lrb-  1798–1874 -rrb- coined the term renaissance  -lrb-  meaning `` rebirth '' in french  -rrb-  ,  as a period in europe's cultural history that represented a break from the middle ages ,  creating a modern understanding of humanity and its place in the world . 
just as the spring and autumn annals has lent their name to the spring and autumn period they cover ,  the following warring states period is named after the book `` intrigues of the warring states '' ,  compiled between the  . 
biography ,  although popular throughout antiquity ,  was introduced as a branch of history by the works of plutarch  -lrb-   –   -rrb-  and suetonius  -lrb-   – after   -rrb-  who described the deeds and characters of ancient personalities ,  stressing their human side . 
gibbon's work has been praised for its style ,  its piquant epigrams and its effective irony . 
in the early modern period ,  the term `` historiography '' meant `` the writing of history '' ,  and `` historiographer '' meant `` historian '' . 
interest in the 1688 glorious revolution was also rekindled by the great reform act of 1832 in england . 
michelet was one of the first historians to shift the emphasis of history to the common people ,  rather than the leaders and institutions of the country . 
paul rapin de thoyras's history of england ,  published in 1723, became `` the classic whig history '' for the first half of the 18th century . 
however ,  j .  r .  western wrote that: `` despite its age and blemishes ,  macaulay's `` history of england '' has still to be superseded by a full-scale modern history of the period '' . 
for example ,  christian writers often included summaries of important historical events prior to the period covered by the work . 
he was also the first to distinguish between cause and immediate origins of an event ,  while his successor xenophon  -lrb-   –   -rrb-  introduced autobiographical elements and character studies in his `` anabasis '' . 
french `` philosophe '' voltaire  -lrb-  1694–1778 -rrb- had an enormous influence on the development of historiography during the age of enlightenment through his demonstration of fresh new ways to look at the past . 
his speculation about what would have happened if alexander the great had marched against rome represents the first known instance of alternate history . 
during the renaissance ,  history was written about states or nations . 
the generation following herodotus witnessed a spate of local histories of the individual city-states  -lrb-  `` poleis ''  -rrb-  ,  written by the first of the local historians who employed the written archives of city and sanctuary . 
he opened the gates for a generation of labor historians ,  such as david montgomery and herbert gutman ,  who made similar studies of the american working classes . 
it is the one english history which may be regarded as definitive .  .  .  whatever its shortcomings the book is artistically imposing as well as historically unimpeachable as a vast panorama of a great period . 
frederick i ,  also called frederick barbarossa ,  was crowned emperor in 1155.
after being elected ,  the king of the romans could theoretically claim the title of `` emperor '' only after being crowned by the pope . 
a prospective emperor had first to be elected king of the romans  -lrb-  latin: `` rex romanorum ''; german: `` römischer könig ''  -rrb-  . 
the kingdoms were:
in 802, irene was overthrown by nikephoros i and henceforth there were two roman emperors . 
the shift in power away from the emperor is also revealed in the way the post-hohenstaufen kings attempted to sustain their power . 
the emperor had to be male and of noble blood . 
charles iv set prague to be the seat of the holy roman emperor . 
in 996 otto iii appointed his cousin gregory v the first german pope . 
in various languages the holy roman empire was known as:  ,   ,   -lrb-  before otto i  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  by otto i  -rrb-  ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   -lrb-  before otto i  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  by otto i  -rrb-  . 
as roman power in gaul declined during the 5th century ,  local germanic tribes assumed control . 
the last such emperor was berengar i of italy ,  who died in 924.
the mostly german prince-electors ,  the highest-ranking noblemen of the empire ,  usually elected one of their peers as `` king of the romans '' ,  and he would later be crowned emperor by the pope; the tradition of papal coronations was discontinued in the 16th century . 
in 1516, ferdinand ii of aragon ,  grandfather of the future holy roman emperor charles v ,  died . 
later emperors dispensed with the papal coronation altogether ,  being content with the styling `` emperor-elect '': the last emperor to be crowned by the pope was charles v in 1530.
otto's coronation as emperor marked the german kings as successors to the empire of charlemagne ,  which through the concept of `` translatio imperii '' ,  also made them consider themselves as successors to ancient rome . 
this ,  or the shortened `` roman empire of the german nation '' ,  is often used in germany to refer to the holy roman empire . 
emperor francis ii dissolved the empire on 6 august 1806 following the creation of the confederation of the rhine by emperor napoleon i the month before . 
also their sons were to know the imperial languages – german ,  latin ,  italian ,  and czech . 
during the middle ages ,  some kings and emperors were not of german origin ,  but since the renaissance ,  german heritage was regarded as vital for a candidate in order to be eligible for imperial office . 
on 25 december 800, pope leo iii crowned the frankish king charlemagne as emperor ,  reviving the title in western europe ,  more than three centuries after the fall of the earlier ancient western roman empire in 476.
after the death of frederick ii in 1250, the german kingdom was divided between his son conrad iv  -lrb-  died 1254 -rrb- and the anti-king ,  william of holland  -lrb-  died 1256 -rrb- . 
in 797, the eastern roman emperor constantine vi was removed from the throne by his mother irene who declared herself empress . 
the habsburg emperors focused on consolidating their own estates in austria and elsewhere . 
otto iii's former mentor antipope john xvi briefly held rome ,  until the holy roman emperor seized the city . 
it was thus increasingly in the king's own interest to strengthen the power of the territories ,  since the king profited from such a benefit in his own lands as well . 
in modern use ,  it means any special day of rest or relaxation ,  as opposed to normal days away from work or school . 
the word `` holiday '' comes from the old english word `` hāligdæg ''  -lrb-  `` hālig '' `` holy '' + `` dæg '' `` day ''  -rrb-  . 
many other days are marked to celebrate events or people ,  but are not strictly holidays as time off work is rarely given; examples include arbor day  -lrb-  originally u . s .   -rrb-  ,  labor day  -lrb-  celebrated sometimes under different names and on different days in different countries  -rrb-  ,  and earth day  -lrb-  22 april  -rrb-  . 
these are holidays that are not traditionally marked on calendars . 
the terms amateur and hobbyist are often used interchangeably . 
outdoor pursuits are the group of activities which occur outdoors . 
people who engage in hobbies have an interest in and time to pursue them . 
as interest increases ,  so has the desire for commercial outdoor pursuits . 
residential gardening most often takes place in or about one's own residence ,  in a space referred to as the garden . 
a hobby is a regular activity that is done for enjoyment ,  typically during one's leisure time . 
the type of hobbies that people engage in changes with time . 
although almost any subject can be found in almost any scale ,  there are common scales for such miniatures which remain constant today . 
dressmaking has been a major hobby up until the late 20th century ,  in order to make cheap clothes ,  but also as a creative design and craft challenge . 
making and tinkering hobbies also include higher-end projects like building or restoring a car ,  or building a computer from individual parts ,  like cpus and ssds . 
in the 16th century ,  the term `` hobyn '' had the meaning of `` small horse and pony '' . 
scale modeling is making a replica of a real-life object in a smaller scale and dates back to prehistoric times with small clay `` dolls '' and other children's toys that have been found near known populated areas . 
an amateur clarinetist is conscious of the role and procedures of a professional clarinetist . 
stebbins makes a distinction between an amateur sports person playing a sport that has a professional equivalent such as football or tennis and a hobbyist playing a less formal sport or game that are rule bound but have no professional equivalent like deck tennis and long distance trekking . 
 ''hobbies are a contradiction: they take work and turn it into leisure ,  and take leisure and turn it into work . `` 
during the 20th century there was extensive research into the important role that play has in human development . 
in dutch ,  the dutch word ``  ''hollands '' '' is the adjectival form for ``  ''holland '' '' . 
however ,  the hollanders did not stop there . 
the predominant language spoken in holland is dutch . 
holland is situated in the west of the netherlands . 
the people of holland are referred to as `` hollanders '' in both dutch and english ,  though in english this is now unusual and nearly-archaic . 
 ''hollandic '' is the name linguists give to the dialect spoken in holland ,  and is occasionally also used by historians and when referring to pre-napoleonic holland . 
the province of holland gave its name to a number of colonial settlements and discovered regions that were called `` nieuw holland '' or new holland . 
inhabitants of belgium and other provinces of the netherlands use `` hollands '' to mean a hollandic dialect or strong accent . 
the land that is now holland has not been `` stable '' since prehistoric times . 
the dialect of urban holland became the standard language . 
the main cities in holland are amsterdam ,  rotterdam and the hague . 
in english ,  `` dutch '' refers to the netherlands as a whole ,  but there is no commonly used adjective for `` holland '' . 
from the great ports of holland ,  hollandic merchants sailed to and from destinations all over europe ,  and merchants from all over europe gathered to trade in the warehouses of amsterdam and other trading cities of holland . 
despite this correspondence between standard dutch and the dutch spoken in the randstad ,  there are local variations within holland itself that differ from standard dutch . 
after 1813, holland was restored as a province of the united kingdom of the netherlands . 
