abdul was married to emilio estevez from 1992 to 1994.
in 2003, abdul was reported as a practitioner of transcendental meditation . 
in 2000, virgin records ,  with whom abdul was already no longer affiliated ,  released the first of two compilation albums by abdul ,  ``  '' . 
in 1987, abdul used her savings to make a singing demo . 
abdul is observant in her jewish faith ,  and is proud of her heritage . 
abdul claimed her departure from `` idol '' was not about money ,  but that she had to stand on principle . 
abdul was born in san fernando ,  california to jewish parents . 
on july 9, 2013, abdul was a guest judge on `` so you think you can dance ''  -lrb-  season ten  -rrb-  . 
in january 2009, abdul hosted `` rah !  , ``  a cheerleading competition on mtv . 
abdul studied broadcasting at the california state university ,  northridge . 
in january 2017, abdul announced that she would not be returning as a judge for its fourteenth season because of her tour schedule . 
 ''i'm just here for the music '' reached number 87 on the `` billboard '' hot 100, becoming abdul's fifteenth song to appear on the chart . 
project gutenberg is intentionally decentralized . 
 ,  project gutenberg reached 57,000 items in its collection of free ebooks . 
 ''project gutenberg '' is a trademark of the organization ,  and the mark cannot be used in commercial or modified redistributions of public domain texts from the project . 
by the mid-1990s ,  hart was running project gutenberg from illinois benedictine college . 
dp became officially affiliated with project gutenberg in 2002.  ,  the 36,000+ dp-contributed books comprised almost two-thirds of the nearly books in project gutenberg . 
all affiliated projects are independent organizations that share the same ideals and have been given permission to use the `` project gutenberg '' trademark . 
the initial name for this project was `` project gutenberg 2 ''  -lrb-  pg ii  -rrb-  ,  which created controversy among pg volunteers because of the re-use of the project's trademarked name for a commercial venture . 
project gutenberg was started by michael hart in 1971 with the digitization of the united states declaration of independence . 
most books in the project gutenberg collection are distributed as public domain under united states copyright law . 
project gutenberg is now hosted by ibiblio at the university of north carolina at chapel hill . 
the project gutenberg collection also has a few non-text items such as audio files and music-notation files . 
michael hart said in 2004, `` the mission of project gutenberg is simple: 'to encourage the creation and distribution of ebooks' '' . 
a wireless personal area network  -lrb-  wpan  -rrb-  is a personal area network in which the connections are wireless . 
a wireless personal area network  -lrb-  wpan  -rrb-  is a pan carried over a low-powered ,  short-distance wireless network technology such as irda ,  wireless usb ,  bluetooth or zigbee . 
nearly all pdas have the ability to connect to the internet . 
the first pda ,  the organizer ,  was released in 1984 by psion ,  followed by psion's series 3, in 1991.
in 2008, most parts of posix were combined into a single standard ``  -lrb-  ieee std 1003.1-2008 '' ,  also known as `` posix . 1-2008 -rrb- . `` 
originally ,  the name `` posix '' referred to ieee std 1003.1-1988, released in 1988.
the personal telco project  -lrb-  or ptp  -rrb-  is a wireless community network project in portland ,  oregon . 
this was due in part to ptp's advocacy . 
krs-one later apologized to paul . 
in 1993 paul co-produced de la soul's `` buhloone mindstate . `` 
collins later introduced paul to de la soul member maseo . 
his most recent release is the album `` itstrumental '' . 
in 2008–2009, paul collaborated with oakland rap group souls of mischief on the group's album `` montezuma's revenge ''  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- . 
in 2005 paul won a grammy award for his work on chris rock's never scared album ,  the first of his career . 
after the group signed to gee street ,  paul estimated that it took them about six months to complete the album . 
his first solo album ,  ``  '' ,  came out in 1997, followed by a second album ,  `` a prince among thieves '' ,  in 1999.
in 2012, paul spoke openly in an interview about the possibility of doing another de la soul album after maseo had made some public comments about a reunion . 
prince paul produced `` the gas face '' and `` brooklyn-queens '' on 3rd bass' 1989 debut `` the cactus album . `` 
paul stated in an interview that his two favorite songs from the album are `` proper aim '' and `` morgan freeman skit '' . 
prince paul formed handsome boy modeling school with dan the automator and their album `` so .  .  .  how's your girl ? `` 
although isc operates the f root name server ,  vixie at one point joined the open root server network  -lrb-  orsn  -rrb-  project and operated their l root server . 
in 1995 he cofounded the palo alto internet exchange  -lrb-  paix  -rrb-  and ,  after metromedia fiber network  -lrb-  mfn  -rrb-  bought it in 1999, served as the chief technology officer to mfn / abovenet and later as the president of paix . 
in 2013, after nearly 20 years at isc ,  he founded a new company ,  farsight security ,  inc .  spinning off the security business unit from isc . 
over 11 major glacial events have been identified ,  as well as many minor glacial events . 
a more recent version of the sampling process makes use of modern glacial ice cores . 
the end of the pleistocene corresponds with the end of the last glacial period and also with the end of the paleolithic age used in archaeology . 
there is no systematic correspondence of pluvials to glacials ,  however . 
the mean annual temperature at the edge of the ice was ; at the edge of the permafrost ,   . 
these events are defined differently in different regions of the glacial range ,  which have their own glacial history depending on latitude ,  terrain and climate . 
corresponding to the terms glacial and interglacial ,  the terms pluvial and interpluvial are in use  -lrb-  latin: `` pluvia '' ,  rain  -rrb-  . 
the pleistocene  -lrb-   ,  often colloquially referred to as the ice age  -rrb-  is the geological epoch which lasted from about 2,588,000 to 11,700 years ago ,  spanning the world's most recent period of repeated glaciations . 
however ,  it is generally incorrect to apply the name of a glacial in one region to another . 
it has been estimated that during the pleistocene ,  the east antarctic ice sheet thinned by at least 500 meters ,  and that thinning since the last glacial maximum is less than 50 meters and probably started after ca 14 ka . 
each glacial advance tied up huge volumes of water in continental ice sheets thick ,  resulting in temporary sea-level drops of or more over the entire surface of the earth . 
the pleistocene is the first epoch of the quaternary period or sixth epoch of the cenozoic era . 
the pleistocene has been dated from 2.588 million  -lrb-  ±0.005 -rrb- to 11,700 years bp with the end date expressed in radiocarbon years as 10,000 carbon-14 years bp . 
glaciation in the pleistocene was a series of glacials and interglacials ,  stadials and interstadials ,  mirroring periodic changes in climate . 
the shelf life of refrigerated pasteurized milk is greater than that of raw milk . 
in the united states in the 1870s ,  it was common for milk to contain substances intended to mask spoilage before milk was regulated . 
developed countries adopted milk pasteurization to prevent such disease and loss of life ,  and as a result milk is now considered a safer food . 
in milk ,  the color difference between pasteurized and raw milk is related to the homogenization step that takes place prior to pasteurization . 
pasteurization is a mild heat treatment of liquid foods  -lrb-  both packaged and unpackaged  -rrb-  where products are typically heated to below 100 °c . 
high-temperature short-time  -lrb-  htst  -rrb-  pasteurization ,  such as that used for milk  -lrb-   for 15 seconds  -rrb-  ensures safety of milk and provides a refrigerated shelf life of approximately two weeks . 
as a precaution ,  modern htst pasteurization processes must be designed with flow-rate restriction as well as divert valves which ensure that the milk is heated evenly and that no part of the milk is subject to a shorter time or a lower temperature . 
after being heated in a heat exchanger ,  the product flows through a hold tube for a set period of time to achieve the required treatment . 
with the exception of b2, pasteurization does not appear to be a concern in diminishing the nutritive value of milk because milk is often not a primary source of these studied vitamins in the north american diet . 
the codex alimentarius `` code of hygienic practice for milk '' notes that milk pasteurization is designed to achieve at least a 5 log reduction of `` coxiella burnetii '' . 
prior to industrialization ,  dairy cows were kept in urban areas to limit the time between milk production and consumption ,  hence the risk of disease transmission via raw milk was reduced . 
they report 148 outbreaks and 2,384 illnesses  -lrb-  with 284 requiring hospitalization  -rrb-  ,  as well as two deaths due to raw milk or cheese products during the same time period . 
pasteurization or pasteurisation is a process in which certain packaged and non-packaged foods  -lrb-  such as milk and fruit juice  -rrb-  are treated with mild heat ,  usually less than  ,  to eliminate pathogens and extend shelf life . 
however ,  this mild heat also means there are only minor changes to heat-labile vitamins in the foods . 
the term `` penicillin '' is often used generically to refer to benzylpenicillin  -lrb-  penicillin g ,  the original penicillin found in 1928 -rrb- ,  procaine benzylpenicillin  -lrb-  procaine penicillin  -rrb-  ,  benzathine benzylpenicillin  -lrb-  benzathine penicillin  -rrb-  ,  and phenoxymethylpenicillin  -lrb-  penicillin v  -rrb-  . 
penicillin  -lrb-  pcn or pen  -rrb-  is a group of antibiotics which include penicillin g  -lrb-  intravenous use  -rrb-  ,  penicillin v  -lrb-  use by mouth  -rrb-  ,  procaine penicillin ,  and benzathine penicillin  -lrb-  intramuscular use  -rrb-  . 
by 1516, he was again at sea as a ship captain in the ottoman fleet . 
piri reis' map is centered on the sahara at the latitude of the tropic of cancer . 
piri reis is the author of the `` kitāb-ı baḥrīye '' ,  or `` book of the sea '' ,  one of the most famous cartographical works of the period . 
ahmed muhiddin piri  -lrb-  1465/70 – 1553 -rrb- ,  better known as piri reis  -lrb-   or `` hacı ahmet muhittin pîrî bey ''  -rrb-  ,  was an ottoman admiral ,  navigator ,  geographer and cartographer . 
for many years ,  little was known about the identity of piri reis . 
several warships and submarines of the turkish navy have been named after piri reis . 
currently ,  a specialist physician in the united states may be described as an `` internist '' . 
both the role of the physician and the meaning of the word itself vary around the world . 
however ,  the american college of physicians ,  established in 1915, does not: its title uses `` physician '' in its original sense . 
many countries in the developing world have the problem of too few physicians . 
physicians in the original ,  narrow sense  -lrb-  specialist physicians or internists ,  see above  -rrb-  are commonly members or fellows of professional organizations ,  such as the american college of physicians or the royal college of physicians in the united kingdom ,  and such hard-won membership is itself a mark of status . 
around the world the term physician refers to a specialist in internal medicine or one of its many sub-specialties  -lrb-  especially as opposed to a specialist in surgery  -rrb-  . 
such 'hospitalists' now make up about 19% of all us `` general internists '' ,  who are often called `` general physicians '' in commonwealth countries . 
in france ,  italy and portugal ,  civilian physicians must be members of the order of physicians to practice medicine . 
in commonwealth countries ,  specialist pediatricians and geriatricians are also described as specialist physicians who have sub-specialized by age of patient rather than by organ system . 
in modern english ,  the term `` physician '' is used in two main ways ,  with relatively broad and narrow meanings respectively . 
around the world ,  the combined term `` physician and surgeon '' is used to describe either a general practitioner or any medical practitioner irrespective of specialty . 
the vast majority of physicians trained in the united states have a doctor of medicine degree ,  and use the initials m . d . 
in the united states and canada ,  the term `` physician '' describes all medical practitioners holding a professional medical degree . 
henry viii granted a charter to the london royal college of physicians in 1518.
in 1528, the standard was changed to the troy pound . 
historically ,  the pound sterling was a tower pound of silver . 
no standards of the tower pound are known to have survived . 
 ''11 stone 4 pounds '' ,  rather than `` 158 pounds ''  -lrb-  as done in the us  -rrb-  ,  or `` 72 kilograms '' as used elsewhere . 
the `` libra '' is the origin of the abbreviation for pound ,  `` lb '' . 
a troy pound is equal to 12 troy ounces and to 5,760 grains ,  that is exactly grams . 
the avoirdupois pound ,  also known as the wool pound ,  first came into general use c .  1300.
the mercantile pound  -lrb-  1304 -rrb- of 6750 troy grains ,  or 9600 tower grains ,  derives from this pound ,  as 25 shilling-weights or 15 tower ounces ,  for general commercial use . 
the international standard symbol for the avoirdupois pound is lb; an alternative symbol is lb  -lrb-  for most pound definitions  -rrb-  ,  #  -lrb-  chiefly in the u . s .   -rrb-  ,  and ℔ or ″̶  -lrb-  specifically for the apothecaries' pound  -rrb-  . 
in chemistry ,  the term proton refers to the hydrogen ion ,   . 
however ,  in such an association with an electron ,  the character of the bound proton is not changed ,  and it remains a proton . 
at sufficiently low temperatures ,  free protons will bind to electrons . 
the name refers to examination of protons as they occur in protium  -lrb-  hydrogen-1 atoms  -rrb-  in compounds ,  and does not imply that free protons exist in the compound being studied . 
protons and neutrons ,  each with masses of approximately one atomic mass unit ,  are collectively referred to as `` nucleons '' . 
the free proton  -lrb-  a proton not bound to nucleons or electrons  -rrb-  is a stable particle that has not been observed to break down spontaneously to other particles . 
since each element has a unique number of protons ,  each element has its own unique atomic number . 
all other types of atomic nuclei are composed of two or more protons and various numbers of neutrons . 
for example ,  a neutral chlorine atom has 17 protons and 17 electrons ,  whereas a cl anion has 17 protons and 18 electrons for a total charge of −1.
the word `` proton '' is greek for `` first '' ,  and this name was given to the hydrogen nucleus by ernest rutherford in 1920.
in chemistry ,  the number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is known as the atomic number ,  which determines the chemical element to which the atom belongs . 
the ion produced by removing the electron from a deuterium atom is known as a deuteron ,  not a proton . 
these protons often have higher energy than solar wind protons ,  and their intensity is far more uniform and less variable than protons coming from the sun ,  the production of which is heavily affected by solar proton events such as coronal mass ejections . 
protons and neutrons are both nucleons ,  which may be bound together by the nuclear force to form atomic nuclei . 
likewise ,  biochemical terms such as proton pump and proton channel refer to the movement of hydrated ions . 
the spontaneous decay of free protons has never been observed ,  and protons are therefore considered stable particles according to the standard model . 
one or more protons are present in the nucleus of every atom; they are a necessary part of the nucleus . 
this waxy white solid reacts vigorously with water . 
the two most common allotropes are white phosphorus and red phosphorus . 
white phosphorus is insoluble in water but soluble in carbon disulfide . 
early matches used white phosphorus in their composition ,  which was dangerous due to its toxicity . 
white phosphorus was first made commercially in the 19th century for the match industry . 
when ignited to a white heat with charcoal ,  calcium metaphosphate yields two-thirds of its weight of white phosphorus while one-third of the phosphorus remains in the residue as calcium orthophosphate:
the international berne convention ,  ratified in 1906, prohibited the use of white phosphorus in matches . 
inorganic phosphorus in the form of the phosphate is required for all known forms of life . 
the white phosphorus allotrope presents a significant hazard because it ignites in air and produces phosphoric acid residue . 
in the united states ,  handlers of red or white phosphorus are subject to stringent regulatory controls . 
from the perspective of applications and chemical literature ,  the most important form of elemental phosphorus is white phosphorus ,  often abbreviated as wp . 
as white phosphorus readily mixes with oils ,  any oily substances or ointments are not recommended until the area is thoroughly cleaned and all white phosphorus removed . 
the word phosphorous is the adjectival form of the p valence: so ,  just as sulfur forms sulfurous and sulfuric compounds ,  phosphorus forms phosphorous compounds  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  phosphorous acid  -rrb-  and p valence phosphoric compounds  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  phosphoric acids and phosphates  -rrb-  . 
white phosphorus is the least stable ,  the most reactive ,  the most volatile ,  the least dense ,  and the most toxic of the allotropes . 
the manual suggests instead ``  ''a bicarbonate solution to neutralise phosphoric acid ,  which will then allow removal of visible white phosphorus . 
later he improved brand's process by using sand in the reaction  -lrb-  still using urine as base material  -rrb-  , 
historically ,  before the development of mineral-based extractions ,  white phosphorus was isolated on an industrial scale from bone ash . 
another form ,  scarlet phosphorus ,  is obtained by allowing a solution of white phosphorus in carbon disulfide to evaporate in sunlight . 
phosphoric acid produced from white phosphorus is relatively pure and is the main route for the production of phosphates for all purposes ,  including detergent production . 
although many oxoacids of phosphorus are formed ,  only nine are commercially important ,  and three of them ,  hypophosphorous acid ,  phosphorous acid ,  and phosphoric acid ,  are particularly important . 
to this end ,  urine can be used as a fertiliser in its pure form or part of being mixed with water in the form of sewage or sewage sludge . 
when first isolated ,  it was observed that the green glow emanating from white phosphorus would persist for a time in a stoppered jar ,  but then cease . 
in this process ,  the tricalcium phosphate in bone ash is converted to monocalcium phosphate with sulfuric acid:
sodium tripolyphosphate made from phosphoric acid is used in laundry detergents in some countries ,  but banned for this use in others . 
white phosphorus is toxic ,  causing severe liver damage on ingestion and may cause a condition known as `` smoking stool syndrome '' . 
white phosphorus is widely used to make organophosphorus compounds through intermediate phosphorus chlorides and two phosphorus sulfides ,  phosphorus pentasulfide and phosphorus sesquisulfide . 
pcl and pf are common compounds . 
fertiliser is often in the form of superphosphate of lime ,  a mixture of calcium dihydrogen phosphate  -lrb-  ca -lrb-  hpo  -rrb-   -rrb-  ,  and calcium sulfate dihydrate  -lrb-  caso·2ho  -rrb-  produced reacting sulfuric acid and water with calcium phosphate . 
at still higher temperatures ,  p dissociates into atomic p . 
processing phosphate minerals with sulfuric acid for obtaining fertiliser is so important to the global economy that this is the primary industrial market for sulfuric acid and the greatest industrial use of elemental sulfur . 
palladium is a metal with low toxicity . 
demand for palladium as a catalyst has increased the price of palladium to about 50% higher than that of platinum in january 2019.
he disclosed that he was the discoverer of palladium in a publication in 1805.
ore deposits of palladium and other pgms are rare . 
palladium is a soft silver-white metal that resembles platinum . 
palladium readily absorbs hydrogen at room temperatures ,  forming palladium hydride pdh with x less than 1.
mixed valence palladium complexes exist ,  e . g . 
often used with platinum ,  palladium provides an alternative to silver . 
the largest use of palladium today is in catalytic converters . 
most palladium is used for catalytic converters in the automobile industry . 
palladium compounds primarily exist in the 0 and +2 oxidation state . 
palladium is a chemical element with symbol pd and atomic number 46.
the second greatest application of palladium in electronics is in multilayer ceramic capacitors in which palladium  -lrb-  and palladium-silver alloy  -rrb-  is used for electrodes . 
unlike platinum ,  palladium may discolor at temperatures above ; it is relatively brittle . 
world demand for palladium increased from 100 tons in 1990 to nearly 300 tons in 2000.
a 2008 study showed that palladium is an effective catalyst for carbon-fluoride bonds . 
most promethium is used only for research purposes ,  except for promethium-147, which can be found outside laboratories . 
promethium is a chemical element with symbol pm and atomic number 61.
no dangers from promethium aside from the radioactivity are known . 
promethium shows only one stable oxidation state of +3.
the spelling was then changed to `` promethium , ``  as this was in accordance with most other metals . 
promethium nuclear isomers may decay to other promethium isotopes and one isotope  -lrb-  pm  -rrb-  has a very rare alpha decay mode to stable praseodymium-141.
promethium can also be formed in nature as a product of spontaneous fission of uranium-238.
there are two possible sources for natural promethium: rare decays of natural europium-151  -lrb-  producing promethium-147 -rrb- ,  and uranium  -lrb-  various isotopes  -rrb-  . 
in 1963, promethium -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  fluoride was used to make promethium metal . 
uranium is thus `` responsible '' for 560 g of promethium in earth's crust . 
a promethium atom has 61 electrons ,  arranged in the configuration xe4f6s . 
in fact ,  promethium-148m has a longer half-life than its ground state ,  promethium-148.
oxyhalides and oxysulfides of protactinium are known . 
other known protactinium ions include  ,   ,  paf ,   ,   ,  and  . 
protactinium-233 is formed upon neutron capture by th . 
protactinium oxides are known for the metal oxidation states +2, +4 and +5.
the longest-lived and most abundant  -lrb-  nearly 100%  -rrb-  naturally occurring isotope of protactinium ,  protactinium-231, has a half-life of 32,760 years and is a decay product of uranium-235.
in hydrides and nitrides ,  protactinium has a low oxidation state of about +3.
protactinium is paramagnetic and no magnetic transitions are known for it at any temperature . 
protactinium also has two nuclear isomers ,  pa  -lrb-  half-life 1.2 milliseconds  -rrb-  and pa  -lrb-  half-life 1.17 minutes  -rrb-  . 
the primary decay products of isotopes of protactinium lighter than  -lrb-  and including  -rrb-  pa are actinium isotopes and the primary decay products for the heavier isotopes of protactinium are uranium isotopes . 
protactinium is one of the rarest and most expensive naturally occurring elements . 
protactinium  -lrb-  formerly protoactinium  -rrb-  is a chemical element with symbol pa and atomic number 91.
protactinium forms mixed binary oxides with various metals . 
heating papo in air to 1400 °c decomposes it into the pentoxides of phosphorus and protactinium . 
protactinium easily reacts with oxygen ,  water vapor and acids ,  but not with alkalis . 
before the advent of nuclear reactors ,  protactinium was separated for scientific experiments from uranium ores . 
platinum is one of the least reactive metals . 
platinum is a member of the platinum group of elements and group 10 of the periodic table of elements . 
pbpo is one of the very few naturally occurring polonium compounds ,  as polonium alpha decays to form lead . 
polonium is a chemical element with symbol po and atomic number 84.
more than one hypothesis exists for how polonium does this; one suggestion is that small clusters of polonium atoms are spalled off by the alpha decay . 
polonium is a radioactive element that exists in two metallic allotropes . 
both politicians co-chaired the left's caucus in the german bundestag after the election . 
in the 2005 federal election the left party received 8.7% of the nationwide vote and won 54 seats in the german bundestag . 
internationally ,  the left party . pds was a co-founder of the party of the european left and was the largest party in the european united left–nordic green left  -lrb-  gue/ngl  -rrb-  group in the european parliament . 
exit polls showed the left had a unique appeal to non-voters: 390,000 germans who refused to support any party in 2002 returned to the ballot box to vote for the left party . 
despite its losses in berlin ,  support for the left party/pds and its wasg ally remains stable at about eight to ten percent of the vote . 
nevertheless ,  the left party membership in schleswig-holstein narrowly passed a vote of confidence in favor of heilmann ,  and he continues to serve in the bundestag . 
on 16 june 2007, the two groupings merged to form a new party called the left  -lrb-  `` die linke ''  -rrb-  . 
five months later ,  the left party's petra pau was elected vice president . 
the possibility of a minority spd-green government tolerated by the left party was the closest the left party came to potential participation in government at this election . 
in mecklenburg-vorpommern ,  the left party suffered no serious losses and remains the third-strongest party in the state . 
the left's image as the last line of defense for germany's traditional `` social state ''  -lrb-  `` sozialstaat ''  -rrb-  proved to be a magnet for voters in western as well as eastern germany . 
the pythonidae ,  commonly known simply as pythons ,  from the greek word `` python ''  -lrb-  πυθων  -rrb-  ,  are a family of nonvenomous snakes found in africa ,  asia ,  and australia . 
larger specimens usually eat animals about the size of a house cat ,  but larger food items are known; some large asian species have been known to take down adult deer ,  and the african rock python ,  `` python sebae '' ,  has been known to eat antelope . 
contrary to popular belief ,  even the larger species ,  such as the reticulated python ,  `` p .  reticulatus '' ,  do not crush their prey to death; in fact ,  prey is not even noticeably deformed before it is swallowed . 
pennsylvania's population in 2010 was 12,702,379.
pennsylvania german is often—even though misleadingly—called `` pennsylvania dutch '' . 
pennsylvania ,  officially the commonwealth of pennsylvania ,  is a state located in the northeastern and mid-atlantic regions of the united states . 
pennsylvania is north to south and east to west . 
pennsylvania was the center state of the german reformed denomination since the 1700s . 
of the original thirteen colonies ,  pennsylvania is the only state that does not border the atlantic ocean . 
pennsylvania's population was reported as 5.9% under 5 and 23.8% under 18, with 15.6% aged 65 or older . 
the new state capitol drew rave reviews . 
the state of pennsylvania has a high in-migration of blacks and hispanics from other nearby states ,  with eastern and south-central portions of the state seeing the bulk of the increases . 
the allegheny is the state's only national forest . 
as of 2011, 32.1% of pennsylvania's population younger than age one were minorities . 
pennsylvania is the 33rd-largest state by area ,  and the 6th-most populous state according to the most recent official u . s .  census count in 2010.
the state is one of the 13 original founding states of the united states; it came into being in 1681 as a result of a royal land grant to william penn ,  the son of the state's namesake . 
this grant was in conflict with the dutch claim for new netherland ,  which included parts of today's pennsylvania . 
of the people residing in pennsylvania ,  74.5% were born in pennsylvania ,  18.4% were born in a different u . s .  state ,  1.5% were born puerto rico ,  u . s .  island areas ,  or born abroad to american parent -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  and 5.6% were foreign born . 
pennsylvania's hispanic population grew by 82.6% between 2000 and 2010, making it one of the largest increases in a state's hispanic population . 
pennsylvania was also the home of the first commercially drilled oil well . 
james buchanan ,  of franklin county ,  the only bachelor president of the united states ,  was the only one to be born in pennsylvania . 
a number of ancient works have survived only as palimpsests . 
porphyrianus ,  vaticanus 2061  -lrb-  double palimpsest  -rrb-  ,  uncial 064, 065, 066, 067, 068  -lrb-  double palimpsest  -rrb-  ,  072, 078, 079, 086, 088, 093, 094, 096, 097, 098, 0103, 0104, 0116, 0120, 0130, 0132, 0133, 0135, 0208, 0209.
cultural considerations also motivated the creation of palimpsests . 
modern methods of reading palimpsests using ultraviolet light and photography are less damaging . 
the writing was washed from parchment or vellum using milk and oat bran . 
the northern stoa seems to have been the site of the library of pergamon . 
the inhabitants of pergamon were supplied with water by an effective system . 
pergamon's oldest temple is a sanctuary of athena from the 4th century bc . 
the first mention of pergamon after ancient times comes from the 13th century . 
the plan of pergamon was affected by the extreme steepness of the site . 
after this ,  pergamon lost its privileged status with the romans and was awarded no further territory by them . 
in 1864/5, the german engineer carl humann visited pergamon for the first time . 
most of the finds from the pergamon excavations before the frist world war were taken to the pergamon museum in berlin ,  with a smaller portion going to the i̇stanbul archaeological museum after it was opened in 1891.
the earliest mention of pergamon in literary sources comes from xenophon's anabasis ,  since the march of the ten thousand under xenophon's command ended at pergamon in 400/399 bc . 
nevertheless ,  under the brothers eumenes ii and attalus ii ,  pergamon reached its apex and was rebuilt on a monumental scale . 
the inhabitants of pergamon enthusiastically followed their lead and took to calling themselves `` telephidai ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  and referring to pergamon itself in poetic registers as the 'telephian city'  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 362 bc ,  orontes ,  satrap of mysia ,  based his revolt against the persian empire at pergamon ,  but was crushed . 
pergamon was the northernmost of the seven churches of asia cited in the new testament book of revelation . 
pergamon  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  ,  pergamos or pergamum  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-   or   -rrb-  ,  was a rich and powerful ancient greek city in aeolis . 
pergamon is a good example of a city that expanded in a planned and controlled manner . 
from the beginning of the reign of philetairos ,  civic events in pergamon were concentrated on the acropolis . 
a large gymnasium area was built in the 2nd century bc on the south side of the acropolis . 
the library of pergamon was the second largest in the ancient greek world after the library of alexandria ,  containing at least 200,000 scrolls . 
the foundations are still located in the upper city ,  but the remains of the pergamon frieze ,  which originally decorated it ,  are displayed in the pergamon museum in berlin ,  where the parts of the frieze taken to germany have been installed in a partial reconstruction . 
generally ,  most of the hellenistic houses at pergamon were laid out with a small ,  centrally-located and roughly square courtyard ,  with rooms on one or two sides of it . 
after the sack of constantinople in 1204 during the fourth crusade ,  pergamon became part of the empire of nicaea . 
pergamon lies on the north edge of the caicus plain in the historic region of mysia in the northwest of turkey . 
during the hellenistic period ,  it became the capital of the kingdom of pergamon under the attalid dynasty in 281–133 bc ,  who transformed it into one of the major cultural centres of the greek world . 
a parsec is defined as the length of the side adjacent to the vertex occupied by a star whose parallax angle is one arcsecond . 
most of the stars visible to the unaided eye in the night sky are within 500 parsecs of the sun . 
in the diagram above  -lrb-  not to scale  -rrb-  ,  s represents the sun ,  and e the earth at one point in its orbit . 
applying the rules of trigonometry to these two values ,  the unit length of the other leg of the triangle  -lrb-  the parsec  -rrb-  can be derived . 
vellum is a finer quality parchment made from the skins of young animals such as lambs and young calves . 
the word parchment evolved  -lrb-  via the latin `` pergamenum '' and the french `` parchemin ''  -rrb-  from the name of the city of pergamon which was a thriving center of parchment production during the hellenistic period . 
parchment is a writing material made from specially prepared untanned skins of animals—primarily sheep ,  calves ,  and goats . 
the word `` phobia '' comes from the  -lrb-  `` phóbos ''  -rrb-  ,  meaning `` aversion '' ,  `` fear '' or `` morbid fear '' . 
vicarious fear acquisition is learning to fear something ,  not by a subject's own experience of fear ,  but by watching others reacting fearfully  -lrb-  observational learning  -rrb-  . 
medications can help regulate apprehension and fear of a particular fearful object or situation . 
informational/instructional fear acquisition is learning to fear something by getting information . 
a specific phobia is a marked and persistent fear of an object or situation . 
a conditioned fear response to an object or situation is not always a phobia . 
stimulation of this area decreases conditioned fear responses ,  so its role may be in inhibiting the amygdala and its reaction to fearful stimuli . 
the amygdala’s role in learned fear includes interactions with other brain regions in the neural circuit of fear . 
in some cases ,  physically experiencing an event may increase the fear and phobia more so than observing a fearful reaction of another human or non-human primate . 
social phobia ,  also known as social anxiety disorder ,  is when the situation is feared as the person is worried about others judging them . 
specific phobias are defined in relation to objects or situations whereas social phobias emphasize social fear and the evaluations that might accompany them . 
the word `` phobia '' may also refer to conditions other than true phobias . 
a phobia is a type of anxiety disorder ,  defined by a persistent and excessive fear of an object or situation . 
when dealing with fear ,  the hippocampus receives impulses from the amygdala that allow it to connect the fear with a certain sense ,  such as a smell or sound . 
a number of terms with the suffix -phobia are used non-clinically to imply irrational fears . 
this team finished 0–10, marking the only winless team in franchise history . 
the pittsburgh steelers are a professional american football team based in pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania . 
they also enjoyed a regular season streak of 49 consecutive wins  -lrb-  –  -rrb-  against teams that would finish with a losing record that year . 
that would be pittsburgh's only playoff game for the next 25 years; they did qualify for a `` playoff bowl '' in 1962 as the second-best team in their conference ,  but this was not considered an official playoff . 
the pittsburgh steelers' 1974 draft was their best ever; no other team has ever drafted four future hall of famers in one year ,  and only very few  -lrb-  including the 1970 steelers  -rrb-  have drafted two or more in one year . 
the patriots won 24–21.
in lurie's first season as owner ,  the team only had 7 wins ,  but that was followed by a 10-win season in 1995.
for the 2011 season ,  the eagles did not wear white for any of their home games . 
the team took a step back in 2005 with a 6–10 record . 
they opened the season on the road versus the washington redskins and won the game 30–17.
at the end of the 2015 season ,  the eagles had the 13th pick in the 2016 nfl draft . 
for the 2013 season ,  the eagles started to wear white pants ,  as an alternate to their green pants ,  with their white jerseys ,  in the regular season . 
however ,  the eagles swept the redskins during the 2017 season for the first time since the 2013 season . 
after slipping to 6–9–1, and then to 3–13, head coach ray rhodes was fired after four seasons . 
on december 29, 2015, with one game left in the season ,  head coach chip kelly was released by the eagles after a 6–9 record . 
vermeil's 1980 team won their first nfc east title . 
foles' first start was a comeback from a 20–7 deficit against the new york giants as he scored four touchdowns and won the game 34–29.
the 2013 season proved to be more successful for the eagles . 
the eagles opened the 2014 season winning their first three games and making nfl history as the only team ever to trail by ten or more points in their first three games and come back to win . 
on march 5, 2010, brian westbrook was cut from the eagles after eight seasons with the team . 
the eagles beat detroit ,  56–21.
the 2011 season for the eagles was a major disappointment ,  as they only managed to finish 8–8 and miss the playoffs . 
in the 2010 season against the green bay packers ,  on september 12, 2010, the eagles wore uniforms similar to the ones that were worn by the 1960 championship team in honor the 50th anniversary of that team . 
the 2003 season also saw the first  -lrb-  though only subtle  -rrb-  change to the 1996-style uniform . 
on january 16, 2013, the eagles brought in university of oregon head coach chip kelly to succeed reid as head coach after a 4–12 season . 
in  ,  dick vermeil was hired from ucla to coach the eagles ,  who had only one winning season from 1962 to 1975.
on january 11, 2009, the team defeated the defending super bowl champion new york giants 23–11 en route to their sixth nfc championship game . 
after a loss to the new york giants on december 30, 2012, longtime head coach andy reid was fired after fourteen seasons with the team . 
the eagles wear their white jerseys at home for preseason games and daytime games in the first half of the regular season from september to mid-october when the temperature is warmer . 
defining paganism is problematic . 
the term pagan is not attested in the english language until the 17th century . 
most modern pagan religions existing today - modern paganism ,  or neopaganism - express a world view that is pantheistic ,  polytheistic or animistic; but some are monotheistic . 
the origin of the application of the term `` pagan '' to polytheism is debated . 
the term pagan is derived from late latin  ,  revived during the renaissance . 
most modern pagans ,  however ,  believe in the divine character of the natural world and paganism is often described as an earth religion . 
referring to paganism as pre-christian indigenous religions is equally untenable . 
paganism was originally a pejorative and derogatory term for polytheism ,  implying its inferiority . 
modern pagan traditions often incorporate beliefs or practices ,  such as nature worship ,  that are different from those in the largest world religions . 
prudence jones and nigel pennick in their `` a history of pagan europe ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- classify pagan religions as characterized by the following traits:
ritual sacrifice was an integral part of ancient graeco-roman religion and was regarded as an indication of whether a person was pagan or christian . 
not all historical pagan traditions were pre-christian or indigenous to their places of worship . 
the latin letter p represents the same sound as the greek letter pi ,  but it looks like the greek letter rho . 
p  -lrb-  named `` pee ''   -rrb-  is the 16th letter of the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
pokey the penguin is an online comic strip created in 1998.
 ''pokey the penguin '' frequently includes minor characters that appear in only one or two comics . 
in late 2010, the first volume of pokey the penguin was released in book form . 
pokey lives in the arctic ,  unlike most penguins ,  which live in the southern hemisphere . 
in the first strip ,  `` pokey '' is described as an `` educational children's cartoon '' . 
the policies of most communist parties in both the eastern and western bloc had been governed by the example of the soviet union . 
in the western bloc ,  many of the self-styled communist parties reacted by changing their policies to a more moderate and less radical course . 
today ,  most post-communist countries in europe are generally seen to have mixed economies ,  although it is argued that some such as estonia ,  romania and slovakia are actually more capitalist than the western bloc with their flat tax rates . 
allen's yacht ,   ,  launched in 2003.
allen was born on january 21, 1953, in seattle ,  washington ,  to kenneth sam allen and edna faye  -lrb-  née gardner  -rrb-  allen . 
in december 2014, allen committed $100 million to create the allen institute for cell science in seattle . 
in 2002, allen donated $14 million to the university of washington to construct the paul g .  allen center for computer science and engineering . 
in 1989, allen donated $2 million to the university of washington to construct the allen library ,  which was named after his father kenneth s .  allen ,  a former associate director of the university of washington library system . 
in september 2003, allen launched the allen institute for brain science with a $100 million contribution dedicated to understanding how the human brain works . 
allen donated the seed money to build seti's allen telescope array ,  eventually contributing $30 million to the project . 
an active art collector ,  allen gifted more than $100 million to support the arts . 
in 2016, allen pledged a $10 million donation over four years for the creation of the allen discovery centers at tufts university and stanford university . 
in 2010, allen announced a gift of $26 million to build the paul g .  allen school of global animal health at washington state university ,  his alma mater . 
in 2012, the endowment was renamed the kenneth s .  and faye g .  allen library endowment after allen's mother  -lrb-  a noted bibliophile  -rrb-  died . 
 ''it's exceeded my expectations '' ,  allen said of the south lake union development . 
allen effectively left microsoft in 1982 after receiving a hodgkin's lymphoma diagnosis . 
this proved critical to allen's becoming a billionaire after microsoft went public . 
in 2017, allen donated $40 million  -lrb-  with an additional $10 million added by microsoft  -rrb-  to reorganize the university of washington's computer science and engineering department into the paul g .  allen school of computer science and engineering . 
allen officially resigned from his position on the microsoft board of directors on november 9, 2000.
allen was the founder ,  with his sister jody allen ,  and chairman of vulcan inc .  ,  the privately held company that managed his various business and philanthropic efforts . 
allen was the founder of the allen institute for brain science ,  institute for artificial intelligence ,  institute for cell science ,  stratolaunch systems ,  and apex learning . 
 -lrb-  it may have been a virtual circumnavigation; see under thule below .   -rrb- 
the first known written use of the word britain is one of its uses was an ancient greek transliteration of the original p-celtic term . 
strabo reports that pytheas says he `` travelled over the whole of britain that was accessible '' . 
he also may have reached iceland . 
thule is described as an island six days' sailing north of britain ,  near the frozen sea  -lrb-  `` pepēguia thalatta '' ,  `` solidified sea ''  -rrb-  . 
the perimeter ,  according to nansen based on the 23,800 stadia ,  was  . 
according to strabo ,  pytheas referred to britain as `` bretannikē '' ,  which is treated a feminine noun . 
diodorus siculus gives a similar number: 42,500 stadia ,  about  ,  and explains that it is the perimeter of a triangle around britain . 
mainstream consensus is that there was only one work ,  `` on the ocean '' ,  which was based on a periplus . 
strabo wants to discredit pytheas on the grounds that 40,000 stadia is outrageously high and cannot be real . 
brandbyge wrote descriptions for 43 genera of polygonaceae in 1993.
the polygonaceae comprise about 1200 species distributed into about 48 genera . 
the fourth column is an incomplete list of genera that have been recognized in recent works . 
the bronze age in the indus valley began around 3300 bce with the indus valley civilization . 
the vedic period  -lrb-    -rrb-  is postulated to have formed during the indo-aryan migration between 1500 bce to 800 bce . 
the ror dynasty  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a sindhi buddhist dynasty which ruled much of what is today sindh ,  punjab and northwest india in 450 bc . 
british india was declared independent on 14th august ,  1947 and after the partition of india created two states - secular india and the muslim-majority dominion of pakistan . 
the main vedic tribes remaining in the indus valley by 550 bc were the `` kamboja '' ,  `` sindhu '' ,  `` taksas '' of gandhara ,  the `` madras '' and `` kathas '' of the river chenab ,  `` mallas '' of the river ravi and `` tugras '' of the river sutlej . 
alexander founded several new settlements in gandhara ,  punjab and sindh . 
between 2600 and 2000 bce ,  region became more arid and mehrgarh was abandoned in favor of the indus valley ,  where a new civilization was in the early stages of development . 
in 328 bc ,  alexander the great of macedonia and now the king of persia ,  had conquered much of the former satraps of the achaemenid empire up to bactria . 
in 1971, the province of east pakistan seceded from pakistan after a war ,  and formed the nation of bangladesh . 
the mature indus civilisation flourished from about 2600 to 1900 bce ,  marking the beginning of urban civilisation in the indus valley . 
thus chandragupta was given gedrosia  -lrb-  balochistan  -rrb-  and much of what is now afghanistan ,  including the modern herat and kandahar provinces ,  thereby ending macedonian control in the indus valley by 303 bc . 
a widespread indian independence movement began in the early 20th century ,  along with the pakistan movement ,  to create a separate nation-state for the muslims of british india . 
the indo-scythians were descended from the sakas  -lrb-  scythians  -rrb-  who migrated from southern central asia into pakistan and arachosia from the middle of the 2nd century bce to the 1st century bce . 
the history of pakistan encompasses the history of the region constituting modern-day pakistan ,  which is intertwined with the history of the broader indian subcontinent and the surrounding regions of south asia ,  east asia and central asia . 
the indo-greek menander i  -lrb-  reigned 155–130 bce  -rrb-  drove the greco-bactrians out of gandhara and beyond the hindu kush ,  becoming king shortly after his victory . 
later the saka kingdom was completely destroyed by chandragupta ii of the gupta empire from eastern india in the 4th century . 
about only 4% of land in pakistan is covered with forests . 
the southern borders are far less contentious than those in northern pakistan  -lrb-  kashmir  -rrb-  . 
pakistan is bordered by india to the east ,  afghanistan to the northwest and iran to the west while china borders the country in the northeast . 
pakistan borders afghanistan at the durand line ,   ,  which runs from the hindu kush and the pamir mountains . 
about 26% of pakistan's total land area is under cultivation and is watered by one of the largest irrigation systems in the world . 
less than one-fifth of pakistan's land area has the potential for intensive agricultural use . 
pakistan is divided into three major geographic areas: the northern highlands; the indus river plain ,  with two major subdivisions corresponding roughly to the provinces of punjab and sindh; and the balochistan plateau . 
pakistan lies in the temperate zone ,  immediately above the tropic of cancer . 
hydrological power is a renewable resource which benefits pakistan a lot . 
cultivation is sparse in the northern mountains ,  the southern deserts ,  and the western plateaus ,  but the indus river basin in punjab and northern sindh has fertile soil that enables pakistan to feed its population under usual climatic conditions . 
at  ,  pakistan is the 36th largest country by area ,  more than twice the size of montana ,  and slightly larger than alberta . 
roughly ,  then ,  the northern highlands are north of the imaginary east-west line; the balochistan plateau is to the west of the imaginary southwest line; and the indus plain lies to the east of that line . 
according to oecd/world bank ,  the population in pakistan increased by 23 million from 1990 to 2008, with a 54% growth in population . 
pakistan's latest estimated population is 207,774,520  -lrb-  excluding the autonomous regions of azad jammu and kashmir and gilgit-baltistan  -rrb-  . 
they are based on the results of the pakistan demographic survey  -lrb-  pds 2007 -rrb- . 
in every province ,  there is one high court . 
high courts have original and appellate jurisdiction . 
pakistan's democracy has no recall method . 
there are over five thousand local governments in pakistan . 
the judiciary includes the supreme court ,  provincial high courts ,  district & sessions courts ,  civil and magistrate courts exercising civil and criminal jurisdiction . 
the federal shariat court  -lrb-  fsc  -rrb-  of pakistan is a court which has the power to examine and determine whether the laws of the country comply with shari'a law . 
 -lrb-  1 -rrb- there shall be a judicial commission of pakistan ,  hereinafter in this article referred to as the commission ,  for appointment of judges of the supreme court ,  high courts and the federal shariat court ,  as hereinafter provided . 
in addition ,  there are special courts and tribunals to deal with specific kinds of cases ,  such as drug courts ,  commercial courts ,  labour courts ,  traffic courts ,  an insurance appellate tribunal ,  an income tax appellate tribunal ,  and special courts for bank offences . 
some federal and provincial courts and tribunals such as services court ,  income tax & excise court ,  banking court and boards of revenue's tribunals are as well established in all provinces . 
appeals from the tribunals go to the supreme court . 
pakistan has been ruled by both democratic and military governments . 
 -lrb-  i  -rrb-  chief justice of pakistan; chairman   -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  four most senior judges of the supreme court;member   -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  a former chief justice or a former judge of the supreme court of pakistan to be nominated by the chief justice of pakistan ,  in consultation with the four member judges ,  for a term of two years; member   -lrb-  iv  -rrb-  federal minister for law and justice;member   -lrb-  v  -rrb-  attorney-general for pakistan; and member   -lrb-  vi  -rrb-  a senior advocate of the supreme court of pakistan nominated by the pakistan bar council for a term of two years . member
pakistan's system is the one that applies an integrated federated systemic framework most comprehensively ,  so far . 
pakistan is subdivided into 4 provinces ,  2 territories ,  and 1 capital territory . 
average annual growth fell to 4.6% in the 1990s with significantly lower growth in the second half of that decade . 
in 2017, pakistan's gdp in terms of purchasing power parity crossed $1 trillion . 
the economy of pakistan is the 23rd largest in the world in terms of purchasing power parity  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  ,  and 38th largest in terms of nominal gross domestic product . 
in 2008 pakistan was the world's third-fastest growing telecommunications market . 
according to the pakistan telecommunication authority  -lrb-  pta  -rrb-  ,  mobilink continues to lead the market with 35.7 million subscribers ,  followed by telenor with 29.3 million ,  ufone with 23.1 million ,  zong with 15.6 million ,  and warid telecom with 14.3 million . 
for international calls ,  you dial `` 00 '' followed by the country code ,  e . g .  ,  for calls to the uk from pakistan you dial 00 - 44 - xxxxxx . 
fixed-line subscriptions declined from a peak of 5.2 million in 2005-06 to 3.4 million in 2009-10.
the mobile telecommunications sector is seeing very large year-to-year growth in pakistan . 
telecommunications in pakistan describes the overall environment for the growing mobile telecommunications ,  telephone ,  and internet markets in pakistan . 
the first railway's in pakistan were built from 1885.
swat motorway and hazara motorway are two more expressways under construction in kpk province . 
international bus services are also well established in pakistan and connect to various countries:
between 1947 and 1971, pakistan has fought three direct conventional wars against india ,  with the indo-pakistani war of 1971 witnessing the secession of east pakistan as independent bangladesh . 
the pakistan armed forces  -lrb-   ,  `` pākistān musallah afwāj ''  -rrb-  are the military forces of pakistan . 
in a formula arranged by the british ,  military resources were to have been divided between india and pakistan in a ratio of 64% going to india and 36% for pakistan; however ,  pakistan initially demanded 50% of the equipment . 
the pakistan armed forces are the best-organized institution in pakistan ,  and are highly respected in civil society . 
it is estimated that approximately 60–70% of pakistan's military personnel are deployed along the indo-pakistan border . 
the joint chiefs of staff committee is composed of the chairman joint chiefs ,  the chief of army staff ,  the chief of air staff ,  the chief of naval staff ,  the commandant marines ,  and the commander of the special plans division . 
the pakistan military has its roots in the british indian army ,  in which many british indian muslims served during world war ii ,  prior to the partition of india . 
pakistan’s foreign policy seeks to protect ,  promote and advance pakistan’s national interests in the comity of nations”
palau is a democratic republic . 
palau adopted a constitution in 1981.
as a sovereign nation ,  palau conducts its own foreign relations . 
palau also became a member of the pacific islands forum . 
the philippines has supported palau to become an observer state in asean ,  as palau also has southeast asian ethnic origins . 
palau  -lrb-   ,  historically belau ,  palaos ,  or pelew  -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of palau  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is an island country located in the western pacific ocean . 
palau shares maritime boundaries with the philippines ,  indonesia ,  and the federated states of micronesia . 
location: oceania ,  group of islands in the north pacific ocean ,  southeast of the philippines
the judicial system consists of the supreme court ,  national court ,  the court of common pleas ,  and the land court . 
politics of palau takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic ,  where by the president of palau is both head of state and head of government ,  and palau currently has no political parties . 
palau's per capita gdp of $8,900 makes it one of the wealthier pacific island states . 
tourism is palau's main industry . 
u . s .  grants in 1999 totaled $24 million . 
