galicia has a surface area of  . 
galicia has preserved some of its dense forests . 
galicia  -lrb-  ; galician: `` galicia ''  ,  `` galiza '' ; ;   -rrb-  is an autonomous community of spain and historic nationality under spanish law . 
in 1063, ferdinand i of castile divided his realm among his sons ,  and the kingdom of galicia was granted to garcia ii of galicia . 
nevertheless ,  galicia has some important environmental problems . 
alberto núñez feijóo  -lrb-  ppdg  -rrb-  is now galicia's president . 
galicia has more than 2,800 plant species and 31 endemic plant taxons . 
in any case ,  `` galicia '' ,  being `` per se '' a derivation of the ethnic name `` kallaikói , ``  means 'the land of the galicians' . 
following a referendum on a galician statute of autonomy ,  galicia was granted the status of an autonomous region . 
during the last decade of franco's rule ,  there was a renewal of nationalist feeling in galicia . 
the animals most often thought of as being `` typical '' of galicia are the livestock raised there . 
the modern period of the kingdom of galicia began with the murder or defeat of some of the most powerful galician lords ,  such as pedro álvarez de sotomayor ,  called pedro madruga ,  and rodrigo henriquez osorio ,  at the hands of the castilian armies sent to galicia between the years 1480 and 1486.
during the pre-war period the supreme council of the kingdom of galicia  -lrb-  `` junta suprema del reino de galicia ''  -rrb-  ,  auto-proclaimed interim sovereign in 1808, was the sole government of the country and mobilized near 40,000 men against the invaders . 
in 585, the visigothic king leovigild invaded the suebic kingdom of galicia and defeated it ,  bringing it under visigoth control . 
the 1833 territorial division of spain put a formal end to the kingdom of galicia ,  unifying spain into a single centralized monarchy . 
galicia is poetically known as the `` country of the thousand rivers ''  -lrb-  `` o país dos mil ríos ''  -rrb-  . 
the interior of galicia is characterized by a hilly landscape; mountain ranges rise to in the east and south . 
there are two classes of g proteins . 
g proteins located within the cell are activated by g protein-coupled receptors  -lrb-  gpcrs  -rrb-  that span the cell membrane . 
during all of this drama ,  gygax became a father again . 
 -lrb-  kaye and gygax reconciled after the wedding .   -rrb- 
gygax was married twice and had six children . 
gygax also performed voiceover narration for cartoons and video games . 
in 2005, gygax was involved in the `` castles & crusades '' role-playing game ,  which was conceived as a hybrid between the third edition of `` d&d '' and the original version of the game conceived by gygax . 
in 1995, gygax began work on a new computer role-playing game called `` lejendary adventures '' . 
this collaboration gradually petered out as gygax and arneson realized their visions for the new game were diverging . 
gygax continued to work on `` lejendary adventures '' which he believed was his best work . 
gygax wrote the supplements `` greyhawk '' ,  `` eldritch wizardry '' ,  and `` swords & spells '' for the original `` d&d game '' . 
three months after his death ,  gygax games – a new company formed by gary's widow ,  gail – withdrew all of the gygax licenses from troll lord ,  and also from hekaforge . 
as the `` father of role-playing games '' ,  gygax received many awards ,  honors ,  and tributes related to gaming:
from an early age ,  gygax hunted and was a target-shooter with both bow and gun . 
immediately after leaving tsr ,  gygax was approached by a wargaming acquaintance ,  forrest baker ,  who had done some consulting work for tsr in 1983 and 1984.
in 1976, tsr moved out of gygax's house into its first professional home ,  known as `` the dungeon hobby shop '' . 
gygax took tsr to court in a bid to block the blumes' sale of their shares to williams ,  but he lost . 
gygax and arneson immediately started to collaborate on creating `` the fantasy game '' ,  the role-playing game which would evolve into `` dungeons & dragons '' . 
gygax ,  with the approval of nec and jvc ,  quickly changed the name to `` dangerous journeys '' ,  and work on the new game continued . 
sales of `` d&d '' reached in 1985, but gygax ,  seeing his future at tsr as untenable ,  resigned all positions with tsr ,  inc .  in october 1986, and settled his disputes with tsr in december 1986.
the new owner of tsr ,  wotc's peter adkison ,  clearly did not harbor any of lorraine williams' ill-will toward gygax: adkison purchased all of gygax's residual rights to d&d and ad&d for a six-figure sum . 
that same year ,  gygax was diagnosed with a potentially deadly abdominal aortic aneurysm . 
in the 1960s ,  gygax created an organization of wargaming clubs and founded the gen con gaming convention . 
gygax met dave arneson ,  the future co-creator of `` d&d '' ,  at the second gen con in august 1969.
although gygax was well compensated for his years of work on `` dangerous journeys '' and `` mythus '' ,  tsr immediately and permanently shelved them both . 
while visiting lake geneva in november 1972, arneson ran his fantasy game using the new rules ,  and gygax immediately saw the potential of role-playing games . 
it is such a degrading of the office and of the governor . `` 
the office of governor is required by the new south wales constitution act ,  1902.
the governor of new south wales is the viceregal representative of the australian monarch ,  queen elizabeth ii ,  in the state of new south wales . 
the following individuals have served as a governor of new south wales: currently ,  two former governors are alive . 
when they are the longest-serving state governor ,  the governor of new south wales holds a dormant commission to act as the administrator of the commonwealth when the governor-general of australia is absent from australia ,  a role most recently held by governor bashir . 
with the governor's return ,  management of the residence reverted to the office of the governor in december 2013.
between 1788 and 1957, all governors were born outside new south wales and were often members of the peerage . 
aside from the crown itself ,  the office of governor of new south wales is the oldest constitutional office in australia . 
the governor is also tasked with fostering unity and pride . 
the office has its origin in the 18th-century colonial governors of new south wales upon its settlement in 1788, and is the oldest continuous institution in australia . 
the governor of victoria is appointed by the queen of australia on the advice of the premier of victoria . 
the current governor of victoria is former judge linda dessau ,  victoria's first female governor . 
the governor of victoria is appointed by the queen of australia ,  on the advice of the premier of victoria ,  to act as her representative as head of state in victoria . 
see governors of the australian states for a description and history of the office of governor . 
the governor of victoria is the representative in the australian state of victoria of its monarch ,  elizabeth ii ,  queen of australia and is one of the governors of the australian states . 
the administrator takes on the governor’s duties if both the governor and lieutenant-governor are not able to act for the above reasons . 
if there is no governor or if the governor is unavailable to act for a substantial period ,  the lieutenant-governor assumes office as administrator and exercises all the powers and functions of the governor . 
during this period ,  shaw was known as `` george shaw ''; after 1876, he dropped the `` george '' and styled himself `` bernard shaw '' . 
during his later years ,  shaw enjoyed tending the gardens at shaw's corner . 
shaw continued to write into his nineties . 
three short plays by shaw were premiered during the war . 
shaw was a prolific correspondent throughout his life . 
after `` saint joan '' ,  it was five years before shaw wrote a play . 
between 1865 and 1871, shaw attended four schools ,  all of which he hated . 
in 1862, lee and the shaws agreed to share a house ,  no . 
in 1898, as a result of overwork ,  shaw's health broke down . 
in 1903 shaw joined in a controversy about vaccination against smallpox . 
the substance of shaw's political legacy is uncertain . 
shaw's views on religion and christianity were less consistent . 
shaw strove throughout his adult life to be referred to as `` bernard shaw '' rather than `` george bernard shaw '' ,  but confused matters by continuing to use his full initials—g . b . s . —as a by-line ,  and often signed himself `` g . bernard shaw '' . 
shaw's first three full-length plays dealt with social issues . 
it became the first theatre group to present all of shaw's stage work through its monthly concert series `` project shaw '' . 
shaw's collected criticisms were published as `` our theatres in the nineties '' in 1932.
shaw followed the first trilogy with a second ,  published as `` plays pleasant '' . 
eventually shaw was driven to applying for office jobs . 
shaw published a collected edition of his plays in 1934, comprising forty-two works . 
after 1897, pressure of other writing led shaw to give up keeping a diary . 
of shaw's various reviewing activities in the 1880s and 1890s it was as a music critic that he was best known . 
after their first runs none of the three plays were seen again in the west end during shaw's lifetime . 
in his lifetime shaw professed many beliefs ,  often contradictory . 
early in 1876 shaw learned from his mother that agnes was dying of tuberculosis . 
shaw's first play of the decade was `` too true to be good '' ,  written in 1931 and premiered in boston in february 1932.
shaw's largest-scale theatrical work was `` back to methuselah '' ,  written in 1918–20 and staged in 1922.
from 1885 to 1889 shaw attended the fortnightly meetings of the british economic association; it was ,  holroyd observes ,  `` the closest shaw had ever come to university education . `` 
shaw's first major work to appear after the war was `` heartbreak house '' ,  written in 1916–17 and performed in 1920.
through his journalism ,  pamphlets and occasional longer works ,  shaw wrote on many subjects . 
in 1884 and 1885, through the influence of archer ,  shaw was engaged to write book and music criticism for london papers . 
shaw remained a british subject all his life ,  but took dual british-irish nationality in 1934.
george bernard shaw  -lrb-  26 july 1856 –  2 november 1950 -rrb- ,  known at his insistence simply as bernard shaw ,  was an irish playwright ,  critic ,  polemicist and political activist . 
after shaw's death ,  pearson wrote: `` no one since the time of tom paine has had so definite an influence on the social and political life of his time and country as bernard shaw . `` 
during the first decade of the twentieth century ,  shaw secured a firm reputation as a playwright . 
in shaw's view ,  the london theatres of the 1890s presented too many revivals of old plays and not enough new work . 
towards the end of the decade ,  both shaws began to suffer ill health . 
the project foundered ,  but shaw returned to the draft as the basis of `` widowers' houses '' in 1892, and the connection with archer proved of immense value to shaw's career . 
pascal was given a third opportunity to film shaw's work with `` caesar and cleopatra ''  -lrb-  1945 -rrb- . 
hot-dip galvanizing deposits a thick ,  robust layer of zinc iron alloys on the surface of a steel item . 
galvanization or galvanizing is the process of applying a protective zinc coating to steel or iron ,  to prevent rusting . 
hot dip galvanized steel is also used for making steel frames as a basic construction material for steel frame buildings . 
the most common method is hot-dip galvanizing ,  in which the parts are submerged in a bath of molten zinc . 
the use of galvanized pipes lends some truth to the urban myth that water purity in outdoor water faucets is lower ,  but the actual impurities  -lrb-  iron ,  zinc ,  calcium  -rrb-  are harmless . 
the golden rule is the principle of treating others as one's self would wish to be treated . 
the `` golden rule '' was given by jesus of nazareth  -lrb-  matthew 7:12 ncv ,  see also   -rrb-  . 
according to simon blackburn ,  the golden rule `` can be found in some form in almost every ethical tradition '' . 
the golden rule in its prohibitive  -lrb-  negative  -rrb-  form was a common principle in ancient greek philosophy . 
simon blackburn also states that the golden rule can be `` found in some form in almost every ethical tradition '' . 
the golden rule can be considered an ethic of reciprocity in some religions ,  although other religions treat it differently . 
the governor of new york is the chief executive of the u . s .  state of new york . 
the lieutenant governor is elected on the same ticket as the governor ,  but nominated separately . 
the governor of new york is often considered a potential candidate for president . 
glasnevin  -lrb-   ,  also known as `` glas naedhe '' ,  meaning `` stream of o'naeidhe '' after an ancient chieftain  -rrb-  is a neighbourhood of dublin ,  ireland ,  situated and south of the river tolka . 
abbot was a lay theologian and scholar . 
abbot was re-elected mp for tamworth in 1645 for the long parliament and held the seat until his death in 1649.
by his will ,  abbot endowed a free school at caldecote . 
a globular cluster is sometimes known more simply as a `` globular '' . 
astronomers are searching for exoplanets of stars in globular star clusters . 
after they are formed ,  the stars in the globular cluster begin to interact gravitationally with each other . 
parametrically ,  these clusters lie somewhere between a globular cluster and a dwarf spheroidal galaxy . 
how these clusters are formed is not yet known ,  but their formation might well be related to that of globular clusters . 
a globular cluster is a spherical collection of stars that orbits a galactic core as a satellite . 
some giant elliptical galaxies  -lrb-  particularly those at the centers of galaxy clusters  -rrb-  ,  such as m87, have as many as 13,000 globular clusters . 
almost all globular clusters have a half-light radius of less than 10 pc ,  although there are well-established globular clusters with very large radii  -lrb-  i . e . 
the number of globular clusters discovered continued to increase ,  reaching 83 in 1915, 93 in 1930 and 97 by 1947.
he coined the term `` globular cluster '' in his `` catalogue of a second thousand new nebulae and clusters of stars '' published in 1789.
in 2000, the results of a search for giant planets in the globular cluster 47 tucanae were announced . 
finally the tidal radius ,  or hill sphere ,  is the distance from the center of the globular cluster at which the external gravitation of the galaxy has more influence over the stars in the cluster than does the cluster itself . 
very large regions of star formation known as super star clusters ,  such as westerlund 1 in the milky way ,  may be the precursors of globular clusters . 
globular clusters are not thought to be favorable locations for the survival of planetary systems . 
globular clusters are generally composed of hundreds of thousands of low-metal ,  old stars . 
in 2005, astronomers discovered a completely new type of star cluster in the andromeda galaxy ,  which is ,  in several ways ,  very similar to globular clusters . 
the ages of globular clusters place a bound on the age limit of the entire universe . 
astronomers characterize the morphology of a globular cluster by means of standard radii . 
there are many globular clusters with a retrograde orbit round the milky way galaxy . 
this demonstrates how many of this galaxy's globular clusters might have been acquired in the past . 
no known globular clusters display active star formation ,  which is consistent with the view that globular clusters are typically the oldest objects in the galaxy ,  and were among the first collections of stars to form . 
globular clusters can contain a high density of stars; on average about 0.4 stars per cubic parsec ,  increasing to 100 or 1000 stars per cubic parsec in the core of the cluster . 
the mass of the smbh in such a galaxy is often close to the combined mass of the galaxy's globular clusters . 
in the milky way ,  the metal-poor clusters are associated with the halo and the metal-rich clusters with the bulge . 
for example ,  bh 176 in the southern part of the milky way has properties of both an open and a globular cluster . 
he also explored the hawaiian islands and the southwest coast of australia . 
while at nootka sound vancouver acquired robert gray's chart of the lower columbia river . 
in april 1792 he encountered american captain robert gray off the coast of oregon just prior to gray's sailing up the columbia river . 
he again spent the winter in the sandwich islands . 
vancouver island and the city of vancouver ,  british columbia are named for him ,  as is vancouver ,  washington . 
in 1794, he first went to cook inlet ,  the northernmost point of his exploration ,  and from there followed the coast south . 
vancouver spent the winter in continuing exploration of the sandwich islands ,  the contemporary islands of hawaii . 
when the first nootka convention ended the crisis in 1790, vancouver was given command of `` discovery '' to take possession of nootka sound and to survey the coasts . 
broughton got as far as the columbia river gorge ,  sighting and naming mount hood . 
thus ,  southern english had a back close-mid vowel  ,  but northern english did not:
the great vowel shift changed vowels without merger so middle english before the vowel shift had the same number of vowel phonemes as early modern english after the vowel shift . 
before the great vowel shift ,  middle english in southern england had seven long vowels ,   . 
if the difference between the northern and southern vowel shifts is caused by the vowel systems at the time of the great vowel shift ,  did not shift because there was no back mid vowel in northern english . 
the second phase of the great vowel shift affected the middle english open vowel  ,  as in `` mate '' ,  and the middle english open-mid vowels  ,  as in `` meat '' and `` boat '' . 
in southern english ,  the close vowels in `` bite '' and in `` house '' shifted to become diphthongs ,  but in northern english ,  in `` bite '' shifted but in `` house '' did not . 
the first phase of the great vowel shift affected the middle english close-mid vowels  ,  as in `` beet '' and `` boot '' ,  and the close vowels  ,  as in `` bite '' and `` out '' . 
in both northern and southern english ,  the first step of the great vowel shift raised the close-mid vowels to become close . 
in southern english ,  shifting of to could have caused diphthongisation of original  ,  but because northern english had no back close-mid vowel to shift ,  the back close vowel did not diphthongise . 
the first step in the great vowel shift in northern and southern english is shown in the table below . 
however ,  the middle english spellings were retained into modern english while the great vowel shift was taking place ,  which caused some of the peculiarities of modern english spelling in relation to vowels . 
george gordon ,  1st earl of aberdeen  -lrb-  3 october 163720 april 1720 -rrb- ,  was a lord chancellor of scotland . 
in 1682 he was made lord chancellor of scotland ,  and was created ,  on 13 november ,  earl of aberdeen ,  viscount formartine ,  and lord haddo ,  methlick ,  tarves and kellie ,  in the scottish peerage ,  being appointed also sheriff principal of aberdeenshire and midlothian . 
gordon ,  born on 3 october 1637, the second son of sir john gordon ,  1st baronet ,  of haddo ,  aberdeenshire ,   -lrb-  executed in 1644 -rrb-;
his person was said to be deformed ,  and his `` want of mine or deportment '' was alleged as a disqualification for the office of lord chancellor . 
accordingly ,  lord aberdeen was asked to form a new government . 
the countess of aberdeen died in august 1833.
in december 1805 lord aberdeen took his seat as a tory scottish representative peer in the house of lords . 
aberdeen was greatly affected by the aftermath of war which he witnessed at first hand . 
aberdeen's career was dominated by foreign policy ,  but his experience did not prevent the slide towards the crimean war . 
lord aberdeen married lady catherine hamilton  -lrb-  10 january 1784 – 29 february 1812; daughter of lord abercorn  -rrb-  on 28 july 1805.
as prime minister ,  the earl of aberdeen was one of these officials ,  who feared france and bonaparte . 
thus on 28 december 1852, the earl of aberdeen appointed palmerston as home secretary and appointed russell as foreign minister . 
lord aberdeen as the leader of the peelites was one of 38 peelites elected to members of parliament independently of the tory/conservative party . 
in order to form the coalition government ,  the earl of aberdeen had been required to appoint both palmerston and russell to his cabinet . 
lord aberdeen served as chancellor of the duchy of lancaster between january and june 1828 and subsequently as foreign secretary until 1830 under the duke of wellington . 
thus lord aberdeen ,  a peelite ,  became prime minister and headed a coalition ministry of whigs and peelites . 
born in edinburgh on 28 january 1784, he was the eldest son of george gordon ,  lord haddo ,  son of george gordon ,  3rd earl of aberdeen . 
although united on international trade issues and on questions of domestic reform ,  his cabinet which also contained lord palmerston and lord john russell ,  who were certain to differ on questions of foreign policy . 
in may 2012, the development of gnucash for android was announced . 
programming on gnucash began in 1997, and its first stable release was in 1998.
children of george robert aberigh-mackay & mary ann louisa cherry
george robert aberigh-mackay  -lrb-  25 july 184812 january 1881 -rrb- ,  anglo-indian writer ,  was the son of the reverend james aberigh-mackay d . d .  ,  b . d . 
three significantly different sizes are in current use: the imperial gallon defined as litres  -lrb-  4 imperial quarts or 8 imperial pints  -rrb-  ,  which is used in the united kingdom ,  canada ,  and some caribbean nations; the us gallon defined as 231 cubic inches  -lrb-  4 us liquid quarts or 8 us liquid pints  -rrb-  or about  ,  which is used in the us and some latin american and caribbean countries; and the least-used us dry gallon defined as  . 
the gini coefficient was proposed by gini as a measure of inequality of income or wealth . 
there are some issues in interpreting a gini coefficient . 
for some functional forms ,  the gini index can be calculated explicitly . 
if `` x '' is the wealth or income of person `` i '' ,  and there are `` n '' persons ,  then the gini coefficient `` g '' is given by:
an often cited case that 1% of all the world's population owns 50% of all wealth ,  means a wealth gini coefficient of at least 49% . 
the gini coefficient calculated from a sample is a statistic and its standard error ,  or confidence intervals for the population gini coefficient ,  should be reported . 
scholars have devised over a dozen variants of the gini coefficient . 
normally the mean  -lrb-  or total  -rrb-  is assumed positive ,  which rules out a gini coefficient less than zero . 
in economics ,  the gini coefficient  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  sometimes called gini index ,  or gini ratio ,  is a measure of statistical dispersion intended to represent the income or wealth distribution of a nation's residents ,  and is the most commonly used measurement of inequality . 
the global income gini coefficient in 2005 has been estimated to be between 0.61 and 0.68 by various sources . 
on 31 october 2018, gchq joined instagram . 
these operations were 5% of all gchq operations according to a conference slideshow presented by the gchq . 
it is co-located with gchq for administrative purposes . 
gchq is led by the director of gchq ,  jeremy fleming ,  and a corporate board ,  made up of executive and non-executive directors . 
in the mid 1990s gchq began to assist in the investigation of cybercrime . 
gchq had a very low profile in the media until 1983 when the trial of geoffrey prime ,  a kgb mole within gchq ,  created considerable media interest . 
ayios nikolaos station in cyprus is run by the british army for gchq . 
in 2015, gchq admitted for the first time in court that it conducts computer hacking . 
at the end of 2003, gchq moved to a new circular hq  -lrb-  popularly known as `` the doughnut ''  -rrb-  . 
in april 1946, gc&cs became gchq ,  and the now gchq security section moved from oxford to join the rest of the organisation at eastcote later that year . 
gchq also has had access to the us internet monitoring programme prism since at least june 2010.
gchq was originally established after the first world war as the government code and cypher school  -lrb-  gc&cs  -rrb-  and was known under that name until 1946.
operations at gchq's chum hom kwok listening station in hong kong ended in 1994.
he was the second born and only male of six children . 
powers was then assigned to the 468th strategic fighter squadron at turner air force base ,  georgia ,  as an f-84 thunderjet pilot . 
other infancy gospels in this tradition include the infancy gospel of thomas ,  the gospel of pseudo-matthew  -lrb-  based on the protevangelium of james and on the infancy gospel of thomas  -rrb-  ,  and the so-called arabic infancy gospel; all of which were regarded by the church as apocryphal . 
the gospel of james ,  also known as the infancy gospel of james ,  the book of james ,  and the protoevangelium of james ,  is an apocryphal gospel probably written about ad 145, which expands backward in time the infancy stories contained in the gospels of matthew and luke ,  and presents a narrative concerning the birth and upbringing of mary herself . 
the gospel of james is one of several surviving infancy gospels that give an idea of the miracle literature that was created to satisfy the hunger of early christians for more detail about the early life of their saviour . 
the most common form uses dna that encodes a functional ,  therapeutic gene to replace a mutated gene . 
gene therapy was conceptualized in 1972, by authors who urged caution before commencing human gene therapy studies . 
the first attempt ,  an unsuccessful one ,  at gene therapy  -lrb-  as well as the first case of medical transfer of foreign genes into humans not counting organ transplantation  -rrb-  was performed by martin cline on 10 july 1980.
the first commercial gene therapy ,  gendicine ,  was approved in china in 2003 for the treatment of certain cancers . 
the first therapeutic use of gene transfer as well as the first direct insertion of human dna into the nuclear genome was performed by french anderson in a trial starting in september 1990.
in the medicine field gene therapy  -lrb-  also called human gene transfer  -rrb-  is the therapeutic delivery of nucleic acid into a patient's cells as a drug to treat disease . 
cases can be ranked in the following hierarchy ,  where a language that does not have a given case will tend not to have any cases to the right of the missing case:
the eight historical indo-european cases are as follows ,  with examples either of the english case or of the english syntactic alternative to case:
old english had an instrumental case ,  but not a locative or prepositional . 
english has largely lost its case system although personal pronouns still have three cases ,  which are simplified forms of the nominative ,  accusative and genitive cases . 
as a language evolves ,  cases can merge  -lrb-  for instance ,  in ancient greek ,  the locative case merged with the dative case  -rrb-  ,  a phenomenon formally called syncretism . 
the english word `` case '' used in this sense comes from the latin  ,  which is derived from the verb  ,  `` to fall '' ,  from the proto-indo-european root ``  '' . 
although not very prominent in modern english ,  cases featured much more saliently in old english and other ancient indo-european languages ,  such as latin ,  old persian ,  ancient greek ,  and sanskrit . 
taken as a whole ,  english personal pronouns are typically said to have three morphological cases:
by the spring of 1934 himmler's ss controlled the sd and the gestapo ,  but for him ,  there was still a problem ,  as technically the ss  -lrb-  and the gestapo by proxy  -rrb-  was subordinated to the sa ,  which was under the command of ernst röhm . 
the first commander of the gestapo was rudolf diels ,  a protégé of göring . 
the gestapo became known as rsha `` amt iv ''  -lrb-  `` department or office iv ''  -rrb-  with heinrich müller as its chief . 
he answered to heydrich; heydrich answered only to himmler and himmler answered only to hitler . 
nevertheless ,  in practice there was jurisdictional overlap and operational conflict between the sd and gestapo . 
concerned that diels was not ruthless enough to effectively counteract the power of the `` sturmabteilung ''  -lrb-  sa  -rrb-  ,  göring handed over control of the gestapo to himmler on 20 april 1934.
during world war ii ,  the gestapo played a key role in the nazi plan to exterminate the jews of europe . 
the gestapo  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  abbreviation of geheime staatspolizei  -lrb-  secret state police  -rrb-  ,  was the official secret police of nazi germany and german-occupied europe . 
in the occupied territories ,  the formal relationship between local units of the gestapo ,  criminal police ,  and sd was slightly closer . 
the gestapo had the authority to investigate cases of treason ,  espionage ,  sabotage and criminal attacks on the nazi party and germany . 
antipathy to hitler and his regime was not tolerated ,  so the gestapo had an important role to play in monitoring and prosecuting all who opposed nazi rule ,  whether openly or covertly . 
less than two weeks later in early may 1933, the gestapo moved into their berlin headquarters at prinz-albrecht-straße 8.
a few english verbs have no special forms that indicate subject agreement  -lrb-  `` i may '' ,  `` you may '' ,  `` she may ''  -rrb-  ,  and the verb `` to be '' has an additional form `` am '' that can only be used with the pronoun `` i '' as the subject . 
verbal agreement or concord is a morpho-syntactic construct in which properties of the subject and/or objects of a verb are indicated by the verb form . 
some languages have a richer agreement system in which verbs also agree with some or all of their objects . 
some languages with verbal agreement can leave certain subjects implicit when the subject is fully determined by the verb form . 
the system of all conjugated variants of a particular verb or class of verbs is called a verb paradigm; this may be presented in the form of a conjugation table . 
the japanese call this game go-moku  -lrb-  five stones  -rrb-  . 
gomoku ,  also called `` five in a row '' ,  is an abstract strategy board game . 
in swap2 rule ,  the first player starts by placing three stones  -lrb-  2 black 1 white ,  if black goes first  -rrb-  on the board . 
like the zodiacal light ,  the gegenschein is sunlight scattered by interplanetary dust . 
it was also humboldt who gave the phenomenon its german name gegenschein . 
in graphonomics ,  the term glyph is used for a noncharacter ,  i . e . 
in archaeology ,  a glyph is a carved or inscribed symbol . 
in summary ,  in typography and computing ,  a glyph is a graphical unit . 
a glyph is `` the specific shape ,  design ,  or representation of a character '' . 
the goth scene continues to exist in the 2010s . 
the goth scene is often described as non-violent . 
goth fashion has a reciprocal relationship with the fashion world . 
mick mercer stated that gill was `` not a goth . 
the goth subculture has associated tastes in music ,  aesthetics ,  and fashion . 
a 2006 study of young goths found that those with higher levels of goth identification had higher drug use . 
the goth kids are usually depicted listening to goth music ,  writing or reading gothic poetry ,  drinking coffee ,  flipping their hair and smoking . 
while goth is `` considered a music-based scene '' ,  ``  .  .  .  to be goth implies much more than shared musical tastes; it is  .  .  .  an 'aesthetic , ' a particular way of seeing and of being seen '' . 
the goth subculture of the 1980s drew inspiration from a variety of sources . 
this was described as `` haute goth '' by cintra wilson in the `` new york times '' . 
throughout the evolution of the goth subculture ,  classic romantic ,  gothic and horror literature has played a significant role . 
the goth subculture is a subculture that began in england during the early 1980s ,  where it developed from the audience of gothic rock ,  an offshoot of the post-punk genre . 
as the subculture became well-established ,  the connection between goth and horror fiction became almost a cliché ,  with goths quite likely to appear as characters in horror novels and film . 
though sexual empowerment is not unique to women in the goth scene ,  it remains an important part of many goth women's experience: the ``  .  .  .  scene's celebration of active sexuality '' enables goth women ``  .  .  .  to resist mainstream notions of passive femininity '' . 
in the us ,  events such as bats day in the fun park celebrate the culture ,  as well as the goth cruise ,  and the gothic cruise . 
young goths have to define themselves and learn beauty is an aspect of cultural relativism . 
this non-fiction book describes over 600 words and phrases relevant to goth subculture . 
in 1979, `` sounds '' described joy division as `` gothic '' and `` theatrical '' . 
gothic fashion is marked by conspicuously dark ,  antiquated and homogeneous features . 
in the us ,  `` propaganda '' was a gothic subculture magazine founded in 1982.
the study was criticized for using only a small sample of goth teens and not taking into account other influences and differences between types of goths; by taking a study from a larger number of people . 
in part because of public misunderstanding surrounding gothic aesthetics ,  people in the goth subculture sometimes suffer prejudice ,  discrimination ,  and intolerance . 
since all gwp calculations are a comparison to co which is non-linear ,  all gwp values are affected . 
a gwp is calculated over a specific time horizon ,  commonly 20, 100, or 500 years . 
the gwp for a mixture of gases can be obtained from the mass-fraction-weighted average of the gwps of the individual gases . 
this is a net reduction of 22.26 tonnes of gwp ,  reducing the global warming effect by a ratio of 25:2.74  -lrb-  approximately 9 times  -rrb-  . 
for a change in time horizon from 20 to 100 years ,  the gwp for methane therefore decreases by a factor of approximately 2.5.
a substance's gwp depends on the timespan over which the potential is calculated . 
the dependence of gwp as a function of wavelength has been found empirically and published as a graph . 
grothendieck topologies axiomatize the notion of an open cover . 
in a grothendieck topology ,  the notion of a collection of open subsets of `` u '' stable under inclusion is replaced by the notion of a sieve . 
a grothendieck topology `` j '' on a category `` c '' is a collection ,  `` for each object c of c '' ,  of distinguished sieves on `` c '' ,  denoted by `` j '' -lrb-  `` c ''  -rrb-  and called covering sieves of `` c '' . 
continuing the previous example ,  a sieve `` s '' on an open set `` u '' in `` o '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  will be a covering sieve if and only if the union of all the open sets `` v '' for which `` s '' -lrb-  `` v ''  -rrb-  is nonempty equals `` u ''; in other words ,  if and only if `` s '' gives us a collection of open sets which cover `` u '' in the classical sense . 
 ''ghost in the shell: the new movie '' ,  also known as `` ghost in the shell: arise − the movie '' or `` new ghost in the shell '' ,  is a 2015 film directed by kazuya nomura that serves as a finale to the `` ghost in the shell: arise '' story arc . 
he had chosen `` ghost in the shell '' in homage to arthur koestler's `` the ghost in the machine '' ,  from which he also drew inspiration . 
in 2002, `` ghost in the shell: stand alone complex '' premiered on animax ,  presenting a new telling of `` ghost in the shell '' independent from the original manga ,  focusing on section 9's investigation of the laughing man hacker . 
in 2008, dreamworks and producer steven spielberg acquired the rights to a live-action film adaptation of the original `` ghost in the shell '' manga . 
in 2013, a new iteration of the series titled ``  '' premiered ,  taking an original look at the `` ghost in the shell '' world ,  set before the original manga . 
the original `` ghost in the shell '' manga ran in japan from april 1989 to november 1990 in kodansha's manga anthology `` young magazine '' ,  and was released in a `` tankōbon '' volume on october 5, 1991.
the gauss–legendre algorithm is an algorithm to compute the digits of π . 
if formula_10 and formula_11 then the limit is formula_12 where formula_13 is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind
the algorithm has quadratic convergence ,  which essentially means that the number of correct digits doubles with each iteration of the algorithm . 
all mersenne primes are of the form  ,  where `` p '' is a prime number itself . 
the smallest mersenne prime in this table is
the first column is the rank of the mersenne prime in the  -lrb-  ordered  -rrb-  sequence of all mersenne primes; gimps has found all known mersenne primes beginning with the 35th . 
the gimps project was founded by george woltman in 1996, who also wrote the software prime95 and mprime for the project . 
 ,  the project has found a total of seventeen mersenne primes ,  fifteen of which were the largest known prime number at their respective times of discovery . 
the game . com pocket pro's primary competitor was the game boy color . 
several games were available for the game . com at the time of its 1997 launch ,  in comparison to hundreds of games available for the game boy . 
the game . com was the first video game console to feature a touchscreen and also the first handheld video game console to have internet connectivity . 
the game . com is a fifth-generation handheld game console released by tiger electronics in august 1997.
twenty games were ultimately released for the game . com ,  most of them developed internally by tiger . 
by february 1997, tiger was planning to release a new game console ,  the handheld `` game . com '' ,  as a direct competitor to nintendo's portable game boy console . 
as for sound ,  game . com delivers better than any other hand-held on the market . `` 
game prices initially ranged between $19 and $29.
general packet radio service  -lrb-  gprs  -rrb-  is a packet oriented mobile data standard on the 2g and 3g cellular communication network's global system for mobile communications  -lrb-  gsm  -rrb-  . 
the gprs core network allows 2g ,  3g and wcdma mobile networks to transmit ip packets to external networks such as the internet . 
usage above the gprs bundled data cap may be charged per mb of data ,  speed limited ,  or disallowed . 
gnosis is the common greek noun for knowledge  -lrb-  γνῶσις ,  `` gnōsis '' ,  f .   -rrb-  . 
 ''gnosis '' is a feminine greek noun which means `` knowledge '' . 
georgian architecture was widely disseminated in the english colonies during the georgian era . 
in australia ,  the old colonial georgian residential and non-residential styles were developed in the period from  . 
in the united states the federalist style contained many elements of georgian style ,  but incorporated revolutionary symbols . 
georgian architecture is the name given in most english-speaking countries to the set of architectural styles current between 1714 and 1830.
georgian succeeded the english baroque of sir christopher wren ,  sir john vanbrugh ,  thomas archer ,  william talman ,  and nicholas hawksmoor; this in fact continued into at least the 1720s ,  overlapping with a more restrained georgian style . 
after about 1840, georgian conventions were slowly abandoned as a number of revival styles ,  including gothic revival ,  that had originated in the georgian period ,  developed and contested in victorian architecture ,  and in the case of gothic became better researched ,  and closer to their originals . 
the early churches ,  falling into the georgian period ,  show a high proportion of gothic revival buildings ,  along with the classically inspired . 
in the united states the term `` georgian '' is generally used to describe all buildings from the period ,  regardless of style; in britain it is generally restricted to buildings that are `` architectural in intention '' ,  and have stylistic characteristics that are typical of the period ,  though that covers a wide range . 
the revived georgian style that emerged in britain at the beginning of the 20th century is usually referred to as neo-georgian; the work of edwin lutyens includes many examples . 
the period brought the vocabulary of classical architecture to smaller and more modest buildings than had been the case before ,  replacing english vernacular architecture  -lrb-  or becoming the new vernacular style  -rrb-  for almost all new middle-class homes and public buildings by the end of the period . 
in both the united states and britain ,  the georgian style is still employed by architects like quinlan terry julian bicknell and fairfax and sammons for private residences . 
goshen was platted in 1831.
goshen is located at  . 
it was in this context that goshen was named . 
this system consists of seven elementary schools ,  goshen middle school ,  and goshen high school . 
in april 2006, goshen was the site for an immigration march . 
goshen community schools serves the portion of the city in elkhart township . 
the median age in the city was 32.4 years . 
in the city ,  the population was spread out with 25.9% under the age of 18, 12.9% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 17.6% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% who were 65 years of age or older . 
goshen is a city in and the county seat of elkhart county ,  indiana ,  united states . 
in ancient times ,  the gallipoli peninsula was known as the thracian chersonesus  -lrb-  from greek `` χερσόνησος '' ,  `` peninsula ''  -rrb-  to the greeks and later the romans . 
the peninsula was abandoned to the persians in 493 bc after the outbreak of the greco-persian wars  -lrb-  499–478 bc  -rrb-  . 
in antiquity ,  the peninsula was known as the thracian chersonese  -lrb-   ,  `` thrakiké chersónesos '';   -rrb-  . 
gallipoli did not experience any more wars until the first balkan war ,  when the 1913 battle of bulair and several minor skirmishes took place here . 
it was eventually ceded to philip in 338 bc . 
after the devastating 1354 earthquake ,  the town of gallipoli was besieged and captured by the ottomans ,  making gallipoli the first ottoman stronghold in europe ,  and the staging area for their expansion across the balkans . 
the gallipoli star was a military decoration created by the ottoman empire in 1915 and awarded for the duration of world war i . 
the gallipoli peninsula  -lrb-  ; ;  ,  `` chersónisos tis kallípolis ''  -rrb-  is located in the southern part of east thrace ,  the european part of turkey ,  with the aegean sea to the west and the dardanelles strait to the east . 
gallipoli was occupied by greek troops on 4 august 1920 during the greco-turkish war of 1919–22, considered part of the turkish war of independence ,  and after the armistice of mudros it became a greek prefecture centre as `` kallipolis '' . 
some bacteria have cell walls which are particularly adept at retaining stains . 
in addition ,  in all bacteria stained using the gram stain ,  the age of the culture may influence the results of the stain . 
some bacteria ,  after staining with the gram stain ,  yield a gram-variable pattern: a mix of pink and purple cells are seen . 
there are four basic steps of the gram stain:
gram staining differentiates bacteria by the chemical and physical properties of their cell walls by detecting peptidoglycan ,  which is present in the cell wall of gram-positive bacteria . 
gram stain or gram staining ,  also called gram's method ,  is a method of staining used to distinguish and classify bacterial species into two large groups  -lrb-  gram-positive and gram-negative  -rrb-  . 
these are called acid fast bacteria ,  and can only be differentiated from other gram-positive bacteria by special staining procedures . 
the counterstain ,  however ,  is unseen on gram-positive bacteria because of the darker crystal violet stain . 
the diderm bacteria can also be further differentiated between simple diderms lacking lipopolysaccharide ,  the archetypical diderm bacteria where the outer cell membrane contains lipopolysaccharide ,  and the diderm bacteria where outer cell membrane is made up of mycolic acid . 
gram-positive bacteria are bacteria that give a positive result in the gram stain test ,  which is traditionally used to quickly classify bacteria into two broad categories according to their cell wall . 
in general ,  gram-positive bacteria are monoderms and have a single lipid bilayer whereas gram-negative bacteria are diderms and have two bilayers . 
despite their thicker peptidoglycan layer ,  gram-positive bacteria are more receptive to certain cell wall targeting antibiotics than gram-negative bacteria ,  due to the absence of the outer membrane . 
in contrast to gram-positive bacteria ,  all archetypical gram-negative bacteria are bounded by a cytoplasmic membrane and an outer cell membrane; they contain only a thin layer of peptidoglycan  -lrb-  2–3 nm  -rrb-  between these membranes . 
in general ,  the following characteristics are present in gram-positive bacteria:
for the bacterial cells bounded by a single cell membrane ,  the term `` monoderm bacteria '' or `` monoderm prokaryotes '' has been proposed . 
gram-negative bacteria are bacteria that do not retain the crystal violet stain used in the gram-staining method of bacterial differentiation . 
they are characterized by their cell envelopes ,  which are composed of a thin peptidoglycan cell wall sandwiched between an inner cytoplasmic cell membrane and a bacterial outer membrane . 
the greyhound is a breed of dog ,  a sighthound which has been bred for coursing game and greyhound racing . 
greyhound owners and adoption groups consider greyhounds wonderful pets . 
greyhounds live most happily as pets in quiet environments . 
a very common misconception regarding greyhounds is that they are hyperactive . 
due to their calm temperament ,  greyhounds can make better `` apartment dogs '' than smaller ,  more active breeds . 
greyhounds wear muzzles during racing ,  which can lead some to believe they are aggressive dogs ,  but this is not true . 
it is usual to identify formula_45 with formula_46, with associated natural embeddings formula_47 and formula_48.
the exterior product has the same properties ,  except that formula_33 for formula_34.
the notation formula_10 or formula_11 will be used to describe the geometric algebra . 
for vectors formula_29 and formula_51, we may write the geometric product of any two vectors formula_29 and formula_51 as the sum of a symmetric product and an antisymmetric product:
benson has been honored with a star on the hollywood walk of fame . 
benson accumulated three other platinum lps and two gold albums . 
benson then signed with creed taylor's jazz label cti records ,  where he recorded several albums ,  with jazz heavyweights guesting ,  to some success ,  mainly in the jazz field . 
benson attended and graduated from schenley high school . 
benson was born and raised in the hill district in pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania . 
the aorist was the `` simple past '' ,  while the imperfective denoted uncompleted action in the past ,  and the perfect was used for past events having relevance to the present . 
turkish verbs conjugate for past ,  present and future ,  with a variety of aspects and moods . 
the pluperfect and future perfect are relative tenses ,  referring to the past relative to a past time or relative to a future time . 
in latin and french ,  for example ,  the imperfect denotes past time in combination with imperfective aspect ,  while other verb forms  -lrb-  the latin perfect ,  and the french `` passé composé '' or `` passé simple ''  -rrb-  are used for past time reference with perfective aspect . 
 -lrb-  it also sometimes references the past ,  however ,  in what is called the historical present .   -rrb- 
in standard german ,  the compound past ``  -lrb-  perfekt  -rrb- ``  has replaced the simple morphological past in most contexts . 
a present tense form may sometimes refer to the past  -lrb-  as in the historical present  -rrb-  ,  a past tense form may sometimes refer to the non-past  -lrb-  as in some english conditional sentences  -rrb-  ,  and so on . 
the six-tense language kalaw lagaw ya of australia has the remote past ,  the recent past ,  the today past ,  the present ,  the today/near future and the remote future . 
the romance languages  -lrb-  descendants of latin  -rrb-  have past ,  present and future morphological tenses ,  with additional aspectual distinction in the past . 
english has only two morphological tenses: the present  -lrb-  or non-past  -rrb-  ,  as in `` he goes ,  and the past  -lrb-  or preterite  -rrb-  ,  as in `` he went . 
proto-indo-european verbs had present ,  perfect  -lrb-  stative  -rrb-  ,  imperfect and aorist forms – these can be considered as representing two tenses  -lrb-  present and past  -rrb-  with different aspects . 
the tenses of ancient greek are similar ,  but with a three-way aspect contrast in the past: the aorist ,  the perfect and the imperfect . 
classical irish had a three-way aspectual contrast of simple–perfective–imperfective in the past and present tenses . 
main tenses found in many languages include the past ,  present ,  and future . 
aspect can mark the stage of an action . 
there is a distinction between grammatical aspect ,  as described here ,  and lexical aspect . 
like tense ,  aspect is a way that verbs represent time . 
the most fundamental aspectual distinction ,  represented in many languages ,  is between perfective aspect and imperfective aspect . 
one of the factors in situation aspect is telicity . 
in russian ,  aspect is more salient than tense in narrative . 
essentially ,  the perfective aspect looks at an event as a complete action ,  while the imperfective aspect views an event as the process of unfolding or a repeated or habitual event  -lrb-  thus corresponding to the progressive/continuous aspect for events of short-term duration and to habitual aspect for longer terms  -rrb-  . 
aspect is a grammatical category that expresses how an action ,  event ,  or state ,  denoted by a verb ,  extends over time . 
achievements ,  accomplishments and semelfactives have telic situation aspect ,  while states and activities have atelic situation aspect . 
lexical or situation aspect is marked in athabaskan languages . 
the glucose in the blood is called blood sugar . 
the rest is one of two cyclic forms of glucose that are formed when the hydroxyl group on carbon 5  -lrb-  c5 -rrb- bonds to the aldehyde carbon 1  -lrb-  c1 -rrb- . 
artificial sweeteners do not lower blood sugar levels . 
the ring arises from the open-chain form by an intramolecular nucleophilic addition reaction between the aldehyde group  -lrb-  at c-1 -rrb- and either the c-4 or c-5 hydroxyl group ,  forming a hemiacetal linkage ,  -c -lrb-  oh  -rrb- h-o- . 
each of the four carbons c-2 through c-5 is a stereocenter ,  meaning that its four bonds connect to four different substituents . 
over time the blood glucose levels should decrease as insulin allows it to be taken up by cells and exit the blood stream . 
namely ,  when the molecule is drawn in the fischer projection ,  the hydroxyls on c-2, c-4, and c-5 must be on the right side ,  while that on c-3 must be on the left side . 
the ring-closing reaction makes carbon c-1 chiral ,  too ,  since its four bonds lead to -h ,  to -oh ,  to carbon c-2, and to the ring oxygen . 
individuals with diabetes or other conditions that result in low blood sugar often carry small amounts of sugar in various forms . 
in its fleeting open-chain form ,  the glucose molecule has an open  -lrb-  as opposed to cyclic  -rrb-  and unbranched backbone of six carbon atoms ,  c-1 through c-6; where c-1 is part of an aldehyde group h -lrb-  c=o  -rrb- - ,  and each of the other five carbons bears one hydroxyl group -oh . 
the open-chain form is thermodynamically unstable ,  and it spontaneously isomerizes to the cyclic forms . 
the blood sugar content of a healthy person in the short-time fasting state ,  e . g . 
eating or fasting prior to taking a blood sample has an effect on analyses for glucose in the blood; a high fasting glucose blood sugar level may be a sign of prediabetes or diabetes mellitus . 
in either case ,  each carbon in the ring has one hydrogen and one hydroxyl attached ,  except for the last carbon  -lrb-  c-4 or c-5 -rrb- where the hydroxyl is replaced by the remainder of the open molecule  -lrb-  which is - -lrb-  c -lrb-  choh  -rrb- hoh  -rrb- -h or - -lrb-  choh  -rrb- -h ,  respectively  -rrb-  . 
the equilibration takes place via the open-chain aldehyde form . 
in solutions ,  the open-chain form of glucose  -lrb-  either `` - '' or `` - ''  -rrb-  exists in equilibrium with several cyclic isomers ,  each containing a ring of carbons closed by one oxygen atom . 
in some bacteria and ,  in modified form ,  also in archaea ,  glucose is degraded via the entner-doudoroff pathway . 
the reaction between c-1 and c-5 yields a six-membered heterocyclic system called a pyranose ,  which is a monosaccharide sugar  -lrb-  hence `` –ose ''  -rrb-  containing a derivatised pyran skeleton . 
this reaction proceeds via an enediol:
about 90% of kidney glucose reabsorption is via sglt2 and about 3% via sglt1.
pólya was born in budapest ,  austria-hungary to anna deutsch and jakab pólya ,  hungarian jews who had converted to the roman catholic faith in 1886.
mark kilgard has a github repository for glut . 
the two aims of glut are to allow the creation of rather portable code between operating systems  -lrb-  glut is cross-platform  -rrb-  and to make learning opengl easier . 
glut also has some limited support for creating pop-up menus . 
boccaccio grew up in florence . 
boccaccio began work on `` the decameron '' around 1349.
the details of boccaccio's birth are uncertain . 
in october 1350, he was delegated to greet francesco petrarch as he entered florence and also to have petrarch as a guest at boccaccio's home ,  during his stay . 
boccaccio and petrarch were also two of the most educated people in early renaissance in the field of archaeology . 
boccaccio's stepmother was called margherita de' mardoli . 
boccaccio returned to florence in early 1341, avoiding the plague of 1340 in that city ,  but also missing the visit of petrarch to naples in 1341.
verdi and strepponi moved into sant'agata on 1 may 1851.
verdi's operas are frequently staged around the world . 
during this period ,  verdi began to work more consistently with his librettists . 
verdi’s hometown of busseto displays luigi secchi's statue of a seated verdi in 1913, next to the teatro verdi built in his honour in the 1850s . 
verdi has been the subject of a number of film and stage works . 
after a period of illness verdi began work on `` macbeth '' in september 1846.
in the eleven years up to and including `` traviata '' ,  verdi had written sixteen operas . 
the earliest study of verdi's music ,  published in 1859 by the italian critic abraham basevi ,  already distinguished four periods in verdi's music . 
he was chosen by verdi as one of the executors of his will ,  but predeceased the composer in 1890.
verdi appeared on the italian 1000 lire notes printed from 1962–76.
in recent years historians have vigorously debated how political verdi's operas were . 
verdi had a younger sister ,  giuseppa ,  who died aged 17 in 1833.
verdi was similarly never explicit about his religious beliefs . 
two external factors had their impacts on verdi's compositions of this period . 
the growth of the `` identification of verdi's music with italian nationalist politics '' perhaps began in the 1840s . 
nonetheless on 15 may ,  verdi signed a contract with la fenice for an opera for the following spring . 
for several months verdi was preoccupied with family matters . 
later ,  in 1874, verdi was appointed a member of the italian senate ,  but did not participate in its activities . 
budden comments `` in no other opera of his does verdi appear to have taken so little interest `` before '' it was staged . `` 
giuseppe fortunino francesco verdi  -lrb-  ; 9 or 10 october 1813 – 27 january 1901 -rrb- was an italian opera composer . 
although verdi's operas brought him a popular following ,  not all contemporary critics approved of his work . 
list of compositions by giuseppe verdi in mid-1834, verdi sought to acquire provesi's former post in busseto but without success . 
verdi had completed `` i masnadieri '' for london by may 1847 except for the orchestration . 
verdi conducted his requiem in paris ,  london and vienna in 1875 and in cologne in 1876.
george martin says verdi was `` the greatest artist '' of the risorgimento . 
the operas of the early period show verdi learning by doing and gradually establishing mastery over the different elements of opera . 
she was to marry in 1878 the son of verdi's friend and lawyer angelo carrara and her family became eventually the heirs of verdi's estate . 
she became closely associated personally with verdi  -lrb-  exactly how closely remains conjectural  -rrb-  ,  to giuseppina verdi's initial disquiet; but the women were reconciled and stolz remained a companion of verdi after giuseppina's death in 1897 until his own death . 
the fact that this is `` the one opera of verdi's which focuses on a mother rather than a father '' is perhaps related to her death . 
 ''tinta '' was for verdi this `` golden thread '' ,  an essential unifying factor in his works . 
in his early operas ,  verdi demonstrated a sympathy with the risorgimento movement which sought the unification of italy . 
while verdi was working on his second opera `` un giorno di regno '' ,  margherita died of encephalitis at the age of 26.
taruskin asserts this is `` the most famous ensemble verdi ever composed '' . 
the german navy  -lrb-   or simply   -rrb-  is the navy of germany and part of the unified `` bundeswehr ''  -lrb-  `` federal defense ''  -rrb-  ,  the german armed forces . 
during the cold war all of the german navy's combat vessels were assigned to nato's allied forces baltic approaches's naval command navbaltap . 
géant is the pan-european data network for the research and education community . 
the next géant project  -lrb-  gn3 -rrb- began on 1 april 2009 and continued until april 2013.
co-funded by the european commission and europe’s nrens ,  the géant network was built and is operated by the géant association . 
ghb can be detected in hair . 
ghb is `` colourless and odorless '' . 
the precise function of ghb in the body is not clear . 
other salt forms such as calcium ghb and magnesium ghb have also been reported ,  but the sodium salt is by far the most common . 
one publication has investigated 226 deaths attributed to ghb . 
both γ-butyrolactone  -lrb-  gbl  -rrb-  and 1,4-butanediol are converted to ghb in the body . 
it acts on the ghb receptor and is a weak agonist at the gaba receptor . 
ghb has been used as a club drug ,  apparently starting in the 1990s ,  as small doses of ghb can act as a euphoriant and are believed to be aphrodisiac . 
this is the law that made ghb a schedule 1 controlled substance . 
convulsions from ghb can be treated with the benzodiazepines diazepam or lorazepam . 
the toxicity of ghb has been an issue in criminal trials ,  as in the death of felicia tang ,  where the defense argued that death was due to ghb ,  not murder . 
to detect ghb in urine ,  the sample must be taken within four hours of ghb ingestion ,  and cannot be tested at home . 
levels lower than this may be due to ghb or to postmortem endogenous elevations . 
in humans ,  ghb has been shown to reduce the elimination rate of alcohol . 
