finally stephen faced the ottomans in battle . 
it was only after receiving this letter that murad ii led the ottoman army and won the battle of varna in 1444.
ottomans and hungarians fought during the years till 1456.
mehmed ii was born on 30 march 1432, in edirne ,  then the capital city of the ottoman state . 
mehmed ii recovered ottoman power over the other turkish states ,  and these conquests allowed him to push further into europe . 
after some battles bosnia became tributary kingdom to the ottomans . 
when mehmed ii ascended the throne again in 1451 he strengthened the ottoman navy and made preparations to attack constantinople . 
the despotate of the morea bordered the southern ottoman balkans . 
after murad ii made peace with the karamanids in anatolia in august 1444, he abdicated the throne to his 12-year-old son mehmed ii . 
ottoman reaction was swift and decisive: mehmed ii dispatched his grand vizier ,  mahmud pasha angelović ,  with an army against the venetians . 
when mehmed ii ascended the throne again in 1451 he devoted himself to strengthening the ottoman navy and made preparations for an attack on constantinople . 
mehmed ii  -lrb-  ; modern ; 30 march 1432 – 3 may 1481 -rrb- ,  commonly known as mehmed the conqueror  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was an ottoman sultan who ruled from august 1444 to september 1446, and then later from february 1451 to may 1481.
in 1459, mehmed ii sent envoys to vlad to urge him to pay a delayed tribute of 10,000 ducats and 500 recruits into the ottoman forces . 
mehmed ii's first campaigns after constantinople were in the direction of serbia ,  which had been an ottoman vassal state since the battle of kosovo in 1389.
after the capture of the genoese towns ,  the ottoman sultan held meñli i giray captive ,  later releasing him in return for accepting ottoman suzerainty over the crimean khans and allowing them to rule as tributary princes of the ottoman empire . <ref name= ''blacksea-crimea/hist ''></ref> however ,  the crimean khans still had a large amount of autonomy from the ottoman empire ,  while the ottomans directly controlled the southern coast . 
after this conquest ,  mehmed moved the ottoman capital from adrianople to constantinople . 
a few years later ,  ottoman vizier  -lrb-  later grand vizier  -rrb-  gedik ahmet pasha captured the coastal region of the `` beylik '' . 
when sultan mehmed ii stepped into the ruins of the boukoleon ,  known to the ottomans and persians as the palace of the caesars ,  probably built over a thousand years before by theodosius ii ,  he uttered the famous lines of saadi:
the albanian resistance led by george kastrioti skanderbeg  -lrb-  `` i̇skender bey ''  -rrb-  ,  an albanian noble and a former member of the ottoman ruling elite ,  curbed the ottoman expansion . 
i̇brahim ii of karaman was the ruler of karaman ,  and during his last years ,  his sons began struggling for the throne . 
bosnia officially fell in 1463 and became the westernmost province of the ottoman empire . 
after skanderbeg died ,  mehmed ii personally led the siege of shkodra in 1478-79, of which early ottoman chronicler aşıkpaşazade  -lrb-  1400–81 -rrb- wrote ,  `` all the conquests of sultan mehmed were fulfilled with the seizure of shkodra . `` 
an ottoman army under gedik ahmed pasha invaded italy in 1480, capturing otranto . 
the agreement was established as a result of the ottomans having reached the outskirts of venice . 
vlad iii dracula fled to moldavia ,  where he lived under the protection of his uncle ,  bogdan ii . 
when mehmed ii was eleven years old he was sent to amasya to govern and thus gain experience ,  per the custom of ottoman rulers before his time . 
negotiations were also begun with other rivals of the ottomans ,  such as karamanids ,  uzun hassan and the crimean khanate . 
the week after the australian open ,  hingis defeated world no . 
in 2000, hingis again found herself in both the singles and doubles finals at the australian open . 
she won the australian open women's doubles with natasha zvereva . 
in 1994, she retained her french open junior title ,  won the girls' singles title at wimbledon ,  and reached the final of the us open . 
she also reached the final of the wta tour championships ,  where she lost to lindsay davenport . 
at the australian open ,  hingis lost in the quarterfinals to second-seeded kim clijsters . 
coming back from injury ,  hingis won the australian open doubles final at the start of 2002  -lrb-  again teaming with anna kournikova  -rrb-  and reached a sixth straight australian open final in singles ,  again facing capriati . 
she made her wta debut at the zurich open in october 1994, two weeks after turning 14, and ended 1994 ranked world no . 
following her win at filderstadt ,  hingis defeated the reigning australian open champion and co-top ranked  -lrb-  with steffi graf  -rrb-  monica seles in the final in oakland ,  but lost to graf in the year-end wta tour championships final in five sets . 
the basic si unit of mass is the kilogram  -lrb-  kg  -rrb-  . 
there are several distinct phenomena which can be used to measure mass . 
the standard international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  unit of mass is the kilogram  -lrb-  kg  -rrb-  . 
from 1972, aluminium-bronze 5 markka were also issued . 
after the 1963 reform this name was used for one new markka . 
the sometimes used `` old markka '' can be misleading ,  since it can also be used to refer to the pre-1963 markka . 
when the markka was introduced ,  coins were minted in copper  -lrb-  1, 5 and 10 penniä  -rrb-  ,  silver  -lrb-  25 and 50 penniä ,  1 and 2 markkaa  -rrb-  and gold  -lrb-  10 and 20 markkaa  -rrb-  . 
this coinage continued to be issued until the introduction of the new markka in 1963.
although the word `` markka '' predates the currency by several centuries ,  the currency was established before being named `` markka '' . 
the name `` markka '' was based on a medieval unit of weight . 
manganese is a silvery-gray metal that resembles iron . 
the most important manganese ore is pyrolusite  -lrb-  mno  -rrb-  . 
the manganese content of some iron ores used in greece led to speculations that steel produced from that ore contains additional manganese ,  making the spartan steel exceptionally hard . 
manganese also has three meta states . 
historically ,  manganese is named for pyrolusite and other black minerals from the region of magnesia in greece ,  which also gave its name to magnesium and the iron ore magnetite . 
manganese is a metal with important industrial metal alloy uses ,  particularly in stainless steels . 
the metal is occasionally used in coins; until 2000, the only united states coin to use manganese was the from 1942 to 1945.
for the production of ferromanganese ,  the manganese ore is mixed with iron ore and carbon ,  and then reduced either in a blast furnace or in an electric arc furnace . 
it was used for british military steel helmets and later by the u . s .  military . 
manganese compounds have been used as pigments and for the coloring of ceramics and glass . 
larger quantities of manganese are used to produce pink colored glass . 
manganese is a chemical element with symbol mn and atomic number 25.
the name `` magnesia '' eventually was then used to refer only to the white magnesia alba  -lrb-  magnesium oxide  -rrb-  ,  which provided the name magnesium for the free element when it was isolated much later . 
the +3 oxidation state is known in compounds like manganese -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  acetate ,  but these are quite powerful oxidizing agents and also prone to disproportionation in solution ,  forming manganese -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  and manganese -lrb-  iv  -rrb-  . 
molybdenum-98 is the most abundant isotope ,  comprising 24.14% of all molybdenum . 
from the perspective of commerce ,  the most important compounds are molybdenum disulfide  -lrb-    -rrb-  and molybdenum trioxide  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
as also noted below ,  the most common isotopic molybdenum application involves molybdenum-99, which is a fission product . 
of these naturally occurring isotopes ,  only molybdenum-100 is unstable . 
for the next century ,  molybdenum had no industrial use . 
molybdenum is a transition metal with an electronegativity of 2.16 on the pauling scale . 
molybdenum is a chemical element with symbol mo and atomic number 42.
the broad range of oxidation states of molybdenum is reflected in various molybdenum chlorides: molybdenum -lrb-  vi  -rrb-  chloride mocl is not known ,  although the molybdenum hexafluoride is well characterized . 
molybdenite—the principal ore from which molybdenum is now extracted—was previously known as molybdena . 
common distinguishing characteristics include crystal structure and habit ,  hardness ,  lustre ,  diaphaneity ,  colour ,  streak ,  tenacity ,  cleavage ,  fracture ,  parting ,  specific gravity ,  magnetism ,  taste or smell ,  radioactivity ,  and reaction to acid . 
minerals are classified by key chemical constituents; the two dominant systems are the dana classification and the strunz classification . 
marble is a rock resulting from metamorphism of sedimentary carbonate rocks ,  most commonly limestone or dolomite rock . 
the word `` marble '' derives from the ancient greek  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  from  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` crystalline rock ,  shining stone '' ,  perhaps from the verb  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` to flash ,  sparkle ,  gleam ''; r .  s .  p .  beekes has suggested that a `` pre-greek origin is probable . `` 
mark achbar edited a companion book of the same name . 
the entire book is available as a pdf document on the region 2 dvd of the film . 
the book made the national bestseller list in canada . 
when bavaria was reunited in 1506, munich became its capital . 
in 1240, munich was transferred to otto ii wittelsbach and in 1255, when the duchy of bavaria was split in two ,  munich became the ducal residence of upper bavaria . 
in 1175, munich received city status and fortification . 
munich is home to many universities ,  museums and theatres . 
traces of the navy v-12 unit appear in the `` bobashela ''  -lrb-  school yearbook  -rrb-  in 1944.
the current united methodist church continues to have affiliations with the college . 
the lake was previously known as `` lǫgrinn '' ,  which is old norse for `` the lake '' . 
the osprey nests in almost all bays of the lake . 
mälaren  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  historically referred to as lake malar in english ,  is the third-largest freshwater lake in sweden  -lrb-  after vänern and vättern  -rrb-  . 
the two largest islands in mälaren are selaön  -lrb-  91 km²  -rrb-  and svartsjölandet  -lrb-  79 km²  -rrb-  . 
macau is the gambling capital of the world . 
there is no death penalty or life imprisonment in macau ,  as they are not covered by the macau criminal code . 
in 1631 the chinese restricted portuguese commerce in china to the port of macau . 
the result was that a virtual japanese protectorate was created over macau . 
the macau native people were tanka boat people . 
according to the article 14, macau basic law ,  the central people's government shall be responsible for the defense of the macau special administrative region . 
the people's republic of china's obligation to run macau as a special administrative region ,  per the joint declaration on the question of macau ,  expires on 20 december 2049.
from a constitutional point of view ,  the macau legal system is characterized by the existence of a text with constitutional force in the macau sar ,  the basic law of the macau special administrative region ,  promulgated by the national people's congress in 1993.
the sino-portuguese joint declaration and macau basic law ,  macau's constitution ,  promulgated by china's national people's congress in 1993, specify that macau's social and economic system ,  lifestyle ,  rights ,  and freedoms are to remain unchanged for at least 50 years after the transfer of sovereignty to china in 1999.
and the government of the macau sar shall be responsible for the maintenance of public order in the region . 
macau did not develop as a major settlement until the portuguese arrived in the 16th century . 
the portuguese continued to pay an annual tribute up to 1863 in order to stay in macau . 
in 2015, macau was ranked as the fastest growing metropolitan area in the world by the brookings institution . 
macau was formerly a colony of the portuguese empire ,  after ming china leased the territory as a trading post in 1557.
macau is a special administrative region  -lrb-  sar  -rrb-  of the people's republic of china . 
two agreements were signed ,  one with macau's chinese community ,  and the other with mainland china . 
from 1848 to about the early 1870s ,  macau was the infamous transit port of a trade of coolies  -lrb-  or slave labourers  -rrb-  from southern china . 
in 1587, philip promoted macau from `` settlement or port of the name of god '' to `` city of the name of god ''  -lrb-  cidade do nome de deus de macau  -rrb-  . 
ilha verde  -lrb-    -rrb-  was incorporated into macau's territory in 1890, and ,  once a kilometre offshore ,  by 1923 it had been absorbed into peninsula macau through land reclamation . 
in 1558, leonel de sousa became the second portuguese governor of macau . 
macau was the last extant european territory in continental asia . 
a portuguese proposal to return the province to china was declined by china . 
macau's golden age coincided with the union of the spanish and portuguese crowns ,  between 1580 and 1640.
this success in macau encouraged leftists in hong kong to `` do the same '' ,  leading to riots by leftists in hong kong in 1967.
in 1962, the gambling industry of macau saw a major breakthrough when the government granted the `` sociedade de turismo e diversões de macau ''  -lrb-  stdm  -rrb-  ,  a syndicate jointly formed by hong kong and macau businessmen ,  the monopoly rights to all forms of gambling . 
after the portuguese were allowed to permanently settle in macau ,  both chinese and portuguese merchants flocked to macau ,  although the portuguese were never numerous  -lrb-  numbering just 900 in 1583 and 1200 out of 26,000 in 1640 -rrb- . 
however ,  macau did not develop as a major settlement until the portuguese arrived in the 16th century . 
the region comprises the macau peninsula and the islands of taipa and coloane . 
there is a long border between macau and mainland china and a forty-kilometer-long coastline . 
the creole macanese language  -lrb-  `` patuá '' or `` macaista chapado ''  -rrb-  is almost extinct . 
upon macau's reversion to china ,  the executive offices were moved from macau government house temporarily to the banco tai fung . 
politics of macau is a framework of political system ,  dominated by the people's republic of china . 
in accordance with article 31 of the constitution of the people's republic of china ,  macau has special administrative region status ,  which provides constitutional guarantees for implementing the policy of `` one country ,  two systems '' and the constitutional basis for enacting the basic law of the macau special administrative region . 
in 2014, the construction sectors in macau engaged 45,368 people . 
in the 1970s macau also saw a rapid development in its manufacturing sector . 
macau import partners are mainland china  -lrb-  30.4%  -rrb-  ,  hong kong  -lrb-  12%  -rrb-  ,  france  -lrb-  10.4%  -rrb-  ,  switzerland  -lrb-  7.5%  -rrb-  ,  italy  -lrb-  7.5%  -rrb-  ,  japan  -lrb-  6.2%  -rrb-  ,  and united states  -lrb-  6.1%  -rrb-  . 
the economy of macau has remained one of the most open in the world since its handover to china in 1999.
the stdm introduced western-style games and modernised the marine transport between macau and hong kong ,  bringing millions of gamblers from hong kong every year . 
the hong kong dollar is itself a reserve currency for the macanese pataca ,  which is pegged at the official rate of around 1 hong kong dollar to 1.03 macanese pataca . 
macau is currently rated as one of the world's top tourism destinations by the world tourism organization . 
hong kong radio stations also are popular in macau . 
macau will be the first region in the world to phase out networks using the gsm standard . 
macau also owns its very own television station called tdm . 
macau has eight chinese-language ,  three portuguese-language and two english-language dailies . 
the macau international airport ,  located at taipa ,  serves as the terminal for macau's international air traffic . 
transport in macau includes road ,  sea and air transport . 
a sea-crossing service has been launched by turbojet which travels between the hong kong international airport and macau . 
it is expected to act as a major hub for passenger transfer between the hong kong international airport and the macau international airport . 
air service in macau began in the 1930s with pan american airways operating seaplanes from macau to hong kong and lasted until 1941.
international flights are available from macau international airport . 
when completed it will serve passengers on macau peninsula ,  taipa island ,  the cotai reclamation area and macau international airport . 
buses and taxis are the major modes of public transport in macau . 
modes of transport out of macau include ferries to hong kong and mainland china from two ferry terminals ,  as well as helicopter service to hong kong . 
a pla major general heads the macao garrison . 
the remainder of the 1,200-strong macau garrison resides just across the chinese border in zhuhai . 
at the request of macau sar government ,  the pla macao garrison was deployed to assist in disaster relief and cleaning up in the aftermath of typhoon hato in august 2017, the first time for domestic affairs in macau history . 
macedonia  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a geographical and historical region of the balkan peninsula in southeast europe . 
prior to its expansion under alexander the great ,  the ancient kingdom of macedonia ,  to which the modern region owes its name ,  lay entirely within the central and western parts of the current greek province of macedonia and was consisted of 17 provinces/districts or eparchies  -lrb-  ancient greek: επαρχία  -rrb-  . 
on 8 september 1991, the republic of macedonia held a referendum where 95.26% voted for independence from yugoslavia ,  under the name of the `` republic of macedonia '' . 
to compromise ,  macedonia was admitted to the united nations under the provisional name of `` the former yugoslav republic of macedonia '' on 8 april 1993.
a new constitution of the republic of macedonia was adopted on 17 november 1991.
this further angered both greece and bulgaria ,  because of the possible territorial claims of the new states to the greek and bulgarian parts of the region of macedonia received after the balkan wars . 
these events also contributed to the bad state of yugoslav-greek relations in macedonia . 
in march 2004, the republic of macedonia submitted an application for membership of the eu . 
in 336 bc philip ii of macedon fully annexed upper macedonia ,  including its northern part and southern paeonia ,  which both now lie within the republic of macedonia . 
more than half of the un's member states have recognized the country as the republic of macedonia ,  including the united states of america while the rest use the temporary reference `` the former yugoslav republic of macedonia '' or have not established any diplomatic relations with macedonia . 
this article is about the history of the territory covered by the modern republic of macedonia . 
during the period of bulgarian national revival ,  many bulgarians from vardar macedonia supported the struggle for creation of bulgarian cultural educational and religious institutions ,  including bulgarian exarchate . 
the whole of macedonia was incorporated into the byzantine empire as `` theme of bulgaria '' and the bulgarian patriarchate was reduced in rank to an archbishopric . 
macedonia also has scenic mountains . 
dojran lake ,  located in southeastern macedonia ,  is the smallest of the three major lakes with an area of 42.7 km² . 
it issues from lakes prespa and ohrid . 
for that the area is called `` vardar macedonia '' after the river ,  to distinguish it from `` aegean macedonia ''  -lrb-  in greece  -rrb-  and `` pirin macedonia ''  -lrb-  in bulgaria  -rrb-  . 
macedonia is also rich with minerals . 
the ten highest mountains in macedonia are:
over 20% of the lake's water comes from nearby lake prespa ,  about to the southeast and at 150 m higher altitude than lake ohrid . 
it has a water area of 857 km ,  while its land area is 24,856 km . 
the vardar is the longest and most important river in the republic of macedonia . 
despite being a landlocked country ,  macedonia has three large lakes  -lrb-  ohrid ,  prespa ,  and dojran  -rrb-  ,  three artificial lakes and roughly 50 ponds . 
 -lrb-  see also: list of islands of the republic of macedonia  -rrb-  . 
in the republic of macedonia there are 1,100 large sources of water . 
the south border that splits macedonia from greece is 228 km long and it is the longest macedonian border . 
the catchment area of the lake has a population of around 170,000 people ,  with 131,000 people living directly at the lake shore  -lrb-  43,000 in albania and 88,000 in the republic of macedonia  -rrb-  . 
the country has some 766 km of boundaries ,  shared with kosovo  -lrb-  159 km or 99 mi  -rrb-  to the northwest ,  serbia  -lrb-  62 km or 39 mi  -rrb-  to the north ,  bulgaria  -lrb-  148 km  -rrb-  to the east ,  greece  -lrb-  246 km  -rrb-  to the south ,  and albania  -lrb-  151 km  -rrb-  to the west . 
macedonia is also experiencing serious problems in water management . 
lake ohrid  -lrb-  macedonian: охридско езеро ,  ohridsko ezero  -rrb-  straddles the mountainous border between the southwestern republic of macedonia and eastern albania . 
the river rises at vrutok ,  a few kilometers north of gostivar in the republic of macedonia . 
the vardar basin includes two-thirds of the territory of the republic of macedonia . 
since bulgaria's entry in the european union ,  and under pressure from fellow european union members ,  bulgaria imposed more stringent rules for the acquisition of a bulgarian passport . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated macedonia as `` hybrid regime '' in 2016.
the political system of the republic of macedonia consists of three branches: legislative ,  executive and judicial . 
macedonia has bilateral free trade agreements with ukraine ,  turkey ,  and the european free trade association  -lrb-  efta—switzerland ,  norway ,  iceland ,  and liechtenstein  -rrb-  . 
real gdp in the first half of 2011 increased by 5.2% . 
macedonia became the first country eligible for the imf’s precautionary credit line in january 2011.
macedonia remains committed to pursuing membership in the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  and nato . 
macedonia is vulnerable to economic developments in europe - due to strong banking and trade ties - and dependent on regional integration and progress toward eu membership for continued economic growth . 
previously ,  skopje was the only industrial center in macedonia ,  this expanded to several other cities during socialist yugoslavia . 
in october 2010, the world bank board of directors approved a new country partnership strategy  -lrb-  cps  -rrb-  with macedonia for the period 2011-2014.
there are no government restrictions on access to the internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or internet chat rooms without judicial oversight . 
television is macedonia's most popular news medium . 
telecommunications in the republic of macedonia include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
the following is a summary of the transport system of the republic of macedonia . 
the army of the republic of macedonia  -lrb-   арм  -rrb-  is a defense force consisting of an army and air force . 
all un member states currently recognise macedonia as a sovereign state ,  but they are still divided over what to call it . 
a number of countries recognise the country by its constitutional name – the republic of macedonia – rather than the un reference ,  notably four of the five permanent un security council members  -lrb-  the uk ,  the united states ,  russia ,  and the people's republic of china  -rrb-  and over 130 other un members . 
malawi  -lrb-   ,  or ; or maláwi  -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of malawi ,  is a landlocked country in southeast africa that was formerly known as nyasaland . 
malawi is among the world's least-developed countries . 
malawi has a low life expectancy and high infant mortality . 
opposition parties ,  including the malawi freedom movement of orton chirwa and the socialist league of malawi ,  were founded in exile . 
in 1961, banda's malawi congress party  -lrb-  mcp  -rrb-  gained a majority in the legislative council elections and banda became prime minister in 1963.
malawi held its most recent elections in may 2014, with challenger arthur peter mutharika defeating incumbent president joyce banda . 
the part of africa now known as malawi was settled by migrating bantu groups around the 10th century . 
in 1944, the nyasaland african congress  -lrb-  nac  -rrb-  was formed by the africans of nyasaland to promote local interests to the british government . 
international aid has been received from the imf and the world bank ,  and a national environmental plan supported by the world bank and usaid began in 1990.
the world bank had a $600 million commitment to madagascar through 21 active international development association projects . 
in 2003, the world bank released more than $100 million in poverty reduction aid in response to madagascar's efforts to stop corruption . 
since the mid-1980s ,  the donor community ,  led by the world bank and the usaid ,  has recognized that madagascar is one of the world's most unusual natural wonders . 
under the plan ,  the world bank ,  the international monetary fund and the african development fund would write off 100 percent of the money owed to them by 18 countries
then ,  in october 2004, the international monetary fund and the world bank said they would write off $2 billion in debt—almost half madagascar's total debt . 
the location of malawi was known to the arabs and swahili of the east coast through the yao . 
the history of malawi covers the area of present-day malawi . 
before 1940, education in malawi was controlled by the church . 
in mulanje they found the yao and mang'anja already settled . 
this was the period before livingstone came to malawi in 1859.
the wars between the yao and livingstone at magomero in 1861 do not appear clearly in the history textbooks of malawi . 
the failure to convert the yao muslims to christianity contributed to the appearing of the negative history of the yao people . 
while the free church of scotland in 1875 went to the yao muslims of chief mponda ,  the established church of scotland in 1876 also went to the yao muslim chief kapeni of blantyre . 
the second group to take power around this time were the yao . 
in 1859 livingstone recorded that he had discovered lake malawi . 
before the established church of scotland established a mission among the yao of kapeni 1876, another scottish group of the free church of scotland had secured land from the machinga yao chief mponda in mangochi . 
to learn more about some of the main archaeology sites in malawi go to the archaeology of malawi page . 
in 1875, chief mponda ,  a yao muslim ,  welcomed the christians to open a mission in cape maclear . 
in 1889 the catholic white fathers also aimed to convert the yao of mponda in mangochi . 
the name malawi is thought to derive from the word `` maravi '' . 
using their strong partnership with the yao ,  the arab traders set up several trading posts along the shore of lake malawi . 
work at the university of malawi  -lrb-  unima  -rrb-  for long time has been studies on how to demolish the yao history  -lrb-  see the creation of tribalism in southern africa  -lrb-  ed .   -rrb- 
on 15 june 1999, malawi held its second democratic elections . 
by ad 1500, the two divisions of the tribe had established a kingdom stretching from north of the present-day city of nkhotakota to the zambezi river in the south ,  and from lake malawi in the east ,  to the luangwa river in zambia in the west . 
the chewas constitute 90% of the population of the central region; the nyanja tribe predominates in the south and the tumbuka in the north . 
at present  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  malawi has as its highest court a supreme court of appeal with jurisdiction only in appeals from lower courts . 
malawi's judicial system ,  based on the english model ,  is made up of magisterial lower courts ,  a high court ,  and a supreme court of appeal . 
from 1970, the system of traditional courts was transformed . 
malawi is a multi-party state system  -lrb-  see list of political parties in malawi  -rrb-  . 
complaints have been made that the local courts ,  now popularly called traditional courts ,  are charging excessive court fees to settle disputes . 
the president of malawi and the current executive branch is supported by appointed members of a cabinet of malawi and government agencies in malawi . 
malawi's most important export crop is tobacco ,  which accounted for half  -lrb-  50%  -rrb-  of export revenue in 2012.
malawi has four pharmaceutical companies . 
the service sector accounts for 51.7% of malawi's national gdp . 
malawi has few exploitable mineral resources . 
malawi's dependence on tobacco is growing ,  with the product jumping from 53% to 70% of export revenues between 2007 and 2008.
lake malawi and lake chilwa provide most of the fish for the region . 
malawi's manufacturing industries are situated around the city of blantyre . 
postal services in malawi are regulated by the malawi communications regulatory authority  -lrb-  macra  -rrb-  . 
malawi posts corporation provides the national postal service in malawi and runs the post offices throughout the country . 
though it is landlocked ,  malawi also has of waterways on lake malawi and along the shire river . 
malawi railways is the national rail network in malawi ,  run by a government corporation until privatisation in 1999.
transportation in malawi is poorly developed . 
in 2006, a brazilian company  -lrb-  vale  -rrb-  announced plans to build a rail branch line to the moatize coal mine in western mozambique from the nacala corridor line to export coal via the port of nacala; the link would cross malawi . 
lake nyasa  -lrb-  lake malawi  -rrb-  and shire river  -lrb-  144 kilometres  -rrb-  provide the major waterways . 
malawi assumed the chair of the southern african development community  -lrb-  sadc  -rrb-  in 2001.
malawi became a full member of the commonwealth on independence from the united kingdom in 1964.
queen elizabeth ii ,  head of the commonwealth ,  was queen of malawi ,  represented by the governor-general of malawi ,  until the country became a commonwealth republic in 1966, when the then prime minister of malawi ,  hastings banda ,  declared himself the first president of malawi . 
the chinese population has shrunk proportionally from 1957, when it was about 40% of malaya ,  although in absolute numbers they have increased around threefold by 2017 in malaysia  -lrb-  2.4 million in 1957 to 6.6 million in 2017, the later figure include east malaysia  -rrb-  but have been dwarfed by the fivefold increase of malays  -lrb-  from around 3.1 million in 1957 to 15.5 million in 2017 -rrb- . 
sabah based ngos estimate that out of the 3 million population ,  2 million are illegal immigrants . 
malaysia is a federation of 13 states and 3 federal territories . 
he is also the head of the islamic faith in malaysia . 
the monarch of malaysia is the `` yang di-pertuan agong ''  -lrb-  ydpa  -rrb-  ,  commonly referred to as the supreme king of malaysia . 
rulers include the yang di-pertuan agong  -lrb-  the elected monarch  -rrb-  ,  and the heads of state of malaysia's component states . 
malaysia also has a special court to hear cases brought by or against all royalty . 
politics of malaysia takes place in the framework of a federal representative democratic constitutional monarchy ,  in which the yang di-pertuan agong is head of state and the prime minister of malaysia is the head of government . 
mahathir mohamad took office as the prime minister of malaysia under the new pakatan harapan government on 10 may 2018.
the constitution of malaysia is codified and the system of government is based on the westminster system . 
during the terms of dr .  mahathir mohamad as the fourth prime minister of malaysia ,  many constitutional amendments were made . 
legislative power is divided between federal and state legislatures . 
legislative power is divided between federal and state legislatures . 
executive power is vested in the cabinet led by the prime minister; the malaysian constitution stipulates that the prime minister must be a member of the lower house of parliament who ,  in the opinion of the yang di-pertuan agong ,  commands a majority in parliament . 
executive power is vested in the cabinet led by the prime minister; the malaysian constitution stipulates that the prime minister must be a member of the lower house of parliament who ,  in the opinion of the yang di-pertuan agong  -lrb-  ydpa  -rrb-  ,  commands a majority in parliament . 
the amendments also limited the powers of the judiciary to what parliament grants them . 
the km also became the catalyst for the establishment of similar organisations in the other states of the british malaya such as the penang malay association  -lrb-  founded in 1927 -rrb- and the perak malay association  -lrb-  founded in 1937 -rrb- . 
each state has a unicameral state legislative chamber  -lrb-    -rrb-  whose members are elected from single-member constituencies . 
the origin of race based politics can be traced back to independence of malaysia from united kingdom ,  who wanted all citizens of malaysia to be equal upon independence ,  instead of dominance by malays . 
the current prime minister of malaysia is from pakatan harapan  -lrb-  ph  -rrb-  who is the ex-umno leader ,  marking the first time the post is occupied by a non-umno party member . 
malaysia's predominant political party ,  the united malays national organization  -lrb-  umno  -rrb-  ,  held power in the coalition known as the barisan nasional  -lrb-  formerly the alliance  -rrb-  with other parties since malaya's independence in 1957 until 2018.
malaysia has 118 airports ,  of which 38 are paved . 
malaysia's largest trading partner is china . 
malaysia has a large construction industry of over rm102.2 billion  -lrb-  us$32 billion  -rrb-  . 
as a result ,  40% of oil fields in malaysia are developed . 
malaysia has a vibrant oil and gas industry . 
during the first half of 2000, us exports totalled us$5 billion ,  while us imports from malaysia reached us$11.6 billion . 
in 2013, malaysia's total external trade totalled us$424 billion ,  made up of us$230.7 billion of exports and us$192.9 billion of imports ,  making malaysia the world's 21st largest exporter and the world's 25th largest importer . 
the infrastructure of malaysia is one of the most developed in asia . 
in comparison ,  malaysia's main rival uae ,  has us$95 billion of assets . 
malaysia is also the world's largest islamic banking and financial centre . 
petronas is also the custodian of oil and gas reserves for malaysia . 
malaysia's third largest trading partner is japan ,  amounting rm137.45 billion  -lrb-  us$42 billion  -rrb-  of trade in 2014, an increase of 1.4% compared with to 2013.
malaysia is currently also the world's largest centre of islamic finance . 
the economy of malaysia is the 3rd largest in southeast asia ,  and is the 38th largest economy in the world . 
the railway network covers most of the 11 states in peninsular malaysia . 
malaysia is an important trading partner for the united states . 
in 2013, malaysia's total power generation capacity was over 29,728 megawatts . 
agriculture is now a minor sector of the malaysian economy ,  accounting for 7.1% of malaysia's gdp in 2014 and employing 11.1% of malaysia's labour force ,  contrasting with the 1960s when agriculture accounted for 37% of malaysia's gdp and employed 66.2% of the labour force . 
the fund invests in major companies in malaysia such as cimb in the banking sector ,  uem group in the construction sector ,  telekom malaysia and axiata in the communications industry ,  malaysia airports and malaysia airlines in the aerospace industry ,  as well as tenaga nasional in the energy sector
kuala lumpur international airport is the main and busiest airport of malaysia . 
malaysia is the global leader in terms of the sukuk  -lrb-  islamic bond  -rrb-  market ,  issuing rm62 billion  -lrb-  us$17.74 billion  -rrb-  worth of sukuk in 2014 - over 66.7% of the global total of us$26.6 billion malaysia also accounts for around two-thirds of the global outstanding sukuk market ,  controlling $178 billion of $290 billion ,  the global total . 
there are currently of railways in malaysia ,  are double tracked and electrified . 
malaysia's road network is one of the most comprehensive in asia and covers a total of  . 
total international tourist receipts increased by 3.9% to rm60.6 billion  -lrb-  us$19 billion  -rrb-  in 2014.
though indonesia produces more palm oil ,  malaysia is the world's largest exporter of palm oil having exported 18 million tonnes of palm oil products in 2011.
port klang is malaysia's busiest port ,  and the 13th busiest port in the world in 2013, handling over 10.3 million teus . 
malaysia's second largest trading partner is singapore and malaysia is singapore's biggest trading partner ,  with bilateral trade totalling roughly $91 billion us dollars in 2012, accounting for over a fifth of total trade within asean . 
malaysia exports the second largest volume and value of palm oil products globally after indonesia . 
despite its minor contribution to malaysia's gdp ,  malaysia has a significant foothold in the world's agricultural sector ,  being the world's second largest producer of palm oil in 2012 producing 18.79 million tonnes of crude palm oil on roughly of land . 
bank negara malaysia for the time being ,  uses interest rate targeting . 
the malaysian government targets to hit rm 9.6 billion  -lrb-  us$3.2 billion  -rrb-  in revenue from 1.9 million foreign patients by 2020.
malaysia consistently achieved more than 7% gdp growth along with low inflation in the 1980s and the 1990s . 
the average household income of malaysia increased by 18% to rm5,900 a month ,  compared to rm5,000 in 2012.
by 2014, malaysia was the world's third largest manufacturer of photovoltaics equipment ,  behind china and the european union . 
radio broadcast stations: am 56, fm 31  -lrb-  plus 13 repeater stations  -rrb-  ,  shortwave 5  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- <br>amateur radio stations: 2,000  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- <br>radios: 9.1 million  -lrb-  1997 -rrb-
it issues licenses under the communications and multimedia act 1998, the postal services act 1991 and the digital signature act 1997.
malaysia has 62 airports ,  of which 38 are paved . 
malaysia has six international airports . 
malaysian government has yet to decide whether the marines will fall under malaysian army or royal malaysian navy . 
malaysian defence requirements are assigned to the malaysian armed forces  -lrb-  angkatan tentera malaysia – atm  -rrb-  . 
the malaysian armed forces  -lrb-  maf ,  ; jawi:اڠكتن تنترا مليسيا  -rrb-  ,  the military of malaysia ,  consists of three branches ,  namely the malaysian army ,  royal malaysian air force and the royal malaysian navy . since june 20.
the armed forces has three branches , the malaysian army  -lrb-  tentera darat malaysia – td  -rrb-  ,  royal malaysian air force  -lrb-  tentera udara diraja malaysia – tudm  -rrb-  and the royal malaysian navy  -lrb-  tentera laut diraja malaysia – tldm  -rrb-  . malaysia does not have conscription ,  and the required minimum age for voluntary military service is 18.
there is also a new development unveiled during the celebration of the malaysia's 50th independence . 
due to this ,  malaysia began to increase its border security . 
in early 2004, the ministry of defence also initiated a compulsory national service program for 18 years old malaysians . 
18 malaysian armed forces personnel have been killed during un peacekeeping operations . 
2018, gen . tan sri zulkifli zainal abidin is the chief of malaysian armed forces . 
malaysia is also a member of g-15 and g-77 economic groupings . 
on 31 october 2011 malaysia became a party to the antarctic treaty . 
malaysia has been a member of the commonwealth since independence in 1957, when it entered into the anglo-malayan defence agreement  -lrb-  amda  -rrb-  with the united kingdom whereby britain guaranteed the defence of malaya  -lrb-  and later malaysia  -rrb-  . 
consistent with this policy malaysia established diplomatic relations with the people's republic of china in 1974.
a former british colony ,  it is also a member of the commonwealth . 
malaysia has asserted sovereignty over the spratly islands together with china ,  the philippines ,  taiwan ,  vietnam ,  and brunei . 
the dutch referred to the islands as the '  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  while the british anglicised the local name for the islands first to the `` maldive islands '' and later to `` maldives '' . 
the first maldivians did not leave any archaeological artifacts . 
the islands are administered by an elected island council . 
after the long buddhist period of maldivian history ,  muslim traders introduced islam . 
this island was evacuated in 1968 due to heavy erosion of the island . 
fisheries were also the second-largest foreign exchange earner after tourism . 
the status of the islands was akin to other british protectorates in the indian ocean region ,  including zanzibar and the trucial states . 
the maldivian economy is to a large degree based on tourism . 
the name `` maldives '' may derive from the tamil words '  -lrb-  garland / evening  -rrb-  and '  -lrb-  island  -rrb-  ,  or  -lrb-  ' ,  `` necklace islands ''  -rrb-  in sinhala . 
the maldivian language ,  the first maldive scripts ,  the architecture ,  the ruling institutions ,  the customs and manners of the maldivians originated at the time when the maldives were a buddhist kingdom . 
the formal title of the sultan up to 1965 was ,  `` sultan of land and sea ,  lord of the twelve-thousand islands and sultan of the maldives '' which came with the style `` highness '' . 
the word '  -lrb-  archaic ' ,  related to tamil  ,  '  -rrb-  means `` island '' ,  and `` dhives ''  -lrb-  `` dhivehin ''  -rrb-  means `` islanders ''  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  maldivians  -rrb-  . 
some social stratification exists on the islands . 
even when ibn battuta visited the islands the governor of the island at that time was abd aziz al mogadishawi ,  a somali
since most atolls have very long geographical names it is also used whenever the long name is inconvenient ,  for example in the atoll website names . 
local and foreign trading ships used to load these products in sri lanka and transport them to other harbours in the indian ocean . 
the maldives and comoros are also both members of the organisation of islamic cooperation . 
in the british period the sultan's powers were taken over by the chief minister ,  much to the chagrin of the british governor-general who continued to deal with the ineffectual sultan . 
so that in that language the word signifies `` four islands , ``  while we ,  corrupting the name ,  call it maldiva . `` 
none of these names is mentioned in any literature ,  but classical sanskrit texts dating back to the vedic period mention the `` hundred thousand islands ''  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  a generic name which would include not only the maldives ,  but also the laccadives ,  aminidivi islands ,  minicoy ,  and the chagos island groups . 
most visitors arrive at malé international airport ,  on hulhulé island ,  adjacent to the capital malé . 
tourism began to be developed on the archipelago by the beginning of the 1970s . 
the british expelled the dutch from ceylon in 1796 and included maldives as a british protected area . 
2013 estimates show maldivians enjoy the highest gdp  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  per capita $11,900  -lrb-  2013 est  -rrb-  among south asian countries . 
maldivian coir was exported to sindh ,  china ,  yemen ,  and the persian gulf . 
ibn batuta states the maldivian king was converted by abu al barakat al berber  -lrb-  blessed father of somalia  -rrb-  . 
islam was introduced to the maldivian archipelago in the 12th century which was consolidated as a sultanate ,  developing strong commercial and cultural ties with asia and africa . 
concerns over sea level rise have also been expressed by nasheed's predecessor and successor ,  maumoon abdul gayoom . 
following the islamic concept that before islam there was the time of jahiliya  -lrb-  ignorance  -rrb-  ,  in the history books used by maldivians the introduction of islam at the end of the 12th century is considered the cornerstone of the country's history . 
in the past there was also a small tamil population known as the giraavaru people . 
compared to the other areas of south asia ,  the conversion of the maldives to islam happened relatively late . 
the first tourist resorts were opened in 1972 with bandos island resort and kurumba village  -lrb-  the current name is kurumba maldives  -rrb-  ,  which transformed the maldives economy . 
some medieval travellers such as ibn battuta called the islands '  -lrb-    -rrb-  from the arabic word '  -lrb-  `` palace ''  -rrb-  ,  which must be how the berber traveller interpreted the local name ,  having been through muslim north india ,  where perso-arabic words were introduced to the local vocabulary . 
the annual rainfall averages in the north and in the south . 
along with sri lanka ,  it is one of only two south asian countries rated `` high '' on the human development index ,  with its per capita income one of the highest among saarc nations . 
as of april 2008, more than 70,000 foreign employees ,  along with 33,000 illegal immigrants ,  comprised more than one third of the maldivian population .  . 
on 26 december 2004, following the 2004 indian ocean earthquake ,  the maldives were devastated by a tsunami . 
the largest ethnic group are dhivehis ,  i . e . 
these first maldivians did not leave any archaeological remains . 
some were later pardoned . 
the maldivian language ,  the first maldive scripts ,  the architecture ,  the ruling institutions ,  the customs and manners of the maldivians originated at the time when the maldives were a buddhist kingdom . 
during the british era ,  which lasted until 1965, maldives continued to be ruled under a succession of sultans . 
the british expelled the dutch from ceylon in 1796 and included maldives as a protected state . 
in a national referendum in march 1968, maldivians abolished the sultanate and established a republic . 
the status of the islands was akin to other british protectorates in the indian ocean region ,  including zanzibar and the trucial states . 
the maldives gained total independence from the british on 26 july 1965.
nasheed appealed also to indian prime minister narendra modi . 
after this ,  the sultanate continued for another three years under muhammad fareed didi ,  who declared himself king rather than sultan . 
after the 16th century ,  when colonial powers took over much of the trade in the indian ocean ,  first the portuguese ,  then the dutch ,  and the french occasionally meddled in local politics . 
on 11 december 1957, the prime minister was forced to resign and velaanagey ibrahim nasir was elected as the new prime minister the following day . 
he appointed ahmed zaki as the new prime minister . 
in line with the broader british policy of decolonisation on 26 july 1965 an agreement was signed on behalf of his majesty the sultan by ibrahim nasir rannabandeyri kilegefan ,  prime minister ,  and on behalf of her majesty the queen by sir michael walker ,  british ambassador designate to the maldive islands ,  which ended the british responsibility for the defence and external affairs of the maldives . 
after the death of sultan majeed didi and his son ,  the members of the parliament elected muhammad amin didi as the next person in line to succeed the sultan . 
however ,  malé latin continues to be widely used . 
however ,  this interference ended when the maldives became a british protectorate in the 19th century and the maldivian monarchs were granted a good measure of self-governance . 
the formal title of the sultan up to 1965 was ,  `` sultan of land and sea ,  lord of the twelve-thousand islands and sultan of the maldives '' which came with the style `` highness '' . 
before embracing buddhism as their way of life ,  maldivians had practised an ancient form of hinduism ,  ritualistic traditions known as `` śrauta '' ,  in the form of venerating the `` surya ''  -lrb-  the ancient ruling caste were of `` aadheetta '' or `` suryavanshi '' origins  -rrb-  . 
despite coup attempts ,  gayoom served three more presidential terms . 
abdulla yameen ,  half-brother of the former president gayoom ,  assumed the presidency . 
following the islamic concept that before islam there was the time of jahiliya  -lrb-  ignorance  -rrb-  ,  in the history books used by maldivians the introduction of islam at the end of the 12th century is considered the cornerstone of the country's history . 
in 1957, however ,  the new prime minister ,  ibrahim nasir ,  called for a review of the agreement in the interest of shortening the lease and increasing the annual payment ,  and announced a new tax on boats . 
he studied the ancient mounds ,  called `` havitta '' or `` ustubu ''  -lrb-  these names are derived from chaitiya and stupa  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  by the maldivians ,  which are found on many of the atolls . 
the maldives remained a buddhist kingdom for another five hundred years  -lrb-  perhaps the south-westernmost buddhist country  -rrb-  until the conversion to islam . 
in 1973 nasir was elected to a second term under the constitution as amended in 1972, which extended the presidential term to five years and which also provided for the election of the prime minister by the majlis . 
nasir was criticized for his authoritarian methods against opponents and for his iron-fisted methods in handling an insurrection by the addu islanders who formed a short-lived breakaway government – united suvadives republic – with closer ties to the british . 
the maldives had one of the highest birth rates in the world . 
the newly elected people's majlis held its first session on 28 may and elected mr .  abdulla shahid  -lrb-  drp  -rrb-  as its new speaker . 
island councilors are elected by the people of each island ,  and the atoll councilors are in turn elected by the island councilors . 
under the new constitution ,  the function of local government is devolved to an atoll council to administer each atoll and an island council to administer each inhabited island . 
an attorney general is part of the cabinet and also needs the approval of parliament before taking office . 
in 2004 it was $444 million . 
fishing is the second leading sector in the maldives . 
tourism is the largest industry in the maldives ,  accounting for 28% of gdp and more than 60% of the maldives' foreign exchange receipts . 
mean wages were $4.15 per man-hour in 2009.
in 1956, a bilateral agreement gave united kingdom access to gan in addu atoll in the far south ,  to establish an air facility in gan in return for british aid . 
in 2005, as a result of the tsunami ,  the gdp contracted by about 5.5%; however ,  the economy rebounded in 2006 with a 13% increase . 
the name `` mali '' is taken from the name of the mali empire . 
in 1960, the population of mali was reported to be about 4.1 million . 
mali's key industry is agriculture . 
slavery in mali has persisted for centuries . 
in old mali ,  there is one village called malika which means `` new mali . `` 
the coup is remembered as mali's march revolution of 1991.
energie du mali is an electric company that provides electricity to mali citizens . 
in 2002, 700 gwh of hydroelectric power were produced in mali . 
present-day mali was once part of three west african empires that controlled trans-saharan trade: the ghana empire ,  the mali empire  -lrb-  for which mali is named  -rrb-  ,  and the songhai empire . 
in mali ,  there is a railway that connects to bordering countries . 
an estimated 800,000 people in mali are descended from slaves . 
mali  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of mali  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked country in west africa ,  a region geologically identified with the west african craton . 
gold ,  livestock and agriculture amount to 80% of mali's exports . 
mali fell under the control of france during the late 19th century . 
in  ,  mali's population was an estimated /1e6 round 1 million . 
the mali federation gained independence from france on 20 june 1960.
though mali's literature is less famous than its music ,  mali has always been one of africa's liveliest intellectual centers . 
personal names reflect mali's complex regional identities . 
the most popular sport in mali is association football  -lrb-  soccer  -rrb-  ,  which became more prominent after mali hosted the 2002 african cup of nations . 
mali's population encompasses a number of sub-saharan ethnic groups . 
mali is a landlocked country in west africa ,  located southwest of algeria . 
an estimated 85–91 percent of mali's girls and women have had female genital mutilation  -lrb-  2006 and 2001 data  -rrb-  . 
the songhai had long been a major power in west africa subject to the mali empire's rule . 
electricity and water are maintained by the energie du mali ,  or edm ,  and textiles are generated by industry textile du mali ,  or itema . 
mali lies in the torrid zone and is among the hottest countries in the world . 
mali was active in regional organizations such as the african union until its suspension over the 2012 malian coup d'état . 
medical facilities in mali are very limited ,  and medicines are in short supply . 
about 80 percent of mali's population can communicate in bambara ,  which serves as an important lingua franca . 
mali is also a member of the organization for the harmonization of business law in africa  -lrb-  ohada  -rrb-  . 
guinean writer djibril niane suggests in `` sundiata: an epic of old mali ''  -lrb-  1965 -rrb- that it is not impossible that mali was the name given to one of the capitals of the emperors . 
estimates of literacy rates in mali range from 27–30 to 46.4 percent ,  with literacy rates significantly lower among women than men . 
the most notable in what is now mali were:
mali is located in africa . 
the borders of mali are those of french sudan ,  drawn in 1891.
mali fell under french colonial rule in 1892.
the mali empire became islamic in the early 14th century ,  under musa i of mali . 
the mali empire began to weaken by the mid 14th century . 
the mali empire began to weaken in the 15th century ,  but it remained dominant for much of the 15th . 
the history of the territory of modern mali may be divided into:
by 1905, most of the area was under firm french control . 
mali's history is dominated by its role in trans-saharan trade ,  connecting west africa and the maghreb . 
presidential elections were held in mali on 28 july 2013, with a second round run-off held on 11 august . 
the bambara empire existed as a centralized state from 1712 to 1861, was based at ségou and also timbuktu  -lrb-  also seen as segu  -rrb-  ,  and ruled parts of central and southern mali . 
the senufo kenedugu kingdom originated in the 17th century in the area around what is now the border of mali and burkina faso . 
a split in the coulibaly dynasty in ségou led to the establishment of a second bambara state ,  the kingdom of kaarta ,  in what is now western mali ,  in 1753.
this empire ,  founded by el hadj umar tall of the toucouleur peoples ,  beginning in 1864, ruled eventually most of what is now mali until the french conquest of the region in 1890.
the death rate in 2007 was 16.5 deaths per 1,000.
the birth rate in 2007 was 49.6 births per 1,000, and the total fertility rate was 7.4 children per woman . 
until the military coup of march 22, 2012 and a second military coup in december 2012 the politics of mali took place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of mali is head of state with a presidentially appointed prime minister as the head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
