nichiren arrived in kamakura in 1254.
upon being pardoned in 1263 nichiren returned to kamakura . 
nichiren appropriated and expanded on these ideas . 
while on sado island ,  nichiren inscribed the first mandala `` gohonzon ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
at the end of the 1271-1272 winter nichiren's conditions had improved . 
nichiren considered this as his second remonstration to the government . 
more than half of the extant letters of nichiren were written during his years at minobu . 
nichiren's izu exile lasted two years . 
in a 1271 letter nichiren outlined his rationale for deeply studying buddhism:
at this point nichiren was transferred to much better accommodations . 
the first extensive biography of nichiren did not appear until more than 200 years after his death . 
his ideas were vociferously attacked by many including nichiren . 
regardless of account ,  nichiren's life was spared and he was exiled to sado island . 
their households provided nichiren with economic support and became the core of nichiren communities in several locations in the kanto region of japan . 
nichiren set a precedent for buddhist social activism centuries before its emergence in other buddhist schools . 
nichiren was pardoned on february 14, 1274 and returned to kamakura one month later on march 26.
more than a hundred mandala gohonzon preserved today are attributed to nichiren's own hand . 
this is nichiren's vision of `` kosen-rufu '' ,  a time when the teachings of the lotus sutra would be widely spread throughout the world . 
nichiren constructed a triad relationship between faith ,  practice ,  and study . 
nichiren advanced these concepts by declaring that they were actualizable rather than theoretical . 
nichiren ,  however ,  elevated countering slander of the dharma into a pillar of buddhist practice . 
nichiren was a product of his times and some of his teachings were drawn from existing schools of thought or from emerging ideas in kamakura buddhism . 
nichiren and his disciples completed the myō-hōkke-in kuon-ji temple  -lrb-  久遠寺  -rrb-  in 1281.
nichiren submitted his treatise on 16 july 1260 but it drew no official response . 
despite severe weather and deprivation ,  nichiren remained in minobu for the rest of his career . 
nichiren envisioned japan as the country where the true teaching of buddhism would be revived and the starting point for its worldwide spread . 
his disciples left ikegami with nichiren's ashes on october 21, reaching minobu on october 25.
nichiren sent 11 letters to influential leaders reminding them about his predictions in the `` rissho ankoku ron '' . 
nichiren buddhism is a branch of mahayana buddhism based on the teachings of the 13th-century japanese buddhist priest nichiren  -lrb-  1222–1282 -rrb- and is one of the kamakura buddhism schools . 
the largest sects are the soka gakkai/ -lrb-  soka gakkai international  -rrb-  ,  nichiren shu ,  and nichiren shoshu . 
located in the city of newport news ,  their facilities span more than  ,  strategically positioned in one of the great harbors of the east coast . 
in numerical analysis ,  newton's method  -lrb-  also known as the newton–raphson method  -rrb-  ,  named after isaac newton and joseph raphson ,  is a method for finding successively better approximations to the roots  -lrb-  or zeroes  -rrb-  of a real-valued function . 
the new order catalogue remains with warner music . 
hook's current band peter hook and the light is touring joy division and new order albums in their entirety . 
new order visited new york city again in 1981, where the band were introduced to post-disco ,  freestyle and electro . 
on 22 september 2015, the band released a new album ,  `` music complete '' ,  their first without peter hook . 
the band released a new album on 27 march 2005, titled `` waiting for the sirens' call '' ,  their first with new member phil cunningham . 
this has often been cited as a defining characteristic of the new order sound . 
however ,  sumner revealed in 2009 that he no longer wished to make music as new order . 
in 1990 gilbert and morris formed their own band ,  the other two . 
new order are an english rock band formed in 1980 by vocalist and guitarist bernard sumner ,  bassist peter hook ,  and drummer stephen morris . 
in 2002, `` q '' featured new order on their list of the `` 50 bands to see before you die '' ,  although this was as part of a sub-list of `` 5 bands that could go either way '' . 
bassist peter hook contributed to new order's sound by developing an idiosyncratic bass guitar technique . 
following the release and promotion of `` republic '' ,  the band put new order on hold while focusing on side projects; with the other two's debut album released in 1993.
in december 2011, new order released `` live at the london troxy '' ,  a live album from their performance of 10 december 2011 at the troxy in london . 
new order's music mixes rock with dance music ,  as can be seen on signature tracks such as 1982's `` temptation '' ,  1983's `` blue monday '' and 1987's `` true faith '' . 
the case was settled out of court and the song has since been credited to both new order and john denver . 
the initial release as new order was the single `` ceremony '' ,  backed with `` in a lonely place '' . 
it was again produced by stephen hague ,  who the band chose to produce their next album . 
almost all new order recordings bear minimalist packaging ,  art directed by peter saville . 
tartaglia is perhaps best known today for his conflicts with gerolamo cardano . 
mathematical historians now credit both cardano and tartaglia with the formula to solve cubic equations ,  referring to it as the `` cardano–tartaglia formula '' . 
tartaglia is also known for having given an expression  -lrb-  tartaglia's formula  -rrb-  for the volume of a tetrahedron  -lrb-  including any irregular tetrahedra  -rrb-  as the cayley–menger determinant of the distance values measured pairwise between its four corners:
the `` mūlamadhyamakakārikā '' is nāgārjuna's best-known work . 
in addition to works mentioned above ,  several others are attributed to nāgārjuna . 
some sources claim that in his later years ,  nāgārjuna lived on the mountain of śrīparvata near the city that would later be called nāgārjunakoṇḍa  -lrb-  `` hill of nāgārjuna ''  -rrb-  . 
nāgārjuna  -lrb-  c .  150 – c .  250 ce  -rrb-  is widely considered one of the most important buddhist philosophers . 
on the basis of this association ,  nāgārjuna is conventionally placed at around 150–250 ce . 
this is known as a nuclear chain reaction . 
as of early 2019, the iaea reports there are 454 nuclear power reactors and 226 nuclear research reactors in operation around the world . 
there is a debate about nuclear power . 
a nuclear reactor is only part of the fuel life-cycle for nuclear power . 
the most important waste stream from nuclear power reactors is spent nuclear fuel . 
nuclear power is the use of nuclear reactions that release nuclear energy to generate heat ,  which most frequently is then used in steam turbines to produce electricity in a nuclear power plant . 
on the other hand ,  power reactors can also reduce nuclear weapons arsenals when military grade nuclear materials are reprocessed to be used as fuel in nuclear power plants . 
regional differences in the use of nuclear power are large . 
the nuclear power debate concerns the controversy which has surrounded the deployment and use of nuclear fission reactors to generate electricity from nuclear fuel for civilian purposes . 
as of 2018, there are over 150 nuclear reactors planned including 50 under construction . 
the u . s .  army ,  nuclear power program ,  formally commenced in 1954.
nuclear power's share of global electricity production has fallen from 16.5% in 1997 to about 10% in 2017, in large part because the economics of nuclear power have become more difficult . 
a fundamental goal for global security is to minimize the nuclear proliferation risks associated with the expansion of nuclear power . 
disposal of nuclear waste is often considered the most politically divisive aspect in the lifecycle of a nuclear power facility . 
this article mostly deals with nuclear fission power for electricity generation . 
in the united states ,  spent nuclear fuel is currently not reprocessed . 
a nuclear plant also needs to be disassembled and removed and much of the disassembled nuclear plant needs to be stored as low level nuclear waste for a few decades . 
some serious nuclear and radiation accidents have occurred . 
in years past ,  they also argued that when all the energy-intensive stages of the nuclear fuel chain are considered ,  from uranium mining to nuclear decommissioning ,  nuclear power is neither a low-carbon nor an economical electricity source . 
these three characteristics have to be taken into account when designing nuclear reactors . 
a total of 63 nuclear units were canceled in the united states between 1975 and 1980.
nuclear reactors have three unique characteristics that affect their safety ,  as compared to other power plants . 
the fukushima daiichi nuclear accident sparked controversy about the importance of the accident and its effect on nuclear's future . 
in addition ,  there were approximately 140 naval vessels using nuclear propulsion in operation ,  powered by about 180 reactors . 
opponents believe that nuclear power poses many threats to people and the environment such as the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation and terrorism . 
nuclear fission power stations ,  excluding the contribution from naval nuclear fission reactors ,  provided 11% of the world's electricity in 2012, somewhat less than that generated by hydro-electric stations at 16% . 
research into nuclear reactors that can last 100 years ,  known as centurion reactors ,  is being conducted . 
as of april 2012 there were thirty one countries that have civil nuclear power plants ,  of which nine have nuclear weapons ,  with the vast majority of these nuclear weapons states having first produced weapons ,  before commercial fission electricity stations . 
on june 27, 1954, the ussr's obninsk nuclear power plant ,  based on what would become the prototype of the rbmk reactor design ,  became the world's first nuclear power plant to generate electricity for a power grid ,  producing around 5 megawatts of electric power . 
in 2017, siemens set the `` milestone '' of supplying the first additive manufacturing part to a nuclear power station ,  at the krško nuclear power plant in slovenia ,  which it regards as an `` industry breakthrough '' . 
just as many conventional thermal power stations generate electricity by harnessing the thermal energy released from burning fossil fuels ,  nuclear power plants convert the energy released from the nucleus of an atom via nuclear fission that takes place in a nuclear reactor . 
the concern over iran's nuclear activities is a case in point . 
many technologies and materials associated with the creation of a nuclear power program have a dual-use capability ,  in that they can be used to make nuclear weapons if a country chooses to do so . 
some commentators have argued that this strengthens the case for nuclear power to be considered a renewable energy
by 2015, the iaea's outlook for nuclear energy had become more promising . 
the future of nuclear power varies greatly between countries ,  depending on government policies . 
globally during the 1980s one new nuclear reactor started up every 17 days on average . 
nuclear energy policy differs among european union countries ,  and some ,  such as austria ,  estonia ,  ireland and italy ,  have no active nuclear power stations . 
by the close of the 1970s it became clear that nuclear power would not grow nearly as dramatically as once believed . 
internationally the price of nuclear plants rose 15% annually in 1970–1990.
the fukushima daiichi nuclear accident prompted a re-examination of nuclear safety and nuclear energy policy in many countries and raised questions among some commentators over the future of the renaissance . 
in may 1979, an estimated 70,000 people ,  including then governor of california jerry brown ,  attended a march against nuclear power in washington ,  d . c .  anti-nuclear power groups emerged in every country that had a nuclear power programme . 
investment banks were also critical of nuclear soon after the accident . 
however ,  nuclear power could not compete with cheap oil and gas ,  particularly after public opposition and regulatory hurdles made new nuclear prohibitively expensive . 
terrorists could target nuclear power plants in an attempt to release radioactive contamination into the community . 
this resulted in the most serious nuclear accident since the chernobyl disaster . 
in august 2015, following 4 years of near zero fission-electricity generation ,  japan began restarting its nuclear reactors ,  after safety upgrades were completed ,  beginning with sendai nuclear power plant . 
light water reactors make relatively inefficient use of nuclear fuel ,  mostly fissioning only the very rare uranium-235 isotope . 
following the 2011 fukushima nuclear disaster ,  it has been estimated that if japan had never adopted nuclear power ,  accidents and pollution from coal or gas plants would have caused more lost years of life . 
the first organization to develop nuclear power was the u . s .  navy ,  with the s1w reactor for the purpose of propelling submarines and aircraft carriers . 
china ,  switzerland ,  israel ,  malaysia ,  thailand ,  united kingdom ,  and the philippines reviewed their nuclear power programs . 
opponents ,  such as greenpeace and nirs ,  contend that nuclear power poses many threats to people and the environment . 
bi norwegian business school  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the largest business school in norway and the second largest in all of europe . 
bi norwegian business school was founded in 1943 by finn øien as `` bedriftøkonomisk institutt ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  hence the abbreviation `` bi '' . 
the school has two student organizations ,  one for the main campus in oslo and one for the other campuses . 
nuclear proliferation is the spread of nuclear weapons ,  fissionable material ,  and weapons-applicable nuclear technology and information to nations not recognized as `` nuclear weapon states '' by the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons  -lrb-  npt  -rrb-  ,  commonly known as the non-proliferation treaty or npt . 
in 2006, north korea conducted its first nuclear test . 
at present ,  189 countries are states parties to the `` treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons '' ,  more commonly known as the nuclear non-proliferation treaty or npt . 
many un and us agencies warn that building more nuclear reactors unavoidably increases nuclear proliferation risks . 
one critique of the npt is that the treaty is discriminatory in the sense that only those countries that tested nuclear weapons before 1968 are recognized as nuclear weapon states while all other states are treated as non-nuclear-weapon states who can only join the treaty if they forswear nuclear weapons . 
notable non-signatories to the npt are israel ,  pakistan ,  and india  -lrb-  the latter two have since tested nuclear weapons ,  while israel is considered by most to be an unacknowledged nuclear weapons state  -rrb-  . 
four countries besides the five recognized nuclear weapons states have acquired ,  or are presumed to have acquired ,  nuclear weapons: india ,  pakistan ,  north korea ,  and israel . 
the crisis over iran’s nuclear activities is a case in point . 
proliferation has been opposed by many nations with and without nuclear weapons ,  as governments fear that more countries with nuclear weapons will increase the possibility of nuclear warfare  -lrb-  up to and including the so-called `` countervalue '' targeting of civilians with nuclear weapons  -rrb-  ,  de-stabilize international or regional relations ,  or infringe upon the national sovereignty of states . 
traditional safeguards are arrangements to account for and control the use of nuclear materials . 
efforts to conclude an international agreement to limit the spread of nuclear weapons did not begin until the early 1960s ,  after four nations  -lrb-  the united states ,  the soviet union ,  the united kingdom and france  -rrb-  had acquired nuclear weapons  -lrb-  see list of states with nuclear weapons for more information  -rrb-  . 
in electronic design ,  a netlist is a description of the connectivity of an electronic circuit . 
spice is an example of instance-based netlists . 
backannotation is data that could be added to a hierarchical netlist . 
instance based netlists usually provide a list of the instances used in a design . 
in a `` flat '' design ,  only primitives are instanced . 
edif is probably the most famous of the net-based netlists . 
another concept often used in netlists is that of inheritance . 
nuclear disarmament is the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons . 
proponents of nuclear disarmament say that it would lessen the probability of nuclear war occurring ,  especially accidentally . 
subsequently ,  the world’s nuclear weapons stockpiles grew . 
nuclear disarmament groups include the campaign for nuclear disarmament ,  peace action ,  greenpeace ,  soka gakkai international ,  international physicians for the prevention of nuclear war ,  mayors for peace ,  global zero ,  the international campaign to abolish nuclear weapons ,  and the nuclear age peace foundation . 
critics of nuclear disarmament say that it would undermine deterrence . 
in 2008, 2009, and 2010, there have been protests about ,  and campaigns against ,  several new nuclear reactor proposals in the united states . 
in recent years ,  some u . s .  elder statesmen have also advocated nuclear disarmament . 
in 1950, the wpc launched its stockholm appeal calling for the absolute prohibition of nuclear weapons . 
the term denuclearization is also used to describe the process leading to complete nuclear disarmament . 
when the extreme danger intrinsic to nuclear war and the possession of nuclear weapons became apparent to all sides during the cold war ,  a series of disarmament and nonproliferation treaties were agreed upon between the united states ,  the soviet union ,  and several other states throughout the world . 
during his presidential campaign ,  u . s .  president-elect barack obama pledged to `` set a goal of a world without nuclear weapons ,  and pursue it . `` 
on june 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in new york city's central park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the cold war arms race . 
if  -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  is a net in the topological space `` x '' ,  and `` x '' is an element of `` x '' ,  we say that the net converges towards `` x or has limit `` x and write if and only if intuitively ,  this means that the values `` x '' come and stay as close as we want to `` x '' for large enough α . 
if `` a '' is a directed set ,  we often write a net from `` a '' to `` x '' in the form  -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  ,  which expresses the fact that the element α in `` a '' is mapped to the element `` x '' in `` x '' . 
if  -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  is a net from a directed set `` a '' into `` x '' ,  and if `` y '' is a subset of `` x '' ,  then we say that  -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  is eventually in `` y  -lrb-  or residually in `` y  -rrb-  if there exists an α in `` a '' so that for every β in `` a '' with β ≥ α ,  the point `` x '' lies in `` y '' . 
a point `` x '' in `` x '' is said to be an accumulation point or cluster point of a net if  -lrb-  and only if  -rrb-  for every neighborhood `` u '' of `` x '' ,  the net is frequently in `` u '' . 
a function `` f: a → x '' is said to be a `` net '' . 
as nuclear devices need not be detonated to ignite a firestorm ,  the term `` nuclear winter '' is something of a misnomer . 
nuclear winter is the severe and prolonged global climatic cooling effect hypothesized to occur after widespread firestorms following a nuclear war . 
in a 1990 paper entitled `` climate and smoke: an appraisal of nuclear winter '' ,  ttaps gave a more detailed description of the short- and long-term atmospheric effects of a nuclear war using a three-dimensional model:
a `` nuclear summer '' is a hypothesized scenario in which ,  after a nuclear winter has abated ,  a greenhouse effect then occurs due to carbon dioxide released by combustion and methane released from the decay of the organic matter that froze during the nuclear winter . 
in their 1988 paper . 
although rarely discussed ,  the proponents of the hypothesis state that the same `` nuclear winter '' effect would occur if 100 conventional firestorms were ignited . 
both golitsyn and sagan had been interested in the cooling on the dust storms on the planet mars in the years preceding their focus on `` nuclear winter '' . 
on 31 october 1982, golitsyn and ginsburg's model and results were presented at the conference on `` the world after nuclear war '' ,  hosted in washington ,  d . c . 
 ''nuclear winter , ``  or as it was initially termed ,  `` nuclear twilight , ``  began to be considered as a scientific concept in the 1980s ,  after it became clear that an earlier hypothesis ,  that fireball generated nox emissions would devastate the ozone layer ,  was losing credibility . 
the nuclear winter scenario assumes that 100 or more city firestorms are ignited by nuclear explosions ,  and that the firestorms lifts large amounts of sooty smoke into the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere by the movement offered by the pyrocumulonimbus clouds that form during a firestorm . 
in the 1985 report `` the effects on the atmosphere of a major nuclear exchange '' ,  the committee on the atmospheric effects of nuclear explosions argues that a `` plausible '' estimate on the amount of stratospheric dust injected following a surface burst of 1 mt is 0.3 teragrams ,  of which 8 percent would be in the micrometer range . 
the first published suggestion that a cooling of climate could be an effect of a nuclear war ,  appears to have been originally put forth by poul anderson and f . n . 
the cooling would last for years ,  and ,  according to the research ,  could be `` catastrophic '' . 
an implication of their work was that a successful nuclear decapitation strike could have severe climatic consequences for the perpetrator . 
the 1988 air force geophysics laboratory publication `` an assessment of global atmospheric effects of a major nuclear war '' by h .  s .  muench et al . 
information regarding all of these properties is necessary to truly ascertain the length and severity of the cooling effect of firestorms ,  independent of the nuclear winter computer model projections . 
robock has not modeled this ,  but has speculated that it would have global agricultural losses as a consequence . 
having gained this committees approval ,  in september 1983, golitsyn published the first computer model on the nascent `` nuclear winter '' effect in the widely read `` herald of the russian academy of sciences '' . 
different forms such as the `` homostrophic ode '' and the `` irregular ode '' also exist . 
an ode  -lrb-  from   -rrb-  is a type of lyrical stanza . 
like the lyric ,  an ode is of greek origin . 
there are three typical forms of odes: the pindaric ,  horatian ,  and irregular . 
a half-hearted attempt was made to complete the temple during augustus' reign as the first roman emperor ,  but it was not until the accession of hadrian in the 2nd century ad that the project was finally completed around 638 years after it had begun . 
in 124-125 ad ,  when the strongly philhellene hadrian visited athens ,  a massive building programme was begun that included the completion of the temple of olympian zeus . 
during the roman period the temple -that included 104 colossal columns- was renowned as the largest temple in greece and housed one of the largest cult statues in the ancient world . 
poly -lrb-  3-alkythiophenes  -rrb-  are also a typical material for use in solar cells and transistors . 
compared to conventional inorganic solar cell ,  organic solar cells have the advantage of lower fabrication cost . 
some have high thermal stability . 
organic solar cells could cut the cost of solar power by making use of inexpensive organic polymers rather than the expensive crystalline silicon used in most solar cells . 
an organic field-effect transistor is a field-effect transistor utilizing organic molecules or polymers as the active semiconducting layer . 
an oled  -lrb-  organic light-emitting diode  -rrb-  consists of a thin film of organic material that emits light under stimulation by an electric current . 
at stanford university reported a novel way to construct large-area organic semiconductor thin films using aligned single crystalline domains . 
silicon thin-film solar cells on flexible substrates allow a significant cost reduction of large-area photovoltaics for several reasons:
protomorphous solar cells prove to be a promising concept for efficient and low-cost photovoltaics on cheap and flexible substrates for large-area production as well as small and mobile applications . 
there are important differences between the processing of small molecule organic semiconductors and semiconducting polymers . 
in the 1940s ,  the earliest electronic digital systems had no operating systems . 
embedded operating systems are designed to be used in embedded computer systems . 
other operating systems used on ibm s/360 series mainframes included systems developed by ibm: cos/360  -lrb-  compatibility operating system  -rrb-  ,  dos/360  -lrb-  disk operating system  -rrb-  ,  tss/360  -lrb-  time sharing system  -rrb-  ,  tos/360  -lrb-  tape operating system  -rrb-  ,  bos/360  -lrb-  basic operating system  -rrb-  ,  and acp  -lrb-  airline control program  -rrb-  ,  as well as a few non-ibm systems: mts  -lrb-  michigan terminal system  -rrb-  ,  music  -lrb-  multi-user system for interactive computing  -rrb-  ,  and orvyl  -lrb-  stanford timesharing system  -rrb-  . 
a single-tasking system can only run one program at a time ,  while a multi-tasking operating system allows more than one program to be running in concurrency . 
in 1974, university of california ,  berkeley installed its first unix system . 
a real-time operating system is an operating system that guarantees to process events or data by a specific moment in time . 
other specialized classes of operating systems ,  such as embedded and real-time systems ,  exist for many applications . 
the alternative cp-67 system for the s/360-67 started a whole line of ibm operating systems focused on the concept of virtual machines . 
four operating systems are certified by the open group  -lrb-  holder of the unix trademark  -rrb-  as unix . 
digital equipment corporation developed many operating systems for its various computer lines ,  including tops-10 and tops-20 time sharing systems for the 36-bit pdp-10 class systems . 
the `` unix-like '' family is a diverse group of operating systems ,  with several major sub-categories including system v ,  bsd ,  and linux . 
in the 1970s ,  univac produced the real-time basic  -lrb-  rtb  -rrb-  system to support large-scale time sharing ,  also patterned after the dartmouth bc system . 
ibm's current mainframe operating systems are distant descendants of this original system and applications written for os/360 can still be run on modern machines . 
notable supported mainframe operating systems include:
unix-like systems run on a wide variety of computer architectures . 
an operating system  -lrb-  os  -rrb-  is system software that manages computer hardware and software resources and provides common services for computer programs . 
when computers in a group work in cooperation ,  they form a distributed system . 
filming `` citizen kane '' took ten weeks . 
 ''citizen kane '' is now hailed by some as one of the greatest films ever made . 
he was the first and remains the greatest . `` 
his first film was `` citizen kane ''  -lrb-  1941 -rrb- ,  which he co-wrote ,  produced ,  directed ,  and starred in as charles foster kane . 
george orson welles  -lrb-  ; may 6, 1915 – october 10, 1985 -rrb- was an american actor ,  director ,  writer ,  and producer who worked in theatre ,  radio ,  and film . 
in 2002, welles was voted the greatest film director of all time in two british film institute polls among directors and critics . 
he invented the use of narration in radio . 
welles's first radio experience was on the todd station ,  where he performed an adaptation of `` sherlock holmes '' that was written by him . 
throughout the shooting of the film welles was also producing a weekly half-hour radio series ,  `` the orson welles show '' . 
rko rejected welles's first two movie proposals ,  but agreed on the third offer – `` citizen kane '' . 
he is remembered for his innovative work in all three: in theatre ,  most notably `` caesar ''  -lrb-  1937 -rrb- ,  a broadway adaptation of william shakespeare's `` julius caesar ''; in radio ,  the long-remembered 1938 broadcast `` the war of the worlds ''; and in film ,  `` citizen kane ''  -lrb-  1941 -rrb- ,  consistently ranked as one of the greatest films ever made . 
on march 22, 1935, welles made his debut on the cbs radio series `` the march of time '' ,  performing a scene from `` panic '' for a news report on the stage production
known for his baritone voice ,  welles was an actor in radio and film ,  a shakespearean stage actor ,  and a magician noted for presenting troop variety shows in the war years . 
 ''citizen kane '' was given a limited release and the film received overwhelming critical praise . 
welles began commuting from california to new york for the two sunday broadcasts of `` the campbell playhouse '' after signing a film contract with rko pictures in august 1939.
hearst's newspapers barred all reference to `` citizen kane '' and exerted enormous pressure on the hollywood film community to force rko to shelve the film . 
at the old firehouse in woodstock he also shot his first film ,  an eight-minute short titled `` the hearts of age '' . 
welles was an outsider to the studio system and directed only 13 full-length films in his career . 
in november 1939, production of the show moved from new york to los angeles . 
simultaneously with his work in the theatre ,  welles worked extensively in radio as an actor ,  writer ,  director and producer ,  often without credit . 
welles's second film for rko was `` the magnificent ambersons '' ,  adapted by welles from the pulitzer prize-winning novel by booth tarkington . 
such content is said to be under an open licence . 
the later `` open definition '' by the open knowledge foundation  -lrb-  now known as open knowledge international  -rrb-  define open knowledge with open content and open data as sub-elements and draws heavily on the open source definition; it preserves the limited sense of open content as free content ,  unifying both . 
some open access works are also licensed for reuse and redistribution  -lrb-  `` libre open access ''  -rrb-  ,  which would qualify them as open content . 
however ,  the narrower definition used in the open definition effectively limits open content to libre content ,  any free content license ,  defined by the definition of free cultural works ,  would qualify as an open content license . 
unlike free content and content under open-source licenses ,  there is no clear threshold that a work must reach to qualify as 'open content' . 
 -lrb-  for more licenses see open knowledge ,  free content and free cultural works licenses  -rrb- 
in 2010, ohio was ranked no . 
ohio is also one of 41 states with its own lottery ,  the ohio lottery . 
ohio is bounded by the ohio river ,  but nearly all of the river itself belongs to kentucky and west virginia . 
ohio is a midwestern state in the great lakes region of the united states . 
ohio is historically known as the `` buckeye state '' after its ohio buckeye trees ,  and ohioans are also known as `` buckeyes '' . 
six presidents of the united states have been elected who had ohio as their home state . 
columbus  -lrb-  home of the ohio state university ,  franklin university ,  capital university ,  and ohio dominican university  -rrb-  is the capital of ohio ,  near the geographic center of the state . 
with about 70,000 people in 2015 ohio had the second largest amish population of all states of the us . 
this is approximately south and west of ohio's population center in 1990.
it was centered in western ohio ,  and had a magnitude of 5.4, and was of intensity viii . 
as of 2011, 27.6% of ohio's children under the age of 1 belonged to minority groups . 
this ranks ohio's economy as the seventh-largest of all fifty states and the district of columbia . 
ohio's unemployment rate stands at 4.5% as of february 2018, down from 10.7% in may 2010.
according to the 2010 united states census ,  the racial composition of ohio was the following:
the manufacturing and financial activities sectors each compose 18.3% of ohio's gdp ,  making them ohio's largest industries by percentage of gdp . 
other ohio cities functioning as centers of united states metropolitan areas include:
in 2010, there were 469,700 foreign-born residents in ohio ,  corresponding to 4.1% of the total population . 
ohio is an industrial state ,  ranking 8th out of 50 states in gdp  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- ,  and is the second largest producer of automobiles behind michigan . 
ohio has only that portion of the river between the river's 1792 low-water mark and the present high-water mark . 
ohio cities that function as centers of united states micropolitan areas include:
in chemistry ,  an organic compound is generally any chemical compound that contains carbon . 
compounds that are prepared by reaction of other compounds are known as `` synthetic '' . 
for historical reasons discussed below ,  a few types of carbon-containing compounds ,  such as carbides ,  carbonates ,  simple oxides of carbon  -lrb-  for example ,  co and co  -rrb-  ,  and cyanides are considered inorganic . 
halides of carbon without hydrogen  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  cf and cclf  -rrb-  ,  phosgene  -lrb-  cocl  -rrb-  ,  carboranes ,  metal carbonyls  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  nickel carbonyl  -rrb-  ,  mellitic anhydride  -lrb-  co  -rrb-  ,  and other exotic oxocarbons are also considered inorganic by some authorities . 
a slightly broader definition of organic compound includes all compounds bearing c-h or c-c bonds . 
the organic compound -isoleucine molecule presents some features typical of organic compounds: carbon–carbon bonds ,  carbon–hydrogen bonds ,  as well as covalent bonds from carbon to oxygen and to nitrogen . 
equation 1.1 is the reaction function for firm 1.
equation 1.2 is the reaction function for firm 2.
some of the better-known models are the dominant firm model ,  the cournot–nash model ,  the bertrand model and the kinked demand model . 
oligopoly is a common market form where a number of firms are in competition . 
as a result ,  price rigidity prevails in such markets . 
oligopolies have their own market structure . 
it can also be used to plant crops . 
in geography ,  an oasis  -lrb-  ; plural: oases   -rrb-  is the combination of a human settlement and a cultivated area  -lrb-  often a date palm grove  -rrb-  in a desert or semi-desert environment . 
the location of oases has been of critical importance for trade and transportation routes in desert areas; caravans must travel via oases so that supplies of water and food can be replenished . 
oboes  -lrb-     -rrb-  are a family of double reed woodwind instruments . 
the classical period brought a regular oboe whose bore was gradually narrowed ,  and the instrument became outfitted with several keys ,  among them were those for the notes d ,  f ,  and g .  a key similar to the modern octave key was also added called the `` slur key '' ,  though it was at first used more like the `` flick '' keys on the modern german bassoon . 
the standard baroque oboe is generally made of boxwood and has three keys: a `` great '' key and two side keys  -lrb-  the side key is often doubled to facilitate use of either the right or left hand on the bottom holes  -rrb-  . 
the modern standard oboe is most commonly made from grenadilla ,  also known as african blackwood ,  though some manufacturers also make oboes out of other members of the genus `` dalbergia '' ,  which includes cocobolo ,  rosewood ,  and violetwood  -lrb-  also known as kingwood  -rrb-  . 
music for the standard oboe is written in concert pitch  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  it is not a transposing instrument  -rrb-  ,  and the instrument has a soprano range ,  usually from b to g .  orchestras tune to a concert a played by the first oboe . 
minor improvements to the bore and key work have continued through the 20th century ,  but there has been no fundamental change to the general characteristics of the instrument for several decades . 
in english ,  prior to 1770, the standard instrument was called a `` hautbois '' ,  `` hoboy '' ,  or `` french hoboy ''  -lrb-   ; borrowed from the french name ,  a compound word made of `` haut '' `` high '' ,  `` loud '' and `` bois '' `` wood '' ,  `` woodwind ''  -rrb-  . 
rings can fuse with other rings on an edge to give polycyclic compounds . 
the range of chemicals studied in organic chemistry includes hydrocarbons  -lrb-  compounds containing only carbon and hydrogen  -rrb-  as well as compounds based on carbon ,  but also containing other elements ,  especially oxygen ,  nitrogen ,  sulfur ,  phosphorus  -lrb-  included in many biochemicals  -rrb-  and the halogens . 
both saturated  -lrb-  alicyclic  -rrb-  compounds and unsaturated compounds exist as cyclic derivatives . 
one important property of carbon is that it readily forms chains ,  or networks ,  that are linked by carbon-carbon  -lrb-  carbon-to-carbon  -rrb-  bonds . 
both researchers suggested that tetravalent carbon atoms could link to each other to form a carbon lattice ,  and that the detailed patterns of atomic bonding could be discerned by skillful interpretations of appropriate chemical reactions . 
two main groups of polymers exist: synthetic polymers and biopolymers . 
the characteristics of the cyclic hydrocarbons are again altered if heteroatoms are present ,  which can exist as either substituents attached externally to the ring  -lrb-  exocyclic  -rrb-  or as a member of the ring itself  -lrb-  endocyclic  -rrb-  . 
the multiple-step synthesis of complex organic compounds is called total synthesis . 
the degree of branching affects characteristics ,  such as the octane number or cetane number in petroleum chemistry . 
such compounds are termed spiro and are important in a number of natural products . 
organic chemistry is the chemistry subdiscipline for the scientific study of structure ,  properties ,  and reactions of organic compounds and organic materials  -lrb-  materials that contain carbon atoms  -rrb-  . 
organic compounds are usually not very stable at temperatures above 300 °c ,  although some exceptions exist . 
in the early part of the 20th century ,  polymers and enzymes were shown to be large organic molecules ,  and petroleum was shown to be of biological origin . 
the english word `` orthography '' dates from the 15th century . 
orthographies that use alphabets and syllabaries are based on the principle that the written symbols  -lrb-  graphemes  -rrb-  correspond to units of sound of the spoken language: phonemes in the former case ,  and syllables in the latter . 
the korean `` hangul '' system was also originally an extremely shallow orthography ,  but as a representation of the modern language it frequently also reflects morphophonemic features . 
sometimes this problem is addressed by the use of such devices as digraphs  -lrb-  such as `` sh '' and `` ch '' in english ,  where pairs of letters represent single sounds  -rrb-  ,  diacritics  -lrb-  like the caron on the letters `` š '' and `` č '' ,  which represent those same sounds in czech  -rrb-  ,  or the addition of completely new symbols  -lrb-  as some languages have introduced the letter `` w '' to the latin alphabet  -rrb-  or of symbols from another alphabet ,  such as the rune `` þ '' in icelandic . 
when an alphabet is borrowed from its original language for use with a new language—as has been done with the latin alphabet for many languages ,  or japanese katakana for non-japanese words—it often proves defective in representing the new language's phonemes . 
the syllabary systems of japanese  -lrb-  hiragana and katakana  -rrb-  are examples of almost perfectly shallow orthographies—the kana correspond with almost perfect consistency to the spoken syllables ,  although with a few exceptions where symbols reflect historical or morphophonemic features: notably the use of ぢ `` ji '' and づ `` zu ''  -lrb-  rather than じ `` ji '' and ず `` zu '' ,  their pronunciation in standard tokyo dialect  -rrb-  when the character is a voicing of an underlying ち or つ  -lrb-  see rendaku  -rrb-  ,  and the use of は ,  を ,  and へ to represent the sounds わ ,  お ,  and え ,  as relics of historical kana usage . 
the next development was the paper pad system . 
here the key is `` subtracted '' from the ciphertext ,  again using modular arithmetic:
the next one-time pad system was electrical . 
a number of nations have used one-time pad systems for their sensitive traffic . 
the auxiliary parts of a software one-time pad implementation present real challenges: secure handling/transmission of plaintext ,  truly random keys ,  and one-time-only use of the key . 
the `` pad '' part of the name comes from early implementations where the key material was distributed as a pad of paper ,  so that the top sheet could be easily torn off and destroyed after use . 
one-time pads have been used in special circumstances since the early 1900s . 
because the pad ,  like all shared secrets ,  must be passed and kept secure ,  and the pad has to be at least as long as the message ,  there is often no point in using one-time padding ,  as one can simply send the plain text instead of the pad  -lrb-  as both can be the same size and have to be sent securely  -rrb-  . 
u . s .  army special forces used one-time pads in vietnam . 
a separate notion was the use of a one-time pad of letters to encode plaintext directly as in the example below . 
the material on the selected sheet is the `` key '' for this message . 
both were found with physical one-time pads in their possession . 
the key material must be securely disposed of after use ,  to ensure the key material is never reused and to protect the messages sent . 
the parts that are known will reveal `` only '' the parts of the key corresponding to them ,  and they correspond on a strictly one-to-one basis; no part of the key is dependent on any other part . 
the classical one-time pad of espionage used actual pads of minuscule ,  easily concealed paper ,  a sharp pencil ,  and some mental arithmetic . 
distributing very long one-time pad keys is inconvenient and usually poses a significant security risk . 
in this example ,  the technique is to combine the key and the message using modular addition . 
one-time use came later ,  when joseph mauborgne recognized that if the key tape were totally random ,  then cryptanalysis would be impossible . 
in more technical words ,  linear operators are morphisms between vector spaces . 
the space of sequences of real numbers ,  or more generally sequences of vectors in any vector space ,  themselves form an infinite-dimensional vector space . 
let `` u '' and `` v '' be two vector spaces over the same ordered field  -lrb-  for example ,  formula_22 -rrb- ,  and they are equipped with norms . 
bounded operators form a vector space . 
the film premiered at the afi film festival on october 19, 2000.
the film was selected into the main competition of the 2000 cannes film festival . 
music in the film was originally conceived as a major component of the film ,  not merely as a background or a support . 
they joined together to perform the music from the film in a `` down from the mountain '' concert tour which was filmed for tv and dvd . 
this was the fourth film of the brothers in which john turturro has starred . 
the film is set in 1937 rural mississippi during the great depression . 
the title of the film is a reference to the 1941 preston sturges film `` sullivan's travels '' ,  in which the protagonist  -lrb-  a director  -rrb-  wants to direct a film about the great depression called `` o brother ,  where art thou ? `` 
who had worked previously with the coens include john goodman  -lrb-  three films  -rrb-  ,  holly hunter  -lrb-  two  -rrb-  ,  michael badalucco and charles durning  -lrb-  one film each  -rrb-  . 
 ''man of constant sorrow '' has five variations: two are used in the film ,  one in the music video ,  and two in the soundtrack album . 
a major theme of the film is the connection between old-time music and political campaigning in the southern u . s . 
much of the music used in the film is period folk music ,  including that of virginia bluegrass singer ralph stanley . 
much of the music used in the film is period-specific folk music ,  including that of virginia bluegrass singer ralph stanley . 
the ohio state university ,  commonly referred to as ohio state or osu ,  is a large ,  primarily residential ,  public research university in columbus ,  ohio . 
ontario has about 250,000 freshwater lakes . 
ontario is sometimes conceptually divided into two regions ,  northern ontario and southern ontario . 
ottawa  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  is the capital city of canada . 
ottawa sits at the confluence of three major rivers: the ottawa river ,  the gatineau river and the rideau river . 
ottawa is on the south bank of the ottawa river and contains the mouths of the rideau river and rideau canal . 
summers are warm and humid in ottawa . 
at present ,  ottawa is host to 130 embassies . 
the ottawa little theatre ,  originally called the ottawa drama league at its inception in 1913, is the longest-running community theatre company in ottawa . 
in 2011, females made up 51.5% of the amalgamated ottawa population . 
the city of ottawa is the second largest employer with over 15,000 employees . 
the city name `` ottawa '' was chosen in reference to the ottawa river ,  the name of which is derived from the algonquin `` odawa '' ,  meaning `` to trade '' . 
there is a proposed lrt system that would link ottawa with gatineau . 
étienne brûlé ,  widely regarded as the first european to travel up the ottawa river ,  passed by ottawa in 1610 on his way to the great lakes . 
ottawa's median age of 39.2 is both below the provincial and national averages  . 
along with being the capital of canada ,  ottawa is politically diverse in local politics . 
the algonquins called the ottawa river `` kichi sibi '' or `` kichissippi '' meaning `` great river '' or `` grand river '' . 
ottawa has the highest standard of living in the nation and low unemployment . 
sport in ottawa has a history dating back to the 19th century . 
founded in 1826 as bytown ,  and incorporated as ottawa in 1855, the city has evolved into the political centre of canada . 
ottawa's former industrial appearance was vastly altered by the 1950 greber plan . 
ottawa experiences about 2,130 hours of average sunshine annually  -lrb-  46% of possible  -rrb-  . 
the highest temperature ever recorded in ottawa was on 4 july 1913, 1 august 1917 and 11 august 1944.
ottawa has the highest per capita concentration of engineers ,  scientists ,  and residents with phds in canada . 
numerous paved multi-use trails wind their way through much of the city ,  including along the ottawa river ,  rideau river ,  and rideau canal . 
rand summarizes:
according to one rand biographer ,  most people first read rand's works in their `` formative years . `` 
rand argued that concepts are hierarchically organized . 
rand rejected `` feeling '' as sources of knowledge . 
rand opposed racism and any legal application of racism . 
rand argued that consciousness is `` the faculty of perceiving that which exists . `` 
says rand ,  `` man's mind is his basic tool of survival . 
surveys such as `` on ayn rand '' by allan gotthelf  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- ,  `` ayn rand '' by tibor r .  machan  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- ,  and `` objectivism in one lesson '' by andrew bernstein  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- provide briefer introductions to rand's ideas . 
faith ,  for rand ,  is not a `` short-cut '' to knowledge ,  but a `` short-circuit '' destroying it . 
an author who focuses on rand's ethics ,  tara smith ,  stays closer to rand's original ideas in such works as `` moral rights and political freedom ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  `` viable values ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- ,  and `` ayn rand's normative ethics ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- . 
in recent decades rand's works are more likely to be encountered in the classroom . 
several authors have developed and applied rand's ideas in their own work . 
most objectivists who are also artists subscribe to what they call romantic realism ,  which is how rand labeled her own work . 
objectivism is a philosophical system developed by russian-american writer ayn rand . 
the end goal of rand's own artistic endeavors was to portray the ideal man . 
in response ,  paul st .  f .  blair defended rand's ethical conclusions ,  while maintaining that his arguments might not have been approved by rand . 
rand argued that the primary focus of man's free will is in the choice: 'to think or not to think' . 
academic philosophers have mostly ignored or rejected rand's philosophy . 
the objectivist movement ,  which rand founded ,  attempts to spread her ideas to the public and in academic settings . 
rand held that `` existence '' is the perceptually self-evident fact at the base of all other knowledge ,  i . e .  ,  that `` existence exists . `` 
