the irish diaspora  -lrb-    -rrb-  refers to irish people and their descendants who live outside ireland . 
 ''irishness '' might then rely primarily on individual identification with an irish diaspora . 
the government of ireland defines the irish diaspora as all persons of irish nationality who habitually reside outside of the island of ireland . 
people of the irish diaspora who were not born in ireland but who identify as irish are sometimes labelled as `` plastic paddies '' . 
there are people of irish descent abroad  -lrb-  including irish speakers  -rrb-  who reject inclusion in an irish `` diaspora '' and who designate their identity in other ways . 
the dispersal of the irish has been mainly to britain or to countries colonised by britain . 
the irish people are largely assimilated in most countries outside ireland
the term irish diaspora is open to many interpretations . 
the irish-born have frequently denied the authenticity of their irish identity . `` 
note that certain non-zero integers map to zero in certain rings . 
the integers form the smallest group and the smallest ring containing the natural numbers . 
again ,  in the language of abstract algebra ,  the above says that z is a euclidean domain . 
this universal property ,  namely to be an initial object in the category of rings ,  characterizes the ring  . 
in fact ,  under addition is the `` only '' infinite cyclic group ,  in the sense that any infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to  . 
this means that under multiplication is not a group . 
the most prominent feature in musical impressionism is the use of `` color '' ,  or in musical terms ,  timbre ,  which can be achieved through orchestration ,  harmonic usage ,  texture ,  etc . 
impressionism in music was a movement among various composers in western classical music  -lrb-  mainly during the late 19th and early 20th centuries  -rrb-  whose music focuses on suggestion and atmosphere ,  `` conveying the moods and emotions aroused by the subject rather than a detailed tone‐picture '' . 
there are several models which seek to explain the factors behind international trade ,  the welfare consequences of trade and the pattern of trade . 
the following table is a list of the 21 largest trading nations according to the world trade organization . 
then the linear interpolation error is
a closely related problem is the approximation of a complicated function by a simple function . 
this table gives some values of an unknown function formula_1.
generally ,  linear interpolation takes two data points ,  say  -lrb-  `` x '' , `` y ''  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  `` x '' , `` y ''  -rrb-  ,  and the interpolant is given by: this previous equation states that the slope of the new line between formula_6 and formula_7 is the same as the slope of the line between formula_6 and formula_9
an `` extensional '' statement is a non-intensional statement . 
an intensional statement ,  then ,  is an instance of such a form; it has the same form as a statement in which substitution of co-extensive terms fails to preserve logical value . 
that is ,  a statement-form is intensional if it has ,  as one of its instances ,  a statement for which there are two co-extensive expressions  -lrb-  in the relevant language  -rrb-  such that one of them occurs in the statement ,  and if the other one is put in its place  -lrb-  uniformly ,  so that it replaces the former expression wherever it occurs in the statement  -rrb-  ,  the result is a  -lrb-  different  -rrb-  statement with a different logical value . 
note that if `` samuel clemens '' is put into  -lrb-  1 -rrb- in place of `` mark twain '' ,  the result is as true as the original statement . 
an instance of the form is a statement obtained by filling the blanks in . 
asimov wrote hard science fiction . 
asimov began writing at the age of 11.
in 1977, asimov suffered a heart attack . 
asimov celebrated his birthday on january 2.
at least some of these appear to have been done with the blessing of ,  or at the request of ,  asimov's widow ,  janet asimov . 
asimov published three volumes of autobiography . 
asimov's career can be divided into several periods . 
asimov coined the term `` robotics '' in his 1941 story `` liar ! 
asimov wrote a typed first draft composed at the keyboard . 
asimov's parents were anna rachel  -lrb-  née berman  -rrb-  and judah asimov ,  a family of jewish millers . 
this later inspired one of asimov's short stories ,  `` spell my name with an s . `` 
in 1921, asimov and 16 other children in petrovichi developed double pneumonia . 
one of the most common impressions of asimov's fiction work is that his writing style is extremely unornamented . 
asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy ,  as well as much nonfiction . 
asimov was a claustrophile: he enjoyed small ,  enclosed spaces . 
in addition to his interest in science ,  asimov was interested in history . 
in 1987, the asimovs co-wrote `` how to enjoy writing: a book of aid and comfort '' . 
books and the magazines `` galaxy '' ,  and `` fantasy & science fiction '' ended asimov's dependence on `` astounding '' . 
by the end of the month asimov completed a second story ,  `` stowaway '' . 
he was survived by his siblings ,  his second wife janet asimov ,  and his children from his first marriage . 
asimov won more than a dozen annual awards for particular works of science fiction and a half dozen lifetime awards . 
particularly in his later years ,  asimov to some extent cultivated an image of himself as an amiable lecher . 
asimov was an able public speaker and was a frequent fixture at science fiction conventions ,  where he was friendly and approachable . 
in 1959, after a recommendation from arthur obermayer ,  asimov's friend and a scientist on the u . s .  missile protection project ,  asimov was approached by darpa to join obermayer's team . 
after a five-minute wait ,  he was summoned back into the room and congratulated as `` dr .  asimov '' . 
scorupco was born to lech ,  a musician ,  and magdalena skorupko ,  a doctor ,  in białystok ,  poland ,  in 1970.
izabella scorupco  -lrb-  born izabela dorota skorupko; 4 june 1970 -rrb- is a polish-swedish actress ,  singer and model . 
in 1978, they moved to bredäng in stockholm ,  sweden ,  where scorupco learned to speak swedish ,  english and french . 
indonesia is a republic with a presidential system . 
since 1999, indonesia has had a multi-party system . 
indonesia  -lrb-    ,  ; indonesian:   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of indonesia  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a country in southeast asia ,  between the indian and pacific oceans . 
the music of indonesia predates historical records . 
indonesia consists of 34 provinces ,  five of which have special status . 
indonesia is one of coral triangle countries with the world's greatest diversity of coral reef fish with more than 1,650 species in eastern indonesia only . 
indonesia was the country hardest hit by the 1997 asian financial crisis . 
in 2016, indonesia was the world's 9th largest energy producer with 16.8 quadrillion btu ,  and the 15th largest energy consumer ,  with 7.5 quadrillion btu . 
the report also indicates that indonesia's performance is among the lowest in the asia-pacific region . 
indonesia is a very ethnically diverse country ,  with around 300 distinct native ethnic groups . 
indonesia's expenditure on science and technology is relatively low ,  at less than 0.1% of gdp  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- . 
in the late 1950s ,  sukarno moved indonesia from democracy towards authoritarianism ,  and maintained his power base by balancing the opposing forces of the military and the communist party of indonesia  -lrb-  `` partai komunis indonesia '' ,  pki  -rrb-  . 
it was only in the first half of the 20th century that the dutch achieved dominance over what was to become indonesia's current boundaries ,  with the addition of western new guinea in 1920.
indonesia's major trading partners are china ,  united states ,  japan ,  singapore and india . 
indonesia has set out to achieve 23% use of renewable energy by 2025, and 31% by 2050.  ,  indonesia's total national installed power generation capacity stands at 55,528.51 mw . 
indonesia has a variety style of clothing as a result from its long and rich cultural history . 
indonesia currently maintains 132 diplomatic missions abroad ,  including 95 embassies . 
in southeast asia ,  indonesia is one of the major sport powerhouses by winning the southeast asian games 10 times since 1977, most recently in 2011.
indonesia's transport system has been shaped over time by the economic resource base of an archipelago ,  and the distribution of its 250 million people highly concentrated on java . 
port of tanjung priok is the busiest and most advanced indonesian port ,  handling more than 50% of indonesia's trans-shipment cargo traffic . 
indonesia lies between latitudes 11°s and 6°n ,  and longitudes 95°e and 141°e . 
indonesia's largest airport ,  soekarno–hatta international airport is the busiest in the southern hemisphere ,  serving 63 million passengers in 2017.
the hindu majapahit kingdom was founded in eastern java in the late 13th century ,  and under gajah mada ,  its influence stretched over much of present-day indonesia . 
indonesia is considered at serious risk from projected effects of climate change . 
close to 80% of indonesia's population lives in the western parts of the archipelago ,  but they are growing at a slower pace than the rest of the country . 
indonesia has a mixed economy in which both the private sector and government play significant roles . 
lying along the equator ,  indonesia's climate tends to be relatively even year-round . 
indonesia's size ,  tropical climate ,  and archipelagic geography support a high level of biodiversity . 
beginning with 2015 local elections ,  indonesia starts to elect governors and mayors simultaneously on the same date . 
the indian ocean is the warmest ocean in the world . 
the indian ocean is named after india . 
the indian ocean covers  ,  including the red sea and the persian gulf but excluding the southern ocean ,  or 19.5% of the world's oceans; its volume is or 19.8% of the world's oceans' volume; it has an average depth of and a maximum depth of  . 
the opening of the indian ocean began 156  when africa separated from east gondwana . 
the indian subcontinent began to separate from australia-antarctica 135-125 ma and as the tethys ocean north of india began to close 118-84 ma the indian ocean opened behind it . 
the indian ocean is the third largest of the world's oceanic divisions ,  covering  -lrb-  approximately 20% of the water on the earth's surface  -rrb-  . 
the borders of the indian ocean ,  as delineated by the international hydrographic organization in 1953 included the southern ocean but not the marginal seas along the northern rim ,  but in 2000 the iho delimited the southern ocean separately ,  which removed waters south of 60°s from the indian ocean ,  but included the northern marginal seas . 
speech . 
 '' ''ich bin ein berliner '' ''  -lrb-   ,  `` i am a berliner ''  -rrb-  is a quotation of u . s .  president john f .  kennedy ,  in a speech given on june 26, 1963, in west berlin . 
the speech culminated with the second use in the speech of the `` ich bin ein berliner '' phrase: `` today ,  in the world of freedom ,  the proudest boast is `` ich bin ein berliner ! ``  ''
but there are differing accounts on the origin of the phrase `` ich bin ein berliner '' . 
hundreds of thousands of east germans defected to the west via west berlin ,  a labour drain that threatened east germany with economic collapse . 
by not leaving out the indefinite article `` ein , ``  he supposedly changed the meaning of the sentence from the intended `` i am a citizen of berlin '' to `` i am a berliner ''  -lrb-  a berliner being a type of german pastry ,  similar to a jelly doughnut  -rrb-  . 
another phrase in the speech was also spoken in german ,  ``  ''lasst sie nach berlin kommen '' ''  -lrb-  `` let them come to berlin ''  -rrb-  ,  addressed at those who claimed `` we can work with the communists '' ,  a remark at which nikita khrushchev scoffed only days later . 
there is a widespread perception that kennedy made an embarrassing mistake by saying `` ich bin ein berliner '' . 
kennedy was accompanied not by robert lochner ,  but by heinz weber of the berlin mission; weber translated the president's speech to the audience . 
apex ,  officially and functionally part of the city of iqaluit ,  is a small community about southeast  -lrb-    -rrb-  from iqaluit's centre and is known in inuktitut as `` niaqunngut '' . 
iqaluit has been a traditional fishing location used by inuit for thousands of years ,  hence the name iqaluit ,  which means `` place of many fish '' . 
inhabitants of iqaluit are called `` iqalummiut ''  -lrb-  singular: `` iqalummiuq ''  -rrb-  . 
just west of iqaluit is the sylvia grinnell territorial park reserve . 
iqaluit has the most inuit people in both numbers  -lrb-  3,900 -rrb- and percentages  -lrb-  59.1%  -rrb-  ,  of all canadian cities with populations greater than 5,000.
the highest temperature ever recorded in iqaluit was on 21 july 2008.
apex was where most inuit lived when iqaluit was a military site ,  and as such the suburb was off-limits to anyone not working at the base . 
iqaluit ,  like many nunavut communities ,  has a volunteer-run annual spring festival . 
iqaluit is located in the everett mountains rising from koojesse  -lrb-  kuujussi  -rrb-  inlet ,  an inlet of frobisher bay ,  on the southeast part of baffin island . 
on 1 january 1987, the name of the municipality was changed from `` frobisher bay '' to `` iqaluit '' – aligning official usage with the name that the inuit population had always used  -lrb-  although ,  many documents still referred to iqaluit as frobisher bay for several years after 1987 -rrb- . 
iqaluit  -lrb-   ; ;   -rrb-  ,  meaning `` place of fish '' ,  is the capital of the canadian territory of nunavut; its largest community ,  and its only city . 
there are also artificial islands . 
a special type of continental island is the microcontinental island ,  which is created when a continent is rifted . 
continental islands are bodies of land that lie on the continental shelf of a continent . 
an island or isle is any piece of sub-continental land that is surrounded by water . 
the state park is located on at the end of iao valley road  -lrb-  highway 32 -rrb- . 
trails in the state park run alongside iao stream and through the forest . 
iao valley is covered in dense rainforest ,  most of which consists of introduced vegetation on the valley floor . 
application of the term `` troll '' is subjective . 
in icelandic ,  `` þurs ''  -lrb-  a thurs  -rrb-  or `` tröll ''  -lrb-  a troll  -rrb-  may refer to trolls ,  the verbs `` þursa ''  -lrb-  to troll  -rrb-  or `` þursast ''  -lrb-  to be trolling ,  to troll about  -rrb-  may be used . 
in thai ,  the term `` krian ''  -lrb-  เกรียน  -rrb-  has been adopted to address internet trolls . 
both the noun and the verb form of `` troll '' is associated with internet discourse . 
trolls can be costly in several ways . 
the `` trollface '' is an image occasionally used to indicate trolling in internet culture . 
it has also been characterising twitter trolls in its weekly podcasts . and outspoken is the most popular facebook troll page in india
the noun `` troll '' usually referred to an act of trolling – or to the resulting discussion – rather than to the author ,  though some posts punned on the dual meaning of `` troll . `` 
unlike `` classic trolls , ``  wikipedia trolls `` have no emotional input ,  they just supply misinformation '' and are one of `` the most dangerous '' as well as one of `` the most effective trolling message designs . `` 
another common term for a troll used in mainland china is `` pēn zi ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
concern trolls just use a different type of bait than the more stereotypical troll in their attempts to manipulate participants and disrupt conversations . 
newslaundry covered the phenomenon of `` twitter trolling '' in its `` criticles '' . 
a `` concern troll '' is a false flag pseudonym created by a user whose actual point of view is opposed to the one that the troll claims to hold . 
trolls of the testimonial page of georgia varley faced no prosecution due to misunderstandings of the legal system in the wake of the term trolling being popularized . 
in portuguese ,  more commonly in its brazilian variant ,   -lrb-  produced in most of brazil as spelling pronunciation  -rrb-  is the usual term to denote internet trolls  -lrb-  examples of common derivate terms are `` trollismo '' or `` trollagem '' ,  `` trolling '' ,  and the verb `` trollar '' ,  `` to troll '' ,  which entered popular use  -rrb-  ,  but an older expression ,  used by those which want to avoid anglicisms or slangs ,  is ``  '' to denote trolling behavior ,  and `` pombos enxadristas ''  -lrb-  literally ,  `` chessplayer pigeons ''  -rrb-  or simply `` pombos '' are the terms used to name the trolls . 
the practice of trolling has been documented by a number of academics as early as the 1990s . 
in korean ,  `` nak-si ''  -lrb-  낚시  -rrb-  means `` fishing '' ,  refers to internet trolling attempts ,  as well as purposefully misleading post titles . 
there are competing theories of where and when `` troll '' was first used in internet slang ,  with numerous unattested accounts of bbs and usenet origins in the early 1980s or before . 
as noted in an `` os news '' article titled `` why people troll and how to stop them ''  -lrb-  25 january 2012 -rrb- ,  `` the traditional definition of trolling includes intent . 
india's border with bangladesh runs  . 
india's borders run a total length of  . 
india lies on the indian plate ,  the northern portion of the indo-australian plate ,  whose continental crust forms the indian subcontinent . 
india shares a border with afghanistan in northwestern kashmir ,  which the indian government officially regards as occupied by pakistan . 
india has more than 50% of its population below the age of 25 and more than 65% below the age of 35.
mughal india also had a large number of villages ,  with 455,698 villages by the time of aurangzeb  -lrb-  reigned 1658–1707 -rrb- . 
india's population growth rate under the mughal empire  -lrb-  16th–18th centuries  -rrb-  was higher than during any previous period in indian history . 
its population growth rate is 1.13% ,  ranking 112th in the world in 2017.
the economist intelligence unit rated india as a `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
the politics of india takes place within the framework of the country's constitution . 
there is a provision for a bicameral legislature consisting of an upper house ,  the rajya sabha  -lrb-  council of states  -rrb-  ,  which represents the states of the indian federation ,  and a lower house ,  the lok sabha  -lrb-  house of the people  -rrb-  ,  which represents the people of india as a whole . 
as of july 2018, india has over 22 million wireline customers . 
as of 2016, india has deployed telecom operations in a total of 8 radio frequency bands . 
telecommunications in india began with the introduction of the telegraph . 
india has the world's second-largest mobile phone user base with over 1157.04 million users as of july 2018.
telenor india has been acquired by airtel almost without any cost . 
according to london-based telecom trade body gsma ,  the telecom sector accounted for 6.5% of india's gdp in 2015, or about  ,  and supported direct employment for 2.2 million people in the country . 
gsma estimates that the indian telecom sector will contribute to the economy and support 3 million direct jobs and 2 million indirect jobs by 2020.
this was a gateway to many foreign investors to get entry into the indian telecom markets . 
indian telecom industry underwent a high pace of market liberalisation and growth since the 1990s and now has become the world's most competitive and one of the fastest growing telecom markets . 
with a subscriber base of more than 1,179.32 million  -lrb-  as of july 2018 -rrb- ,  the mobile telecommunications system in india is the second largest in the world and it was thrown open to private players in the 1990s . 
on 14 may 2018, department of telecom approved the merger of telenor india with bharti airtel paving the way for final commercial closing of the merger between the two companies . 
india's telecommunication network is the second largest in the world by number of telephone users  -lrb-  both fixed and mobile phone  -rrb-  with 1.179 billion subscribers as on 31 july 2018.
the number of telephones grew leisurely to 980,000 in 1971, 2.15 million in 1981 and 5.07 million in 1991, the year economic reforms were initiated in the country . 
as of 2013, there are 45 heliports in india . 
the operational systems are kolkata metro ,  delhi metro ,  namma metro ,  rapid metro ,  mumbai metro ,  jaipur metro ,  chennai metro ,  kochi metro ,  lucknow metro and hyderabad metro . 
the planned systems are noida metro ,  ghaziabad metro ,  navi mumbai metro ,  nagpur metro ,  metro-link express for gandhinagar and ahmedabad ,  varanasi metro ,  kanpur metro ,  bareilly metro ,  pune metro ,  vijayawada metro ,  patna metro ,  meerut metro ,  guwahati metro ,  chandigarh metro ,  bhopal metro ,  kozhikode light metro ,  indore metro ,  thiruvananthapuram light metro ,  agra metro ,  coimbatore metro ,  visakhapatnam metro ,  dehradun metro ,  surat metro ,  srinagar metro ,  greater gwalior metro ,  jabalpur metro and greater nashik metro . 
transport system in india consists of transport by land ,  water ,  and air . 
buses are an important means of public transport in india . 
monorail is generally considered as feeder system for the metro trains in india . 
cycle rickshaws were introduced in india in the 1940s . 
the first modern rapid transit in india is the kolkata metro and its vert modern . 
air india is india's national flag carrier after merging with indian  -lrb-  airline  -rrb-  in 2011 and plays a major role in connecting india with the rest of the world . 
the operational suburban rail systems in india are in mumbai suburban railway ,  kolkata suburban railway ,  lucknow-kanpur suburban railway ,  chennai suburban railway ,  delhi suburban railway ,  pune suburban railway ,  hyderabad multi-modal transport system ,  barabanki-lucknow suburban railway and karwar railway division . 
rail links between india and neighbouring countries are not well-developed . 
country-wide rail services in india ,  are provided by the state-run indian railways under the supervision of the ministry of railways . 
public transport remains the primary mode of transport for most indian citizens ,  and india's public transport systems are among the most heavily used in the world . 
the railways transport about 18 million citizens daily . 
there were 47.5 million powered two-wheelers in india in 2003 compared with just 8.6 million cars . 
the kolkata suburban railway ,  was established in kolkata in 1854.
bullock carts have been traditionally used for transport ,  especially in rural india . 
manufacture of scooters in india started when `` automobile products of india  -lrb-  api  -rrb- ``  ,  set up at mumbai and incorporated in 1949, began assembling innocenti-built lambretta scooters in india . 
the first utility vehicle in india was manufactured by mahindra . 
india does not have any railways classified as high-speed rail  -lrb-  hsr  -rrb-  ,  which have operational speeds in excess of  . 
the mumbai suburban railway is the first rail system in india which began services in mumbai in 1853, transports 6.3 million passengers daily and has the highest passenger density in the world . 
indian government approved the choice of japan to build india's first high-speed railway . 
the namma metro in bangalore is india's third operational rapid transit and began operations in 2011.
as of 2013, india has a total of of national highways ,  of which are classified as expressways . 
the mumbai monorail ,  which started in 2014, is the first operational monorail network in india  -lrb-  excluding the skybus metro  -rrb-  since the patiala state monorail trainways closed in 1927.
regionally ,  india is a part of saarc and bimstec . 
most of the sanctions imposed on india were removed by 2001.
india and bangladesh also have free trade agreement in 7 june 2015.
at the outset india's relations with bangladesh could not have been stronger because of india's unalloyed support for independence and opposition against pakistan in 1971.
vijay keshav gokhale is the current foreign secretary of india . 
though india continues to have a military relationship with russia ,  israel has emerged as india's second largest military partner while india has built a strong strategic partnership with the united states . 
the end of the cold war significantly affected india's foreign policy ,  as it did for much of the world . 
the ministry of external affairs of india  -lrb-  mea  -rrb-  ,  also known as the foreign ministry ,  is the government agency responsible for the conduct of foreign relations of india . 
bilateral relations between india and afghanistan have been traditionally strong and friendly . 
india's international influence varied over the years after independence . 
to quote prime minister manmohan singh `` it was also a strategic shift in india's vision of the world and india's place in the evolving global economy '' . 
as a member of the interim government in 1946, nehru articulated india's approach to the world . 
india has been pushing for reforms in the un and wto with mixed results . 
in recent years india has increasingly complained that bangladesh does not secure its border properly . 
india was the second country to recognise bangladesh as a separate and independent state ,  doing so on 6 december 1971.
the ministry of external affairs is the indian government's agency responsible for the foreign relations of india . 
the reform or shramanic period between 800–200 bce marks a `` turning point between the vedic hinduism and puranic hinduism '' . 
some modern hindu scholars use the `` vedic religion '' synonymously with `` hinduism . `` 
between 400 and 1000 ce hinduism expanded as the decline of buddhism in india continued . 
the late vedic period  -lrb-  9th to 6th centuries bce  -rrb-  marks the beginning of the upanisadic or vedantic period . 
both jainism and buddhism spread throughout india during the period of the magadha empire . 
indian religions ,  sometimes also termed as dharmic faiths or religions ,  are the religions that originated in the indian subcontinent; namely hinduism ,  jainism ,  buddhism and sikhism . 
the period of the composition ,  redaction and commentary of these texts is known as the vedic period ,  which lasted from roughly 1750 to 500 bce . 
the early islamic period  -lrb-  1100–1500 ce  -rrb-  also gave rise to new movements . 
flood and muesse take the period between 200 bce and 500 bce as a separate period ,  in which the epics and the first puranas were being written . 
the harappan people of the indus valley civilisation ,  which lasted from 3300 to 1300 bce  -lrb-  mature period ,  2600–1900 bce  -rrb-  ,  had an early urbanized culture which predates the vedic religion . 
buddhism survived followed by hindus . 
two of hinduism's most revered `` epics '' ,  the mahabharata and ramayana were compositions of this period . 
according to michaels ,  `` it is justified to see a turning point between the vedic religion and hindu religions '' . 
buddhism lost its position ,  and began to disappear in india . 
the puranic period  -lrb-  200 bce – 500 ce  -rrb-  and early medieval period  -lrb-  500–1100 ce  -rrb-  gave rise to new configurations of hinduism ,  especially bhakti and shaivism ,  shaktism ,  vaishnavism ,  smarta and much smaller groups like the conservative shrauta . 
during the time of the shramanic reform movements `` many elements of the vedic religion were lost '' . 
another periodisation is the division into `` ancient ,  classical ,  medieval and modern periods '' ,  although this periodization has also received criticism . 
jainism and buddhism belong to the sramana tradition . 
scholars believe that parsva ,  the 23rd jain `` tirthankara '' lived during this period in the 9th century bce . 
jainism began its golden period during the reign of emperor kharavela of kalinga in the 2nd century bce . 
the gupta period marked a watershed of indian culture: the guptas performed vedic sacrifices to legitimize their rule ,  but they also patronized buddhism ,  which continued to provide an alternative to brahmanical orthodoxy . 
buddhism continued to have a significant presence in some regions of india until the 12th century . 
all of idaho's state laws are contained in the idaho code and statutes . 
idaho  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the northwestern region of the united states . 
from 1990 to 2010, idaho's population increased by over 560,000  -lrb-  55%  -rrb-  . 
idaho has a state gambling lottery which contributed $333.5 million in payments to all idaho public schools and idaho higher education from 1990 to 2006.
idaho still operates under its original  -lrb-  1889 -rrb- state constitution . 
the united states forest service holds about 38% of idaho's land ,  the most of any state . 
idaho's climate varies widely . 
idaho imports most of the energy it consumes . 
the official state nickname is the `` gem state '' ,  which references idaho's natural beauty . 
idaho borders six u . s .  states and one canadian province . 
however ,  the name `` idaho '' did not fall into obscurity . 
major federal aid highways in idaho:
idaho is served by three transcontinental railroads . 
the major rivers in idaho are the snake river ,  the clark fork/pend oreille river ,  the clearwater river ,  and the salmon river . 
regardless ,  part of washington territory ,  including idaho county ,  was used to create idaho territory in 1863.
idaho was eventually admitted to the union on july 3, 1890, becoming the 43rd state . 
idaho is an important agricultural state ,  producing nearly one-third of the potatoes grown in the united states . 
when oregon became a state ,  what is now idaho was in what remained of the original oregon territory not part of the new state ,  and designated as the washington territory . 
idaho was one of the hardest hit of the pacific northwest states during the great depression . 
from 2004 to 2005, idaho grew the third-fastest ,  surpassed only by nevada and arizona . 
this made idaho the sixth fastest-growing state after arizona ,  nevada ,  florida ,  georgia ,  and utah . 
idaho ,  as part of the oregon country ,  was claimed by both the united states and great britain until the united states gained undisputed jurisdiction in 1846.
the defense may similarly use interrogatories to help build legal and factual defenses to the plaintiff's case . 
for some types of cases there are standard sets of interrogatories available that cover the essential facts ,  and may be modified for the case in which they are used . 
in the united states ,  use of interrogatories is governed by the law where the case has been filed . 
the injured person may ,  however ,  argue that the driver was still responsible  -lrb-  perhaps the driver should have used the horn of the vehicle to alert the third party  -rrb-  ,  or there may be other allegations . 
the affidavit may distinguish interrogatories from requests for admission ,  which are not normally answered under oath . 
intel had also for a number of years been embroiled in litigation . 
intel corporation  -lrb-  commonly known as intel and stylized as intel  -rrb-  is an american multinational corporation and technology company headquartered in santa clara ,  california ,  in the silicon valley . 
in august 2010, intel and infineon technologies announced that intel would acquire infineon's wireless solutions business . 
on june 27, 2006, the sale of intel's xscale assets was announced . 
in the 1980s ,  intel was among the top ten sellers of semiconductors  -lrb-  10th in 1987 -rrb- in the world . 
while intel created the first commercially available microprocessor  -lrb-  intel 4004 -rrb- in 1971 and one of the first microcomputers in 1972, by the early 1980s its business was dominated by dynamic random-access memory chips . 
in 2004 and 2005, amd brought further claims against intel related to unfair competition . 
at its founding ,  intel was distinguished by its ability to make logic circuits using semiconductor devices . 
by launching its intel inside marketing campaign in 1991, intel was able to associate brand loyalty with consumer selection ,  so that by the end of the 1990s ,  its line of pentium processors had become a household name . 
during the turkish war of independence he was also a member of the gna in ankara . 
world war ii broke out in the first year of his presidency ,  and both the allies and the axis pressured i̇nönü to bring turkey into the war on their side . 
afterwards these battles became to be known as the first battle of i̇nönü and second battle of i̇nönü . 
i̇nönü university and malatya i̇nönü stadium in malatya are named after him ,  as is the i̇nönü stadium in istanbul ,  home of the beşiktaş football club . 
i̇nönü knew very well the hardships which his country had suffered during decades of incessant war between 1908 and 1922 and was determined to keep turkey out of another war as long as he could . 
shortly afterwards ,  i̇nönü allowed allied shipping to use the turkish straits to send supplies to the soviet union and on 25 february 1945 he declared war on germany and japan . 
i̇nönü later served as the prime minister of turkey for several terms ,  maintaining the system that mustafa kemal had put in place . 
mustafa i̇smet i̇nönü  -lrb-  ; 24 september 1884 – 25 december 1973 -rrb- was a turkish general and statesman ,  who served as the second president of turkey from 10 november 1938 to 27 may 1950, when his republican people's party was defeated in turkey's second free elections . 
in the first half of 1941, germany which was intent upon invading the soviet union went out of its way to improve relations with turkey as the `` reich '' hoped for a benevolent turkish neutrality when the german-soviet war began . 
roosevelt ,  on the other hand ,  still believed that a turkish attack would be too risky ,  and an eventual turkish failure would have disastrous effects for the allies . 
the top 20 inorganic chemicals manufactured in canada ,  china ,  europe ,  india ,  japan ,  and the us  -lrb-  2005 data  -rrb- : aluminium sulfate ,  ammonia ,  ammonium nitrate ,  ammonium sulfate ,  carbon black ,  chlorine ,  hydrochloric acid ,  hydrogen ,  hydrogen peroxide ,  nitric acid ,  nitrogen ,  oxygen ,  phosphoric acid ,  sodium carbonate ,  sodium chlorate ,  sodium hydroxide ,  sodium silicate ,  sodium sulfate ,  sulfuric acid ,  and titanium dioxide . 
many inorganic compounds are ionic compounds ,  consisting of cations and anions joined by ionic bonding . 
where some salts  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  nacl  -rrb-  are very soluble in water ,  others  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  sio  -rrb-  are not . 
inorganic compounds are found in nature as minerals . 
when one reactant contains hydrogen atoms ,  a reaction can take place by exchanging protons in acid-base chemistry . 
there are more exact terms to use when the new ,  inserted shot is another view of actors: close-up ,  head shot ,  knee shot ,  two shot . 
an insert differs from a cutaway as cutaways cover action `` not '' covered in the master shot . 
bergman retired from filmmaking in december 2003.
bergman began working with sven nykvist ,  his cinematographer ,  in 1953.
by bergman's own account ,  he never had a problem with funding . 
bergman attended palmgren's school as a teenager . 
bergman directed over sixty films and documentaries for cinematic release and for television ,  most of which he also wrote . 
a complete list of bergman's work in theatre can be found under `` stage productions and radio theatre credits '' at `` ingmar bergman filmography '' . 
most of his films were set in sweden ,  and numerous films from `` through a glass darkly ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- onward were filmed on the island of fårö . 
he expressed regret that bergman had left the country ,  hoping that bergman was a `` stronger '' person now when the investigation had shown that he had not done any wrong . 
bergman did two five-month stretches in sweden of mandatory military service . 
in one of the last major interviews with bergman ,  conducted in 2005 on the island of fårö ,  bergman said that despite being active during the exile ,  he had effectively lost eight years of his professional life . 
bergman's film career began in 1941 with his work rewriting scripts ,  but his first major accomplishment was in 1944 when he wrote the screenplay for `` torment ''  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
ernst ingmar bergman  -lrb-  14 july 1918 – 30 july 2007 -rrb- was a swedish director ,  writer ,  and producer who worked in film ,  television ,  theatre and radio . 
from 1670 to 1672, newton lectured on optics . 
this is known as newton's theory of colour . 
subsequent to newton ,  much has been amended . 
newton successfully prosecuted 28 coiners . 
john conduitt ,  newton's assistant at the royal mint and husband of newton's niece ,  also described the event when he wrote about newton's life:
with the `` principia '' ,  newton became internationally recognised . 
stukeley recorded in his `` memoirs of sir isaac newton's life '' a conversation with newton in kensington on 15 april 1726:
newton's mother had three children from her second marriage . 
although it was claimed that he was once engaged ,  newton never married . 
it has been argued that newton conceived of his work at the mint as a continuation of his alchemical work . 
in 1693, the relationship between duillier and newton deteriorated and the book was never completed . 
in 1704, newton published `` opticks '' ,  in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light . 
newton was the second scientist to be knighted ,  after sir francis bacon . 
all of newton's known writings on alchemy are currently being put online in a project undertaken by indiana university: `` the chymistry of isaac newton '' . 
various trees are claimed to be `` the '' apple tree which newton describes . 
mercury poisoning could explain newton's eccentricity in late life . 
 -lrb-  here newton used what became his famous expression ``  ''hypotheses non-fingo '' ''  -rrb-  . 
some of the content contained in newton's papers could have been considered heretical by the church . 
this tract contained the nucleus that newton developed and expanded to form the `` principia '' . 
newton's work on infinite series was inspired by simon stevin's decimals . 
newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared controversy and criticism . 
however ,  this type of view 'has lost support of late with the availability of newton's theological papers' ,  and now most scholars identify newton as an antitrinitarian monotheist . 
the mathematician joseph-louis lagrange said that newton was the greatest genius who ever lived ,  and once added that newton was also `` the most fortunate ,  for we cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish . `` 
such a suggestion fails to account for the calculus in book 1 of newton's `` principia '' itself and in its forerunner manuscripts ,  such as `` de motu corporum in gyrum '' of 1684; this content has been pointed out by critics of both newton's time and modern times . 
newton found 72 of the 78 `` species '' of cubic curves and categorized them into four types . 
in his position at the royal society ,  newton made an enemy of john flamsteed ,  the astronomer royal ,  by prematurely publishing flamsteed's `` historia coelestis britannica '' ,  which newton had used in his studies . 
newton's work has been said `` to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied . `` 
in newton's eyes ,  worshipping christ as god was idolatry ,  to him the fundamental sin . 
thus a conflict between newton's religious views and anglican orthodoxy was averted . 
newton was made president of the royal society in 1703 and an associate of the french académie des sciences . 
in an article entitled `` newton ,  prisms ,  and the 'opticks' of tunable lasers '' it is indicated that newton in his book `` opticks '' was the first to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander . 
scholars long debated whether newton disputed the doctrine of the trinity . 
in kant's essay `` answering the question: what is enlightenment ? 
the notion of the `` thing in itself '' was much discussed by philosophers after kant . 
a common myth is that kant never traveled more than from königsberg his whole life . 
kant was the fourth of nine children  -lrb-  four of whom reached adulthood  -rrb-  . 
kant showed a great aptitude for study at an early age . 
kant also credited david hume with awakening him from a `` dogmatic slumber '' . 
shortly thereafter ,  kant's friend johann friedrich schultz  -lrb-  1739–1805 -rrb-  -lrb-  professor of mathematics  -rrb-  published `` erläuterungen über des herrn professor kant critik der reinen vernunft ''  -lrb-  königsberg ,  1784 -rrb- ,  which was a brief but very accurate commentary on kant's `` critique of pure reason '' . 
reinhold maintained in his letters that kant's `` critique of pure reason '' could settle this dispute by defending the authority and bounds of reason . 
reinhold's letters were widely read and made kant the most famous philosopher of his era . 
kant published other important works on ethics ,  religion ,  law ,  aesthetics ,  astronomy ,  and history . 
there is much discussion among kant scholars about the correct interpretation of this train of thought . 
kant drew a parallel between the copernican revolution and the epistemology of his new transcendental philosophy . 
the issue that vexed kant was central to what 20th-century scholars called `` the philosophy of mind '' . 
kant is best known for his work in the philosophy of ethics and metaphysics ,  but he made significant contributions to other disciplines . 
in one of kant's major works ,  the `` critique of pure reason ''  -lrb-  1781 -rrb- ,  he attempted to explain the relationship between reason and human experience and to move beyond the failures of traditional philosophy and metaphysics . 
the boundaries of the state of indonesia represent the 20th century borders of the dutch east indies . 
european influence ,  particularly that of the dutch ,  would not have its greatest impact on indonesia until the 18th and 19th centuries . 
for most of the colonial period ,  dutch control over its territories in the indonesian archipelago was tenuous . 
western new guinea had been part of the dutch east indies ,  and indonesian nationalists had thus claimed it on this basis . 
other indonesian areas gradually adopted islam ,  making it the dominant religion in java and sumatra by the end of the 16th century . 
the indonesian government declared the territory an indonesian province but relinquished it in 1999.
indonesia was supported materially and diplomatically by the united states ,  australia ,  and the united kingdom ,  who regarded indonesia as an anti-communist ally . 
around the same period ,  in the 6th to 7th century ,  the kalingga kingdom was established in central java northern coast ,  mentioned in chinese account . 
in 1602, the dutch parliament awarded the voc a monopoly on trade and colonial activities in the region at a time before the company controlled any territory in java . 
the name of this kingdom was derived from ancient indian kingdom of kaling ,  which suggest the ancient link between india and indonesia . 
by the 15th century ,  two major states dominated this period; majapahit in east java ,  the greatest of the pre-islamic indonesian states ,  and malacca on the west coast of the malay peninsula ,  arguably one of the greatest of the muslim trading empires ,  this marked the rise of muslim states in indonesian archipelago . 
although muslim traders first travelled through south east asia early in the islamic era ,  the spread of islam among the inhabitants of the indonesian archipelago dates to the 13th century in northern sumatra . 
indonesia like much of southeast asia was influenced by indian culture . 
on 14 january 2016, indonesia encountered a terrorist attack in jakarta . 
the political history of indonesian archipelago during the 7th to 11th centuries was dominated by srivijaya based in sumatra and sailendra that dominated southeast asia based in java and constructed borobudur ,  the largest buddhist monument in the world . 
with the unifying struggle to secure indonesia's independence over ,  divisions in indonesian society began to appear . 
the buni culture was probably the predecessor of the tarumanagara kingdom ,  one of the earliest hindu kingdoms in indonesia ,  producing numerous inscriptions and marking the beginning of the historical period in java . 
medang empire or previously known as mataram kingdom was an indianized kingdom based in central java around modern-day yogyakarta the kingdom was ruled by the sailendra dynasty later by sanjaya dynasty . 
a number of hindu and buddhist states flourished and then declined across indonesia . 
references to the dvipantara or yawadvipa ,  a hindu kingdom in java and sumatra appear in sanskrit writings from 200 bce . 
and by the 5th century ,  stone inscriptions written in pallava scripts were found in java and borneo . 
indonesia alleged that fretilin was communist ,  and feared that an independent east timor would influence separatism in the archipelago . 
srivijaya was an ethnic malay kingdom on sumatra which influenced much of the maritime southeast asia . 
he tried repeatedly in the 1620s and 1630s to drive the dutch from batavia ,  but his armies had met their match ,  and he was forced to share control over java . 
beginning in the 16th century ,  successive waves of europeans—the portuguese ,  spanish ,  dutch and british—sought to dominate the spice trade at its sources in india and the 'spice islands'  -lrb-  maluku  -rrb-  of indonesia . 
the founder of the majapahit empire ,  kertarajasa ,  was the son-in-law of the ruler of the singhasari kingdom ,  also based in java . 
rejecting un supervision ,  the indonesian government under suharto decided to settle the question of west irian ,  the former dutch new guinea ,  in their favour . 
the east indies were treated as a proxy french colony ,  administrated through a dutch intermediary . 
the indonesian government ,  people and authorities has ever since tried to crack down the terrorist cells in indonesia . 
in 1811, java fell to a british east india company force under baron minto ,  the governor-general of india . 
the hindu majapahit kingdom was founded in eastern java in the late 13th century ,  and under gajah mada it experienced what is often referred to as a `` golden age '' in indonesian history ,  when its influence extended to much of southern malay peninsula ,  borneo ,  sumatra ,  and bali from about 1293 to around 1500.
the japanese invasion and subsequent occupation during world war ii ended dutch rule and encouraged the previously suppressed indonesian independence movement . 
yet the shivaist dynasty survived and successfully reclaimed the east java in 1019 then descended to kahuripan kingdom led by airlangga son of udayana of bali . 
after the fall of the netherlands to the first french empire and the dissolution of the dutch east india company in 1800, there were profound changes in the european colonial administration of the east indies . 
from the 7th century ,  the powerful srivijaya naval kingdom flourished as a result of trade and the influences of hinduism and buddhism that were imported with it . 
as the pki rallied in jakarta streets in support ,  the west became increasingly alarmed at indonesian foreign policy and the united states withdrew its aid to indonesia . 
in 1962 the united states pressured the netherlands into secret talks with indonesia which in august 1962 produced the new york agreement ,  and indonesia assumed administrative responsibility for west irian on 1 may 1963.
sulawesi is an island lies on three separate plates ,  the banda sea plate ,  molucca sea plate ,  and sunda plate . 
karimata strait ,  java sea and arafura sea were formed as the sea level rose at the end of the pleistocene . 
the main islands of sumatra ,  java ,  madura ,  and kalimantan lie on the sunda plate and geographers have conventionally grouped them ,   -lrb-  along with sulawesi  -rrb-  ,  as the greater sunda islands . 
the northern part of sulawesi and maluku islands lie on the convergence of sunda plate and molucca sea plate ,  making it an active tectonic region with volcanic chains such as the sangihe and talaud islands . 
nusa tenggara or lesser sunda islands consists of two strings of islands stretching eastward from bali toward southern maluku . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
according to 2011 estimate ,  total median age of indonesia is 28.2 years . 
the mpr is the legislative branch in indonesia's political system . 
the new order  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the term coined by president suharto to characterise his regime as he came to power in 1966.
from 1957, the guided democracy was the political system in place until the new order began in 1966.
the term `` new order '' in more recent times has become synonymous with the suharto years  -lrb-  1966–1998 -rrb- . 
the transition to the `` new order '' in the mid-1960s ,  ousted sukarno after 22 years in the position . 
the post-suharto era began with the fall of suharto in 1998 during which indonesia has been in a period of transition ,  an era known as `` reformasi ''  -lrb-  english: `` reform ''  -rrb-  . 
the politics of indonesia take place in the framework of a presidential representative democratic republic whereby the president of indonesia is both head of state and head of government and of a multi-party system . 
immediately following the attempted coup in 1965, the political situation was uncertain ,  but the new order found much popular support from groups wanting a separation from indonesia's problems since its independence . 
indonesia is a founding member of the association of south east asian nations ,  and thereby a member of both asean+3 and the east asia summit . 
at the beginning of indonesia's reform era ,  us exports to indonesia in 1999 totalled $2 billion ,  down significantly from $4.5 billion in 1997.
indonesia is the world's largest tin market . 
agriculture is a key sector which contributed to 14.43% of indonesia's gdp . 
inflation has long been a problem in indonesia . 
japan is indonesia's main export partner . 
in 2012, indonesia's real gdp growth reached 6% ,  then it steadily decreased below 5% until 2015.
there are 50 million small businesses in indonesia with online usage growth of 48% in 2010.
average net wage in indonesia is varied by sector . 
this is a chart of trend of indonesia's gdp at market prices by the imf with figures in millions of rupiah . 
exports from the textile sector in 2012 was $13.7 billion . 
in 2015, total public spending was rp 1,806 trillion  -lrb-  us$130.88 billion ,  15.7% of gdp  -rrb-  . 
indonesia regained its investment grade rating from fitch rating in late 2011, and from moody's rating in early 2012, after losing it in the 1997 crisis ,  during which indonesia spent more than rp . 
in 2011, indonesia released 55,010 working visas for foreigners ,  an increase of 10% compared to 2010, while the number of foreign residents in indonesia ,  excluding tourists and foreign emissaries was 111,752, rose by 6% compared to last year . 
as of 28 june 2010, the indonesia stock exchange had 341 listed companies with a combined market capitalisation of $269.9 billion . 
at the end of 2017, indonesia's inflation rate was 3.61 percent ,  above the government-set forecast of 3.0–3.5 percent . 
indonesia has the largest economy in southeast asia and is one of the emerging market economies of the world . 
in late 2004, indonesia faced an 'mini-crisis' due to international oil prices rises and imports . 
in 2012, indonesia replaced india as the second-fastest-growing g-20 economy ,  behind china . 
indonesia has a long list of print media ,  in the form of newspapers and magazines . 
a number of lines connect indonesia to international communication routes . 
communications in indonesia has a complex history due to the need to reach an extended archipelago of over 17,500 islands . 
