the oath is:
the oath is taken in bengali . 
the affirmation is: upon taking office ,  the governor-general of australia is required to take the above oath of allegiance as well as a second oath of office:
the word was first used in its latin form by philosophers based on the latin roots ,  which themselves are based on the greek . 
while the etymology is greek ,  the oldest extant record of the word itself ,  the new latin form `` ontologia '' ,  appeared in 1606 in the work `` ogdoas scholastica '' by jacob lorhard  -lrb-  `` lorhardus ''  -rrb-  and in 1613 in the `` lexicon philosophicum '' by rudolf göckel  -lrb-  `` goclenius ''  -rrb-  . 
the ordovician  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a geologic period and system ,  the second of six periods of the paleozoic era . 
the ordovician spans 41.2 million years from the end of the cambrian period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  to the start of the silurian period mya . 
oregano is related to the herb marjoram ,  sometimes being referred to as wild marjoram . 
some varieties show a flavour intermediate between oregano and marjoram . 
oregano  -lrb-   ,  ; origanum vulgare  -rrb-  is a flowering plant in the mint family  -lrb-  lamiaceae  -rrb-  . 
obituary is one of the pioneering bands of the death metal genre . 
obituary is an american death metal band formed in tampa ,  florida ,  in 1984.
after 1997's `` back from the dead '' album ,  the band had grown tired of touring ,  which led to the group disbanding . 
the following year ,  shortly before the release of the band's first album `` slowly we rot '' ,  they changed their name to obituary . 
ottoman classical music was an important part of the education of the ottoman elite . 
ottoman turkish was the official language of the empire . 
in modern turkish ,  it is known as `` osmanlı i̇mparatorluğu ''  -lrb-  `` the ottoman empire ''  -rrb-  or `` osmanlı devleti ''  -lrb-  `` the ottoman state ''  -rrb-  . 
the tughra were calligraphic monograms ,  or signatures ,  of the ottoman sultans ,  of which there were 35.
in the 15th and 16th centuries ,  the ottoman empire entered a period of expansion . 
censuses of ottoman territories only began in the early 19th century . 
the modernization of the ottoman empire in the 19th century started with the military . 
it ended when mehmed i emerged as the sultan and restored ottoman power . 
the ottoman legal system accepted the religious law over its subjects . 
the ottoman ministry of post was established in istanbul on 23 october 1840.
the representatives formed the imperial government of the ottoman empire . 
in the late 19th century ,  the ottoman legal system saw substantial reform . 
the history of the ottoman empire during world war i began with the ottoman surprise attack on the russian black sea coast on 29 october 1914.
the word `` ottoman '' is a historical anglicisation of the name of osman i ,  the founder of the empire and of the ruling house of osman  -lrb-  also known as the ottoman dynasty  -rrb-  . 
the ottoman islamic legal system was set up differently from traditional european courts . 
the ottoman constitution of 1876 did officially cement the official imperial status of turkish . 
modern ottoman studies indicate that the change in relations between the ottoman turks and central europe was caused by the opening of the new sea routes . 
charles xii persuaded the ottoman sultan ahmed iii to declare war on russia ,  which resulted in an ottoman victory in the pruth river campaign of 1710–1711, in moldavia . 
until the 19th century ,  ottoman prose did not develop to the extent that contemporary divan poetry did . 
the shipyard at barrow ,  england ,  built its first submarine in 1886 for the ottoman empire . 
the two primary streams of ottoman written literature are poetry and prose . 
ottoman architecture was influenced by persian ,  byzantine greek and islamic architectures . 
in the century after the death of osman i ,  ottoman rule began to extend over anatolia and the balkans . 
albanian resistance was a major obstacle to ottoman expansion on the italian peninsula . 
the ottomans ended the byzantine empire with the 1453 conquest of constantinople by mehmed the conqueror . 
slavery was a part of ottoman society ,  with most slaves employed as domestic servants . 
ottoman divan poetry was a highly ritualized and symbolic art form . 
plague remained a major scourge in ottoman society until the second quarter of the 19th century . 
the officially accepted state dīn ``  -lrb-  madh'hab  -rrb- ``  of the ottomans was sunni ``  -lrb-  hanafi jurisprudence  -rrb-  . `` 
the ottoman navy recovered quickly ,  persuading venice to sign a peace treaty in 1573, allowing the ottomans to expand and consolidate their position in north africa . 
much of the cuisine of former ottoman territories today is descended from a shared ottoman cuisine ,  especially turkish ,  and including greek ,  balkan ,  armenian ,  and middle eastern cuisines . 
the ottoman empire  -lrb-  ;  ,  ' ,  literally `` the exalted ottoman state ''; modern turkish: ' or '  -rrb-  ,  also historically known in western europe as the turkish empire or simply turkey ,  was a state that controlled much of southeast europe ,  western asia and north africa between the 14th and early 20th centuries . 
the establishment of ottoman military aviation dates back to between june 1909 and july 1911.
over the course of ottoman history ,  the ottomans managed to build a large collection of libraries complete with translations of books from other cultures ,  as well as original manuscripts . 
in 1878, austria-hungary unilaterally occupied the ottoman provinces of bosnia-herzegovina and novi pazar . 
the body controlled swaths of the ottoman economy ,  and used its position to ensure that european capital continued to penetrate the empire ,  often to the detriment of local ottoman interests . 
during the years of the stagnation period ,  ottoman architecture moved away from this style ,  however . 
during this time ,  atrocities were committed by the ottoman government against the armenians ,  assyrians and pontic greeks . 
the primary purpose of the imperial harem was to ensure the birth of male heirs to the ottoman throne and secure the continuation of the direct patrilineal  -lrb-  male-line  -rrb-  descendance of the ottoman sultans . 
the `` ottoman navy foundation '' was established in 1910 to buy new ships through public donations . 
ottoman illumination covers non-figurative painted or drawn decorative art in books or on sheets in `` muraqqa '' or albums ,  as opposed to the figurative images of the ottoman miniature . 
the ottoman navy vastly contributed to the expansion of the empire's territories on the european continent . 
however ,  the collapsing ottoman economy could not sustain the fleet's strength for too long . 
before the reforms of the 19th and 20th centuries ,  the state organisation of the ottoman empire was a system with two main dimensions ,  the military administration and the civil administration . 
the discovery of new maritime trade routes by western european states allowed them to avoid the ottoman trade monopoly . 
the british historian norman stone suggested many continuities between the eastern roman and ottoman empires such as the `` zeugarion '' tax of byzantium becoming the ottoman `` resm-i çift '' tax ,  the `` pronoia '' land-holding system that linked the amount of land one owned with one's ability to raise cavalry becoming the ottoman `` timar '' system ,  and the ottoman measurement for land the `` donum '' was the same as the byzantine `` stremma '' . 
the crimean war  -lrb-  1853–1856 -rrb- was part of a long-running contest between the major european powers for influence over territories of the declining ottoman empire . 
opel had been transformed and rebuilt before . 
opel received a patent on this technology . 
rv 1888 opel rüsselsheim is a cycling club . 
the buick regal is a rebadged opel insignia . 
opel's relationship to gm in america during the war has been disputed . 
opel's first turbocharged car was the opel rekord 2.3 td ,  first shown at geneva in march 1984.
the first opel logo contained the letters `` a '' and `` o '' – the initials of the company's founder ,  adam opel . 
at the time of opel's death in 1895, he was the leader in both markets . 
opel is in most cases fully responsible for the car architectures and technologies up to the opel insignia/buick regal . 
in 2011, frank weber left opel for bmw . 
cars and truck production lines were lost by opel . 
opel traces its roots to a sewing machine manufacturer founded by adam opel in 1862 in rüsselsheim am main . 
in 1866, opel expanded and started to produce bicycles . 
the sc opel rüsselsheim is a soccer club with over 450 members . 
opel is headquartered in rüsselsheim am main ,  hesse ,  germany . 
1999 was the last time when opel was profitable for the full year . 
 '' -lrb-  opel  -rrb-  had been seized by the german government soon after the war began . 
the opel writing was black and in the middle of the oval symbol . 
a moskvitch model that bore no trace of opel engineering was not introduced until 1959, and by that time ,  opel was just about ready to introduce a new kadett of its own . 
the buick cascada is a rebadged opel cascada ,  built in poland and sold in the united states unchanged from the opel in all but badging . 
the next step for opel was the resumption of passenger car production . 
never was the outlook bleaker at adam opel ag than in the first months of 1945.
the saturn l-series was a modified version of the opel vectra b . 
the company was founded in rüsselsheim ,  hesse ,  germany ,  on 21 january 1862, by adam opel . 
opel established the opel performance center in 1997, which is responsible for the development of high-performance cars such as the astra opc ,  corsa opc ,  and insignia opc . 
opel actually fully recovered from the consequences of the postwar era . 
world war ii brought to rüsselsheim the only year in the history of opel – 1945 – in which it produced fewer vehicles since that first lutzmann-authored opel was made in 1899.
in 1935, opel became the first german car manufacturer to produce over 100,000 vehicles a year . 
below is a list of current or recent opel models which are sold under gm's north american brands . 
in 1909, the opel 4/8 ps model ,  known as the `` doktorwagen ''  -lrb-  `` doctor's car ''  -rrb-  was produced . 
the drake passage is located between south america and antarctica . 
the chilling of the south ocean deep water began in earnest once the tasmanian gateway and the drake passage opened fully . 
regardless of the time at which the opening of the drake passage occurred ,  the effect on the cooling of the southern ocean would have been the same . 
the other major oceanic gateway opening during this time was the tasman ,  or tasmanian ,  depending on the paper ,  gateway between australia and antarctica . 
the earliest hypothesized time for the opening of the drake passage is around 30 ma . 
more information about the evolution of north atlantic deep water will be given a few sections down . 
isotopic evidence suggests that during the early oligocene ,  the main source of deep water was the north pacific and the southern ocean . 
as the continents shifted to a more modern configuration ,  so too did ocean circulation . 
this would have facilitated an earlier onset of the antarctic circumpolar current . 
the oligocene sees the beginnings of modern ocean circulation ,  with tectonic shifts causing the opening and closing of ocean gateways . 
the free software foundation has related but distinct criteria for evaluating whether or not a license qualifies software as free software . 
in the interpretation of the fsf ,  open-source license criteria focus on the availability of the `` source code '' and the ability to modify and share it ,  while free software licenses focuses on the user's freedom to use the `` program '' ,  to modify it ,  and to share it . 
the name occitan comes from `` lenga d'òc ''  -lrb-  `` language of òc ''  -rrb-  ,  `` òc '' being the occitan word for `` yes . `` 
in fact ,  catalan was considered an occitan dialect until the end of the 19th century . 
the long-term survival of occitan is in grave doubt . 
indeed ,  in the 12th and 13th centuries ,  catalan troubadours such as guerau de cabrera ,  guilhem de bergadan ,  guilhem de cabestany ,  huguet de mataplana ,  raimon vidal de besalú ,  cerverí de girona ,  formit de perpinhan ,  and jofre de foixà wrote in occitan . 
unlike other romance languages such as french or spanish ,  there is no single written standard language called `` occitan '' ,  and occitan has no official status in france ,  home to most of occitania . 
  -rrb-  ,  `` daurel e betó ''  -lrb-  12th or 13th century  -rrb-  ,  `` las ,  qu'i non sun sparvir ,  astur ''  -lrb-  11th century  -rrb-  and `` tomida femina ''  -lrb-  9th or 10th century  -rrb-  . 
today ,  occitan is an official language in catalonia ,  where a subdialect of gascon known as aranese is spoken in the val d'aran . 
nonetheless ,  the number of proficient speakers of occitan is dropping precipitously . 
occitan  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  ,  also known as lenga d'òc  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  by its native speakers ,  is a romance language . 
occitan's greatest decline was during the french revolution ,  during which diversity of language was considered a threat . 
these efforts are hindered by the rapidly declining use of occitan as a spoken language in much of southern france ,  as well as by the significant differences in phonology and vocabulary among different occitan dialects . 
the old turkic script  -lrb-  also known as variously göktürk script ,  orkhon script ,  orkhon-yenisey script  -rrb-  is the alphabet used by the göktürks and other early turkic khanates during the 8th to 10th centuries to record the old turkic language . 
most of these characters are either identical with or very similar to the letters of the turkic orkhon script . 
the old turkic manuscripts ,  of which there are none earlier than the 9th century ,  were found in present-day xinjiang and represent old uyghur ,  a different turkic dialect than the one represented in the old turkic inscriptions in the orkhon valley and elsewhere . 
the preserved inscriptions were dated to between the 8th and 10th centuries . 
variants of the script were found from mongolia and xinjiang in the east to the balkans in the west . 
despite that ,  fsf founder richard stallman stresses underlying philosophical differences when he comments: open knowledge international  -lrb-  oki  -rrb-  described in their open definition for open content ,  open data ,  and open licenses ,  `` open/free '' as synonymous in the definitions of open/free in the open source definition ,  the fsf and the definition of free cultural works:
open source doesn't just mean access to the source code . 
in 2012, under the leadership of osi director and then-president simon phipps ,  the osi began transitioning towards a membership-based governance structure . 
subsequently ,  the osi announced an individual membership program and listed a number of corporate sponsors . 
kuhn later recollected that the charter membership was a `` brouhaha  -lrb-  bordering on a flame fest  -rrb- ``  and took no action . 
in nature ,  free oxygen is produced by the light-driven splitting of water during oxygenic photosynthesis . 
the unusually high concentration of oxygen gas on earth is the result of the oxygen cycle . 
as `` dioxygen '' ,  two oxygen atoms are chemically bound to each other . 
oxygen is a chemical element with symbol o and atomic number 8.
the common allotrope of elemental oxygen on earth is called dioxygen ,   ,  the major part of the earth's atmospheric oxygen  -lrb-  see occurrence  -rrb-  . 
liquid oxygen may also be condensed from air using liquid nitrogen as a coolant . 
liquid oxygen is so magnetic that ,  in laboratory demonstrations ,  a bridge of liquid oxygen may be supported against its own weight between the poles of a powerful magnet . 
free oxygen also occurs in solution in the world's water bodies . 
oxygen is the most abundant chemical element by mass in the earth's biosphere ,  air ,  sea and land . 
paleoclimatologists measure the ratio of oxygen-18 and oxygen-16 in the shells and skeletons of marine organisms to determine the climate millions of years ago  -lrb-  see oxygen isotope ratio cycle  -rrb-  . 
the name `` oxygen '' was coined in 1777 by antoine lavoisier ,  who first recognized oxygen as a chemical element and correctly characterized the role it plays in combustion . 
oxygen dissolves more readily in water than nitrogen ,  and in freshwater more readily than seawater . 
other estimates of the oceanic contribution to atmospheric oxygen are higher ,  while some estimates are lower ,  suggesting oceans produce ~45% of earth's atmospheric oxygen each year . 
the spectroscopy of molecular oxygen is associated with the atmospheric processes of aurora and airglow . 
excited state singlet molecular oxygen is responsible for red chemiluminescence in solution . 
oxygen presents two spectrophotometric absorption bands peaking at the wavelengths 687 and 760 nm . 
osmium pentafluoride  -lrb-  osf  -rrb-  is known ,  but osmium trifluoride  -lrb-  osf  -rrb-  has not yet been synthesized . 
metallic osmium is harmless but finely divided metallic osmium is pyrophoric and reacts with oxygen at room temperature ,  forming volatile osmium tetroxide . 
another osmium compound ,  osmium ferricyanide  -lrb-  osfecn  -rrb-  ,  exhibits similar fixing and staining action . 
after it is dissolved ,  osmium is separated from the other platinum group metals by distillation or extraction with organic solvents of the volatile osmium tetroxide . 
osmium is usually sold as a minimum 99.9% pure powder . 
as with all of the platinum group metals ,  osmium can be found naturally in alloys with nickel or copper . 
in 2017, the estimated us import of osmium for consumption was 90 kg . 
osmium forms compounds with oxidation states ranging from −2 to +8.
osmium has high reflectivity in the ultraviolet range of the electromagnetic spectrum; for example ,  at 600 å osmium has a reflectivity twice that of gold . 
nowadays osmium is obtained primarily from the processing of platinum and nickel ores . 
the most common compound exhibiting the +8 oxidation state is osmium tetroxide . 
this makes osmium tetroxide the main source of contact with the environment . 
apart from metals ,  hydrogen can also displace metal oxides to form hydrogen oxide ,  also known as water:
conversion of a metal oxide to the metal is called reduction . 
in such systems ,  the metal center transfers an oxide ligand to the organic compound followed by regeneration of the metal oxide ,  often by oxygen in the air . 
many metal oxides convert to metals simply by heating . 
metals that are more reactive displace the oxide of the metals that are less reactive . 
since metals that are reactive form oxides that are stable ,  some metal oxides must be electrolyzed to be reduced . 
due to its electronegativity ,  oxygen forms stable chemical bonds with almost all elements to give the corresponding oxides . 
normally ,  rights of use of common land in england and wales were ,  and still are ,  closely regulated ,  and available only to `` commoners '' . 
hardin's example could only apply to unregulated use of land regarded as a common resource . 
the animals then use the warm-season grasses during the heat of the summer ,  and the cool-season grasses recover for fall grazing . 
in reality the use of common land in england and wales was a triumph of conserving a scarce resource using agreed custom and practice . 
it reduces the usefulness ,  productivity ,  and biodiversity of the land and is one cause of desertification and erosion . 
overgrazing is also indicated in livestock performance and condition . 
oxford was heavily damaged during the norman invasion of 1066.
oxford  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a city in south central england and the county town of oxfordshire . 
in 1925 the city was renamed oslo . 
oslo  -lrb-   ;  ,    -rrb-  is the capital and most populous city of norway . 
oslo is the economic and governmental centre of norway . 
some gay rights activists defend outing as a tactic . 
 -lrb-  `` why i oppose outing '' ,  `` outweek '' ,  may 29, 1991 -rrb-
further ,  outing is not the airing of private details . 
outing may be found to be libel by a court of law . 
in season 5 the television series `` the l word '' ,  the issue of public outing is addressed in the form of alice pieszecki ,  a web-journalist ,  outing a basketball player who made offensive comments toward gay people while himself being gay . 
one of the first outings by an activist in the united states occurred in february 1989.
it is hard to pinpoint the first use of outing in the modern sense . 
the article `` forcing gays out of the closet '' by william a .  henry iii in `` time ''  -lrb-  january 29, 1990 -rrb- introduced the term `` outing '' to the general public . 
the harden–eulenburg affair of 1907–1909 was the first public outing scandal of the twentieth century . 
signorile argues that the outing of journalist pete williams `` and its aftermath did indeed make a big dent in the military's policy against gays . 
thus outing is `` both permissible and an expected consequence of living morally . `` 
some gay activists ,  however ,  continue to disapprove of outing as a political tactic ,  arguing that even anti-gay conservatives have a right to personal privacy which should be respected . 
 ''outrage '' featured interviews with several people who claim that governor of florida charlie crist has led a private gay life while publicly opposing gay marriage and gay adoption . 
in 2004, gay rights activist michael rogers outed edward schrock ,  a republican congressman from virginia . 
the team finished the 1961 season with a 2–12 record . 
the raiders finished the 2013 season with a record of 4–12.
oakland finished 12–4 in the 2000 season ,  the team's most successful in a decade . 
their season ended with another disappointing 8–8 record . 
this was the most selections for the team since 1991, and the most for any team in the 2016 nfl season . 
under gruden ,  the raiders posted consecutive 8–8 seasons in 1998 and 1999.
the team departed oakland to play in los angeles from the 1982 season until the 1994 season before returning to oakland at the start of the 1995 season . 
in 1974, oakland had a 12–2 regular season ,  which included a nine-game winning streak . 
the game went into overtime and the patriots won 16–13.
in 1990, shell led the raiders to a 12–4 record . 
flores led the raiders to another 9–7 season ,  but not the playoffs . 
the raiders lost the 37–27 on december 8, 2013, but won the most recent matchup 20–34 on november 1, 2015.
they lost their home opener on monday night football against san diego 22–14, and finished the season 4–12.
subsequently ,  the team announced that it will continue to be known as the oakland raiders for the 2017 and 2018 nfl seasons and will play its games in oakland for at least those two seasons . 
oakland defeated the oilers in the 1980 wild card playoffs 27–7 and defeated the titans in the 2002 afc championship game 41–24; the combined scores of these four games is 164–45.
feldman began the 1962 season as raiders head coach but was fired on october 16, 1962 after an 0–5 start . 
the first contest being the following year during the 2002 season in oakland ,  with the raiders winning 27–20; they met in the 2005 season opener in new england with the patriots ruining randy moss' debut as a raider 30–20; the patriots defeated the raiders 49–26 in december 2008 in bill belichick's 100th regular season win as patriots coach; a patriots 31–19 win during the 2011 season; a scrappy 16–9 patriots win in the third week of the 2014 season ,  and the patriots' 33–8 win in mexico city in 2017.
the raiders showed great improvement in del rio's first season ,  improving upon their three-win 2014 season ,  going 7–9 in the 2015 season . 
the team's finish to the 2008 season would turn out to match their best since they lost the super bowl in the 2002 season . 
the raiders' fortunes declined after that ,  and from 1986 to 1989, they finished no better than 8–8 and posted consecutive losing seasons for the first time since 1961–62.
the broncos reached their first ever super bowl when they defeated the raiders 20–17 in the afc championship game . 
after a 4–12 season and a second consecutive last place finish ,  turner was fired as head coach . 
however ,  this time ,  they lost 27–23 by the new york jets in the afl championship game . 
the following year ,  the raiders ended the 1968 season with a 12–2 record and again winning the afl west division title . 
the 49ers won the game 34-3 to tie their regular season series at 7.
the raiders finished the 1967 season with a 13–1–0 record and won the 1967 afl championship . 
in their debut year under erdelatz the raiders finished with a 6–8 record . 
after splitting the first home season between kezar stadium and candlestick ,  the raiders moved exclusively to candlestick park in 1961, where total attendance for the season was about 50,000, and finished 2–12.
they would go on to win 27–10, winning their second super bowl and becoming the first team to ever win the super bowl after getting into the playoffs as the wild card team . 
the team defeated the dolphins 12–7, ending miami's winning streak . 
the raiders defeated pittsburgh 33–14 in the divisional round of the playoffs to reach the afc championship ,  but lost 27–10 to the miami dolphins . 
the raiders finished 4–12 and in last place in the afc west for the first time since 2014.
the raiders plan to remain in oakland through 2018 – and possibly 2019 – and relocate to las vegas in either 2019 or 2020, depending on the completion of the team's planned new stadium . 
however ,  following a 9–7 record in the 1994 season that resulted in no postseason ,  art shell was fired . 
after starting the 1989 season with a 1–3 record ,  shanahan was fired by davis ,  which began a long-standing feud between the two . 
the raiders did play one regular season game at california memorial stadium in berkeley . 
with significant injuries hampering the team ,  including the loss of starting quarterback carr in the second to last regular season game ,  they lost to the texans 27–14.
shanahan led the team to a 7–9 season in 1988, and allen and jackson continued to trade places as the starting running back . 
the 1981 raiders fell to 7–9 record ,  failing to make the playoffs following their super bowl win . 
the following season saw the raiders finish 11–3, but they lost the division title to the denver broncos . 
callahan's second season as head coach was considerably less successful . 
the pittsburgh steelers' rivalry with the raiders has historically been very tight; as of the 2015 season the raiders lead the regular season series 12 wins to 10, and their playoff rivalry is tied 3–3.
with the hiring ,  shell became the first african american head coach in the modern nfl era ,  but the team still finished a middling 8–8.
beasley's stations kcye-fm  -lrb-  102.7 -rrb- `` the coyote '' and kdwn-am  -lrb-  720 -rrb- began carrying all preseason and regular season games in the 2017 season . 
the letter is the fourth most common letter in the english alphabet . 
the use of this phoenician letter for a vowel sound is due to the early greek alphabets ,  which adopted the letter as o `` omicron '' to represent the vowel  . 
in most dialects of british english ,  it is either an open-mid back rounded vowel or an open back rounded vowel ; in american english ,  it is most commonly an unrounded back to a central vowel  . 
in 2011, according to politifact and others ,  the top 400 wealthiest americans `` have more wealth than half of all americans combined . `` 
oligarchy  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a form of power structure in which power rests with a small number of people . 
overall there are 35 oligarchic groups
in 1998 bob herbert of `` the new york times '' referred to modern american plutocrats as `` the donor class ''  -lrb-  list of top donors  -rrb-  and defined the class ,  for the first time ,  as `` a tiny group—just one-quarter of 1 percent of the population—and it is not representative of the rest of the nation . 
gilens says that average citizens only get what they want if wealthy americans and business-oriented interest groups also want it; and that when a policy favored by the majority of the american public is implemented ,  it is usually because the economic elites did not oppose it . 
the born free generation  -lrb-  born since independence in 1980 -rrb- has no birthright to rule zimbabwe . 
arabic is the official language of oman . 
it continues to rule oman to this day . 
homosexual acts are illegal in oman . 
oman also has 4 a202-18 bravos ,  and 8 mfi-17b mushshaqs . 
oman  -lrb-   ; '   -rrb-  ,  officially the sultanate of oman  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is an arab country on the southeastern coast of the arabian peninsula in western asia . 
the sultan of muscat would be responsible for the external affairs of oman . 
in the 1690s ,  saif bin sultan ,  the imam of oman ,  pressed down the swahili coast . 
oman is an absolute monarchy by male primogeniture . 
oman is an absolute monarchy ,  with the sultan's word having the force of law . 
oman was one of the last countries to abolish slavery in 1970.
the royal navy of oman had 4,200 men in 2000, and is headquartered at seeb . 
in 1783, oman's seyyid sultan ,  defeated ruler of muscat ,  was granted sovereignty over gwadar . 
 ,  oman's population is over 4 million ,  with 2.23 million omani nationals and 1.76 million expatriates . 
the plight of domestic workers in oman is a taboo subject . 
oman's national anthem ,  `` as-salam as-sultani '' is dedicated to sultan qaboos . 
like the rest of the persian gulf ,  oman generally has one of the hottest climates in the world—with summer temperatures in muscat and northern oman averaging  . 
following the 1970s energy crisis ,  oman doubled their oil output between 1979 and 1985.
in 1981 oman became a founding member of the six-nation gulf cooperation council . 
oman also maintains a modestly sized paramilitary force of 4,400 men . 
mainland oman is separated by a small strip of uae territory from musandam . 
the central desert of oman is an important source of meteorites for scientific analysis . 
according to sipri ,  oman was the 23rd largest arms importer from 2012–2016.
drinking water is available throughout oman ,  either piped or delivered . 
except for a brief persian invasion in the late 1740s ,  oman has been self-governing ever since . 
oman's other exclave ,  inside uae territory ,  known as madha ,  located halfway between the musandam peninsula and the main body of oman ,  is part of the musandam governorate ,  covering approximately  . 
oman's proved reserves of petroleum total about 5.5 billion barrels ,  25th largest in the world . 
tourism in oman has grown considerably recently ,  and it is expected to be one of the largest industries in the country . 
local and national entities have noted unethical treatment of animals in oman . 
summer temperatures in salalah range from —relatively cool compared to northern oman . 
the world travel & tourism council stated that oman is the fastest growing tourism destination in the middle east . 
he then defeated bal'arab ,  and was elected sultan of muscat and imam of oman . 
several foreign powers attacked oman . 
oman is the only country with a majority ibadi population . 
oman once possessed the island of zanzibar ,  on the east coast of africa as a colony . 
during the period of sultan said ibn sultan's reign  -lrb-  1806–1856 -rrb- ,  oman built up its overseas colonies ,  profiting from the slave trade . 
muscat and oman was the object of franco-british rivalry throughout the 18th century . 
zanzibar paid an annual subsidy to muscat and oman until its independence in early 1964.
in 1154 the indigenous nabhani dynasty took control of oman ,  and the nabhani kings ruled oman until 1470, with an interruption of 37 years between 1406 and 1443.
this period also included a revolt in oman's colony of zanzibar in the year 1784.
in 751 ibadi muslims ,  a moderate branch of the kharijites ,  established an imamate in oman . 
when sultan sa'id bin sultan al-busaid died in 1856, his sons quarreled over the succession . 
this conflict was resolved temporarily by the treaty of seeb ,  which granted the imam rule in the interior imamate of oman ,  while recognising the sovereignty of the sultan in muscat and its surroundings . 
the death of sa'id bin sultan in 1856 prompted a further division: the descendants of the late sultan ruled muscat and oman  -lrb-  thuwaini ibn said al-busaid ,  r .  1856–1866 -rrb- and zanzibar  -lrb-  mayid ibn said al-busaid ,  r .  1856–1870 -rrb-; the qais branch intermittently allied itself with the ulama to restore imamate legitimacy . 
seljuk power even spread through oman to koothanallur in south india . 
oman is a country situated in southwest asia ,  bordering the arabian sea ,  gulf of oman ,  and persian gulf ,  between yemen and the united arab emirates  -lrb-  uae  -rrb-  . 
west of the coastal areas lies the tableland of central oman . 
except for the foggy and fertile dhofar ,  all of the coast and the lowlands around the hajar mountains are part of the gulf of oman desert and semi-desert ecoregion ,  while the mountains themselves are a distinct habitat . 
oman is located in the southeastern quarter of the arabian peninsula and covers a total land area of  . 
about 50% of the population in oman lives in muscat and the batinah coastal plain northwest of the capital; about 200,000 live in the dhofar  -lrb-  southern  -rrb-  region; and about 30,000 live in the remote musandam peninsula on the strait of hormuz . 
some 2 million  -lrb-  45% of entire population  -rrb-  expatriates live in oman ,  most of whom are workers from india ,  pakistan ,  bangladesh ,  morocco ,  jordan ,  and the philippines . 
there are three court levels in oman ,  the elementary court is the lowest court ,  followed by the court of appeal ,  and then the supreme court as the highest court in the country . 
the sultan is a direct descendant of usman sa'id bin sultan ,  who first opened relations with the united states in 1833.
politics of oman place in a framework of an absolute monarchy where by the sultan of oman is not only head of state ,  but also the head of government . 
the court system in oman is regulated by royal decree 90/99.
oman is not a member of opec . 
oman does not have the immense oil resources of some of its neighbors . 
oman is a country in the middle east . 
it also provides strong protections for foreign businesses investing in oman . 
omanization ,  however ,  in the private sector is not always successful . 
in oman ,  the omanization program has been in operation since 1988, working toward replacing expatriates with trained omani personnel . 
agriculture and fishing are the traditional way of life in oman . 
the networks providing 3g coverage are oman mobile ,  ooredoo ,  renna and friendi . 
oman has developed close ties to its neighbors; it joined the six-member gulf cooperation council when it was established in 1980.
oman has traditionally supported middle east peace initiatives ,  as it did those in 1983.
while the hebrew ,  greek and latin versions of the hebrew bible are the best known old testaments ,  there were others . 
this septuagint remains the basis of the old testament in the eastern orthodox church . 
the books that comprise the old testament canon ,  as well as their order and names ,  differ between christian denominations . 
catholic and orthodox old testaments contain two  -lrb-  catholic old testament  -rrb-  to four  -lrb-  orthodox  -rrb-  books of maccabees ,  written in the 2nd and 1st centuries bc . 
the problem of evil plays a large part in the old testament . 
the second part of the christian bible is the new testament . 
although the god of the old testament is not consistently presented as the only god who exists ,  he is always depicted as the only god whom israel is to worship ,  or the one `` true god '' ,  that only yahweh is almighty ,  and both jews and christians have always interpreted the bible  -lrb-  both the `` old '' and `` new '' testaments  -rrb-  as an affirmation of the oneness of almighty god . 
these history books make up around half the total content of the old testament . 
the old testament stresses the special relationship between god and his chosen people ,  israel ,  but includes instructions for proselytes as well . 
the name `` old testament '' reflects christianity's understanding of itself as the fulfillment of jeremiah's prophecy of a new covenant  -lrb-  which is similar to `` testament '' and often conflated  -rrb-  to replace the existing covenant between god and israel  -lrb-  jeremiah 31:31 -rrb- . 
hebrew texts commenced to be translated into greek in alexandria in about 280 and continued until about 130 bc . 
the old testament contains 39  -lrb-  protestant  -rrb-  ,  46  -lrb-  catholic  -rrb-  ,  or more  -lrb-  orthodox and other  -rrb-  books ,  divided ,  very broadly ,  into the pentateuch  -lrb-  torah  -rrb-  ,  the historical books ,  the `` wisdom '' books and the prophets . 
for example ,  to convert 125 to octal: therefore ,  125 = 175.
two zeroes can be added at the left:  ,  corresponding the octal digits  ,  yielding the octal representation 112.
octal representation may be particularly handy with non-ascii bytes of utf-8, which encodes groups of 6 bits ,  and where any start byte has octal value \3nn and any continuation byte has octal value \2nn . 
the octal numeral system ,  or oct for short ,  is the base-8 number system ,  and uses the digits 0 to 7.
the modrm byte ,  which is divided into fields of 2, 3, and 3 bits ,  so octal can be useful in describing these encodings . 
in catalan ,  `` oi ? `` 
also ,  in portuguese ,  `` oi ! `` 
oi is an interjection used in various varieties of the english language ,  particularly british english ,  australian english ,  new zealand english ,  canadian english ,  irish english ,  malaysian english ,  singaporean english and south african english ,  as well as hindi/urdu ,  portuguese and japanese to get the attention of another person or to express surprise or disapproval . 
there's also a form in indonesian `` oi '' means to call someone . 
october is the tenth month of the year in the julian and gregorian calendars and the sixth of seven months to have a length of 31 days . 
the oberkommando des heeres  -lrb-  okh  -rrb-  was the high command  -lrb-    -rrb-  of the german army during the era of nazi germany . 
the supreme commander of the army  -lrb-    -rrb-  was the head of the okh and commander-in-chief of the german army during the years of the nazi regime . 
hitler agreed with him that invasion would be a last resort . 
it could only be the final act of an already victorious war against britain as otherwise the preconditions for success of a combined operation would not be met '' . 
on 2 july ,  the okw asked the services to start preliminary planning for an invasion ,  as hitler had concluded that invasion would be achievable in certain conditions ,  the first of which was command of the air ,  and specifically asked the `` luftwaffe '' when this would be achieved . 
on 16 july 1940 hitler issued führer directive no . 
6 for the conduct of the war '' planned an offensive to defeat these allies and `` win as much territory as possible in holland ,  belgium ,  and northern france to serve as a base for the successful prosecution of the air and sea war against england '' . 
these errors can be random or systematic . 
measurement errors can be divided into two components: `` random error '' and `` systematic error '' . 
measurement errors can be divided into two components: random error and systematic error . 
the random or stochastic error in a measurement is the error that is random from one measurement to the next . 
random error is always present in a measurement . 
incorrect zeroing of an instrument leading to a zero error is an example of systematic error in instrumentation . 
incorrect zeroing of an instrument leading to a zero error is an example of systematic error in instrumentation . 
the term `` observational error '' is also sometimes used to refer to response errors and some other types of non-sampling error . 
random error  -lrb-  or random variation  -rrb-  is due to factors which cannot or will not be controlled . 
sources of systematic error may be imperfect calibration of measurement instruments  -lrb-  zero error  -rrb-  ,  changes in the environment which interfere with the measurement process and sometimes imperfect methods of observation can be either zero error or percentage error . 
opera seria had its weaknesses and critics . 
in italian opera after about 1800, the `` overture '' became known as the `` sinfonia '' . 
chinese contemporary classical opera ,  a chinese language form of western style opera that is distinct from traditional chinese opera ,  has had operas dating back to `` the white haired girl '' in 1945.
today ,  operas are only rarely performed in translation . 
in england ,  opera's antecedent was the 17th-century `` jig '' . 
the changing role of the orchestra in opera is described in more detail below . 
opera did not remain confined to court audiences for long . 
the opera is based on the kyrgyz heroic epic `` manas '' . 
opera is a key part of the western classical music tradition . 
handel also uses the french overture form in some of his italian operas such as giulio cesare . 
opera  -lrb-  ; english plural: `` operas ''; italian plural: `` opere ''   -rrb-  is a form of theatre in which music has a leading role and the parts are taken by singers ,  but is distinct from musical theater . 
the words of an opera are known as the libretto  -lrb-  literally `` small book ''  -rrb-  . 
the metropolitan opera in the us reports that the average age of its audience is now 60.
in latin america ,  opera started as a result of european colonisation . 
however ,  the real birth of russian opera came with mikhail glinka and his two great operas `` a life for the tsar ''  -lrb-  1836 -rrb- and `` ruslan and lyudmila ''  -lrb-  1842 -rrb- . 
before the 1700s ,  italian operas used a small string orchestra ,  but it rarely played to accompany the singers . 
the only exceptions were ballad operas ,  such as john gay's `` the beggar's opera ''  -lrb-  1728 -rrb- ,  musical burlesques ,  european operettas ,  and late victorian era light operas ,  notably the savoy operas of w .  s .  gilbert and arthur sullivan ,  all of which types of musical entertainments frequently spoofed operatic conventions . 
the emergence of the internet has also affected the way in which audiences consume opera . 
stanisław moniuszko's opera `` straszny dwór ''  -lrb-  in english `` the haunted manor ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  1861–64 -rrb- represents a nineteenth-century peak of polish national opera . 
another feature of late 20th-century opera is the emergence of contemporary historical operas ,  in contrast to the tradition of basing operas on more distant history ,  the re-telling of contemporary fictional stories or plays ,  or on myth or legend . 
the bel canto opera movement flourished in the early 19th century and is exemplified by the operas of rossini ,  bellini ,  donizetti ,  pacini ,  mercadante and many others . 
in russian eastern europe ,  several national operas began to emerge . 
in contrast to italian opera ,  which was generally composed for the aristocratic class ,  german opera was generally composed for the masses and tended to feature simple folk-like melodies ,  and it was not until the arrival of mozart that german opera was able to match its italian counterpart in musical sophistication . 
this fashion of opera directed opera from verdi ,  onward ,  exercising tremendous influence on his successors giacomo puccini ,  richard strauss ,  and benjamin britten . 
the first german opera was `` dafne '' ,  composed by heinrich schütz in 1627, but the music score has not survived . 
a milestone for opera broadcasting in the u . s .  was achieved on december 24, 1951, with the live broadcast of `` amahl and the night visitors '' ,  an opera in one act by gian carlo menotti . 
today composers such as thomas adès continue to export english opera abroad . 
 ''odyssey '' topped the list . 
after this ,  ithaca is at peace once more ,  concluding the `` odyssey '' . 
the omens seen in the `` odyssey '' are also a recurring theme throughout the epic . 
the `` odyssey '' is written in dactylic hexameter . 
another theme throughout the `` odyssey '' is testing . 
guest-friendship is also a theme in the `` odyssey '' ,  but it too follows a very specific pattern . 
omens occur frequently throughout the `` odyssey , ``  as well as in many other epics . 
the odyssey  -lrb-  ; `` odýsseia '' ,  in classical attic  -rrb-  is one of two major ancient greek epic poems attributed to homer . 
the `` odyssey '' has a lost sequel ,  the `` telegony '' ,  which was not written by homer . 
omens are another example of a type scene in the `` odyssey . `` 
the `` odyssey '' begins after the end of the ten-year trojan war  -lrb-  the subject of the `` iliad ''  -rrb-  ,  and odysseus has still not returned home from the war because he angered the god poseidon . 
the `` odyssey '' is regarded as one of the most important foundational works of western literature . 
all ancient and nearly all modern editions and translations of the `` odyssey '' are divided into 24 books . 
authors have sought to imagine new endings for the `` odyssey '' . 
the `` odyssey '' continues to be read in the homeric greek and translated into modern languages around the world . 
finding scenes occur in the `` odyssey '' when a character discovers another character within the epic . 
he further promises the men of the return of odysseus ,  but his promises are wearily discounted by the men . 
he then begins to tell the story of his return from troy . 
most bony fish belong to the ray-finned fish  -lrb-  actinopterygii  -rrb-  . 
bony fish have no placoid scales . 
the largest bony fish ever was `` leedsichthys '' ,  which dwarfed the beluga sturgeon ,  ocean sunfish ,  giant grouper ,  and all the other giant bony fishes alive today . 
 ''arapaima gigas '' is the largest species of freshwater bony fish . 
cartilaginous fishes can be further divided into sharks ,  rays and chimaeras . 
some bony fish are hermaphrodites ,  and a number of species exhibit parthenogenesis . 
during world war ii dix was conscripted into the `` volkssturm '' . 
dix eventually returned to dresden and remained there until 1966.
when the first world war erupted ,  dix enthusiastically volunteered for the german army . 
subsequently ,  he referred again to the war in the war triptych ,  painted from 1929-1932.
otto dix was born in untermhaus ,  germany ,  now a part of the city of gera ,  thuringia . 
dix died on 25 july 1969 after a second stroke in singen am hohentwiel . 
dix was profoundly affected by the sights of the war ,  and later described a recurring nightmare in which he crawled through destroyed houses . 
the collection also includes 48 postcards he sent from the front during world war i . 
as of 2007, 20 fossils of the species have been found . 
 ''orrorin '' had small teeth relative to its body size . 
 ''orrorin '' had small post-canines and was microdont ,  like modern humans ,  whereas robust australopithecines were megadont . 
the 20 fossils have been found at four sites in the lukeino formation ,  located in kenya: of these ,  the fossils at cheboit and aragai are the oldest  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  while those in kapsomin and kapcheberek are found in the upper levels of the formation  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
consisted of long jump ,  javelin throw ,  200 metres ,  discus throw ,  and 1500 metres . 
the first relay event to be held at the olympics ,  the 1600 m relay consisted of two legs over 200 m ,  one over 400 m ,  and one over 800 m .  this `` medley '' relay was replaced by the 4 × 400 m relay at subsequent olympics . 
two gold medal-winning teams ,  both u . s .  men's teams ,  were inducted to the naismith memorial basketball hall of fame in 2010.
the 1992 team ,  better known as the `` dream team '' ,  had 11 future hall of fame players ,  along with three coaches who were inducted to the hall as coaches  -lrb-  one of whom was previously inducted separately for his accomplishments as a player  -rrb-  . 
as of the 2016 summer olympics ,  90 medals  -lrb-  30 of each color  -rrb-  have been awarded to teams from 20 national olympic committees . 
d .  the ioc site for the 1900 olympic games gives erroneous figure of 95 events ,  while the ioc database for the 1900 olympic games lists 85 ones . <br> e .  the ioc site for the 1904 olympic games gives erroneous figure of 91 events ,  while the ioc database for the 1904 olympic games lists 94 ones . <br> f .  the ioc site for the 1920 olympic games gives erroneous figure of 154 events ,  while the ioc database for the 1920 olympic games lists 156 ones . <br> g .  due to australian quarantine laws ,  6 equestrian events were held in stockholm several months before the rest of the 1956 games in melbourne . <br> h .  the ioc site for the 1956 olympic games gives figure of 145 events ,  however actually there was 151  -lrb-  145 events in melbourne and 6 equestrian events in stockholm  -rrb-  . 
in mathematics ,  an ordered pair  -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  is a pair of objects . 
 -lrb-  in contrast ,  the unordered pair { ''a '' ,  `` b ''} equals the unordered pair { ''b '' ,  `` a ''} .   -rrb- 
in the ordered pair  -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  ,  the object `` a '' is called the `` first entry '' ,  and the object `` b '' the `` second entry '' of the pair . 
let formula_1 and formula_2 be ordered pairs . 
the set of all ordered pairs whose first entry is in some set `` a '' and whose second entry is in some set `` b '' is called the cartesian product of `` a '' and `` b '' ,  and written `` a '' × `` b '' . 
a binary relation between sets `` a '' and `` b '' is a subset of `` a '' × `` b '' . 
then the `` characteristic ''  -lrb-  or `` defining ''  -rrb-  `` property '' of the ordered pair is:
old catholicism's formal separation from roman catholicism occurred over the issue of papal authority . 
member churches of the union of utrecht of the old catholic churches  -lrb-  uu  -rrb-  are in full communion with the anglican communion ,  and some are members of the world council of churches . 
the old catholic church of slovakia was accepted in 2000 as a member of the union of utrecht . 
in 1910, mathew left the over his allegation of their becoming more protestant and called his church the `` old roman catholic church '' . 
the occna fully believes the intent of the founders of old catholicism was for the western church to return to the faith of the undivided church prior to the great schism of 1054.
the only recognized group in america that is in communion with the union of utrecht is the episcopal church . 
steenoven and the other bishops were excommunicated and thus began the old catholic church in the netherlands . 
döllinger ,  an excommunicated roman catholic priest and church historian ,  was a notable leader of the movement but was never a member of an old catholic church . 
the polish national catholic church  -lrb-  pncc  -rrb-  is no longer in communion with the old catholic churches but considers `` the declaration of utrecht as a normative document of faith '' and part of its ecclesiology . 
in time ,  vilatte asked the old catholic archbishop of utrecht to be ordained a bishop so that he might confirm ,  but his petition was not granted because recognized the episcopal church as the local catholic church . 
it is the desire of the occna to continue to bring about unity among like-minded old catholics and therefore actively seeks to establish dialog or communion with any old catholic churches or anglican churches which embrace the orthodox theology of the undivided and early christian church . 
it left the in opposition to the ordination of women by other member churches . 
in 1997, using the alias lsg ,  lieb spent one week at #63 in the uk singles chart with `` netherworld '' . 
lieb began his musical career at the age of fourteen ,  as a bassist ,  playing in funk and soul bands . 
an assembler is used to convert assembly code into machine code  -lrb-  object code  -rrb-  . 
in computing ,  object code or object module is the product of a compiler . 
the mass of the inner oort cloud has not been estimated . 
the hills cloud explains the continued existence of the oort cloud after billions of years . 
space probes have yet to reach the area of the oort cloud . 
oort independently proposed it in 1950.
it lies at a radius of 100,000 to 200,000 au ,  and marks the outer boundary of the oort cloud . 
the oort cloud is thought to occupy a vast space from somewhere between to as far as from the sun . 
the outer limit of the oort cloud defines the cosmographical boundary of the solar system and the extent of the sun's hill sphere . 
it has been suggested that the kepler observatory may also be able to detect objects in the oort cloud . 
the oort cloud  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  named after the dutch astronomer jan oort ,  sometimes called the öpik–oort cloud ,  is a theoretical cloud of predominantly icy planetesimals proposed to surround the sun at distances ranging from 2,000 to 200,000 au  -lrb-  0.03 to 3.2 light-years  -rrb-  . 
the currently escaping the solar system either are already or are predicted to be non-functional when they reach the oort cloud; however ,  it may be possible to find an object from the cloud that has been knocked into the inner solar system . 
the existence of the oort cloud was first postulated by estonian astronomer ernst öpik in 1932.
the middle ohio river formed in a manner similar to formation of the upper ohio river . 
from a geological standpoint ,  the ohio river is young . 
from a hydrographic perspective ,  the ohio river is the main stream of the whole river system . 
the ohio river is a naturally shallow river that was artificially deepened by a series of dams . 
the name `` ohio '' comes from the seneca ,   ,   `` good river '' . 
an earlier miami-illinois language name was also applied to the ohio river ,   -lrb-  `` river of the mosopelea '' tribe  -rrb-  . 
the ohio river as a whole is ranked as the most polluted river in the us based on 2009 and 2010 data although the more industrial and regional ohio tributary ,  monongahela river ,  ranked behind 16 other american rivers for pollution at number 17.
the ancient rivers were rearranged or consumed . 
the ohio river is formed by the confluence of the allegheny and monongahela rivers at point state park in pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania . 
the upper ohio river formed when one of the glacial lakes overflowed into a south-flowing tributary of the teays river . 
the ohio river ,  which flows westward from pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania ,  to cairo ,  illinois ,  is the largest tributary ,  by volume ,  of the mississippi river in the united states . 
the ohio river ,  which flows westward from pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania ,  to cairo ,  illinois ,  is the largest tributary ,  by volume ,  of the mississippi river in the united states . 
at paducah ,  kentucky ,  in the south ,  at the ohio's confluence with the tennessee river ,  it is ice-free year-round . 
such cell structures include:
in cell biology ,  an organelle is a specialized subunit within a cell that has a specific function . 
not all eukaryotic cells have each of the organelles listed below . 
while most cell biologists consider the term `` organelle '' to be synonymous with cell compartment ,  a space typically bound by one or two lipid bilayers . 
ouida's impression of the work is unknown . 
during her career ,  ouida wrote more than 40 novels ,  children's books and collections of short stories and essays . 
for many years ouida lived in london ,  but about 1871 she moved to italy . 
she made up for it later by purchasing every book written by ouida and keeping them in her library for the rest of her life . 
she moved into the langham hotel ,  london in 1867.
ibm discontinued its support for os/2 on 31 december 2006.
the collaboration between ibm and microsoft unravelled in 1990, between the releases of windows 3.0 and os/2 1.3.
os/2 and windows-related books of the late 1980s acknowledged the existence of both systems and promoted os/2 as the system for the future . 
os/2 1.0 was announced in april 1987 and released in december . 
