greenwich mean time  -lrb-  gmt  -rrb-  is the mean solar time at the royal observatory in greenwich ,  london ,  reckoned from midnight . 
several countries define their local time by reference to greenwich mean time . 
 ''mean ''  -rrb-  moment of this event ,  which accounts for the word `` mean '' in `` greenwich mean time '' . 
it is named from its original generation at the royal greenwich observatory ,  is aligned to coordinated universal time ,  and called either greenwich mean time or british summer time as appropriate for the time of year . 
during the experiment of 1968-1971, when the british isles did not revert to greenwich mean time during the winter ,  the all-year british summer time was called british standard time  -lrb-  bst  -rrb-  . 
greenwich mean time is used as standard time in the following countries ,  which also advance their clock one hour  -lrb-  gmt+1 -rrb- in summer . 
the original version of gif was called 87a . 
gif was one of the first two image formats commonly used on web sites ,  the other being the black-and-white xbm . 
compuserve introduced gif on june 15, 1987 to provide a color image format for their file downloading areas ,  replacing their earlier run-length encoding  -lrb-  rle  -rrb-  format ,  which was black and white only . 
guy fawkes was born in 1570 in stonegate ,  york . 
 ''guy '' was an uncommon name in england ,  but may have been popular in york on account of a local notable ,  sir guy fairfax of steeton . 
in 1579, when guy was eight years old ,  his father died . 
turner's report did not ,  however ,  mention fawkes's pseudonym in england ,  john johnson ,  and did not reach cecil until late in november ,  well after the plot had been discovered . 
in britain ,  5 november has variously been called guy fawkes night ,  guy fawkes day ,  plot night ,  and bonfire night  -lrb-  which can be traced directly back to the original celebration of 5 november 1605 -rrb- . 
fawkes gave his name as john johnson and was first interrogated by members of the king's privy chamber ,  where he remained defiant . 
guy fawkes  -lrb-  ; 13 april 1570 – 31 january 1606 -rrb- ,  also known as guido fawkes while fighting for the spanish ,  was a member of a group of provincial english catholics who planned the failed gunpowder plot of 1605.
fawkes was one of 13 conspirators ,  but he is the individual most associated with the plot . 
it is uncertain when fawkes returned to england ,  but he was back in london by late august 1605, when he and wintour discovered that the gunpowder stored in the undercroft had decayed . 
he was born and educated in york ,  england; his father died when fawkes was eight years old ,  after which his mother married a recusant catholic . 
the `` ascii '' buffer email described the mechanism of good times as a buffer overflow . 
the longer version of the good times warning contained descriptions of what good times was supposedly capable of doing to computers . 
the first recorded email warnings about the good times virus showed up on 15 november 1994.
snyder is now professor emeritus of english . 
snyder and joanne kyger were married from 1960 to 1965.
gary sherman snyder was born in san francisco ,  california to harold and lois hennessy snyder . 
snyder met allen ginsberg when the latter sought snyder out on the recommendation of kenneth rexroth . 
gary snyder  -lrb-  born may 8, 1930 -rrb- is an american man of letters . 
back in san francisco ,  snyder lived with whalen ,  who shared his growing interest in zen . 
the film also shows archival photographs and film of snyder's life . 
snyder was married to uehara for twenty-two years; the couple divorced in 1989.
lawrence ferlinghetti later referred to snyder as 'the thoreau of the beat generation' . 
in 1986, snyder became a professor in the writing program at the university of california ,  davis . 
snyder was an academic at the university of california ,  davis and a member of the california arts council . 
do it `` now '': pure gonzo journalism . `` 
the term `` gonzo '' was first used in connection with hunter s .  thompson by `` the boston globe '' magazine editor bill cardoso in 1970.
thompson felt that objectivity in journalism was a myth . 
thompson based his style on william faulkner's notion that `` fiction is often the best fact '' . 
the term `` gonzo '' has also come into  -lrb-  sometimes pejorative  -rrb-  use to describe journalism in thompson's style ,  characterized by a drug-fueled stream of consciousness writing technique . 
in 1938, five giant pandas were sent to london . 
the giant panda has been referred to as a living fossil . 
the giant panda has luxuriant black-and-white fur . 
the giant panda is a conservation-reliant vulnerable species . 
the giant panda has a body shape typical of bears . 
even in 2013, the `` encyclopædia britannica '' still used `` giant panda '' or `` panda bear '' for the bear ,  and simply `` panda '' for the ailuridae ,  despite the popular usage of the word `` panda '' . 
the giant panda's tail ,  measuring  ,  is the second-longest in the bear family . 
giant pandas give birth to twins in about half of pregnancies . 
the face of the giant panda sign is an mri sign in patients with wilson's disease ,  named for the midbrain's resemblance to a giant panda's face . 
the giant panda typically lives around 20 years in the wild and up to 30 years in captivity . 
not until the 1950s were pandas again recorded to have been exhibited in china's zoos . 
this practice has been termed `` panda diplomacy '' . 
the giant panda genome was sequenced in 2009 using illumina dye sequencing . 
this has resulted in panda fetuses ,  but no live births . 
until 1901, when it was erroneously stated to be related to the red panda ,  the giant panda was known as `` black and white cat-footed animal ''  -lrb-  `` ailuropus melanoleucus ''  -rrb-  . 
the giant panda  -lrb-  `` ailuropoda melanoleuca '' ,  literally `` black and white cat-foot '';  ,  literally `` big bear cat ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as panda bear or simply panda ,  is a bear native to south central china . 
the name `` xióngmāo ''  -lrb-   `` bear cat ''  -rrb-  was originally used to describe the red panda  -lrb-  `` ailurus fulgens ''  -rrb-  ,  but since giant panda was thought to be closely related to red panda ,  `` dàxióngmāo ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  was named relatively . 
by 1984, however ,  pandas were no longer given as gifts . 
the creature named `` mo ''  -lrb-  貘  -rrb-  mentioned in some ancient books has been interpreted as giant panda . 
the morphological characteristics of extinct relatives of the giant panda suggest that while the ancient giant panda was omnivorous 7 million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  ,  it only became herbivorous some 2-2.4 mya with the emergence of `` a .  microta '' . 
in many older encyclopedic sources ,  the name `` panda '' or `` common panda '' originally referred to the lesser-known red panda ,  thus necessitating the inclusion of `` giant '' and `` lesser/red '' prefixes in front of the names . 
a bent note is a musical note that is varied in pitch . 
in music ,  a glissando  -lrb-  ; plural: `` glissandi '' ,  abbreviated `` gliss . ``   -rrb- 
some colloquial equivalents are slide ,  sweep  -lrb-  referring to the `` discrete glissando '' effects on guitar and harp ,  respectively  -rrb-  ,  bend ,  smear ,  rip  -lrb-  for a loud ,  violent gliss to the beginning of a note  -rrb-  ,  lip  -lrb-  in jazz terminology ,  when executed by changing one's embouchure on a wind instrument  -rrb-  ,  plop ,  or falling hail  -lrb-  a glissando on a harp using the back of the fingernails  -rrb-  . 
male giraffes use their necks as weapons in combat ,  a behaviour known as `` necking '' . 
the eight species are: `` g .  angolensis '' ,  `` g .  antiquorum '' ,  `` g .  camelopardalis '' ,  `` g .  giraffa '' ,  `` g .  peralta '' ,  `` g .  reticulata '' ,  `` g .  thornicrofti '' ,  and `` g .  tippelskirchi '' . 
it has also been proposed that the neck serves to give the animal greater vigilance . 
they also kept giraffes as pets and shipped them around the mediterranean . 
these animals may have evolved from the extinct family palaeomerycidae which might also have been the ancestor of deer . 
there are also seven extinct species of giraffe ,  listed as the following:  `` g .  attica '' ,  also extinct ,  was formerly considered part of `` giraffa '' but was reclassified as `` bohlinia attica '' in 1929.
 ''bohlinia '' closely resembled modern giraffes ,  having a long neck and legs and similar ossicones and dentition . 
giraffe groups tend to be sex-segregated although mixed-sex groups made of adult females and young males are known to occur . 
in 2016 there were an estimated 90,000 individuals of `` giraffa '' in the wild . 
the front and back legs of a giraffe are about the same length . 
the giraffe has an extremely elongated neck ,  which can be up to in length ,  accounting for much of the animal's vertical height . 
the elongation of the neck appears to have started early in the giraffe lineage . 
the giraffe's chief distinguishing characteristics are its extremely long neck and legs ,  its horn-like ossicones ,  and its distinctive coat patterns . 
a gallbladder is generally present during fetal life ,  but it may disappear before birth . 
another theory ,  the sexual selection hypothesis ,  proposes that the long necks evolved as a secondary sexual characteristic ,  giving males an advantage in `` necking '' contests  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  to establish dominance and obtain access to sexually receptive females . 
after a duel ,  it is common for two male giraffes to caress and court each other . 
when swimming ,  the thorax would be weighed down by the front legs ,  making it difficult for the animal to move its neck and legs in harmony or keep its head above the surface . 
during copulation ,  the male stands on his hind legs with his head held up and his front legs resting on the female's sides . 
the giraffe has also been used for some scientific experiments and discoveries . 
although most fights do not lead to serious injury ,  there have been records of broken jaws ,  broken necks ,  and even deaths . 
the giraffe is one of only two living genera of the family giraffidae in the order artiodactyla ,  the other being the okapi . 
in this experiment ,  bacteria from the iii-s strain were killed by heat ,  and their remains were added to ii-r strain bacteria . 
today ,  we know that the `` transforming principle '' griffith observed was the dna of the iii-s strain bacteria . 
some anarcho-capitalists consider molinari to be the first proponent of anarcho-capitalism . 
in the past ,  molinari influenced some of the political thoughts of individualist anarchist benjamin tucker and the `` liberty '' circle . 
the spanish word `` guerrilla '' is the diminutive form of `` guerra ''  -lrb-  `` war ''  -rrb-  . 
guerrilla groups are a type of violent non-state actor . 
the strategy would further influence guerrilla tactics into the modern era . 
the term `` guerrilla '' was used in english as early as 1809 to refer to the `` fighters ''  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  `` the town was taken by the guerrillas ''  -rrb-  ,  and also  -lrb-  as in spanish  -rrb-  to denote `` a group or band '' of such fighters . 
guerrilla warfare is a type of asymmetric warfare: competition between opponents of unequal strength . 
the chinese general and strategist sun tzu ,  in his `` the art of war ''  -lrb-  6th century bc  -rrb-  or 600 bc to 501 bc ,  was the earliest to propose the use of guerrilla warfare . 
in correct spanish usage ,  a person who is a member of a `` guerrilla '' unit is a `` guerrillero ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  if male ,  or a `` guerrillera ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  if female . 
this outline should not be considered a rigorous proof of the theorem . 
grits is a food made from corn  -lrb-  maize  -rrb-  that is ground into a coarse meal and then boiled . 
it is a traditional breakfast dish . 
grits should not be confused with boiled ground corn ,  which makes `` hasty pudding '' or `` mush '' or may be made into polenta using coarse ground corn ,  or with the `` mush '' made from more finely ground corn meal . 
shrimp and grits is a traditional dish in the low country of coastal south carolina and georgia . 
in 2012, ge's brand was valued at $28.8 billion . 
the sound was broadcast on ge's wgy  -lrb-  am  -rrb-  . 
in may 2007, ge acquired smiths aerospace for $4.8 billion . 
vivendi would sell its 20% stake in nbcuniversal to ge for us$5.8 billion . 
in 2004, ge bought 80% of universal pictures from vivendi . 
in april 2017, ge announced the name of their $200 million corporate headquarters would be `` ge innovation point '' . 
saudi arabia is one of ge's largest customers . 
on may 21, 2007, ge announced it would sell its ge plastics division to petrochemicals manufacturer sabic for net proceeds of $11.6 billion . 
in may 2017, ge had signed $15 billion of business deals with saudi arabia . 
at the end of october 2016, it was announced that ge was under negotiations for a deal valued at about $30 billion to combine ge oil and gas with baker hughes . 
in january 2016, haier group acquired ge's appliance division for $5.4 billion . 
also in 2002, ge wind energy was formed when ge bought the wind turbine manufacturing assets of enron wind after the enron scandals . 
in october 2012, ge acquired $7 billion worth of bank deposits from metlife inc . 
in april 2013, ge acquired oilfield pump maker lufkin industries for $2.98 billion . 
in 2002, francisco partners and norwest venture partners acquired a division of ge called ge information systems  -lrb-  geis  -rrb-  . 
in 2011, `` fortune '' ranked ge the sixth-largest firm in the u . s .  ,  and the 14th-most profitable . 
genpact formerly known as ge capital international services  -lrb-  gecis  -rrb-  was established by ge in late 1997 as its captive india-based bpo . 
some consumers boycotted ge light bulbs ,  refrigerators and other products during the 1980s and 1990s . 
in 2002, ge acquired the wind power assets of enron during its bankruptcy proceedings . 
vivendi would sell 7.66% of nbcuniversal to ge for us$2 billion if the ge/comcast deal was not completed by september 2010 and then sell the remaining 12.34% stake of nbcuniversal to ge for us$3.8 billion when the deal was completed or to the public via an ipo if the deal was not completed . 
 ,  ge had appeared on the fortune 500 list for 22 years and held the 11th rank . 
harrison's guitar work with the beatles was varied and flexible . 
in 1966 harrison contributed innovative musical ideas to `` revolver '' . 
in 1979, harrison released `` george harrison '' ,  which followed his second marriage and the birth of his son dhani . 
during the group's first tour of scotland ,  in 1960, harrison used the pseudonym `` carl harrison '' ,  in reference to carl perkins . 
in november 1987 harrison released the platinum album `` cloud nine '' . 
in december 1991, harrison joined clapton for a tour of japan . 
in 1989, harrison and starr appeared in the music video for petty's song `` i won't back down '' . 
harrison co-wrote the song `` badge '' with clapton ,  which was included on cream's 1969 album ,  `` goodbye '' . 
harrison released several best-selling singles and albums as a solo performer . 
by late 1966, harrison's interests had moved away from the beatles . 
lavezzoli recognises harrison as `` the man most responsible for this phenomenon '' . 
dylan and the band were a major musical influence on harrison at the end of his career with the beatles . 
in 1973 peter sellers introduced harrison to denis o'brien . 
from 1980, harrison became a vocal supporter of greenpeace and cnd . 
delaney bramlett inspired harrison to learn slide guitar ,  significantly influencing his later music . 
harrison's pseudonym on the album was `` nelson wilbury ''; he used the name `` spike wilbury '' for their second album . 
most beatles albums from 1965 onwards contain at least two harrison compositions; three of his songs appear on `` revolver '' ,  `` the album on which harrison came of age as a songwriter '' ,  according to inglis . 
another of harrison's musical techniques was the use of guitar lines written in octaves ,  as on `` i'll be on my way '' . 
harrison's first marriage ,  to model pattie boyd in 1966, ended in divorce in 1977.
of the 1967 harrison song `` within you without you '' ,  author gerry farrell said that harrison had created a `` new form '' ,  calling the composition `` a quintessential fusion of pop and indian music '' . 
the latter included `` don't bother me '' ,  harrison's first solo writing credit . 
harrison was involved in humanitarian and political activism throughout his life . 
on 12 november in new york ,  harrison ,  starr and mccartney came together for the last time . 
harrison was born at 12 arnold grove in wavertree ,  liverpool ,  on 25 february 1943.
in early 1966 harrison and lennon each purchased epiphone casinos ,  which they used on `` revolver '' . 
for many years ,  harrison was restricted in his songwriting contributions to the beatles' albums ,  but he released `` all things must pass '' ,  a triple album with two discs of his songs and the third of recordings of harrison jamming with friends . 
in 1974 harrison founded dark horse records as an avenue for collaboration with other musicians . 
harrison's last recording session with the beatles was on 4 january 1970, when he ,  mccartney and starr recorded his song `` i me mine '' for the `` let it be '' soundtrack album . 
in december ,  harrison released `` dark horse '' ,  which was an album that earned him the least favourable reviews of his career . 
the album included three new songs ,  including `` cheer down '' ,  which harrison had recently contributed to the `` lethal weapon 2 '' film soundtrack . 
in line with the hindu yoga tradition ,  harrison became a vegetarian in the late 1960s . 
harrison served as the beatles' scout for new american releases ,  being especially knowledgeable about soul music . 
harrison's final album ,  `` brainwashed ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- ,  was released posthumously after it was completed by his son dhani and jeff lynne . 
a giant planet is any massive planet . 
a giant planet is a massive planet and has a thick atmosphere of hydrogen and helium . 
gas giants consist mostly of hydrogen and helium . 
massive solid planets can also exist . 
ice giants have distinctly different interior compositions from gas giants . 
many extrasolar giant planets have been identified orbiting other stars . 
extrasolar giant planets that orbit very close to their stars are the exoplanets that are easiest to detect . 
in `` traditional '' giant planets such as jupiter and saturn  -lrb-  the gas giants  -rrb-  hydrogen and helium constitute most of the mass of the planet ,  whereas they only make up an outer envelope on uranus and neptune ,  which are instead mostly composed of water ,  ammonia ,  and methane and therefore increasingly referred to as `` ice giants '' . 
a goddess is a female deity . 
other mesopotamian goddesses include ninhursag ,  ninlil ,  antu and gaga . 
the noun `` goddess '' is a secondary formation ,  combining the germanic `` god '' with the latinate `` -ess '' suffix . 
for the most powerful black powder ,  meal powder ,  a wood charcoal ,  is used . 
french war powder in 1879 used the ratio 75% saltpeter ,  12.5% charcoal ,  12.5% sulfur . 
gunpowder ,  also known as black powder to distinguish it from modern smokeless powder ,  is the earliest known chemical explosive . 
cannons usually used lower burn rate powders ,  because most would burst with higher burn rate powders . 
most of the bulk semi-smokeless powders ceased to be manufactured in the 1920s . 
the term `` black powder '' was coined in the late 19th century ,  primarily in the united states ,  to distinguish prior gunpowder formulations from the new smokeless powders and semi-smokeless powders . 
the dust from `` repairing '' powder in the field was a major hazard . 
besides black powder ,  there are other historically important types of gunpowder . 
lesmok powder was a product developed by dupont in 1911, one of several semi-smokeless products in the industry containing a mixture of black and nitrocellulose powder . 
the introduction of smokeless powder in the late 19th century led to a contraction of the gunpowder industry . 
the advent of much more powerful and easy to use `` corned '' powder changed this procedure ,  but serpentine was used with older guns into the 17th century . 
 ''mammoth '' powder with large grains ,  made for rodman's 15-inch cannon ,  reduced the pressure to only 20 percent as high as ordinary cannon powder would have produced . 
by 1882 german makers also produced hexagonal grained powders of a similar size for artillery . 
these brown powders reduced burning rate even further by using as little as 2 percent sulfur and using charcoal made from rye straw that had not been completely charred ,  hence the brown color . 
corned powder also retained the advantage of low moisture absorption ,  as even tiny grains still had much less surface area to attract water than a floury powder . 
modern corning first compresses the fine black powder meal into blocks with a fixed density  -lrb-  1.7 g/cm³  -rrb-  . 
two british physicists ,  andrew noble and frederick abel ,  worked to improve the properties of black powder during the late 19th century . 
the original dry-compounded powder used in 15th-century europe was known as `` serpentine '' ,  either a reference to satan or to a common artillery piece that used it . 
the current standard composition for the black powders that are manufactured by pyrotechnicians was adopted as long ago as 1780.
thus ,  a black powder composition containing pure carbon would burn similarly to a match head ,  at best . 
the development of smokeless powders ,  such as cordite ,  in the late 19th century created the need for a spark-sensitive priming charge ,  such as gunpowder . 
before long ,  powder-makers standardized the process by forcing mill cake through sieves instead of corning powder by hand . 
black powder is a granular mixture of potassium nitrate is the most important ingredient in terms of both bulk and function because the combustion process releases oxygen from the potassium nitrate ,  promoting the rapid burning of the other ingredients . 
neither the use of graphite nor sodium nitrate was new . 
if one takes the median of 17 of these 22 compositions for rockets  -lrb-  75% nitrates ,  9.06% sulfur ,  and 15.94% charcoal  -rrb-  ,  it is nearly identical to the modern reported ideal gunpowder recipe of 75% potassium nitrate ,  10% sulfur ,  and 15% charcoal . 
when the cannon was fired through the touchhole ,  turbulence from the initial surface combustion caused the rest of the powder to be rapidly exposed to the flame . 
gunpowder was widely used to fill fused artillery shells  -lrb-  and used in mining and civil engineering projects  -rrb-  until the second half of the 19th century ,  when the first high explosives were put into use . 
allen had 86-dos adapted for ibm's hardware ,  and ibm shipped it as pc dos . 
ibm ,  presided by john r .  opel ,  approached digital research in 1980, at bill gates' suggestion ,  to negotiate the purchase of a forthcoming version of cp/m called cp/m-86 for the ibm pc . 
although his career in computing spanned more than two decades ,  he is mainly remembered in connection with ibm's unsuccessful attempt in 1980 to license cp/m for the ibm pc . 
he demonstrated cp/m to intel ,  but intel had little interest and chose to market pl/m instead . 
kildall obtained a copy of pc dos ,  examined it ,  and concluded that it infringed on cp/m . 
gary returned in the afternoon and tried to move the discussion with ibm forward ,  but accounts disagree on whether he signed the non-disclosure agreement ,  as well as if he ever met with the ibm representatives . 
by 1981, at the peak of its popularity ,  cp/m ran on 3,000 different computer models and dri had $5.4 million in yearly revenues . 
gary arlen kildall  -lrb-  ; may 19, 1942 – july 11, 1994 -rrb- was an american computer scientist and microcomputer entrepreneur who created the cp/m operating system and founded digital research ,  inc .   -lrb-  dri  -rrb-  . 
it is believed that saxo then wrote books 11, 12, and 13.
the title saxo himself used for his work is unknown . 
when exactly `` gesta danorum '' was written is the subject of numerous works; however ,  it is generally agreed that `` gesta danorum '' was not finished before 1208.
gesta danorum  -lrb-  `` deeds of the danes ''  -rrb-  is a patriotic work of danish history ,  by the 13th century author saxo grammaticus  -lrb-  `` saxo the literate '' ,  literally `` the grammarian ''  -rrb-  . 
this would also explain the 22 years between the last event described in the last book  -lrb-  book 16 -rrb- and the 1208 event described in the preface . 
keillor was born in anoka ,  minnesota ,  the son of grace ruth  -lrb-  `` née '' denham  -rrb-  and john philip keillor . 
on november 1, 2006, keillor opened an independent bookstore ,  `` common good books ,  g .  keillor ,  prop . `` 
upon opening the bookstore ,  keillor wrote this poem:
keillor wrote the screenplay for the 2006 movie `` a prairie home companion , ``  directed by robert altman . 
in a march 2011 interview ,  keillor announced that he would be retiring from `` a prairie home companion '' in 2013; but in a december 2011 interview with the `` sioux city journal '' ,  keillor said: `` the show is going well . 
garrison keillor started his professional radio career in november 1969 with minnesota educational radio  -lrb-  mer  -rrb-  ,  later minnesota public radio  -lrb-  mpr  -rrb-  ,  which today distributes programs under the american public media  -lrb-  apm  -rrb-  brand . 
on a typical broadcast of `` a prairie home companion '' ,  keillor's name is not mentioned unless a guest addresses him by name ,  although some sketches feature keillor as his alter ego ,  carson wyler . 
in november 2017, minnesota public radio cut all business ties with keillor after an allegation of inappropriate behavior with a freelance writer for `` a prairie home companion '' . 
in `` slate '' ,  sam anderson called keillor `` very clearly a genius . 
the territory of celtic galatia included the cities of ancyra  -lrb-  present day ankara  -rrb-  ,  pessinus ,  tavium ,  and gordion . 
in an administrative reorganisation  -lrb-  `` c . ``  386–395 -rrb- ,  two new provinces succeeded it ,  `` galatia prima '' and `` galatia secunda '' or `` salutaris '' ,  which included part of phrygia . 
ancient galatia  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` galatía '' ,  `` gaul ''  -rrb-  was an area in the highlands of central anatolia ,  roughly corresponding to the provinces of ankara ,  çorum ,  and yozgat ,  in modern turkey . 
ankara ,  today the capital of modern turkey  -rrb-  . 
a hypernym is superordinate to a hyponym ,  and a hyponym is subordinate to a hypernym . 
cartographers must decide and then adjust the content within their maps to create a suitable and useful map that conveys geospatial information within their representation of the world . 
generalization is the process of identifying the parts of a whole ,  as belonging to the whole . 
of any two related concepts ,  such as `` a '' and `` b '' ,  `` a '' is a `` generalization '' of `` b '' ,  and `` b '' is a special case of `` a '' ,  if and only if
carangi's life has been the subject of several works . 
carangi was born in philadelphia ,  the third and youngest child of joseph carangi ,  a restaurant owner ,  and kathleen carangi  -lrb-  `` née '' adams  -rrb-  ,  a homemaker . 
gia marie carangi  -lrb-  january 29, 1960 – november 18, 1986 -rrb- was an american fashion model during the late 1970s and early 1980s . 
after she became addicted to heroin ,  carangi's modeling career rapidly declined . 
in november 1980, carangi left wilhelmina models and signed with ford models ,  but she was dropped within weeks . 
a biography of carangi by sacha lanvin baumann titled `` born this way: friends ,  colleagues ,  and coworkers recall gia carangi ,  the supermodel who defined an era '' was published in 2015.
after 1904, puccini's compositions were less frequent . 
by the time of puccini's death in 1924, he had earned $4 million from his works . 
after the premiere of the `` capriccio sinfonico '' ,  ponchielli and puccini discussed the possibility that puccini's next work might be an opera . 
the 2008 italian film ,  `` puccini e la fanciulla ''  -lrb-  `` puccini and the girl ''  -rrb-  ,  is based on the period of his life when he was composing the opera . 
puccini was born giacomo antonio domenico michele secondo maria puccini in lucca ,  italy in 1858.
puccini's early work was rooted in traditional late-19th-century romantic italian opera . 
puccini is also frequently referred to as a `` verismo '' composer . 
puccini's composition of `` la bohème '' was the subject of a public dispute between puccini and fellow composer ruggiero leoncavallo . 
in 1909, puccini's wife elvira publicly accused doria manfredi ,  a maid working for the puccini family ,  of having an affair with the composer . 
founded in 1996 in lucca ,  the `` centro di studi giacomo puccini '' embraces a wide range of approaches to the study of puccini's work . 
unlike wagner and verdi ,  puccini was not active in politics . 
only then ,  in early 1904, were puccini and elvira able to marry ,  and to legitimize antonio . 
an annual festival puccini is held at torre del lago . 
puccini's most renowned works are `` la bohème ''  -lrb-  1896 -rrb- ,  `` tosca ''  -lrb-  1900 -rrb- ,  `` madama butterfly ''  -lrb-  1904 -rrb- ,  and `` turandot ''  -lrb-  1924 -rrb- ,  all of which are among the important operas played as standards . 
most broadly ,  puccini wrote in the style of the late-romantic period of classical music  -lrb-  see romantic music  -rrb-  . 
in his work on puccini ,  julian budden describes puccini as a gifted and original composer ,  noting the innovation hidden in the popularity of works such as `` che gelida manina '' . 
the accident and its consequences slowed puccini's completion of his next work ,  `` madama butterfly '' . 
puccini's next work after `` la bohème '' was `` tosca ''  -lrb-  1900 -rrb- ,  arguably puccini's first foray into `` verismo '' ,  the realistic depiction of many facets of real life including violence . 
puccini's work was favorably reviewed in the milanese publication `` perseveranza '' ,  and thus puccini began to build a reputation as a young composer of promise in milanese music circles . 
puccini's career extended from the end of the romantic period into the modern period . 
 ''la rondine '' was initially conceived as an operetta ,  but puccini eliminated spoken dialogue ,  rendering the work closer in form to an opera . 
cukor and hepburn became close friends off the set . 
cukor directed six more broadway productions before departing for hollywood in 1929.
george dewey cukor  -lrb-  ; july 7, 1899 – january 24, 1983 -rrb- was an american film director . 
the remainder of the decade was a series of hits and misses for cukor . 
cukor was hired to direct `` gone with the wind '' by selznick in 1936, even before the book was published . 
following `` my fair lady '' ,  cukor became less active . 
that fall towers married a woman ,  and his relationship with cukor evolved into one of father and son ,  and for the remainder of cukor's life the two remained very close . 
cukor's friends were of paramount importance to him and he kept his home filled with their photographs . 
two years later ,  cukor achieved one of his greatest successes with `` my fair lady ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- . 
by the mid-1930s ,  cukor was not only established as a prominent director but ,  socially ,  as an unofficial head of hollywood's gay subculture . 
this mask was later used widely in industry . 
the modern gas mask was developed in 1943 by the british  . 
masks are typically tested for fit before use . 
the gas mask is a mask used to protect the user from inhaling airborne pollutants and toxic gases . 
some have one or two filters attached to the face mask while others have a large filter connected to the face mask with a hose ,  that is sometimes confused with respirators . 
there are two main difficulties with gas mask design:
modern gas masks are quite safe and do not use asbestos ,  but it is still important to be careful when using a modern gas mask . 
gas masks have a limited useful lifespan that is related to the absorbent capacity of the filter . 
each filter type protects against a particular hazard:
the first effective filtering activated charcoal gas mask in the world was invented in 1915 by russian chemist nikolay zelinsky . 
handel's father died on 11 february 1697.
in 1736 handel produced `` alexander's feast '' . 
in 1747 handel wrote his oratorio `` alexander balus '' . 
handel was portrayed as the antagonist in the film `` farinelli ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- . 
in 1712, handel decided to settle permanently in england . 
around this same time handel made the acquaintance of telemann . 
mainwaring has handel traveling to berlin the next year ,  1698.
handel's probationary appointment to domkirche expired in march 1703.
in 1861, using a theme from the second of handel's harpsichord suites ,  johannes brahms wrote the `` variations and fugue on a theme by handel '' ,  op . 
in 1942, handel was the subject of the british biopic `` the great mr .  handel '' directed by norman walker and starring wilfrid lawson . 
handel gave up the opera business ,  while he enjoyed more success with his english oratorios . 
handel owned an art collection that was auctioned posthumously in 1760.
george frideric  -lrb-  or frederick  -rrb-  handel  -lrb-  ; born ; 23 february 1685  -lrb-  o . s .   -rrb- 
in 1749 handel composed `` music for the royal fireworks ''; 12,000 people attended the first performance . 
handel never married ,  and kept his personal life private . 
after handel's death ,  many composers wrote works based on or inspired by his music . 
handel composed more than forty operas in over thirty years ,  and since the late 1960s ,  with the revival of baroque music and historically informed musical performance ,  interest in handel's operas has grown . 
handel secured a balance between soloists and chorus which he never surpassed . 
handel became sure of himself ,  broader in his presentation ,  and more diverse in his composition . 
mainwaring writes that during this time zachow had begun to have handel assume some of his church duties . 
the first published catalogue of handel's works appeared as an appendix to mainwaring's `` memoirs '' . 
early chamber works do exist ,  but it is difficult to date any of them to handel's time in halle . 
palestrina was born in the town of palestrina ,  near rome ,  then part of the papal states . 
bach ,  who himself arranged two of palestrina's masses for performance . 
title: `` palestrina - prince of music '' ,  directed by georg brintrup . 
palestrina's masses show how his compositional style developed over time . 
according to fux ,  palestrina had established and followed these basic guidelines:
one of the hallmarks of palestrina's music is that dissonances are typically relegated to the `` weak '' beats in a measure . 
much research on palestrina was done in the 19th century by giuseppe baini ,  who published a monograph in 1828 which made palestrina famous again and reinforced the already existing legend that he was the `` saviour of church music '' during the reforms of the council of trent . 
as late as the 1750s ,  palestrina's style was still the reference for composers working in the motet form ,  as can be seen by francesco barsanti's `` sei antifones '' 'in the style of palestrina'  -lrb-  c .  1750; published by peter welcker ,  c .  1762 -rrb- . 
not mentioned by fux ,  was the manner in which the musical phrasing of palestrina followed the syntax of the sentences he was setting to music ,  something not always observed by earlier composers . 
the longer waves travel more slowly ,  and their amplitudes diminish as they emerge from the trailing boundary of the group . 
the group `` g '' is said to act on `` x ''  -lrb-  on the left  -rrb-  . 
actions of groups on vector spaces are called representations of the group . 
therefore ,  one may alternatively define a group action of `` g '' on `` x '' as a group homomorphism from `` g '' into the symmetric group sym -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  of all bijections from `` x '' to `` x '' . 
if `` g '' is a group and `` x '' is a set ,  then a  -lrb-  `` left ''  -rrb-  `` group action '' `` φ '' of `` g '' on `` x '' is a function that satisfies the following two axioms  -lrb-  where we denote `` φ '' -lrb-  `` g '' ,  `` x ''  -rrb-  as `` g ''⋅ ''x ''  -rrb- :
gzip is a file format and a software application used for file compression and decompression . 
many compounds have been used for inhalation anaesthesia ,  but only a few are still in widespread use . 
general anesthetics elicit a state of general anesthesia . 
it is possible to deliver anaesthesia solely by inhalation or injection ,  but most commonly the two forms are combined ,  with an injection given to induce anaesthesia and a gas used to maintain it . 
researchers are also actively exploring the use of xenon as an anaesthetic . 
in the city hustings roll 110, 5, ric ii ,  dated june 1380, chaucer refers to himself as `` me galfridum chaucer ,  filium johannis chaucer ,  vinetarii ,  londonie ''  -lrb-  `` geoffrey chaucer ,  son of john chaucer ,  vintner ,  london ''  -rrb-  . 
geoffrey chaucer  -lrb-  ;  – 25 october 1400 -rrb- was an english poet and author . 
chaucer's `` treatise on the astrolabe '' was written for lewis . 
chaucer is sometimes considered the source of the english vernacular tradition . 
under the discussion of chaucer's friends ,  namely john of gaunt ,  speght further explains:
in the 16th and 17th centuries ,  chaucer was printed more than any other english author ,  and he was the first author to have his works collected in comprehensive single-volume editions in which a chaucer canon began to cohere . 
however ,  it is still uncertain whether or not the work can be attributed to chaucer . 
the last mention of chaucer is on 5 june 1400 when some money was paid which was owed to him . 
the poet thomas hoccleve ,  who may have met chaucer and considered him his role model ,  hailed chaucer as `` the firste fyndere of our fair langage . `` 
in 1385, thomas usk made glowing mention of chaucer ,  and john gower also lauded him . 
chaucer is known as the `` father of english literature '' ,  and he was the first writer to be buried in poets' corner of westminster abbey . 
chaucer's first major work was `` the book of the duchess '' ,  an elegy for blanche of lancaster who died in 1368.
chaucer's short poem `` fortune '' ,  believed to have been written in the 1390s ,  is also thought to refer to lancaster . 
these editions certainly established chaucer's reputation ,  but they also began the complicated process of reconstructing and frequently inventing chaucer's biography and the canonical list of works which were attributed to him . 
in 1960, gardner's official biography ,  entitled `` gerald gardner: witch '' ,  was published . 
alongside rosicrucianism ,  gardner had also been pursuing other interests . 
between 1936 and 1939, gardner befriended the christian mystic j . s . m . 
in 1936, gardner and donna left malaya and headed for europe . 
gardner's mother had died in 1920, but he had not returned to britain on that occasion . 
valiente further criticises gardner for his publicity-seeking – or at least his indiscretion . 
several years after gardner's death ,  the wiccan high priestess eleanor bone visited north africa and went looking for gardner's grave . 
gardner only married once ,  to donna ,  and several who knew him made the claim that he was devoted to her . 
in 1952, gardner had begun to correspond with a young woman named doreen valiente . 
in 2012, philip heselton published a two-volume biography of gardner ,  titled `` witchfather '' . 
according to gardner's first biographer ,  jack bracelin ,  com was very flirtatious and `` clearly looked on these trips as mainly manhunts '' ,  viewing gardner as a nuisance . 
gardner is internationally recognised as the `` father of wicca '' among the pagan and occult communities . 
in 1915, gardner again joined a local volunteer militia ,  the malay states volunteer rifles . 
gardner wanted to stay in malaya ,  but he conceded to his wife donna ,  who insisted that they return to england . 
in highcliffe ,  gardner came across a building describing itself as the `` first rosicrucian theatre in england '' . 
he would subsequently style himself as `` dr .  gardner '' ,  despite the fact that academic institutions would not recognise his qualifications . 
gardner hoped to spread wicca ,  and described some of its practices in a fictional form as `` high magic's aid '' . 
in 1997, macleod joined the `` love boat '' cast on `` the oprah winfrey show '' . 
between 1957 and 1961, macleod made several television appearances on various shows . 
macleod was born in mount kisco ,  new york ,  the elder of two children . 
macleod's breakout role as murray slaughter on cbs' `` the mary tyler moore show '' won him lasting fame ,  and two golden globe nominations . 
the gopher ecosystem is often regarded as the effective predecessor of the world wide web . 
the world wide web was in its infancy in 1991, and gopher services quickly became established . 
the gopher protocol is a tcp/ip application layer protocol designed for distributing ,  searching ,  and retrieving documents over the internet . 
several factors contributed to gopher's stagnation:
in u . s .  politics ,  general elections are elections held at any level  -lrb-  e . g . 
the five-year limit on the time of a parliament can be varied by an act of parliament implemented by several bodies . 
the elections held to elect the members of the lok sabha after expiry of the parliamentary elections . 
the term `` general election '' in the united kingdom often refers to the elections held on the same day in all constituencies of their members of parliament  -lrb-  mps  -rrb-  to the house of commons . 
in the case of an albino with a recessive allele  -lrb-  aa  -rrb-  ,  the phenotype depends upon the other allele  -lrb-  aa ,  aa ,  aa or aa  -rrb-  . 
all three have different genotypes but the first two have the same phenotype  -lrb-  purple  -rrb-  as distinct from the third  -lrb-  white  -rrb-  . 
if she mated with a man with haemophilia  -lrb-  another carrier  -rrb-  there would be a 75% chance of passing on the gene . 
the terms genotype and phenotype are distinct for at least two reasons:
msi and loh in particular have been associated with cancer cell genotypes for colon ,  breast and cervical cancer . 
any given gene will usually cause an observable change in an organism ,  known as the phenotype . 
he was the father of frederick william ,  the `` great elector '' . 
in 1619 george william inherited the margravate of brandenburg and the duchy of prussia . 
raffe's `` graphic design '' ,  published in 1927, was the first book to use `` graphic design '' in its title . 
an important aspect of interface design is icon design . 
graphic designers often form part of a branding team . 
common uses of graphic design include corporate design  -lrb-  logos and branding  -rrb-  ,  editorial design  -lrb-  magazines ,  newspapers and books  -rrb-  ,  wayfinding or environmental design ,  advertising ,  web design ,  communication design ,  product packaging and signage . 
the term graphic design was coined by william addison dwiggins in 1922.
designers need communication skills to convince an audience and sell their designs . 
some graphic design tools such as a grid are used in both traditional and digital form . 
the professional graphic design industry grew in parallel with consumerism . 
aside from technology ,  graphic design requires judgment and creativity . 
a graphic design project may involve the stylization and presentation of existing text and either preexisting imagery or images developed by the graphic designer . 
design can aid in selling a product or idea . 
the term `` graphic design '' first appeared in print in the 1922 essay `` new kind of printing calls for new design '' by william addison dwiggins ,  an american book designer in the early 20th century . 
experiential graphic design is the application of communication skills to the built environment . 
graphic design is the process of visual communication and problem-solving through the use of typography ,  photography and illustration . 
graphic designers will be expected to constantly learn new techniques ,  programs ,  and methods . 
graphic designers are expected to be proficient in software programs for image-making ,  typography and layout . 
graphic designers may also work freelance ,  working on their own terms ,  prices ,  ideas ,  etc . 
the east african rift has two branches ,  the western rift valley and the eastern rift valley . 
all of the african great lakes were formed as the result of the rift ,  and most lie within its rift valley . 
it included what we would call today the lebanese section of the dead sea transform ,  the jordan rift valley ,  red sea rift and the east african rift . 
off the southern tip of sinai in the red sea ,  the dead sea transform meets the red sea rift which runs the length of the red sea . 
the northernmost part of the rift corresponds to the central section of what is called today the dead sea transform  -lrb-  dst  -rrb-  or rift . 
there are few records of rasputin's parents . 
rasputin was buried on january 2 o . s . 
according to rasputin's daughter ,  maria ,  rasputin did `` look into '' the khlysty sect ,  but rejected it . 
rasputin first met the tsar on november 1, 1905, at the peterhof palace . 
rasputin's daughter ,  maria rasputin  -lrb-  matryona rasputina  -rrb-   -lrb-  1898–1977 -rrb- ,  emigrated to france after the october revolution ,  and then to the united states . 
rasputin was murdered during the early morning on  ,  at the home of felix yusupov . 
feofan was so impressed with rasputin that he invited him to stay in his home ,  and became one of rasputin's most important and influential friends in st .  petersburg . 
vyrubova would become one of rasputin's most influential advocates . 
perhaps inadvertently ,  rasputin had contributed to the diminishing respect the tsar's subjects had for him . 
news of rasputin's murder spread quickly ,  even before his body was found . 
it is unclear when rasputin first learned of alexei's hemophilia ,  or when he first acted as a healer for alexei . 
numerous film and stage productions have been based on the life of rasputin . 
rasputin is said to have been particularly appalled by the belief that grace is found through self-flagellation . 
in late 1906, rasputin began acting as a healer for the tsar and his wife alexandra's only son alexei ,  who suffered from hemophilia . 
word of rasputin's activity and charisma began to spread in siberia during the early 1900s . 
for example ,  diamonds ,  which have a cubic crystal system ,  are often found as octahedrons . 
a gemstone  -lrb-  also called a gem ,  fine gem ,  jewel ,  precious stone ,  or semi-precious stone  -rrb-  is a piece of mineral crystal which ,  in cut and polished form ,  is used to make jewelry or other adornments . 
other examples are the emerald  -lrb-  green  -rrb-  ,  aquamarine  -lrb-  blue  -rrb-  ,  red beryl  -lrb-  red  -rrb-  ,  goshenite  -lrb-  colorless  -rrb-  ,  heliodor  -lrb-  yellow  -rrb-  and morganite  -lrb-  pink  -rrb-  ,  which are all varieties of the mineral species beryl . 
david's surviving work mainly consists of religious scenes . 
david was one of the town's leading citizens . 
david had been completely forgotten when in the early 1860s he was rescued from oblivion by william henry james weale ,  whose researches in the archives of bruges brought to light the main facts of the painter's life and led to the reconstruction of david's artistic personality ,  beginning with the recognition of david's only documented work ,  the `` virgin among virgins '' at rouen . 
at the time of david's death ,  the glory of bruges and its painters was on the wane: antwerp had become the leader in art as well as in political and commercial importance . 
benson pursued the matter legally and won ,  leading to david serving time in prison . 
 ''gsm '' is a trademark owned by the gsm association . 
telstra in australia shut down its 2g gsm network on december 1, 2016, the first mobile network operator to decommission a gsm network . 
gsm ,  for the first time ,  set a common standard for europe for wireless networks . 
by 2005 gsm networks accounted for more than 75% of the worldwide cellular network market ,  serving 1.5 billion subscribers . 
pre-paid gsm sim cards were launched in 1996 and worldwide gsm subscribers passed 100 million in 1998.
also that year ,  telecom australia became the first network operator to deploy a gsm network outside europe and the first practical hand-held gsm mobile phone became available . 
kasparov won again by a score of 4½–3½ . 
in january 1984, kasparov became the no . 
kasparov holds the record for the longest time as the no . 
kasparov rose quickly through the world chess federation rankings . 
kasparov played in a total of eight chess olympiads . 
in their five world championship matches ,  kasparov had 21 wins ,  19 losses ,  and 104 draws in 144 games . 
kasparov's detailed olympiad record follows:
kramnik had been a student of kasparov's at the famous botvinnik/kasparov chess school in russia ,  and had served on kasparov's team for the 1995 match against viswanathan anand . 
kasparov left the party on april 28, 1991, after its conference . 
kasparov played two blitz exhibition matches in the autumn of 2011.
with the world champion title in hand ,  kasparov began opposing fide . 
kasparov wrote in february 2013 that `` fascism has come to russia . 
due to kasparov's continuing strong results ,  and status as world no . 
kasparov and short were ejected from fide ,  and played their well-sponsored match in london . 
as a teenager ,  kasparov tied for first place in the ussr chess championship in 1981–82.
kasparov won games 47 and 48 to bring the scores to 5–3 in karpov's favour . 
on 25 and 26 april 2015, kasparov played a mini-match against nigel short . 
on 14 april 2007, kasparov led a pro-democracy demonstration in moscow . 
kasparov tied for first with anatoly karpov ,  scoring 4½/6.
kasparov lost the first game but won the match 7–4  -lrb-  four wins ,  one loss  -rrb-  . 
after kasparov retired ,  he devoted his time to politics and writing . 
kasparov also won the marca leyenda trophy that year . 
in 1978, kasparov participated in the sokolsky memorial tournament in minsk . 
kasparov's wife manages his business activities worldwide as the founder of kasparov international management inc . 
the world chess championship 1984 match between anatoly karpov and garry kasparov had many ups and downs ,  and a very controversial finish . 
kasparov's style of play has been compared by many to alekhine's . 
kasparov's relations with campomanes and fide were greatly strained ,  and the feud between them finally came to a head in 1993 with kasparov's complete break-away from fide . 
kasparov was instrumental in setting up the other russia ,  a coalition which opposes putin's government . 
kasparov has criticized these groups as being secretly under the auspices of the kremlin . 
kasparov and anatoly karpov played a 12-game match from 21–24 september 2009, in valencia ,  spain . 
on 2 june 2016, kasparov played against fifteen chess players in a simultaneous exhibition in the of mönchengladbach . 
the better-prepared kramnik won game 2 against kasparov's grünfeld defence and achieved winning positions in games 4 and 6, although kasparov held the draw in both games . 
kasparov won the match decisively with a score of 8½–1½ ,  winning all five games on the second day . 
kasparov became the youngest ever undisputed world chess champion in 1985 at age 22 by defeating then-champion anatoly karpov . 
on 24 november 2007, kasparov and other protesters were detained by police at an other russia rally in moscow . 
a fifth match between kasparov and karpov was held in new york and lyon in 1990, with each city hosting 12 games . 
the flag of greenland was designed by greenland native thue christiansen . 
the flag of greenland is the only national flag of a nordic country or territory without a nordic cross . 
greenland first entertained the idea of a flag of its own in 1973 when five greenlanders proposed a green ,  white and blue flag . 
the core of radbruch's legal philosophy consists of his tenets the concept of law and the idea of law . 
the concept of law ,  for radbruch ,  is `` nothing other than the given fact ,  which has the sense to serve the idea of law . `` 
born in lübeck ,  radbruch studied law in munich ,  leipzig and berlin . 
gustav radbruch  -lrb-  21 november 1878 – 23 november 1949 -rrb- was a german legal scholar and politician . 
incendiary and flaming weapons were used in warfare for centuries prior to the invention of greek fire . 
although usage of the term `` greek fire '' has been general in english and most other languages since the crusades ,  original byzantine sources called the substance a variety of names ,  such as `` sea fire ''  -lrb-  medieval greek: πῦρ θαλάσσιον `` pŷr thalássion ''  -rrb-  ,  `` roman fire ''  -lrb-   `` pŷr rhōmaïkón ''  -rrb-  ,  `` war fire ''  -lrb-   `` polemikòn pŷr ''  -rrb-  ,  `` liquid fire ''  -lrb-   `` hygròn pŷr ''  -rrb-  ,  `` sticky fire ''  -lrb-   `` pŷr kollētikón ''  -rrb-  or `` manufactured fire ''  -lrb-   `` pŷr skeuastón ''  -rrb-  . 
although the destructiveness of greek fire is indisputable ,  it did not make the byzantine navy invincible . 
however ,  extensive experiments with it also failed to reproduce the described intensity of greek fire . 
another ,  possibly first-hand ,  account of the use of greek fire comes from the 11th-century `` yngvars saga víðförla '' ,  in which the viking ingvar the far-travelled faces ships equipped with greek fire weapons: they began blowing with smiths’ bellows at a furnace in which there was fire and there came from it a great din . 
and the fire which was to be directed against the enemy through tubes he made to pass through the mouths of the beasts ,  so that it seemed as if the lions and the other similar monsters were vomiting the fire . 
greek fire continued to be mentioned during the 12th century ,  and anna komnene gives a vivid description of its use in a naval battle against the pisans in 1099.
the chief method of deployment of greek fire ,  which sets it apart from similar substances ,  was its projection through a tube  -lrb-  `` siphōn ''  -rrb-  ,  for use aboard ships or in sieges . 
records of a 13th-century event in which `` greek fire '' was used by the saracens against the crusaders can be read through the memoirs of the lord of joinville during the seventh crusade . 
the impression made by greek fire on the western european crusaders was such that the name was applied to any sort of incendiary weapon ,  including those used by arabs ,  the chinese ,  and the mongols . 
greek fire was an incendiary weapon used by the eastern roman  -lrb-  byzantine  -rrb-  empire that was first developed  . a combustible compound emitted by a flame-throwing weapon and used to set light to enemy ships . 
the importance placed on greek fire during the empire's struggle against the arabs would lead to its discovery being ascribed to divine intervention . 
since the data entered into the computer is then processed by the computer ,  people who do not understand the processes in question ,  tend to believe the data they see and take it just as seriously as if the data were gospels:
the term may have been derived from last-in ,  first-out  -lrb-  lifo  -rrb-  or first-in ,  first-out  -lrb-  fifo  -rrb-  . 
the term can also be used as an explanation for the poor quality of a digitized audio or video file . 
after the uruguay round ,  tariffs were under 5% . 
the uruguay round began in 1986.
the sixth round of gatt multilateral trade negotiations ,  held from 1963 to 1967.
the wto is a successor to gatt ,  and the original gatt text  -lrb-  gatt 1947 -rrb- is still in effect under the wto framework ,  subject to the modifications of gatt 1994.
gatt ,  and its successor wto ,  have successfully reduced tariffs . 
gatt held a total of nine rounds: the second round took place in 1949 in annecy ,  france . 
experts attribute part of these tariff changes to gatt and the wto . 
kennedy round took place from 1962–1967.
in 1993, the gatt was updated  -lrb-  `` gatt 1994 ''  -rrb-  to include new obligations upon its signatories . 
the fifth round occurred once more in geneva and lasted from 1960-1962.
the agreement on agriculture of the uruguay round continues to be the most substantial trade liberalization agreement in agricultural products in the history of trade negotiations . 
the third round occurred in torquay ,  england in 1951.
activated g proteins are bound to gtp . 
further signal transduction depends on the type of g protein . 
if a receptor in an active state encounters a g protein ,  it may activate it . 
the g protein's α subunit ,  together with the bound gtp ,  can then dissociate from the β and γ subunits to further affect intracellular signaling proteins or target functional proteins directly depending on the α subunit type  -lrb-  g ,  g ,  g ,  g  -rrb-  . 
there are three main g-protein-mediated signaling pathways ,  mediated by four sub-classes of g-proteins distinguished from each other by sequence homology  -lrb-  g ,  g ,  g ,  and g  -rrb-  . 
the g protein-coupled receptor is activated by an external signal in the form of a ligand or other signal mediator . 
g proteins are subsequently inactivated by gtpase activating proteins ,  known as rgs proteins . 
g protein-coupled receptors  -lrb-  gpcrs  -rrb-  ,  also known as seven- -lrb-  pass  -rrb- -transmembrane domain receptors ,  7tm receptors ,  heptahelical receptors ,  serpentine receptor ,  and g protein–linked receptors  -lrb-  gplr  -rrb-  ,  constitute a large protein family of receptors that detect molecules outside the cell and activate internal signal transduction pathways and ,  ultimately ,  cellular responses . 
the g protein-coupled receptor kinases  -lrb-  grks  -rrb-  are protein kinases that phosphorylate only active gpcrs . 
there are two principal signal transduction pathways involving the g protein-linked receptors: the camp signal pathway and the phosphatidylinositol signal pathway . 
gpcrs that act as receptors for stimuli that have not yet been identified are known as orphan receptors . 
stimulative hormone receptor  -lrb-  rs  -rrb-  is a receptor that can bind with stimulative signal molecules ,  while inhibitory hormone receptor  -lrb-  ri  -rrb-  is a receptor that can bind with inhibitory signal molecules . 
activity of grks and subcellular targeting is tightly regulated by interaction with receptor domains ,  g protein subunits ,  lipids ,  anchoring proteins and calcium-sensitive proteins . 
coupling with g proteins ,  they are called seven-transmembrane receptors because they pass through the cell membrane seven times . 
integrin signaling will phosphorylate fak ,  which can then decrease gpcr g activity . 
in the late 1990s ,  evidence began accumulating to suggest that some gpcrs are able to signal without g proteins . 
cyclic amp-dependent protein kinases  -lrb-  protein kinase a  -rrb-  are activated by the signal chain coming from the g protein  -lrb-  that was activated by the receptor  -rrb-  via adenylate cyclase and cyclic amp  -lrb-  camp  -rrb-  . 
the transduction of the signal through the membrane by the receptor is not completely understood . 
the dissociated g and g subunits interact with other intracellular proteins to continue the signal transduction cascade while the freed gpcr is able to rebind to another heterotrimeric g protein to form a new complex that is ready to initiate another round of signal transduction . 
the gtp binding and hydrolysis takes place in the highly conserved g domain common to all gtpases . 
galla placidia herself was now forced from the western empire . 
placidia was a devout chalcedonian christian . 
conflict between placidia and bonifacius started in 429.
their deaths left placidia effectively unattached . 
prior to the fall of rome ,  placidia was captured by alaric . 
placidia and ataulf had a single known son ,  theodosius . 
placidia was the daughter of theodosius i and his second wife ,  galla ,  who was herself daughter of valentinian i and his second wife ,  justina . 
stilicho was the magister militum of the western roman empire . 
galla placidia was regent of the western roman empire from 425 to 437, her regency ending when valentinian reached his eighteenth birthday on july 2, 437.
aelia galla placidia  -lrb-  388 – 27 november 450 -rrb- ,  daughter of the roman emperor theodosius i ,  was regent to valentinian iii from 423 until his majority in 437, and a major force in roman politics for most of her life . 
placidia spent most of her early years in the household of stilicho the vandal and his wife ,  serena . 
bonifacius had meanwhile returned to rome ,  where placidia raised him to the rank of patrician and made him `` master-general of the roman armies '' . 
their son valentinian iii was born july 2, 419.
