the internet protocol suite and the layered protocol stack design were in use before the osi model was established . 
the tcp/ip model's link layer corresponds to the open systems interconnection  -lrb-  osi  -rrb-  model physical and data link layers ,  layers one and two of the osi model . 
the internet protocol suite is the conceptual model and set of communications protocols used in the internet and similar computer networks . 
the transmission control program was split into two distinct protocols ,  the transmission control protocol and the internet protocol . 
the following is a description of each layer in the tcp/ip networking model starting from the lowest level . 
the link layer is used to move packets between the internet layer interfaces of two different hosts on the same link . 
the link layer has the networking scope of the local network connection to which a host is attached . 
the internet protocol suite predates the osi model ,  a more comprehensive reference framework for general networking systems . 
the ssl/tls library operates above the transport layer  -lrb-  uses tcp  -rrb-  but below application protocols . 
the internet layer has the responsibility of sending packets across potentially multiple networks . 
the last protocol is still in use today . 
the technical standards underlying the internet protocol suite and its constituent protocols are maintained by the internet engineering task force  -lrb-  ietf  -rrb-  . 
criticisms of this model ,  which have been made with respect to the osi model ,  often do not consider iso's later extensions to that model . 
again ,  there was no intention ,  on the part of the designers of these protocols ,  to comply with osi architecture . 
al-libi was turned over to the fbi and held at bagram air base . 
in 2006, the united states transferred al-libi to libya ,  where he was imprisoned by the government . 
department of defense spokesmen used to routinely described the khaldan training camp as an al-qaeda training camp ,  and al-libi and abu zubaydah as senior members of al-qaeda . 
ibn al-shaykh al-libi  -lrb-  ; `` ḁbnʋ ălşɑỉƈ allibi ''; born ali mohamed abdul aziz al-fakheri ,  1963 – may 10, 2009 -rrb- was a libyan national captured in afghanistan in november 2001 after the fall of the taliban; he was interrogated by the american and egyptian forces . 
the icrc opened its archives from world war ii in 1996.
the legal basis of the work of the icrc during world war ii were the geneva conventions in their 1929 revision . 
at the end of the cold war ,  the icrc's work actually became more dangerous . 
the red cross also considered its primary focus to be prisoners of war whose countries had signed the geneva convention . 
with the outbreak of world war i ,  the icrc found itself confronted with enormous challenges that it could handle only by working closely with the national red cross societies . 
a total of 524 camps throughout europe were visited by 41 delegates from the icrc until the end of the war . 
in 1944, the icrc received its second nobel peace prize . 
in 1906, the 1864 geneva convention was revised for the first time . 
a year before the end of the war ,  the icrc received the 1917 nobel peace prize for its outstanding wartime work . 
in celebration of its centennial in 1963, the icrc ,  together with the league of red cross societies ,  received its third nobel peace prize . 
during the entire war ,  the icrc monitored warring parties' compliance with the geneva conventions of the 1907 revision and forwarded complaints about violations to the respective country . 
the formation of the league ,  as an additional international red cross organization alongside the icrc ,  was not without controversy for a number of reasons . 
the red cross' response to the holocaust has been the subject of significant controversy and criticism . 
as a result ,  the fundamental principles of the red cross and red crescent were not revealed ,  but `` found '' – through a deliberate and participative process of discovery . 
in 1919, representatives from the national red cross societies of britain ,  france ,  italy ,  japan ,  and the us came together in paris to found the `` league of red cross societies '' . 
feinstein's book `` the gershwins and me: a personal history in twelve songs '' about working for ira ,  and george and ira's music was published in 2012.
the george and ira gershwin collection is at the library of congress music division . 
ira gershwin was a joyous listener to the sounds of the modern world . 
according to a 1999 story in vanity fair ,  ira gershwin's love for loud music was as great as his wife's loathing of it . 
it was not until 1924 that ira and george teamed up to write the music for what became their first broadway hit `` lady ,  be good '' . 
in 1987, ira's widow ,  leonore ,  established the ira gershwin literacy center at university settlement ,  a century-old institution at 185 eldridge street on the lower east side ,  new york city . 
following his brother's death ,  ira waited nearly three years before writing again . 
the success the gershwin brothers had with their collaborative works has often overshadowed the creative role that ira played . 
it is the longest river and national river of pakistan . 
the word `` india '' is derived from the indus river . 
the region through which the river drains into sea is called sindh and owes its name to the river  -lrb-  sanskrit: `` sindhu ''  -rrb-  . 
the indus river  -lrb-  locally called sindhu or darya-e-sindh  -rrb-  is one of the longest rivers in asia . 
palla fish ,  tenualosa ilisha ,  of the river is a delicacy for people living along the river . 
any further utilization of the river basin water is not economically feasible . 
the river has a total drainage area exceeding  . 
after pakistan came into existence ,  a water control treaty signed between india and pakistan in 1960 guaranteed that pakistan would receive water from the indus river and its two tributaries the jhelum river & the chenab river independently of upstream control by india . 
tarbela dam in pakistan is constructed on the indus river ,  while the controversial kalabagh dam is also being constructed on indus river . 
over the years factories on the banks of the indus river have increased levels of water pollution in the river and the atmosphere around it . 
the indus river dolphin  -lrb-  `` platanista indicus minor ''  -rrb-  is a sub-species of dolphin found only in the indus river . 
 ''india '' is a greek and latin term for `` the country of the river indus '' . 
the indus is one of the few rivers in the world to exhibit a tidal bore . 
india retained the right to use of the western rivers for non-irrigation projects . 
this gender usage could mean that the sindhu river was believed to be a warrior ,  and thus one of the greatest among all the rivers in the whole world . 
also describes several mythical rivers ,  including one named `` sindhu '' . 
no algorithm has been published that can factor all integers in polynomial time ,  i . e .  ,  that can factor `` b ''-bit numbers in time o -lrb-  `` b ''  -rrb-  for some constant `` k '' . 
if these integers are further restricted to prime numbers ,  the process is called prime factorization . 
among the `` b ''-bit numbers ,  the most difficult to factor in practice using existing algorithms are those that are products of two primes of similar size . 
given a general algorithm for integer factorization ,  any integer can be factored into its constituent prime factors by repeated application of this algorithm . 
the best published asymptotic running time is for the general number field sieve  -lrb-  gnfs  -rrb-  algorithm ,  which ,  for a `` b ''-bit number `` n '' ,  is:
the imperial system is one of many systems of english units . 
india's conversion to the metric system from the imperial system occurred in stages between 1955 and 1962.
today all official measurements are made in the metric system . 
in the 19th and 20th centuries ,  the uk used three different systems for mass and weight . 
the imperial system developed from what were first known as english units ,  as did the related system of united states customary units . 
the system of imperial units or the imperial system  -lrb-  also known as british imperial or exchequer standards of 1825 -rrb- is the system of units first defined in the british weights and measures act of 1824, which was later refined and reduced . 
the us customary system is historically derived from the english units that were in use at the time of settlement . 
in all the systems ,  the fundamental unit is the pound ,  and all other units are defined as fractions or multiples of it . 
the distinctions between these systems are often not drawn precisely . 
in general ,  god's time would not be related to our time . 
the problem of evil is the argument that the existence of evil is incompatible with the concept of an omnipotent and perfectly good god . 
the incompatible-properties argument is the idea that no description of god is consistent with reality . 
 ,  the isoh has about 340 members from 48 nations . 
from its inception to 2000, ian buchanan has been the president of the isoh . 
isoh was formed with the purpose of promoting and studying the olympic movement and the olympic games . 
bologna won the play-off 2–0.
there are 67 teams that have taken part in 87 serie a championships in a single round that was played from the 1929–30 season until the 2018–19 season . 
global rights for the 2010–11 and 2011–12 seasons were sold for million to mp & silva . 
serie a ,  as it is structured today ,  began during the 1929–30 season . 
for the 2010–11 and 2011–12 seasons ,  serie a clubs negotiating club tv rights collectively rather than individually for the first time since 1998–99.
it had been organized by lega calcio until 2010, when the lega serie a was created for the 2010–11 season . 
from 2005–06 season if two or more teams are tied in points  -lrb-  for any place  -rrb-  ,  the deciding tie-breakers are as follows:
torino were declared champions in the 1948–49 season following a plane crash near the end of the season in which the entire team was killed . 
a number of gases intended for household or industrial use are inhaled as recreational drugs . 
a small number of recreational inhalant drugs are pharmaceutical products that are used illicitly . 
several medical anesthetics are used as recreational drugs ,  including diethyl ether  -lrb-  a drug that is no longer used medically ,  due to its high flammability and the development of safer alternatives  -rrb-  and nitrous oxide ,  which is widely used in the 2010s by dentists as an anti-anxiety drug during dental procedures . 
there are three main product categories: solvents; gases; and medical drugs which are used illicitly . 
a wide range of volatile solvents intended for household or industrial use are inhaled as recreational drugs . 
iceman and gambit returned to the x-men . 
iceman was successful in finding the new x-men ,  most of them injured . 
the duplicate iceman was defeated by the o5 iceman ,  the present iceman ,  and the future iceman during the battle in the past  -lrb-  prompting the youngest iceman to note that they only needed one more iceman for a five-a-side basketball team  -rrb-  . 
iceman attacks sinister ,  distracting him ,  which allows both of the x-men to escape . 
with most of the original team ,  he quits the x-men . 
iceman is one of the few heroes summoned by mr . 
but iceman perished at the hands of the master of magnetism himself when iceman is cut apart . 
the original x-men ,  including iceman ,  reunite to form the superhero team x-factor . 
iceman stayed at the institute as a student only until xavier returned and reformed his x-men . 
professor x is later revealed to be alive and the x-men return to the xavier institute ,  which is also when iceman rejoins the x-men line up . 
iceman is one of the x-men that assists in fighting the skrull invasion in san francisco . 
a mainstay in most x-men titles ,  iceman has been a main character in both `` uncanny x-men '' and the second volume of `` x-men '' and was also featured in `` the champions '' from 1975 to 1978 and `` the new defenders '' from 1983 to 1986 as a member . 
during the legion quest ,  iceman was one of the x-men who went back in time to stop legion from killing magneto . 
after the `` muir island saga '' ,  iceman rejoins the x-men along with the rest of x-factor . 
iceman appears in `` x-men noir '' as one of the x men ,  a crew of talented criminals . 
some time later ,  iceman encounters mirage ,  the `` daughter '' of oblivion . 
iceman rescues colossus from venom and is later made a part of a team to battle emma frost's dark x-men . 
in the novelization for `` x-men: the last stand '' ,  iceman saves pyro from the destruction of dark phoenix . 
iceman is also able to dissolve his own icy constructs . 
iceman wonders if he will entirely turn into ice on a permanent basis . 
iceman joins rogue's team after she tells him that she wants him as a member . 
iceman's powers were pushed to their limit while possessed by emma frost ,  who used iceman to discover the fate of her hellions . 
in ``  '' ,  iceman appears as one of the instrumental characters in the defeat of cassandra nova and khan and one of the few surviving x-men . 
iceman had a brief relationship with a japanese-american new yorker named opal . 
the x-men were separated into two groups ,  iceman was placed in the gold team ,  led by storm ,  along with fellow original x-men jean grey  -lrb-  now sans codename  -rrb-  and archangel . 
in the alternate reality of `` x-men: ronin '' iceman is a murderous ninja in the employ of the hellfire club . 
iceman has taken as much combat training as cyclops or beast . 
the ultimatum wave hits the x-men next killing several of the x-men  -lrb-  beast ,  dazzler ,  and nightcrawler  -rrb-  . 
in `` all-new x-men '' #40, the time-displaced iceman is revealed to be gay ,  which eventually forces the youth to confront the adult version of himself about the matter . 
iceman is a member of a subspecies of humans known as mutants ,  who are born with superhuman abilities . 
in the films ,  `` x-men '' ,  `` x2 '' ,  ``  '' ,  and ``  '' ,  he is played by shawn ashmore . 
shawn ashmore portrayed iceman in the `` x-men '' films ,  and voices the character in `` the super hero squad show '' . 
in `` x-men fairy tales ''  -lrb-  issue #1 -rrb- ,  iceman appears as a white wolf with icy breath named kori  -lrb-  japanese for ice  -rrb-  . 
new excalibur battles an evil counterpart of iceman ,  who is a member of the shadow-x ,  the x-men of an alternate reality in which professor x was possessed by the shadow king . 
with this new team ,  he encounters apocalypse for the first time . 
the aged archbishop saint isidore presided over its deliberations and originated most enactments of the council . 
the catholic church celebrates him and all his siblings as known saints:
the council dealt with a conflict over the see of écija ,  and wrongfully stripped bishop martianus of his see ,  a situation that was rectified by the fourth council of toledo . 
the records of the council ,  unlike the first and second councils of seville were not preserved in the hispana ,  a collection of canons and decretals likely edited by saint isidore himself . 
all bishops of hispania attended the fourth national council of toledo ,  begun on 5 december 633.
after the death of saint leander of seville on 13 march 600 or 601, isidore succeeded to the see of seville . 
saint isidore presided over the second council of seville ,  begun on 13 november 619, in the reign of king sisebut ,  a provincial council attended by eight other bishops ,  all from the ecclesiastical province of baetica in southern spain . 
based on a few surviving canons found in the pseudo-isidorian decretals ,  saint isidore is known to have presided over an additional provincial council around 624.
compounds of carbon are defined as chemical substances containing carbon . 
there are many oxides of carbon  -lrb-  oxocarbons  -rrb-  ,  of which the most common are  -lrb-  co  -rrb-  and carbon monoxide  -lrb-  co  -rrb-  oxides include carbon suboxide  -lrb-  co  -rrb-  and mellitic anhydride  -lrb-  co  -rrb-  . 
the anhydrides of some of these acids are oxides of carbon; carbon dioxide ,  for instance ,  can be seen as the anhydride of carbonic acid . 
silicon valley is known to be one of the world's most targeted areas for espionage ,  though any industry with information of use to competitors may be a target . 
a spy may break into the premises to steal data and may search through waste paper and refuse ,  known as `` dumpster diving '' . 
the rising use of the internet has also extended opportunities for industrial espionage with the aim of sabotage . 
the us based firm cybersitter announced in january 2010 that it was suing the chinese government ,  and other us companies ,  for stealing its anti pornography software ,  with the accusation that it had been incorporated into china's green dam program ,  used by the state to censor children's internet access . 
using targeted emails it compromised thousands of computers in governmental organisations ,  enabling attackers to scan for information and transfer this back to a `` digital storage facility in china '' . 
in may 2010, the federal jury convicted chordiant software ,  inc .  ,  a u . s .  corporation ,  of stealing dongxiao yue's jrpc technologies and used them in a product called chordiant marketing director . 
this method was allegedly utilized by russian secret services ,  over a period of two weeks on a cyberattack on estonia in may 2007, in response to the removal of a soviet era war memorial . 
economic or industrial espionage commonly occurs in one of two ways . 
outsourced industrial producers may ask for information outside the agreed-upon contract . 
the use of these methods of industrial espionage have increasingly become a concern for governments ,  due to potential attacks by terrorist groups or hostile foreign governments . 
there was speculation that `` insiders '' had been involved in the attack ,  with some google china employees being denied access to the company's internal networks after the company's announcement . 
on 13 january 2010, google announced that operators ,  from within china ,  had hacked into their google china operation ,  stealing intellectual property and ,  in particular ,  accessing the email accounts of human rights activists . 
canadian intelligence has apparently supported u . s .  economic espionage efforts . 
in april 2009 the us based hospitality company starwood accused its rival hilton of a `` massive '' case of industrial espionage . 
a recent report to the us government ,  by aerospace and defense company northrop grumman ,  describes chinese economic espionage as comprising `` the single greatest threat to u . s .  technology '' . 
singer always wrote and published in yiddish . 
throughout the 1940s ,  singer's reputation grew . 
of her style ,  singer wrote that `` her works are rooted in jewish folklore and are faithful to jewish life and the jewish spirit . `` 
many of singer's stories and novels have not yet been translated . 
the street where singer grew up was located in the impoverished ,  yiddish-speaking jewish quarter of warsaw . 
singer became a literary contributor to the `` forward '' only after his older brother israel died in 1945.
throughout the 1960s ,  singer continued to write on questions of personal morality . 
among his yiddish contemporaries ,  singer considered his older brother to be his greatest artistic example; he was also a life-long friend and admirer of the author and poet aaron zeitlin . 
isaac bashevis singer  -lrb-  ; november 21, 1902 – july 24, 1991 -rrb- was a polish-american writer in yiddish ,  awarded the nobel prize in literature in 1978.
in 1935, four years before the german invasion ,  singer emigrated from poland to the united states . 
the day of judgment is also known as the day of reckoning ,  the last day ,  and the hour  -lrb-  `` al-sā'ah ''  -rrb-  . 
in islam ,  a number of major and minor signs foretell the end of days . 
when god created adam ,  he ordered all the angels to bow before the new creation . 
god grants his request but also warned that he will have no power over god's servants . 
 ''when allah commanded the angels to prostrate before adam ,  iblis was included in this command . 
iblis is mentioned 11 times in the quran by name ,  9 times related to his rebellion against god's command to prostrate himself before adam . 
and god states he was of the jinn ,  so they said that it is not possible that he should be related to that which god does not relate him to; they said that iblis had progeny and offspring ,  but the angels do not procreate or have children . 
intelsat corporation—formerly intel-sat ,  intelsat ,  intelsat—is a communications satellite services provider . 
in 2015 intelsat reincorporated in delaware and became intelsat corporation . 
it was also this year that intelsat privatized and changed its name to intelsat . 
on february 1, 2007, intelsat changed the names of 16 of its satellites formerly known under the intelsat americas and panamsat brands to galaxy and intelsat ,  respectively . 
since its inception ,  intelsat has used several versions  -lrb-  blocks  -rrb-  of its dedicated intelsat satellites . 
there were talks that intelsat was to merge with softbank-backed oneweb . 
to avert the us government's interference with intelsat ,  intelsat's senior management unsuccessfully considered relocating the igo to another country . 
a near-end-of-life intelsat satellite will be moved to a graveyard orbit above the geostationary belt where the refueling will be done ,  `` without consequence '' to the intelsat business . 
on 6 april 1965, intelsat's first satellite ,  the intelsat i  -lrb-  nicknamed `` early bird ''  -rrb-  ,  was placed in geostationary orbit above the atlantic ocean by a delta d rocket . 
indian numerals are the symbols representing numbers in india . 
a decimal place system has been traced back to c .  500 in india . 
below is a list of the indian numerals in their modern devanagari form ,  the corresponding western arabic equivalents ,  their hindi and sanskrit pronunciation ,  and translations in some languages . 
the addition of zero as a tenth positional digit is documented from the 7th century by brahmagupta ,  though the earlier bakhshali manuscript ,  written sometime before the 5th century ,  also included zero . 
botham did not bat again . 
during this period ,  botham played in 25 tests . 
botham's first tour of australia was in 1978–79.
botham's test career spanned 16 seasons and he played in 102 matches . 
botham was out of action for eleven months . 
botham continued to make progress in 1975.
botham didn't get a second innings . 
due to his england commitments ,  botham appeared infrequently for somerset in 1978.
botham's outstanding form continued through the next two tests . 
botham played for england in the 1979 cricket world cup and was a member of their losing team in the final . 
botham's final tour was to australia and new zealand in 1991–92.
botham's form in new zealand cemented his place in the england team . 
botham made his test début at trent bridge on 28 july 1977 in the third test against australia . 
botham played in the five 1987 tests against pakistan ,  the last time he represented england in a full series . 
botham left pakistan after the first test there ,  the one england lost ,  to have a knee problem investigated at home . 
england won the series 3–0.
in the second match at lord's ,  botham was replaced by returning england captain tony greig . 
in 1976, in doncaster ,  botham married kathryn  -lrb-  `` kathy ''  -rrb-  waller  -lrb-  now lady botham  -rrb-  whom he first met in june 1974.
in a county championship match on 13 july 1974, botham scored his first half-century in first-class cricket . 
botham was replaced by the returning mike brearley ,  who had been his predecessor until retiring from test cricket in 1980.
apart from an innings of 57 in the first test ,  botham contributed little to england in the series and that innings was the only time he reached 50 in all his twelve tests as england captain . 
botham played in 18 tests from 1984 to 1986, ten of them  -lrb-  five home ,  five away  -rrb-  against west indies . 
due to the ban ,  botham played in only one test which was the final one of the series against new zealand . 
botham is an avid trout and salmon angler . 
botham's third overseas tour was to india in february 1980.
india won the toss and decided to bat first but ,  with botham taking six for 58, they were all out on day one for 242.
botham's final tour of australia was in 1986–87 under mike gatting's captaincy . 
after his resignation from somerset ,  botham joined worcestershire for the 1987 season and spent five seasons with them . 
botham continued to play for england under brearley and achieved the highpoint of his career in the next three tests as england recovered to win the ashes . 
in summary ,  botham scored four runs ,  took one wicket for 14 and held one catch . 
in the 1978 english season ,  pakistan and new zealand both visited to play three tests each and botham featured in all six matches . 
botham has a wide range of sporting interests outside cricket . 
england had won by 18 runs and it was only the second time in history that a team following on had won a test match . 
in 1992, botham joined county championship newcomers durham and he played in the first two tests against pakistan ,  the second one at lord's being his final test appearance . 
england's wicketkeeper bob taylor held ten catches in the match ,  eight of them off botham's bowling . 
after `` wolfenstein 3d ''s great success ,  id began working on `` doom '' . 
 ''wolfenstein 3d '' is often considered as the first true fps ,  `` doom '' was a game that popularized the genre and pc gaming in general ,  and `` quake '' was id's first true 3d fps . 
id software llc  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an american video game developer based in dallas ,  texas . 
id's work was particularly important in 3d computer graphics technology and in game engines that are used throughout the video game industry . 
only later  -lrb-  about the time of the release of `` doom ii ''  -rrb-  did id software release their games via more traditional shrink-wrapped boxes in stores  -lrb-  through other game publishers  -rrb-  . 
where formula_25 is the velocity expressed as a function of time . 
is a linear functional on this vector space . 
the work done by a force formula_26  -lrb-  given as a function of position  -rrb-  from an initial position formula_27 to a final position formula_28 is:
for a suitable class of functions  -lrb-  the measurable functions  -rrb-  this defines the lebesgue integral . 
the riemann integral is defined in terms of riemann sums of functions with respect to `` tagged partitions '' of an interval . 
given a function of a real variable and an interval of the real line ,  the definite integral
the height ,  represented in the volume formula by formula_21, is given in this integral by the infinitesimally small  -lrb-  in order to approximate the volume with the greatest possible accuracy  -rrb-  term formula_22.
such an integral is the lebesgue integral ,  that exploits the following fact to enlarge the class of integrable functions: if the values of a function are rearranged over the domain ,  the integral of a function should remain the same . 
a general measurable function is lebesgue-integrable if the sum of the absolute values of the areas of the regions between the graph of and the -axis is finite: in that case ,  the integral is ,  as in the riemannian case ,  the difference between the area above the -axis and the area below the -axis: where
moreover ,  the integral under an entire probability density function must equal 1, which provides a test of whether a function with no negative values could be a density function or not . 
the integral with respect to of a real-valued function of a real variable on the interval is written as
using the `` partitioning the range of ``  philosophy ,  the integral of a non-negative function should be the sum over of the areas between a thin horizontal strip between and  . 
for example ,  in rectilinear motion ,  the displacement of an object over the time interval formula_23 is given by:
the `` riemann integral '' of a function over the interval is equal to if: when the chosen tags give the maximum  -lrb-  respectively ,  minimum  -rrb-  value of each interval ,  the riemann sum becomes an upper  -lrb-  respectively ,  lower  -rrb-  darboux sum ,  suggesting the close connection between the riemann integral and the darboux integral . 
the volume of a three-dimensional object such as a disc or washer ,  as outlined in disc integration can be computed using the equation for the volume of a cylinder ,  formula_4, where formula_5 is the radius ,  which in this case would be the distance from the curve of a function to the line about which it is being rotated . 
summing the areas of these rectangles ,  we get a better approximation for the sought integral ,  namely
for instance ,  one might write formula_33 to express the linearity of the integral ,  a property shared by the riemann integral and all generalizations thereof . 
while the palestinian arabs were `` carefully disarmed '' by the british mandatory authorities by 1939, the zionists were not . 
after the beginning of world war ii ,  the haganah and irgun suspended their activity against the british in support of their war against nazi germany . 
during world war i ,  zionist volunteers fought in the jewish legion of the british army against the ottoman turks
after world war ii ,  between 1945 and the 29 november 1947 partition vote ,  british soldiers and policemen were targeted by irgun and lehi . 
irgun was specifically condemned . 
actions have been carried out by individuals and jewish paramilitary groups such as the irgun ,  the lehi ,  the haganah and the palmach as part of a conflict between jews ,  british authorities ,  and palestinian arabs ,  regarding land ,  immigration ,  and control over palestine . 
during the battle for jerusalem  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- where the jewish community of 100,000 people was besieged ,  most arab villages of the tel aviv – jerusalem corridor were captured by jewish militias and leveled . 
sibm is not inherited and is not passed on to the children of ibm patients . 
the cause of ibm is unknown . 
dysphagia is present in 40 to 85% of ibm cases . 
there are two major theories about how sibm is caused . 
polymyositis that does not respond to treatment is likely ibm . 
ibm is often initially misdiagnosed as polymyositis . 
it may have different root causes unrelated to either polymyositis or sibm . 
sibm is a challenge to the pathologist and even with a biopsy ,  diagnosis can be ambiguous . 
sibm is not passed on from generation to generation ,  although the susceptibility region of genes may be . 
eventually ,  sibm results in general ,  progressive muscle weakness . 
ion implantation can be used to achieve ion beam mixing ,  i . e . 
the energy of the ions ,  as well as the ion species and the composition of the target determine the depth of penetration of the ions in the solid: a monoenergetic ion beam will generally have a broad depth distribution . 
ion implantation equipment typically consists of an ion source ,  where ions of the desired element are produced ,  an accelerator ,  where the ions are electrostatically accelerated to a high energy ,  and a target chamber ,  where the ions impinge on a target ,  which is the material to be implanted . 
ion implantation is a low-temperature process by which ions of one element are accelerated into a solid target ,  thereby changing the physical ,  chemical ,  or electrical properties of the target . 
because ion implantation causes damage to the crystal structure of the target which is often unwanted ,  ion implantation processing is often followed by a thermal annealing . 
accelerator systems for ion implantation are generally classified into medium current  -lrb-  ion beam currents between 10 μa and ~2 ma  -rrb-  ,  high current  -lrb-  ion beam currents up to ~30 ma  -rrb-  ,  high energy  -lrb-  ion energies above 200 kev and up to 10 mev  -rrb-  ,  and very high dose  -lrb-  efficient implant of dose greater than 10ions/cm  -rrb-  . 
nitrogen or other ions can be implanted into a tool steel target  -lrb-  drill bits ,  for example  -rrb-  . 
typical ion energies are in the range of 10 to 500 kev  -lrb-  1,600 to 80,000 aj  -rrb-  . 
each individual ion produces many point defects in the target crystal on impact such as vacancies and interstitials . 
woo's hollywood films include the action films `` hard target ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- and `` broken arrow ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  the sci-fi action thriller `` face/off ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- and the action spy film ``  ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- . 
as a result ,  it did not match the success of his other films . 
john woo has made three additional films in hollywood: ``  '' ,  `` windtalkers '' and `` paycheck '' . 
woo married annie woo ngau chun-lung in 1976, with whom he has three children . 
john woo sbs  -lrb-  ; born may 1, 1946 -rrb- is a chinese-born hong kong film director ,  writer ,  and producer . 
woo has directed several notable hong kong action films ,  among them ,  `` a better tomorrow ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- ,  `` the killer ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- ,  `` hard boiled ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  and `` red cliff ''  -lrb-  2008/2009 -rrb- . 
after the death of japanese actor ken takakura in 2014, woo announced his next film `` manhunt '' ,  a film based on the novel by juko nishimura . 
his christian upbringing shows influences in his films . 
john woo was presented with a golden lion award for lifetime achievement at the venice film festival in 2010.
by the mid-1980s ,  woo was experiencing occupational burnout . 
in 1969, woo was hired as a script supervisor at cathay studios . 
japan has 108 active volcanoes . 
in 2016, 24,039,053 foreign tourists visited japan . 
in 2017, japan had the fifth largest diplomatic network in the world . 
for inbound tourism ,  japan was ranked 16th in the world in 2015.
japan is one of the most densely populated countries in the world . 
japan has close ties to the united states . 
from the meiji restoration until the end of world war ii ,  the full title of japan was  ,  meaning `` the empire of great japan '' . 
modern japan's economic growth began in the edo period . 
the subducting plates pulled japan eastward ,  opening the sea of japan around 15 million years ago . 
japan maintains one of the largest military budgets of any country in the world . 
in 1996, japan ranked fourth in the world in tonnage of fish caught . 
japan's industrial sector makes up approximately 27.5% of its gdp . 
rice accounts for almost all of japan's cereal production . 
approximately 0.5% of japan's total area is reclaimed land  -lrb-  umetatechi  -rrb-  . 
japan has a total of 6,852 islands extending along the pacific coast . 
in 2018 japan executed 15 people ,  the highest annual total since 2008.
japan is the third largest automobile producer in the world ,  and is home to toyota ,  the world's largest automobile company . 
japan has also sparked controversy by supporting quasi-commercial whaling . 
japan also has a large cooperative sector ,  with three of the ten largest cooperatives in the world located in japan ,  including the largest consumer cooperative and the largest agricultural cooperative in the world . 
japan's relationship with south korea has been strained due to japan's treatment of koreans during japanese colonial rule ,  particularly over the issue of comfort women . 
the average winter temperature in japan is and the average summer temperature is  . 
the climate of japan is predominantly temperate ,  but varies greatly from north to south . 
 ,  more than 40 coal-fired power plants are planned or under construction in japan ,  following the switching-off of japan's nuclear fleet following the 2011 fukushima nuclear disaster . 
today ,  japan ranks highly for competitiveness and economic freedom . 
japan's main import markets were china  -lrb-  24.8 percent  -rrb-  ,  the united states  -lrb-  10.5 percent  -rrb-  ,  australia  -lrb-  5.4 percent  -rrb-  and south korea  -lrb-  4.1 percent  -rrb-  . 
housing in japan is characterized by limited land supply in urban areas . 
the military is governed by the ministry of defense ,  and primarily consists of the japan ground self-defense force  -lrb-  jgsdf  -rrb-  ,  the japan maritime self-defense force  -lrb-  jmsdf  -rrb-  and the japan air self-defense force  -lrb-  jasdf  -rrb-  . 
japan is a constitutional monarchy and sovereign state whereby the power of the emperor is very limited . 
japan's exports amounted to us$4,210 per capita in 2005.  ,  japan's main export markets were the united states  -lrb-  20.2 percent  -rrb-  ,  china  -lrb-  17.5 percent  -rrb-  ,  south korea  -lrb-  7.1 percent  -rrb-  ,  hong kong  -lrb-  5.6 percent  -rrb-  and thailand  -lrb-  4.5 percent  -rrb-  . 
japan first appears in written history in the chinese `` book of han '' . 
japan has a population of 126,672,000 in 2016.
location: japan is a long island chain between the sea of okhotsk ,  the sea of japan and the philippine sea . 
japan is east of siberia ,  the korean peninsula and taiwan . 
to the north the sea of okhotsk separates it from the russian far east ,  to the west the sea of japan separates it from the korean peninsula ,  to the southwest the east china sea separates the ryukyu islands from china and taiwan ,  to the east is the pacific ocean . 
more than 20 percent of the population of japan were aged 65 and over . 
the world population-ranking of japan dropped from 7th to 8th in 1990, to 9th in 1998, and to 10th in the early 21st century . 
japan's population is aging faster than any other nation . 
japan's population density was 336 people per square kilometer . 
japan has a high population concentration in urban areas on the plains since 75% of japan’s land area is made up of mountains ,  and also japan has a forest cover rate of 68.5%  -lrb-  the only other developed countries with such a high forest cover percentage are finland and sweden  -rrb-  . 
japan is an urban society with about only 5% of the labor force working in agriculture . 
koizumi was elected as japan's 87th prime minister on 26 april 2001.
most of the prime ministers were elected from inner factions of ldp . 
in april 1994, prime minister hosokawa resigned . 
 ''see also: '' industrial policy of japan; monetary and fiscal policy of japan; mass media and politics in japan
on 16 september 2009, president of dpj ,  hatoyama was elected by the house of representatives as the 93rd prime minister of japan . 
prime minister murayama served from june 1994 to january 1996.
with the liberal democratic party  -lrb-  ldp  -rrb-  in power ,  it has been convention that the president of the party serves as the prime minister . 
he was replaced by yasuo fukuda ,  a veteran of ldp . 
the ldp domination lasted until the diet lower house elections on 18 july 1993, in which ldp failed to win a majority . 
the chief of the executive branch ,  the prime minister ,  is appointed by the emperor as directed by the diet . 
prime minister obuchi suffered a stroke in april 2000 and was replaced by yoshirō mori . 
the election was held on 14 december 2014, and the results were in the favor of ldp and its ally new komeito . 
japan is considered a constitutional monarchy with a system of civil law . 
about 84% of japan's energy is imported from other countries . 
japan's mining production has been minimal ,  and japan has very little mining deposits . 
japan is home to 251 companies from the forbes global 2000 or 12.55%  -lrb-  as of 2013 -rrb- . 
japan is the third biggest producer of automobiles in the world . 
as of 2015, 54 of the fortune global 500 companies are based in japan ,  down from 62 in 2013.
japan's spendings on roads has been considered large . 
rail transport is a major means of transport in japan . 
rice accounts for almost all of japan's cereal production . 
japan ranked fourth in the world in 1996 in tonnage of fish caught . 
by the end of said period ,  japan had moved into being a high-wage economy . 
japan has also sparked controversy by supporting quasi-commercial whaling . 
the economy of japan is a highly developed and market-oriented economy . 
marine and freshwater aquaculture is conducted in all 47 prefectures in japan . 
japan maintains one of the world's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly 15% of the global catch ,  prompting some claims that japan's fishing is leading to depletion in fish stocks such as tuna . 
japan has the highest ratio of public debt to gdp of any developed nation . 
there are 98 passenger and 175 total airports in japan ,  and flying is a popular way to travel . 
the largest ports in japan include nagoya port ,  the port of yokohama ,  the port of tokyo and the port of kobe . 
in recent years ,  japan has been the top export market for almost 15 trading nations worldwide . 
japan's service sector accounts for about three-quarters of its total economic output . 
in 2012, japan was the fifth most visited country in asia and the pacific ,  with over 8.3 million tourists . 
the economic history of japan is one of the most studied economies for its spectacular growth in three different periods . 
by 1990, income per capita in japan equalled or surpassed that in most countries in the west . 
the nation of japan currently possesses one of the most advanced communication networks in the world . 
there are some 994 ports in japan as of april 2014.
there are 176 airports ,  and the largest domestic airport ,  haneda airport ,  is asia's busiest airport . 
transport in japan is modern and highly developed . 
japan's spending on roads has been large . 
in japan ,  railways are a major means of passenger transport ,  especially for mass and high-speed transport between major cities and for commuter transport in metropolitan areas . 
japan has 84 km of pipelines for crude oil ,  322 km for petroleum products ,  and 1,800 km for natural gas . 
according to japan statistical yearbook 2015, japan in april 2012 had approximately 1,215,000 km of roads made up of 1,022,000 km of city ,  town and village roads ,  129,000 km of prefectural roads ,  55,000 km of general national highways and 8,050 km of national expressways . 
the shinkansen ,  or `` bullet trains '' ,  as they are often known ,  are the high-speed rail trains that run across japan . 
transport in japan is also very expensive in international comparison ,  reflecting high tolls and taxes ,  particularly on automobile transport . 
jackson grew up in california until the age of 8.
holmes claims jackson was her first love . 
joshua jackson  -lrb-  born june 11, 1978 -rrb- is a canadian actor . 
jackson started acting in a small role in the film `` crooked hearts '' in 1991.
jackson was born in vancouver ,  british columbia ,  to parents john carter and fiona jackson . 
john ray was born in the village of black notley in essex . 
from then on ,  he used 'ray' ,  after `` having ascertained that such had been the practice of his family before him '' . 
at cambridge ,  ray spent much of his time in the study of natural history ,  a subject which would occupy him for most of his life . 
ray was the first person to produce a biological definition of species ,  in his 1686 `` history of plants '':
joyce returned to dublin in mid-1909 with george ,  to visit his father and work on getting `` dubliners '' published . 
by 1926 joyce had completed the first two parts of the book . 
joyce returned to dublin again briefly in mid-1912 during his years-long fight with dublin publisher george roberts over the publication of `` dubliners '' . 
thus was born a text that became known ,  first ,  as `` work in progress '' and later `` finnegans wake '' . 
joyce was born in dublin into a middle-class family . 
he went on to attend university college dublin . 
 ''dubliners '' is a collection of fifteen short stories by joyce ,  first published in 1914.
his daughter lucia was born later that year . 
joyce remained in dublin for some time longer ,  drinking heavily . 
three more months were devoted to working on the proofs of the book before joyce halted work shortly before his self-imposed deadline ,  his 40th birthday  -lrb-  2 february 1922 -rrb- . 
joyce published a number of books of poetry . 
they form a naturalistic depiction of irish middle class life in and around dublin in the early years of the 20th century . 
this provoked the first accusations of obscenity with which the book would be identified for so long . 
later that year nora gave birth to their first child ,  george  -lrb-  known as giorgio  -rrb-  . 
also in 1904 he met nora barnacle ,  a young woman from galway city who was working as a chambermaid . 
on 2 february 1882, joyce was born at 41 brighton square ,  rathgar ,  dublin ,  ireland . 
in 1887, his father was appointed rate collector by dublin corporation; the family subsequently moved to the fashionable adjacent small town of bray ,  from dublin . 
after this trip ,  he never again came closer to dublin than london ,  despite many pleas from his father and invitations from his fellow irish writer william butler yeats . 
reaction to the work was mixed ,  including negative comment from early supporters of joyce's work ,  such as pound and the author's brother ,  stanislaus joyce . 
having completed work on `` ulysses '' ,  joyce was so exhausted that he did not write a line of prose for a year . 
the work and life of joyce is celebrated annually on 16 june ,  known as bloomsday ,  in dublin and in an increasing number of cities worldwide ,  and critical studies in scholarly publications ,  such as the `` james joyce quarterly '' ,  continue . 
central to kano's vision for judo were the principles of and  . 
thus kano renamed it  . 
judo is mostly known for `` nage-waza '' and `` katame-waza '' . 
judo pedagogy emphasizes  . 
there are three basic categories of in judo:  ,  and  . 
on fukuda's death in 1880, kano ,  who had become his keenest and most able student in both `` randori '' and  ,  was given the of the fukuda dojo . 
fukuda is said to have emphasized technique over formal exercise ,  sowing the seeds of kano's emphasis on in judo . 
kano realised that `` seiryoku zen'yō '' ,  initially conceived as a jujutsu concept ,  had a wider philosophical application . 
the culture of bullying endemic at this school was the catalyst that caused kano to seek out a at which to train . 
the first bond film ,  `` dr .  no '' ,  saw m ordering bond to leave his beretta behind and take up the walther ppk ,  which the film bond used in eighteen films . 
bond returned to his bentley for the subsequent novels . 
the films are also noted for bond's relationships with various women ,  who are sometimes referred to as `` bond girls '' . 
in 1991 a tv cartoon series `` james bond jr . ``  was produced with corey burton in the role of bond's nephew ,  also called james bond . 
barry composed the scores for eleven bond films and had an uncredited contribution to `` dr .  no '' with his arrangement of the bond theme . 
in 1996 the american author raymond benson became the author of the bond novels . 
fleming did not provide bond's date of birth ,  but john pearson's fictional biography of bond ,  ``  '' ,  gives bond a birth date on 11 november 1920, while a study by john griswold puts the date at 11 november 1921.
 ,  eon holds the full adaptation rights to all of fleming's bond novels . 
in 1967 `` casino royale '' was adapted into a parody bond film starring david niven as sir james bond and ursula andress as vesper lynd . 
television also saw the effect of bond films ,  with the nbc series `` the man from u . n . c . l . e . 
for the first five novels ,  fleming armed bond with a beretta 418 until he received a letter from a thirty-one-year-old bond enthusiast and gun expert ,  geoffrey boothroyd ,  criticising fleming's choice of firearm for bond ,  calling it `` a lady's gun – and not a very nice lady at that ! `` 
the name james bond came from that of the american ornithologist james bond ,  a caribbean bird expert and author of the definitive field guide `` birds of the west indies '' . 
in 1996 gardner retired from writing james bond books due to ill health . 
other 1960s television series inspired by bond include `` i spy '' ,  and `` get smart '' . 
it was not until the penultimate novel ,  `` you only live twice '' ,  that fleming gave bond a sense of family background . 
cinematically ,  bond has been a major influence within the spy genre since the release of `` dr .  no '' in 1962, with 22 secret agent films released in 1966 alone attempting to capitalise on the bond franchise's popularity and success . 
for the film adaptations of bond ,  the pre-mission briefing by q branch became one of the motifs that ran through the series . 
the uk film distributors' association have stated that the importance of the bond series of films to the british film industry cannot be overstated ,  as they `` form the backbone of the industry '' . 
negatives are formed by inflecting the verb . 
man'yōgana also has a symbol for  ,  which merges with before the end of the period . 
early modern japanese ,  not to be confused with modern japanese ,  was the dialect used after the meiji restoration . 
modern japanese is considered to begin with the edo period ,  which lasted between 1603 and 1868.
dozens of dialects are spoken in japan . 
old japanese does not have  ,  but rather  -lrb-  preserved in modern `` fu '' ,    -rrb-  ,  which has been reconstructed to an earlier * . 
due to these extra syllables ,  it has been hypothesized that old japanese's vowel system was larger than that of modern japanese – it perhaps contained up to eight vowels . 
japanese `` pronouns '' also function differently from most modern indo-european pronouns  -lrb-  and more like nouns  -rrb-  in that they can take modifiers as any other noun may . 
japanese often use titles of the person referred to where pronouns would be used in english . 
most likely being the spoken form of classical japanese language ,  a writing style that was prevalent during the heian period ,  but began decline during the late meiji period . 
the word `` da ''  -lrb-  plain  -rrb-  ,  `` desu ''  -lrb-  polite  -rrb-  is the copula verb . 
the verb `` to do ''  -lrb-  `` suru '' ,  polite form `` shimasu ''  -rrb-  is often used to make verbs from nouns  -lrb-  `` ryōri suru '' `` to cook '' ,  `` benkyō suru '' `` to study '' ,  etc .   -rrb- 
 ''hair of the eye ''  -rrb- ; modern `` mieru ''  -lrb-  `` to be visible ''  -rrb-  and `` kikoeru ''  -lrb-  `` to be audible ''  -rrb-  retain what may have been a mediopassive suffix - ''yu -lrb-  ru  -rrb- ``   -lrb-  `` kikoyu '' → `` kikoyuru ''  -lrb-  the attributive form ,  which slowly replaced the plain form starting in the late heian period  -rrb-  > `` kikoeru ''  -lrb-  as all shimo-nidan verbs in modern japanese did  -rrb-   -rrb- ; and the genitive particle `` ga '' remains in intentionally archaic speech . 
although japanese is spoken almost exclusively in japan ,  it has been spoken outside . 
the phonology of japanese also includes a pitch accent system ,  which is a system that helps differentiate words with identical hiragana spelling or words in different japanese dialects . 
verbs are conjugated to show tenses ,  of which there are two: past and present  -lrb-  or non-past  -rrb-  which is used for the present and the future . 
in this time period the japanese in addition to their use of katakana and hiragana they also used traditional chinese characters called `` han '' which later developed in `` kanji '' which is a form of writing used to express ideas in the japanese and chinese languages . 
several fossilizations of old japanese grammatical elements remain in the modern language – the genitive particle `` tsu ''  -lrb-  superseded by modern `` no ''  -rrb-  is preserved in words such as `` matsuge ''  -lrb-  `` eyelash '' ,  lit . 
 ''hayaku '' > `` hayau '' > `` hayɔɔ '' ,  where modern japanese just has `` hayaku '' ,  though the alternative form is preserved in the standard greeting `` o-hayō gozaimasu '' `` good morning ''; this ending is also seen in `` o-medetō '' `` congratulations '' ,  from `` medetaku ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''pan o tabenakatta ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  `` i did not eat bread '' . 
joe's mother ,  marcia bonham ,  was always close to joe and bill . 
josé worked at a bakery with joe . 
joe bonham is the main character . 
joe's father ,  bill bonham ,  courted joe's mother and raised a family with her in colorado . 
bill harper warns joe that diane has cheated on him with glen hogan . 
joe meets howie  -lrb-  chapter 4 -rrb- after his troubles with diane and glen hogan . 
she also cheats on joe with his best friend ,  bill harper  -lrb-  who told him that she cheated with hogan  -rrb-  . 
would pay simon . 
ehrlich lost the bet ,  as all five commodities that were bet on declined in price from 1980 through 1990, the wager period . 
ehrlich could have won if the bet had been for a different ten-year period . 
as a result ,  in october 1990, paul ehrlich mailed julian simon a check for $576.07 to settle the wager in simon's favor . 
tenniel was born in bayswater ,  west london ,  to john baptist tenniel ,  a fencing and dancing master of huguenot descent ,  and eliza maria tenniel . 
so it was here that tenniel returned to his earlier independent education . 
tenniel's `` grotesqueness '' was one reason why lewis carroll wanted tenniel as his illustrator for the `` alice '' books . 
after the 1850s ,  tenniel's style modernized to incorporate more detail in backgrounds and in figures . 
another `` formal '' means of training was tenniel's participation in an artists' group ,  free from the rules of the academy that were stifling tenniel . 
tenniel's first book illustration was for samuel carter hall's `` the book of british ballads '' ,  in 1842.
the most noticeably grotesque is tenniel's famous jabberwock drawing in `` alice '' . 
one unusual aspect of the `` alice '' books is the placing of tenniel's illustrations on the pages . 
in the mid-1840s tenniel joined the artist's society or clipstone street life academy ,  and it could be said here that tenniel first emerged as a satirical draughtsman . 
in 1861, tenniel was offered john leech's position at `` punch '' ,  as political cartoonist ,  but tenniel still maintained a sense of decorum and restraint in the heated social and political issues of the day . 
