burgess was sent back to england ,  where he met maclean in his london club . 
it is possible that it was a viennese-born friend of friedmann's in london ,  edith tudor hart – herself ,  at this time ,  a soviet agent – who first approached philby about the possibility of working for soviet intelligence . 
modrzhinskaya concluded that all were double agents ,  working essentially for the british . 
lacking access to material of value and out of touch with soviet intelligence ,  he all but ceased to operate as a soviet agent . 
in january 1934 arnold deutsch ,  one of nkvd's agents ,  was sent to london . 
on 30 july soviet officials announced that they had granted him political asylum in the ussr ,  along with soviet citizenship . 
philby planned to infiltrate five or six groups of émigrés into soviet armenia or soviet georgia . 
in 1968 she returned to maclean . 
harold adrian russell `` kim '' philby  -lrb-  1 january 1912 – 11 may 1988 -rrb- was a high-ranking member of british intelligence who worked as a double agent before defecting to the soviet union in 1963.
in july 1939, philby returned to `` the times '' office in london . 
his public position was that of first secretary at the british consulate; in reality ,  his intelligence work required overseeing british agents and working with the turkish security services . 
in 1940 he began living with aileen furse in london . 
it was litzi . `` 
after being exonerated ,  philby was no longer employed by mi6 and soviet intelligence lost all contact with him . 
philby was born at ambala in the punjab province of british india . 
it has since been suggested that the whole confrontation with elliott had been a charade to convince the kgb that philby had to be brought back to moscow ,  where he could serve as a british penetration agent of moscow centre . 
 ''before then , ``  he later wrote ,  `` there had been a lot of criticism of british journalists from franco officers who seemed to think that the british in general must be a lot of communists because so many were fighting with the international brigades . 
philby told the british ,  after a direct question to franco ,  that german troops would never be permitted to cross spain to attack gibraltar . 
the investigation into the british embassy leak was still ongoing ,  and the stress of it was exacerbated by the arrival in washington ,  in october 1950, of burgess – philby's unstable and dangerously alcoholic fellow soviet spy . 
on 25 may  -lrb-  maclean's thirty-eighth birthday  -rrb-  ,  burgess drove maclean from his home in tatsfield to southampton ,  where the two of them boarded a boat to france and then proceeded to moscow . 
in february 1947, philby was appointed head of british intelligence for turkey ,  and posted to istanbul with his second wife ,  aileen ,  and their family . 
he listed seven ,  including donald maclean and guy burgess . 
he joined the anglo-german fellowship ,  which was supported both by the british and german governments ,  and made many trips to berlin . 
solomon introduced philby to his second wife ,  aileen furse ,  but went to work for the british retailer marks & spencer . 
burgess had intended to aid maclean in his escape ,  not accompany him in it . 
even after philby's departure from mi6, speculation regarding his possible soviet affiliations continued . 
according to genrikh borovik ,  who worked from soviet archives ,  tudor hart recommended philby and friedmann in 1934.
kamacite is an alloy of iron and nickel ,  which is found on earth only in meteorites . 
kamacite meteorites have been found on every continent on earth and have also been found on mars . 
since kamacite is only formed in space and is only found on earth in meteorites ,  it has very low abundance on earth . 
taenite contains more nickel  -lrb-  12 to 45 wt . 
after using metallographic and x-ray diffraction techniques to determine shock history it was found that 49% of meteorites found on earth contain evidence of shock . 
it has been speculated to be e-iron ,  a hexagonal polymorph of iron . 
to accommodate this areas start to form of higher iron concentration displacing nickel to the areas around it which creates taenite which is the nickel end member . 
thomson structures or widmanstätten patterns are created as the meteorite cools; at high temperatures both iron and nickel have face-centered lattices . 
in analysis of kamacite in e chondrites it was found that they contain generally less nickel then average . 
kamacite starts to form around 723 ˚c ,  where iron splits from being face centered to body centered while nickel remains face centered . 
this difference is caused by nickel and iron having a similar size but different interatomic magnetic and quantum interactions . 
kamacite has been found and studied in meteor crater ,  arizona . 
kaohsiung has also 306 churches . 
the kaohsiung international airport is the second largest airport in taiwan ,  while the port of kaohsiung is the largest harbor in taiwan . 
main landmarks of kaohsiung city include the 85 sky tower ,  the ferris wheel of the kaohsiung dream mall ,  the kaohsiung arena and kaohsiung harbor . 
during this time ,  kaohsiung developed rapidly . 
the port of kaohsiung is not officially a part of kaohsiung city ,  instead it is administrated by kaohsiung port authority ,  under ministry of transportation . 
kaohsiung has the most numbers of districts among other special municipalities in taiwan . 
kaohsiung currently hosts around 56,000 christians . 
kaohsiung is a major international port and industrial city in the southwest of taiwan . 
kaohsiung also hosts the largest buddhist temple in taiwan ,  the foguangshan temple . 
kaohsiung is home to many museums ,  including the chung li-he museum ,  cijin shell museum ,  jiaxian fossil museum ,  kaohsiung astronomical museum ,  kaohsiung hakka cultural museum ,  kaohsiung harbor museum ,  kaohsiung museum of fine arts ,  kaohsiung museum of history ,  kaohsiung museum of labor ,  kaohsiung vision museum ,  meinong hakka culture museum ,  national science and technology museum ,  republic of china air force museum ,  soya-mixed meat museum ,  taiwan sugar museum ,  takao railway museum and ym museum of marine exploration kaohsiung . 
there is a push for kaohsiung city to annex the port of kaohsiung in order to facilitate better regional planning . 
kaohsiung mosque is the largest mosque in kaohsiung and the main gathering site of muslims within the city . 
kaohsiung is directly divided into 35 districts and 3 mountain indigenous districts . 
as the largest municipality in taiwan ,  kaohsiung has a number of newly built leisure areas and parks . 
kaohsiung city is also home to taiwan's second largest international airport ,  the kaohsiung international airport ,  located in siaogang district near the city's center . 
kaohsiung is sometimes seen as the political opposite taipei . 
as of december 2010, kaohsiung city hosts around 21,000 foreign spouses . 
the sea temperature of kaohsiung harbor remains above year-round ,  the second highest of southern taiwan after liuqiu island . 
on december 25, 2010, kaohsiung city merged with kaohsiung county to form a larger special municipality with lingya district and fengshan district becoming the capital city ,  ending the administration of kaohsiung county . 
the current mayor of kaohsiung city is han kuo-yu of the kuomintang . 
after control of taiwan was handed over from japan to the government of the republic of china on 25 october 1945, kaohsiung city and kaohsiung county were established as a provincial city and a county of taiwan province respectively on 25 december 1945.
other attractions include the dome of light of kaohsiung mrt's formosa boulevard station ,  the kaohsiung mosque and the tower of light of sanmin district . 
are of kashubian descent . 
kashubians are included with poles ,  while mennonites with germans . 
similarly ,  the slovincian  -lrb-  now extinct  -rrb-  and kashubian languages are grouped as pomeranian languages ,  with slovincian  -lrb-  also known as łeba kashubian  -rrb-  either a distinct language closely related to kashubian ,  or a kashubian dialect . 
immigrant kashubians kept a distinct identity among polish canadians and polish americans . 
the classification of kashubian as a language or dialect has been controversial . 
the first activist of the kashubian national movement was florian ceynowa . 
the vocabulary is influenced by both german and polish . 
famous is kashubian embroidery and kashubian embroidering zukowo school is important intangible cultural heritage . 
the society of young kashubians  -lrb-  towarzystwo młodokaszubskie  -rrb-  has decided to follow in this way ,  and while they sought to create a strong kashubian identity ,  at the same time they regarded the kashubians as `` one branch ,  of many ,  of the great polish nation '' . 
in the 19th century the kashubian activist florian ceynowa undertook efforts to identify the kashubian language ,  and its culture and traditions . 
today canadian kashubians return to  -lrb-  kashubia  -rrb-  to learn about their heritage . 
in 2011 population census about 108,100 people declared kashubian as their language . 
another important writer in kashubian was bernard sychta  -lrb-  1907–1982 -rrb- . 
altogether they account for almost 8/10 of the total kashubian mtdna diversity . 
the total number of kashubians  -lrb-  pomeranians  -rrb-  varies depending on one's definition . 
the english word `` karst '' was borrowed from german in the late 19th century ,  which entered german much earlier . 
jovan cvijić greatly advanced the knowledge of karst regions ,  so much that he became known as the `` father of karst geomorphology '' . 
karst is a topography formed from the dissolution of soluble rocks such as limestone ,  dolomite ,  and gypsum . 
if this underground drainage system does form ,  it will speed up the development of karst formations there because more water will be able to flow through the region ,  giving it more erosive power . 
although civil wars continued ,  wars between established states have been rare since 1945, with a few exceptions in the middle east . 
moreover ,  it erased the legal distinction between war and peace because the signatories began to wage wars without declaring them . 
notably ,  the pact served as the legal basis for the concept of a crime against peace . 
the pact's central provisions renouncing the use of war ,  and promoting peaceful settlement of disputes and the use of collective force to prevent aggression ,  were incorporated into the united nations charter and other treaties . 
renal physiology is the study of kidney function . 
the substance ,  or parenchyma ,  of the kidney is divided into two major structures: the outer renal cortex and the inner renal medulla . 
each kidney ,  with its adrenal gland is surrounded by two layers of fat: the perirenal fat present between renal fascia and renal capsule and pararenal fat superior to the renal fascia . 
the renal sinus collectively contains the renal pelvis and calyces and separates these structures from the renal medullary tissue . 
kermit was named after kermit the frog from the muppets ,  with permission from henson associates . 
the first file transfer with kermit occurred in april 1981.
by 1988 kermit was available on more than 300 computers and operating systems . 
kermit is an open protocol—anybody can base their own program on it ,  but some kermit software and source code is copyright by columbia university . 
kermit can be used as a means to bootstrap other software ,  even itself . 
kermit has been featured prominently on both `` the muppet show '' and `` sesame street '' . 
initially ,  kermit was a lizard-like creature . 
kermit the frog is a muppet character ,  an anthropomorphic frog and jim henson's most well-known creation . 
the origin of kermit's name is a subject of some debate . 
kermit was one of the original main muppet characters on `` sesame street '' . 
kermit also served as the mascot for the jim henson company ,  until the sale of the muppet characters to disney . 
for a brief demonstration at `` muppetfest ''  -lrb-  a 2001 muppet fan convention  -rrb-  ,  muppet performer john kennedy performed kermit opposite whitmire's performance of young kermit  -lrb-  from `` kermit's swamp years ''  -rrb-  . 
matt danner voices baby kermit on the 2018 reboot of `` muppet babies '' . 
following henson's death ,  veteran muppet performer steve whitmire was named kermit's new performer . 
on `` muppets tonight '' ,  kermit was still a main character ,  although he was the producer rather than frontman . 
as head of the khad apparatus ,  najibullah was also extremely powerful . 
khad also had a political role that was clearly unintended by the soviets . 
khad was also responsible for co-opting religious leaders . 
khad was also accused of human rights abuses in the mid-1980s . 
khad also directed its attention to afghanistan's hindu and sikh religious minorities . 
there are some complaints that khad was used as a tool against opponents by the northern alliance . 
after the december 1979 soviet invasion ,  the kam was renamed khad and came under the control of the kgb . 
protea cynaroides ,  the king protea ,  is a flowering plant . 
the king protea is the national flower of south africa . 
the genus `` protea '' ,  and hence `` p .  cynaroides '' ,  is placed under the tribe proteae . 
 ''protea cynaroides '' is a species of protea in the huge family proteaceae . 
 ''protea cynaroides '' is further placed within the subfamily proteoideae ,  which is found mainly in southern africa . 
modern concert kantele can have up to 40 strings . 
the small and concert kanteles have different ,  though related ,  repertoires . 
modern instruments with 15 or fewer strings are generally more closely modeled on traditional shapes ,  and form a category of instrument known as small kantele ,  in contrast to the modern concert kantele . 
larger small kanteles very often have also other semitone levers that allow more varied selection of music to be played without retuning . 
the 'centennial variegated' kumquat cultivar arose spontaneously from the oval kumquat . 
kumquats are much hardier than other citrus plants such as oranges . 
kumquat is a fairly cold-hardy citrus . 
depending on size ,  the kumquat tree can produce hundreds or even thousands of fruits each year . 
the kumquat plant is native to south asia and the asia-pacific region . 
the essential oil of the kumquat peel contains much of the aroma of the fruit ,  and is composed principally of limonene ,  which makes up around 93% of the total . 
its name comes from the same origin as that of the color cyan ,  being derived from the ancient greek word κύανος . 
kyanite's elongated ,  columnar crystals are usually a good first indication of the mineral ,  as well as its color  -lrb-  when the specimen is blue  -rrb-  . 
kyanite is a member of the aluminosilicate series ,  which also includes the polymorph andalusite and the polymorph sillimanite . 
the orange color is due to inclusion of small amounts of manganese  -lrb-  mn  -rrb-  in the structure . 
the final vote in favor of the bill was 113 to 100.
in a report accompanying the bill ,  douglas's committee wrote that the utah and new mexico acts:
finally ,  atchison took the position that he would rather see nebraska `` sink in hell '' before he would allow it to be overrun by free soilers . 
the report compared the situation in new mexico and utah with the situation in nebraska . 
on january 23, a revised bill was introduced in the senate that repealed the missouri compromise and divided the territory into two territories: kansas and nebraska . 
the kansas–nebraska act divided the nation and pointed it toward civil war . 
the `` washington union '' ,  the communications organ for the administration ,  wrote on january 24 that support for the bill would be `` a test of democratic orthodoxy . `` 
the two territories ,  however ,  unlike nebraska ,  had not been part of the louisiana purchase and had never been subject to the missouri compromise . 
pierce had barely mentioned nebraska in his state of the union message the previous month and was not enthusiastic about the implications of repealing the missouri compromise . 
a large portion of nebraska territory would soon be split off into dakota territory  -lrb-  1861 -rrb- ,  and smaller portions transferred to colorado territory  -lrb-  1861 -rrb- and idaho territory  -lrb-  1863 -rrb- before the balance of the land became the state of nebraska in 1867.
by a vote of 23 to 17, the senate voted to table the motion ,  with every senator from the states south of missouri voting to table . 
the kansas–nebraska act of 1854  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an organic act passed by the 33rd u . s .  congress that created the territories of kansas and nebraska and was drafted by democratic senator stephen a .  douglas of illinois and president franklin pierce . 
prior to the organization of the kansas–nebraska territory in 1854, the kansas and nebraska territories were consolidated as part of the indian territory . 
white american settlers from both the free-soil north and pro-slavery south flooded the northern indian territory ,  hoping to influence the vote on slavery that would come following the admittance of kansas and ,  to a lesser extent ,  nebraska to the united states . 
at the heart of the conflict was the question of whether kansas would allow or outlaw slavery ,  and thus enter the union as a slave state or a free state . 
douglas's attempt to finesse his way around the missouri compromise did not work . 
free-state senators voted 14 to 12 in favor ,  and slave-state senators supported the bill 23 to 2.
brewster thought his instrument to be of great value in `` all the ornamental arts '' as a device that creates an `` infinity of patterns '' . 
a kaleidoscope  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an optical instrument with two or more reflecting surfaces tilted to each other in an angle ,  so that one or more  -lrb-  parts of  -rrb-  objects on one end of the mirrors are seen as a regular symmetrical pattern when viewed from the other end ,  due to repeated reflection . 
brewster's opinion was shared by several scientists ,  including james watt . 
common kestrels measure from head to tail ,  with a wingspan of  . 
in britain ,  where no other kestrel species occurs ,  it is generally just called `` the kestrel '' . 
all common kestrels have a prominent black malar stripe like their closest relatives . 
the common kestrel  -lrb-  `` falco tinnunculus ''  -rrb-  is a bird of prey species belonging to the kestrel group of the falcon family falconidae . 
common kestrels eat almost exclusively mouse-sized mammals . 
a number of subspecies of the common kestrel are known ,  though some are hardly distinct and may be invalid . 
the lesser kestrel  -lrb-  `` f .  naumanni ''  -rrb-  ,  which much resembles a small common kestrel with no black on the upperside except wing and tail tips ,  is probably not very closely related to the present species ,  and the american kestrel  -lrb-  `` f .  sparverius ''  -rrb-  is apparently not a true kestrel at all . 
the plant was originally brought to europe as an ornamental plant during the 18th century . 
it is an evergreen shrub growing to 3–9 m tall . 
they also use the wood for carving . 
the plant is naturally found on rocky slopes and mountainous forest areas . 
on 17 april 1975, the khmer rouge captured phnom penh . 
the khmer rouge dissolved sometime in december 1999.
the term `` khmers rouges '' ,  french for `` red khmers '' ,  was coined by cambodian head of state norodom sihanouk and later adopted by english speakers  -lrb-  in the form of the corrupted version khmer rouge  -rrb-  . 
the party's appeal to indigenous khmers appears to have been minimal . 
once in power ,  the khmer rouge explicitly targeted the chinese ,  the vietnamese ,  the cham minority and even their partially khmer offspring . 
they transformed the khmer students association  -lrb-  ksa  -rrb-  ,  to which most of the 200 or so khmer students in paris belonged ,  into an organization for nationalist and leftist ideas . 
the khmer rouge  -lrb-   ,   ,  red khmers; `` khmae kro-hom ''  -rrb-  was the name popularly given to the followers of the communist party of kampuchea  -lrb-  cpk  -rrb-  and by extension to the regime through which the cpk ruled in cambodia between 1975 and 1979.
however ,  the khmer rouge displayed these characteristics in a more extreme form . 
after sihanouk showed his support for the khmer rouge by visiting them in the field ,  their ranks swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 fighters . 
china `` armed and trained '' the khmer rouge both during the civil war and the years afterward . 
after returning to cambodia in 1953, pol pot threw himself into party work . 
the regime was removed from power in 1979 when vietnam invaded cambodia and quickly destroyed most of the khmer rouge's army . 
sihanouk habitually labelled local leftists the khmer rouge ,  a term that later came to signify the party and the state headed by pol pot ,  ieng sary ,  khieu samphan and their associates . 
the standing committee of the khmer rouge's central committee during its period of power consisted of the following:
in 1965, pol pot made a visit of several months to north vietnam and china . 
during the 1950s ,  khmer students in paris organized their own communist movement which had little ,  if any ,  connection to the hard-pressed party in their homeland . 
in 1968, the khmer rouge was officially formed and its forces launched a national insurgency across cambodia . 
many people in cambodia who helped the khmer rouge against the lon nol government thought they were fighting for the restoration of sihanouk . 
a year later ,  thousands of khmer rouge guerrillas surrendered themselves in a government amnesty . 
khmer rouge economic policies took a similarly extreme course . 
the khmer rouge regime was highly autocratic ,  xenophobic ,  paranoid and repressive . 
kenji sahara  -lrb-  佐原 健二 `` sahara kenji '' ,  born `` tadashi ishihara ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  born 14 may 1932 -rrb- is a japanese actor . 
since director tsuburaya was not able to fail in the first time of the tsuburaya pro's beginning by any means ,  he left all the works to sahara . 
some theories also regard ame-no-minaka-nushi as the source of all creation or as the god of the big dipper . 
some japanese clans also claimed descent from this god ,  such as the saeki clan ,  he is also an imperial ancestor . 
lake mácha  -lrb-    -rrb-  was named after him in 1961.
macha was honored on a 50 haleru and a 1 koruna stamp on 30 april 1936, scott catalog # 213-214.
karel hynek mácha  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  16 november 1810 – 5 november 1836 -rrb- was a czech romantic poet . 
in 1929, the chrysler building was capped with krupp steel . 
krupp's marriage was not a happy one . 
krupp's had a great krupp building with an exhibition of guns at the columbian exposition in 1893.
in 1807 the progenitor of the modern krupp firm ,  friedrich krupp ,  began his commercial career at age 19 when the widow krupp appointed him manager of the forge . 
thus ,  in 1811 friedrich founded the krupp gusstahlfabrik  -lrb-  cast steel works  -rrb-  . 
alfred krupp  -lrb-  born alfried felix alwyn krupp  -rrb-  ,  son of friedrich carl ,  was born in essen in 1812.
krupp's trucks were once again produced after the war ,  but so as to minimize the negative wartime connotations of the krupp name they were sold as `` südwerke '' trucks from 1946 until 1954, when the krupp name was considered rehabilitated . 
the krupp family first appeared in the historical record in 1587, when arndt krupp joined the merchants' guild in essen . 
krupp established the `` generalregulativ '' as the firm's basic constitution . 
after krupp's death in 1887, his only son ,  friedrich alfred ,  carried on the work . 
historically the krupp business has been controversial in its association with wars in europe . 
as the eldest son of bertha krupp ,  alfried was destined by family tradition to become the sole heir of the krupp concern . 
in his lifetime ,  krupp manufactured a total of 24,576 guns; 10,666 for the german government and 13,910 for export . 
in 1943, hitler decreed the lex krupp ,  authorizing the transfer of all bertha's shares to alfried ,  giving him the name `` krupp '' and dispossessing his siblings . 
as part of hitler's secret rearmament program ,  krupp expanded from 35,000 to 112,000 employees . 
in the mid-1960s ,  a series of blows ended the special status of krupp . 
krupp became the arms manufacturer for the kingdom of prussia in 1859 and later the german empire . 
in the 1930s ,  krupp developed two 800 mm railway guns ,  the schwerer gustav and the dora . 
russia and the ottoman empire both bought large quantities of krupp guns . 
prussia used the advanced technology of krupp to defeat both austria and france in the german wars of unification . 
friedrich krupp  -lrb-  1787–1826 -rrb- launched the family's metal-based activities ,  building a pioneering steel foundry in essen in 1810.
this activity became the basis for the charge of `` plunder '' at the war crimes trial of krupp executives after the war . 
he was an alcoholic and died of cancer in 1986, aged 48, 399 years after arndt krupp arrived in essen . 
as another war crime ,  krupp used slave labor ,  both pows and civilians from occupied countries ,  and krupp representatives were sent to concentration camps to select laborers . 
krupp was also a revolutionary company that paved the way for workers rights . 
indeed ,  unable to sell his steel cannon ,  krupp gave it to the king of prussia ,  who used it as a decorative piece . 
krupp's construction of the great venezuela railway from 1888 to 1894 raised venezuelan national debt . 
in 1999 the krupp firm merged with thyssen ag to form thyssenkrupp ag ,  a large industrial conglomerate . 
in 1953 krupp negotiated the mehlem agreement with the governments of the us ,  great britain and france . 
after he became regent in 1859, prussia bought its first 312 steel cannon from krupp ,  which became the main arms manufacturer for the prussian military . 
krupp industries was prosecuted after the end of war for its support to the nazi regime and use of forced labour . 
kwame nkrumah was born in about 1909 in nkroful ,  gold coast  -lrb-  later known as ghana   -rrb-  to a poor and illiterate family . 
nkrumah lived the rest of his life in guinea ,  of which he was named honorary co-president . 
the chinese name guanyin ,  is short for guanshiyin ,  which means `` the one who perceives the sounds of the world '' . 
 ''guānyīn '' is a translation from the sanskrit `` avalokitasvara '' or `` avalokiteśvara '' ,  referring to the mahāyāna bodhisattva of the same name . 
the word `` kangaroo '' derives from the guugu yimithirr word `` gangurru '' ,  referring to grey kangaroos . 
a common myth about the kangaroo's english name is that `` kangaroo '' was a guugu yimithirr phrase for `` i don't understand you . `` 
kangaroos are often colloquially referred to as `` roos '' . 
the collective noun for kangaroos is a mob ,  troop ,  or court . 
the developed film results in a kirlian photograph of the object . 
kirlian photography has been the subject of mainstream scientific research ,  parapsychology research and art . 
kirlian photography has been a subject of scientific research ,  parapsychology research and pseudoscientific claims . 
kirlian photography was used in the former eastern bloc in the 1970s . 
in 1958, the kirlians reported the results of their experiments for the first time . 
kirlian's claims were embraced by energy treatments practitioners . 
kirlian photography does not require the use of a camera or a lens because it is a contact print process . 
kirlian believed that images created by kirlian photography might depict a conjectural energy field ,  or aura ,  thought ,  by some ,  to surround living things . 
kirlian photography is a technique for creating contact print photographs using high voltage . 
scientific study of what the researchers called the kirlian effect was conducted by victor inyushin at kazakh state university . 
chios  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the fifth largest of the greek islands ,  situated in the aegean sea ,  off the anatolian coast . 
chios island is crescent or kidney shaped ,  long from north to south ,  and at its widest ,  covering an area of  . 
kurdish  -lrb-  kurdish: `` kurdî '' or کوردی  -rrb-  is a collection of related dialects spoken by the kurds . 
the kurdish languages belong to the northwestern sub‑group of the iranian languages ,  which in turn belongs to the indo-iranian branch of the indo-european family . 
kurds  -lrb-   ,  `` kurd ''  -rrb-  or the kurdish people  -lrb-   ,  `` gelî kurd ''  -rrb-  are an ethnic group of the middle east ,  mostly inhabiting a contiguous area they view as greater kurdistan . 
klein also calculated a scale for the fifth dimension based on the quantum of charge . 
in his 1921 paper ,  kaluza established all the elements of the classical five-dimensional theory: the metric ,  the field equations ,  the equations of motion ,  the stress-energy tensor ,  and the cylinder condition . 
kangchenjunga ,  also spelled kanchenjunga ,  is the third highest mountain in the world . 
kangchenjunga and its satellite peaks form a huge mountain massif . 
the kangchenjunga massif forms also part of the ganges basin . 
the film singalila in the himalaya is journey around kangchenjunga . 
the `` kangchenjunga himal '' section of the himalayas lies both in nepal and india ,  and encompasses 16 peaks over  . 
the area around kangchenjunga is said to be home to a mountain deity ,  called `` dzö-nga '' or `` kangchenjunga demon '' ,  a type of yeti or rakshasa . 
there are four climbing routes to reach the summit of kangchenjunga ,  three of which are in nepal from the southwest ,  northwest and northeast ,  and one from northeastern sikkim in india . 
allowing for further verification of all calculations ,  it was officially announced in 1856 that kangchenjunga is the third highest mountain in the world . 
the above himalayan journal references were all also reproduced in the `` 50th anniversary of the first ascent of kangchenjunga '' the himalayan club ,  kolkata section 2005.
henry granted kenilworth to his son ,  edmund crouchback ,  in 1267.
much of the right-hand court of kenilworth castle is occupied by the castle garden . 
isabella continued to use kenilworth as a royal castle until her fall from power in 1330.
kenilworth castle is located in the town of the same name in warwickshire ,  england . 
kenilworth was restored to dudley's son ,  robert ,  earl of leicester ,  in 1563, four years after the succession of elizabeth i to the throne . 
edward and his wife ,  isabella of france ,  spent christmas 1323 at kenilworth ,  amidst major celebrations . 
the rest of kenilworth castle's interior is divided into three areas: the base court ,  stretching between mortimer's tower and leicester's gatehouse; the left-hand court ,  stretching south-west around the outside of the inner court; and the right-hand court ,  to the north-west of the inner court . 
leicester continued his father's modernisation of kenilworth ,  attempting to ensure that kenilworth would attract the interest of elizabeth during her regular tours around the country . 
the remainder of the inner court was built by robert dudley ,  the earl of leicester ,  in the 1570s . 
by this point kenilworth castle consisted of the great keep ,  the inner bailey wall ,  a basic causeway across the smaller lake that preceded the creation of the great mere ,  and the local chase for hunting . 
kenilworth remained a ruin during the 18th and 19th centuries ,  still used as a farm but increasingly also popular as a tourist attraction . 
there was an early attempt at symmetry in the external appearance of the great hall – the strong and saintlowe towers architecturally act as near symmetrical `` wings '' to the hall itself ,  while the plinth of the hall is designed to mirror that of the great tower opposite it . 
kenilworth castle was founded in the early 1120s by geoffrey de clinton ,  lord chamberlain and treasurer to henry i . 
much of the northern part of the inner bailey was built by the 14th-century noble john of gaunt between 1372 and 1380.
the outer bailey of kenilworth castle is usually entered through mortimer's tower ,  today a modest ruin but originally a norman stone gatehouse ,  extended in the late 13th and 16th centuries . 
lorenz has been called 'the father of ethology' ,  by niko tinbergen . 
in 1958, lorenz transferred to the max planck institute for behavioral physiology in seewiesen . 
lorenz claimed that there was widespread contempt for the descriptive sciences . 
lorenz is recognized as one of the founding fathers of the field of ethology ,  the study of animal behavior . 
the degree to which lorenz participated in the project is unknown ,  but the project director hippius referred a couple of times to lorenz as an `` examining psychologist '' . 
there are three research institutions named after lorenz in austria: the konrad lorenz institute for evolution and cognition research  -lrb-  kli  -rrb-  was housed in lorenz' family mansion at altenberg before moving to klosterneuburg in 2013 ; the konrad lorenz forschungsstelle  -lrb-  klf  -rrb-  at his former field station in grünau; and the konrad lorenz institute of ethology ,  an external research facility of the university of veterinary medicine vienna . 
lorenz studied instinctive behavior in animals ,  especially in greylag geese and jackdaws . 
lorenz joined the nazi party in 1938 and accepted a university chair under the nazi regime . 
the max planck society established the lorenz institute for behavioral physiology in buldern ,  germany ,  in 1950.
lorenz's work was interrupted by the onset of world war-ii and in 1941 he was recruited into the german army as a medic . 
lorenz states that humanity is the one species not bound by these mechanisms ,  being the only one that has defined its own environment:
tinbergen ,  lorenz's friend with whom he conjointly received the nobel prize ,  summarized lorenz's major contribution to ethology as being the way in which he made behavior a topic of biological inquiry ,  considering behavior a part of an animal's evolutionary equipment . 
lorenz predicted the relationship between market economics and the threat of ecological catastrophe . 
philip k .  dick enthusiastically recommended jeter's early cyberpunk novel ,  `` dr .  adder '' . 
as well as his own original novels ,  k .  w .  jeter has written three authorized novel sequels to the critically acclaimed 1982 motion picture `` blade runner '' ,  which was adapted from philip k .  dick's novel `` do androids dream of electric sheep ? 
jamison has also been criticized . 
jamison was born to dr .  marshall verdine jamison  -lrb-  1916–2012 -rrb- ,  an officer in the air force ,  and mary dell temple jamison  -lrb-  1916–2007 -rrb- . 
jamison's father ,  and many others in his family ,  had bipolar disorder . 
kay redfield jamison  -lrb-  born june 22, 1946 -rrb- is an american clinical psychologist and writer . 
jamison moved to california during adolescence ,  and soon thereafter began to struggle with bipolar disorder . 
jamison is an episcopalian ,  and was married to her first husband ,  alain andré moreau ,  an artist ,  during her graduate school years . 
after several years as a tenured professor at ucla ,  jamison was offered a position as assistant professor and then professor of psychiatry at the johns hopkins university school of medicine . 
in the late 1980s and 1990s ,  pioneer electronics dominated the international karaoke music video market ,  producing high quality karaoke music videos  -lrb-  inspired by the music videos such as those on mtv  -rrb-  . 
karaoke  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is a form of interactive entertainment or video game developed in japan in which an amateur singer sings along with recorded music  -lrb-  a music video  -rrb-  using a microphone . 
a popular game using karaoke is to type in a random number and call up a song ,  which participants attempt to sing . 
cd+g ,  dvd ,  vcd and microphone-based players are most popular for home use . 
in japan ,  it has long been common to provide musical entertainment at a dinner or a party . 
a basic karaoke machine consists of a music player ,  microphone inputs ,  a means of altering the pitch of the played music ,  and an audio output . 
as such ,  noraebangs are popular and widespread ,  often identifiable by bright neon signs with musical notes or microphones . 
throughout much of north america ,  live band karaoke is also popular . 
vcd and dvd are the most common format for asian singers due to music availability and largely due to the moving picture/video background . 
rock critic rob sheffield claims that the 1986 music video for the song `` wild wild life '' by the talking heads was the first depiction of karaoke in american popular culture . 
no song was repeated in any 2 hour period . 
south korean firms t . j .  media and kumyoung produce digital music content in midi format and manufacture computer music players for the asian market . 
the music system also uses a hand-held wii style point and click controller with built-in microphone allowing users to select and sing along to thousands of songs from its catalogue . 
in australia ,  karaoke was gradually popularized in the late 1980s . 
in august 2017, roxi home music system launched in the uk ,  and later that year in the us ,  providing on-demand music streaming and a karaoke singalong feature called sing with the stars . 
the video features a variety of characters taking turns singing portions of the song to an audience at a bar . 
karaoke in the philippines is also known for the my way killings ,  a number of fatal disputes which arose due to the singing of the song `` my way '' ,  popularized by frank sinatra ,  in karaoke bars . 
other music video game titles that involve singing by the player include `` boogie '' and its sequel `` boogie superstar '' ,  `` disney sing it '' ,  `` get on da mic '' ,  the `` guitar hero '' series starting with `` world tour '' ,  ``  '' ,  `` lips '' ,  the `` rock band '' series ,  `` singsong '' ,  `` ultrastar '' ,  and `` xbox music mixer '' . 
researchers have also developed karaoke games for cell phones in order to boost music database training . 
karaoke machines which are connected via fiber-optic links enabling them to provide instant high-quality music and video are becoming increasingly popular . 
shortly after the development of laserdisc pioneer started to offer video karaoke machines ,  capable of displaying lyrics over a music video ,  in addition to the existing audio functionality . 
with live band karaoke ,  singers sing with a live band instead of the prerecorded backing track . 
karaoke is very popular in asian countries ,  and many artists distribute a karaoke track at the same time the song is released . 
one long-running popular device from the 1990s has been the magicsing ,  a plug and play microphone that houses about 2000+ songs and with extendable song chips in it and connected directly to a tv unit . 
karaoke world championship is one of the most popular karaoke contests and has been around since 2003.
in 1992, taito introduced the x2000, which fetched music via a dial-up telephone network . 
a common workflow for film editing involves edge-coding printed film simultaneously with the film's synchronized audio track ,  on 35mm magnetic film ,  so that a foot of film and its synchronized audio have identical edge numbers . 
laboratories can also imprint their own edge numbers on the processed film negative or print to identify the film for their own means . 
keykode is a form of metadata identifier for film negatives . 
the russian knout had different forms . 
peter the great is traditionally accused of knouting his son alexis to death; the latter was tortured by knouting to extract confessions . 
even twenty lashes could maim ,  and with the specially extended great knout ,  twenty blows could kill ,  with death sometimes being attributed to the breaking of the spine . 
and after p . c . r . `` 
a concept similar to that of pcr had been described before mullis' work . 
the anthropologist paul rabinow wrote a book on the history of the pcr method in 1996  -lrb-  entitled `` making pcr ''  -rrb-  in which he discussed whether or not mullis `` invented '' pcr or `` merely '' came up with the concept of it . 
other cetus scientists ,  including randall saiki and henry erlich ,  were placed on pcr projects to work on evaluating whether pcr could amplify a specific human gene  -lrb-  betaglobin  -rrb-  from genomic dna . 
later a heat stable dna polymerase was incorporated into the process . 
as of 2014, he is a researcher at the children's hospital oakland research institute in oakland ,  california . 
he allegedly came up with the polymerase chain reaction while driving along a highway . 
a complication at that point was that the dna polymerase used was destroyed by the high heat used at the start of each replication cycle and had to be replaced . 
introducing the scale ,  kinsey wrote:
the kinsey reports are two books on human sexual behavior ,  sexual behavior in the human male  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- and sexual behavior in the human female  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- ,  written by alfred kinsey ,  paul gebhard ,  wardell pomeroy ,  clyde martin and others and published by saunders . 
kinsey's evidence suggested that women were less sexually active than men . 
kinsey was a zoologist at indiana university and the founder of the kinsey institute for research in sex ,  gender ,  and reproduction  -lrb-  more widely known as the kinsey institute  -rrb-  . 
the conclusion of the kinsey institute was that none of kinsey's original estimates were significantly affected by these data sources . 
kendo was allowed to return to the curriculum in 1950  -lrb-  first as and then as kendo from 1952 -rrb- . 
in 1975, the all japan kendo federation  -lrb-  ajkf  -rrb-  developed then published `` the concept and purpose of kendo '' which is reproduced below . 
kendo  -lrb-  along with other martial arts  -rrb-  was banned in japan in 1946 by the occupying powers . 
swordsmen in japan established schools of `` kenjutsu ''  -lrb-  the ancestor of kendo  -rrb-  ,  which continued for centuries and which form the basis of kendo practice today . 
practitioners of kendo are called  ,  meaning `` someone who practices kendo '' ,  or occasionally  ,  meaning `` swordsman '' . 
the international kendo federation  -lrb-  fik  -rrb-  was founded in april 1970; it is an international federation of national and regional kendo federations and the world governing body for kendo . 
kingfishers feed on a wide variety of prey . 
the plumage of most kingfishers is bright ,  with green and blue being the most common colours . 
they also have nictitating membranes that cover the eyes to protect them when they hit the water; the pied kingfisher has a bony plate which slides across the eye when it hits the water . 
amongst the three subfamilies ,  the alcedininae are basal to the other two subfamilies . 
the longest tunnels recorded are those of the giant kingfisher ,  which have been found to be long . 
individual species may have massive ranges ,  like the common kingfisher ,  which ranges from ireland across europe ,  north africa ,  and asia as far as the solomon islands in australasia ,  or the pied kingfisher ,  which has a widespread distribution across africa and asia . 
the shovel-billed kookaburra uses its massive ,  wide bill as a shovel to dig for worms in soft mud . 
most species have four toes ,  three of which are forward-pointing . 
kingfishers occupy a wide range of habitats . 
the five primary schools in the immediate vicinity of kesgrave are beacon hill primary school ,  birchwood primary school ,  cedarwood primary school the building of which was awarded a civic trust award in 2003, gorseland primary school and heath primary school . 
kesgrave high school is a large 11-18 comprehensive co-educational school with nearly 2000 pupils . 
after his term ended in 1992, waldheim did not seek re-election . 
waldheim later stated that `` he did not know about the murder of civilians there '' . 
waldheim ran for a second term in the 1976 un secretary-general selection . 
waldheim was born in sankt andrä-wördern ,  near vienna ,  on 21 december 1918.
stolen jewish art remained public property until after the waldheim affair . 
although waldheim had stated that he was unaware of any crimes taking place ,  the committee cited evidence that waldheim must have known about war crimes . 
waldheim ran for an unprecedented third full term as secretary-general in the 1981 selection . 
kurt josef waldheim  -lrb-  ; 21 december 1918 – 14 june 2007 -rrb- was an austrian diplomat and politician . 
in favour of waldheim is ,  that he only had very minor possibilities to act against the injustices happening . 
waldheim succeeded u thant as united nations secretary-general in 1972.
waldheim joined the austrian diplomatic service in 1945, after finishing his studies in law at the university of vienna . 
much historical interest has centered on waldheim's role in operation kozara in 1942.
waldheim had previously claimed to have received a medical discharge after being wounded in winter 1942.
the k6 microprocessor was launched by amd in 1997.
the amd k6 is a superscalar p5 pentium-class microprocessor ,  manufactured by amd ,  which superseded the k5.
ka9q was later maintained by anthony frost  -lrb-  callsign g8udv  -rrb-  and adam goodfellow . 
ka9q ,  also called ka9q nos or simply nos ,  was a popular early implementation of tcp/ip and associated protocols for amateur packet radio systems and smaller personal computers connected via serial lines . 
hmac uses two passes of hash computation . 
the cryptographic strength of the hmac depends upon the cryptographic strength of the underlying hash function ,  the size of its hash output ,  and the size and quality of the key . 
key escrow  -lrb-  also known as a “fair” cryptosystem  -rrb-  is an arrangement in which the keys needed to decrypt encrypted data are held in escrow so that ,  under certain circumstances ,  an authorized third party may gain access to those keys . 
key escrow is proactive ,  anticipating the need for access to keys; a retroactive alternative is key disclosure law ,  where users are required to surrender keys upon demand by law enforcement ,  or else face legal penalties . 
because video compression only stores incremental changes between frames  -lrb-  except for keyframes  -rrb-  ,  it is not possible to fast forward or rewind to any arbitrary spot in the video stream . 
in video compression ,  a keyframe ,  also known as an `` intra-frame '' ,  is a frame in which a complete image is stored in the data stream . 
the kurfürstendamm  -lrb-  ; colloquially ku'damm ,    -rrb-  is one of the most famous avenues in berlin . 
nevertheless ,  after the war rebuilding started quickly ,  and when berlin was separated into east and west berlin ,  the kurfürstendamm became the leading commercial street of west berlin in its wirtschaftswunder days . 
one block farther ,  near uhlandstraße u-bahn station ,  is the kempinski hotel as well as the theater am kurfürstendamm ,  at the site of a former exhibition hall of the berlin secession art association . 
especially during the `` golden twenties '' the kurfürstendamm area of the `` new west '' was a centre of leisure and nightlife in berlin ,  an era that ended with the great depression and the nazi `` machtergreifung '' in 1933.
raoul hausmann
the first use of the word 'merzbau' occurs in 1933.
as schwitters's first overtures to zurich and berlin dada made explicit mention of merz pictures ,  there are no grounds for the widespread claim that he invented merz because he was rejected by berlin dada . 
the sprengel museum in hanover has a reconstruction of the first room of the `` merzbau '' . 
merz has been called 'psychological collage' . 
as the first world war progressed his work became darker ,  gradually developing a distinctive expressionist tone . 
in the late 1920s schwitters joined the `` deutscher werkbund ''  -lrb-  german work federation  -rrb-  . 
schwitters was to use the term merz for the rest of the decade ,  but ,  as isabel schulz has noted ,  'though the fundamental compositional principles of merz remained the basis and centre of schwitters' creative work  .  .  .  the term merz disappears almost entirely from the titles of his work after 1931' . 
“he knocked on her door to ask how the boiler worked ,  and that was that . 
whilst schwitters still created work in an expressionist style into 1919  -lrb-  and would continue to paint realist pictures up to his death in 1948 -rrb- ,  the first abstract collages ,  influenced in particular by recent works by hans arp ,  would appear in late 1918, which schwitters dubbed `` merz '' after a fragment of found text from the phrase `` commerz und privatbank ''  -lrb-  commerce and private bank  -rrb-  in his work `` das merzbild '' ,  completed in the winter of 1918–19.
schwitters spent the last one-and-half years of the war working as a drafter in a factory just outside hanover . 
he is most famous for his collages ,  called `` merz pictures '' . 
whilst his work was far less political than key figures in berlin dada ,  such as george grosz and john heartfield ,  he would remain close friends with various members ,  including hannah höch and raoul hausmann ,  for the rest of his career . 
schwitters' visual work has now been completely catalogued in the catalogue raisonné . 
whilst these works were usually collages incorporating found objects ,  such as bus tickets ,  old wire and fragments of newsprint ,  merz also included artists' periodicals ,  sculptures ,  sound poems and what would later be called `` installations '' . 
schwitters asked to join berlin dada either in late 1918 or early 1919, according to the memoirs of raoul hausmann . 
 .  .  .  kurt schwitters worked with more concentration than ever during internment to stave off bitterness and hopelessness . 
his work in this period became increasingly modernist in spirit ,  with far less overtly political context and a cleaner style ,  in keeping with contemporary work by hans arp and piet mondrian . 
by his own account ,  his time as a draftsman influenced his later work ,  and inspired him to depict machines as metaphors of human activity . 
kenneth noland  -lrb-  april 10, 1924 – january 5, 2010 -rrb- was an american painter . 
noland used simplified abstraction so the design would not detract from the use of color . 
instead of painting the canvas with a brush ,  noland's style was to stain the canvas with color . 
by 2018, karachi's ranking has dropped to 50.
karachi will be the terminus of the under construction m-9 motorway ,  which will connect karachi to hyderabad . 
karachi is pakistan's financial and commercial capital . 
approximately 2.5% of karachi's population is christian . 
karachi is home to several of pakistan's most important museums . 
karachi has the largest number of urdu speakers in pakistan . 
karachi is home to some of pakistan's important cultural institutions . 
karachi is one of pakistan's most religiously diverse cities . 
karachi is now pakistan's premier industrial and financial centre . 
approximately 25% of pakistan's national revenue is `` generated '' in karachi . 
karachi was reputedly founded in 1729 as the settlement of `` kolachi '' . 
a fourth corridor is currently under construction that will link karachi's centre to karachi's malir town . 
in 2001, five districts of karachi were merged to form the city district of karachi ,  with a three-tier structure . 
karachi is also home to numerous private universities . 
karachi is one of pakistan's most secular and socially liberal cities . 
karachi is home to several major public universities . 
in 2016, the number of murders in karachi had dropped to 471, which had dropped further to 381 in 2017.
up to 60% of karachi's residents live in such unplanned communities . 
karachi is linked by rail to the rest of the country by pakistan railways . 
within the city of karachi ,  the lyari expressway is a controlled-access highway along the lyari river in karachi ,  sindh ,  pakistan . 
in 1976, the body became the karachi metropolitan corporation . 
karachi is considered to be pakistan’s fashion capital ,  and has hosted the annual karachi fashion week since 2009.
karachi  -lrb-  ; ala-lc:  ,  ;   -rrb-  is the capital of the pakistani province of sindh . 
by 1899, karachi had become the largest wheat-exporting port in the east . 
karachi is the most linguistically ,  ethnically ,  and religiously diverse city in pakistan . 
karachi was once served by numerous trams and the karachi circular railway ,  although both systems are no longer in operation . 
migrants from punjab began settling in karachi in large numbers in the 1960s ,  and now make up an estimated 14% of karachi's population . 
the karachi region is believed to have been known to the ancient greeks . 
the karachi expo centre also complements karachi's industrial economy by hosting regional and international exhibitions . 
the university of karachi ,  founded in 1951, is pakistan's largest university with a student population of 24,000.
karachi is overwhelmingly muslim ,  though the city is one of pakistan's most secular cities . 
by the end of the 19th century ,  karachi's population was estimated to be 105,000.
at the end of the 19th century ,  karachi had an estimated population of 105,000.
tourist attractions near karachi city include:
with 650 homicides in 2015, karachi's homicide rate decreased by 75% compared to 2013.
karachi is a tourist destination for domestic and international tourists . 
karachi export processing zone ,  site ,  korangi ,  northern bypass industrial zone ,  bin qasim and north karachi serve as large industrial estates in karachi . 
an estimated 63% of the karachi's workforce is employed in trade and manufacturing . 
the largest shipping ports in pakistan are the port of karachi and the nearby port qasim ,  the former being the oldest port of pakistan . 
karachi was selected as the first capital of pakistan and served as such until the capital was shifted to rawalpindi in 1958.
a sea port called barbarikon by the greeks was situated in karachi . 
naimatullah khan was the first nazim of karachi during the union council period ,  while shafiq-ur-rehman paracha was the first district co-ordination officer of karachi . 
in 1878, the british raj connected karachi with the network of british india's vast railway system . 
98% of karachi's households are connected to the city's underground public sewerage system ,  largely operated by the karachi water and sewerage board . 
until 1955, the kerguelen islands were administratively part of the french colony of madagascar and dependencies . 
there is also a french satellite tracking station . 
kerguelen islands appear as the `` ile de nachtegal '' on philippe buache's map from 1754 before the island was officially discovered in 1772.
the kerguelen islands  -lrb-   or ; in french commonly ' but officially ' ,    -rrb-  ,  also known as the desolation islands  -lrb-  ``  '' in french  -rrb-  ,  are a group of islands in the antarctic constituting one of the two exposed parts of the kerguelen plateau ,  a large igneous province mostly submerged by the southern indian ocean . 
the main island of the archipelago is called ``  '' . 
the islands were officially discovered by the french navigator yves-joseph de kerguelen-trémarec on 12 february 1772.
the german auxiliary cruiser called at kerguelen during december 1940.
kahlúa  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a coffee-flavored liqueur from mexico . 
pedro domecq began producing kahlúa in 1936.
since 2004, the alcohol content of kahlúa is 20.0%; earlier versions had 26.5% . 
grammer won a scholarship to the prestigious juilliard school . 
after his divorce from alderman ,  grammer had a daughter ,  kandace greer grammer  -lrb-  `` greer grammer ''; born february 15, 1992 -rrb- ,  with hair and makeup stylist barrie buckner . 
grammer and donatacci's divorce was finalized on february 10, 2011.
grammer claimed she was abusive and fired a gun at him . 
grammer was two years old when his parents divorced . 
grammer's voice has been featured in many commercials . 
grammer later commented ,  `` honestly ,  it just wasn't very funny . `` 
grammer and walsh have a daughter ,  born july 2012, and two sons ,  born july 2014 and november 2016.
in 2007, grammer starred with patricia heaton in the american sitcom `` back to you '' . 
in 2000, grammer again played `` macbeth '' on broadway ,  in a production that closed after only 10 days . 
in 2010, he starred in `` the kelsey grammer bill zucker comedy hour '' . 
grammer has been married four times and has seven children and one grandchild  . 
kemerovo  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an industrial city and the administrative center of kemerovo oblast ,  russia ,  located at the confluence of the iskitim and tom rivers ,  in the major coal mining region of the kuznetsk basin . 
the kealaikahiki channel is the channel between lānaʻi and kahoʻolawe . 
the channel is 17 miles wide . 
the maximum depth of the channel is over 11000 feet . 
the kaiwi channel  -lrb-  also known as the molokaʻi channel  -rrb-  separates the islands of oʻahu and molokaʻi ,  and is wide . 
the hawaiʻiloa channel to the northwest of the islands of nihoa . 
the middle of the ʻauʻau channel off lahaina is known as the lahaina roads . 
kemp town is a 19th-century residential estate in the east of brighton in east sussex ,  england ,  uk . 
below and to the east of kemp town ,  at beach level ,  is now brighton marina and a proposed redevelopment at black rock ,  site of a former lido . 
the race often draws celebrities . 
a horse must win all three races to win the triple crown . 
the derby first offered a $1 million purse in 1996; it was doubled to $2 million in 2005.
pop vocalist dan fogelberg composed the song `` run for the roses '' which was released in time for the 1980 running of the race . 
the race is often called `` the run for the roses '' on account of the blanket of roses draped over the winner . 
on the kentucky derby race alone ,  the handle of twinspires was $20.1 million ,  which is a 22 percent rise compared to the prior year . 
from there ,  clark went on to paris ,  france ,  where in 1863, a group of racing enthusiasts had formed the french jockey club and had organized the grand prix de paris at longchamp ,  which at the time was the greatest race in france . 
the kentucky derby was first run at 1 1/2 miles  -lrb-  12 furlongs; 2.4 km  -rrb-  the same distance as the epsom derby . 
the katal is not used to express the rate of a reaction; that is expressed in units of concentration per second ,  as moles per liter per second . 
the name `` katal '' has been used for decades ,  and the unit became an official si unit in 1999.
koalas were hunted for food by aboriginals . 
koalas may live from 13 to 18 years in the wild . 
unlike most other marsupials ,  the koala does not clean her pouch . 
the word koala comes from the dharug `` gula '' . 
the koala  -lrb-  `` phascolarctos cinereus '' ,  or ,  inaccurately ,  koala bear  -rrb-  is an arboreal herbivorous marsupial native to australia . 
in addition ,  koalas live in many protected areas . 
the pelage of the koala is thicker and longer on the back ,  and shorter on the belly . 
the koala's geographic range covers roughly  ,  and 30 ecoregions . 
the koala is featured in the dreamtime stories and mythology of indigenous australians . 
traditionally ,  three distinct subspecies have been recognised: the queensland koala  -lrb-  `` p .  c .  adustus '' ,  thomas 1923 -rrb- ,  the new south wales koala  -lrb-  `` p .  c .  cinereus '' ,  goldfuss 1817 -rrb- ,  and the victorian koala  -lrb-  `` p .  c .  victor '' ,  troughton 1935 -rrb- . 
koalas have few natural predators and parasites ,  but are threatened by various pathogens ,  such as chlamydiaceae bacteria and the koala retrovirus ,  as well as by bushfires and droughts . 
a koala sometimes regurgitates the food into the mouth to be chewed a second time . 
in queensland ,  koalas are unevenly distributed and uncommon except in the southeast ,  where they are numerous . 
koalas are asocial animals and spend just 15 minutes a day on social behaviours . 
the first living koala in britain arrived in 1881, purchased by the zoological society of london . 
koalas typically inhabit open eucalypt woodlands ,  and the leaves of these trees make up most of their diet . 
the koala is well known worldwide and is a major draw for australian zoos and wildlife parks . 
the koala usually grooms itself with its hindpaws ,  but sometimes uses its forepaws or mouth . 
in general ,  however ,  koalas tend to avoid energy-wasting aggressive behaviour . 
certain models of lg cd-rom drives with specific firmware used an abnormal command for `` update firmware '': the `` clear buffer '' command usually used on cd-rw drives . 
most cd-rom drives dependably return an error for the unsupported cd-rw command ,  but the faulty drives interpreted it as `` update firmware '' ,  causing them to stop working  -lrb-  or ,  in casual parlance ,  to be `` bricked ''  -rrb-  . 
the floppy drive of the commodore amiga personal computer could be made to produce noises of various pitches by making the drive heads move back and forth . 
the commodore 64 had an optional external 5-1/4 '' floppy drive . 
some newsreader programs also allow the user to specify a time period to keep an author in the kill file . 
thus to add a person or subject to one's kill file is to arrange for that person or topic to be ignored by one's newsreader in the future . 
the prefix `` kilo- ''  -lrb-  symbol k  -rrb-  is defined in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  as a multiplier of 10  -lrb-  1 thousand  -rrb-  ,  and therefore , 
