however ,  lebanon's debt to gdp ratio remained one of the highest in the world . 
the stock market capitalisation of listed companies in lebanon was valued at $9.6 billion in january 2019, down from $11.5 billion in january 2018
in 2018 lebanon ranked 11th on the financial secrecy index . 
lebanon benefits from its large ,  cohesive ,  and entrepreneurial diaspora . 
lebanon has a competitive and free market regime and a strong laissez-faire commercial tradition . 
lebanon possesses one am radio broadcast station ,  and 32 fm radio broadcast stations . 
there are 1.18 million television sets in lebanon . 
internet services are administered in lebanon by the ministry of telecommunication . 
lebanon ranks 27th on the netindex . com  -lrb-  as of 1 october 2018 -rrb- . 
this article concerns the systems of communication in lebanon . 
the country code and top-level domain for lebanon is ``  . lb '' . 
the main roads in the country are:
the port of tripoli  -lrb-  lebanon  -rrb-  is also a port of entry . 
the regular taxi fare starts at lbp 10,000  -lrb-  $6.66 -rrb- . 
apart from the international airport ,  the port of beirut is another port of entry . 
 ''service-taxi taxi ''  the driver must not pick up additional passengers . 
the main national airport is the beirut rafic hariri international airport and is located in the southern suburbs . 
during world war ii ,  lebanese troops fought in lebanon with the vichy french forces against free french and british forces . 
the laf command is headquartered at yarzeh . 
the majority of the lebanese armed forces remained a part of the french army in lebanon . 
about 85% of the laf's equipment is american-made ,  with the remaining being british ,  french ,  and soviet-made . 
the organizational structure of the laf command includes:
during the period of the semi-autonomous province  -lrb-  mutasarrifia  -rrb-  period of mount lebanon between 1861 and 1914, no turkish troops were allowed to station within its boundary . 
after syria's military withdrawal in 2005, lebanon's foreign policy charted a more independent course . 
lebanon is one of the main mediterranean beneficiaries of community assistance and the eu through its various instruments is lebanon’s leading donor . 
lesotho covers  . 
lesotho has a population of approximately  . 
the population of lesotho is estimated to be more than 95 percent christian . 
lesotho  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  officially the kingdom of lesotho  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an enclaved country within the border of south africa . 
lesotho is geographically surrounded by south africa and economically integrated with it . 
it has a supervisory and review jurisdiction over all the courts of lesotho . 
the lesotho government is a parliamentary or constitutional monarchy . 
lesotho also recognises the state of palestine and from 2014 until 2018 also the republic of kosovo . 
basutoland gained its independence from britain and became the kingdom of lesotho in 1966.
lesotho was ranked 12th out of 48 sub-saharan african countries in the 2008 ibrahim index of african governance . 
lesotho flora is alpine ,  due to the high and mountainous terrain . 
the original inhabitants of the area now known as lesotho were the san people . 
a number of south africans and basotho also died in the fighting . 
life expectancy at birth in lesotho in 2016 was 51 years for men and 55 for women . 
lesotho's geographic location makes it extremely vulnerable to political and economic developments in south africa . 
the present lesotho ,  then called basutoland ,  emerged as a single polity under king moshoeshoe i in 1822.
the name `` lesotho '' roughly translates to `` the land of the people who speak sesotho '' . 
lesotho is a member of the southern african customs union  -lrb-  sacu  -rrb-  ,  in which tariffs have been eliminated on the trade of goods between other member countries botswana ,  namibia ,  south africa ,  and swaziland . 
lesotho was previously the british crown colony of basutoland ,  but it declared independence from the united kingdom on 4 october 1966.
the extent to which the british exerted direct control over basutoland waxed and waned until basutoland's independence in 1966, when it became the kingdom of lesotho . 
when the union of south africa was founded in 1910 the colony was still controlled by the british and moves were made to transfer it to the union . 
a military government chaired by justin lekhanya ruled lesotho in coordination with king moshoeshoe ii and a civilian cabinet appointed by the king . 
in 1818, moshoeshoe i consolidated various basotho groupings and became their king . 
because moshoeshoe ii initially refused to return to lesotho under the new rules of the government in which the king was endowed only with ceremonial powers ,  moshoeshoe's son was installed as king letsie iii . 
after a 1955 request by the basutoland council to legislate its internal affairs ,  in 1959 a new constitution gave basutoland its first elected legislature . 
in 1997, tension within the bcp leadership caused a split in which dr .  mokhehle abandoned the bcp and established the lesotho congress for democracy  -lrb-  lcd  -rrb-  followed by two-thirds of the parliament . 
a treaty was signed with the boers of griqualand in 1843 and an agreement was made with the british in 1853 following a minor war . 
at some stage during their migration south from a tertiary dispersal area bantu speaking peoples came to settle the lands that now make up lesotho as well as a more extensive territory of fertile lands that surround modern day lesotho . 
over 80% of lesotho lies above  . 
lesotho is a mountainous ,  landlocked country located in southern africa . 
lesotho is a country in southern africa ,  located at around 29°30' south latitude and 28°30' east longitude . 
even though very little of lesotho is covered in water ,  the rivers that run across the country are an important part of lesotho's economy . 
according to the 2016 census ,  lesotho has a total population of 2,007,201.
the demographics of lesotho describe the condition and overview of lesotho's peoples . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
parallel to the high court is the labour court ,  which is a specialist court dealing exclusively with industrial and labour matters . 
the court of appeal is located in maseru and consists of a president and 6 justices of appeal . 
the chief justice and justices of the court of appeal are appointed by the king on the advice of the prime minister . 
high court judges may retire any time after attaining the age of 75 but may be removed from office by the king for malfeasance or infirmity . 
the lesotho government is a constitutional monarchy . 
it is a major contributor to the exports of lesotho . 
lesotho is geographically surrounded by south africa and economically integrated with it as well . 
there is a short rail line  -lrb-  freight  -rrb-  linking lesotho with south africa that is totally owned and operated by south africa . 
water and diamonds are lesotho's only significant natural resources . 
telecommunications in lesotho include radio ,  television ,  print and online newspapers ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
there are a total of 28 airports in lesotho ,  of which 3 have paved runways . 
this article concerns systems of transport in lesotho . 
in mafeteng ,  the transporters use two-wheel carts ,  while in maputsoe ,  the transporters use four-wheel wagons . 
lesotho is landlocked and completely dependent on south africa for sea transport . 
lesotho ,  along with brunei ,  malaysia ,  swaziland ,  and tonga ,  is a commonwealth member state with its own monarchy . 
liberia  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of liberia ,  is a country on the west african coast . 
the armed forces of liberia  -lrb-  afl  -rrb-  are the armed forces of the republic of liberia . 
the second most popular sport in liberia is basketball . 
liberia had the second-highest rate of economic growth in the world during the 1950s . 
as of the 2017 national census ,  liberia was home to 4,694,608 people . 
in 2008, liberia had only one doctor and 27 nurses per 100,000 people . 
both male and female homosexuality is illegal in liberia . 
the central bank of liberia is responsible for printing and maintaining the liberian dollar ,  which is the primary form of currency in liberia . 
in 2014, an outbreak of ebola virus in guinea spread to liberia . 
in the past ,  both of liberia's neighbors ,  guinea and sierra leone ,  have accused liberia of backing rebels inside their countries . 
bushmeat is widely eaten in liberia ,  and is considered a delicacy . 
liberia's highest judicial authority is the supreme court ,  made up of five members and headed by the chief justice of liberia . 
in 1919 liberia attended the versailles peace conference ,  when the league of nations was founded in january 1920 liberia was one of the founding members . 
a rich literary tradition has existed in liberia for over a century . 
illegal logging has increased in liberia since the end of the second civil war in 2003.
in 2010 some 43.5% of liberians were below the age of 15.
pollution is a significant issue in liberia's capital city monrovia . 
liberia and norway struck an agreement in september 2014 whereby liberia ceases all logging in exchange for $150 million in development aid . 
in the mid-20th century ,  liberia gradually began to modernize with american assistance . 
the united kingdom was the first country to recognize liberia's independence . 
rape and sexual assault are frequent in the post-conflict era in liberia . 
the kpelle comprise more than 20% of the population and are the largest ethnic group in liberia ,  residing mostly in bong county and adjacent areas in central liberia . 
the highest point wholly within liberia is mount wuteve at above sea level in the northwestern liberia range of the west africa mountains and the guinea highlands . 
endangered species are hunted for human consumption as bushmeat in liberia . 
liberia also began to take a more active role in international affairs . 
english is the official language and serves as the `` lingua franca '' of liberia . 
in 2013, liberia began importing power from neighboring ivory coast and guinea through the west african power pool . 
liberia was the first african republic to proclaim its independence ,  and is africa's first and oldest modern republic . 
on may 9, 2015, liberia was declared ebola free after six weeks with no new cases . 
there are six major newspapers in liberia ,  and 45% of the population has a mobile phone service . 
liberia also has a tradition of baking imported from the united states that is unique in west africa . 
liberia has the highest ratio of foreign direct investment to gdp in the world ,  with us$16 billion in investment since 2006.
liberia is situated in west africa ,  bordering the north atlantic ocean to the country's southwest . 
the liberian constitution and flag were modeled after those of the u . s .  on january 3, 1848, joseph jenkins roberts ,  a wealthy ,  free-born african american from virginia who settled in liberia ,  was elected as liberia's first president after the people proclaimed independence . 
slash-and-burn agriculture is one of the human activities eroding liberia's natural forests . 
liberia's economic and political stability was threatened in the 2010s by an ebola virus epidemic; it originated in guinea in december 2013, entered liberia in march 2014, and was declared officially ended on may 8, 2015.
in liberia ,  the samuel kanyon doe sports complex serves as a multi-purpose stadium . 
liberia imports 90% of its rice ,  a staple food ,  and is extremely vulnerable to food shortages . 
in 2009, tubman university in harper ,  maryland county was established as the second public university in liberia . 
the same day ,  taylor returned to liberia . 
of the 4,571 emigrants who arrived in liberia from 1820 to 1843, only 1,819 survived until 1843.
liberia remained neutral for most of world war i .  liberia joined the war on the allied side in 4 august 1917.
the american navy established a coaling station in liberia . 
bloodshed in liberia did slow considerably ,  but it did not end . 
the social order in liberia was dominated by a group of americo-liberians . 
from 1962 until 1980, the u . s .  donated $280 million in aid to liberia ,  in exchange for which liberia offered its land free of rent for u . s .  government facilities . 
in 1942, liberia signed a defense pact with the united states . 
politically ,  liberia was dominated by two political parties . 
december 1989, the npfl invaded nimba county in liberia . 
in 1926, firestone ,  an american rubber company ,  started the world's largest rubber plantation in liberia . 
the defense areas agreement between the u . s .  and liberia entailed the us-financed construction of roberts field airport ,  the freeport of monrovia ,  and roads into the interior of liberia . 
in 2002, the women in liberia were tired of seeing their country torn apart . 
after world war ii ,  the u . s .  pressured liberia to resist the expansion of soviet influence in africa during the cold war . 
a few initial cases grew into an ebola virus epidemic in liberia . 
after a bloody overthrow of the americo-liberian régime by indigenous liberians in 1980, a 'redemption council' took control of liberia . 
in may 2006, the united nations mission in liberia  -lrb-  unmil  -rrb-  released a report: “human rights in liberia’s rubber plantations: tapping into the future” which detailed the results of its investigation into the conditions on the firestone plantation in liberia . 
liberia was now engaged in a complex three-way conflict with sierra leone and the guinea republic . 
in 1847, the acs encouraged liberia to proclaim independence ,  as it no longer wanted to support it . 
meanwhile ,  u . s .  stationed a marine expeditionary unit with 2300 marines offshore liberia . 
in 1926, the liberian government gave a concession to the american rubber company firestone to start the world's largest rubber plantation at harbel ,  liberia . 
june 1991, former liberian army fighters formed rebel group united liberation movement of liberia for democracy  -lrb-  ulimo  -rrb-  ,  entered western liberia in september ’91, and gained territories from the npfl . 
between 1847 and 1980, the state of liberia was dominated by the small minority of black colonists and their descendants ,  known collectively as americo-liberians . 
charles taylor ,  born 1948 in arthington ,  liberia is son to a gola mother and either an americo-liberian or an afro-trinidadian father . 
in 1989, while in the ivory coast ,  taylor assembled a group of rebels into the national patriotic front of liberia  -lrb-  npfl  -rrb-  ,  mostly from the gio and mano tribes . 
internal unrest ,  opposition to the new military regime ,  and governmental repression steadily grew ,  until in 1989 liberia sank into outright tribal and civil war . 
in particular ,  liberia's important coffee industry was destroyed in the 1870s by the emergence of production in brazil . 
other elements of the former ulimo-factions formed another new small rebel group in the republic of ivory coast ,  the movement for democracy in liberia  -lrb-  model  -rrb-  headed by mr yayah nimley ,  in 2003 and emerged in the south of liberia . 
liberia is a country in west africa which was founded ,  established ,  colonized ,  and controlled by citizens of the united states and ex-caribbean slaves as a colony for former african american slaves and their free black descendants . 
under doe ,  liberian ports were opened to american ,  canadian ,  and european merchant ships ,  which brought in considerable foreign investment from shipping firms and earned liberia a reputation as a tax haven . 
liberia is a sub-saharan nation in west africa located at 6 °n ,  9 °w . 
as of 2006, liberia has the highest population growth rate in the world  -lrb-  4.50% per annum  -rrb-  . 
as of 2006, liberia has the highest population growth rate in the world  -lrb-  4.50% per annum  -rrb-  . 
43.5% of liberians were below the age of 15 in 2010.
there are fifteen counties in liberia . 
liberia is still in transition from dictatorship and civil war to democracy . 
trial by ordeal is practiced in various parts of liberia . 
as a result of the boycott ,  sirleaf won the second round with 90.7% of the vote ,  though voter turnout significantly declined from the first round . 
taylor won the election by a large majority ,  primarily because liberians feared a return to war had taylor lost . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated liberia as `` hybrid regime '' in 2016.
between 1980 and 2006, liberia was governed by a series of military and transitional governments . 
taylor refused to work with the interim government and continued war . 
sirleaf garnered 43.9% of the vote in the first round ,  more than any other candidate but short of the 50% needed to avoid a run-off . 
liberia earned more than $18 million from its maritime program in 2000.
timber and rubber are liberia's main export items since the end of the war . 
liberia earns more than $100 million and more than $70 million annually from timber and rubber exports ,  respectively . 
liberia's external debt was estimated in 2006 at approximately $4.5 billion ,  800% of gdp . 
liberia is one of the poorest countries in the world ,  and its economy is extremely underdeveloped ,  largely due to the first liberian civil war in 1989-96.
but because of the liberian government's perceived disregard for human rights ,  foreign assistance to liberia has declined drastically . 
liberia is a member of the economic community of west african states  -lrb-  ecowas  -rrb-  . 
today ,  firestone's rubber plantation in liberia is the world's largest contiguous rubber plantation ,  operated by the firestone  -lrb-  now bridgestone  -rrb-  subsidiary ,  the firestone natural rubber company . 
the liberian economy had relied heavily on the mining of iron ore prior to the civil war . 
communications in liberia include the press ,  radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
in 1984 the afl included the liberian national guard  -lrb-  lng  -rrb-  brigade and related units  -lrb-  6,300 men  -rrb-  ,  and the liberian national coast guard  -lrb-  about 450 men  -rrb-  . 
under samuel doe the coast guard was retitled the liberian navy in 1986 through the passage of the liberian navy act of 1986.
the armed forces of liberia  -lrb-  afl  -rrb-  are the armed forces of the republic of liberia . 
the afl became entangled in the conflict ,  which lasted from 1989 to 1996–97, and then the second liberian civil war ,  which lasted from 1999 to 2003.
the afl was purged of gio soldiers . 
a united states coast guard officer is now serving at the u . s .  embassy in monrovia supporting efforts to reestablish the liberian coast guard . 
liberia joined the allies in both world war i and world war ii . 
the liberian ground forces currently consist of two infantry battalions and supporting units . 
as of 2014, the afl consists of two infantry battalions ,  a service support company ,  a military police company ,  a logistics command ,  and the liberian national coast guard . 
as of december 2010, a logistics command is being established within the afl ,  taking the same name as a pre-civil war afl formation . 
luka had succeeded the previous liberian chief of staff ,  kpenkpa y .  konah ,  in 2006.
the liberian air force was established from the aviation unit by an act of legislature on august 12, 1987.
the armed forces' third arm ,  the liberian national coast guard ,  was established in 1959.
in the 1850s ,  the liberian president requested naval support from the british government to transport liberian troops to the gallinas territory to punish liberians there who persisted in slave trafficking . 
the fifth infantry battalion was at gbarnga . 
tarnue was later implicated in a land dispute in 1999, while acting as afl commander . 
in 1964 the us army area handbook described the national guard as 3,000 strong with a headquarters company ,  the executive mansion guard battalion in monrovia ,  three infantry battalions and one engineer battalion  -lrb-  which was newly formed at camp naama in 1962 and only had one company organized  -rrb-  . 
the inability of the afl to make any headway was one of the reasons why doe changed his field commander in the area five times in the first six months of the war . 
the three infantry battalions were the 1st infantry battalion ,  at camp schiefflin ,  situated on the airport road between monrovia and roberts international airport ,  the 2nd infantry battalion ,  hq at barclay training center  -lrb-  btc  -rrb-  ,  monrovia ,  and the 3rd infantry battalion ,  hq at baworobo ,  maryland county . 
the civil war lasted until the abuja accords of august 1996.
yet taylor denied ecomog any role in the restructuring of the afl ,  and the force eventually left liberia by the end of 1998.
on february 6, 1908, the militia was established on a permanent basis as the 500-strong liberian frontier force  -lrb-  lff  -rrb-  . 
the duties and functions of the afl are officially stated as follows:
by 1978, the lng brigade had been established and the brigade was described as comprising a headquarters and headquarters company at the barclay training center ,  monrovia ,  the executive mansion guard battalion on capitol hill ,  monrovia ,  the engineer battalion and the first field artillery battalion  -lrb-  both at camp jackson ,  naama  -rrb-  two tactical combat battalions  -lrb-  the first infantry battalion ,  at schiefflin and the second infantry battalion which in the intervening period had moved from the btc to camp tolbert ,  todee  -rrb-  and three non-tactical battalions ,  tasked with providing guard services to government officials ,  tax collection ,  and 'other non-military duties' . 
the ranks and insignia of the armed forces of liberia are based on those of the united states department of defense ,  and are laid out in the liberian defense act of 2008.
in october 2009 a state partnership program relationship was begun between the afl and the u . s .  state of michigan's michigan national guard . 
shortly after the induction of taylor as elected president of liberia in august 1997, the ministry of national defense determined that the strength of the afl had risen during the war from 6,500 to 14,981 service members . 
liberian foreign relations were traditionally stable and cordial throughout much of the 19th and 20th centuries . 
during the 1990s ,  charles taylor's presidency and the first and second liberian civil wars underscored liberian relations with the western world ,  the people's republic of china ,  and its neighboring countries in western africa . 
area: <br> ''total: '' 1 759 540 km² <br> ''land: '' 1 759 540 km² <br> ''water: '' 0 km²
land boundaries: <br> ''total: '' 4 348 km <br> ''border countries: '' algeria 982 km ,  chad 1 055 km ,  egypt 1 115 km ,  niger 354 km ,  sudan 383 km ,  tunisia 459 km
cyrenaica comprises 51% ,  fezzan 33% ,  and tripolitania 16% of the country's area . 
along the shore of tripolitania for more than 300 km ,  coastal oases alternate with sandy areas and lagoons . 
in cyrenaica there are fewer coastal oases ,  and the marj plain – the lowland area corresponding to the jifarah plain of tripolitania – covers a much smaller area . 
from jabal al akhdar ,  cyrenaica extends southward across a barren grazing belt that gives way to the sahara desert ,  which extends still farther southwest across the chadian frontier . 
in the second world war libya was one of the main battlegrounds of north africa . 
in september 2008, italy and libya signed a memorandum by which italy would pay $5 billion over the next 20 years to compensate libya for its dominion over libya for its reign of 30 years . 
libya has a small population residing in a large land area . 
in the 18th century libya was used as the base for various pirates . 
eight population censuses have been carried out in libya ,  the first in 1931 and the most recent one in 2006.
the law of libya is based on sharia . 
the general national congress was the legislative authority of libya . 
on 30 march 2014, the general national congress voted to replace itself with a new house of representatives ,  formally known as the council of deputies . 
the house of representatives would continue to exist as a legislature and an advisory body ,  to be known as the state council ,  was formed with members nominated by the new general national congress . 
the politics of libya is in an uncertain state due to the collapse of the libyan arab jamahiriya in 2011 and an ongoing civil war between the council of deputies in tobruk and its supporters ,  the new general national congress in tripoli and its supporters ,  and various jihadists and tribal elements controlling parts of the country . 
libyan gdp per capita was about $40 in the early 1920s and it rose to $1,018 by 1967.
these oil revenues and a small population have given libya one of the highest nominal per capita gdp in africa . 
this clears the road for u . s .  oil companies to exploit libyan oil and is expected to have a positive impact on the libyan economy . 
in 1947 alone ,  per capita gdp rose by 42 percent . 
as of 2017, libya's per capita ppp gdp stands at 60% of its pre-wars level . 
the control of the media by colonel gaddafi's regime came to an end after the fall of tripoli in august 2011, resulting in a mushrooming of new media outlets . 
as of 2016, the new unity government of national accord led by faiez seraj agreed to and organised with the help of the un ,  is attempting to bring about political unity between the hor of tobruk and other governments to assess unity in the country ,  by removing the illegitimate and expired governments set up during the second civil war  -lrb-  such as nouri abusahmein's gnc  -rrb-  ,  to in good faith re-balance the libyan crisis . 
total: 59 <br>over 3,047 m: 23  <br>2,438 to 3,047 m: 6 <br>1,524 to 2,437 m: 23 <br>914 to 1,523 m: 5 <br>under 914 m: 2  -lrb-  2005 -rrb-
total: 80 <br>over 3,047 m: 5 <br>2,438 to 3,047 m: 2 <br>1,524 to 2,437 m: 14 <br>914 to 1,523 m: 41 <br>under 914 m: 18  -lrb-  2008 -rrb-
there are about 83,200 km of roads in libya ,  47,590 km of which are surfaced . 
the libyan army has ceased to function following the rebel victory in the libyan civil war . 
the armed forces of the libyan arab jamahiriya consisted of the libyan army ,  libyan air force and the libyan navy and other services including the people's militia . 
these numbers do not take into account equipment destroyed or captured during the 2011 libyan civil war . 
the roots of the 1951–2011 libyan armed forces can be traced to the libyan arab force  -lrb-  popularly known as the sanusi army  -rrb-  of world war ii . 
in 2009, the libyan army consisted of 25,000 volunteers with an additional 25,000 conscripts  -lrb-  total 50,000 -rrb- . 
continued libyan defiance led to further sanctions by the un against libya in november 1993.
beginning in 1969, colonel muammar gaddafi determined libya's foreign policy . 
gaddafi closed american and british bases on libyan territory and partially nationalized all foreign oil and commercial interests in libya . 
the u . s .  government declared libya a `` state sponsor of terrorism '' on 29 december 1979.
the foreign minister of libya also called the massacres `` heroic acts '' . 
the chadian–libyan conflict  -lrb-  1978–1987 -rrb- ended in disaster for libya in 1987 with the toyota war . 
in 1986 libyan state television announced that libya was training suicide squads to attack american and european interests . 
the treaty was ratified by italy on 6 february 2009, and by libya on 2 march ,  during a visit to tripoli by berlusconi . 
the court also established a connection to the libyan government . 
this action was apparently taken in retaliation for switzerland blacklisting 188 high-ranking officials from libya ,  although there has been no official confirmation from libya itself about why they have taken this action . 
libya had close ties with slobodan milošević's regime in yugoslavia . 
it is still common for sahrawi students to attend their schooling in libya . 
in january 1989, there was another encounter over the gulf of sidra between u . s .  and libyan aircraft which resulted in the downing of two libyan jets . 
in 2008 libya established a fund to compensate victims of these three terrorist acts  -lrb-  and the 1986 us bombing of tripoli and benghazi  -rrb-  . 
on 21 november 2008, the us senate confirmed the appointment of gene cretz to be the first us ambassador to libya since 1972.
in august 2009 swiss president hans-rudolf merz visited tripoli and issued a public apology to libya for the arrest of hannibal gaddafi and his wife . 
the uk also expelled the libyan ambassador in london from the country . 
during the libyan civil war ,  all european union and nato member states withdrew diplomatic staff from tripoli and shut their embassies in the libyan capital . 
in 1996, the iran and libya sanctions act  -lrb-  ilsa  -rrb-  was enacted ,  seeking to penalize non-u . s .  companies which invest more than $40 million in libya's oil and gasoline sector in any one year . 
in may 1987, australia deported diplomats and broke off relations with libya because of its activities in oceania . 
libya's relationship with the soviet union involved massive libyan arms purchases from the soviet bloc and the presence of thousands of east bloc advisers . 
in february 2009, gaddafi was selected to be chairman of the african union for one year . 
amin lost the battle and later fled to exile in libya ,  where he remained for almost a year . 
on 17 november 2008, fco minister bill rammell signed five agreements with libya . 
two swiss businessmen ,  rachid hamdani and max göldi ,  libya head of abb ,  who were in libya at the time were denied permission to leave the country and were forced to take shelter at the swiss embassy in tripoli . 
on 16 october 2007, libya was elected to serve on the united nations security council for two years starting in january 2008.
libyan agents who had carried out the operation from the libyan embassy in east germany were prosecuted by reunited germany in the 1990s . 
libya also still provided bounties for heads of refugees who criticized gaddafi ,  including 1 million dollars for ashur shamis ,  a libyan-british journalist . 
liechtenstein  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the principality of liechtenstein  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a doubly landlocked german-speaking microstate in alpine central europe . 
liechtenstein is bordered by switzerland to the west and south and austria to the east and north . 
this region was enfeoffed to the counts of hohenems until the sale to the liechtenstein dynasty in 1699.
in 1396 vaduz  -lrb-  the southern region of liechtenstein  -rrb-  was raised to the status of `` imperial immediacy '' and as such made subject to the holy roman emperor alone . 
the principality is a constitutional monarchy headed by the prince of liechtenstein . 
soon afterward ,  liechtenstein joined the german confederation  -lrb-  20 june 181524 august 1866 -rrb- ,  which was presided over by the emperor of austria . 
modern publications generally attribute liechtenstein's sovereignty to these events . 
the principality of liechtenstein encompasses most of the eastern half of the rhine valley ,  wedged between austria and switzerland . 
66.2% are liechtensteiners ,  the rest are foreigners . 
the official language is german; most speak alemannic ,  a german dialect highly divergent from standard german ,  but closely related to those dialects spoken in neighbouring regions . 
the duties and working procedures of parliament are laid down in the constitution and in parliament's standing orders . 
according to the constitution of liechtenstein ,  the government is a collegiate body and consists of the head of government and four governmental councilors . 
the judiciary of liechtenstein is made up of the supreme court  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  the princely superior court  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and the princely court  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
from 1938 to 1997 liechtenstein had a coalition government . 
however the prince of liechtenstein is head of state and exercises considerable political powers . 
587 million  -rrb-  . 
some 15.7% of liechtenstein goods are exported to switzerland ,  62.6% to the eu and 21.1% to the rest of the world . 
liechtenstein's historical customs union with austria was dissolved in 1919.
liechtenstein utilizes the swiss franc as its national currency . 
some differences on the withholding tax arose ,  but switzerland did not agree to introduce this practice to residents of liechtenstein working in switzerland . 
currently there are 21 swiss border guards stationed in liechtenstein and 20 austrian border guards securing its border  -lrb-  as of 2011 -rrb- . 
liechtenstein was admitted to the united nations in 1990.
under a 1919 agreement between liechtenstein and switzerland ,  ambassadors of switzerland are authorised to represent liechtenstein in countries and in diplomatic situations unless liechtenstein opts to send its own ambassador . 
liechtenstein has resorted two times to international dispute settlement by the international court of justice ,  in the `` nottebohm  -lrb-  liechtenstein v .  guatemala  -rrb- ``  case against guatemala in the 1950s and in a case concerning art property of the liechtenstein family against germany in 2005.
the most important of the grand duchy's documents ,  the lithuanian metrica ,  the lithuanian chronicles and the statutes of lithuania ,  were all written in that language . 
the union of horodło  -lrb-  1413 -rrb- incorporated lithuania into poland again ,  but only as a formality . 
but lithuania was trapped between the two branches of the order . 
large numbers of lithuanians had emigrated to the united states in 1867–1868 after a famine in lithuania . 
western lithuania had an important role in the preservation of the lithuanian language and its culture . 
on february 16, 1918, lithuania was re-established as a democratic state . 
the poem became the national anthem of lithuania ,  `` tautiška giesmė '':  -lrb-  `` lithuania ,  our homeland ''  -rrb-  . 
in 1236 the pope declared a crusade against the lithuanians . 
the economy of lithuania did well in comparison with other regions of the soviet union . 
the national developments in lithuania followed tacit compromise agreements worked out by the soviet communists ,  lithuanian communists and the lithuanian intelligentsia . 
lithuanian was not considered a prestigious language . 
lithuania's nationalist movement continued to grow . 
the third seimas of lithuania was elected in may 1926.
mindaugas was the principal founder of the lithuanian state . 
in 1009, the missionary bruno of querfurt arrived in lithuania and baptized the lithuanian ruler `` king nethimer . `` 
in the summer of 1944, the soviet red army reached eastern lithuania . 
its presence would greatly impact the futures of both lithuania and poland . 
the first lithuanian national census took place in 1923.
the rest of lithuania continued to be administered as a russian province . 
the second seimas of lithuania ,  elected in may 1923, was the only seimas in independent lithuania that served its full term . 
military confrontations with lithuanians followed at that time and at the turn of the century ,  but for the time being the lithuanians had the upper hand . 
the lithuanian state maintained a patrimonial power structure . 
it is estimated that lithuania lost 780,000 people between 1940 and 1954 under the nazi and soviet occupations . 
at this time ,  italian architecture was introduced in lithuanian cities ,  and lithuanian literature written in latin flourished . 
in mid-may 1919, the lithuanian army commanded by general silvestras žukauskas began an offensive against the soviets in northeastern lithuania . 
the polish ruling establishment had been aiming at the incorporation of the grand duchy of lithuania into poland since before the union of krewo . 
thus the first phase of the lithuanian wars of independence was over and lithuanians could direct attention to internal affairs . 
lithuania ceased to exist as a distinct entity for more than a century . 
considerably more ethnic lithuanians died after world war ii than during it . 
immediately following the occupation ,  soviet authorities began rapid sovietization of lithuania . 
lithuania joined the nato alliance in 2004 and the european union as part of its enlargement in 2004.
the lithuanian state of the later 14th century was primarily binational ,  lithuanian and ruthenian  -lrb-  in territories that correspond to the modern belarus and ukraine  -rrb-  . 
before it could fully recover ,  lithuania was again ravaged during the great northern war of 1700–1721.
the lithuanian civil war of 1389–1392 involved the teutonic knights ,  the poles ,  and the competing factions loyal to jogaila and vytautas in lithuania . 
this initiated the formation of early statehood ,  from which the grand duchy of lithuania developed . 
vytautas had been frustrated by jogaila's polish arrangements and rejected the prospect of lithuania's subordination to poland . 
afterward ,  the lithuanians lived under the rule of the russian empire until the 20th century . 
legal evolution had lately been taking place in lithuania nevertheless . 
the ruthenian princes were orthodox ,  and many lithuanian princes also converted to orthodoxy ,  even some who resided in lithuania proper ,  or at least their wives . 
many educated lithuanians came back from studies abroad to help build the active cultural life that distinguished 16th-century lithuania ,  sometimes referred to as lithuanian renaissance  -lrb-  not to be confused with lithuanian national revival in the 19th century  -rrb-  . 
the livonian order completed its conquest of semigalia ,  the last baltic ally of lithuania ,  in 1291.
the lithuanian legislative assembly assumed the same formal powers as the polish sejm . 
the klaipėda revolt was the last armed conflict in lithuania before world war ii . 
initially ,  there was substantial cooperation and collaboration between the german forces and some lithuanians . 
the lithuanians were interested only in a state `` within ethnographic frontiers , ``  as they perceived it . 
after the outbreak of hostilities in world war i ,  germany occupied lithuania and courland in 1915.
as the power of the lithuanian warlord dukes expanded to the south and east ,  the cultivated east slavic ruthenians exerted influence on the lithuanian ruling class . 
lithuania was dependent for its survival on the human and material resources of the ruthenian lands . 
jogaila's baptism and crowning were followed by the final and official christianization of lithuania . 
the language revival spread into more affluent strata ,  beginning with the release of the lithuanian newspapers `` aušra '' and `` varpas '' ,  then with the writing of poems and books in lithuanian many of which glorified the historic grand duchy of lithuania . 
the restoration of the former grand duchy of lithuania was no longer the objective of this movement ,  and the territorial ambitions of its leaders were limited to the lands they considered historically lithuanian . 
lithuania is a country in the baltic region of europe . 
lithuania's major warm-water port of klaipėda  -lrb-  memel  -rrb-  lies at the narrow mouth of curonian lagoon ,  a shallow lagoon extending south to kaliningrad and separated from the baltic sea by curonian spit ,  where kuršių nerija national park was established for its remarkable sand dunes . 
see lithuanian nationality law . 
lithuania's membership of the european union has made lithuanian citizenship all the more appealing . 
the primary lithuanian state ,  the duchy of lithuania ,  emerged in the territory of lietuva ,  the ethnic homeland of lithuanians . 
the name of lithuania – `` lithuanians '' – was first mentioned in 1009.
the lithuanian constitutional court ruled in november 2006 that a number of provisions of the law of the republic of lithuania on citizenship are in conflict with the lithuanian constitution . 
the lithuanian parliament amended the citizenship law substantially as a result of this court ruling ,  allowing dual citizenship for children of at least one lithuanian parent who are born abroad ,  but preventing lithuanians from retaining their lithuanian citizenship after obtaining the citizenship of another country . 
the lithuanian national revival had begun to intensify by the end of the 19th century ,  and the number of lithuanian speakers and people identifying themselves as ethnic lithuanians started to increase; but at the same time many polish speaking lithuanians ,  especially former `` szlachta '' ,  cut themselves adrift from the lithuanian nation . 
now there are only about 4,000 jews living in lithuania . 
at the court of zygmunt august ,  the last king of the duchy ,  both polish and lithuanian were spoken . 
the prime minister of lithuania is the head of government of the country ,  appointed by the president and approved by the seimas . 
politics of lithuania takes place in a framework of a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of lithuania is the head of state and the prime minister of lithuania is the head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
lithuania joined nato on 29 march 2004, and joined the eu on 1 may 2004.
during this period ,  the prime minister was gediminas vagnorius . 
on november 22, 2016, saulius skvernelis became the new and current prime minister . 
executive power is exercised by the president and the government ,  which is headed by the prime minister . 
the executive branch of the lithuanian government consists of a president ,  a prime minister ,  and the president's council of ministers . 
this article provides an overview of telecommunications in lithuania ,  including radio ,  television ,  telephones ,  and the internet . 
the lithuanian air force  -lrb-  laf  -rrb-  is an integral part of the lithuanian armed forces . 
the lithuanian armed forces consist of the lithuanian land force ,  lithuanian air force ,  lithuanian naval force ,  lithuanian special operations force and other units: logistics command ,  training and doctrine command ,  headquarters battalion ,  military police . 
the lithuanian land forces are undertaking a major modernization . 
the lithuanian armed forces consist of 20,565 active personnel . 
lithuania abolished its conscription in 2008.
sof is formed from the special operations unit . 
lithuanian soldiers have taken part in international operations since 1993.
the core of the lithuanian land force structure is the `` iron wolf '' mechanised infantry brigade  -lrb-  mib `` iron wolf ''  -rrb-  consisting of three mechanized infantry battalions  -lrb-  grand duke kestutis mechanized ,  lithuanian grand duke algirdas mechanized and grand duke vaidotas mechanized battalions  -rrb-  and artillery battalion . 
units are located at various bases across lithuania:
on 1 may 2004, lithuania became one of the 28 member states of the european union . 
on 17 september 1991, lithuania became a member of the united nations . 
in 2007, lithuania presided over the economic and social council of the united nations . 
it operates through the baltic assembly and baltic council of ministers . 
lithuania also cooperates with nordic and other two baltic countries through nb8 cooperation format . 
the history of luxembourg consists of the history of the country of luxembourg and its geographical area . 
the history of luxembourg properly began with the construction of luxembourg castle in the high middle ages . 
2,848 luxembourgers eventually died fighting in the german army . 
between 1945 and 2005, the economic structure of luxembourg changed significantly . 
louis was the first real claimant of luxembourg to descend from both sisters ,  the daughters of elisabeth of bohemia ,  the last luxembourg empress . 
luxembourg remained more or less under french rule until the defeat of napoleon in 1815.
the congress of vienna of 1815, gave formal autonomy to luxembourg . 
although these treaties greatly reduced luxembourg's territory ,  the latter established its formal independence ,  which was confirmed after the luxembourg crisis of 1867.
luxembourg has been one of the strongest advocates of the european union in the tradition of robert schuman . 
charles was the first ruler of luxembourg to descend from both sisters ,  daughters of elisabeth of bohemia . 
altogether ,  of a pre-war population of 293,000, 5,259 luxembourgers lost their lives during the hostilities . 
world war i affected luxembourg at a time when the nation-building process was far from complete . 
in 1867, luxembourg's independence was confirmed ,  after a turbulent period which even included a brief time of civil unrest against plans to annex luxembourg to belgium ,  germany or france . 
the general strike in luxembourg remained one of the few mass strikes against the german war machine in western europe . 
austrian rulers were ready to exchange luxembourg and other territories in the low countries . 
luxembourg’s small size no longer seemed to be a challenge to the existence of the country ,  and the creation of the banque centrale du luxembourg  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- and of the university of luxembourg  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- was evidence of the continuing desire to become a “real” nation . 
on the international level ,  the interwar period was characterised by an attempt to put luxembourg on the map . 
in the 17th and 18th centuries ,  the electors of brandenburg ,  later kings of prussia  -lrb-  borussia  -rrb-  ,  advanced their claim to the luxembourg patrimony as heirs-general to william of thuringia and his wife anna of bohemia ,  the disputed dukes of luxembourg in the 1460s . 
this brandenburger claim ultimately produced some results when some districts of luxembourg were united with prussia in 1813.
this loss left the grand duchy of luxembourg a predominantly german state ,  although french cultural influence remained strong . 
habsburg rule was confirmed in 1715 by the treaty of utrecht ,  and luxembourg was integrated into the southern netherlands . 
south of the sûre river ,  the country is known as the gutland . 
luxembourg is landlocked ,  separated from the north sea by belgium . 
luxembourg has a number of minor rivers ,  such as the eisch ,  the alzette ,  and the pétrusse ,  but the main river is the moselle with its tributaries-the sûre and the our . 
other major rivers include the alzette in the south and the wiltz in the north . 
besides luxembourg city ,  the other main towns are primarily located in the southern red lands region ,  which lines the border between luxembourg and france to the south . 
rising in belgium ,  the sûre river flows for in an easterly direction through luxembourg and into the moselle . 
the capital ,  luxembourg city ,  is located in the southern part of the country . 
luxembourg is a small country located in the low countries ,  part of north-west europe it borders belgium for to the west and north ,  france  -lrb-    -rrb-  to the south ,  and germany  -lrb-    -rrb-  to the east . 
the upper sûre lake is the largest stretch of water in the grand duchy . 
geographic coordinates: area: `` total: '' 2 586 km `` land: '' 2 586 km `` water: '' 0 km
the following is an overview of the demographics of luxembourg . 
in 2013, the csv lost one seat  -lrb-  23 seats instead of 24 -rrb- . 
according to the constitution of 1868, executive power is exercised by the grand duke or grand duchess and the cabinet ,  which consists of a prime minister and a variable number of government branch ministers . 
the luxembourg socialist workers' party  -lrb-  lsap  -rrb-  is a party of social-democratic orientation which has been a junior partner in most governments since 1974 either with the csv in 1984–1999 and 2004-2013, or the democratic party in 1974-1979.
in the june 2004 parliamentary elections ,  the csv won 24 seats ,  the lsap 14, the dp 10, the greens 7, and the alternative democratic reform party 5.
the same goes for the administrative court  -lrb-  luxembourgish: `` verwaltungsgeriicht ''; french: `` cour administrative ''  -rrb-  . 
the government is currently a coalition of the dp ,  lsap and green party . 
banking is the largest sector in the luxembourg economy . 
luxembourg is a member of the european space agency where luxembourg contributed 23 million euros in 2015.
according to a note from the luxembourg statistical agency ,  the luxembourg economy was set to grow 4.0% in 2011.
the economy of luxembourg is largely dependent on the banking ,  steel ,  and industrial sectors . 
by april 2017, three space mining corporations had established headquarters established in luxembourg . 
luxembourg's small but productive agricultural sector is highly subsidized ,  mainly by the eu and the government . 
luxembourg has efficient road ,  rail and air transport facilities and services . 
the refining process led to the development of the steel industry in luxembourg and founding of the arbed company in 1911.
the world's biggest satellite operator  -lrb-  ses global  -rrb-  has its origin and headquarters in betzdorf ,  luxembourg . 
luxembourg airport at findel ,  some 6 km to the north of the city ,  is luxembourg's only commercial airport . 
the trunk natural gas pipelines in luxembourg have a total length of 155 km  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
the luxembourg network is connected to germany ,  france and belgium . 
with 56.8 km of motorway per 1,000 km ,  luxembourg probably now has the highest density of motorways in europe . 
transport in luxembourg is ensured principally by road ,  rail and air . 
the remaining road network in luxembourg accounts for a total length of 2,820 km ,  consisting of 798 km of trunk roads  -lrb-  rn or `` routes nationales ''  -rrb-  and 2,022 km of secondary roads  -lrb-  cr or `` chemins repris ''  -rrb-  . 
the six luxembourg motorways cover a total distance of 147 km ,  linking the capital with trier  -lrb-  germany  -rrb-  ,  thionville  -lrb-  france  -rrb-  and arlon  -lrb-  belgium  -rrb-  as well as with esch-sur-alzette and ettelbruck in luxembourg . 
luxembourg city is served by 163 of its own avl  -lrb-  autobus de la ville de luxembourg  -rrb-  buses transporting some 28 million passengers per year  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
the luxembourg army is the national military force of luxembourg . 
in 1867, the prussian garrison left the fortress ,  and the two battalions of luxembourgish light infantry entered the city of luxembourg that september . 
the luxembourg contingent now consisted of two light infantry battalions ,  one in echternach and the second in diekirch; two reserve companies; and a depot company . 
luxembourg signed the treaty of brussels in march 1948, and the north atlantic treaty in 1949.
in 1964, the grand ducal guard was organized into a hq ,  three platoons ,  a reinforcement platoon ,  and the nco school . 
on 8 january 1817, william i ,  grand duke of luxembourg ,  published a constitutional law governing the organization of a militia ,  the main provisions of which were to remain in force until the militia was abolished in 1881.
luxembourg is the site of the european court of justice ,  the european court of auditors ,  the statistical office of the european communities  -lrb-  eurostat  -rrb-  and other vital eu organs . 
the line and the stations were transferred to the london overground network in 2010.
in 1933, most of london's underground railways ,  tramway and bus services were merged to form the london passenger transport board ,  which used the london transport brand . 
the underground has its origins in the metropolitan railway ,  the world's first underground railway . 
by 1907 the district and metropolitan railways had electrified the underground sections of their lines . 
transport for london  -lrb-  tfl  -rrb-  was created in 2000 as the integrated body responsible for london's transport system . 
in january 1913, the uerl acquired the central london railway and the city & south london railway ,  as well as many of london's bus and tram operators . 
the london transport brand continued to be used by the glc . 
only the metropolitan railway ,  along with its subsidiaries the great northern & city railway and the east london railway ,  and the waterloo & city railway ,  by then owned by the main line london and south western railway ,  remained outside the underground group's control . 
in 1984 control of london buses and the london underground passed back to central government with the creation of london regional transport  -lrb-  lrt  -rrb-  ,  which reported directly to the secretary of state for transport ,  still retaining the london transport brand . 
tfl eventually replaced london regional transport ,  and discontinued the use of the london transport brand in favour of its own brand . 
the idea of an underground railway linking the city of london with the urban centre was proposed in the 1830s ,  and the metropolitan railway was granted permission to build such a line in 1854.
in april 1994, the waterloo & city railway ,  by then owned by british rail and known as the waterloo & city line ,  was transferred to the london underground . 
lund institute of technology was established in 1961 but was merged with lund university eight years later . 
in 1845 and 1862 lund co-hosted nordic student meetings together with the university of copenhagen . 
lund university has a satellite campus in nearby malmö ,  sweden's third largest city . 
lund university library was established in 1668 at the same time as the university and is one of sweden's oldest and largest libraries . 
campus helsingborg is ,  as the name suggests ,  located in the city of helsingborg ,  almost 50 km from lund . 
the first woman to study in lund was hildegard björck  -lrb-  spring of 1880 -rrb- who had previously studied in uppsala and had there been the first swedish woman ever to get an academic degree . 
the university's facilities are mainly located in the small city of lund in scania ,  about 15 km away from central malmö and 50 km from copenhagen . 
after sweden won scania from denmark in the 1658 treaty of roskilde ,  the university was founded in 1666 on the location of the old studium generale next to lund cathedral . 
teaching and training at the school of aviation  -lrb-  lusa  -rrb-  takes place at an airfield next to the town of ljungbyhed ,  about 40 km away from lund . 
lord peter wimsey is called `` lord '' as he is the son of a duke . 
 ''roger '' is an ancestral wimsey name . 
over the next five years ,  according to sayers' short stories ,  the wimseys have three sons: bredon delagardie peter wimsey  -lrb-  born in october 1936 in the story `` the haunted policeman ''  -rrb- ; roger wimsey  -lrb-  born 1938 -rrb- ,  and paul wimsey  -lrb-  born 1940 -rrb- . 
dorothy sayers wrote 11 wimsey novels and a number of short stories featuring wimsey and his family . 
 '' ,  on such occasions bunter would take care of wimsey and tenderly put him to bed ,  and they would revert to being `` major wimsey '' and `` sergeant bunter '' . 
consequently ,  when wimsey's brother dies of a heart attack in 1951 during a fire in bredon hall at duke's denver ,  wimsey becomes the duke of denver . 
the only occasion when sayers returned to wimsey was the 1942 short story `` talboys '' . 
the wimsey papers included a reference to wimsey and bunter setting out during the war on a secret mission of espionage in europe ,  and provide the ironic epitaph wimsey writes for himself: `` here lies an anachronism in the vague expectation of eternity '' . 
in `` strong poison '' ,  she is the first person other than wimsey himself to realise that he has fallen in love with harriet . 
at the end of their investigation ,  vane finally accepts wimsey's proposal of marriage . 
lord peter wimsey's  -lrb-  fictional  -rrb-  ancestry begins with the 12th-century knight gerald de wimsey ,  who went with king richard the lionheart on the third crusade and took part in the siege of acre . 
it was left to jill paton walsh to extend wimsey's career through and beyond the second world war . 
during the 1920s ,  wimsey has affairs with various women ,  which are the subject of much gossip in britain and europe . 
letters have the following advantages over email:
letters are a way to connect with someone not through the internet . 
today ,  the internet ,  by means of email ,  plays a large part in written communications; however ,  these email communications are not generally referred to as letters but rather as e-mail  -lrb-  or email  -rrb-  messages ,  messages or simply emails or e-mails ,  with only the term `` letter '' generally being reserved for communications on paper . 
no historical documentation exists of women who had other women as sex partners . 
this did not mean that women could not pursue sexual relationships with other women ,  but that such associations could not impose upon women's relationships to men . 
in terms of medical issues ,  lesbians are referred to as women who have sex with women  -lrb-  wsw  -rrb-  because of the misconceptions and assumptions about women's sexuality and some women's hesitancy to disclose their accurate sexual histories even to a physician . 
 ''designing women '' ,  `` the golden girls '' ,  and `` friends '' used this device with women in particular . 
most women ,  however ,  were married to men and participated in affairs with women regularly; bisexuality was more widely accepted than lesbianism . 
male intervention into relationships between women was necessary only when women acted as men and demanded the same social privileges . 
lack of differentiation between homosexual and heterosexual women in medical studies that concentrate on health issues for women skews results for lesbians and non-lesbian women . 
the most masculine women were not necessarily common ,  though they were visible so they tended to attract women interested in finding other lesbians . 
the sexual revolution in the 1970s introduced the differentiation between identity and sexual behavior for women . 
butch women were not a novelty in the 1950s; even in harlem and greenwich village in the 1920s some women assumed these personae . 
other women ,  however ,  embraced the distinction and used their uniqueness to set themselves apart from heterosexual women and gay men . 
women in ancient rome were similarly subject to men's definitions of sexuality . 
a lesbian is a homosexual woman . 
aristophanes ,  in plato's `` symposium '' ,  mentions women who love women ,  but uses the term `` trepesthai ''  -lrb-  to be focused on  -rrb-  instead of `` eros '' ,  which was applied to other erotic relationships between men ,  and between men and women . 
 ''invert '' described the opposite gender roles ,  and also the related attraction to women instead of men; since women in the victorian period were considered unable to initiate sexual encounters ,  women who did so with other women were thought of as possessing masculine sexual desires . 
china before westernization was another society that segregated men from women . 
the concept of `` lesbian '' to differentiate women with a shared sexual orientation evolved in the 20th century . 
the presence of sexual activity between women as necessary to define a lesbian or a relationship continues to be debated . 
however ,  postwar masculinization of women's clothing became associated with lesbians . 
gradually ,  women began to author their own thoughts and literary works about lesbian relationships . 
independent women in the 1930s were generally seen as holding jobs that men should have . 
women who had the option of a career instead of marriage labeled themselves new women ,  and took their new opportunities very seriously . 
lesbians portrayed in literature ,  film ,  and television often shape contemporary thought about women's sexuality . 
portrayals of lesbians in the media suggest that society at large has been simultaneously intrigued and threatened by women who challenge feminine gender roles ,  and fascinated and appalled with women who are romantically involved with other women . 
further arguments attested that the study was flawed and misrepresented accurate sexual contact between women ,  or sexual contact between women has increased since 1983 as many lesbians find themselves freer to sexually express themselves . 
the caliphal court in baghdad featured women who dressed as men ,  including false facial hair ,  but they competed with other women for the attentions of men . 
researchers ,  including social scientists ,  state that often behavior and identity do not match: women may label themselves heterosexual but have sexual relations with women ,  self-identified lesbians may have sex with men ,  or women may find that what they considered an immutable sexual identity has changed over time . 
women who identify as lesbian report feeling significantly different and isolated during adolescence . 
outside their duties to bear sons to their husbands ,  women were perceived as having no sexuality at all . 
once again ,  women felt safer claiming to be more sexually adventurous ,  and sexual flexibility became more accepted . 
ideas about women's sexuality were linked to contemporary understanding of female physiology . 
outside europe ,  women were able to dress as men and go undetected . 
between 1992 and 1994, `` mademoiselle '' ,  `` vogue '' ,  `` cosmopolitan '' ,  `` glamour '' ,  `` newsweek '' ,  and `` new york '' magazines featured stories about women who admitted sexual histories with other women . 
some historians view cases of cross-dressing women to be manifestations of women seizing power they would naturally be unable to enjoy in feminine attire ,  or their way of making sense out of their desire for women . 
most of the women who reported homosexual activity had not experienced it more than ten times . 
ellis believed that many women who professed love for other women changed their feelings about such relationships after they had experienced marriage and a `` practical life '' . 
respondents to hite's questions indicated that 8% preferred sex with women and 9% answered that they identified as bisexual or had sexual experiences with men and women ,  though they refused to indicate preference . 
many lesbian communities are centered in bars ,  and drinking is an activity that correlates to community participation for lesbians and bisexual women . 
many women's groups in the middle east and southwest asia suspect that more than 20,000 women are victims of honor killings in the world each year . 
the highest rate of transmission of hiv to lesbians is among women who participate in intravenous drug use or have sexual intercourse with bisexual men . 
more discussion on gender and sexual orientation identity has affected how many women label or view themselves . 
cross-gender roles and marriage between women has also been recorded in over 30 african societies . 
in the ideal society ,  named lesbian nation ,  `` woman '' and `` lesbian '' were interchangeable . 
bacterial vaginosis  -lrb-  bv  -rrb-  occurs more often in lesbians ,  but it is unclear if bv is transmitted by sexual contact; it occurs in celibate as well as sexually active women . 
women also limit who they divulge their sexual identities to ,  and more often see being lesbian as a choice ,  as opposed to gay men ,  who work more externally and see being gay as outside their control . 
the liberty of being employed in silk factories starting in 1865 allowed some women to style themselves `` tzu-shu nii ''  -lrb-  never to marry  -rrb-  and live in communes with other women . 
despite common attitudes regarding women's traditional roles in the 1930s ,  independent and masculine women were directly recruited by the military in the 1940s ,  and frailty discouraged . 
anxiety disorders and depression are the most common mental health issues for women . 
however ,  polls in australia have recorded a range of self-identified lesbian or bisexual women from 1.3% to 2.2% of the total population . 
although the authors of `` islamic homosexualities '' argued this did not mean women could not engage in lesbian relationships ,  a lesbian anthropologist in 1991 visited yemen and reported that women in the town she visited were unable to comprehend her romantic relationship to another woman . 
butch and femme modes of socialization were so integral within lesbian bars that women who refused to choose between the two would be ignored ,  or at least unable to date anyone ,  and butch women becoming romantically involved with other butch women or femmes with other femmes was unacceptable . 
the word `` lesbian '' is also used for women in relation to their sexual identity or sexual behavior regardless of sexual orientation ,  or as an adjective to characterize or associate nouns with female homosexuality or same-sex attraction . 
in categorizing behavior that indicated what was referred to as `` inversion '' by german sexologist magnus hirschfeld ,  researchers categorized what was normal sexual behavior for men and women ,  and therefore to what extent men and women varied from the `` perfect male sexual type '' and the `` perfect female sexual type '' . 
in modern greek the name of the letter ,  λάμδα ,  is pronounced  . 
in early greek alphabets ,  the shape and orientation of lambda varied . 
the remaining `` leucas '' is paraphyletic over four other genera . 
the circumscription of several genera has changed since 2004.
kew gardens provides a list of genera that includes additional information . 
in 2004, the lamiaceae were divided into seven subfamilies with 10 genera not placed in any of the subfamilies . 
the wide shot has been used since films have been made as it is a very basic type of cinematography . 
many directors are known for their use of the variety of wide shots . 
there are a variety of ways of framing that are considered as being wide shots; these include:
however ,  due to sheer distance ,  establishing shots and extremely wide shots can use almost any camera type . 
in the 1939 film `` the wizard of oz '' ,  a very wide shot is used that keeps all the protagonists on screen with the wizard's palace in clear view . 
most modern films will frequently use the different types of wide shots as they are a staple in filmmaking and are almost impossible to avoid unless deliberately chosen to . 
in mathematics ,  the logarithm is the inverse function to exponentiation . 
