what you are is a reform rabbi . `` 
sexual liaisons between women are ,  however ,  viewed as forbidden by orthodox rabbis . 
tendler said that rabbi greenberg's announcement is `` the exact same as if he said ,  'i'm an orthodox rabbi ,  and i eat ham sandwiches on yom kippur . '
while a variety of views regarding homosexuality as an inclination or status exist within the orthodox jewish community ,  orthodox judaism generally prohibits homosexual conduct . 
in fact ,  there is no account of capital punishment ,  in regards to this law ,  in jewish history . 
orthodox israeli rabbi ron yosef became in 2009 the first israeli orthodox rabbi to come out ,  by appearing in uvda  -lrb-  `` fact ''  -rrb-  ,  israel's leading investigative television program ,  in an episode regarding conversion therapies in israel . 
the subject of homosexual behavior and judaism dates back to the torah . 
rabbi norman lamm  -lrb-  the chancellor ,  `` rosh yeshiva '' `` head of the yeshiva '' ,  and former president of yeshiva university ,  a major modern orthodox jewish institution  -rrb-  advocated that some  -lrb-  although not all  -rrb-  homosexuals should be viewed as diseased and in need of compassion and treatment ,  rather than willful rebels who should be ostracized . 
logical positivism also figured in dewey's thought . 
in 1919, dewey and his wife traveled to japan on sabbatical leave . 
dewey sees paradox in contemporary logical theory . 
dewey was elected president of the american psychological association in 1899.
in a later letter to his wife ,  dewey confessed that addams' argument was:
john dewey was born in burlington ,  vermont to a family of modest means . 
yet dewey was not entirely opposed to modern logical trends . 
in august 1934, dewey accepted an honorary degree from the university of the witwatersrand . 
in `` psychology '' ,  dewey attempted a synthesis between idealism and experimental science . 
dewey studied privately with torrey between his graduation from vermont and his enrollment at johns hopkins university . 
dewey married to alice chipman in 1886 shortly after chipman graduated with her phb from the university of michigan . 
the intermediate size and shape of the ethiopian wolf has at times led it to be regarded as a jackal ,  thus it has also been called the `` red jackal '' or the `` simien jackal '' . 
jackals are crepuscular ,  most active at dawn and dusk . 
the paraphyletic nature of `` canis '' with respect to `` lycaon '' and `` cuon '' has led to suggestions that the two african jackals should be assigned to different genera ,  `` schaeffia '' for the side-striped jackal and `` lupulella '' for the black-backed jackal or `` lupulella '' for both . 
while the word `` jackal '' has historically been used for many small canids ,  in modern use it most commonly refers to three species: the closely related black-backed jackal and side-striped jackal of sub-saharan africa ,  and the golden jackal of south-central eurasia ,  which is more closely related to other members of the genus `` canis '' . 
jumping the broom  -lrb-  or jumping the besom  -rrb-  is a phrase and custom relating to a wedding ceremony where the couple jumps over a broom . 
in wales ,  romani couples would get married by eloping ,  when they would `` jump the broom , ``  or jump over a branch of flowering common broom or a besom made of broom . 
jumping the broom fell out of practice when blacks were free to marry legally . 
danita rountree green describes the african american custom as it stood in the early 1990s in her book `` broom jumping: a celebration of love ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- . 
via its association with wales and the popular association of the broom with witches ,  the custom has also been adopted by some wiccans . 
there have also been suggestions that the expression may derive from an actual custom of jumping over a `` broomstick ''  -lrb-  where `` broom '' refers to the plant `` common broom '' rather than the household implement  -rrb-  associated with the romani people of the united kingdom ,  especially those in wales . 
in the 2016 film `` the birth of a nation '' ,  a couple getting betrothed is seen jumping a broom . 
other sources have stepping over a broom as a test of chastity ,  while putting out a broom was also said to be a sign `` that the housewife’s place is vacant '' and a way ,  therefore ,  of advertising for a wife . 
it has often been assumed that ,  in england ,  jumping over the broom  -lrb-  or sometimes walking over a broom  -rrb-  ,  always indicated an irregular or non-church union  -lrb-  as in the expressions `` married over the besom '' ,  `` living over the brush ''  -rrb-  ,  but there are examples of the phrase being used in the context of legal weddings ,  both religious and civil . 
robinson had what was an average year for him in 1952.
robinson portrayed himself in the 1950 motion picture `` the jackie robinson story '' . 
robinson did not long outlive his son . 
robinson had an exceptional 10-year mlb career . 
robinson was also derided by opposing teams . 
42 was in 1997, but sharon robinson maintained the position that such an honor should remain in place for jackie robinson only . 
a number of buildings have been named in robinson's honor . 
after robinson's death ,  his widow founded the jackie robinson foundation ,  and she remains an officer as of 2018.
robinson has also been recognized outside of baseball . 
that year ,  a song about robinson by buddy johnson ,  `` did you see jackie robinson hit that ball ? 
after robinson's retirement from baseball ,  his wife rachel robinson pursued a career in academic nursing . 
robinson was inducted into the baseball hall of fame in 1962.
robinson was also the subject of a 2016 pbs documentary ,  `` jackie robinson '' ,  which was directed by ken burns and features jamie foxx doing voice-over as robinson . 
summer 1949 brought an unwanted distraction for robinson . 
in 1970, robinson established the jackie robinson construction company to build housing for low-income families . 
an event on july 6, 1944 derailed robinson's military career . 
during the season ,  robinson pursued potential major league interests . 
robinson's presence was controversial in racially charged florida . 
the city of pasadena has recognized robinson in several ways . 
robinson was active in politics throughout his post-baseball life . 
shortly afterward ,  robinson and isum were formally engaged . 
in 1954, robinson had 62 runs scored ,  a  . 311 batting average ,  and 7 steals . 
in 1956, robinson had 61 runs scored ,  a  . 275 batting average ,  and 12 steals . 
although he required robinson to keep the arrangement a secret for the time being ,  rickey committed to formally signing robinson before november 1, 1945.
before the 1951 season ,  o'malley reportedly offered robinson the job of manager of the montreal royals ,  effective at the end of robinson's playing career . 
after robinson's father left the family in 1920, they moved to pasadena ,  california . 
in track and field ,  robinson won the 1940 ncaa championship in the long jump at  . 
at dodger stadium in los angeles ,  a statue of robinson was introduced in 2017.
robinson's eldest son ,  jackie robinson jr .  ,  had emotional trouble during his childhood and entered special education at an early age . 
in 1947, the dodgers called robinson up to the major leagues six days before the start of the season . 
robinson was born on january 31, 1919, into a family of sharecroppers in cairo ,  georgia . 
jng was created as an adjunct to the mng animation format ,  but may be used as a stand-alone format . 
however ,  a jng may contain two separate jpeg datastreams for color information  -lrb-  one 8-bit and one 12-bit  -rrb-  to permit decoders that are unable to  -lrb-  or do not wish to  -rrb-  handle 12-bit datastreams to display the 8-bit datastream instead ,  if one is present . 
shore's two other lovers were edward iv's eldest stepson ,  thomas grey ,  1st marquess of dorset ,  and william hastings ,  1st baron hastings . 
elizabeth `` jane '' shore  -lrb-  `` née '' lambert  -rrb-   -lrb-  c . 1445 – c . 1527 -rrb- was one of the many mistresses of king edward iv of england ,  one of three whom he described as `` the merriest ,  the wiliest ,  and the holiest harlots '' in his realm . 
after her public penitence ,  shore resided in ludgate prison . 
according to the patent rolls for 4 december 1476, it was during this same year that shore began her liaison with edward iv ,  after his return from france . 
kemp had a reputation as the highest-profile progressive republican . 
during the campaign ,  kemp's endorsement was highly coveted . 
they also had two daughters: jennifer kemp andrews  -lrb-  born in 1961 -rrb- and judith kemp  -lrb-  born in 1963 -rrb- . 
the bills went 1–12–1 without kemp . 
kemp's political career began long before his 1970 campaign . 
kemp was considered the star of the 1992 republican national convention . 
before entering politics ,  kemp was a professional quarterback for 13 years . 
by 1996, kemp had been named a director of six corporate boards . 
kemp delivered speeches at several republican national conventions . 
according to billy shaw ,  kemp's acquisition solved the bills' quarterback problem ,  but kemp was not excited about coming to buffalo . 
kemp had previously contended for the presidential nomination in the 1988 republican primaries . 
kemp did not expect to be retained if the republicans were reelected in 1992, and some pundits agreed with him . 
in 1960, kemp led the chargers to a western division championship with a 10–4 record . 
they had two sons ,  who were both professional football quarterbacks: jeff kemp  -lrb-  born in 1959 -rrb- played in the nfl from 1981 to 1991, and jimmy kemp  -lrb-  born in 1971 -rrb- played in the cfl from 1994 to 2002.
injuries ,  including the broken finger ,  kept kemp from playing for most of 1962.
kemp signed as a free agent with the afl's los angeles chargers . 
kemp was also outspoken on immigration on around this time: according to kemp's interpretation of a scientific index that he and bennett support ,  `` immigrants are a blessing ,  not a curse . `` 
kemp was the founder and chairman of kemp partners ,  a strategic consulting firm that helps clients achieve both business and public policy goals . 
kemp at times felt his role was that of `` freewheeling ,  entrepreneurial ,  wildcatting backbencher . `` 
joanne kemp once suffered a miscarriage ,  which kemp later said made him re-evaluate the sanctity of human life and affirmed his opposition to abortion . 
in april 2008, kemp had announced plans to establish the jack f .  kemp institute of political economy at pepperdine university's school of public policy . 
in 1962, kemp broke his middle finger two games into the season and was unable to play . 
kemp was said to be the `` clubhouse lawyer '' for the bills because of his role in mediating conflicts . 
kemp was a critic of association football ,  known as soccer in the united states . 
kemp also won the associated press award and the championship game most valuable player award . 
the 1967 bills endured a 4–10 1967 afl season ,  in which kemp was not named to the all-star game for the first time in his afl career . 
jack kemp was a 33rd degree freemason in the northern masonic jurisdiction . 
in addition ,  kemp and phil gramm advised mccain on economic policy . 
after bush won and kemp left congress for the cabinet ,  the two did not really cross paths again until 1996, when kemp endorsed dole's opponent forbes on the eve of the new york primary in march . 
senate majority leader dole and gingrich appointed kemp to head a tax reform commission ,   -lrb-  the kemp commission  -rrb-  ,  in response to voter concern that the tax code had become too complicated . 
jihad is classified into inner  -lrb-  `` greater ''  -rrb-  jihad ,  which involves a struggle against one's own base impulses ,  and external  -lrb-  `` lesser ''  -rrb-  jihad ,  which is further subdivided into `` jihad of the pen/tongue ''  -lrb-  debate or persuasion  -rrb-  and `` jihad of the sword '' . 
of the 199 references to jihad in perhaps the most standard collection of hadith—bukhari—all assume that jihad means warfare . 
as important as jihad was ,  it was/is not considered one of the `` pillars of islam '' . 
wars against western colonial forces were often declared to be jihad: the senussi religious order declared jihad against italian rule of libya in 1912, and the `` mahdi '' in the sudan declared jihad against both the british and the egyptians in 1881.
 ''from an early date muslim law laid down '' jihad in the military sense as `` one of the principal obligations '' of both `` the head of the muslim state '' ,  who declared the jihad ,  and the muslim community . 
it has also been reported that muhammad considered well-performing hajj to be the best jihad for muslim women . 
although some islamic scholars have differed on the implementation of jihad ,  there is consensus amongst them that the concept of jihad will always include armed struggle against persecution and oppression . 
the term `` jihad '' is often rendered in english as `` holy war '' ,  although this translation is controversial . 
according to another hadith ,  supporting one's parents is also an example of jihad . 
in 2010 a radical american publication ,  `` jacobin '' ,  was founded . 
a jacobin  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a member of the jacobin club ,  a revolutionary political movement that was the most famous political club during the french revolution  -lrb-  1789–99 -rrb- . 
the english who supported the french revolution during its early stages  -lrb-  or even throughout  -rrb-  were early known as `` jacobins '' . 
early federalist-leaning american newspapers during the french revolution referred to the democratic-republican party as the `` jacobin party '' . 
he had three sons ,  and the eldest ,  johann ludwig krebs ,  became a well-known composer . 
cannon wielded the office of speaker with unprecedented power . 
cannon also has the distinction of being the subject of the first `` time '' cover ever ,  dated march 3, 1923.
cannon was defeated in 1912 but returned in 1914 and was re-elected each congressional election until 1920.
in 1876 cannon moved to danville ,  illinois ,  where he resided for the rest of his life . 
as such ,  cannon effectively controlled every aspect of the house's agenda: bills reached the floor of the house only if cannon approved of them ,  and then in whatever form he determined — with cannon himself deciding whether and to what extent the measures could be debated and amended . 
cannon is also the longest serving republican representative ever ,  as well as first member of congress ,  of either party ,  ever to surpass 40 years of service  -lrb-  non-consecutive  -rrb-  . 
cannon's congressional career spanned 46 years of cumulative service—a record that was not broken until 1959.
both candidates believed that the states of new york ,  new jersey ,  indiana ,  and connecticut would determine the election . 
blaine's career as a republican newspaperman led naturally to involvement in republican party politics . 
the new government petitioned the united states for annexation ,  but by that time blaine was no longer in office . 
logan was named vice presidential nominee on the first ballot ,  and the republicans had their ticket . 
harrison defeated cleveland in a close election ,  and offered blaine his former position as secretary of state . 
as the state conventions drew nearer ,  blaine announced that he would not be a candidate . 
blaine began the year 1882 without a political office for the first time since 1859.
as secretary of state ,  blaine was a transitional figure ,  marking the end of an isolationist era in foreign policy and foreshadowing the rise of the american century that would begin with the spanish–american war . 
the 1874 house elections produced a democratic majority for the 44th congress ,  and blaine's time as speaker was at an end . 
the democrats held their convention in chicago the following month and nominated governor grover cleveland of new york . 
to counter cleveland's image of superior morality ,  republicans discovered reports that cleveland had fathered an illegitimate child while he was a lawyer in buffalo ,  new york ,  and chanted `` ma ,  ma ,  where's my pa ? 
opinion swiftly turned against blaine; the june 3 `` the new york times '' carried the headline `` blaine's nomination now out of the question . `` 
but other republicans were exposed by the accusations ,  including vice president colfax ,  who was dropped from the ticket at the 1872 republican national convention . 
blaine had always believed his health to be fragile ,  and by the time he joined harrison's cabinet he truly was unwell . 
republicans remained in control of the house in the 42nd and 43rd congresses ,  and blaine was reelected as speaker at the start of both of them ,  for a total term of six years in the speaker's chair . 
he had initially opposed a reciprocity treaty with canada that would have reduced tariffs between the two nations ,  but by the end of his time in the senate ,  he had changed his mind ,  believing that americans had more to gain by increasing exports than they would lose by the risk of cheap imports . 
harrison had developed his foreign policy based largely on blaine's ideas ,  and at the start of his term ,  harrison and blaine had very similar views on the united states' place in the world . 
his time in the senate allowed blaine to develop his foreign policy ideas . 
harrison was renominated on the first ballot ,  but die-hard blaine delegates still gave their champion 182 and 1/6 votes ,  good enough for second place . 
running on a campaign of staunch support for the war effort ,  blaine was elected with an ample majority despite republican losses across the rest of the country . 
under the congressional calendar of the 1860s ,  members of the 38th united states congress ,  elected in november 1862, did not begin their work until december 1863; by the time blaine finally took his seat that month ,  the union had turned the tide in the war with victories at gettysburg and vicksburg . 
justinian i  -lrb-  ; ; ; 482 14 november 565 -rrb- ,  traditionally known as justinian the great and also saint justinian the great in the eastern orthodox church ,  was the eastern roman emperor from 527 to 565.
imprisoned ,  the deposed king appealed to justinian . 
justinian was born in tauresium ,  dardania ,  around 482.
justinian and members of his court ,  were physically unaffected by the previous 535-536 famine ,  they were affected by what was called plague of justinian ,  with justinian himself contracting ,  but surviving the pestilence . 
procopius provides the primary source for the history of justinian's reign . 
 ''the glittering horn: secret memoirs of the court of justinian '' was a novel written by pierson dixon in 1958 about the court of justinian . 
the first of the western kingdoms justinian attacked was that of the vandals in north africa . 
justinian had the city rebuilt ,  but on a slightly smaller scale . 
early in his reign ,  justinian appointed the `` quaestor '' tribonian to oversee this task . 
when emperor anastasius died in 518, justin was proclaimed the new emperor ,  with significant help from justinian . 
justinian's ambition to restore the roman empire to its former glory was only partly realized . 
from his uncle ,  justinian inherited ongoing hostilities with the sassanid empire . 
on theodora's insistence ,  and apparently against his own judgment ,  justinian had anastasius' nephews executed . 
he forced justinian i to pay him 5,000 pounds of gold ,  plus 500 pounds of gold more each year . 
because of his restoration activities ,  justinian has sometimes been known as the `` last roman '' in mid 20th century historiography . 
other schools in constantinople ,  antioch ,  and alexandria ,  which were the centers of justinian's empire ,  continued . 
justinian is widely regarded as a saint by orthodox christians ,  and is also commemorated by some lutheran churches on 14 november . 
justinian also tried to find new routes for the eastern trade ,  which was suffering badly from the wars with the persians . 
justinian's habit of choosing efficient ,  but unpopular advisers nearly cost him his throne early in his reign . 
despite justinian's passion for the glorious roman past ,  the practice of choosing consuls was allowed to lapse after 541.
justinian was a prolific builder; the historian procopius bears witness to his activities in this area . 
during justinian's reign ,  the balkans suffered from several incursions by the turkic and slavic peoples who lived north of the danube . 
martyn's last concerts were in november 2008 reprising grace and danger . 
in 1977, he released `` one world '' ,  which led some commentators to describe martyn as the `` father of trip-hop '' . 
in the late 1980s martyn cited `` grace and danger '' as his favourite album ,  and said that it was `` probably the most specific piece of autobiography i've written . 
to mark martyn's 60th birthday ,  island released a 4cd boxed set ,  `` ain't no saint '' on 1 september 2008.
in 1973, martyn released one of the defining british albums of the 1970s ,  `` solid air '' ,  the title song a tribute to the singer-songwriter nick drake ,  a close friend and label-mate who died in 1974 from an overdose of antidepressants . 
in 2001, martyn appeared on the track `` deliver me '' by faithless keyboard player and dj sister bliss . 
in 1626, milton's tutor was nathaniel tovey . 
john milton was born in bread street ,  london on 9 december 1608, the son of composer john milton and his wife sarah jeffrey . 
in 1625, milton began attending christ's college ,  cambridge . 
at cambridge ,  milton was on good terms with edward king ,  for whom he later wrote `` lycidas '' . 
milton may have been rusticated  -lrb-  suspended  -rrb-  in his first year for quarrelling with his tutor ,  bishop william chappell . 
on 24 february 1652, milton published his latin defence of the english people `` defensio pro populo anglicano '' ,  also known as the `` first defence '' . 
milton's first datable compositions are two psalms done at age 15 at long bennington . 
in may 1638, milton embarked upon a tour of france and italy that lasted until july or august 1639.
the phases of milton's life parallel the major historical and political divisions in stuart britain . 
upon the restoration in may 1660, milton went into hiding for his life ,  while a warrant was issued for his arrest and his writings were burnt . 
milton's views developed from his very extensive reading ,  as well as travel and experience ,  from his student days of the 1620s to the english civil war . 
john milton  -lrb-  9 december 16088 november 1674 -rrb- was an english poet ,  polemicist ,  man of letters ,  and civil servant for the commonwealth of england under its council of state and later under oliver cromwell . 
milton died of kidney failure on 8 november 1674 and was buried in the church of st giles-without-cripplegate ,  fore street ,  london . 
from 1965 to 1970 he filmed two propaganda films about north vietnam during the war: he made ``  '' ``  -lrb-  17th parallel: vietnam in war  -rrb- ``  and he participated in the collective work `` loin du vietnam ''  -lrb-  `` far from vietnam ''  -rrb-  . 
in 1943, he also directed two allied propaganda films for the national film board of canada ,  including `` action stations '' ,  about the royal canadian navy's escorting of convoys in the battle of the atlantic . 
in fact ,  walter wanger ,  the film's producer ,  was adamant about `` running him {ivens} out of town {hollywood} . `` 
in 1988 ivens received the golden lion honorary award at the venice film festival . 
originally his work focused on technique ,  especially in `` rain ''  -lrb-  `` regen '' ,  1929 -rrb- ,  a 10-minute short filmed over 2 years ,  and in `` the bridge ''  -lrb-  `` de brug '' ,  1928 -rrb- . 
the jaguar also has an effect on other predators . 
the jaguar is a compact and well-muscled animal . 
the jaguar stands tall at the shoulders . 
the jaguar is the only extant new world member of the genus `` panthera '' . 
fossils of extinct `` panthera '' species ,  such as the european jaguar  -lrb-  `` panthera gombaszoegensis ''  -rrb-  and the american lion  -lrb-  `` panthera atrox ''  -rrb-  ,  show characteristics of both the lion and the jaguar . 
depending on the availability of prey ,  the cougar and jaguar may even share it . 
the jaguars preferred habitats are usually swamps and wooded regions ,  but jaguars also live in scrublands and deserts . 
the jaguar  -lrb-  `` panthera onca ''  -rrb-  is a wild cat species and the only extant member of the genus `` panthera '' native to the americas . 
at present ,  the jaguar's range extends from mexico through central america to south america ,  including much of amazonian brazil . 
south american jaguars in venezuela or brazil are much larger with average weights of about in males and of about in females . 
overall ,  the jaguar is the largest native cat species of the new world and the third largest in the world . 
jaguars also have rounder heads and shorter ,  stockier limbs compared to leopards . 
the word 'jaguar' is thought to derive from the tupian word `` yaguara '' ,  meaning `` beast of prey '' . 
in may 1978, dahmer graduated from high school . 
although fosdel did state his belief that dahmer suffered from paraphilia ,  his conclusion was that dahmer was not a sadist . 
the trial of jeffrey dahmer began on january 30, 1992.
it has been claimed that dahmer was deprived of attention as an infant . 
when he reached puberty ,  dahmer discovered he was homosexual . 
jeffrey dahmer is known to have killed 17 young men between 1978 and 1991.
on july 25, 1991, dahmer was charged with four counts of murder . 
scarver alleges that immediately before murdering dahmer ,  he had cornered him ,  presented a newspaper article detailing dahmer's crimes ,  and demanded that dahmer answer whether the account was true . 
the dahmer family relocated to doylestown ,  ohio ,  in october 1966.
from an early age ,  dahmer manifested an interest in animals . 
the prosecution rejected the defense's argument that dahmer was insane . 
lionel dahmer is retired and now lives with his second wife ,  shari . 
dahmer's estate was awarded to the families of 11 of his victims who had sued for damages . 
dahmer had stated in his will he wished for no services to be conducted and that he wished to be cremated . 
dahmer was not charged with the attempted murder of tracy edwards ,  nor with the murder of steven tuomi . 
in september 1995, dahmer's body was cremated ,  and his ashes divided between his parents . 
three days later ,  dahmer was charged by authorities in ohio with the murder of steven hicks . 
although initially on amicable grounds ,  both of dahmer's parents began to quarrel frequently in the presence of their sons and ,  in early 1978, lionel dahmer moved out of the house . 
dahmer committed his first murder in the summer of 1978 at the age of 18, just three weeks after his graduation . 
two months before his scheduled release from the work camp ,  dahmer was paroled from this regime . 
on july 15, dahmer encountered 24-year-old oliver lacy at the corner of 27th and kilbourn . 
upon sentencing ,  dahmer was transferred to the columbia correctional institution in portage ,  wisconsin . 
for a total of two weeks following tuomi's murder ,  dahmer retained the victim's head wrapped in a blanket . 
in june 1990, dahmer lured a 27-year-old acquaintance named edward smith to his apartment . 
two months after his conviction and two months prior to his sentencing for the sexual assault ,  dahmer murdered his fifth victim . 
on april 23, dahmer lured another young man to his house; however ,  after giving the victim a drugged coffee ,  both he and the victim heard dahmer's grandmother call ,  `` is that you ,  jeff ? `` 
the oxford apartments at 924 north 25th street ,  where dahmer had killed 12 of his victims ,  were demolished in november 1992.
when edwards rose from the couch ,  he noted dahmer was not holding the handcuffs ,  whereupon edwards punched him in the face ,  knocking dahmer off balance ,  and ran out the front door . 
eventually ,  the skull was rendered too brittle by this bleaching process ,  so dahmer pulverized and disposed of it . 
on the morning of november 28, 1994, dahmer left his cell to conduct his assigned work detail . 
on at least three occasions ,  this proved fatal although on none of these occasions was this dahmer's intention . 
joseph cotten was born in 1905 in petersburg ,  virginia ,  the first of three sons born to joseph cheshire cotten ,  sr .  ,  an assistant postmaster ,  and sally willson cotten . 
cotten made his broadway debut in 1932 in `` absent friends '' which ran for 88 performances . 
joseph cheshire cotten jr .   -lrb-  may 15, 1905 – february 6, 1994 -rrb- was an american film ,  stage ,  radio and television actor . 
god then commands the fish to vomit jonah out . 
in the new testament ,  jonah is mentioned in and and in  . 
he concludes that `` the whale shark is not the fish that swallowed jonah . `` 
jonah  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the title of the tenth chapter of the quran . 
while the book of jonah itself is considered fiction ,  jonah himself may have been a historical prophet; he is briefly mentioned in the second book of kings:
surah 37:139-148 retells the full story of jonah:
when jonah complains of the bitter heat ,  god rebukes him . 
god again commands jonah to travel to nineveh and prophesy to its inhabitants . 
jonah is also mentioned in a few incidents during the lifetime of muhammad . 
the views expressed by jonah in the book of jonah are a parody of views held by members of jewish society at the time when it was written . 
jesus says that the sign will be the sign of jonah: jonah's restoration after three days inside the great fish prefigures his own resurrection . 
jonah is regarded as a saint by a number of christian denominations . 
the quran never mentions jonah's father ,  but muslim tradition teaches that jonah was from the tribe of benjamin and that his father was amittai . 
most scholars believe that the anonymous author of the book of jonah may have seized upon this obscure prophet from 2 kings and used him as the basis for the fictional character of jonah ,  but some have contended that the figure of jonah himself is entirely legendary . 
in turkish ,  `` jonah fish ''  -lrb-  in turkish `` yunus baligi ''  -rrb-  is the term used for dolphins . 
it is difficult to determine what part of the 'jacquard' machine was designed by jacquard himself . 
the term `` jacquard loom '' is somewhat inaccurate . 
the threading of a jacquard loom is so labor-intensive that many looms are threaded only once . 
the jacquard machine subsequently evolved from this . 
both the jacquard process and the necessary loom attachment are named after their inventor . 
modern jacquard looms are controlled by computers in place of the original punched cards ,  and can have thousands of hooks . 
the jacquard head used replaceable punched cards to control a sequence of operations . 
linen products associated with jacquard weaving are linen damask napery ,  jacquard apparel fabrics and damask bed linen . 
a junit test fixture is a java object . 
junit is a unit testing framework for the java programming language . 
kern was one of the founding members of ascap . 
in 1905, kern contributed the song `` how'd you like to spoon with me ? `` 
kern and his wife ,  eva ,  often vacationed on their yacht `` show boat '' . 
in his last hollywood musicals ,  kern worked with several new and distinguished partners . 
kern's first complete score was broadway's `` the red petticoat ''  -lrb-  1912 -rrb- ,  one of the first musical-comedy westerns . 
while most kern musicals have largely been forgotten ,  except for their songs ,  `` show boat '' remains well-remembered and frequently seen . 
in 1929 kern made his first trip to hollywood to supervise the 1929 film version of `` sally '' ,  one of the first `` all-talking '' technicolor films . 
kern's last broadway show  -lrb-  other than revivals  -rrb-  was `` very warm for may ''  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- ,  another show-biz story and another disappointment ,  although the score included the kern and hammerstein classic `` all the things you are '' . 
a native new yorker ,  kern created dozens of broadway musicals and hollywood films in a career that lasted for more than four decades . 
kern is interred at ferncliff cemetery in westchester county ,  new york . 
kern's second and last symphonic work was his 'mark twain suite ''  -lrb-  1942 -rrb- . 
henson remained at wrc from 1954 to 1961.
the collection contains the film work of jim henson and the jim henson company . 
the jim henson company and the jim henson foundation continued after his death ,  producing new series and specials . 
he founded muppets ,  inc .  ,  in 1958, which became the jim henson company . 
in 2010, it was announced that the first major biography of henson ,  sanctioned by the family and the jim henson legacy ,  was to be published . 
henson began developing puppets while attending high school . 
the script remained in the henson company archives until the screenplay was adapted in the 2012 graphic novel `` jim henson's tale of sand '' . 
on may 4, 1990, henson appeared with kermit on `` the arsenio hall show '' ,  for what turned out to be his last television appearance . 
henson blamed its failure on nbc's constant rescheduling . 
in addition to his own puppetry projects ,  henson aided others in their work . 
he won the emmy award twice for his involvement in `` the storyteller '' and `` the jim henson hour '' . 
at first ,  henson's muppets appeared separately from the realistic segments on the street ,  but after a poor test-screening in philadelphia ,  the show was revamped to integrate the two ,  placing much greater emphasis on henson's work . 
the moving image collection of jim henson is held at the academy film archive . 
in 1963, henson and his wife moved to new york city ,  where the newly formed muppets ,  inc .  ,  would reside for some time . 
all five of his children began working with muppets at an early age ,  partly because ,  as cheryl henson remembered ,  `` one of the best ways of being around him was to work with him . `` 
a hat switch is a control on some joysticks . 
for example ,  the lunar lander test models were controlled with a joystick . 
in many modern airliners aircraft ,  for example all airbus aircraft developed from the 1980s ,  the joystick has received a new lease on life for flight control in the form of a `` side-stick '' ,  a controller similar to a gaming joystick but which is used to control the flight ,  replacing the traditional yoke . 
by midway games . 
virpil controls' mongoost-50 joystick was designed to mimic the style of russian aircraft  -lrb-  including the sukhoi su-35 and sukhoi su-57 -rrb- ,  unlike most flight joysticks . 
it often has supplementary switches to control various aspects of the aircraft's flight . 
joysticks are often used to control video games ,  and usually have one or more push-buttons whose state can also be read by the computer . 
the germans developed an electrical two-axis joystick around 1944.
most of the town of san juan bautista on robinson crusoe island was destroyed . 
the islands are named after juan fernandez ,  the explorer who discovered them in the 1570s . 
the juan fernández islands  -lrb-    -rrb-  are a sparsely inhabited island group reliant on tourism and fishing in the south pacific ocean . 
alejandro selkirk is the largest of the juan fernández islands at  ,  and its highest peak ,  cerro de los inocentes ,  is also the highest point of the archipelago at  . 
the islands are volcanic in origin ,  produced by the movement of the nazca plate over the juan fernández hotspot . 
the magellanic penguin breeds on robinson crusoe island within the archipelago . 
most of the archipelago's present-day inhabitants reside on robinson crusoe island ,  and mainly in the capital ,  san juan bautista ,  located at cumberland bay on the island's north coast . 
the juan fernández islands are home to a high percentage of rare and endemic plants and animals ,  and are recognized as a distinct ecoregion . 
john maynard smith  -lrb-  6 january 1920 – 19 april 2004 -rrb- was a british theoretical and mathematical evolutionary biologist and geneticist . 
john maynard smith was born in london ,  the son of the surgeon sidney maynard smith ,  but following his father's death in 1928, the family moved to exmoor ,  where he became interested in natural history . 
prior to his death the building housing much of life sciences at sussex was renamed the john maynard smith building ,  in his honour . 
maynard smith published a book entitled `` the evolution of sex '' which explored in mathematical terms ,  the notion of the `` two-fold cost of sex '' . 
in his honour ,  the european society for evolutionary biology has an award for extraordinary young evolutionary biology researchers named `` the john maynard smith prize '' . 
danforth was narrowly re-elected in 1982.
danforth is an ordained episcopal priest . 
danforth was defeated in a close race . 
danforth was elected in 1968 at the age of 32 to be missouri attorney general . 
danforth was born in st .  louis ,  missouri ,  the son of dorothy  -lrb-  claggett  -rrb-  and donald danforth . 
in 1976 danforth ran to succeed symington ,  who was retiring . 
in 1988, danforth was vetted by the campaign of george h . w . 
danforth's brother ,  dr .  william henry danforth ,  is former chancellor of washington university in st .  louis . 
jordanes wrote `` romana '' ,  about the history of rome ,  but his best-known work is his `` getica '' ,  which was written in constantinople about ad 551.
jordanes  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also written jordanis or ,  uncommonly ,  jornandes ,  was a 6th-century eastern roman bureaucrat of gothic extraction who turned his hand to history later in life . 
the bakkers had a lavish lifestyle . 
on march 19, 1987, after the disclosure of a payoff to hahn ,  bakker resigned from ptl . 
bakker also did teachings on prosperity theology . 
bakker owes $6 million to the internal revenue service . 
bakker believed that falwell would temporarily lead the ministry until the scandal died down ,  but falwell barred bakker from returning to ptl on april 28, 1987.
james orsen bakker was born in muskegon ,  michigan ,  the son of raleigh bakker and furnia lynette `` furn '' irwin . 
bakker was succeeded as ptl head by southern baptist pastor jerry falwell . 
a $279,000 payoff for the silence of jessica hahn ,  who alleged that bakker and former `` ptl club '' co-host john wesley fletcher drugged and raped her ,  was paid with ptl's funds through bakker's associate roe messner . 
on january 18, 2019, american broadcasting company's ,  20/20  -lrb-  u . s .  tv program  -rrb-  aired a two-hour special entitled ,  `` unfaithfully yours '' about rise and downfall of bakker and tammy faye bakker . 
in 1971 jan & dean released the album `` jan & dean anthology album '' under the label united artists records . 
in 1964, at the height of their fame ,  jan and dean hosted and performed at `` the t . a . m . i . 
jan and dean were an american rock duo consisting of william jan berry  -lrb-  april 3, 1941 – march 26, 2004 -rrb- and dean ormsby torrence  -lrb-  born march 10, 1940 -rrb- . 
jan and dean reached their commercial peak in 1963 and 1964, after they met brian wilson . 
jan and dean also filmed two unreleased television pilots: `` surf scene '' in 1963 and `` on the run '' in 1966.
in february 2010, the jan & dean album `` carnival of sound '' was released on the rhino handmade label . 
the who covered jan and dean's `` bucket t '' on their uk ep `` ready steady who '' from 1966.
jan and dean's career together ended with jan berry's death on march 26, 2004, after he suffered a seizure eight days before his 63rd birthday . 
unlike most other rock 'n roll acts of the period ,  jan and dean did not give music their full-time attention . 
jan & dean were ,  however ,  inducted into the hollywood rock walk of fame on april 12, 1996, exactly 30 years after jan berry had his near fatal car accident . 
between the 1970s and the early 2000s ,  torrence issued a number of re-recordings of classic jan and dean and beach boys hits . 
nevertheless ,  jan berry and dean torrence's anti-establishment attitudes toward the music industry are well-documented . 
according to rock critic dave marsh ,  the attitude and public persona of punk rock can be traced to jan and dean . 
in an interview conducted by jan & dean fan and historian david beard for the collectors' choice release ,  `` jan & dean ,  the complete liberty singles '' ,  dean torrence stated that he felt the duo should be in the rock & roll hall of fame: `` we have the scoreboard if you just want to compare number of hits and musical projects done . 
in 1964, jan and dean were signed to host what became the first multi-act rock and roll show that was edited into a motion picture designed for wide distribution . 
after torrence returned from a six-month compulsory stint in the us army reserve ,  berry and torrence began to make music as `` jan and dean '' . 
berry and ginsburg ,  now christened `` jan & arnie '' ,  re-recorded their vocals on a professional recording system . 
after the surfing craze ,  jan and dean scored two top-30 hits in 1965: `` you really know how to hurt a guy '' got up to 27 and `` i found a girl '' got to 30—the latter from the album `` folk 'n roll '' . 
berry also toured with his aloha band ,  while dean began performing with a band called papa doo run run . 
jawaharlal nehru was born on 14 november 1889 in allahabad in british india . 
nehru became an ardent nationalist during his youth . 
within months of his return to india in 1912, nehru attended an annual session of the indian national congress in patna . 
nehru welcomed and encouraged the rapprochement between the two indian communities . 
nehru and the congress dominated indian politics during the 1930s as the country moved towards independence . 
he was also known as pandit nehru due to his roots with the kashmiri pandit community while indian children knew him as `` chacha nehru ''  -lrb-  hindi ,  lit .  ,  `` uncle nehru ''  -rrb-  . 
nehru agreed to vote for the new resolution . 
nehru had developed an interest in indian politics during his time in britain as a student and a barrister . 
nehru described his childhood as a `` sheltered and uneventful one '' . 
nehru was one of the first nationalist leaders to realise the sufferings of the people in the states ruled by indian princes . 
nehru represented india and was elected to the executive council of the league against imperialism that was born at this meeting . 
in 1963, joplin was arrested in san francisco for shoplifting . 
joplin's manager ,  albert grossman ,  and his assistant/publicist friedman ,  had staged an intervention with joplin the previous winter while joplin was in new york . 
joplin headlined the festival on all three nights . 
still photographs in color show joplin backstage with grace slick the day after joplin's performance ,  wherein joplin appears to be very happy . 
joplin had a profound influence on many singers . 
when joplin returned to the u . s .  ,  she began using heroin again . 
in 1995, joplin was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame . 
on january 13, 2000, caserta appeared on-camera for a segment about joplin on `` 20/20 '' . 
joplin stated that she was ostracised and bullied in high school . 
the film `` the rose ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- is loosely based on joplin's life . 
when a visitor injected drugs in front of joplin and getz ,  joplin angrily reminded getz that he had broken his promise . 
in 1988, on what would have been joplin's 45th birthday ,  the janis joplin memorial ,  with an original gold ,  multi-image sculpture of joplin by douglas clark ,  was dedicated during a ceremony in port arthur ,  texas . 
in 1992, the first major biography of joplin in two decades ,  `` love ,  janis '' ,  authored by her younger sister ,  laura joplin ,  was published . 
joplin appeared at woodstock starting at approximately 2:00 a . m .  ,  on sunday ,  august 17, 1969.
in an interview ,  laura stated that joplin enjoyed being on the `` dick cavett show '' ,  that joplin while growing up in texas had difficulties with some people at school ,  but not the entire school ,  and that joplin was really enthusiastic after performing at woodstock in 1969.
the last recording joplin completed was on october 1, 1970— ''mercedes benz '' . 
sometime in 1968, the band's billing was changed to `` janis joplin and big brother and the holding company , ``  and the media coverage given to joplin generated resentment within the band . 
a book about joplin by her publicist myra friedman ,  titled `` buried alive: the biography of janis joplin ''  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- ,  was excerpted in many newspapers . 
she thought joplin sounded on the phone like she was less depressed than she had been over the summer . 
joplin became engaged to peter de blanc in the fall of 1965.
despite graham's announcement that the fillmore west gig was big brother's last concert with joplin ,  the band—with joplin still as lead vocalist—toured the u . s .  that fall . 
during the `` festival express '' tour ,  joplin was accompanied by `` rolling stone '' writer david dalton ,  who later wrote several articles and two books on joplin . 
in addition to woodstock ,  joplin also had problems at madison square garden ,  in 1969.
in june ,  joplin was photographed at an outdoor concert in san francisco that celebrated the summer solstice . 
joplin denigrated port arthur and the classmates who had humiliated her a decade earlier . 
among joplin's last public appearances were two broadcasts of `` the dick cavett show '' . 
these tracks were later issued as a new album in 1995, entitled `` this is janis joplin 1965 '' by james gurley . 
peggy caserta and seth morgan had both failed to meet joplin the friday immediately prior to her death ,  october 2, and joplin had been expecting both of them to keep her company that night . 
she chose the new costumes after her friend and designer ,  linda gravenites  -lrb-  whom joplin had praised in `` vogue '''s profile of her in its may 1968 edition  -rrb-  ,  cut ties with joplin shortly after their return from brazil ,  due largely to joplin's continued use of heroin . 
gleason wrote that the new band was a `` drag '' and joplin should `` scrap '' her new band and `` go right back to being a member of big brother  .  .  .   -lrb-  if they'll have her  -rrb-  . `` 
aside from two 1970 reunions ,  joplin's last performance with big brother was at a chet helms benefit in san francisco on december 1, 1968.
on september 26, 1970, joplin recorded vocals for `` half moon '' and `` cry baby '' . 
for approximately the first two weeks of joplin's stay at the landmark ,  she did not know caserta was in los angeles . 
within a few days ,  joplin became a regular customer of the same heroin dealer who had been supplying caserta . 
joplin jammed with the other performers on the train ,  and her performances on this tour are considered to be among her greatest . 
also in 2009, joplin was the honoree at the rock hall's american music master concert and lecture series . 
joplin's appearances with the kozmic blues band in europe were released in cinemas ,  in multiple documentaries . 
at the 1976 montreux jazz festival ,  nina simone ,  whom joplin admired greatly ,  commented on joplin and referred to the documentary `` janis ''  -lrb-  1975 -rrb- that evidently was screened at the festival:
joplin's bandmate sam andrew would later describe caserta as `` halfway between a groupie and a friend '' . 
when joplin was alive ,  country joe mcdonald released a song called `` janis '' on his band's album `` i-feel-like-i'm-fixin'-to-die ''  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- . 
john fink  -lrb-  born february 11, 1940 -rrb- is an american film and television actor . 
he is known for his roles in two `` batman '' movies ,  `` batman forever ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- and `` batman & robin ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- ,  and his other film credits include `` loving ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- ,  `` the carey treatment ''  -lrb-  1972 -rrb- ,  `` home for the holidays ''  -lrb-  1972 -rrb- ,  `` the lindbergh kidnapping case ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  `` flatliners ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- ,  `` what's love got to do with it ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- and `` the client ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- . 
they already had a daughter diane cousteau  -lrb-  born 1980 -rrb- and a son ,  pierre-yves cousteau  -lrb-  born 1982 -rrb- ,  born during cousteau's marriage to his first wife . 
cousteau was born on 11 june 1910, in saint-andré-de-cubzac ,  gironde ,  france ,  to daniel and élisabeth cousteau . 
cousteau and marcel ichac brought back from there the carnets diving film  -lrb-  presented and preceded with the cannes film festival 1951 -rrb- . 
in 1943 cousteau tried out the first prototype aqua-lung which finally made extended underwater exploration possible . 
cousteau described his underwater world research in a series of books ,  perhaps the most successful being his first book ,  ``  '' ,  published in 1953.
rushton was born in bournemouth ,  england . 
rushton taught at york university in canada from 1974 to 1976 and the university of toronto until 1977.
in 2005, `` the ottawa citizen '' described rushton as the most famous university professor in canada . 
in 2002, hatfield released ``  '' . 
in 2006, hatfield released her first live album . 
the guitar is hatfield's primary instrument . 
this was hatfield's third release for her record label . 
hatfield also made the cover of spin magazine .  . 
born in wiscasset ,  maine ,  hatfield is the daughter of philip m .  hatfield ,  a radiologist ,  and julie hatfield ,  a `` boston globe '' entertainment writer . 
on august 28, 2012, juliana hatfield released a covers record titled `` juliana hatfield '' on her ye olde records label . 
hatfield achieved alterna-rock stardom with the release of 1993's `` become what you are ''  -lrb-  recorded under the group name the juliana hatfield three  -rrb-  . 
hatfield received a degree in songwriting from berklee . 
in 2014, the juliana hatfield three reunited two decades after it disbanded . 
juliana hatfield is currently using pledgemusic for a fourth time to raise funds for a new album by the recently reformed the juliana hatfield three ,  consisting of juliana hatfield on guitar and vocals ,  dean fisher on bass ,  and todd philips on drums . 
for the first time ,  hatfield also played drums on at least one track . 
hatfield's 9th studio album ,  `` how to walk away '' ,  was released on august 19, 2008 on ye olde records . 
hatfield released the book `` when i grow up: a memoir '' on september 22, 2008.
in late december ,  `` stereogum '' named the album `` one of their most anticipated albums of 2015 '' ,  and on january 4, 2015 `` consequence of sound '' named it `` one of the 50 most anticipated albums of 2015. ''
in late december 2014, `` stereogum '' named the album `` one of their most anticipated albums of 2015, '' and on january 4, 2015, `` consequence of sound '' named it `` one of the 50 most anticipated albums of 2015. ''
hatfield began her solo career following the blake babies' breakup in 1991, releasing her first solo album  -lrb-  `` hey babe ''  -rrb-  in 1992.
juliana hatfield  -lrb-  born july 27, 1967 -rrb- is an american musician and singer-songwriter from the boston area ,  formerly of the indie rock bands blake babies ,  the juliana hatfield three ,  some girls ,  and the lemonheads . 
on her album `` made in china ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- she played drums . 
despite recording a song named `` my sister '' ,  hatfield has no sisters but she does have two brothers . 
in 2007 hatfield signed the boston  -lrb-  now austin  -rrb- -based band frank smith to her record label ,  ye olde records . 
hatfield went to duxbury high school in duxbury ,  massachusetts . 
as part of the agreement ,  the united states and israel meet twice a year to honor the obligations of the memorandum of understanding . 
the jpmg meets biannually ,  alternating between israel and the united states . 
william michael rossetti published polidori's journal in 1911.
john william polidori  -lrb-  7 september 1795 – 24 august 1821 -rrb- was an english writer and physician . 
although originally and erroneously accredited to lord byron ,  both byron and polidori affirmed that the story is polidori's . 
a new edition of `` the diary of john william polidori '' was reprinted by cornell university in 2009.
dismissed by byron ,  polidori traveled in italy and then returned to england . 
it can also be a dismissal ,  as in `` this is no joking matter '' or `` this is no time for jokes '' . 
some humorous forms which are `` not '' verbal jokes are: involuntary humour ,  situational humour ,  practical jokes ,  slapstick and anecdotes . 
expected response to a joke is laughter . 
the context ,  however ,  should not be confused with the function of the joking . 
a joke cycle is a collection of jokes about a single target or situation which displays consistent narrative structure and type of humour . 
this classification system provides a functional multi-dimensional label for any joke ,  and indeed any verbal humour . 
the psychologist has been very active in the research of humour . 
internet joking forces a re-evaluation of social spaces and social groups . 
these six krs of the joke structure include:
the context explores the specific social situation in which joking occurs . 
the context of joking in turn leads into a study of joking relationships ,  a term coined by anthropologists to refer to social groups within a culture who take part in institutionalised banter and joking . 
the context of the joke telling in turn leads into a study of joking relationships ,  a term coined by anthropologists to refer to social groups within a culture who engage in institutionalised banter and joking . 
jokes are also passed along in written form or ,  more recently ,  through the internet . 
linguistics has developed further methodological tools which can be applied to jokes: discourse analysis and conversation analysis of joking . 
following its linguistic framing the joke ,  in the form of a story ,  can be told . 
and sometimes joking is just simple entertainment for a group of friends . 
many academic disciplines lay claim to the study of jokes  -lrb-  and other forms of humour  -rrb-  as within their purview . 
this theory established the semantic/pragmatic foundation of humour as well as the humour competence of speakers . 
more sophisticated computer joke programs have yet to be developed . 
but they have since been identified in cultures around the world ,  where jokes and joking are used to mark and re-inforce appropriate boundaries of a relationship . 
various kinds of jokes have been identified in ancient pre-classical texts . 
his work is in the permanent collections of numerous museums ,  including the metropolitan museum of art ,  the museum of modern art ,  the whitney museum ,  the phillips collection ,  the brooklyn museum ,  the national gallery of art and reynolda house museum of american art . 
for jacob lawrence's education ,  he took works progress administration art classes in new york  -lrb-  1934-1937 -rrb- and he also studied at harlem art workshop in new york in 1937.
these paintings are now in the collection of the state of washington history museum . 
jacob lawrence  -lrb-  september 7, 1917 – june 9, 2000 -rrb- was an african-american painter known for his portrayal of african-american life . 
after many years in new york ,  in 1970 lawrence and knight moved to the pacific northwest ,  where he had been invited to be an art professor at the university of washington . 
one of his art teachers noted great potential in lawrence . 
