while in boston ,  richman formed the modern lovers ,  a proto-punk garage rock band . 
 ''back in your life '' was released in 1979 under the `` jonathan richman and the modern lovers '' moniker ,  but only about half the disc featured a backup band . 
jonathan michael richman  -lrb-  born may 16, 1951 -rrb- is an american singer ,  songwriter and guitarist . 
in 1975, richman moved to california to record as a solo singer/songwriter with beserkley records . 
the album `` jonathan richman and the modern lovers '' was released in may 1976  -lrb-  three months before the earlier `` the modern lovers '' sessions were finally released  -rrb-  but david robinson left the group soon thereafter ,  due to frustration with richman's quest for lower volume levels ,  and joined with ric ocasek in forming the band the cars . 
in january 1976, richman put together a new version of the modern lovers ,  which included original modern lovers drummer ,  david robinson ,  along with former rubinoos bassist greg 'curly' keranen and leroy radcliffe on guitar . 
 ''rock and roll with the modern lovers '' was released in 1977 and ,  just as this record began to climb the charts in europe ,  keranen left the group  -lrb-  to attend college  -rrb-  . 
bayer had several interests outside his work ,  including archaeology and mathematics . 
johann bayer  -lrb-  1572 – 7 march 1625 -rrb- was a german lawyer and uranographer  -lrb-  celestial cartographer  -rrb-  . 
demme won the academy award for `` the silence of the lambs ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb-—one of only three films to win all the major categories  -lrb-  best picture ,  best director ,  best screenplay ,  best actor ,  and best actress  -rrb-  . 
demme was on the board of directors at jacob burns film center in pleasantville ,  new york . 
he also co-directed  -lrb-  with his nephew ted  -rrb-  the music video for bruce springsteen's best song oscar-winning `` streets of philadelphia '' from the film's soundtrack . 
throughout 1986–2004, demme was known for his dramatic close-ups in films . 
he also directed `` melvin and howard ''  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- ,  `` swing shift ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- ,  `` something wild ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- ,  `` married to the mob ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- ,  the concert film `` stop making sense ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- ,  `` philadelphia ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- and `` rachel getting married ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- . 
they were based out of new york city for fifteen years . 
robert wilkinson castle jr .  ,  an episcopal priest who appeared in some of demme's films . 
gris exhibited for the first time at the 1912 salon des indépendants  -lrb-  a painting entitled `` hommage à pablo picasso ''  -rrb-  . 
the top auction price for a gris work is $57.1 million  -lrb-  £34.8 million  -rrb-  ,  achieved for his 1915 painting `` nature morte à la nappe à carreaux  -lrb-  still life with checked tablecloth  -rrb- ``  . 
josé victoriano  -lrb-  carmelo carlos  -rrb-  gonzález-pérez  -lrb-  23 march 1887 – 11 may 1927 -rrb- ,  better known as juan gris  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  was a spanish painter born in madrid who lived and worked in france most of his life . 
this surpassed previous records of $20.8 million for his 1915 still life `` livre ,  pipe et verres '' ,  $28.6 million for the 1913 artwork `` violon et guitare '' and $31.8 million for `` the musician's table '' ,  now in the met . 
gris began to paint seriously in 1911  -lrb-  when he gave up working as a satirical cartoonist  -rrb-  ,  developing at this time a personal cubist style . 
the geometric structure of juan gris's crystal period is already palpable in `` still life before an open window ,  place ravignan ''  -lrb-  june 1915; philadelphia museum of art  -rrb-  . 
with his film career behind him ,  whale found himself at a loose end . 
this was the last of whale's films to be produced under the laemmle family . 
whale only made one additional successful feature film ,  `` the man in the iron mask ''  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- ,  before retiring from the film industry in 1941.
whale was known for his use of camera movement . 
whale and foegel settled into a quiet routine until the spring of 1956, when whale suffered a small stroke . 
whale was heavily influenced by german expressionism . 
whale's next film was `` the kiss before the mirror ''  -lrb-  1933 -rrb- ,  a critical success but a box-office failure . 
whale's companion david lewis stated flatly that whale's sexual orientation was `` not germane '' to his filmmaking . 
whale was openly gay throughout his career ,  something that was very unusual in the 1920s and 1930s . 
james whale  -lrb-  22 july 1889 – 29 may 1957 -rrb- was an english film director ,  theater director and actor . 
whale directed his final film in 1950, a short subject based on the william saroyan one-act play `` hello out there '' . 
whale's career went into sharp decline following the release of his next film ,  `` the road back ''  -lrb-  1937 -rrb- . 
following the debacle of `` the road back '' ,  charles rogers tried to get out of his contract with whale; whale refused . 
only two of whale's films received oscar nominations: `` the man in the iron mask ''  -lrb-  for its musical score  -rrb-  ,  and `` bride of frankenstein ''  -lrb-  for its sound recording  -rrb-  . 
whale's final months are the subject of the novel `` father of frankenstein ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- by christopher bram . 
 '' ,  the film was one of whale's personal favorites ,  but met with sharply divided reviews and commercial disinterest . 
at around this time ,  whale and lewis began living together . 
the 62-year-old whale was smitten with the younger man and hired him as his chauffeur . 
hagelin's first marriage ,  to margaret hagelin ,  ended in divorce . 
hagelin became a trustee of mum and ,  in 2016, its president . 
hagelin was featured in the movies `` what the bleep do we know !  ? `` 
hagelin is also president of the david lynch foundation ,  which promotes tm . 
hagelin was born in pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania ,  the second of four sons ,  to mary lee hagelin ,  née stephenson ,  a school teacher ,  and carl william hagelin ,  a businessman . 
maharishi mahesh yogi appointed hagelin the `` raja of invincible america '' in november 2007.
john samuel hagelin  -lrb-  born june 9, 1954 -rrb- is the leader of the transcendental meditation  -lrb-  tm  -rrb-  movement in the united states . 
while at miu ,  hagelin received funding from the national science foundation . 
after taft ,  hagelin attended dartmouth college ,  and at the end of his freshman year studied tm in vittel ,  france ,  and returned as a qualified tm teacher . 
according to hagelin ,  the analysis was examined by an `` independent review board '' ,  although all members of the board were tm practitioners . 
hagelin stood as a candidate for president of the united states for the natural law party ,  a party founded by the tm movement ,  in the 1992, 1996 and 2000 elections . 
the javelin has a grip ,  about wide ,  made of cord and located at the javelin's center of gravity  -lrb-   from the javelin tip for the men's javelin and from the javelin tip for the women's javelin  -rrb-  . 
the javelin throw is a track and field event where the javelin ,  a spear about in length ,  is thrown . 
in 1999, the women's javelin  -lrb-    -rrb-  was similarly redesigned . 
athletes would hold the javelin by the thong and when the javelin was released this thong unwound giving the javelin a spiraled flight . 
javelin throwing is an event of both the men's decathlon and the women's heptathlon . 
the weight of the javelin in the under-20 category is the same as the senior level . 
the first known women's javelin marks were recorded in finland in 1909.
the javelin throw has been part of the decathlon since the decathlon was introduced in the early 1910s; the all-around ,  an earlier ten-event contest of american origin ,  did not include the javelin throw . 
finland has ,  however ,  never been nearly as successful in the women's javelin . 
james madison university  -lrb-  also known as jmu ,  madison ,  or james madison  -rrb-  is a public research university in harrisonburg ,  virginia . 
the jmu men's and women's club soccer teams are two of the most decorated club organizations in jmu school history . 
james madison university's athletic teams are known as the `` dukes . `` 
 ''u . s .  news & world report '' ranked jmu as the no . 
since 2004, the jmu football team has appeared in the playoffs in 2006, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017.
james madison university is home to the john c .  wells planetarium . 
james madison university has over 350 clubs and organizations for students to choose from . 
like all public universities in virginia ,  james madison is governed by a board of visitors appointed by the governor of virginia . 
the jmu men's ultimate team ,  the flying hellfish ,  was founded in 1997.
the jmu student government association  -lrb-  sga  -rrb-  was founded in 1915 and stood as the first organization on campus . 
in 1946, men were first enrolled as regular day students . 
 ''the breeze '' is also known to all jmu alumni and current students for having the long-standing tradition of publishing darts & pats . 
the john c .  wells planetarium also employs students enrolled at james madison university to operate the system and host shows to the public . 
the `` princeton review '' also recognized james madison as one of 81 schools in america `` with a conscience '' ,  and in the latest year ranked jmu second in the nation behind only the university of virginia in the number of peace corps volunteers it sent from its student body among `` medium-sized '' universities . 
in 1976, the university's name was changed to james madison university . 
the james madison speech team has been recognized by afa-niet as one of the top 20 intercollegiate speech teams in the nation . 
the campus of jmu originally consisted of two buildings ,  known today as jackson and maury halls . 
the jmu student ambassadors work alongside the admissions office to offer student-led tours for prospective students . 
the first permanent settlement on the site of jericho developed near the ein es-sultan spring between 9,500 and 9000 bce . 
jericho has evidence of settlement dating back to 10,000 bce . 
jericho  -lrb-  ; ' ; '  -rrb-  is a city in the palestinian territories and is located near the jordan river in the west bank . 
jericho's arabic name ,   ,  means `` fragrant '' and also has its roots in canaanite `` reaẖ '' . 
jesuits do not have an official habit . 
the jesuit mission in quebec was re-established in 1842.
the jesuits in new spain distinguished themselves in several ways . 
josé de anchieta and manuel da nóbrega were the first jesuits that ignacio de loyola sent to america . 
he was ,  at his passing ,  one of ten jesuit cardinals in the catholic church . 
the jesuits took part in the foundation of the city of rio de janeiro in 1565.
as elsewhere in the spanish empire ,  the jesuits were expelled from mexico in 1767.
the current superior general of the jesuits is arturo sosa . 
monastic orders were permitted in 1897, but the ban on jesuits was only lifted in 1956.
at the time when the jesuits were expelled from spanish america in 1767, the jesuits of quito registered 36 missions run by 25 jesuits of quito in the audiencia of quito – 6 in the napo and aguarico missions and 19 in the pastaza and iquitos missions ,  with the population at 20,000 inhabitants . 
the jesuits often gathered the aborigines in communities  -lrb-  the jesuit reductions  -rrb-  where the natives worked for the community and were evangelised . 
tomé de sousa ,  first governor general of brazil ,  brought the first group of jesuits to the colony . 
antonio ruiz de montoya was an important missionary in the jesuit reductions of paraguay . 
the spanish king charles iii  -lrb-  1759–88 -rrb- expelled the jesuits in 1767 from spain and its territories . 
several jesuits were prominent in the small german resistance . 
for better cooperation and apostolic efficacy in each continent ,  the jesuit provinces are grouped into six jesuit conferences worldwide . 
the jesuits operated their properties as an integrated unit with the larger jesuit order; thus revenues from haciendas funded their colegios . 
in 1983 john paul gave leave for the jesuits to appoint a successor to arrupe . 
in scotland ,  john ogilvie  -lrb-  saint  -rrb-  ,  a jesuit ,  is the nation's only native saint . 
in 2013, jorge mario bergoglio became the first jesuit to be elected pope ,  taking the name pope francis . 
at their apogee ,  the jesuits dreamed of a jesuit empire that would stretch from the paraguay-paraná confluence to the coast and back to the paraná headwaters . 
in the early years the new jesuit reductions were threatened by the slave-raiding `` bandeirantes '' . 
cardinal jorge bergoglio of argentina was elected pope francis on 13 march 2013 and is the first jesuit to be elected pope . 
the jesuits became involved in the huron mission in 1626 and lived among the huron peoples . 
jesuit lucas de la cueva and raimundo de santacruz opened up two new routes of communication with quito ,  through the pastaza and napo rivers . 
there seems to be no `` pope francis effect '' in counteracting the fall of vocations among the jesuits . 
the jesuits were allowed to return to mexico in 1840 when general antonio lópez de santa anna was once more president of mexico . 
the jesuits were banned from france ,  although this ban was quickly lifted . 
the superior general of jesuits at the outbreak of war was wlodzimierz ledochowski ,  a pole . 
the first jesuits ,  guided by manuel da nóbrega ,  juan de azpilcueta navarro ,  leonardo nunes ,  and later josé de anchieta ,  established the first jesuit missions in salvador and in são paulo dos campos de piratininga ,  the settlement that gave rise to the city of são paulo . 
jesuit efforts in goa were interrupted by the expulsion of the jesuits from portuguese territories in 1759 by the powerful marquis of pombal ,  secretary of state in portugal . 
the jesuit china missions of the 16th and 17th centuries introduced western science and astronomy . 
their ascendancy in societies in the americas accelerated during the seventeenth century ,  wherein jesuits created new missions in peru ,  colombia ,  and bolivia; as early as 1603, there were 345 jesuit priests in mexico alone . 
among the jesuit victims of the nazis ,  germany's rupert mayer has been beatified . 
and jesuit-educated voltaire called the jesuit government `` a triumph of humanity . `` 
the theater was a form of expression especially prominent in jesuit schools . 
in fulfilling the mission of the `` formula of the institute of the society '' ,  the first jesuits concentrated on a few key activities . 
the historic curia of ignatius is now part of the `` collegio del gesù '' attached to the church of the gesù ,  the jesuit mother church . 
by 1700, jesuits turned to maintaining quebec ,  montreal ,  and ottawa without establishing new posts . 
another famous jesuit was jean de brébeuf ,  a french missionary who was martyred during the 17th century in what was once new france  -lrb-  now ontario  -rrb-  in canada . 
the period following the restoration of the jesuits in 1814 was marked by tremendous growth ,  as evidenced by the large number of jesuit colleges and universities established in the 19th century . 
jesuits were also zealous in evangelization of the indigenous ,  particularly on the northern frontiers . 
several other jesuits are known to have rescued or given refuge to jews during that period . 
the jesuits had frequent disputes with other colonists who wanted to enslave the natives . 
karon ,  age 18, was on her own with candace . 
karon and winslow split a $100,000 prize . 
by the late 1990s ,  karon's books were `` new york times '' bestsellers . 
haydn returned to vienna in 1795.
perhaps more than any other composer's ,  haydn's music is known for its humor . 
in 1785 haydn was admitted to the same masonic lodge as mozart ,  the ``  '' in vienna . 
his biographer dies reported haydn saying in 1806:
haydn once remarked that he had worked on `` the creation '' so long because he wanted it to last . 
haydn's job title under count morzin was `` kapellmeister '' ,  that is ,  music director . 
when werner died in 1766, haydn was elevated to full kapellmeister . 
the return to vienna in 1795 marked the last turning point in haydn's career . 
several important landmarks have been observed in the evolution of haydn's musical style . 
efforts to bring haydn to london had been undertaken since 1782, though haydn's loyalty to prince nikolaus had prevented him from accepting . 
the choice was a sensible one because haydn was already a very popular composer there . 
while a chorister ,  haydn had not received any systematic training in music theory and composition . 
over time ,  haydn turned some of his minuets into `` scherzi '' which are much faster ,  at one beat to the bar . 
 -lrb-  franz  -rrb-  joseph haydn  -lrb-  ; ; 31 march 173231 may 1809 -rrb- was an austrian composer of the classical period . 
haydn's works are listed in a comprehensive catalogue prepared by anthony van hoboken . 
joseph haydn was born in rohrau ,  austria ,  a village that at that time stood on the border with hungary . 
fürnberg later recommended haydn to count morzin ,  who ,  in 1757, became his first full-time employer . 
tracing haydn's work over the six decades in which it was produced  -lrb-  roughly from 1749 to 1802 -rrb- ,  one finds a gradual but steady increase in complexity and musical sophistication ,  which developed as haydn learned from his own experience and that of his colleagues . 
haydn was short in stature ,  perhaps as a result of having been underfed throughout most of his youth . 
aledort wrote: `` in rock guitar ,  there are but two eras—before hendrix and after hendrix . `` 
jimi hendrix had a diverse heritage . 
by 1969, hendrix was the world's highest-paid rock musician . 
the two remained friends until hendrix's death in 1970.
this would be hendrix's final concert appearance in the u . s . 
by 1967, as hendrix was gaining in popularity ,  many of his pre-experience recordings were marketed to an unsuspecting public as jimi hendrix albums ,  sometimes with misleading later images of hendrix . 
in mid-1958, at age 15, hendrix acquired his first acoustic guitar ,  for $5  -lrb-  equivalent to $43.40 in 2018 -rrb- . 
soon after he acquired the acoustic guitar ,  hendrix formed his first band ,  the velvetones . 
born in seattle ,  washington ,  hendrix began playing guitar at the age of 15.
in 1993, mca records delayed a multimillion-dollar sale of hendrix's publishing copyrights because al hendrix was unhappy about the arrangement . 
the album's cover stated that it was `` produced and directed by jimi hendrix '' . 
hendrix was inspired musically by american rock and roll and electric blues . 
hendrix's rendition of `` the star-spangled banner '' was honored with a grammy in 2009.
although the lineup of hendrix ,  mitchell ,  and cox became known as the cry of love band ,  after their accompanying tour ,  billing ,  advertisements ,  and tickets were printed with the new jimi hendrix experience or occasionally just jimi hendrix . 
hendrix was the recipient of several music awards during his lifetime and posthumously . 
james marshall hendrix  -lrb-  born johnny allen hendrix; november 27, 1942 – september 18, 1970 -rrb- was an american rock guitarist ,  singer ,  and songwriter . 
during the first half of 1970, hendrix sporadically worked on material for what would have been his next lp . 
on october 1, 1966, chandler brought hendrix to the london polytechnic at regent street ,  where cream was scheduled to perform ,  and where hendrix and eric clapton met . 
some of hendrix's unfinished material was released as the 1971 title `` the cry of love '' . 
hendrix favored overdriven amplifiers with high volume and gain . 
chandler later admitted that he engineered the tour in an effort to gain publicity for hendrix . 
the single failed to chart ,  but hendrix and lee began a friendship that lasted several years; hendrix later became an ardent supporter of lee's band ,  love . 
immediately following the festival ,  hendrix ,  mitchell ,  and cox travelled to london . 
hendrix received several prestigious rock music awards during his lifetime and posthumously . 
in march 1964, hendrix recorded the two-part single `` testify '' with the isley brothers . 
with few exceptions ,  hendrix played right-handed guitars that were turned upside down and restrung for left-hand playing . 
after hendrix and moore relocated to vancouver ,  british columbia ,  canada ,  had a son they named james allen hendrix on june 10, 1919; the family called him `` al '' . 
 ''stone free '' ,  which was hendrix's first songwriting effort after arriving in england ,  was recorded on november 2.
champ ,  who had taken care of and had attempted to adopt hendrix; this is where al saw his son for the first time . 
on august 21, 2016, jimi hendrix was officially inducted into the r&b hall of fame in dearborn ,  michigan . 
hendrix played a variety of guitars throughout his career ,  but the instrument that became most associated with him was the fender stratocaster . 
chandler also convinced hendrix to change the spelling of his first name from `` jimmy '' to the exotic looking `` jimi '' . 
in july 1965, on nashville's channel 5 `` night train '' ,  hendrix made his first television appearance . 
the james marshall `` jimi '' hendrix united states post office in renton highlands near seattle ,  about a mile from hendrix's grave and memorial ,  was renamed for the musician in 2019.
a star on the hollywood walk of fame was dedicated to hendrix on november 14, 1991, at 6627 hollywood boulevard . 
bode was also responsible for giving the new planet its name . 
bode was born in hamburg . 
bode determined the orbit of uranus and suggested the planet's name . 
from 1787 to 1825 bode was director of the astronomisches rechen-institut . 
reno was born in miami ,  florida . 
reno was born and raised in miami ,  florida . 
from 1963 to 1971 reno worked as an attorney for two miami law firms . 
in 1993, president bill clinton reno nominated to serve as the united states attorney general . 
reno was one of two candidates gerstein recommended to replace him . 
in january 1978, governor askew appointed reno the state attorney for dade county  -lrb-  now called miami-dade county  -rrb-  . 
for a while ,  he was also a member of the anti-communist john birch society . 
only leading roles in numerous followed during the 1930s ,  most of them also westerns . 
wayne was nominated as the producer of best picture for `` the alamo ''  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- ,  one of two films he directed . 
while working for fox film corporation in bit roles ,  wayne was given on-screen credit as `` duke morrison '' only once ,  in `` words and music ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- . 
marion mitchell morrison  -lrb-  born marion robert morrison; may 26, 1907 – june 11, 1979 -rrb- ,  known professionally as john wayne and nicknamed `` duke '' ,  was an american actor and filmmaker . 
director robert rossen offered the starring role in `` all the king's men ''  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- to wayne . 
several of wayne's children entered the film and television industry; wayne's son ethan was billed as john ethan wayne in a few films ,  and played one of the leads in the 1990s update of the `` adam-12 '' television series . 
his support of the treaty brought him hate mail for the first time in his life . 
wayne's career was rejuvenated with john ford's `` stagecoach ''  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- making him an instant mainstream star . 
as a favor to usc football coach howard jones ,  who had given silent western film star ,  tom mix ,  tickets to usc games ,  director john ford and mix hired wayne as a prop boy and extra . 
wayne was born marion robert morrison on may 26, 1907 at 224 south second street in winterset ,  iowa . 
he appeared in nearly two dozen of john ford's films over twenty years ,  including `` she wore a yellow ribbon ''  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- ,  `` the quiet man ''  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- ,  `` the wings of eagles ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  and `` the man who shot liberty valance ''  -lrb-  1962 -rrb- with james stewart . 
born in winterset ,  iowa ,  wayne grew up in southern california . 
wayne also appeared with his usc teammates playing football in `` brown of harvard ''  -lrb-  1926 -rrb- ,  `` the dropkick ''  -lrb-  1927 -rrb- ,  and `` salute ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- and columbia's `` maker of men ''  -lrb-  filmed in 1930, released in 1931 -rrb- . 
throughout most of his life ,  wayne was a vocally prominent conservative republican in hollywood ,  supporting anti-communist positions . 
in total he made 657 appearances for fulham ,  and scored 157 goals . 
he first captained england in 1960 and played for them at two world cups . 
he signed for fulham as a 15 year old amateur in 1950 and made his senior debut in may 1952.
playing for england against northern ireland in 1955, haynes ran onto a long clearance into the northern ireland half . 
on the day of the death of johnny haynes ,  alan mullery ,  another high-profile fulham and england player ,  made the following tribute: ``  ''he was the only reason i went to fulham as a young boy of 15 leaving school . 
whilst at fulham he became britain's first footballer to earn £100 per week . 
he serves on the advisory board for the austin film society . 
in november 1997, the national film preservation board announced that `` return of the secaucus 7 '' would be one of the 25 films selected that year for preservation in the national film registry at the library of congress . 
that film's director ,  steven spielberg ,  later commissioned sayles to write a script  -lrb-  unused  -rrb-  for the fourth `` jurassic park '' film . 
his directorial debut ,  `` return of the secaucus 7 ''  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- ,  has been added to the national film registry . 
he has written and directed his own films ,  including `` lone star '' ,  `` passion fish '' ,  `` eight men out '' ,  `` the secret of roan inish , ``  and `` matewan '' . 
sayles has funded most of his films by writing genre scripts ,  such as `` piranha '' ,  `` alligator '' ,  `` the howling '' and `` the challenge '' . 
as well as achieving success as a solo act ,  he has collaborated with sasha as sasha & john digweed ,  and with nick muir as bedrock . 
he featured among the top ten artists from 1998–2008 and was voted dj mag's number 1 one dj won in 2001.
between 2000 and 2005, digweed promoted his `` bedrock '' sound with monthly club nights for club members and newcomers to the electronic music scene . 
in 2013, digweed was ranked the number 17 best dj in the world in resident advisor's top 100 dj charts; he currently is number 43 as of june 2016.
2008 saw digweed and sasha reuniting for a spring club tour that once again featured performances all over north america . 
spader's first major film role was in the film `` endless love ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- ,  and his first starring role was in `` tuff turf ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- . 
spader was born in boston ,  massachusetts ,  and is the youngest of three children . 
james todd spader  -lrb-  born february 7, 1960 -rrb- is an american actor . 
spader stars in the nbc series `` the blacklist '' ,  which premiered on nbc september 23, 2013.
for this performance ,  he received the best actor award at the cannes film festival . 
disguised as esau ,  jacob entered isaac's room . 
laban pursued jacob for seven days . 
jacob is also the protagonist of the testament of jacob ,  of the ladder of jacob and of the prayer of joseph ,  which interpret the experience of this patriarch in the context of merkabah mysticism . 
tells the account of esau selling his birthright to jacob . 
laban returned to his home and jacob continued on his way . 
jacob loved rachel more than leah ,  and leah felt hated . 
the house of jacob dwelt in hebron ,  in the land of canaan . 
after joseph was born ,  jacob decided to return home to his parents . 
this is seen as evidence that the stories of abraham ,  joseph ,  jacob ,  and esau were written after this time . 
jacob had still another reason for grieving the loss of joseph . 
jacob returned to bethel ,  where he had another vision of blessing . 
jacob asked the being's name ,  but he refused to answer . 
jacob  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  later given the name israel ,  is regarded as a patriarch of the israelites . 
although esau sold jacob his own birthright ,  which was his blessing ,  for `` red pottage , ``  esau still hated jacob for receiving his blessing that their father isaac unknowingly had given to him . 
as jacob neared the land of canaan ,  he sent messengers ahead to his brother esau . 
rachel therefore gave leah the signs so that jacob would not realize the switch . 
in contrast to the judeo-christian view of jacob ,  one main difference is that the story of jacob's blessing ,  in which he deceives isaac ,  is not accepted in islam . 
jacob was finally reunited with his father isaac in mamre  -lrb-  outside hebron  -rrb-  . 
jacob offered to give esau a bowl of stew in exchange for his birthright ,  to which esau agreed . 
israel  -lrb-  jacob  -rrb-  was 147 years old when he called to his favorite son joseph and pleaded that he not be buried in egypt . 
jacob and his twin brother ,  esau ,  were born to isaac and rebecca after 20 years of marriage ,  when isaac was 60 years of age  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  . 
the septuagint renders the name  ,  whence latin  ,  english `` jacob '' . 
jacob then arrived in shechem ,  where he bought a parcel of land ,  now identified as joseph's tomb . 
'jehoshaphat ! '
in the judean regnal year 849/848 bc ,  which for calculation purposes can be taken as 849 bc . 
william f .  albright has dated the reign of jehoshaphat to 873–849 bc . 
jehoshaphat ,  according to 1 kings 15:24, was the son of asa ,  and the king of the kingdom of judah ,  in succession to his father . 
so jehoshaphat's dates are taken as one year earlier: co-regency beginning in 873/871, sole reign commencing in 871/870, and death in 849/848 bc . 
with a chosen band ,  jehu proceeded to jezreel . 
the author of `` kings '' tells that jehu entered the city without resistance . 
the reign of jehu's predecessor ,  jehoram ,  was marked by the battle of ramoth-gilead against the army of the arameans . 
the prophet hosea ,  though ,  writes that the house of jehu was punished by god through the hands of the assyrians for the bloodshed carried out by jehu at jezreel . 
according to the obelisk ,  jehu severed his alliances with phoenicia and judah ,  and became subject to assyria . 
joshua then went to defeat ai . 
according to  ,  joshua died at the age of 110.
joshua  -lrb-    -rrb-  or jehoshua  -lrb-   `` yehoshuʿa ''  -rrb-  is the central figure in the hebrew bible's book of joshua . 
joshua is believed by some muslims to be buried on joshua's hill in the beykoz district of istanbul . 
joshua was a major figure in the events of the exodus . 
joshua also holds a position of respect among muslims . 
joshua  -lrb-     -rrb-  is not mentioned by name in the quran ,  but his name appears in other islamic literature . 
the first part of the book of joshua covers the period when he led the conquest of canaan . 
there is a consensus that the joshua traditions in the pentateuch are secondary additions . 
according to  ,  god appointed joshua to succeed moses as leader of the israelites along with giving him a blessing of invincibility during his lifetime  -lrb-  joshua 1:5 -rrb- . 
most modern bibles translate to identify jesus as a better joshua ,  as joshua led israel into the rest of canaan ,  but jesus leads the people of god into `` god's rest '' . 
muslim literature includes traditions of joshua not found in the hebrew bible . 
jeroboam reigned for 22 years . 
jeroboam was in `` constant war with the house of judah '' . 
in 1 kings 14, jeroboam's son abijah gets sick ,  and he sends his wife to the prophet ahijah . 
jeroboam was crippled by this severe defeat to abijah and posed little threat to the kingdom of judah for the rest of his reign . 
jeroboam was the son of nebat ,  a member of the tribe of ephraim of zereda . 
later in the gospel there is an account of john's death . 
then jesus came from galilee to the jordan to john ,  to be baptized by him . 
the synoptic gospels  -lrb-  mark ,  matthew and luke  -rrb-  describe john baptising jesus; in the gospel of john this is implied in  . 
jesus comes to john ,  and is baptized by him in the river jordan . 
at that time herod the tetrarch heard about the fame of jesus ,  and he said to his servants ,  `` this is john the baptist . 
for john came neither eating nor drinking ,  and they say ,  'he has a demon . '
the text briefly mentions that john is imprisoned and later beheaded by herod ,  but the gospel of luke lacks the story of a step-daughter dancing for herod and requesting john's head . 
john the baptist is mentioned in all four canonical gospels and the non-canonical gospel of the nazarenes . 
in those days jesus came from nazareth of galilee and was baptized by john in the jordan . 
matthew shortens the account of the beheading of john ,  and adds two elements: that herod antipas wants john dead ,  and that the death is reported to jesus by his disciples . 
to clarify the meaning of `` baptist '' ,  he is sometimes alternatively called john the baptizer . 
truly ,  i say to you ,  among those born of women there has arisen no one greater than john the baptist . 
john was sentenced to death and subsequently beheaded by herod antipas sometime between 28 and 36 ad after john rebuked him for divorcing his wife ,  phasaelis ,  and unlawfully taking herodias ,  the wife of his brother herod philip i . 
according to the new testament ,  john anticipated a messianic figure greater than himself . 
john used baptism as the central symbol or sacrament of his messianic movement . 
now when john heard in prison about the deeds of the christ ,  he sent word by his disciples and said to him ,  `` are you the one who is to come ,  or shall we look for another ? `` 
john kilian houston brunner  -lrb-  24 september 1934 – 25 august 1995 -rrb- was a british author of science fiction novels and stories . 
john brunner wrote the screenplay for the science fiction film `` the terrornauts ''  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- by amicus productions . 
brunner's health began to decline in the 1980s and worsened with the death of his wife in 1986.
brunner's pen names include k .  h .  brunner  -lrb-  kilian houston brunner  -rrb-  ,  gill hunt ,  john loxmith ,  trevor staines ,  ellis quick ,  henry crosstrees jr .  ,  and keith woodcott . 
at first writing conventional space opera ,  brunner later began to experiment with the novel form . 
john butler yeats  -lrb-  29 august 1871 – 28 march 1957 -rrb- was an irish artist and olympic medalist . 
the artist closest to him in style is his friend ,  the austrian painter ,  oskar kokoschka . 
w .  b .  yeats was his brother . 
yeats was born in london ,  england . 
yoakum was again living and painting in chicago by 1962.
joseph elmer yoakum  -lrb-  february 22, ca . 
yoakum official records note that yoakum was born in ash grove ,  missouri ,  but he told a story of being born in arizona ,  in 1888, as a navajo indian on the window rock navajo reservation . 
in 1967, yoakum was discovered by the mainstream art community through john hopgood ,  an instructor at the chicago state college ,  who saw yoakum's work hanging in his studio window and purchased twenty-two pictures . 
in 1846 the mexican–american war began . 
the civil war had begun . 
after the war ,  he contributed to reconciliation of the south with the north ,  but remained a symbol for southern pride . 
davis's older brother joseph had been very successful and owned hurricane plantation and of adjoining land along the mississippi river on a peninsula 20 miles south of vicksburg ,  mississippi . 
other states containing a jefferson  -lrb-  or jeff  -rrb-  davis county/parish include georgia ,  louisiana ,  and mississippi . 
he soon returned with pemberton to mississippi . 
at the start of the war ,  nearly 21 million people lived in the north compared to 9 million in the south . 
jefferson davis ,  jr .  ,  was born january 16, 1857.
jefferson and varina had six children; three died before reaching adulthood . 
northerners were outraged and there was increasing talk in the south of secession from the union . 
honoring davis's war service ,  governor albert g .  brown of mississippi appointed him to the vacant position of united states senator jesse speight ,  a democrat ,  who had died on may 1, 1847.
this also led to complaints as more states joined the confederacy ,  however ,  because there were more states than cabinet positions . 
jefferson davis served in many roles . 
during davis's childhood ,  his family moved twice: in 1811 to st .  mary parish ,  louisiana ,  and less than a year later to wilkinson county ,  mississippi . 
in texas ,  `` confederate heroes day '' is celebrated on january 19, the birthday of robert e .  lee; jefferson davis's birthday had been officially celebrated on june 3 but was combined with lee's birthday in 1973.
his father samuel died on july 4, 1824, when jefferson was 16 years old . 
richmond mayor and confederate veteran j .  taylor ellyson established the jefferson davis monument association ,  and on july 12, 1891 varina revealed in a letter to confederate veterans and people of the southern states that her first choice would be davis's plantation in mississippi ,  but that because she feared flooding ,  she had decided to urge richmond as the proper place for his tomb . 
seward hinted that fort sumter would be evacuated ,  but gave no assurance . 
only two survived him ,  and only one married and had children . 
jefferson davis considered `` yankee and negroe '' rule in the south oppressive ,  and said so in 1871 and especially after 1873.
as the war progressed ,  this dissatisfaction increased and there were frequent changes to the cabinet . 
the jefferson davis presidential library was established at beauvoir in 1998.
a hand-woven crown of thorns associated with the portrait is often said to have been made by the pope but may have been woven by davis's wife varina . 
jefferson finis davis was born at the family homestead in fairview ,  kentucky ,  on june 3, 1808.
he was appointed as the united states secretary of war ,  serving from 1853 to 1857, under president franklin pierce . 
joseph retained the title . 
franklin pierce ,  after winning the presidential election ,  made davis his secretary of war in 1853.
numerous memorials to jefferson davis were created . 
after davis's remains were exhumed in new orleans ,  they lay in state for a day at memorial hall of the newly organized louisiana historical association . 
in 1862 randolph resigned from the war department ,  and james seddon of virginia was appointed to replace him . 
his funeral was one of the largest in the south ,  and new orleans draped itself in mourning as his body lay in state in the city hall for several days . 
the two denominations were reunited in 1865.
on april 14, lincoln was shot ,  dying the next day . 
the idea had been suggested years earlier ,  but davis did not act upon it until late in the war ,  and very few slaves were enlisted . 
in 1913, the united daughters of the confederacy conceived the jefferson davis memorial highway ,  a transcontinental highway to be built through the south . 
in august 1835, jefferson and sarah traveled south to his sister anna's home in west feliciana parish ,  louisiana; the plantation was known as locust grove . 
after lee's surrender ,  a public meeting was held in shreveport ,  louisiana ,  at which many speakers supported continuation of the war . 
his latest film ,  `` jonathan meades on jargon '' ,  aired on bbc four on 27 may 2018.
his next series was `` abroad in britain '' ,  broadcast on bbc two in 1990.
meades' first foray into television was in 1985: a short film on the art and architecture of barcelona for the bbc two arts magazine programme `` saturday review '' . 
he made two films on the architectural historian nikolaus pevsner . 
in 2012, bbc four screened `` jonathan meades on france '' ,  a series in which he explored what he called his `` second country '' . 
in a 2010 interview with `` the arts desk '' ,  he revealed that he was working on a third novel . 
in 2009, meades toured scotland in a three-part bbc four series entitled `` jonathan meades: off kilter '' . 
the series spawned four sequels: `` further abroad ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- ,  `` even further abroad ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- ,  `` abroad again in britain ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- and `` abroad again ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- ,  along with several other series and stand-alone films . 
he would be credited as the sole author of all his subsequent work . 
meades has been married three times and has four grown-up daughters . 
his latest film ,  `` jonathan meades on jargon '' ,  aired on bbc four in may 2018, while a new anthology of uncollected writing from the last thirty years ,  `` pedro and ricky come again , ``  is currently crowdfunding at unbound . 
the 2008 two-part bbc four film `` jonathan meades: magnetic north '' celebrated the culture of northern europe ,  examining why the north suffers in the british popular imagination in comparison with the south . 
a three-part series on food culture ,  `` meades eats '' ,  aired on bbc four in 2003, again featuring biggins and hanly . 
in a 2008 interview with `` the independent '' ,  he indicated that the blame for this lay mostly with former bbc two controller jane root . 
it is described as `` the best of three decades of jonathan meades '' and as the sequel to `` peter knows what dick likes '' . 
pass worked often with pianist oscar peterson and vocalist ella fitzgerald . 
in the early 1970s ,  pass collaborated on a series of music books ,  and his `` joe pass guitar style ''  -lrb-  written with bill thrasher  -rrb-  is considered a leading improvisation textbook for students of jazz . 
joe pass  -lrb-  born joseph anthony jacobi passalaqua; january 13, 1929 – may 23, 1994 -rrb- was an american jazz guitarist of sicilian descent . 
although the earliest guitars used in jazz were acoustic and acoustic guitars are still sometimes used in jazz ,  most jazz guitarists since the 1940s have performed on an electrically amplified guitar or electric guitar . 
while jazz can be played on any type of guitar ,  from an acoustic instrument to a solid-bodied electric guitar such as a fender stratocaster ,  the full-depth archtop guitar has become known as the prototypical `` jazz guitar . `` 
jazz guitarists use their knowledge of harmony and jazz theory to create jazz chord `` voicings , ``  which emphasize the 3rd and 7th notes of the chord . 
the term jazz guitar may refer to either a type of guitar or to the variety of guitar playing styles used in the various genres which are commonly termed `` jazz '' . 
some jazz guitarists use their knowledge of jazz scales and chords to provide a walking bass-style accompaniment . 
jazz guitar playing styles include `` comping '' with jazz chord voicings  -lrb-  and in some cases walking bass lines  -rrb-  and `` blowing ''  -lrb-  improvising  -rrb-  over jazz chord progressions with jazz-style phrasing and ornaments . 
the gibson l5, an acoustic archtop guitar which was first produced in 1923, was an early “jazz”-style guitar which was used by early jazz guitarists such as eddie lang . 
over the years ,  jazz guitarists have been able to solo in standard jazz idioms ,  such as bebop ,  cool jazz and so on ,  while in also absorbing influences from rock guitarists ,  such as the use of electronic effects . 
jazz guitarists are not limited to single note improvisation . 
when jazz guitar players improvise ,  they use the scales ,  modes ,  and arpeggios associated with the chords in a tune's chord progression . 
jazz rhythm guitar often consists of very textural ,  odd-meter playing that includes generous use of exotic ,  difficult-to-fret chords . 
watt was a prolific correspondent . 
watt was much honoured in his own time . 
william murdoch joined boulton and watt in 1777.
watt had a working model later that same year . 
watt and boulton formed a hugely successful partnership ,  boulton and watt ,  which lasted for the next twenty-five years . 
from an early age watt was very interested in chemistry . 
watt continued to invent other things before and during his semi-retirement . 
watt retired in 1800, the same year that his fundamental patent and partnership with boulton expired . 
in inventing the locomotive ,  watt and stephenson were part inventors of time . `` 
there is a popular story that watt was inspired to invent the steam engine by seeing a kettle boiling ,  the steam forcing the lid to rise and thus showing watt the power of steam . 
these early engines were not manufactured by boulton and watt ,  but were made by others according to drawings made by watt ,  who served in the role of consulting engineer . 
watt was forced to go to court to enforce his claims . 
through boulton ,  watt finally had access to some of the best iron workers in the world . 
in 1800, the year of watt's retirement ,  the firm made a total of forty-one engines . 
watt patented the application of the sun and planet gear to steam in 1781 and a steam locomotive in 1784, both of which have strong claims to have been invented by murdoch . 
edward bull started constructing engines for boulton and watt in cornwall in 1781.
in 1759 watt's friend ,  john robison ,  called his attention to the use of steam as a source of motive power . 
watt adamantly opposed this and they circumvented the patent by their sun and planet gear in 1781.
watt was buried in the grounds of st .  mary's church ,  handsworth ,  in birmingham . 
he developed the concept of horsepower ,  and the si unit of power ,  the watt ,  was named after him . 
while working as an instrument maker at the university of glasgow ,  watt became interested in the technology of steam engines . 
in the netherlands ,  locke had time to return to his writing ,  spending a great deal of time re-working the `` essay '' and composing the `` letter on toleration . `` 
locke's concept of man started with the belief in creation . 
locke's philosophy on freedom is also derived from the bible . 
locke distinguishes two functions of money ,  as a `` counter '' to measure value ,  and as a `` pledge '' to lay claim to goods . 
silver and gold ,  he says ,  are treated to have equal value by all of humanity and can thus be treated as a pledge by anyone ,  while the value of paper money is only valid under the government which issues it . 
as for a country's money stock ,  if it is large relative to that of other countries ,  he says it will cause the country's exchange to rise above par ,  as an export balance would do . 
sydenham had a major effect on locke's natural philosophical thinkingan effect that would become evident in `` an essay concerning human understanding . `` 
these ideas would come to have profound influence on the declaration of independence and the constitution of the united states . 
locke's general theory of value and price is a supply and demand theory ,  which was set out in a letter to a member of parliament in 1691, titled `` some considerations on the consequences of the lowering of interest and the raising of the value of money '' . 
following locke's philosophy ,  the american declaration of independence founded human rights partially on the biblical belief in creation . 
as a medium of exchange ,  he states that `` money is capable by exchange to procure us the necessaries or conveniences of life , ``  and for loanable funds ,  `` it comes to be of the same nature with land by yielding a certain yearly income .  .  .  or interest . `` 
he also prepares estimates of the cash requirements for different economic groups  -lrb-  landholders ,  labourers and brokers  -rrb-  . 
during this time ,  locke served as secretary of the board of trade and plantations and secretary to the lords proprietor of carolina ,  which helped to shape his ideas on international trade and economics . 
events that happened during locke's lifetime include the english restoration ,  the great plague of london and the great fire of london . 
john locke  -lrb-  ; 29 august 1632 – 28 october 1704 -rrb- was an english philosopher and physician ,  widely regarded as one of the most influential of enlightenment thinkers and commonly known as the `` father of liberalism '' . 
three arguments are central:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- earthly judges ,  the state in particular ,  and human beings generally ,  cannot dependably evaluate the truth-claims of competing religious standpoints;  -lrb-  2 -rrb- even if they could ,  enforcing a single `` true religion '' would not have the desired effect ,  because belief cannot be compelled by violence;  -lrb-  3 -rrb- coercing religious uniformity would lead to more social disorder than allowing diversity . 
jewish holidays occur on the same dates every year in the hebrew calendar ,  but the dates vary in the gregorian . 
engler married colleen house engler in 1975, who served in the michigan house of representatives and ran for lieutenant governor of michigan in 1986.
michigan voters re-elected engler to his third and final term in 1998.
engler's lieutenant governor ,  dick posthumus ,  sought to succeed engler in the 2002 gubernatorial race . 
he was engler's running mate in the 1998 election and served from 1999 to 2003.
engler has spent most of his adult life in government . 
in 2013, engler joined the advisory board of blackford capital's michigan prosperity fund as chairman . 
engler endorsed texas governor george w .  bush in the 2000 republican primary . 
lacan was born in paris ,  the eldest of émilie and alfred lacan's three children . 
in 1934 lacan became a candidate member of the société psychanalytique de paris  -lrb-  spp  -rrb-  . 
the overture to the caracas encounter was to be lacan's final public address . 
by the 1960s ,  lacan was associated ,  at least in the public mind ,  with the far left in france . 
in autumn 1932, lacan began his training analysis with rudolph loewenstein ,  which was to last until 1938.
throughout the final decade of his life ,  lacan continued his widely followed seminars . 
during the early 1920s ,  lacan actively engaged with the parisian literary and artistic avant-garde . 
in 1953, after a disagreement over the variable-length session ,  lacan and many of his colleagues left the société parisienne de psychanalyse to form a new group ,  the société française de psychanalyse  -lrb-  sfp  -rrb-  . 
in 1920, after being rejected for military service on the grounds that he was too thin ,  lacan entered medical school . 
with the support of claude lévi-strauss and louis althusser ,  lacan was appointed lecturer at the école pratique des hautes études . 
the ace had an 8 kb rom containing the forth kernel and operating system ,  and the predefined dictionary of forth words in about 5 kb . 
some of the rom was written in z80 machine code ,  but some was also coded in forth . 
the next 8 kb were split in 2 blocks of 4 kb each . 
external roms were developed with ace forth to be used as control applications . 
the ace differed from other microcomputers of the time in that it used forth instead of the more popular basic . 
forth build up compiled applications . 
this tape-friendly and ram-saving solution was unique to the jupiter ace forth . 
they finished the season 8–8.
they finished the season 4–12.
the jaguars finished with records of 6–10 in both the 2001 and 2002 seasons . 
the jaguars managed to end their season with a 3–13 record . 
the jaguars finished the 2015 season with a record of 5–11, the team's fifth straight losing season and their eighth straight non-winning season . 
the jaguars unveiled new uniforms for the 2009 season . 
from 1995–97 and again from 2006–09, the stadium was named jacksonville municipal stadium . 
the jaguars and the carolina panthers joined the nfl as expansion teams for the 1995 season . 
bradley's w-l record as head coach of the jaguars was 14–48 in three seasons . 
the jaguars in 1995 were the first nfl team to have 2-tone borders on their numbers and lettering ,  and the first nfl team to show a complex logo  -lrb-  the crawling jaguar  -rrb-  on the sleeve . 
the team introduced a black alternate jersey in 2002.
the jaguars began the 2012 season with a new coaching staff and a new owner . 
jacksonville's 1996 season was a marked success as they won six of their last seven games of the season and finished with a record of 9–7.
charlotte was awarded the first franchise – the carolina panthers – in october 1993.
jacksonville looked like a team on the rise coming off of their 12–4 season ,  and was considered a playoff contender entering the season . 
the loss marked the end of an era that saw the jaguars make the playoffs in four of the team's first 5 years and would be the team's last playoff appearance until the 2005 season . 
after finishing the 2013 season with a 4–12 record ,  a two-win improvement over the previous season ,  the jaguars traded their 2011 nfl draft first round draft pick blaine gabbert to the san francisco 49ers for the 6th round pick of the 2014 nfl draft . 
after the 2002 season ,  head coach tom coughlin was fired after eight seasons ,  leading the jaguars to a total record of 68–60 and four trips to the playoffs . 
in fact ,  from 2009–12 gold had only been used in the team logo and as a minor accent color . 
in 1997, the franchise's third season ,  the jaguars and the steelers both finished the season with an 11–5 record ,  tops in the afc central division . 
the team plays its home games at tiaa bank field . 
on november 29, 2011, owner wayne weaver announced the firing of head coach jack del rio ,  whose record had been 3–8 through the first 12 weeks of the season and 68–71 over his 9-year tenure . 
along with the carolina panthers ,  the jacksonville jaguars entered the nfl as the first expansion teams in almost 20 years . 
prior to the 2012 season ,  new jaguars owner shahid khan announced that the team would once again use a black jersey ,  something they had not done since 2008.
the 2008 season began with high expectations for the jaguars . 
after their week 15 win over the houston texans ,  the jaguars clinched their first playoff appearance since 2007; they finished the season 10–6, enough to win the division for the first time since 1999.
the 2004 season ,  the 10th season of the jaguars franchise ,  resulted in a 9–7 record ,  their first winning season since 1999, with road victories against the green bay packers at lambeau field and the indianapolis colts at the rca dome . 
coughlin had worked in the nfl as a position coach ,  but he had been neither a head coach nor a coordinator in the nfl . 
in the first round of the 2017 nfl draft the jaguars selected running back leonard fournette of lsu . 
on january 20, 2012, the team hired john bonamego as special teams coordinator . 
the jaguars ended the season losing 28–3 to the two-time defending champion new england patriots on january 7, 2006 in the afc wild card playoff round . 
he immediately began the team's search for head coaching candidates . 
north frisia is also part of germany . 
in both `` beowulf ''  -lrb-  8th – 11th centuries  -rrb-  and `` widsith ''  -lrb-  10th century  -rrb-  ,  the `` eotenas ''  -lrb-  in the finn passage  -rrb-  are clearly distinguished from the `` geatas '' . 
the quoit brooch style has been regarded as jutish ,  from the 5th century . 
the jutes are believed to have originated from the jutland peninsula  -lrb-  called `` iutum '' in latin  -rrb-  and part of the north frisian coast . 
in this view ,  prayer is not a conversation . 
individual prayer is considered acceptable ,  but prayer with a quorum of ten adults—a `` minyan ''—is the most highly recommended form of prayer and is required for some prayers . 
it is not time-dependent and is mandatory for both jewish men and women . 
a distinction is made between individual prayer and communal prayer ,  which requires a quorum known as a `` minyan '' ,  with communal prayer being preferable as it permits the inclusion of prayers that otherwise would be omitted . 
traditionally ,  since the second temple period ,  three prayer services are recited daily: further additional prayers:
maimonides  -lrb-  mishneh torah ,  laws of prayer 1:4 -rrb- relates that until the babylonian exile ,  all jews composed their own prayers . 
according to halakha ,  all individual prayers and virtually all communal prayers may be said in any language that the person praying understands . 
jewish prayer  -lrb-   ,  `` tefillah '' ; plural  ,  `` tefillot '' ; yiddish תּפֿלה `` tfile ''  ,  plural תּפֿלות `` tfilles '' ; yinglish: davening from yiddish דאַוון `` daven '' ‘pray’  -rrb-  are the prayer recitations and jewish meditation traditions that form part of the observance of rabbinic judaism . 
to this framework various jewish sages added ,  from time to time ,  various prayers ,  and ,  for festivals especially ,  numerous hymns . 
in orthodox judaism ,  according to some authorities ,  women can count in the `` minyan '' for certain specific prayers ,  such as the `` birchot hagomel '' blessing ,  which both men and women are obligated to say publicly . 
as in the book of daniel: orthodox ,  modern orthodox and sefardic strands of judaism regard `` halakha ''  -lrb-  the collective body of religious laws for jews  -rrb-  as requiring jewish men to say `` tefillot ''  -lrb-  `` prayers ''  -rrb-  three times daily and four times daily on the sabbath and most jewish holidays ,  and five times on yom kippur . 
however ,  in general ,  today ,  jewish men are obligated to conduct `` tefillah ''  -lrb-  `` prayer ''  -rrb-  three times a day within specific time ranges  -lrb-  zmanim  -rrb-  ,  while ,  according to some posekim  -lrb-  `` jewish legal authorities ''  -rrb-  ,  women are only required to engage in `` tefillah '' once a day ,  others say at least twice a day . 
the oral torah ,  according to the talmud yerushalmi  -lrb-  tractate berachoth 4 -rrb- states why there are three basic `` tefillot ''  -lrb-  `` prayers ''  -rrb-  and who instituted them:
the hebrew word `` mashiach ''  -lrb-  or `` moshiach ''  -rrb-  refers to the jewish idea of the messiah . 
while the name of jewish messiah is considered to be one of the things that precede creation ,  he is not considered divine ,  in contrast to christianity where jesus is both divine and the messiah . 
the books of the hebrew prophets elaborated and prophesied about the end of days . 
jewish eschatology is the area of theology and philosophy concerned with events that will happen in the end of days and related concepts ,  according to the hebrew bible and jewish thought . 
it is a reference to the jewish leader and king that will redeem israel in the end of days and usher in a messianic era of peace and prosperity for both the living and deceased . 
macleod was a prolific writer . 
in the summer of 1923 macleod resumed other research . 
john macleod was a distinguished physiologist even before the discovery of insulin . 
macleod was born in clunie ,  near dunkeld in central scotland . 
on his return ,  macleod was surprised and expressed doubt about the results . 
macleod did not continue to work on insulin ,  but he remained active as a researcher ,  lecturer and author . 
jackson is the anchor for the jackson ,  mississippi metropolitan statistical area . 
by 1930, there were 14 derricks in the jackson skyline . 
jackson ,  officially the city of jackson ,  is the capital and most populous city of the u . s .  state of mississippi . 
jackson was connected by public road to vicksburg and clinton in 1826.
the largest community is located in choctaw northeast of jackson . 
the city sits on the pearl river and is located in the greater jackson prairie region of mississippi . 
the northern line of confederate defenses in jackson during the siege was located along a road near downtown jackson ,  now known as fortification street . 
in 1863, during the military campaign which ended in the capture of vicksburg ,  union forces captured jackson during two battles—once before the fall of vicksburg and once after the fall of vicksburg . 
confederate forces marched out of jackson in early july 1863 to break the siege of vicksburg . 
because of the siege and following destruction ,  few antebellum structures have survived in jackson . 
it is named for u . s .  president andrew jackson and considered to be one of michigan's `` cabinet counties '' ,  named for members of jackson's cabinet . 
lopez's third studio album ,  `` this is me .  .  .  then '' ,  was released on november 25, 2002.
lopez has also been an active advocate for the time's up movement . 
in august 1996, lopez had a supporting role in the comedy `` jack '' . 
in 2009, lopez launched the lopez family foundation  -lrb-  originally known as the maribel foundation  -rrb-  alongside her sister ,  lynda . 
lopez's debut single ,  `` if you had my love '' ,  was released in may 1999, as she began to ready her first album . 
the perfume was inspired by lopez's forthcoming `` return to the spotlight '' . 
in march 2004, lopez had a minor role in the film `` jersey girl '' ,  alongside affleck . 
lopez's personal life has attracted widespread media attention . 
lopez provided the voice of azteca in the computer-animated film `` antz '' in october . 
 ,  lopez has sold more than 80 million records worldwide ,  including 40 million albums ,  and her films have grossed a cumulative total of  . 
lopez's provocative stage performances have also drawn scrutiny at times . 
lopez launched the dance again world tour ,  her first headlining concert tour ,  on june 14.
lopez reprised her voice role as shira in the animated film ``  '' ,  which was released in july 2016.
the film was successful at the box office ,  and was considered a rebound for lopez following `` gigli '' . 
lopez is a tabloid fixture and has admitted to having a `` less-than-perfect '' public image . 
lopez described it as `` one of the world's most shocking and disturbing ,  underreported crimes against humanity . `` 
after placing her career on hiatus ,  lopez released her fourth studio album ,  `` rebirth '' ,  in february 2005.
in august 2003, lopez starred opposite affleck in the romantic comedy `` gigli '' . 
while working on her first album ,  `` on the 6 '' ,  lopez began dating record producer and rapper sean combs . 
lopez ventured into the music industry with her debut studio album `` on the 6 ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- ,  which helped propel the latin pop movement in american music . 
after the conclusion of her dance again world tour ,  lopez began recording her eighth studio album ,  `` a . k . a . 
lopez's first greatest hits album ,  `` dance again .  .  .  the hits '' ,  was released on july 24, 2012 in the united states . 
other recurrent themes in lopez's music have included her upbringing in the bronx and women's empowerment . 
taylor was the scottish sidecar champion with passenger lewis ward in 1977.
taylor died in finland as a consequence of a racing incident in 1982.
in 2012, the race was held at east fortune where taylor started his racing career nearly 40 years ago . 
