bruce mclaren motor racing was founded in 1963 by new zealander bruce mclaren . 
the mclaren m23, designed by gordon coppuck ,  was the team's new car for the season . 
having been fired by renault ,  prost was once again at mclaren for  . 
mclaren racing limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of mclaren group . 
mclaren racing limited ,  competing as mclaren f1 team ,  is a british formula one team based at the mclaren technology centre ,  woking ,  surrey ,  england . 
the team is a wholly owned subsidiary of the mclaren group . 
besides the cars raced by the works team ,  a variety of mclaren racing cars have also been used by customer teams . 
founded in 1963 by new zealander bruce mclaren . 
mclaren retained their alonso - button pair for the season . 
mclaren ,  though ,  lost the constructors' championship to ferrari . 
bruce made the team's grand prix debut at the 1966 monaco race  -lrb-  of the current formula one teams only ferrari is older  -rrb-  . 
founded in 1963 by new zealander bruce mclaren ,  the team won its first grand prix at the 1968 belgian grand prix ,  but their greatest initial success was in can-am ,  which they dominated from 1967 to 1971.
mclaren's formula one team was originally called bruce mclaren motor racing ,  and for their first season ran white-and-green coloured cars ,  which came about as a result of a deal with the makers of the film `` grand prix '' . 
during the 1993 season mclaren took part in a seven part bbc television documentary called `` a season with mclaren '' . 
on 10 april 2018, brown became the ceo of mclaren racing ,  as part of an operational restructure of the mclaren group . 
ron dennis retired as mclaren team principal in 2009, handing over to long time mclaren employee martin whitmarsh . 
mclaren racing is part of the mclaren group which includes five other associated companies; in 2009 the group was said to have `` more than 1300 '' employees . 
with this ,  räikkönen scored the team's and his only win of the year at the belgian grand prix ,  as mclaren finished fifth in the constructors' championship ,  their worst ranking since 1983.
the team also lost räikkönen to ferrari at the end of the year . 
with former mclaren men nichols and prost  -lrb-  barnard had moved to the benetton team  -rrb-  ,  ferrari pushed the british team more closely in  . 
honda replaced mercedes as mclaren's engine supplier from the 2015 season . 
in 1981, mclaren merged with ron dennis' project four racing; dennis took over as team principal and shortly after organised a buyout of the original mclaren shareholders to take full control of the team . 
in 1981, mclaren merged with ron dennis' project four racing; dennis took over as team principal and shortly after organised a buyout of the original mclaren shareholders to take full control of the team . 
from 2015 till 2017, during their 3-year run with honda ,  they competed under the name `` mclaren honda '' . 
at the season opening australian grand prix ,  fernando alonso scored the team's best finish since the 2016 monaco grand prix with fifth ,  alonso said that the team's target would be red bull racing . 
it is named after the two main towns in its territory: carrara and massa ,  its capital . 
this was the name that had been designated to the city of massa or massa of carrara from 1700 until the formation of the kingdom of italy  -lrb-  1860 -rrb- ,  to distinguish it from other homonymous cities . 
the province of massa and carrara was left crippled ,  waiting for a reorganization . 
it is known for its brunello di montalcino wine . 
the first walls of the town were built in the 13th century . 
montalcino is a hill town and `` comune '' in the province of siena ,  tuscany ,  central italy . 
as time went by ,  many medieval hill towns ,  including montalcino ,  went into serious economic decline . 
in the case of montalcino ,  gradual economic decline has recently been reversed by economic growth due to the increasing popularity of the town's famous wine brunello di montalcino ,  made from the sangiovese grosso grapes grown within the comune . 
there are also modern works from the early 20th century in the museum . 
in 2010, the festa europea della musica had its first edition in montalcino ,  to promote tourism and the produce ,  especially wine ,  of the region . 
blennies are popular aquarium fish ,  and for good reason . 
clownfish ,  more technically known as anemonefish ,  are the classic aquarium fish . 
chromis are perhaps the ultimate reef fish . 
when properly cared for ,  butterflyfish can make beautiful and distinctive additions to fish only marine aquariums . 
most damselfish are aggressive and difficult to catch once you put them in an aquarium . 
unlike many other saltwater aquarium inhabitants ,  they can be kept in groups . 
dragonets are often mis-categorized as gobies or blennies by fish sellers . 
in this exceedingly large group of fish ,  few are considered proper aquarium inhabitants ,  for various reasons including diet and size . 
that a publication calls itself a `` journal '' does not make it a journal in the technical sense; `` the wall street journal '' is actually a newspaper . 
the `` moniteur ottoman '' was a gazette written in french and first published in 1831 on the order of mahmud ii . 
founded by herbert ingram in 1842, `` the illustrated london news '' was the first illustrated magazine . 
satirical magazines of turkey have a long tradition ,  with the first magazine  -lrb-  `` diyojen ''  -rrb-  published in 1869.
cosmetics ,  which ,  until the 1920s ,  were not typically accepted in american society because of their association with prostitution ,  became ,  for the first time ,  extremely popular . 
the oldest consumer magazine still in print is `` the scots magazine '' ,  which was first published in 1739, though multiple changes in ownership and gaps in publication totalling over 90 years weaken that claim . 
immortalized in movies and magazines ,  young women's fashions of the 1920s set both a trend and social statement ,  a breaking-off from the rigid victorian way of life . 
historian m .  patricia dougherty says this process created a distance between the church and the new monarch and enabled catholics to develop a new understanding of church-state relationships and the source of political authority . 
the subscription business models for distribution fall into three main categories . 
they called their circuit a `` multivibrator '' because its output waveform was rich in harmonics . 
merseburg is where the merseburg incantations were rediscovered in 1841.
merseburg was first mentioned in 850.
merseburg is part of the central german metropolitan region . 
venenien was incorporated into merseburg on 1 january 1949.
geusa is a part of merseburg since 1 january 2010.
it combined read-only memory ,  read/write memory ,  processor and clock on one chip and was targeted at embedded systems . 
over two billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 1997, and according to semico ,  over four billion 8-bit microcontrollers were sold in 2006.
in 2002, about 55% of all cpus sold in the world were 8-bit microcontrollers and microprocessors . 
however ,  both processors required external chips to implement a working system ,  raising total system cost ,  and making it impossible to economically computerize appliances . 
the first microprocessor was the 4-bit intel 4004 released in 1972, with the intel 8008 and other more capable microprocessors becoming available over the next several years . 
proust had a close relationship with his mother . 
1908 was an important year for proust's development as a writer . 
proust's father ,  adrien proust ,  was a prominent pathologist and epidemiologist ,  studying cholera in europe and asia . 
from these disparate fragments proust began to shape a novel on which he worked continually during this period . 
proust was involved in writing and publishing from an early age . 
proust set out to translate two of ruskin's works into french ,  but was hampered by an imperfect command of english . 
that year proust also began working on a novel ,  which was eventually published in 1952 and titled `` jean santeuil '' by his posthumous editors . 
the exact influence of proust's sexuality on his writing is a topic of debate . 
 -lrb-  illiers was renamed illiers-combray in 1971 on the occasion of the proust centenary celebrations .   -rrb- 
beginning in 1895 proust spent several years reading carlyle ,  emerson ,  and john ruskin . 
michelangelo returned to florence in 1499.
michelangelo arrived in rome 25 june 1496 at the age of 21.
michelangelo worked on a number of architectural projects at this time . 
cavalieri remained devoted to michelangelo until his death . 
in 1546, michelangelo was appointed architect of st .  peter's basilica ,  rome . 
the `` madonna of the steps '' is michelangelo's earliest known work in marble . 
lorenzo de' medici's death on 8 april 1492 brought a reversal of michelangelo's circumstances . 
michelangelo died in rome in 1564, at the age of 88  -lrb-  three weeks before his 89th birthday  -rrb-  . 
in rome ,  michelangelo lived near the church of santa maria di loreto . 
in 1542, michelangelo met cecchino dei bracci who died only a year later ,  inspiring michelangelo to write forty-eight funeral epigrams . 
michelangelo was the first western artist whose biography was published while he was alive . 
in the right foreground ,  michelangelo walks out of the painting with an expression of disillusionment . 
in his lifetime ,  michelangelo was often called `` il divino ''  -lrb-  `` the divine one ''  -rrb-  . 
the last sculpture that michelangelo worked on  -lrb-  six days before his death  -rrb-  ,  the `` rondanini pietà '' could never be completed because michelangelo carved it away until there was insufficient stone . 
michelangelo was born on 6 march 1475 in caprese ,  known today as caprese michelangelo ,  a small town situated in valtiberina ,  near arezzo ,  tuscany . 
michelangelo was a devout catholic whose faith deepened at the end of his life . 
in the same year ,  giorgio vasari published his `` vita '' ,  including a biography of michelangelo . 
in 1520 the medici came back to michelangelo with another grand proposal ,  this time for a family funerary chapel in the basilica of san lorenzo . 
while still working on the `` last judgement '' ,  michelangelo received yet another commission for the vatican . 
michelangelo ,  with leonardo da vinci and raphael ,  is one of the three giants of the florentine high renaissance . 
the painting heralds the forms ,  movement and colour that michelangelo was to employ on the ceiling of the sistine chapel . 
a number of michelangelo's works of painting ,  sculpture and architecture rank among the most famous in existence . 
following the 1924 battle of mecca ,  the sharif of mecca was overthrown by the saud family ,  and mecca was incorporated into saudi arabia . 
the total area of mecca today is over  . 
another name of mecca is `` ṫihāmah ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
population density in mecca is very high . 
the black death pandemic hit mecca in 1349.
mecca features a hot desert climate . 
mecca was regularly hit by cholera outbreaks . 
the pilgrimage to mecca attracts millions of muslims from all over the world . 
in 1803 the city was captured by the first saudi state ,  which held mecca until 1813.
mecca owns its hometown paper ,  `` al nadwa '' . 
mecca has only the small mecca east airport with no airline service ,  so mecca is served by king abdulaziz international airport located at jeddah ,  about 100 kilometres from the city centre . 
between 1830 and 1930 cholera broke out among pilgrims at mecca 27 times . 
muhammad's migration to medina shifted the focus away from mecca . 
muhammad ali pasha successfully returned mecca to ottoman control in 1813.
one of the world travelers to mecca in the fifteenth century was ibn battuta . 
mecca is the capital of the makkah region ,  which includes neighboring jeddah . 
king abdulaziz stadium is the largest stadium in mecca with capacity of 38,000.
in 628, muhammad and his followers wanted to enter mecca for pilgrimage ,  but were blocked by the quraysh . 
in pre-modern mecca ,  the city used a few chief sources of water . 
in the islamic view ,  the beginnings of mecca are attributed to ishmael's descendants . 
the full official name is `` makkah al-mukarramah ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  or `` makkatu l-mukarramah ''  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  which means `` mecca the honored '' ,  but is also loosely translated as `` the holy city of mecca '' . 
mecca is at an elevation of above sea level ,  and approximately inland from the red sea . 
it has been reported that there are now fewer than 20 structures remaining in mecca that date back to the time of muhammad . 
mecca is governed by the municipality of mecca ,  a municipal council of fourteen locally elected members headed by a mayor  -lrb-  called `` al-amin ''  -rrb-  appointed by the saudi government . 
muhammad was born in mecca in 570, and thus islam has been inextricably linked with it ever since . 
the first press was brought to mecca in 1885 by osman nuri pasha ,  an ottoman wāli . 
as the birthplace of muhammad ,  and the site of muhammad's first revelation of the quran  -lrb-  specifically ,  a cave from mecca  -rrb-  ,  mecca is regarded as the holiest city in the religion of islam and a pilgrimage to it known as the hajj is obligatory for all able muslims . 
in pre-modern mecca the most common sports were impromptu wrestling and foot races . 
mormons believe that god re-established the early christian church as found in the new testament through joseph smith . 
mainstream mormonism is defined by the leadership of the lds church which identifies itself as christian . 
some lds church members have worked towards a more liberal reform of the church . 
mormonism categorizes itself within christianity ,  and nearly all mormons self-identify as christian . 
in mormonism ,  the central part of god's plan is the atonement of jesus christ . 
the two broad movements outside mainstream mormonism are mormon fundamentalism ,  and liberal reformist mormonism . 
the lds church seeks to distance itself from other branches of mormonism ,  particularly those that practice polygamy . 
one way mormon fundamentalism distinguishes itself from mainstream mormonism is through the practice of plural marriage . 
mormons believe that smith and subsequent church leaders could speak scripture `` when moved upon by the holy ghost . `` 
mormonism is the predominant religious tradition of the latter day saint movement of restorationist christianity started by joseph smith in western new york in the 1820s and 30s . 
because of the formal abolition of plural marriage in 1890, several smaller groups of mormons broke with the lds church forming several denominations of mormon fundamentalism . 
islam and mormonism both originate in the abrahamic traditions . 
lorenzo snow is quoted as saying `` as man now is god once was: as god now is ,  man may be . `` 
the largest group of mormons  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  accepted brigham young as the new prophet/leader and emigrated to what became the utah territory . 
the religions differ significantly in their views on god . 
the mormon affinity for judaism is expressed by the many references to judaism in the mormon liturgy . 
additionally ,  mormons claim the martyrdom of the apostles led to the loss of priesthood authority to administer the church and its ordinances . 
in 1998, meat loaf released `` the very best of meat loaf '' . 
this was the last album that meat loaf did with the record label epic until the 'best of' album . 
in 2003, meat loaf released his album `` couldn't have said it better '' . 
the album reached no . 
according to meat loaf ,  steinman had given the songs `` total eclipse of the heart '' and `` making love out of nothing at all '' to meat loaf for this album . 
according to meat loaf's 1998 autobiography ,  the album sold poorly because of its production . 
in 1995, meat loaf released his seventh studio album ,  `` welcome to the neighbourhood '' . 
meat loaf sold out over 160 concerts during his 2005 tour ,  `` hair of the dog '' . 
meat loaf and steinman started `` bat out of hell '' in 1972, but did not get serious about it until the end of 1974.
the album featured duets with patti russo and meat loaf's daughter pearl aday . 
the title track still regularly forms part of meat loaf concerts ,  and was one of few 1980s songs to feature on the 1998 hit album `` the very best of meat loaf '' . 
in 1984, meat loaf went to england to record the album `` bad attitude ''; it was released that year . 
the album did not feature any songs from his 1986 album `` blind before i stop '' . 
after the tour ,  meat loaf rejoined the cast of `` hair '' ,  this time on broadway . 
meat loaf and steinman formed the band the neverland express to tour in support of `` bat out of hell '' . 
meat loaf said in 2011 that he planned to release a christmas album called `` hot holidays '' . 
denying reports in the press over the years of a rift between meat loaf and steinman ,  meat loaf told dan rather that he and steinman never stopped talking ,  and that the lawsuits reported in the press were between lawyers and managers ,  and not between meat loaf and steinman . 
with the publicity generated from `` hair '' ,  meat loaf was invited to record with motown . 
following the success of meat loaf's touring in the 1980s ,  he and steinman began work during the christmas of 1990 on the sequel to `` bat out of hell '' . 
as of 2019, the album has not yet been released . 
in germany ,  meat loaf was commercially successful following the release of `` bat out of hell ii '' . 
 ''i'd lie for you  -lrb-  and that's the truth  -rrb- ``  was a duet with patti russo ,  who had been touring with meat loaf and singing on his albums since 1993.
of the twelve songs on the album ,  two are written by steinman . 
the following is a list of operating system kernels derived from mach and operating systems with kernels derived from mach:
under mach ,  the ipc system was used for this role instead . 
ipc overhead is a major issue for mach 3 systems . 
development under such a system would be easier . 
other performance problems were related to mach's support for multiprocessor systems . 
one of the first systems to use a pipe-like system as the basis for the operating system was the aleph kernel developed at the university of rochester . 
although the messages were triggered by system calls as they would be on other kernels ,  under mach that was pretty much all the kernel did—handling the actual request would be up to some other program . 
this system would implement the interprocess communications system with dramatically higher performance . 
thus mach would begin as a monolithic system similar to existing unix systems ,  and evolve more towards the microkernel concept over time . 
to quote one text on mach:
under mach ,  and like unix ,  the operating system again becomes primarily a collection of utilities . 
if the existing system could be ported to run on mach ,  it would seem it would then be easy to change the platform underneath . 
mach is the logical successor to carnegie mellon's accent kernel . 
mach's derivatives are the basis of the modern operating system kernels in gnu hurd and apple's operating systems macos ,  ios ,  tvos ,  and watchos . 
pipes were built on the underlying input/output system . 
for example ,  getting the system time involves an ipc call to the user-space server maintaining system clock . 
the mach virtual memory management system was also adopted in 4.4bsd by the bsd developers at csrg ,  and appears in modern bsd-derived unix systems ,  such as freebsd . 
given a syscall that does nothing ,  a full round-trip under bsd would require about 40μs ,  whereas on a user-space mach system it would take just under 500μs . 
the existence of ports and the use of ipc is perhaps the most fundamental difference between mach and traditional kernels . 
during the 1960s other molokans settled in southern alaska and australia . 
approximately 25,000 molokans reside in the united states ,  of whom about 5,000 `` ethnically '' identify as molokans . 
the molokans feared that history would repeat itself in america as it had in russia . 
the judaizers preceded the modern day molokans . 
nonetheless ,  these were `` spiritual christians '' not directly related to the group later known as `` molokans '' . 
a group of molokan families are also living in south america in the country of uruguay . 
the `` constant '' molokan sect condemned the new sect to authorities ,  resulting in betrayals and imprisonment for many of the molokan jumpers . 
it is said that ,  in 1900, despite the persecution there could have been about a half-million spiritual christian `` molokane '' in the russia empire . 
molokans adhere to old testament laws in the spirit of the christian new covenant . 
as the molokans traditionally practice endogamy and marry within the faith . 
musical chairs  ,  also known as trip to jerusalem ,  is a game of elimination involving players ,  chairs ,  and music ,  with one fewer chair than players . 
musical chairs is a game where a number of chairs ,  one fewer than the number of players ,  are arranged facing outward with the players standing in a circle just outside the chairs . 
in the all-inclusive version of `` musical chairs '' everyone plays but nobody loses ,  with one chair but no player eliminated each round until only one chair remains . 
the music resumes and the cycle repeats until there is only one player left in the game ,  who is the winner . 
he has also held the post of new zealand ambassador to the united states from 2010 to 2015.
moore was born in whakatane ,  bay of plenty ,  new zealand in 1949.
following his retirement from new zealand politics ,  moore was the director-general of the world trade organization from 1999 to 2002.
as a result of his dumping as labour leader ,  he strongly considered forming a break-away party ,  the new zealand democratic coalition ,  for the 1996 mmp election but then decided against it . 
mozi also encourages early marriage . 
that law of heaven is love . 
mozi views aesthetics as nearly useless . 
law and order was an important aspect of mozi's philosophy . 
mohism is best known for the concepts of `` impartial care ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
mozi calls fatalism a heresy which needs to be destroyed . 
by the time of mozi ,  chinese rulers and the wealthier citizens already had the practice of extravagant burial rituals . 
to mozi ,  bare necessities are sufficient; resources should be directed to benefit man . 
mohism or moism  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an ancient chinese philosophy of logic ,  rational thought and science developed by the academic scholars who studied under the ancient chinese philosopher mozi  -lrb-  c .  470 bc – c .  391 bc  -rrb-  and embodied in an eponymous book: the `` mozi '' . 
the mohist beliefs were popular for a time in china ,  and mohist followers were employed for their ability as negotiators and as defense engineers . 
mozi spoke against such long and lavish funerals and also argued that this would even create resentment among the living . 
this may occur in those with either migraine with aura or migraine without aura . 
sensory aurae are the second most common type; they occur in 30–40% of people with auras . 
rarely ,  an aura occurs without a subsequent headache . 
symptoms may start up to 24 hours after a trigger . 
these psychiatric disorders are approximately 2–5 times more common in people without aura ,  and 3–10 times more common in people with aura . 
the exact mechanism of the head pain which occurs during a migraine is unknown . 
increasing dietary intake may be better . 
migraines with aura appear to be a risk factor for ischemic stroke doubling the risk . 
prodromal or premonitory symptoms occur in about 60% of those with migraines ,  with an onset that can range from two hours to two days before the start of pain or the aura . 
triptans such as sumatriptan are effective for both pain and nausea in up to 75% of people . 
an aura is a transient focal neurological phenomenon that occurs before or during the headache . 
negative impacts also frequently occur for a person's family . 
they are not addictive ,  but may cause medication-overuse headaches if used more than 10 days per month . 
ibuprofen helps decrease pain in children with migraines . 
visual effects occur most frequently; they occur in up to 99% of cases and in more than 50% of cases are not accompanied by sensory or motor effects . 
associated symptoms are less common in the elderly . 
it is believed that when depolarization travels down the underside of the brain ,  nerves that sense pain in the head and neck are triggered . 
botulinum toxin has been found to be useful in those with chronic migraines but not those with episodic ones . 
migraines may be induced by triggers ,  with some reporting it as an influence in a minority of cases and others the majority . 
chronic migraines occur in approximately 1.4 to 2.2% of the population . 
migraine surgery ,  which involves decompression of certain nerves around the head and neck ,  may be an option in certain people who do not improve with medications . 
the film was banned in ireland . 
the film's music was composed by peter dasent . 
the film was marketed in some countries with the tagline: `` from the creators of `` bad taste '' ,  comes a film with no taste at all ! `` 
it is the first jackson film that was co-written by his future wife fran walsh ,  who has gone on to act as co-writer for all his subsequent films . 
 ''meet the feebles '' was given its public premiere at a fantasy film festival in hamburg ,  in april 1990.
mafic lava ,  before cooling ,  has a low viscosity ,  in comparison with felsic lava ,  due to the lower silica content in mafic magma . 
chemically ,  mafic rocks are enriched in iron ,  magnesium and calcium and typically dark in color . 
if the bishop is a diocesan rather than a titular bishop ,  he is likely to delegate the daily functions to an auxiliary bishop or a lower cleric . 
but the jurisdiction of military ordinariates is cumulative to that of the diocesan bishops . 
in september 2016, ea mobile ,  maxis and bioware joined ea worldwide studios . 
maxis' emeryville studio was closed in march 2015, moving development of maxis titles to other ea studio locations . 
the third edition in the series ,  `` the sims 3 '' ,  was released by ea in 2009, developed by the sims studio . 
at the 2012 game developers conference ,  ea announced a new `` simcity '' along with a new logo for the maxis brand . 
maxis is a subsidiary of electronic arts  -lrb-  ea  -rrb-  . 
ea maxis as a subsidiary ,  label and brand ,  includes: the sims studio  -lrb-  redwood shores  -rrb-  ,  ea salt lake  -lrb-  salt lake city  -rrb-  and maxis helsinki  -lrb-  helsinki ,  finland  -rrb-  ,  a studio focused on `` the sims '' for mobile platforms . 
in 2013, ea maxis label emeryville released a new version of `` simcity '' . 
however ,  in 2012 an ea restructure saw the sims studio reintegrated with the revitalised ea maxis label ,  and since the 9th expansion of `` the sims 3 '' ,  ``  , ``  which was released in early 2013, `` the sims '' was back in development control of ea maxis ,  including expansion packs and developments ,  with the sims studio operating inside ea maxis . 
in 2004, maxis' longtime studios in walnut creek were closed ,  and the staff moved to ea offices in redwood city . 
maxis is the creator of one of the best-selling computer games of all time ,  `` the sims ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- ,  its first major sequel `` the sims 2 ''  -lrb-  2004 -rrb- ,  and the majority of their later expansions . 
he was elected to the italian chamber of deputies in 1924.
mario berlinguer  -lrb-  ; sassari ,  august 29, 1891 – rome ,  september 5, 1969 -rrb- was an italian lawyer and politician . 
some of those who criticized us foreign policy at the time contended that us power in the cold war was used only to pursue an economically-driven agenda . 
moral equivalence is a term used in political debate ,  usually to deny that a moral comparison can be made of two sides in a conflict ,  or in the actions or tactics of two sides . 
however these negotiations may prove difficult in that both parties in a conflict believe that they are morally superior to the other ,  and are unwilling to negotiate on basis of moral equivalence . 
examples include `` pink motel ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- ,  `` motel blue 19 ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  `` backroad motel ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- ,  `` stateline motel ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- ,  `` niagara motel ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  and `` motel 5150 ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- . 
motels are often individually owned ,  though motel chains do exist . 
the `` cockroach motel '' and `` no-tell motel '' stereotypes continue with various motels in the series ,  including the happy earwig motel and worst western . 
more recent manifestations include `` paradise motel ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- ,  `` talking walls ''  -lrb-  1987 -rrb- ,  `` desire and hell at sunset motel ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- ,  and the korean films `` motel cactus ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- and `` the motel ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- . 
these motels have daily to monthly rates . 
in the 1970s and 1980s ,  independent motels were losing ground to chains such as motel 6 and ramada ,  existing roadside locations were increasingly bypassed by freeways ,  and the development of the motel chain led to a blurring of motel and hotel . 
the american hotel and motel association removed 'motel' from its name in 2000, becoming the american hotel and lodging association . 
the first australian motels include the west end motel in ballina ,  new south wales  -lrb-  1937 -rrb- and the penzance motel in eagle hawk ,  tasmania  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- . 
as many motels vied for their place on busy highways ,  the beach-front motel instantly became a success . 
most of these establishments ,  previously called motels ,  may still look like motels but are now called hotels ,  inns ,  or lodges . 
glenrio once boasted the `` first motel in texas ''  -lrb-  as seen when arriving from new mexico  -rrb-  or `` last motel in texas ''  -lrb-  the same motel ,  its signage viewed from the opposite side  -rrb-  . 
with the introduction of chains ,  independent motels started to decline . 
the division between motel and hotel ,  like elsewhere ,  has been blurred ,  so many of these are low-end hotels . 
motels gained international popularity in countries such as thailand ,  germany ,  and japan but in some countries the term `` motel '' now connotes either a low-end hotel  -lrb-  such as hotel formule 1 in europe  -rrb-  or a no-tell motel . 
by the 1990s ,  motel 6 and super 8 were built with inside corridors  -lrb-  so were nominally hotels  -rrb-  while other former motel brands  -lrb-  including ramada and holiday inn  -rrb-  had become mid-price hotel chains . 
the 1950s and 1960s was the pinnacle of the motel industry in the united states and canada . 
best western  -lrb-  1946 -rrb- was a similar referral chain of independent western u . s .  motels . 
broadway musicals have also paid homage to the lowbrow reputation of motel culture ,  demonstrated by songs such as `` the no-tel motel '' from `` prettybelle '' and `` at the bed-d-by motel '' from `` lolita ,  my love ''
the original concept of a motel as a motorist's hotel which grew up around the highways of the 1920s is of american origin . 
a motel is a hotel designed for motorists and usually has a parking area for motor vehicles . 
the term `` motel '' originated with the motel inn of san luis obispo ,  originally called the milestone mo-tel ,  which was constructed in 1925 by arthur heineman  -lrb-  although some hotels with a similar architecture existed at least as early as 1915 -rrb- . 
the connotations of `` motel '' as adult motel or love hotel in both the spanish and portuguese languages can be awkward for u . s . -based chains accustomed to using the term in its original meaning ,  although this issue is diminishing as chains  -lrb-  such as super 8 motels  -rrb-  increasingly drop the word `` motel '' from their corporate identities at home . 
in the film `` sparkle lite motel ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- and the tv miniseries `` the lost room ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  the motel made forays into the realms of science fiction . 
the scenario of an isolated motel being operated by a serial killer ,  whose guests subsequently become victims ,  has been exploited in a number of other horror films ,  notably `` motel hell ''  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- and `` mountaintop motel massacre ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- . 
in tv's `` the simpsons '' ,  the sleep eazy motel signage displays its name with missing neon lighting segments ,  `` sleep-eazy motel '' ,  a sleazy motel advertising hourly rates and adult movies . 
alamo plaza hotel courts ,  the first motel chain ,  was sold off in pieces as the original owners retired . 
the emergence of freeways bypassing existing highways  -lrb-  such as the interstate highway system in the u . s .   -rrb-  caused older motels further away from the new roads to become abandoned as they lost clientele to motel chains built along the new road's offramps . 
several historic motels are listed on the us national register of historic places . 
the first of these were ownership chains ,  in which a small group of people owned and operated all of the motels under one common brand . 
the early motels were built in the southwestern united states as a replacement for the tourist camps and tourist cabins which had grown around the u . s .  highway system . 
united motor courts ,  founded in 1933 by a group of motel owners in the southwestern u . s .  ,  published a guidebook until the early 1950s . 
the british soap opera `` crossroads '' was set in a motel in the english midlands which was originally based on american-style motels with chalets but later was transformed into a luxury country hotel . 
the earliest motel chains ,  proprietary brands for multiple properties built with common architecture ,  were born in the 1930s . 
the oakleigh motel in oakleigh ,  victoria ,  australia ,  constructed using googie architecture during the 1956 summer olympics as one of the first motels in the state ,  was added to the victorian heritage register in 2009.
some individual franchisees built new hotels with modern amenities alongside or in place of their former holiday inn motels; by 2010 a mid-range hotel with an indoor pool was the standard required to remain a holiday inn . 
the twin bridges motor hotel ,  established in 1957 near washington ,  d . c .  as a member of quality courts ,  became the first marriott in 1959, expanding from motel to hotel in 1962.
by the 1980s ,  motels were losing ground rapidly to franchises such as journey's end corporation and the u . s . -based chains . 
but there is no known proof that all of them are so ,  nor any known proof that not all of them are so . 
and so far ,  every one thus tested has in fact been the sum of two primes . 
constructivism is often identified with intuitionism ,  although intuitionism is only one constructivist program . 
with the omission of the law of the excluded middle as an axiom ,  the remaining logical system has an existence property that classical logic does not have: whenever formula_2 is proven constructively ,  then in fact formula_3 is proven constructively for  -lrb-  at least  -rrb-  one particular formula_4, often called a witness . 
joachim  -lrb-  1505–1571 -rrb- ,  the future elector of brandenburg ,  was the eldest son and heir of their current claimant of luxembourg ,  joachim i ,  elector of brandenburg  -lrb-  1484–1535 -rrb- ,  the eldest son and heir of margaret of thuringia  -lrb-  1449–1501 -rrb- ,  dowager electress of brandenburg ,  herself the eldest daughter and heiress of anna ,  duchess of luxembourg and william of saxony ,  landgrave of thuringia . 
she was a granddaughter of the elisabeth aforementioned , mother of the jagiellonians ,  queen of poland ,  who had claimed the duchy of luxembourg in 1460s as being the younger daughter of the last luxembourg heiress elisabeth of luxembourg ,  queen of bohemia . 
if the `` x '' ion is k or na ,  the mica is a `` common '' mica ,  whereas if the `` x '' ion is ca ,  the mica is classed as a `` brittle '' mica . 
muscovite  -lrb-  also known as common mica ,  isinglass ,  or potash mica  -rrb-  is a hydrated phyllosilicate mineral of aluminium and potassium with formula kal -lrb-  alsio  -rrb-  -lrb-  foh  -rrb-  ,  or  -lrb-  kf  -rrb-  -lrb-  alo  -rrb-  -lrb-  sio  -rrb-  -lrb-  ho  -rrb-  . 
sheets of muscovite 5 meters × 3 meters  -lrb-  16.5 feet × 10 feet  -rrb-  have been found in nellore ,  india . 
 -lrb-  he is the second king mosiah ,  as his grandfather was also king mosiah .   -rrb- 
he also decrees that his son mosiah is the new king . 
the book of mosiah  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the books which make up the book of mormon . 
king benjamin had three sons ,  mosiah ,  helorum ,  and helaman . 
king mosiah makes it illegal to persecute the believers . 
king noah's son limhi rules ,  but becomes a tributary monarch to the king of the lamanites . 
at the end of the book of mosiah ,  alma  -lrb-  the elder  -rrb-  and mosiah both pass away . 
king limhi and his people are baptized and join the church . 
descriptions of the angel moroni vary . 
karl quilter sculpted his first angel moroni in 1978.
the angel moroni  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an angel stated by joseph smith to have visited him on numerous occasions ,  beginning on september 21, 1823.
in addition to smith ,  several other early mormons said they had visions where they saw the angel moroni . 
millard f .  malin's angel ,  which was placed on the los angeles temple in 1953, is known as the second angel moroni statue . 
cyrus dallin sculpted the first angel which was identified as moroni . 
according to the book of mormon ,  moroni was the son of mormon ,  the prophet for whom the book of mormon is named . 
quilter's angel moroni is now on over one hundred temples around the world . 
there have been two conflicting accounts as to the name of the angel . 
barrayar is a planet colonized by humans some four hundred years prior to `` shards of honor '' ,  the first vorkosigan novel . 
in all the books except `` ethan of athos '' and `` falling free '' ,  the protagonists are connected to the planet barrayar ,  home of the vorkosigan clan . 
captain cordelia naismith of beta colony meets and eventually falls in love with captain lord aral vorkosigan of barrayar when they are both stranded on an uninhabited planet . 
a more detailed chronology can be found in `` the vorkosigan companion '' . 
barrayar is an exception to most of these advances due to its history of isolation . 
the roots of the vorkosigan saga lie in an early collection by bujold called `` dreamweaver's dilemma '' . 
it is also the only vorkosigan saga story not published or republished by baen books . 
both cetaganda and barrayar have empires ,  acquired by conquering other planets via neighboring wormholes . 
while cordelia vorkosigan is pregnant with miles ,  an attempted assassination threatens her unborn child's life . 
the barrayarans then conquer and annex komarr under the command of admiral aral vorkosigan ,  count piotr's second son . 
aral vorkosigan later meets cordelia naismith ,  an enemy officer from beta colony ,  at the commencement of another war . 
barrayar is eventually rediscovered by a different wormhole route controlled by the rich merchant planet komarr . 
within the series ,  exploration and colonization of new planets is still ongoing ,  most notably on the planet sergyar . 
still new to her duties as lady vorkosigan ,  ekaterin is working together with an expatriate scientist on a radical scheme to recover the lands of the vashnoi exclusion zone ,  the lingering radioactive legacy of the cetagandan invasion of the planet barrayar . 
 ''shards of honor '' and `` barrayar '' concern miles' parents ,  `` ethan of athos '' involves a few minor characters from other vorkosigan novels ,  and `` falling free '' does not involve miles or any of his family ,  though in a later novel miles encounters the descendants of the characters from `` falling free ''  . 
miles has just graduated from the imperial academy ,  and is at home at vorkosigan surleau with his parents . 
finally ,  dwellers in space habitats despise all those who call one planet home as `` dirt suckers '' . 
the vorkosigan saga is a series of science fiction novels and short stories set in a common fictional universe by american author lois mcmaster bujold . 
in the vorkosigan saga ,  humans live in planets with diverse degrees of habitability ,  and has developed diverse adaptation strategies to environments that are only approximately fit for human life . 
three years after the death of aral vorkosigan ,  admiral jole of the sergyar fleet  -lrb-  who once was aral's subordinate as well as lover  -rrb-  receives a proposal . 
the worlds of barrayar and athos suggest aspects of preindustrial europe and america . 
as barrayar prepares for emperor gregor vorbarra's wedding to a komarran heiress ,  miles attempts to court ekaterin vorsoisson without her knowledge . 
the point of view characters include women  -lrb-  cordelia in `` shards of honor '' and `` barrayar ''; ekaterin in `` komarr , ``  `` a civil campaign '' ,  and `` the flowers of vashnoi ''  -rrb-  ,  a gay man  -lrb-  `` ethan of athos ''  -rrb-  ,  and a pair of brothers ,  one of whom is physically handicapped and the other a clone  -lrb-  miles and mark vorkosigan  -rrb-  ,  their cousin  -lrb-  ivan vorpatril  -rrb-  together with some minor characters  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  miles' bodyguard roic and the runaway lad jin  -rrb-  . 
collected in the omnibus edition `` cordelia's honor '' . 
the pervasiveness of mobilian jargon ,  as a result ,  created its longtime survival . 
mobilian jargon  -lrb-  also mobilian trade language ,  mobilian trade jargon ,  chickasaw–choctaw trade language ,  yamá  -rrb-  was a pidgin used as a lingua franca among native american groups living along the gulf of mexico around the time of european settlement of the region . 
mobilian jargon facilitated trade between tribes speaking different languages and european settlers . 
in its syntax ,  mobilian jargon was fundamentally muskogean and compared to other southeastern indian tribes it showed a reduced morphology . 
so `` mad '' is almost in a competition with itself . `` 
 ''mad ''s satiric net was cast wide . 
though there are antecedents to `` mad ''s style of humor in print ,  radio and film ,  `` mad '' became a pioneering example of it . 
bob and ray ,  kovacs and freberg all became contributors to `` mad '' . 
in 1988, geoffrey o'brien wrote about the impact `` mad '' had upon the younger generation of the 1950s:
mad  -lrb-  stylized as mad  -rrb-  is an american humor magazine founded in 1952 by editor harvey kurtzman and publisher william gaines ,  launched as a comic book before it became a magazine . 
comics historian tom spurgeon picked `` mad '' as the medium's top series of all time ,  writing ,  `` at the height of its influence ,  `` mad '' was `` the simpsons '' ,  `` the daily show '' and `` the onion '' combined . `` 
 ''mad '' ended its 65-year run in manhattan at the end of 2017, when its offices relocated to dc entertainment headquarters in burbank ,  california . 
cage purchased the comic in 1997 for $110,000.
cage has been married three times . 
in 2018, cage starred in the action thriller film ,  `` mandy '' ,  which premiered on january 19 at the 2018 sundance film festival . 
cage starred as the narrator of the film ,  reading various anton's writings . 
in 1988, cage began dating actress christina fulton ,  with whom he had a son ,  weston coppola cage  -lrb-  born december 26, 1990 -rrb- . 
in 2012, cage reprised his role in `` ghost rider's '' sequel ``  . `` 
cage has been called one of the most generous stars in hollywood . 
cage had a malibu home where he and kim lived ,  but sold the property in 2005 for $10 million . 
cage owns the production company saturn films and has produced films such as `` shadow of the vampire ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- and `` the life of david gale ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- . 
also in 2007, cage purchased midford castle in somerset ,  england . 
later that year ,  cage voiced superman in the animated film `` teen titans go ! 
cage's producing career includes `` shadow of the vampire '' ,  the first effort from saturn films . 
weston has been married three times ,  with his marriage to second wife danielle providing cage with two grandsons ,  lucian augustus coppola cage  -lrb-  born 2014 -rrb- ,  and sorin cage  -lrb-  born 2016 -rrb- . 
the film has received mixed reviews though cage's performance was cited as a highlight and solid . 
christina fulton sued cage in december 2009 for $13 million and for the house in which she was living . 
also in 2007, he starred in `` next '' ,  which shared the concept of a glimpse into an alternate timeline with cage's film ,  `` the family man ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- . 
now worth around $25 million  -lrb-  as of may 2017 -rrb- ,  cage is reportedly `` taking film roles left and right '' in order to pay off his remaining debts . 
most of cage's movies that have achieved financial success were in the action/adventure genre . 
napster was faced with the following allegations from the music industry:
napster's brand and logos were acquired at bankruptcy auction by roxio which used them to re-brand the pressplay music service as napster 2.0.
napster was founded by shawn fanning and sean parker . 
on july 14, 2016, rhapsody phased out the rhapsody brand in favor of napster and has since branded its service internationally as napster . 
napster is expanding to other markets by providing music on-demand as a service to other brands . 
napster is the name given to three music-focused online services . 
napster lost the case in the district court but then appealed to the u . s .  court of appeals for the ninth circuit . 
in 2002, over 9,000 drivers had licenses from nascar to race at all levels . 
it also manages the nascar website . 
in 1994, nascar announced the formation of the nascar supertruck series presented by craftsman . 
the nascar xfinity series is the second-highest level of professional competition in nascar . 
the nascar pinty's series is a nascar racing series in canada that derives from the old cascar super series  -lrb-  founded in 1981 and bought out by nascar in 2006 -rrb- . 
on july 1, 2013, with partnership from nascar whelen engineering ,  the series was renamed the nascar whelen euro series . 
in 2006, toyota announced they would be joining nascar's ranks . 
these drivers have made an impact on nascar not only by winning races and dominating road courses ,  but by expanding nascar's point of view . 
the first commissioner of nascar was erwin `` cannonball '' baker . 
each year ,  the champion of the nascar iracing . com world championship series is invited to nascar's championship weekend at homestead-miami speedway to receive $10,500 prize money and nascar championship trophy at the track . 
another topic on the nascar circuit is the increase in foreign born drivers and the effects they may have on the future of nascar . 
wendell scott was the first african-american to win a race in the grand national series  -lrb-  now the monster energy nascar cup series  -rrb-  ,  nascar's highest level . 
in 2010, nascar officially sanctioned its first sim racing esports series ,  partnering with iracing to form the nascar iracing . com series . 
in early 2012, nascar announced that it would sanction the existing european-based racecar euro series as a `` nascar touring series '' . 
movies about nascar racing include `` days of thunder ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  and `` logan lucky ''  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- . 
nascar also ventures into esports via the peak antifreeze nascar iracing series and a sanctioned ladder system on that title . 
many drivers move up through the series before reaching the monster energy nascar cup series . 
nascar kinetics was established in 2009 with the mission of connecting college students nationwide to nascar ,  and mentored its last round of students in 2013.
the first nascar `` strictly stock '' race ever was held at charlotte speedway ,  although this is not the same track as the charlotte motor speedway that is a fixture on current nascar schedule . 
nascar acquired the series on april 27, 2018 after being privately owned for 60 years . 
the nascar camping world truck series features modified pickup trucks . 
nascar has been the target of criticism on various topics from various sources . 
in 2004, nascar also began to sanction a mini stock racing series in mexico ,  known as the mexico t4 series . 
 -lrb-  race 36/36 -rrb- ''
 ''drivers who will compete in all 2019 arca racing series races . `` 
 ''drivers who will compete in all 2019 nascar xfinity series races . `` 
 ''drivers who will compete in all 2019 nascar k&n pro series east races . `` 
a typical neuron consists of a cell body  -lrb-  soma  -rrb-  ,  dendrites ,  and an axon . 
a typical neuron is divided into three parts: the soma or cell body ,  dendrites ,  and axon . 
there are ,  however ,  many exceptions to these rules: for example ,  neurons can lack dendrites ,  or have no axon ,  and synapses can connect an axon to another axon or a dendrite to another dendrite . 
there are many types of specialized neurons . 
in most cases ,  neurons are generated by neural stem cells during brain development and childhood . 
interneurons connect neurons to other neurons within the same region of the brain or spinal cord in neural networks . 
sensory neurons can have axons that run from the toes to the posterior column of the spinal cord ,  over 1.5 meters in adults . 
the longest axon of a human motor neuron can be over a meter long ,  reaching from the base of the spine to the toes . 
the `` alt . 
there are a number of newsgroup hierarchies outside of the big 8  -lrb-  and alt . 
most newsgroups are not moderated . 
communication is facilitated by the network news transfer protocol  -lrb-  nntp  -rrb-  which allows connection to usenet servers and data transfer over the internet . 
there were seven original major hierarchies of usenet newsgroups ,  known as the `` big 7 '':
the number of newsgroups grew from more than 100 as of 1983 to more than 110,000, but only 20,000 or so of those are active . 
a usenet newsgroup is a repository usually within the usenet system ,  for messages posted from many users in different locations using internet . 
there are also a number of companies who sell access to premium news servers . 
creating a new group in the alt . 
some admins keep posts in local or technical newsgroups around longer than posts in other newsgroups . 
literature ,  philosophy  -rrb-  ,  and the big 7 became the big 8.
no military operations were conducted by nato during the cold war . 
following the lead of its member nations ,  nato began to award a service medal ,  the nato medal ,  for these operations . 
nato has twenty-nine members ,  mainly in europe and north america . 
the september 11 attacks in the united states caused nato to invoke article 5 of the nato charter for the first time in the organization's history . 
the handover of control to nato took place on 11 august ,  and marked the first time in nato's history that it took charge of a mission outside the north atlantic area . 
in august 2004, during the iraq war ,  nato formed the nato training mission – iraq ,  a training mission to assist the iraqi security forces in conjunction with the us led mnf-i . 
colombia is the nato’s latest partner and colombia has access to the full range of cooperative activities nato offers to partners; colombia became the first and only latin american country to cooperate with nato . 
additionally ,  nato cooperates and discusses its activities with numerous other non-nato members . 
on 20 march 2011, nato states agreed on enforcing an arms embargo against libya with operation `` unified protector '' using ships from nato standing maritime group 1 and standing mine countermeasures group 1, and additional ships and submarines from nato members . 
nato also began a gradual expansion to include newly autonomous central and eastern european nations ,  and extended its activities into political and humanitarian situations that had not formerly been nato concerns . 
ipaps began in 2002, and are open to countries that have the political will and ability to deepen their relationship with nato . 
nato air strikes that year helped bring the yugoslav wars to an end ,  resulting in the dayton agreement in november 1995.
the collapse of the warsaw pact in 1989–1991 removed the `` de facto '' main adversary of nato and caused a strategic re-evaluation of nato's purpose ,  nature ,  tasks ,  and their focus on the continent of europe . 
the north atlantic treaty organization  -lrb-  nato ; ; '  -rrb-  ,  also called the north atlantic alliance ,  is an intergovernmental military alliance between 29 north american and european countries . 
the us ,  the uk ,  and most other nato countries opposed efforts to require the un security council to approve nato military strikes ,  such as the action against serbia in 1999, while france and some others claimed that the alliance needed un approval . 
the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  signed a comprehensive package of arrangements with nato under the berlin plus agreement on 16 december 2002.
new hampshire is a state in the new england region of the northeastern united states . 
new hampshire is part of the six-state new england region . 
new hampshire has the shortest ocean coastline of any state in the united states ,  approximately long . 
the largest of new hampshire's lakes is lake winnipesaukee ,  which covers in the east-central part of new hampshire . 
border . 
the following is a list of nectas in new hampshire:
metropolitan areas in the new england region are defined by the u . s .  census bureau as new england city and town areas  -lrb-  nectas  -rrb-  . 
squam lake is the second largest lake entirely in new hampshire . 
in one method ,  numbers can be assigned to letters of the latin alphabet as follows:
numerology is any belief in the divine or mystical relationship between a number and one or more coinciding events . 
at least two studies have investigated numerological claims ,  both producing negative results: one in the uk in 1993, and one in 2012 in israel . 
throughout its pages ,  the author attempts to demonstrate that the number five and the related quincunx pattern can be found throughout the arts ,  in design ,  and in nature – particularly botany . 
see numerology and the church fathers for early christian beliefs on the subject . 
the vast majority of north america is on the north american plate . 
north america has been historically referred to by other names . 
demographically ,  north america is ethnically diverse . 
the united nations formally recognizes `` north america '' as comprising three areas: northern america ,  central america ,  and the caribbean . 
north america has also been witness to the growth of megapolitan areas . 
the dominant languages in north america are english ,  spanish ,  and french . 
the north america free trade agreement  -lrb-  nafta  -rrb-  forms one of the four largest trade blocs in the world . 
the predominant religion in central america is christianity  -lrb-  96%  -rrb-  . 
the u . s .  economy is also the fastest growing economy in north america and the americas as a whole ,  with the highest gdp per capita in the americas as well . 
spanish north america  -lrb-  new spain  -rrb-  was often referred to as `` northern america '' ,  and this was the first official name given to mexico . 
north america occupies the northern portion of the landmass generally referred to as the new world ,  the western hemisphere ,  the americas ,  or simply america  -lrb-  which ,  less commonly ,  is considered by some as a single continent with north america a subcontinent  -rrb-  . 
in contrast to the common definition of `` north america '' ,  which encompasses the whole continent ,  the term `` north america '' is sometimes used to refer only to mexico ,  canada ,  the united states ,  and greenland . 
the most populous country in north america is the united states with 329.7 million persons . 
the united states is the largest trade partner of canada and mexico; while canada and mexico are each other's third largest trade partners . 
britain ,  spain ,  and france took over extensive territories in north america . 
north america is the source of much of what humanity knows about geologic time periods . 
north america is a continent entirely within the northern hemisphere and almost all within the western hemisphere; it is also considered by some to be a northern subcontinent of the americas . 
the term northern america refers to the northern-most countries and territories of north america: the united states ,  bermuda ,  st .  pierre and miquelon ,  canada and greenland . 
the southern north american continent is composed of two regions . 
in the united states of america ,  usage of the term may refer only to canada and the us ,  and sometimes includes greenland and mexico  -lrb-  as in the north american free trade agreement  -rrb-  ,  as well as offshore islands . 
the term `` north america '' maintains various definitions in accordance with location and context . 
north america is a very large continent which surpasses the arctic circle ,  and the tropic of cancer . 
during the age of discovery ,  europeans explored and staked claims to various parts of north america . 
christianity is the largest religion in the united states ,  canada and mexico . 
it is bordered to the north by the arctic ocean ,  to the east by the atlantic ocean ,  to the west and south by the pacific ocean ,  and to the southeast by south america and the caribbean sea . 
geographically the north american continent has many regions and subregions . 
in theory ,  radon is more reactive than xenon ,  and therefore should form chemical bonds more easily than xenon does . 
neon ,  argon ,  krypton ,  and xenon also form clathrate hydrates ,  where the noble gas is trapped in ice . 
xenon reacts with fluorine to form numerous xenon fluorides according to the following equations:
xenon compounds are the most numerous of the noble gas compounds that have been formed . 
the first stable compound of argon was reported in 2000 when argon fluorohydride  -lrb-  harf  -rrb-  was formed at a temperature of  . 
krypton is less reactive than xenon ,  but several compounds have been reported with krypton in the oxidation state of +2.
for large-scale use ,  helium is extracted by fractional distillation from natural gas ,  which can contain up to 7% helium . 
the chemistries of the heavier noble gases ,  krypton and xenon ,  are well established . 
neon ,  argon ,  krypton ,  and xenon are obtained from air in an air separation unit using the methods of liquefaction of gases and fractional distillation . 
the chemistry of the lighter ones ,  argon and helium ,  is still at an early stage ,  while a neon compound is yet to be identified . 
as of 2007, no stable neutral molecules involving covalently bound helium or neon are known . 
helium is also used as filling gas in nuclear fuel rods for nuclear reactors . 
compounds in which krypton forms a single bond to nitrogen and oxygen have also been characterized ,  but are only stable below and respectively . 
neon ,  argon ,  krypton ,  and xenon are obtained from air using the methods of liquefaction of gases ,  to convert elements to a liquid state ,  and fractional distillation ,  to separate mixtures into component parts . 
two different types of cost are important in microeconomics: marginal cost ,  and fixed cost . 
all industries have costs associated with entering them . 
if that ideal size is large enough to supply the whole market ,  then that market is a natural monopoly . 
a natural monopoly is a monopoly in an industry in which high infrastructural costs and other barriers to entry relative to the size of the market give the largest supplier in an industry ,  often the first supplier in a market ,  an overwhelming advantage over potential competitors . 
the fixed cost of constructing a competing transmission network is so high ,  and the marginal cost of transmission for the incumbent so low ,  that it effectively bars potential competitors from the monopolist's market ,  acting as a nearly insurmountable barrier to entry into the market place . 
a natural monopoly has a high fixed cost for a product that does not depend on output ,  but its marginal cost of producing one more good is roughly constant ,  and small . 
so ,  a legal prohibition against competition is often advocated and rates are not left to the market but are regulated by the government . 
selection has different effects on traits . 
some traits are governed by only a single gene ,  but most traits are influenced by the interactions of many genes . 
darwin acknowledged blyth's ideas in the first chapter on variation of `` on the origin of species '' . 
this unlimited applicability has been called universal darwinism . 
a variation in one of the many genes that contributes to a trait may have only a small effect on the phenotype; together ,  these genes can produce a continuum of possible phenotypic values . 
when some component of a trait is heritable ,  selection alters the frequencies of the different alleles ,  or variants of the gene that produces the variants of the trait . 
some mutations occur in `` toolkit '' or regulatory genes . 
the classical arguments were reintroduced in the 18th century by pierre louis maupertuis and others ,  including darwin's grandfather ,  erasmus darwin . 
a prerequisite for natural selection to result in adaptive evolution ,  novel traits and speciation is the presence of heritable genetic variation that results in fitness differences . 
the exact outcome of the two processes depends both on the rate at which new mutations occur and on the strength of the natural selection ,  which is a function of how unfavourable the mutation proves to be . 
the concept of fitness is central to natural selection . 
between 1835 and 1837, the zoologist edward blyth worked on the area of variation ,  artificial selection ,  and how a similar process occurs in nature . 
in a letter to charles lyell in september 1860, darwin regretted the use of the term `` natural selection '' ,  preferring the term `` natural preservation '' . 
the term `` natural selection '' is most often defined to operate on heritable traits ,  because these directly participate in evolution . 
however ,  this does not imply that natural selection is always directional and results in adaptive evolution; natural selection often results in the maintenance of the status quo by eliminating less fit variants . 
traits that cause greater reproductive success of an organism are said to be `` selected for '' ,  while those that reduce success are `` selected against '' . 
selection can be classified in several different ways ,  such as by its effect on a trait ,  on genetic diversity ,  by the life cycle stage where it acts ,  by the unit of selection ,  or by the resource being competed for . 
according to this cellular darwinism ,  random variation at the molecular level generates diversity in cell types whereas cell interactions impose a characteristic order on the developing embryo . 
selection can also be classified by the level or unit of selection . 
the polymorphism at the human abo blood group locus has been explained in this way . 
dutch society is egalitarian and modern . 
other religions account for some 6% of the dutch people . 
sustainability is a concept important for the dutch . 
the dutch are one of the least religious people in the world . 
during and after the dutch golden age ,  the dutch people built up a commercial and colonial empire . 
the southern dutch cuisine consists of the cuisines of the dutch provinces of north brabant and limburg and the flemish region in belgium . 
in asia ,  the dutch established the dutch east indies  -lrb-  now indonesia  -rrb-  ,  and the only western trading post in japan ,  dejima . 
the first of these recognised regional languages is low saxon  -lrb-  `` nedersaksisch '' in dutch  -rrb-  . 
the dutch were also one of the last european countries to industrialise ,  in the second half of the 19th century . 
the history of dutch foreign policy has been characterised by its neutrality . 
the dutch royal family has been traditionally associated with calvinism ,  specifically the 1795 disestablished and now non-existent dutch reformed church . 
the official language is dutch ,  which is spoken by the vast majority of the inhabitants . 
the dutch economy is very open and relies strongly on international trade . 
from the exploitations of the dutch east india company in the 17th century ,  to the colonisations in the 19th century ,  dutch imperial possessions continued to expand ,  reaching their greatest extent by establishing a hegemony of the dutch east indies in the early 20th century . 
in dutch they are referred to as `` indische nederlanders '' or as indo  -lrb-  short for indo-european  -rrb-  . 
dutch k-1 kickboxers have won the k-1 world grand prix 15 times out of 19 tournaments . 
according to dutch central statistics bureau ,  in 2015, 28 percent of dutch population had a spendable income above 40,000 euros  -lrb-  which does not include spendings on health care or education  -rrb-  . 
the level of ferocity exhibited by both sides can be gleaned from a dutch chronicler's report:
modern culinary writers distinguish between three general regional forms of dutch cuisine . 
the policy brought the dutch enormous wealth and made the colony self-sufficient . 
in the dutch golden age ,  spanning much of the 17th century ,  the dutch empire grew to become one of the major seafaring and economic powers ,  alongside portugal ,  spain ,  france and england . 
one of the great masterpieces of dutch literature is the book `` max havelaar '' ,  written by multatuli in 1860.
a key feature of the dutch system is that premiums may not be related to health status or age . 
in classical music ,  jan sweelinck ranks as the dutch most famous composer ,  with louis andriessen amongst the best known living dutch classical composers . 
today dutch rock and pop music thrives in both languages ,  with some artists recording in both . 
the provinces of north holland ,  south holland ,  zeeland ,  utrecht and the gelderlandic region of betuwe are the parts of the netherlands which make up the region in which western dutch cuisine is found . 
the dutch are the tallest people in the world ,  with an average height of for adult males and for adult females in 2009.
the dutch agricultural sector is highly mechanised ,  and has a strong focus on international exports . 
early 1990s dutch and belgian house music came together in eurodance project 2 unlimited . 
ever since a major reform of the health care system in 2006, the dutch system received more points in the index each year . 
the circuit was purpose built for the dutch tt in 1954, with previous events having been held on public roads . 
the dutch never recovered from the defeat and no longer posed a large colonial threat to india . 
the traditional dutch architecture is especially valuated in amsterdam ,  delft and leiden ,  with 17 and 18th century buildings along the canals . 
over the centuries ,  the dutch coastline has changed considerably as a result of natural disasters and human intervention . 
in the 18th century ,  while the dutch reformed church was the state religion ,  catholicism ,  other forms of protestantism ,  such as baptists and lutherans ,  and judaism were tolerated but discriminated against . 
on 20 february 2010, the cabinet fell when the pvda refused to prolong the involvement of the dutch army in uruzgan ,  afghanistan . 
although considered fully assimilated into dutch society ,  as the main ethnic minority in the netherlands ,  these 'repatriants' have played a pivotal role in introducing elements of indonesian culture into dutch mainstream culture . 
after the 1953 disaster ,  the delta works was constructed ,  a comprehensive set of civil works throughout the dutch coast . 
in contrast to many other european systems ,  the dutch government is responsible for the accessibility and quality of the healthcare system in the netherlands ,  but not in charge of its management . 
 ''what may strike you as being blatantly blunt topics and comments are no more embarrassing or unusual to the dutch than discussing the weather . `` 
the economic success of this region is important for the international competitiveness of the netherlands; amsterdam ,  rotterdam ,  and eindhoven form together the foundation of the dutch economy . 
contemporary dutch rock and pop music  -lrb-  nederpop  -rrb-  originated in the 1960s ,  heavily influenced by popular music from the united states and britain . 
in q3 and q4 2011, the dutch economy contracted by 0.4% and 0.7% ,  respectively ,  because of european debt crisis ,  while in q4 the eurozone economy shrunk by 0.3% . 
the majority of dutchmen that repatriated to the netherlands after and during the indonesian revolution are indo  -lrb-  eurasian  -rrb-  ,  native to the islands of the dutch east indies . 
government-encouraged emigration efforts to reduce population density prompted some 500,000 dutch people to leave the country after the war . 
in the dutch golden age of the 17th century ,  the netherlands urbanised considerably ,  mostly financed by corporate revenue from the asian trade monopolies . 
in 2015, statistics netherlands ,  the dutch governmental institution that gathers statistical information about the netherlands ,  found that 50.1% of the total population declared to be non-religious . 
anne frank's `` diary of a young girl '' was published after she died in the holocaust and translated from dutch to all major languages . 
a specific segment of dutch literature called dutch indies literature still exists and includes established authors ,  such as louis couperus ,  the writer of `` the hidden force '' ,  taking the colonial era as an important source of inspiration . 
the sociaal en cultureel planbureau  -lrb-  social and cultural planning agency ,  scp  -rrb-  expects the number of non-affiliated dutch to be at 72% in 2020.
in the dutch golden age ,  literature flourished as well ,  with joost van den vondel and p .  c .  hooft as the two most famous writers . 
mobility on dutch roads has grown continuously since the 1950s and now exceeds 200 billion km travelled per year ,  three quarters of which are done by car . 
in the late 19th century this dutch tradition of religious tolerance transformed into a system of pillarisation ,  in which religious groups coexisted separately and only interacted at the level of government . 
a noted exception within the traditional dutch alcoholic landscape ,  `` advocaat '' ,  a rich and creamy liqueur made from eggs ,  sugar and brandy ,  is also native to this region . 
in the european part of the kingdom two other regional languages are recognised under the european charter for regional or minority languages . 
since the 1990s ,  dutch electronic dance music  -lrb-  edm  -rrb-  gained widespread popularity in the world in many forms ,  from trance ,  techno and gabber to hardstyle . 
since the 1990s the dutch army has been involved in the bosnian war and the kosovo war ,  it held a province in iraq after the defeat of saddam hussein ,  and it was engaged in afghanistan . 
the dutch rank first in the european union and second worldwide in value of agricultural exports ,  behind only the united states ,  with agricultural exports earning €80.7 billion in 2014, up from €75.4 billion in 2012.
just like the previous ,  this river forms a linguistic divide: people to the northeast of this river speak dutch low saxon dialects  -lrb-  except for the province of friesland ,  which has its own language  -rrb-  . 
the kingdom also encourage dutch companies to build sustainable business/projects/facilities ,  with financial aids from the state to the companies or individuals who are active in making the country more sustainable . 
the netherlands is the 24th most densely populated country in the world ,  with or – if only the land area is counted  -lrb-    -rrb-  –  . 
the term is so pervasive among potential investors and tourists ,  however ,  that the dutch government's international websites for tourism and trade are `` holland . com '' and `` hollandtradeandinvest . com '' . 
this is especially true close to the dutch coastline ,  where the difference in temperature between summer and winter ,  as well as between day and night is noticeably smaller than it is in the southeast of the country . 
