 ''at johnston island ,  there was an intense white flash . 
on august 22, 2006, johnston island was struck by hurricane ioke . 
by september 1941, construction of an airfield on johnston island commenced . 
the larger island was renamed kalama island ,  and the nearby smaller island was called cornwallis . 
johnston island was also used as the launch site of 124 sounding rockets going up as high as  . 
afterward ,  the johnston island launch complex was heavily damaged and contaminated with plutonium . 
by 1964, dredge and fill operations had increased the size of johnston island to from its original  ,  also increased sand island from  ,  and added two new islands ,  north and east ,  of  . 
the four islands compose a total land area of  . 
after the tests were completed ,  the island reverted to the command of the us air force . 
seven sounding rockets were launched from johnston island in support of the `` tightrope '' test ,  and this was the final american nuclear atmospheric test . 
after the war on march 27, 1949, a pby-6a catalina had to make a forced landing during flight from kwajalein to johnston island . 
the runway was subsequently lengthened and improved as the island was enlarged . 
the loran a and c station and buildings on sand island were then dismantled and removed . 
however ,  the `` starfish '' ,  `` bluegill prime '' ,  and `` bluegill double prime '' test launch failures in 1962 scattered radioactive debris over johnston island contaminating it ,  the lagoon ,  and sand island with plutonium for decades . 
the baker-nunn space camera station was constructed on sand island and was functioning by 1965.
the johnston atoll is a deserted atoll in the north pacific ocean located about southwest of the island of hawai'i and is grouped as one of the united states minor outlying islands . 
the islands were not officially named until captain charles j .  johnston of the royal naval ship sighted them on december 14, 1807.
more wreckage along with plutonium contamination was found on nearby sand island . 
since then ,  u . s .  defense authorities have surveyed the island in a series of studies . 
in 1990, two full-time u . s . 
eight pgm-17 thor missiles deployed by the u . s .  air force  -lrb-  usaf  -rrb-  ,  were launched from johnston island in 1962 as part of `` operation fishbowl '' ,  a part of `` operation dominic '' nuclear weapons tests in the pacific . 
in february ,  march ,  and april 1965 johnston atoll was used to launch biological attacks against u . s .  army and navy vessels south-west of johnston island in vulnerability ,  defense and decontamination tests conducted by the deseret test center during project shad under project 112.
johnston atoll's economic activity was limited to providing services to american military and contractor personnel residing on the island . 
the guano islands act ,  enacted on august 18, 1856, was federal legislation passed by the u . s .  congress that enabled citizens of the u . s .  to take possession of islands containing guano deposits . 
multiple studies of the johnston atoll environment and ecology have been conducted and the atoll is likely the most studied island in the pacific . 
the subsequent nuclear weapon launch failures from johnston atoll caused serious contamination to the island and surrounding areas with weapons-grade plutonium and americium that remains an issue to this day . 
jordan is situated geographically in southwest asia ,  south of syria ,  west of iraq ,  northwest of saudi arabia and east of israel and the west bank; politically ,  the area has also been referred to in the west as the middle or near east . 
there is an assyrian refugee population in jordan . 
there were 1,977,534 households in jordan in 2015, with an average of 4.8 persons per household . 
the druze people are believed to constitute about 0.5% of the total population of jordan ,  which is around 32,000.
jordan has a population of approximately 9,531,712 inhabitants  -lrb-  female: 47%; males: 53%  -rrb-  as of 2015.
in 2016, jordan was named as the largest refugee hosting country per capita in the world ,  followed by turkey ,  pakistan and lebanon . 
the constitution of jordan vests executive authority in the king and in his cabinet . 
king abdullah has been sovereign since the death of his father in 1999.
on february 1, 2012, it was announced that king abdullah had dismissed his government . 
the king exercises his power through the government he appoints which is responsible before the parliament . 
king abdullah ii succeeded his father hussein following the latter's death in february 1999.
administratively ,  jordan is divided into twelve governorates  -lrb-  `` muhafazat '' ,  singular— ''muhafazah ''  -rrb-  ,  each headed by a governor appointed by the king . 
jordan's share in this is almost $84 billion . 
jordan has been a member of the world trade organization since 2000.
jordan is an emerging knowledge economy . 
by the mid-1980s ,  agriculture's share of gnp in jordan was only about 6% . 
jordan's gdp per capita rose by 351% in the 1970s ,  declined 30% in the 1980s ,  and rose 36% in the 1990s . 
jordan's population is 6,342,948 and mean wages were $4.19 per man-hour in 2009.
jordan is classified by the world bank as an `` upper middle income country . `` 
jordan was ranked as the 19th most expensive country in the world to live in 2010 and the most expensive arab country to live in . 
jordan is one of the most liberal countries in the middle east with a secular government . 
50% of households have at least one main line telephone . 
some of the major highways in jordan are:
israel captured jerusalem in 1967, which is located at the west bank of jordan . 
jordan also participates in the multilateral peace talks ,  and recently jordan has signed a free trade agreement with the united states . 
jordan signed a non-aggression pact with israel  -lrb-  the washington declaration  -rrb-  in washington ,  dc ,  on july 25, 1994.
it is a low ,  flat island ,  in size . 
juan de nova island  -lrb-  french: `` île juan da nova ''  -lrb-  official  -rrb-  ,  `` île juan de nova ''  -lrb-  local  -rrb-   -rrb-  ,  also known as saint-christophe ,  is a french tropical island in the narrowest part of the mozambique channel ,  about one-third of the way between madagascar and mozambique . 
anchorage is possible off the northeast of the island which also has a airstrip . 
philip glass wrote an opera called `` kepler '' based on kepler's life  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- . 
directly named for kepler's contribution to science are kepler's laws of planetary motion ,  kepler's supernova  -lrb-  supernova 1604, which he observed and described  -rrb-  and the kepler solids ,  a set of geometrical constructions ,  two of which were described by him ,  and the kepler conjecture on sphere packing . 
kepler's laws of planetary motion were not immediately accepted . 
alexandre koyré's work on kepler was ,  after apelt ,  the first major milestone in historical interpretations of kepler's cosmology and its influence . 
according to kepler's biographers ,  this was a much happier marriage than his first . 
only kepler's self-authored poetic epitaph survived the times:
on october 30, 1613, kepler married the 24-year-old susanna reuttinger . 
however ,  kepler later rejected this formula ,  because it was not precise enough . 
kepler began by exploring regular polygons and regular solids ,  including the figures that would come to be known as kepler's solids . 
that blow ,  happening only a few years after kepler’s excommunication ,  is not seen as a coincidence but as a symptom of the full-fledged assault waged by the lutherans against kepler . 
in 1623, kepler at last completed the `` rudolphine tables '' ,  which at the time was considered his major work . 
kepler moved to ulm ,  where he arranged for the printing of the `` tables '' at his own expense . 
frisch's edition only included kepler's latin ,  with a latin commentary . 
in the first years of their marriage ,  the keplers had two children  -lrb-  heinrich and susanna  -rrb-  ,  both of whom died in infancy . 
kepler's first major astronomical work ,  `` mysterium cosmographicum ''  -lrb-  `` the cosmographic mystery '' ,  1596 -rrb- ,  was the first published defense of the copernican system . 
max caspar  -lrb-  1880–1956 -rrb- published his german translation of kepler's `` mysterium cosmographicum '' in 1923.
 ''epitome of copernican astronomy '' was read by astronomers throughout europe ,  and following kepler's death ,  it was the main vehicle for spreading kepler's ideas . 
also in that year ,  barbara kepler contracted hungarian spotted fever ,  then began having seizures . 
on august 2, 1600, after refusing to convert to catholicism ,  kepler and his family were banished from graz . 
apelt ,  who saw kepler's mathematics ,  aesthetic sensibility ,  physical ideas ,  and theology as part of a unified system of thought ,  produced the first extended analysis of kepler's life and work . 
in 1615, ursula reingold ,  a woman in a financial dispute with kepler's brother christoph ,  claimed kepler's mother katharina had made her sick with an evil brew . 
to kepler's disappointment ,  however ,  galileo never published his reactions  -lrb-  if any  -rrb-  to `` astronomia nova '' . 
kepler and tycho soon reconciled and eventually reached an agreement on salary and living arrangements ,  and in june ,  kepler returned home to graz to collect his family . 
however ,  it was clear that kepler's future prospects in the court of matthias were dim . 
bardeen was a scientist with a very unassuming personality . 
by 1951, bardeen was looking for a new job . 
bardeen was born in madison ,  wisconsin ,  on may 23, 1908.
the current john bardeen professor is nick holonyak ,  bardeen's doctoral student and protege . 
in october 1945, bardeen began work at bell labs . 
bardeen brought his three children to the nobel prize ceremony in stockholm . 
bardeen married jane maxwell on july 18, 1938.
in honor of professor bardeen ,  the engineering quadrangle at the university of illinois at urbana-champaign is named the bardeen quad . 
bardeen attended the university high school at madison . 
bardeen was also an important adviser to xerox corporation . 
as a graduate student ,  bardeen studied mathematics and physics . 
in addition to being awarded the nobel prize twice ,  bardeen has numerous other awards including:
jewellery  -lrb-  british english  -rrb-  or jewelry  -lrb-  american english  -rrb-  consists of small decorative items worn for personal adornment ,  such as brooches ,  rings ,  necklaces ,  earrings ,  pendants ,  bracelets ,  and cufflinks . 
jewellery may be made from a wide range of materials . 
in later years berglin has acknowledged the input of his wife maria berglin ,  an artist and literary critic ,  within his strips by signing them `` berglins '' . 
the protagonists of jarmusch's films are usually lone adventurers . 
jarmusch is ascribed as having instigated the american independent film movement with `` stranger than paradise '' . 
jarmusch has been characterized as a minimalist filmmaker whose idiosyncratic films are unhurried . 
in 2005 he won the grand prix of the 2005 cannes film festival for his film `` broken flowers '' . 
a behind-the-scenes documentary ,  `` behind jim jarmusch '' ,  was filmed over three days on the set of the film in seville by director léa rinaldi . 
as a musician ,  jarmusch has composed music for his films and released two albums with jozef van wissem . 
in 2004 jarmusch was honored with the filmmaker on the edge award at the provincetown international film festival . 
the moving image collection of jim jarmusch is held at the academy film archive . 
it was awarded the camera d'or at the 1984 cannes film festival as well as the 1985 national society of film critics award for best film ,  and became a landmark work in modern independent film . 
jarmusch's final year university project was completed in 1980 as `` permanent vacation '' ,  his first feature film . 
in his final year at new york university ,  jarmusch worked as an assistant to the film noir director nicholas ray ,  who was at that time teaching in the department . 
james robert jarmusch  -lrb-  born january 22, 1953 -rrb- is an american film director ,  screenwriter ,  actor ,  producer ,  editor ,  and composer . 
in a 1989 review of his work ,  vincent canby of `` the new york times '' called jarmusch `` the most adventurous and arresting film maker to surface in the american cinema in this decade '' . 
jarmusch's first major film ,  `` stranger than paradise '' ,  was produced on a budget of approximately $125,000 and released in 1984 to much critical acclaim . 
jarmusch rarely discusses his personal life in public . 
in an august 2010 interview ,  jarmusch revealed his forthcoming work schedule at that time:
a retrospective of the director's films was hosted at the walker art center in minneapolis ,  minnesota ,  during february 1994, and another ,  `` the sad and beautiful world of jim jarmusch '' ,  by the american film institute in august 2005.
thomas believes that filmmakers like jarmusch `` are not coming through  .  .  .  any more . `` 
despite his enthusiasm for film ,  jarmusch was an avid reader in his youth and had a greater interest in literature ,  which was encouraged by his grandmother . 
gutenberg in 1439 was the first european to use movable type . 
it has also been questioned whether gutenberg used movable types at all . 
in 1455 gutenberg completed his `` 42-line bible '' ,  known as the gutenberg bible . 
project gutenberg ,  the oldest digital library ,  commemorates gutenberg's name . 
gutenberg's technique of making movable type remains unclear . 
however ,  the type used in gutenberg's earliest work shows other variations . 
the invention of the making of types with punch ,  matrix and mold has been widely attributed to gutenberg . 
some time in 1456, there was a dispute between gutenberg and fust ,  and fust demanded his money back ,  accusing gutenberg of misusing the funds . 
around 1427, the name `` zu gutenberg '' ,  after the family house in mainz ,  is documented to have been used for the first time . 
gutenberg's early printing process ,  and what texts he printed with movable type ,  are not known in great detail . 
there are many statues of gutenberg in germany ,  including the famous one by bertel thorvaldsen  -lrb-  1837 -rrb- in mainz ,  home to the eponymous johannes gutenberg university of mainz and the gutenberg museum on the history of early printing . 
the 19th-century printer and typefounder fournier le jeune suggested that gutenberg was not using type cast with a reusable matrix ,  but wooden types that were carved individually . 
this church and the cemetery were later destroyed ,  and gutenberg's grave is now lost . 
gutenberg died in 1468 and was buried in the franciscan church at mainz ,  his contributions largely unknown . 
in 1462, during the devastating mainz diocesan feud ,  mainz was sacked by archbishop adolph von nassau ,  and gutenberg was exiled . 
until at least 1444 gutenberg lived in strasbourg ,  most likely in the st .  arbogast parish . 
in 1997, time–life magazine picked gutenberg's invention as the most important of the second millennium . 
mayol was one of the screenwriters . 
mayol described the fateful encounter in his book ,  `` homo delphinus: the dolphin within man '' . 
it is the dolphins that became the foundation of mayol’s life philosophy of `` homo delphinus '' . 
mayol’s last deep dive followed in 1983 when he reached the depth of 105m ,  at the age of 56.
terboven only had supervisory authority over the civilian administration in norway . 
terboven ordered the massacre a few days earlier . 
terboven was made reichskommissar for norway on 24 april 1940, even before the military invasion was completed on 7 june 1940.
josef antonius heinrich terboven  -lrb-  23 may 1898 – 8 may 1945 -rrb- was a nazi leader ,  best known as the reichskommissar for norway during the german occupation of norway and the quisling regime . 
on 18 december 1944, falkenhorst was dismissed from his command for opposing certain radical policies of terboven . 
brown was married four times . 
brown continued making recordings . 
during the reading of the will on january 11, 2007, thurmond revealed that brown's six adult living children  -lrb-  terry brown ,  larry brown ,  daryl brown ,  yamma brown lumar ,  deanna brown thomas and venisha brown  -rrb-  were named in the document ,  while hynie and james ii were not mentioned as heirs . 
brown also bought webb in baltimore in 1970.
brown eventually joined byrd's group in 1954.
in 1971, brown began recording for polydor records which also took over distribution of brown's king records catalog . 
in 2002, brown appeared in `` undercover brother '' ,  playing himself . 
brown continued to perform and record until his death from pneumonia in 2006.
in a black household ,  james brown is part of the fabric – motown ,  stax ,  atlantic and james brown . `` 
local authorities found no merit to brown's accusations . 
james brown jr .  was confirmed to be his biological son . 
brown began his career as a gospel singer in toccoa ,  georgia . 
however ,  by the mid-1980s it was alleged that brown himself was using drugs . 
james brown's performances were famous for their intensity and length . 
in 1962, tammi terrell joined the james brown revue . 
in 2015, a judge ruled hynie as brown's legal widow . 
brown had numerous children and acknowledged nine of them including five sons – teddy  -lrb-  1954–1973 -rrb- ,  terry ,  larry ,  daryl and james joseph brown jr .  and four daughters – lisa ,  dr .  yamma noyola brown lumar ,  deanna brown thomas and venisha brown  -lrb-  1964-2018 -rrb- . 
by 1967, brown's emerging sound had begun to be defined as funk music . 
brown received awards and honors throughout his lifetime and after his death . 
in 1973, brown provided the score for the blaxploitation film `` black caesar '' . 
after his stint in prison during the late 1980s ,  brown met larry fridie and thomas hart who produced the first james brown biopic ,  entitled `` james brown: the man ,  the message ,  the music '' ,  released in 1992.
brown branched out to make several recordings with musicians outside his own band . 
brown recorded 17 singles that reached number one on the `` billboard '' r&b charts . 
the riff was composed by alomar ,  who had briefly been a member of brown's band in the late 1960s . 
as a tribute to james brown ,  the rolling stones covered the song ,  `` i'll go crazy '' from brown's `` live at the apollo '' album ,  during their 2007 european tour . 
brown's demands of his support acts were ,  meanwhile ,  quite the reverse . 
brown's personal life was marred by several brushes with the law . 
changes in brown's style that started with `` cold sweat '' also established the musical foundation for brown's later hits ,  such as `` i got the feelin' ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- and `` mother popcorn ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- . 
in 2003, brown participated in the pbs `` american masters '' television documentary `` james brown: soul survivor '' ,  which was directed by jeremy marre . 
instead ,  brown was required to forfeit a us$1,087 bond as punishment . 
for the remainder of his life ,  brown was repeatedly arrested for domestic violence . 
postel was the rfc editor from 1969 until his death ,  and wrote and edited many important rfcs ,  including rfc 791, rfc 792 and rfc 793, which define the basic protocols of the internet protocol suite ,  and rfc 2223, `` instructions to rfc authors '' . 
in total ,  he wrote or co-authored more than 200 rfcs . 
postel served on the internet architecture board and its predecessors for many years . 
the internet society's postel award is named in his honor ,  as is the postel center at information sciences institute ,  university of southern california . 
with bob braden ,  she received the 2006 postel award in recognition of her services to the internet . 
as area director of the user services area ,  she was a member of the internet engineering steering group of the ietf from 1990 to march 1998.
in sweden ,  `` julmust '' outsells coca-cola during the christmas season; in fact ,  the consumption of coca-cola drops by as much as 50% over the holiday . 
julmust  -lrb-   `` christmas '' and ' `` not-yet-fermented juice of fruit or berries '' ,  though there is no such juice in `` julmust ''  -rrb-  is a soft drink that is mainly consumed in sweden around christmas . 
he was promoted to an officier de la légion d'honneur in 1892.
verne was made a chevalier de la légion d'honneur in 1870.
for the rest of his lifetime ,  most of his novels would be serialized in hetzel's `` magasin '' before their appearance in book form ,  beginning with his second novel for hetzel ,  `` the adventures of captain hatteras ''  -lrb-  1864–65 -rrb- . 
it was published by hetzel on 31 january 1863.
verne's strong antiwar sentiments ,  to the dismay of his father ,  would remain steadfast throughout his life . 
however ,  his father took it for granted that verne ,  being the firstborn son of the family ,  would not attempt to make money in literature but would instead inherit the family law practice . 
it took shape as a story of travel across africa and would eventually become his first published novel ,  `` five weeks in a balloon '' . 
they married her instead to armand terrien de la haye ,  a rich landowner 10 years her senior ,  on 19 july 1848.
to secure his services for the planned magazine ,  to be called the `` magasin d'éducation et de récréation ''  -lrb-  `` magazine of education and recreation ''  -rrb-  ,  hetzel also drew up a long-term contract in which verne would give him three volumes of text per year ,  each of which hetzel would buy outright for a flat fee . 
the relationship between father and son improved as michel grew older . 
after the death of both his mother and hetzel ,  jules verne began publishing darker works . 
in order to leave a completed work behind ,  one would need to live to be at least 100 years old ! `` 
three sisters ,  anna  -lrb-  1836 -rrb- ,  mathilde  -lrb-  1839 -rrb- ,  and marie  -lrb-  1842 -rrb- would follow . 
the theme of the robinsonade would stay with verne throughout his life and appear in many of his novels ,  including `` the mysterious island ''  -lrb-  1874 -rrb- ,  `` second fatherland ''  -lrb-  1900 -rrb- ,  and `` the school for robinsons ''  -lrb-  1882 -rrb- . 
while writing stories and articles for pitre-chevalier ,  verne began to form the idea of inventing a new kind of novel ,  a `` roman de la science ''  -lrb-  novel of science  -rrb-  ,  which would allow him to incorporate large amounts of the factual information he so enjoyed researching in the bibliothèque . 
in 1862, through their mutual acquaintance alfred de bréhat ,  verne came into contact with the publisher pierre-jules hetzel ,  and submitted to him the manuscript of his developing novel ,  then called `` voyage en ballon '' . 
his cousin caroline ,  with whom he was in love ,  was married on 27 april 1847, to émile dezaunay ,  a man of 40, with whom she would have five children . 
hetzel influenced many of verne's novels directly ,  especially in the first few years of their collaboration ,  for verne was initially so happy to find a publisher that he agreed to almost all of the changes hetzel suggested . 
it is now known that the legend is an exaggerated tale invented by verne's first biographer ,  his niece marguerite allotte de la füye ,  though it may have been inspired by a real incident . 
johannes rau  -lrb-  ; 16 january 193127 january 2006 -rrb- was a german politician of the spd . 
in 1958, rau was elected for the first time as member of the `` landtag ''  -lrb-  state parliament  -rrb-  of north rhine-westphalia  -lrb-  nrw  -rrb-  . 
during 2000, rau became the first german head of state to address the knesset ,  the israeli parliament ,  in german . 
from 1995 onwards ,  rau led an spd-greens coalition in nrw . 
hitler rejected both of these proposals . 
in the mid-afternoon of 30 april ,  hitler shot himself . 
hitler was very fond of magda goebbels and the children . 
goebbels first took an interest in adolf hitler and nazism in 1924.
after reading hitler's book `` mein kampf '' ,  goebbels found himself agreeing with hitler's assertion of a `` jewish doctrine of marxism '' . 
in his last will and testament ,  hitler named no successor as führer or leader of the nazi party . 
john gunther wrote in 1940 that goebbels `` is the cleverest of all the nazis '' ,  but could not succeed hitler because `` everybody hates him '' . 
a major focus of nazi propaganda was hitler himself ,  who was glorified as a heroic and infallible leader and became the focus of a cult of personality . 
paul joseph goebbels  -lrb-  ; 29 october 1897 – 1 may 1945 -rrb- was a german nazi politician and reich minister of propaganda of nazi germany from 1933 to 1945.
like hitler ,  goebbels practised his public speaking skills in front of a mirror . 
throughout july 1944, goebbels and speer continued to press hitler to bring the economy to a total war footing . 
strasser disagreed with hitler on many parts of the party platform ,  and in november 1926 began working on a revision . 
when other nazi leaders urged hitler to leave berlin and establish a new centre of resistance in the national redoubt in bavaria ,  goebbels opposed this ,  arguing for a heroic last stand in berlin . 
goebbels continued his intensive antisemitic propaganda campaign that culminated in hitler's 30 january 1939 reichstag speech ,  which goebbels helped to write:
less than two weeks later ,  he gave a speech at the nazi book burning in berlin on 10 may ,  a ceremony he suggested . 
goebbels' efforts had little impact for the time being ,  as while hitler was in principle in favour of total war ,  he was not prepared to implement changes over the objections of his ministers . 
goebbels had frequent discussions with hitler about the fate of the jews ,  a subject they discussed almost every time they met . 
as the war drew to a close and nazi germany faced defeat ,  magda goebbels and the goebbels children joined him in berlin . 
goebbels finally received hitler's appointment to the cabinet ,  officially becoming head of the newly created reich ministry of public enlightenment and propaganda on 14 march . 
he was one of the few top nazi officials to do so publicly . 
in an effort to stabilise the country and improve economic conditions ,  hindenburg appointed hitler as reich chancellor on 30 january 1933.
at his insistence ,  initially half the films made in wartime germany were propaganda films  -lrb-  particularly on antisemitism  -rrb-  and war propaganda films  -lrb-  recounting both historical wars and current exploits of the wehrmacht  -rrb-  . 
partly out of foreign policy concerns ,  hitler ordered a scaling back of the church struggle by the end of july 1937.
to celebrate hitler's appointment as chancellor ,  goebbels organised a torchlight parade in berlin on the night of 30 january of an estimated 60,000 men ,  many in the uniforms of the sa and ss . 
at hitler's invitation ,  goebbels spoke at party meetings in munich and at the annual party congress ,  held in weimar in 1926.
by 1930 berlin was the party's second-strongest base of support after munich . 
in 1943, goebbels began to pressure hitler to introduce measures that would produce `` total war '' ,  including closing businesses not essential to the war effort ,  conscripting women into the labour force ,  and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the wehrmacht . 
joel coen  -lrb-  born november 29, 1954 -rrb- and ethan coen  -lrb-  born september 21, 1957 -rrb- ,  collectively referred to as the coen brothers ,  are american filmmakers . 
joel and ethan coen were born and raised in st .  louis park ,  minnesota ,  a suburb of minneapolis . 
she also did a voice-over in `` barton fink '' . 
ethan married film editor tricia cooke in 1990.
he was visited first by father pierre jacquet and by pastor edouard de montmollin . 
pastor de montmollin concluded ,  `` it is not man who discovers the word ,  it is the word that comes to him . `` 
around this time ,  borges also began writing screenplays . 
eight of borges's poems appear in the 1943 anthology of spanish american poets by h . r . 
borges's own father ,  jorge guillermo borges haslam  -lrb-  24 february 1874 – 14 february 1938 -rrb- was a lawyer ,  and wrote a novel `` el caudillo '' in 1921.
his 1929 book ,  `` cuaderno san martín '' ,  includes the poem `` isidoro acevedo '' ,  commemorating his grandfather ,  isidoro de acevedo laprida ,  a soldier of the buenos aires army . 
his first collection of short stories ,  `` el jardín de senderos que se bifurcan ''  -lrb-  `` the garden of forking paths ''  -rrb-  ,  appeared in 1941, composed mostly of works previously published in `` sur '' . 
de acevedo laprida died of pulmonary congestion in the house where his grandson jorge luis borges was born . 
borges's father died in 1938, shortly before his 64th birthday . 
his later collection of poetry ,  `` elogio de la sombra ''  -lrb-  `` in praise of darkness ''  -rrb-  ,  develops this theme . 
the family lived in a large house with an english library of over one thousand volumes; borges would later remark that `` if i were asked to name the chief event in my life ,  i should say my father's library . `` 
born in a suburb of buenos aires ,  borges later moved with his family to switzerland in 1914, where he studied at the collège de genève . 
from the first issue ,  borges was a regular contributor to `` sur '' ,  founded in 1931 by victoria ocampo . 
jorge luis borges was taught at home until the age of 11, was bilingual in spanish and english ,  reading shakespeare in the latter at the age of twelve . 
borges published his first published collection of poetry ,  `` fervor de buenos aires '' ,  in 1923 and contributed to the avant-garde review `` martín fierro '' . 
his father gave up practicing law due to the failing eyesight that would eventually afflict his son . 
kodama commissioned new translations by andrew hurley ,  which have become the standard translations in english . 
these were the last of austen's novels to be published during her lifetime . 
since then ,  austen's novels have been continuously in print . 
with the publication in 1939 of mary lascelles' `` jane austen and her art '' ,  the academic study of austen took hold . 
after austen's death ,  cassandra ,  henry austen and murray arranged for the publication of `` persuasion '' and `` northanger abbey '' as a set . 
several of austen's works have been subject to academic study . 
during her time at chawton ,  jane austen published four generally well-received novels . 
private theatricals were an essential part of austen's education . 
austen began a second novel ,  `` first impressions ''  -lrb-  later published as `` pride and prejudice ''  -rrb-  ,  in 1796.
as austen's works were published anonymously ,  they brought her little personal renown . 
austen made light of her condition ,  describing it as `` bile '' and rheumatism . 
eliza's french husband was guillotined in 1794; she married jane's brother henry austen in 1797.
the paucity of record of austen's life leaves modern biographers little with which to work . 
apart from chasles ,  austen was almost completely ignored in france until 1878.
all copies were sold within six months ,  and austen's earnings on this novel were larger than for any of her other novels . 
the publication of james edward austen-leigh's `` a memoir of jane austen '' in 1869 introduced austen to a wider public as `` dear aunt jane '' ,  the respectable maiden aunt . 
there is manuscript evidence that austen continued to work on these pieces as late as 1811  -lrb-  when she was 36 -rrb- ,  and that her niece and nephew ,  anna and james edward austen ,  made further additions as late as 1814.
austen was feeling unwell by early 1816, but ignored the warning signs . 
austen had a natural ear for speech and dialogue ,  according to scholar mary lascelles `` few novelists can be more scrupulous than jane austen as to the phrasing and thoughts of their characters . `` 
austen has inspired a large number of critical essays and literary anthologies . 
when she was around eighteen years old austen began to write longer ,  more sophisticated works . 
the manuscript remained in crosby's hands ,  unpublished ,  until austen repurchased the copyright from him in 1816.
austen learned that the prince regent admired her novels and kept a set at each of his residences . 
scott and whately set the tone for almost all subsequent 19th-century austen criticism . 
the june bootids take place roughly between 26 june and 2 july each year . 
the latin name for june is `` junius '' . 
under the calendar of ancient rome ,  the festival of ludi fabarici took place on may 29 – june 1, kalendae fabariae took place on june 1, the festival to bellona took place on june 3, ludi piscatorii took place on june 7, and vestalia took place from june 7 – june 15.
it is on average the warmest month in most of the northern hemisphere ,  where it is the second month of summer ,  and the coldest month in much of the southern hemisphere ,  where it is the second month of winter . 
prior to that ,  it was called quintilis ,  being the fifth month of the 10-month calendar . 
july is the seventh month of the year  -lrb-  between june and august  -rrb-  in the julian and gregorian calendars and the fourth of seven months to have a length of 31 days . 
it is also the first day of the first quarter of the year and the first half of the year . 
january 1 is the first day of the year in the gregorian calendar . 
conway was born in liverpool ,  the son of cyril horton conway and agnes boyce . 
conway is especially known for the invention of the game of life ,  one of the early examples of a cellular automaton . 
nevertheless ,  the game did help launch a new branch of mathematics ,  the field of cellular automata . 
lemmon was married twice . 
both featured lemmon's singing and piano solos . 
 ''days of wine and roses ''  -lrb-  1962 -rrb- was a favorite role of lemmon's . 
it was the only movie that lemmon directed; matthau was nominated for the best actor oscar for his performance . 
the amateur who helps his team most in the pro-am portion is annually awarded the jack lemmon award . 
during the 1980s and 1990s lemmon served on the advisory board of the national student film institute . 
quine also directed lemmon's screen test when the actor was signed by columbia . 
in 1963, lemmon released a third album ,  this time on capitol records ,  entitled `` jack lemmon plays piano selections from irma la douce . `` 
apollo did his best to home-school conrad . 
more is known about conrad's other ,  more open flirtation . 
eventually conrad would make his home in england . 
she had thought conrad's foreignness a positive merit . 
conrad was a russian subject ,  having been born in the russian part of what had once been the polish–lithuanian commonwealth . 
jacques encouraged conrad to continue writing the novel . 
like conrad's mother ,  apollo had been gravely ill with tuberculosis . 
in a letter of 9 august 1877, conrad's uncle bobrowski broached two important subjects: the desirability of conrad's naturalisation abroad  -lrb-  tantamount to release from being a russian subject  -rrb-  and conrad's plans to join the british merchant marine . 
conrad was a reserved man ,  wary of showing emotion . 
in refutation of this ,  najder quotes from conrad's 14 august 1883 letter to family friend stefan buszczyński ,  written nine years after conrad had left poland:
in march 1896 conrad married an englishwoman ,  jessie george . 
conrad's subsequent refusal to follow in apollo's footsteps ,  and his choice of exile over resistance ,  were a source of lifelong guilt for conrad . 
the young conrad was placed in the care of ewa's brother ,  tadeusz bobrowski . 
in 1874 conrad left poland for marseille ,  france ,  to start a merchant-marine career on french merchant ships . 
jessie conrad would later write in her memoirs: `` i understood my husband so much better after those months in poland . 
edward said describes three phases to conrad's literary career . 
conrad suffered throughout life from ill health ,  physical and mental . 
sanderson continued his voyage and seems to have been the first to develop closer ties with conrad . 
both `` rabbit is rich ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- and `` rabbit at rest ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- were recognized with the pulitzer prize . 
in 1990, he published the last rabbit novel ,  `` rabbit at rest '' ,  which won the pulitzer prize and the national book critics circle award . 
 ''rabbit ,  run '' was featured in `` time ''s all-time 100 greatest novels . 
his pulitzers for the last two rabbit novels make updike one of only three writers to have won two pulitzer prizes for fiction ,  the others being william faulkner and booth tarkington . 
it was his last published novel . 
in 1995, everyman's library collected and canonized the four novels as the omnibus `` rabbit angstrom ''; updike wrote an introduction in which he described rabbit as `` a ticket to the america all around me . 
in 1980, he published another novel featuring harry angstrom ,  `` rabbit is rich '' ,  which won the national book award ,  the national book critics circle award ,  and the pulitzer prize for fiction—all three major american literary prizes . 
in ipswich ,  updike wrote `` rabbit ,  run ''  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- ,  on a guggenheim fellowship ,  and `` the centaur ''  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- ,  two of his most acclaimed and famous works; the latter won the national book award . 
in 1971, updike published a sequel to `` rabbit ,  run '' called `` rabbit redux '' ,  his response to the 1960s; rabbit reflected much of updike's resentment and hostility towards the social and political changes that beset the united states during that time . 
updike found it difficult to end the book ,  because he was `` having so much fun '' in the imaginary county rabbit and his family inhabited . 
 ''rabbit ,  run '' featured harry `` rabbit '' angstrom ,  a former high school basketball star and middle-class paragon who would become updike's most enduring and critically acclaimed character . 
updike was also a critic of literature and art ,  one frequently cited as one of the best american critics of his generation . 
after writing `` rabbit is rich '' ,  updike published `` the witches of eastwick ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- ,  a playful novel about witches living in rhode island . 
he opened me up as a writer . `` 
these early years in berks county ,  pennsylvania ,  would influence the environment of the rabbit angstrom tetralogy ,  as well as many of his early novels and short stories . 
their correspondence continued until steinbeck's death . 
with his second wife steinbeck had two sons ,  thomas  -lrb-  `` thom ''  -rrb-  myles steinbeck  -lrb-  1944–2016 -rrb- and john steinbeck iv  -lrb-  1946–1991 -rrb- . 
the fbi denied that steinbeck was under investigation . 
steinbeck was born on february 27, 1902, in salinas ,  california . 
between 1930 and 1933, steinbeck produced three shorter works . 
this third marriage for steinbeck lasted until his death in 1968.
between 1930 and 1936, steinbeck and ricketts became close friends . 
in 1952 steinbeck's longest novel ,  `` east of eden '' ,  was published . 
steinbeck complained publicly about government harassment . 
ecological themes recur in steinbeck's novels of the period . 
steinbeck was a close associate of playwright arthur miller . 
in the 1930s and 1940s ,  ed ricketts strongly influenced steinbeck's writing . 
steinbeck's close relations with ricketts ended in 1941 when steinbeck moved away from pacific grove and divorced his wife carol . 
his son ,  author thomas steinbeck ,  accepted the award on his behalf . 
the award of the 1962 nobel prize for literature to steinbeck was controversial in the united states . 
many of steinbeck's works are required reading in american high schools . 
although carol accompanied steinbeck on the trip ,  their marriage was beginning to suffer ,  and ended a year later ,  in 1941, even as steinbeck worked on the manuscript for the book . 
steinbeck spent the year after ricketts' death in deep depression . 
the day after steinbeck's death in new york city ,  reviewer charles poore wrote in `` the new york times '': `` john steinbeck's first great book was his last great book . 
john ernst steinbeck jr .   -lrb-  ; february 27, 1902 – december 20, 1968 -rrb- was an american author . 
what work ,  if any ,  steinbeck may have performed for the cia during the cold war is unknown . 
steinbeck wrote two more stage plays  -lrb-  `` the moon is down '' and `` burning bright ''  -rrb-  . 
according to steinbeck's son thom ,  steinbeck made the journey because he knew he was dying and wanted to see the country one last time . 
in 1948, the year the book was published ,  steinbeck was elected to the american academy of arts and letters . 
his father ,  john ernst steinbeck  -lrb-  1862–1935 -rrb- ,  served as monterey county treasurer . 
in 1967, at the behest of `` newsday '' magazine ,  steinbeck went to vietnam to report on the war . 
steinbeck may also have been concerned about the safety of his son serving in vietnam . 
in 2018, the 250th anniversary of the founding of the royal academy of arts in london ,  uk was celebrated . 
reynolds pictor’ ,  and is now in the collection of the royal academy of arts ,  london . 
the royal academy of art in london celebrated their 250th anniversary in 2018, since their opening in 1768.
sir joshua reynolds  -lrb-  16 july 1723 – 23 february 1792 -rrb- was an english painter ,  specialising in portraits . john russell said he was one of the major european painters of the 18th century . 
by 1761 reynolds could command a fee of 80 guineas for a full-length portrait; in 1764 he was paid 100 guineas for a portrait of lord burghersh . 
having shown an early interest in art ,  reynolds was apprenticed in 1740 to the fashionable london portrait painter thomas hudson ,  who had been born in devon . 
reynolds was one of the earliest members of the royal society of arts ,  helped found the society of artists of great britain ,  and in 1768 became the first president of the royal academy of arts ,  a position he was to hold until his death . 
reynolds and the royal academy received a mixed reception . 
the clothing of reynolds' sitters was usually painted by either one of his pupils ,  his studio assistant giuseppe marchi ,  or the specialist drapery painter peter toms . 
in the battle of ushant against the french in 1778, lord keppel commanded the channel fleet and the outcome resulted in no clear winner; keppel ordered the attack be renewed and was obeyed except by sir hugh palliser ,  who commanded the rear ,  and the french escaped bombardment . 
in 1787 reynolds painted the portrait of lord heathfield ,  who became a national hero for the successful defence of gibraltar in the great siege from 1779 to 1783 against the combined forces of france and spain . 
on 10 november reynolds wrote to benjamin west to resign the presidency ,  but the general assembly agreed he should be re-elected ,  with sir william chambers and west to deputise for him . 
he was married three times . 
schumpeter developed mark ii while a professor at harvard . 
in one of his seminal works ,  `` capitalism ,  socialism and democracy '' ,  schumpeter wrote:
 ''this '' is the reason why gold is so unpopular now and also why it was so popular in a bourgeois era . `` 
schumpeter claimed that he had set himself three goals in life: to be the greatest economist in the world ,  to be the best horseman in all of austria and the greatest lover in all of vienna . 
although his writings could be critical of the school ,  schumpeter's work on the role of innovation and entrepreneurship can be seen as a continuation of ideas originated by the historical school ,  especially the work of gustav von schmoller and werner sombart . 
in this book ,  joseph schumpeter recognized the implication of a gold monetary standard compared to a fiat monetary standard . 
joseph aloïs schumpeter  -lrb-  ; 8 february 1883 – 8 january 1950 -rrb- was an austrian political economist . 
schumpeter was a loyal supporter of franz joseph i of austria . 
he saw these cycles varying in time – although in a tight time frame by coincidence – and for each to serve a specific purpose . 
he said he had reached two of his goals ,  but he never said which two ,  although he is reported to have said that there were too many fine horsemen in austria for him to succeed in all his aspirations . 
schumpeter was probably the first scholar to theorize about entrepreneurship ,  and the field owed much to his contributions . 
the hooker children were home-schooled . 
in 2007, john lee hooker was voted into the michigan rock and roll legends hall of fame . 
 ''boom boom '' and `` dimples '' ,  two popular songs by hooker ,  were originally released by vee-jay . 
hooker appeared in the 1980 film `` the blues brothers '' . 
john lee hooker  -lrb-  august 22, 1912 or 1917 – june 21, 2001 -rrb- was an american blues singer ,  songwriter ,  and guitarist . 
among his many awards ,  hooker was inducted into the blues hall of fame in 1980, and the rock and roll hall of fame in 1991.
another influence was tony hollins ,  who dated hooker's sister alice ,  helped teach hooker to play ,  and gave him his first guitar . 
the narrator contends that traditional roman virtues ,  such as fides and virtus ,  had disappeared from society to the extent that `` rome was no longer roman '':
roman `` satura '' was a formal literary genre rather than being simply clever ,  humorous critique in no particular format . 
in 1738, samuel johnson was inspired by this text to write his `` london: a poem in imitation of the third satire of juvenal '' . 
the author employs outright obscenity less frequently than martial or catullus ,  but the scenes painted in his text are no less vivid or lurid for that discretion . 
the satires are a collection of satirical poems by the latin author juvenal written in the early 2nd century ad . 
jean cocteau never hid his homosexuality . 
cocteau's longest-lasting relationships were with french actors jean marais and édouard dermit ,  whom cocteau formally adopted . 
cocteau's experiments with the human voice peaked with his play `` la voix humaine '' . 
the popularity was due in no small measure to the presence of cocteau and his friends . 
in 1945 cocteau was one of several designers who created sets for the théâtre de la mode . 
in 1955, cocteau was made a member of the académie française and the royal academy of belgium . 
cocteau was born in maisons-laffitte ,  yvelines ,  a town near paris ,  to georges cocteau and his wife ,  eugénie lecomte; a socially prominent parisian family . 
cocteau is best known for his novel `` les enfants terribles ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- ,  and the films `` the blood of a poet ''  -lrb-  1930 -rrb- ,  `` beauty and the beast ''  -lrb-  1946 -rrb- ,  `` les parents terribles ''  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- ,  and `` orpheus ''  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- . 
john donne  -lrb-   ; 22 january 1572 – 31 march 1631 -rrb- was an english poet and cleric in the church of england . 
among them is also the choral setting of `` negative love '' that opens `` harmonium ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- by john adams . 
he also served as a member of parliament in 1601 and in 1614.
common subjects of donne's poems are love  -lrb-  especially in his early life  -rrb-  ,  death  -lrb-  especially after his wife's death  -rrb-  ,  and religion . 
in 1963 came joseph brodsky's `` the great elegy for john donne '' . 
he then wrote two anniversaries ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1611 -rrb- and `` of the progress of the soul ''  -lrb-  1612 -rrb- for drury . 
prose texts by donne have also been set to music . 
on 6 may 1592 he was admitted to lincoln's inn ,  one of the inns of court . 
one of the most famous of donne's conceits is found in ``  '' where he compares two lovers who are separated like the two legs of a compass . 
donne mourned her deeply ,  and wrote of his love and loss in his holy sonnet . 
donne is commemorated as a priest in the calendar of the church of england and in the calendar of saints of the evangelical lutheran church in america on 31 march . 
there have been settings in popular music as well . 
but joey was unique ,  totally unique . `` 
in 1972 hyman joined the glam punk band sniper . 
several songs have been written in tribute to joey ramone . 
joey initially served as the group's drummer while dee dee ramone was the original vocalist . 
jeffrey ross hyman  -lrb-  may 19, 1951 – april 15, 2001 -rrb- ,  known professionally as joey ramone ,  was an american musician and singer-songwriter ,  lead vocalist of the punk rock band the ramones . 
joey ramone is interred at hillside cemetery in lyndhurst ,  new jersey . 
in 1974, jeffrey hyman co-founded the punk rock band the ramones with friends john cummings and douglas colvin . 
jeffrey ross hyman was born on may 19, 1951, in queens ,  new york to a jewish family . 
joey ramone died from lymphoma at new york-presbyterian hospital on april 15, 2001, a month before he would have turned 50.
on november 30, 2003, a block of east 2nd street in new york city was officially renamed joey ramone place . 
sean was lennon's only child with ono . 
lennon then asked mccartney to join the band . 
lennon's most intense feelings were reserved for mccartney . 
lennon's relationship with julian was already strained ,  and after lennon and ono moved to manhattan in 1971, julian would not see his father again until 1973.
two versions exist of how lennon met yoko ono . 
lennon relented only after he was physically restrained by nilsson . 
while lennon was recording `` mind games '' in 1973, he and ono decided to separate . 
an alternate take ,  from the same 1973 `` ringo '' sessions ,  with lennon providing a guide vocal ,  appears on `` john lennon anthology '' . 
at age 15, lennon formed the skiffle group ,  the quarrymen . 
ono had previously suffered three miscarriages in her attempt to have a child with lennon . 
when asked ,  lennon gave ono the original handwritten lyrics to `` the word '' . 
on 23 march 1973, lennon was ordered to leave the us within 60 days . 
in september 1980, lennon commented about his family and his rebellious nature:
ono began visiting and telephoning lennon's home and ,  when his wife asked him for an explanation ,  lennon explained that ono was only trying to obtain money for her `` avant-garde bullshit '' . 
lennon was born on 9 october 1940 at liverpool maternity hospital ,  to julia  -lrb-  née stanley  -rrb-   -lrb-  1914–1958 -rrb- and alfred lennon  -lrb-  1912–1976 -rrb- . 
the performance was recorded and two of the tracks later appeared on `` john lennon anthology ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- . 
lennon told pang that his separation from ono was now over ,  although ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress . 
lennon delighted in mocking epstein for his homosexuality and for the fact that he was jewish . 
two years before the beatles disbanded ,  lennon and ono began public protests against the vietnam war . 
lennon was raised as an anglican and attended dovedale primary school . 
in 1973, lennon contributed a limerick called `` why make it sad to be gay ? `` 
lennon had settled back in new york when he recorded the album `` walls and bridges '' . 
later that year ,  lennon and ono supported efforts by the family of james hanratty to prove his innocence . 
lennon and ono moved to new york in august 1971 and released `` happy xmas  -lrb-  war is over  -rrb- ``  in december . 
after the group disbanded in 1970, lennon pursued a solo career and started the band plastic ono band with his second wife yoko ono . 
in 1970, lennon and ono went through primal therapy with arthur janov in los angeles ,  california . 
julian was born on 8 april 1963; lennon was on tour at the time and did not see his infant son until three days later . 
lennon's love of wordplay and nonsense with a twist found a wider audience when he was 24.
the following year ,  the brit award for outstanding contribution to music was given to lennon . 
in 1972, bob dylan wrote a letter to the ins defending lennon ,  stating:
by 2012, lennon's solo album sales in the united states had exceeded 14 million units . 
also in 1965, cleese and chapman began writing on `` the frost report '' . 
later booth would become a writing partner . 
in 2009 and 2010, cleese toured scandinavia and the us with his alimony tour year one and year two . 
2008 also saw reports of cleese working on a musical version of `` a fish called wanda '' with his daughter camilla . 
graham chapman was diagnosed with throat cancer in 1989; cleese ,  michael palin ,  peter cook ,  and chapman's partner david sherlock ,  witnessed chapman's death . 
along with his python co-stars terry gilliam ,  eric idle ,  terry jones ,  michael palin and graham chapman ,  cleese starred in four monty python films: `` and now for something completely different '' ,  `` monty python and the holy grail '' ,  `` life of brian '' and `` the meaning of life '' . 
he also starred in `` clockwise '' and has appeared in many other films ,  including two `` james bond '' films  -lrb-  as r and q  -rrb-  ,  two `` harry potter '' films  -lrb-  as nearly headless nick  -rrb-  ,  and three `` shrek '' films . 
cleese also declared his support for proportional representation . 
cleese returned to the troupe to co-write and co-star in the monty python films `` monty python and the holy grail '' ,  `` monty python's life of brian '' and `` monty python's the meaning of life '' ,  and participated in various live performances over the years . 
he was soon offered work as a writer with bbc radio ,  where he worked on several programmes ,  most notably as a sketch writer for `` the dick emery show '' . 
he expressed support for immigration ,  but also concern about the integration of immigrants into british culture . 
it was chapman's suggestion to change the faulty item into a dead parrot ,  and he also suggested that the parrot be specifically a `` norwegian blue '' ,  giving the sketch a surreal air which made it far more memorable . 
also in 2006, cleese released the song `` don't mention the world cup '' . 
during the 1980s and 1990s ,  cleese focused on film ,  though he did work with peter cook in his one-off tv special `` peter cook and co . ``  in 1980.
from 10 november to 9 december 2005, cleese toured new zealand with his stage show ,  `` john cleese—his life ,  times and current medical problems '' . 
the revue was so successful at the edinburgh festival fringe that it was renamed `` cambridge circus '' and taken to the west end in london and then on a tour of new zealand and broadway ,  with the cast also appearing in some of the revue's sketches on `` the ed sullivan show '' in october 1964.
in 1996, he was offered a knighthood ,  and later a life peerage ,  both of which he declined . 
palin agreed to work with cleese and chapman in the meantime ,  bringing with him gilliam ,  jones ,  and idle . 
in 1988, he wrote and starred in `` a fish called wanda '' as the lead ,  archie leach ,  along with jamie lee curtis ,  kevin kline ,  and michael palin . 
 ''monty python's flying circus '' ran for four seasons from october 1969 to december 1974 on bbc television ,  though cleese quit the show after the third . 
around this time ,  cleese worked with comedian les dawson on his sketch/stand-up show `` sez les '' . 
if somebody had said that to me when i was 20, i would have regarded him as a left-wing loony . `` 
during this period cleese met and befriended influential british comedian peter cook . 
chapman and cleese also specialised in sketches where two characters would conduct highly articulate arguments over completely arbitrary subjects ,  such as in the `` cheese shop '' ,  the `` dead parrot '' sketch and `` argument clinic '' ,  where cleese plays a stone-faced bureaucrat employed to sit behind a desk and engage people in pointless ,  trivial bickering . 
less than a year later ,  he returned to the uk ,  where he has property in london and a home on the royal crescent in bath ,  somerset . 
lynch was born in waltham ,  massachusetts ,  the fifth of william and margaret lynch's six children . 
lynch is the most popular governor in new hampshire history and ,  while in office ,  consistently ranked among the nation's most popular governors . 
