in 1610 ainsworth was forced reluctantly to withdraw ,  with a large part of their church ,  from johnson and those who adhered to him . 
henry ainsworth  -lrb-  1571–1622 -rrb- was an english nonconformist clergyman and scholar . 
a hindu could:
the hindus have been persecuted during the medieval and modern era . 
most hindus are found in asian countries . 
the term hindu appears in the texts from the mughal empire era . 
one need not be religious in the minimal sense ,  states julius lipner ,  to be accepted as hindu by hindus ,  or to describe oneself as hindu . 
during the colonial era ,  the term hindu had connotations of native religions of india ,  that is religions other than christianity and islam . 
the historical meaning of the term `` hindu '' has evolved with time . 
in the modern era ,  religious persecution of hindus have been reported outside india . 
the british government created a compendium of religious laws for hindus ,  and the term 'hindu' in these colonial 'hindu laws' ,  decades before india's independence ,  applied to buddhists ,  jains and sikhs . 
pew research projects that there will be 1.161 billion hindus by 2020.
the term `` hindu '' there is ambivalent and could mean geographical region or religion . 
according to pennington ,  the terms hindu and hinduism were thus constructed for colonial studies of india . 
these together accounted for 99% of the world's hindu population ,  and the remaining nations of the world together had about 6 million hindus in 2010.
the hindu nationalism movement has sought to reform indian laws ,  that critics say attempts to impose hindu values on india's islamic minority . 
in early colonial era anglo-hindu laws and british india court system ,  the term hindu referred to people of all indian religions and two non-indian religions:
overlaps in jain-hindu identities have included jains worshipping hindu deities ,  intermarriages between jains and hindus ,  and medieval era jain temples featuring hindu religious icons and sculpture . 
california historical landmark no . 
568, on the west bank of the colorado river near andrade in imperial county ,  california ,  commemorates alarcón's expedition having been the first non-indians to sight land within the present-day state of california . 
hernando de alarcón  -lrb-  born 1500 -rrb- was a spanish explorer and navigator of the 16th century ,  noted for having led an early expedition to the baja california peninsula ,  during which he became one of the first europeans to ascend the colorado river from its mouth and perhaps the first to reach alta california . 
first hamilton hakka
hakka cuisine ,  or kuh-chia cuisine ,  is the cooking style of the hakka people ,  who may also be found in other parts of taiwan and in countries with significant overseas hakka communities . 
some of the more notable dishes in hakka cuisine are listed as follow:
the hakka people have a marked cuisine and style of chinese cooking which is little known outside the hakka home . 
hunan cuisine ,  also known as xiang cuisine ,  consists of the cuisines of the xiang river region ,  dongting lake and western hunan province in china . 
thus when fiat money is printed ,  government obligations that are not denominated in money increase in cost by more than the value of the money created . 
here m refers to the money stock and p to the price level . 
as this happens ,  the real stock of money  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  the amount of circulating money divided by the price level  -rrb-  decreases considerably . 
the price increases that result from the rapid money creation creates a vicious circle ,  requiring ever growing amounts of new money creation to fund government deficits . 
as a result ,  no one holds currency ,  which increases the velocity of money ,  and worsens the crisis . 
the cantillon effect says that those institutions that receive the new money first are the beneficiaries of the policy . 
in either model ,  the second effect then follows from the first—either too little confidence forcing an increase in the money supply ,  or too much money destroying confidence . 
enactment of price controls to prevent discounting the value of paper money relative to gold ,  silver ,  hard currency ,  or other commodities fail to force acceptance of a paper money that lacks intrinsic value . 
in this case ,  the local money was mainly driven out by the us dollar and the south african rand . 
whatever the cause ,  hyperinflation involves both the supply and velocity of money . 
the economic crisis in poland in the 1980s was accompanied by rising inflation when new money was printed to cover a budget deficit . 
since hyperinflation is visible as a monetary effect ,  models of hyperinflation center on the demand for money . 
this results in an imbalance between the supply and demand for the money  -lrb-  including currency and bank deposits  -rrb-  ,  causing rapid inflation . 
by november 1922, the value in gold of money in circulation had fallen from £300 million before world war i to £20 million . 
unable to tax adequately ,  the government resorted to printing money ,  and in 1923 inflation in hungary reached 98% per month . 
usually ,  the excessive money supply growth results from the government being either unable or unwilling to fully finance the government budget through taxation or borrowing ,  and instead it finances the government budget deficit through the printing of money . 
while there can be a number of causes of high inflation ,  most hyperinflations have been caused by government budget deficits financed by money creation . 
in countries experiencing hyperinflation ,  the central bank often prints money in larger and larger denominations as the smaller denomination notes become worthless . 
in the case of rapid expansion of the money supply ,  prices rise rapidly in response to the increased supply of money relative to the supply of goods and services ,  and in the case of loss of confidence ,  the monetary authority responds to the risk premiums it has to pay by `` running the printing presses . `` 
hyperinflation occurs when there is a continuing  -lrb-  and often accelerating  -rrb-  rapid increase in the amount of money that is not supported by a corresponding growth in the output of goods and services . 
because rapidly rising prices undermine the role of money as a store of value ,  people try to spend it on real goods or services as quickly as possible . 
hyperinflation often ends when a civil conflict ends with one side winning . 
hoover and his wife had two children: herbert charles hoover  -lrb-  1903–1969 -rrb- and allan henry hoover  -lrb-  1907–1993 -rrb- . 
in his spare time ,  hoover wrote . 
the hoovers lived in china from april 1899 until august 1900.
herbert hoover was born on august 10, 1874 in west branch ,  iowa . 
rather than returning to australia ,  hoover and his new wife traveled to china . 
fellow quaker lawrie tatum was appointed as hoover's guardian . 
after a brief stay with one of his grandmothers in kingsley ,  iowa ,  hoover lived the next 18 months with his uncle allen hoover in west branch . 
in 1901, hoover no longer lived in australia ,  but he visited the country in 1902, 1903, 1905, and 1907 as an overseas investor . 
in 1908, hoover became an independent mining consultant ,  traveling worldwide until the outbreak of world war i in 1914.
hoover graduated from stanford in 1895, in the midst of the panic of 1893, and initially struggled to find a job . 
hildegard also invented an alternative alphabet . 
hildegard catalogued both her theory and practice in two works . 
this greenness or power of life appears frequently in hildegard's works . 
the following modern musical works are directly linked to hildegard and her music or texts:
hildegard's hagiography ,  `` vita sanctae hildegardis '' ,  was compiled by the monk theoderic of echternach after hildegard's death . 
in 1165 hildegard founded a second monastery for her nuns at eibingen . 
before hildegard's death ,  a problem arose with the clergy of mainz . 
in her `` vita '' ,  hildegard states that from a very young age she had experienced visions . 
in early 1148, a commission was sent by the pope to disibodenberg to find out more about hildegard and her writings . 
it concludes with the symphony of heaven ,  an early version of hildegard's musical compositions . 
hildegard did not accept this idea ,  replying that it was a sin and that the man had been reconciled to the church at the time of his death . 
hildegard of bingen's correspondence is an important component of her literary output . 
hildegard was born around the year 1098, although the exact date is uncertain . 
it was between november 1147 and february 1148 at the synod in trier that pope eugenius heard about hildegard's writings . 
despite hildegard's self-professed view that her compositions have as object the praise of god ,  one scholar has asserted that hildegard made a close association between music and the female body in her musical compositions . 
in her first theological text ,  `` scivias ''  -lrb-  `` know the ways ''  -rrb-  ,  hildegard describes her struggle within:
hildegard's parish and pilgrimage church in eibingen near rüdesheim houses her relics . 
recordings and performances of hildegard's music have gained critical praise and popularity since 1979.
in recent years ,  hildegard has become of particular interest to feminist scholars . 
hilversum lies south-east of amsterdam and north of utrecht . 
hilversum has a variety of international schools ,  such as the `` violenschool '' and `` international school hilversum `` alberdingk thijm '' '' . 
hilversum is part of the randstad ,  one of the largest conurbations in europe . 
hilversum was one of the first towns to have a local party of the populist movement called `` leefbaar ''  -lrb-  `` liveable ''  -rrb-  . 
earthenware found in hilversum gives its name to the hilversum culture ,  which is an early- to mid-bronze age ,  or 800–1200 bce material culture . 
hilversum  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city and municipality in the province of north holland ,  netherlands . 
the following is a list of organizations that have ,  or are continuing to ,  broadcast from studios in hilversum:
the town is known for its architecturally important town hall  -lrb-  raadhuis hilversum  -rrb-  ,  designed by willem marinus dudok and built in 1931.
 ''the hound of heaven '' is a 182-line poem written by english poet francis thompson  -lrb-  1859–1907 -rrb- . 
as do the other internet regions ,  there is an operational forum ,  the internet community of operational networking specialists . 
the internet began to penetrate asia in the 1980s . 
africa is building an internet infrastructure . 
it was around the time when arpanet was interlinked with nsfnet in the late 1980s ,  that the term was used as the name of the network ,  internet ,  being the large and global tcp/ip network . 
south korea's first internet system ,  the system development network  -lrb-  sdn  -rrb-  began operation on 15 may 1982.
standardization efforts of the working groups are often adopted by the internet community ,  but the ietf does not control or patrol the internet . 
even before the world wide web ,  there were search engines that attempted to organize the internet . 
the arpanet project led to the development of protocols for internetworking ,  in which multiple separate networks could be joined into a network of networks . 
niprnet does have controlled security gateways to the public internet . 
e-mail has often been called the killer application of the internet . 
the internet engineering task force  -lrb-  ietf  -rrb-  is the largest and most visible of several loosely related ad-hoc groups that provide technical direction for the internet ,  including the internet architecture board  -lrb-  iab  -rrb-  ,  the internet engineering steering group  -lrb-  iesg  -rrb-  ,  and the internet research task force  -lrb-  irtf  -rrb-  . 
the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers  -lrb-  icann  -rrb-  provides oversight and coordination for two principal name spaces in the internet ,  the internet protocol address space and the domain name system . 
as a globally distributed network of voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks ,  the internet operates without a central governing body . 
initially ,  as with its predecessor networks ,  the system that would evolve into the internet was primarily for government and government body use . 
concepts of this network influenced later arpanet architecture . 
as interest in networking grew and new applications for it were developed ,  the internet's technologies spread throughout the rest of the world . 
sublink network represented possibly one of the first examples of the internet technology becoming progress through popular diffusion . 
the history of the internet begins with the development of electronic computers in the 1950s . 
npl ,  followed by arpanet ,  were the first two networks in the world to use packet switching ,  and were interconnected in the early 1970s . 
by the 1990s it provided a worldwide networking infrastructure . 
the first mobile phone with internet connectivity was the nokia 9000 communicator ,  launched in finland in 1996.
isoc provides financial and organizational support to and promotes the work of the standards settings bodies for which it is the organizational home: the internet engineering task force  -lrb-  ietf  -rrb-  ,  the internet architecture board  -lrb-  iab  -rrb-  ,  the internet engineering steering group  -lrb-  iesg  -rrb-  ,  and the internet research task force  -lrb-  irtf  -rrb-  . 
packet switching networks such as the npl network ,  arpanet ,  tymnet ,  merit network ,  cyclades ,  and telenet ,  were developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s using a variety of communications protocols . 
the first public dial-in networks used asynchronous tty terminal protocols to reach a concentrator operated in the public network . 
the term `` internet '' was adopted in the first rfc published on the tcp protocol  -lrb-  rfc 675: internet transmission control program ,  december 1974 -rrb- as an abbreviation of the term `` internetworking '' and the two terms were used interchangeably . 
the issue of connecting separate physical networks to form one logical network was the first of many problems . 
the cyclades packet switching network was a french research network designed and directed by louis pouzin . 
the ietf ,  with financial and organizational support from the internet society ,  continues to serve as the internet's ad-hoc standards body and issues request for comments . 
on november 22, 1977 a three network demonstration was conducted including the arpanet ,  the sri's packet radio van on the packet radio network and the atlantic packet satellite network . 
during the first decade or so of the public internet ,  the immense changes it would eventually enable in the 2000s were still nascent . 
while developed countries with technological infrastructures were joining the internet ,  developing countries began to experience a digital divide separating them from the internet . 
stemming from the first specifications of tcp in 1974, tcp/ip emerged in mid-late 1978 in nearly its final form ,  as used for the first decades of the internet ,  known as `` ipv4 '' . 
as of the 2010s ,  the world wide web is the primary tool billions use to interact on the internet ,  and it has changed people's lives immeasurably . 
that idea is the arpanet . 
there are nearly insurmountable problems in supplying a historiography of the internet's development . 
the internet society  -lrb-  isoc  -rrb-  is an international ,  nonprofit organization founded during 1992 `` to assure the open development ,  evolution and use of the internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world '' . 
the internet research task force  -lrb-  irtf  -rrb-  and the internet research steering group  -lrb-  irsg  -rrb-  ,  peer activities to the ietf and iesg under the general supervision of the iab ,  focus on longer term research issues . 
networking beyond this scope ,  known as wide area networks  -lrb-  wans  -rrb-  ,  emerged during the 1950s and became established during the 1960s . 
arpanet became the technical core of what would become the internet ,  and a primary tool in developing the technologies used . 
today ,  the major web browsers are firefox ,  internet explorer ,  google chrome ,  opera and safari . 
however ,  the future of the global internet may be shaped by regional differences in the world . 
the first internet link into low earth orbit was established on january 22, 2010 when astronaut t .  j .  creamer posted the first unassisted update to his twitter account from the international space station ,  marking the extension of the internet into space . 
arpanet development was centered around the request for comments  -lrb-  rfc  -rrb-  process ,  still used today for proposing and distributing internet protocols and systems . 
there was considerable resistance in europe towards more widespread use of tcp/ip ,  and the cern tcp/ip intranets remained isolated from the internet until 1989.
search . 
but despite this ,  the internet continues to grow ,  driven by commerce ,  ever greater amounts of online information and knowledge and social networking . 
however ,  interest in commercial use of the internet quickly became a commonly debated topic . 
in 1981 nsf supported the development of the computer science network  -lrb-  csnet  -rrb-  . 
perhaps she also had been a slave . 
nevertheless ,  the first book includes some of his most popular poems . 
quintus horatius flaccus  -lrb-  december 8, 65 bc – november 27, 8 bc  -rrb-  ,  known in the english-speaking world as horace  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was the leading roman lyric poet during the time of augustus  -lrb-  also known as octavian  -rrb-  . 
he imitated other greek lyric poets as well ,  employing a 'motto' technique ,  beginning each ode with some reference to a greek original and then diverging from it . 
now at the start of the third millennium ,  poets are still absorbing and re-configuring the horatian influence ,  sometimes in translation  -lrb-  such as a 2002 english/american edition of the `` odes '' by thirty-six poets  -rrb-  and sometimes as inspiration for their own work  -lrb-  such as a 2003 collection of odes by a new zealand poet  -rrb-  . 
the public reception of `` odes '' 1–3 disappointed him however . 
horace's popularity is revealed in the large number of quotes from all his works found in almost every genre of medieval literature ,  and also in the number of poets imitating him in quantitative latin meter  . 
the roman poet was presented in the nineteenth century as an honorary english gentleman . 
a re-appraisal of the `` epodes '' also appears in creative adaptations by recent poets  -lrb-  such as a 2004 collection of poems that relocates the ancient context to a 1950s industrial town  -rrb-  . 
statius paid homage to horace by composing one poem in sapphic and one in alcaic meter  -lrb-  the verse forms most often associated with `` odes ''  -rrb-  ,  which he included in his collection of occasional poems ,  `` silvae '' . 
horatian-style lyrics were increasingly typical of oxford and cambridge verse collections for this period ,  most of them in latin but some like the previous ode in english . 
the rhetorician quintilian regarded his `` odes '' as just about the only latin lyrics worth reading: `` he can be lofty sometimes ,  yet he is also full of charm and grace ,  versatile in his figures ,  and felicitously daring in his choice of words . `` 
horace can be regarded as the world's first autobiographer – in his writings ,  he tells us far more about himself ,  his character ,  his development ,  and his way of life than any other great poet in antiquity . 
 ''odes '' 1–3 were the next focus for his artistic creativity . 
the reception of horace's work has varied from one epoch to another and varied markedly even in his own lifetime . 
his works were also used to justify commonplace themes ,  such as patriotic obedience ,  as in james parry's english lines from an oxford university collection in 1736:
the `` epistles '' may be considered among horace's most innovative works . 
new editions of his works were published almost yearly . 
in 1993, microsoft released windows nt 3.1, the first version of the newly-developed windows nt operating system . 
in an attempt to resolve this tension ,  ibm and microsoft agreed that ibm would develop os/2 2.0, to replace os/2 1.3 and windows 3.0, while microsoft would develop a new operating system ,  os/2 3.0, to later succeed os/2 2.0.
meanwhile ,  microsoft continued to develop windows nt . 
ibm continued to market os/2, producing later versions in os/2 3.0 and 4.0  -lrb-  also called warp  -rrb-  . 
version 1.2, released in 1989, introduced a new file system ,  hpfs ,  to replace the fat file system . 
after windows 3.11, microsoft began to develop a new consumer oriented version of the operating system codenamed chicago . 
during the mid to late 1980s ,  microsoft and ibm had cooperatively been developing os/2 as a successor to dos . 
the first independent version of microsoft windows ,  version 1.0, released on november 20, 1985, achieved little popularity . 
ibm later introduced os/2 into the united states v .  microsoft case ,  blaming unfair marketing tactics on microsoft's part . 
later ,  two new versions were released: windows/286 2.1 and windows/386 2.1.
one of microsoft's biggest advances initially developed for windows nt was a new 32-bit api ,  to replace the legacy 16-bit windows api . 
it introduced system restore ,  help and support center ,  updated versions of the disk defragmenter and other system tools . 
all these versions continued version 3.0's impressive sales pace . 
windows nt was the first windows operating system based on a hybrid kernel . 
after an interim 1.3 version to fix up many remaining problems with the 1.x series ,  ibm released os/2 version 2.0 in 1992.
is the northern sami name of helsinki . 
the helsinki metropolitan area  -lrb-  greater helsinki  -rrb-  consists of the cities of helsinki capital region and ten surrounding municipalities . 
the helsinki urban area is an officially recognized urban area in finland ,  defined by its population density . 
helsinki  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is the capital city and most populous municipality of finland . 
helsinki has a humid continental climate  -lrb-  dfb  -rrb-  . 
the helsinki metropolitan area ,  also known as the capital region  -lrb-  finnish: `` pääkaupunkiseutu '' ,  swedish: `` huvudstadsregionen ''  -rrb-  comprises four municipalities: helsinki ,  espoo ,  vantaa ,  and kauniainen . 
helsinki has one of the highest urban standards of living in the world . 
together with the cities of espoo ,  vantaa ,  and kauniainen ,  and surrounding commuter towns ,  helsinki forms the greater helsinki metropolitan area ,  which has a population of nearly 1.5 million . 
helsinki's city council consists of eighty-five members . 
in the iron age the area occupied by present day helsinki was inhabited by tavastians . 
called the `` daughter of the baltic '' ,  helsinki is on the tip of a peninsula and on 315 islands . 
hobart town became a city on 21 august 1842, and was renamed hobart from the beginning of 1881.
hobart is located on the estuary of the derwent river in the state's south-east . 
hobart has a mild temperate oceanic climate  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
hobart town ,  from the census of 1835, contained 13,826 inhabitants ,  and the whole of tasmania 36,505.
the metropolitan area is often referred to as `` greater hobart '' ,  to differentiate it from the city of hobart ,  one of the five local government areas that cover the city . 
the city ,  initially known as `` hobart town '' or `` hobarton '' ,  was named after lord hobart ,  the british secretary of state for war and the colonies . 
the `` theogony '' is commonly considered hesiod's earliest work . 
hesiod  -lrb-  ; `` hēsíodos ''  -rrb-  was a greek poet generally thought by scholars to have been active between 750 and 650 bc ,  around the same time as homer . 
two different—yet early—traditions record the site of hesiod's grave . 
in addition to the `` theogony '' and `` works and days '' ,  numerous other poems were ascribed to hesiod during antiquity . 
three works have survived which are attributed to hesiod by ancient commentators: `` works and days '' ,  `` theogony '' ,  and `` shield of heracles '' . 
hesiod certainly predates the lyric and elegiac poets whose work has come down to the modern era . 
greeks in the late 5th and early 4th centuries bc considered their oldest poets to be orpheus ,  musaeus ,  hesiod and homer—in that order . 
the dating of hesiod's life is a contested issue in scholarly circles  -lrb-  `` see § dating below ''  -rrb-  . 
various legends accumulated about hesiod and they are recorded in several sources:
hesiod mentions a poetry contest at chalcis in euboea where the sons of one amphidamas awarded him a tripod  -lrb-  `` works and days '' 654–662 -rrb- . 
the system of hebrew numerals is a quasi-decimal alphabetic numeral system using the letters of the hebrew alphabet . 
alternatively ,  the 22-letter hebrew numeral set is sometimes extended to 27 by using 5 `` sofit ''  -lrb-  final  -rrb-  forms of the hebrew letters . 
note: for numbers greater than 20, gender does not apply . 
this is used in the case where a number is represented by two or more hebrew numerals  -lrb-  `` e . g .  , ``  28 → כ״ח  -rrb-  . 
note: for ordinal numbers greater than 10, cardinal numbers are used instead . 
the hebrew language has names for common numbers that range from zero to one million . 
the hebrew numeral system has sometimes been extended to include the five final letter forms—ך  -lrb-  500‎  -rrb-  ,  ם  -lrb-  600‎  -rrb-  ,  ן  -lrb-  700‎  -rrb-  ,  ף  -lrb-  800‎  -rrb-  and ץ  -lrb-  900‎  -rrb- —which are then used to indicate the numbers from 500 to 900.
this is used in the case where a number is represented by a single hebrew numeral  -lrb-  `` e . g .  , ``  100 → ק׳  -rrb-  . 
the concept of the hero can be found in classical literature . 
these ancient greek hero cults worshipped heroes from oral epic tradition ,  with these heroes often bestowing blessings ,  especially healing ones ,  on individuals . 
heroes in myth often had close but conflicted relationships with the gods . 
among noticeable events in the studies of the role of the hero and great man in history one should mention sydney hook's book  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- `` the hero in history '' . 
social psychology has begun paying attention to heroes and heroism . 
the concept of the `` mythic hero archetype '' was first developed by lord raglan in his 1936 book ,  `` the hero ,  a study in tradition ,  myth and drama '' . 
fate ,  or destiny ,  plays a massive role in the stories of classical heroes . 
victims may appear in tales with seeker heroes ,  but the tale does not follow them both . 
the word `` hero '' comes from the greek ἥρως  -lrb-  `` hērōs ''  -rrb-  ,  `` hero ''  -lrb-  literally `` protector '' or `` defender ''  -rrb-  ,  particularly one such as heracles with divine ancestry or later given divine honors . 
an evolutionary psychology explanation for heroic risk-taking is that it is a costly signal demonstrating the ability of the hero . 
on the other hand are medieval and modern heroes ,  who perform great deeds for the common good instead of the classical goal of pride and fame . 
the hydroxide ion is intermediate in nucleophilicity between the fluoride ion f ,  and the amide ion  . 
the hydroxide ion may act as a base catalyst . 
solutions containing the hydroxide ion are generated when a salt of a weak acid is dissolved in water . 
the same ion has a  -lrb-  ho  -rrb- –zn– -lrb-  oh  -rrb-  bending vibration at 300 cm . 
the simplest hydroxide of boron b -lrb-  oh  -rrb-  ,  known as boric acid ,  is an acid . 
when these acids are neutralized the hydrogen atom is removed from the hydroxide group . 
 ''ortho ''-periodic acid can lose all its protons ,  eventually forming the periodate ion io . 
these acids also have hydroxide groups attached to the silicon; the formulas suggest that these acids are protonated forms of polyoxyanions . 
the hydroxide ion by itself is not a strong enough base ,  but it can be converted in one by adding sodium hydroxide to ethanol to produce the ethoxide ion . 
other acids of iodine -lrb-  vii  -rrb-  that contain hydroxide groups are known ,  in particular in salts such as the `` meso ''periodate ion that occurs in kio -lrb-  oh  -rrb- ·8ho . 
in solution ,  exposed to air ,  the hydroxide ion reacts rapidly with atmospheric carbon dioxide ,  acting as an acid ,  to form ,  initially ,  the bicarbonate ion . 
in aqueous solution the hydroxide ion is a base in the brønsted–lowry sense as it can accept a proton from a brønsted–lowry acid to form a water molecule . 
solutions containing the hydroxide ion attack glass . 
in the manufacture of soap ,  sodium chloride is added to salt out the sodium salt of the carboxylic acid; this is an example of the application of the common ion effect . 
numerous mixed ligand complexes of these metals with the hydroxide ion exist . 
tin -lrb-  iv  -rrb-  hydroxide is unknown but can be regarded as the hypothetical acid from which stannates ,  with a formula sn -lrb-  oh  -rrb-  ,  are derived by reaction with the  -lrb-  lewis  -rrb-  basic hydroxide ion . 
when the oh group is bound to a metal ion in a coordination complex ,  an m−oh bending mode can be observed . 
giger museum . 
giger museum ,  a permanent repository of his work . 
giger's style and thematic execution were influential . 
giger's first success was when h .  h .  kunz ,  co-owner of switzerland's first poster publishing company ,  printed and distributed giger's first posters ,  beginning in 1969.
hispaniola  -lrb-  ; latin and ; ;   -rrb-  is an island in the caribbean island group known as the greater antilles . 
the island has four distinct ecoregions . 
the island has four distinct ecoregions . 
it is the second largest island in the caribbean after cuba ,  and the most populous island in the caribbean; it is also the eleventh most populous island in the world . 
due to taíno ,  spanish and french influences on the island ,  historically the whole island was often referred to as haiti ,  hayti ,  santo domingo ,  st .  domingue ,  or san domingo . 
the primary indigenous group on the island of hispaniola was the arawak/taíno people . 
the island was inhabited by the taíno ,  one of the indigenous arawak peoples . 
when columbus took possession of the island in 1492, he named it insula hispana in latin and la isla española in spanish ,  with both meaning `` the spanish island '' . 
the island was called by various names by its native people ,  the taíno amerindians . 
the island has five major mountain ranges: the central range ,  known in the dominican republic as the cordillera central ,  spans the central part of the island ,  extending from the south coast of the dominican republic into northwestern haiti ,  where it is known as the massif du nord . 
there are many bird species in hispaniola ,  and the island's amphibian species are also diverse . 
in the oldest documented map of the island ,  created by andrés de morales ,  los haitises is labeled montes de haití  -lrb-  `` haiti mountains ''  -rrb-  ,  and de las casas apparently named the whole island haiti on the basis of that particular region ,  as d'anghiera states that the name of one part was given to the whole island . 
hispaniola is the second-largest island in the caribbean  -lrb-  after cuba  -rrb-  ,  with an area of  ,  of which is under the sovereignty of the dominican republic occupying the eastern portion and under the sovereignty of haiti occupying the western portion . 
there is still heated debate over the population of taíno people on the island of hispaniola in 1492, but estimates range upwards of 750,000.
 ,  she is the only woman of african-american descent to have won the award . 
while the film was panned by critics ,  it made us$142 million worldwide . 
berry starred as the title role in the film `` catwoman '' ,  for which she received us$12.5 million . 
while critical response towards the film was mixed ,  it made us$414 million worldwide . 
she has taken on the role of an assassin in the film ``  '' ,  which is scheduled to be released on may 17, 2019 by lionsgate . 
her breakthrough film role was in the romantic comedy `` boomerang ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  alongside eddie murphy ,  which led to roles in films such as the family comedy `` the flintstones ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- ,  the political comedy-drama `` bulworth ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- and the television film `` introducing dorothy dandridge ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- ,  for which she won the primetime emmy award and golden globe award for best actress in a miniseries or movie ,  among many other awards . 
berry was one of the highest-paid actresses in hollywood during the 2000s and has been involved in the production of several of the films in which she performed . 
in april 2007, berry was awarded a star on the hollywood walk of fame in front of the kodak theatre at 6801 hollywood boulevard for her contributions to the film industry ,  and by the end of the decade ,  she established herself as one of the highest-paid actresses in hollywood ,  earning an estimated $10 million per film . 
berry's performance was recognized with several awards ,  including a primetime emmy award and golden globe award . 
 ''the call '' was a sleeper hit ,  grossing us$68.6 million around the globe . 
in addition to her academy award win ,  berry garnered high-profile roles in the 2000s ,  such as storm in `` x-men ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- ,  the action crime thriller `` swordfish ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- ,  and the spy film `` die another day ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- ,  where she played bond girl jinx . 
berry's film debut was in a small role for spike lee's `` jungle fever ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- ,  in which she played vivian ,  a drug addict . 
while the film made us$8.6 million in its global theatrical run ,  it garnered positive reviews from writers; `` the austin chronicle '' found the film to be `` an impeccably constructed and perfectly paced drama of domestic and internal volatility '' and felt that `` berry is brilliant here ,  as good as she's ever been '' . 
the robert koch institute is named in his honor . 
koch observed the phenomenon of acquired immunity . 
koch lost the right to apply for patent protection . 
koch was born in clausthal ,  germany ,  on 11 december 1842, to hermann koch  -lrb-  1814–1877 -rrb- and mathilde julie henriette  -lrb-  née biewend; 1818–1871 -rrb- . 
heinrich hermann robert koch  -lrb-  ; ; 11 december 1843 – 27 may 1910 -rrb- was a german physician and microbiologist . 
in an attempt to grow bacteria ,  koch began to use solid nutrients such as potato slices . 
in 1897, koch was elected a foreign member of the royal society  -lrb-  formemrs  -rrb-  . 
a tobacco hogshead was used in british and american colonial times to transport and store tobacco . 
honda has three joint-ventures in china  -lrb-  honda china ,  dongfeng honda ,  and guangqi honda  -rrb-  . 
honda has also created joint ventures around the world ,  such as honda siel cars and hero honda motorcycles in india ,  guangzhou honda and dongfeng honda in china ,  boon siew honda in malaysia and honda atlas in pakistan . 
throughout his life ,  honda's founder ,  soichiro honda ,  had an interest in automobiles . 
honda is headquartered in minato ,  tokyo ,  japan . 
in 2017, india became the largest motorcycle market of honda . 
the first complete motorcycle ,  with both the frame and engine made by honda ,  was the 1949 d-type ,  the first honda to go by the name dream . 
honda's automotive manufacturing ambitions can be traced back to 1963, with the honda t360, a kei car truck built for the japanese market . 
the civic is a line of compact cars developed and manufactured by honda . 
in 2013, honda invested about 5.7%  -lrb-  us$6.8 billion  -rrb-  of its revenues in research and development . 
the honda aircraft company was established in 1995, as a wholly owned subsidiary; its goal was to produce jet aircraft under honda's name . 
american honda motor company is based in torrance ,  california . 
also in 2013, honda became the first japanese automaker to be a net exporter from the united states ,  exporting 108,705 honda and acura models ,  while importing only 88,357.
in india ,  honda is leading in the scooters segment ,  with 59 percent market share . 
honda's net sales and other operating revenue by geographical regions in 2007
women's team handball was added at the 1976 summer olympics . 
handball  -lrb-  also known as team handball ,  european handball or olympic handball  -rrb-  is a team sport in which two teams of seven players each  -lrb-  six outcourt players and a goalkeeper  -rrb-  pass a ball using their hands with the aim of throwing it into the goal of the other team . 
the game was codified at the end of the 19th century in denmark . 
a standard match consists of two periods of 30 minutes ,  and the team that scores the most goals wins . 
if formula_1 is a noetherian ring ,  then formula_2 is a noetherian ring . 
if formula_1 is a noetherian ring ,  then formula_11 is a noetherian ring . 
if formula_1 is a ring ,  let formula_2 denote the ring of polynomials in the indeterminate formula_3 over formula_1.
since formula_1 is noetherian the chain of ideals
although heterocyclic chemical compounds may be inorganic compounds or organic compounds ,  most contain at least one carbon . 
those with two heteroatoms are more likely to occur as reactive intermediates . <br> common 3-membered heterocycles with `` one '' heteroatom are:
in 1994, connick decided to branch out . 
in july 2003, connick released his first instrumental album in fifteen years ,  `` other hours connick on piano volume 1 '' . 
connick's album `` oh ,  my nola '' ,  and ``  '' were released in 2007, with a following tour called the my new orleans tour . 
on june 11, 2013, connick released a new album of all original music titled `` every man should know '' . 
harry connick jr .  was born and raised in new orleans ,  louisiana . 
connick's best-selling album in the united states is his christmas album `` when my heart finds christmas ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- . 
connick and his sister ,  suzanna ,  were raised in the lakeview neighborhood of new orleans . 
connick is a supporter of hometown nfl franchise new orleans saints . 
the film `` new in town '' starring connick and renée zellweger ,  began filming in january 2008, and was released in january 2009.
connick returned to `` american idol '' to mentor the top four of season 12.
connick and branford marsalis devised an initiative to help restore new orleans' musical heritage . 
in contrast to connick's previous albums ,  this album is a collaboration with a record company producer ,  the multiple grammy award winning music executive clive davis . 
 ''songs i heard '' won connick another grammy for best traditional pop album and he toured performing songs from the album ,  holding matinees at which each parent had to be accompanied by a child . 
in november 1992, connick released `` 25 '' ,  a solo piano collection of standards that again went platinum . 
he has had seven top20 us albums ,  and ten number-one us jazz albums ,  earning more number-one albums than any other artist in us jazz chart history . 
a 2013 us summer tour was announced in support of the album . 
lee et al . 
lee et al . 
goransson et al . 
roberts et al . 
the work of courtney et al . 
 -lrb-  p .  155 -rrb-
 -lrb-  p .  150 -rrb-
the results of suneson et al . 
other sources indicate that ballistic impacts can create shock waves in tissue . 
even though wang et al . 
in addition to stress waves ,  bellamy and zajtchuck describe shear waves as a possible mechanism of indirect injuries in the wdmet data . 
a shock wave can be created when fluid is rapidly displaced by an explosive or projectile . 
the rigorous calculations of lee et al . 
duncan macpherson ,  a former member of the international wound ballistics association and author of the book ,  bullet penetration ,  claimed that shock waves cannot result from bullet impacts with tissue . 
hadith may be `` hadith qudsi ''  -lrb-  sacred hadith  -rrb-  — which some muslims regard as the words of god  -lrb-  arabic: allah  -rrb-  — or `` hadith sharif ''  -lrb-  noble hadith  -rrb-  ,  which are muhammad's own utterances . 
in islamic law ,  the use of hadith as now understood  -lrb-  hadith of muhammad with documentation ,  isnads ,  etc .   -rrb- 
but did not mention muhammad
but she adds that `` nowadays ,  hadith almost always means hadith from mohammed himself . `` 
 ''hadith '' also refers to the speech of a person . 
the hadith literature is based on spoken reports in circulation after the death of muhammad . 
a `` hadith qudsi '' need not be a `` sahih ''  -lrb-  sound hadith  -rrb-  ,  but may be `` da‘if '' or even `` mawdu‘ '' . 
the hadith had a profound and controversial influence on `` tafsir ''  -lrb-  commentaries of the quran  -rrb-  . 
classical hadith specialist ibn hajar al-asqalani says that the intended meaning of `` hadith '' in religious tradition is something attributed to muhammad but that is not found in the quran . 
the importance of hadith in the shia school of thought is well documented . 
some sources  -lrb-  khaled abou el fadl  -rrb-  limit hadith to verbal reports ,  with the deeds of muhammad and reports about his companions being part of the `` sunnah '' ,  but not hadith . 
to do this ,  they used a number of techniques which muslims now call the science of hadith . 
by means of hadith terminology ,  hadith are categorized as `` ṣaḥīḥ ''  -lrb-  sound ,  authentic  -rrb-  ,  `` ḍaʿīf ''  -lrb-  weak  -rrb-  ,  or `` mawḍūʿ ''  -lrb-  fabricated  -rrb-  . 
different branches of islam refer to different collections of hadith ,  though the same incident may be found in hadith in different collections:
 .  .  .  a practice which is contained within the hadith may well be regarded as sunna ,  but it is not necessary that a sunna would have a supporting hadith sanctioning it . 
in `` introduction to hadith '' by abd al-hadi al-fadli ,  `` kitab ali '' is referred to as `` the first hadith book of the `` ahl al-bayt ''  -lrb-  family of muhammad  -rrb-  to be written on the authority of the prophet '' . 
joseph schacht describes hadith as providing `` the documentation '' of the sunnah . 
the first people to hear hadith were the companions who preserved it and then conveyed it to those after them . 
an example of a `` hadith qudsi '' is the hadith of abu hurairah who said that muhammad said: when god decreed the creation he pledged himself by writing in his book which is laid down with him: my mercy prevails over my wrath . 
not all hulls are decked  -lrb-  for instance a dinghy  -rrb-  . 
the hull is the watertight body of a ship or boat . 
the shape of the hull is entirely dependent upon the needs of the design . 
the structure of the hull varies depending on the vessel type . 
the music to which a hymn may be sung is a hymn tune . 
non-scriptural hymns  -lrb-  i . e . 
in many evangelical churches ,  traditional songs are classified as hymns while more contemporary worship songs are not considered hymns . 
many churches today use contemporary worship music which includes a range of styles often influenced by popular music . 
some of the oldest surviving examples of notated music are hymns with greek texts . 
hymns may or may not include instrumental accompaniment . 
a writer of hymns is known as a hymnodist ,  and the practice of singing hymns is called `` hymnody ''; the same word is used for the collectivity of hymns belonging to a particular denomination or period  -lrb-  e . g . 
found in few hymnals today ,  the hymn has eight stanzas in common meter and is based on revelation 5:6, 8, 9, 10, 12.
today ,  except for choirs ,  more musically inclined congregations and `` a cappella '' congregations ,  hymns are typically sung in unison . 
of note ,  in recent years ,  christian traditional hymns `` have '' seen a revival in some churches ,  usually more reformed or calvinistic in nature ,  as modern hymn writers such as keith and kristyn getty and sovereign grace music have reset old lyrics to new melodies ,  revised old hymns and republished them ,  or simply written a song in accordance with christian hymn standards such as the hymn ,  `` in christ alone '' . 
the meter indicates the number of syllables for the lines in each stanza of a hymn . 
also ,  if the number of syllables in one verse differ from another verse in the same hymn  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  the hymn `` i sing a song of the saints of god ''  -rrb-  ,  the meter is called irregular . 
ancient hymns include the egyptian `` great hymn to the aten '' ,  composed by pharaoh akhenaten; the hurrian hymn to nikkal; the `` vedas '' ,  a collection of hymns in the tradition of hinduism; and the psalms ,  a collection of songs from judaism . 
it is used to chant all forms of liturgical worship . 
since the earliest times ,  christians have sung `` psalms and hymns and spiritual songs '' ,  both in private devotions and in corporate worship  -lrb-  ; ; ; ; ; ; ; cf . 
in the 7th to 15th centuries ,  scientific progress occurred in the muslim world . 
during the classical period in greece  -lrb-  6th ,  5th and 4th centuries bce  -rrb-  and in hellenistic times ,  natural philosophy slowly developed into an exciting and contentious field of study . 
in the 3rd century bce ,  the greek mathematician archimedes of syracuse  -lrb-    -lrb-  287–212 bce  -rrb-  – generally considered to be the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time – laid the foundations of hydrostatics ,  statics and calculated the underlying mathematics of the lever . 
in 1905 a young ,  26-year-old german physicist  -lrb-  then a bern patent clerk  -rrb-  named albert einstein  -lrb-  1879–1955 -rrb- ,  showed how measurements of time and space are affected by motion between an observer and what is being observed . 
the study of magnetism in ancient china dates back to the 4th century bce . 
he also developed the principles of equilibrium states and centers of gravity ,  ideas that would influence the well known scholars ,  galileo ,  and newton . 
in indian philosophy ,  maharishi kanada was the first to systematically develop a theory of atomism around 200 bce though some authors have allotted him an earlier era in the 6th century bce . 
important contributions were made by ibn al-haytham  -lrb-  965–1040 -rrb- ,  an arab scientist ,  considered as one of the founders of modern optics . 
during the 16th and 17th centuries ,  a large advancement of scientific progress known as the scientific revolution took place in europe . 
deliberately  -rrb-  – had universally consistent characteristics that could be described mathematically . 
the rational mechanics developed in the 18th century received a brilliant exposition in both lagrange's 1788 work and the `` celestial mechanics ''  -lrb-  1799–1825 -rrb- of pierre-simon laplace . 
at the beginning of the 20th century a major revolution shook the world of physics ,  which led to a new era ,  generally referred to as modern physics . 
hipparchus  -lrb-  190–120 bce  -rrb-  ,  focusing on astronomy and mathematics ,  used sophisticated geometrical techniques to map the motion of the stars and planets ,  even predicting the times that solar eclipses would happen . 
ancient philosophy ,  meanwhile – including what was called `` physics '' – focused on explaining nature through ideas such as aristotle's four types of `` cause '' . 
copernicus' new perspective ,  along with the accurate observations made by tycho brahe ,  enabled german astronomer johannes kepler  -lrb-  1571–1630 -rrb- to formulate his laws regarding planetary motion that remain in use today . 
franklin also showed that lightning is electricity in 1752.
the accepted theory of heat in the 18th century viewed it as a kind of fluid ,  called caloric; although this theory was later shown to be erroneous ,  a number of scientists adhering to it nevertheless made important discoveries useful in developing the modern theory ,  including joseph black  -lrb-  1728–99 -rrb- and henry cavendish  -lrb-  1731–1810 -rrb- . 
a precursor of the engine was designed by the german scientist otto von guericke who ,  in 1650, designed and built the world's first vacuum pump and created the world's first ever vacuum known as the magdeburg hemispheres experiment . 
however ,  observed celestial motions did not precisely conform to a newtonian treatment ,  and newton ,  who was also deeply interested in theology ,  imagined that god intervened to ensure the continued stability of the solar system . 
galileo has been called the `` father of modern observational astronomy '' ,  the `` father of modern physics '' ,  the `` father of science '' ,  and `` the father of modern science '' . 
during the 18th century ,  the mechanics founded by newton was developed by several scientists as more mathematicians learned calculus and elaborated upon its initial formulation . 
it remained the mainstream scientific paradigm in europe until the time of galileo galilei and isaac newton . 
for his work on relativity ,  the photoelectric effect and blackbody radiation ,  einstein received the nobel prize in 1921.
the application of mathematical analysis to problems of motion was known as rational mechanics ,  or mixed mathematics  -lrb-  and was later termed classical mechanics  -rrb-  . 
einstein had the genius to question it ,  and found that it was incomplete . 
as a hydrofoil craft gains speed ,  the hydrofoils lift the boat's hull out of the water ,  decreasing drag and allowing greater speeds . 
these hydrofoils were fast and well armed . 
a hydrofoil is a lifting surface ,  or foil ,  that operates in water . 
early hydrofoils used v-shaped foils . 
from 1952 to 1971, supramar designed many models of hydrofoils: pt20, pt50, pt75, pt100 and pt150.
the us navy began experiments with hydrofoils in the mid-1950s by funding a sailing vessel that used hydrofoils to reach speeds in the 30 mph range . 
italian inventor enrico forlanini began work on hydrofoils in 1898 and used a `` ladder '' foil system . 
in the early 1950s an english couple built the `` white hawk '' ,  a jet-powered hydrofoil water craft ,  in an attempt to beat the absolute water speed record . 
the designers had faced an engineering phenomenon that limits the top speed of even modern hydrofoils: cavitation disturbs the lift created by the foils as they move through the water at speed above  ,  bending the lifting foil . 
henri chopin  -lrb-  18 june 1922 – 3 january 2008 -rrb- was an avant-garde poet and musician . 
chopin was a french practitioner of concrete and sound poetry ,  well known throughout the second half of the 20th century . 
henri chopin was born in paris , 18 june 1922, one of three brothers ,  and the son of an accountant . 
from 1968 to 1986 henri chopin lived in ingatestone ,  essex ,  but with the death of his wife jean in 1985, he moved back to france . 
hassium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol hs and atomic number 108.
iupac relented and the name `` hassium ''  -lrb-  hs  -rrb-  was adopted internationally in 1997.
hassium has no stable or naturally occurring isotopes . 
this was the first acid-base reaction with a hassium compound ,  forming sodium hassate -lrb-  viii  -rrb- :
osmium is the densest element of the first 6 periods ,  and its heavier congener hassium is expected to be the densest element of the first 7 periods . 
hassium is not known to occur naturally on earth; the half-lives of all its known isotopes are short enough that no primordial hassium would have survived to the present day . 
according to mendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements ,  hassium should be known as `` eka-osmium '' . 
the atomic radius of hassium is expected to be around 126 pm . 
in 2004 scientists reacted hassium tetroxide and sodium hydroxide to form sodium hassate -lrb-  viii  -rrb-  ,  a reaction well known with osmium . 
most of these decay predominantly through alpha decay ,  but some also undergo spontaneous fission . 
in 2004, the joint institute for nuclear research conducted a search for natural hassium . 
the group 8 elements show a very distinctive oxide chemistry which allows extrapolations to be made easily for hassium . 
nixon had been elected in 1968 on the promise of achieving `` peace with honor '' and ending the vietnam war . 
kissinger served as national security advisor and secretary of state under president richard nixon ,  and continued as secretary of state under nixon's successor gerald ford . 
kissinger said in april 2008 that `` india has parallel objectives to the united states , ``  and he called it an ally of the u . s . 
the war began on october 6, 1973, when egypt and syria attacked israel . 
after richard nixon won the presidency in 1968, he made kissinger national security advisor . 
under kissinger's guidance ,  the united states government supported pakistan in the bangladesh liberation war in 1971.
in 1973, kissinger did not feel that pressing the soviet union concerning the plight of jews being persecuted there was in the interest of u . s .  foreign policy . 
as a direct response to the dissent against us policy kissinger and nixon ended archer blood's tenure as united states consul general in east pakistan and put him to work in the state department's personnel office . 
his studies were interrupted in early 1943, when he was drafted into the u . s .  army . 
a practitioner of `` realpolitik '' ,  kissinger played a prominent role in united states foreign policy between 1969 and 1977.
a proponent of `` realpolitik '' ,  kissinger played a dominant role in united states foreign policy between 1969 and 1977.
in his 2011 book on china ,  his 2014 book world order and in a 2018 interview with financial times ,  kissinger stated that he believes china wants to restore its historic role as the middle kingdom and be `` the principal adviser to all humanity '' . 
the result was the formation of a tacit strategic anti-soviet alliance between china and the united states . 
in 2011, kissinger published `` on china '' ,  chronicling the evolution of sino-american relations and laying out the challenges to a partnership of 'genuine strategic trust' between the u . s .  and china . 
keen to have a greater influence on u . s .  foreign policy ,  kissinger became foreign policy advisor to the presidential campaigns of nelson rockefeller ,  supporting his bids for the republican nomination in 1960, 1964, and 1968.
historian david rothkopf has looked at the personalities of nixon and kissinger:
a document released by the cia in 2000 titled `` cia activities in chile '' revealed that the united states ,  acting through the cia ,  actively supported the military junta after the overthrow of allende ,  and that it made many of pinochet's officers into paid contacts of the cia or u . s .  military . 
kissinger's position on this issue of u . s . –iran talks was reported by the `` tehran times '' to be that `` any direct talks between the u . s .  and iran on issues such as the nuclear dispute would be most likely to succeed if they first involved only diplomatic staff and progressed to the level of secretary of state before the heads of state meet . `` 
commenting on the joint comprehensive plan of action ,  kissinger said that he wouldn't have agreed to it ,  but that trump's plan to end the agreement after it was signed would `` enable the iranians to do more than us . `` 
documents show that kissinger delayed telling president richard nixon about the start of the yom kippur war in 1973 to keep him from interfering . 
henry kissinger had also come under fire for private comments he made to nixon during the bangladesh–pakistan war in which he described indian prime minister indira gandhi as a `` bitch '' and a `` witch '' . 
the whistleblower ,  martin edwin andersen ,  was not only a senior staff member who earlier—as a senior advisor for policy planning at the criminal division of the u . s .  department of justice—was the first national security whistleblower to receive the u . s .  office of special counsel's `` public servant award , ``  but was also the same person who broke the story in the nation on kissinger's `` green light '' for argentina's dirty `` war . `` 
as the article published in `` the nation '' noted ,  as the state-sponsored terror mounted ,  conservative republican u . s . 
following a period of steady relations between the u . s .  government and the greek military regime after 1967, secretary of state kissinger was faced with the coup by the greek junta and the turkish invasion of cyprus in july and august 1974.
according to a 2014 survey by `` foreign policy '' magazine 32.21% of `` america's top international relations scholars '' considered henry kissinger the most effective u . s .  secretary of state since 1965.
the peace was finalized in 1978 when u . s .  president jimmy carter mediated the camp david accords ,  during which israel returned the sinai peninsula in exchange for an egyptian peace agreement that included the recognition of the state of israel . 
kissinger initially supported the normalization of united states-cuba relations ,  broken since 1961  -lrb-  all u . s . –cuban trade was blocked in february 1962, a few weeks after the exclusion of cuba from the organization of american states because of u . s .  pressure  -rrb-  . 
in several articles of his and interviews that he gave during the yugoslav wars ,  he criticized the united states' policies in southeast europe ,  among other things for the recognition of bosnia and herzegovina as a sovereign state ,  which he described as a foolish act . 
in a 1967 peace initiative ,  he would mediate between washington and hanoi . 
the portuguese decolonization process brought u . s .  attention to the former portuguese colony of east timor ,  which lies within the indonesian archipelago and declared its independence in 1975.
 ''hydra '' has two main body layers ,  which makes it `` diploblastic '' . 
the algae are protected from predators by `` hydra '' and ,  in return ,  photosynthetic products from the algae are beneficial as a food source to `` hydra '' . 
when a hydra is well fed ,  a new bud can form every two days . 
if the `` hydra '' is sliced into many segments then the middle slices will form both a `` head '' and a `` foot '' . 
 ''hydra '' mainly feed on aquatic invertebrates such as `` daphnia '' and `` cyclops '' . 
the feeding response in `` hydra '' is induced by reduced glutathione released from injured prey . 
 ''hydra '' undergoes morphallaxis  -lrb-  tissue regeneration  -rrb-  when injured or severed . 
hd 20003 is a star of magnitude 8.37.
beta hydri ,  the brightest star in hydrus ,  is a yellow star of apparent magnitude 2.8, lying 24 light-years from earth . 
the brightest star is the 2.8-magnitude beta hydri ,  also the closest reasonably bright star to the south celestial pole . 
it is also the closest bright star to the south celestial pole . 
eta hydri is the other optical double ,  composed of eta and eta . 
the system is a complex one as the faint star gj 3021b orbits at a distance of 68 au; it is a red dwarf of spectral type m4v . 
hercules  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a roman hero and god . 
the romans adapted the greek hero's iconography and myths for their literature and art under the name `` hercules '' . 
hercules had a number of myths that were distinctly roman . 
in the french navy ,  there were no less that nineteen ships called `` hercule '' ,  plus three more named `` alcide '' which is another name of the same hero . 
six successive ships of the british royal navy ,  from the 18th to the 20th century ,  bore the name `` hms hercules '' . 
in the roman era hercules' club amulets appear from the 2nd to 3rd century ,  distributed over the empire  -lrb-  including roman britain ,  c . f . 
during the roman imperial era ,  hercules was worshipped locally from hispania through gaul . 
