while lax is the busiest airport in the greater los angeles area ,  several other airports ,  including hollywood burbank airport ,  john wayne airport ,  long beach airport ,  and ontario international airport ,  also serve the area . 
before the 1930s ,  existing airports used a two-letter abbreviation based on the weather stations at the airports . 
the airports council international places lax at third most aircraft movements in the world ,  as of 2013.
sepulveda boulevard also goes right under the airport runways . 
lax handles more `` origin and destination ''  -lrb-  not connecting  -rrb-  passengers than any other airport in the world . 
it is also the only airport to rank among the top five u . s .  airports for both passenger and cargo traffic . 
24r/06l and 24l/06r  -lrb-  designated the north airfield complex  -rrb-  are north of the airport terminals ,  and 25r/07l and 25l/07r  -lrb-  designated the south airfield complex  -rrb-  are south of the airport terminals . 
in 2018, lax handled 87,534,384 passengers ,  making it the world's fifth busiest and the united states' second busiest airport following hartsfield-jackson atlanta international airport . 
there are other museums at major airports ,  however ,  including the udvar-hazy center of the national air and space museum adjacent to washington dulles airport ,  the royal thai air force museum at don mueang airport ,  the suomen ilmailumuseo  -lrb-  finnish aviation museum  -rrb-  at helsinki-vantaa airport ,  the frontiers of flight museum at dallas love field ,  the tulsa air and space museum & planetarium at tulsa international airport and others . 
a number of private shuttle companies also offer limousine and bus services to lax airport . 
lax serves as a hub or focus city for more passenger airlines than any other airport in the united states . 
los angeles international airport  ,  locally referred to as lax  -lrb-  with each of its letters pronounced individually  -rrb-  ,  is the primary international airport serving los angeles ,  california . 
lax's terminals are immediately west of the interchange between century boulevard and sepulveda boulevard  -lrb-  state route 1 -rrb- . 
the air station relocated by may 18, 2016 from lax to accommodate the planned improvements for lax's midfield ,  including the midfield satellite concourse north  -lrb-  msc north  -rrb-  terminal . 
under `` easterly operations '' ,  departing aircraft take off to the east ,  and arriving aircraft approach from the west . 
uber and lyft both provide ride services to and from lax . 
the la tène culture  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was a european iron age culture . 
all in all ,  over 2500 objects ,  mainly made from metal ,  have been excavated in la tène . 
the art history of la tène culture has various schemes of periodization . 
after about 275, roman expansion into the la tène areal began ,  at first with the conquest of gallia cisalpina . 
it is therefore common to also talk of the `` la tène period '' in the context of those regions even though they were never part of the la tène culture proper ,  but connected to its core area via trade . 
the site at la tène itself was therefore near the southern edge of the original `` core '' area  -lrb-  as is also the case for the hallstatt site for its core  -rrb-  . 
by this time the la tène style was spreading to the british isles ,  though apparently without any significant movements in population . 
it is named after the type site of la tène on the north side of lake neuchâtel in switzerland ,  where thousands of objects had been deposited in the lake ,  as was discovered after the water level dropped in 1857.
initially la tène people lived in open settlements that were dominated by the chieftains’ hill forts . 
it is often distinguished from earlier and neighbouring cultures mainly by the la tène style of celtic art ,  characterized by curving `` swirly '' decoration ,  especially of metalwork . 
the lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points  -lrb-   `` f '' ,  `` l ''   -rrb-  ,  `` i '' = 0 to `` n '' ,  where `` f '' = 0, `` l '' = 0, and for `` i '' = 1 to `` n '':
for a probability density function `` f '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  with the cumulative distribution function `` f '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  ,  the lorenz curve `` l '' is given by:
for a population of size `` n '' ,  with a sequence of values `` y '' ,  `` i '' = 1 to `` n '' ,  that are indexed in non-decreasing order  -lrb-   `` y '' ≤ `` y ''  -rrb-  ,  the lorenz curve is the continuous piecewise linear function connecting the points  -lrb-   `` f '' ,  `` l ''   -rrb-  ,  `` i '' = 0 to `` n '' ,  where `` f '' = 0, `` l '' = 0, and for `` i '' = 1 to `` n '':
this can be depicted by the straight line `` y '' = `` x ''; called the `` line of perfect equality . `` 
the gini coefficient is the ratio of the area between the line of perfect equality and the observed lorenz curve to the area between the line of perfect equality and the line of perfect inequality . 
this is backwards: well-documented code or documentation extracted from code follows the structure of the code ,  with documentation embedded in the code; in literate programming code is embedded in documentation ,  with the code following the structure of the documentation . 
applicability of the concept to programming on a large scale ,  that of commercial-grade programs ,  is proven by an edition of tex code as a literate program . 
literate programming is a programming paradigm introduced by donald knuth in which a program is given as an explanation of the program logic in a natural language ,  such as english ,  interspersed with snippets of macros and traditional source code ,  from which a compilable source code can be generated . 
literate programming is writing out the program logic in a human language with included  -lrb-  separated by a primitive markup  -rrb-  code snippets and macros . 
the case of the logistic map is a nonlinear transformation of both the bit-shift map and the case of the tent map . 
mathematically ,  the logistic map is written
at this time ,  the far east was known as the `` upper levant '' . 
the term `` levant '' ,  which appeared in english in 1497, originally meant the east in general or `` mediterranean lands east of italy '' . 
the french mandate of syria and lebanon  -lrb-  1920–1946 -rrb- was called the levant states . 
today ,  `` levant '' is the term typically used by archaeologists and historians with reference to the history of the region . 
the levant  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an approximate historical geographical term referring to a large area in the eastern mediterranean ,  primarily in western asia . 
the term entered english in the late 15th century from french . 
the largest religious group in the levant are the muslims and the largest cultural-linguistic group are arabs ,  due to the muslim conquest of the levant in the 7th century and subsequent arabization of the region . 
the levant has been described as the `` crossroads of western asia ,  the eastern mediterranean ,  and northeast africa '' ,  and the `` northwest of the arabian plate '' . 
the mandate system was established by article 22 of the covenant of the league of nations ,  drafted by the victors of world war i . 
all of the territories subject to league of nations mandates were previously controlled by states defeated in world war i ,  principally imperial germany and the ottoman empire . 
the town was settled about 1782.
in the town ,  18.7% of the population were under the age of 18, 6.8% were from 18 to 24, 19.4% from 25 to 44, 34.8% from 45 to 64, and 20.4% were 65 years of age or older . 
it is the second-largest town in area in new hampshire ,  after pittsburg . 
lincoln is a town in grafton county ,  new hampshire ,  united states . 
lincoln is drained by the pemigewasset river and its east branch . 
the coherency ,  high monochromaticity ,  and ability to reach extremely high powers are all properties which allow for these specialized applications . 
left-arm orthodox spin also known as slow left arm orthodox spin bowling is a type of left arm finger off spin bowling in the sport of cricket . 
in logic ,  mathematics and linguistics ,  and  -lrb-  ∧  -rrb-  is the truth-functional operator of logical conjunction; the `` and '' of a set of operands is true if and only if `` all '' of its operands are true . 
logical connectives along with quantifiers are the two main types of logical constants used in formal systems such as propositional logic and predicate logic . 
logical connectives can be used to link more than two statements ,  so one can speak about `` -ary logical connective '' . 
the words `` and '' and `` so '' are `` grammatical '' conjunctions joining the sentences  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  to form the compound sentences  -lrb-  c  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  d  -rrb-  . 
in this sense ,  propositional logic is the foundation of first-order logic and higher-order logic . 
propositional calculus is a branch of logic . 
the sharing can reduce the running time of certain functions by an exponential factor over other non-strict evaluation strategies ,  such as call-by-name . 
this demonstrates that lemur species such as the lemur `` catta '' and the common brown lemur were forced to switch their primary diet to a group of secondary food sources . 
evidence from the subfossil records show that many of the now extinct lemurs actually lived in much drier climates than the currently extant lemurs . 
lemurs are able to mark their territory by using scents from local areas . 
lucent's stock price grew 10-fold . 
on april 2, 2006, lucent announced a merger agreement with alcatel ,  which was 1.5 times the size of lucent . 
lucent means `` they shine '' in latin . 
in 1997, lucent acquired livingston enterprises inc .  for $650 million in stock . 
lucent was reduced to 30,500 employees ,  down from about 165,000 employees at its zenith . 
by early 2003, lucent's market value was $15.6 billion  -lrb-  which includes $6.8 billion of current value for two companies that lucent had recently spun off ,  avaya and agere systems  -rrb-  ,  making the shares worth around $2.13, a far cry from its dotcom bubble peak of around $84, when lucent was worth $258 billion . 
in 2001 there were merger discussions between lucent and alcatel ,  which would have seen lucent acquired at its current market price without a premium; the newly combined entity would have been headquartered in murray hill . 
lucent was merged with alcatel sa of france in a merger of equals on december 1, 2006, forming alcatel-lucent . 
patricia russo ,  formerly lucent's evp of the corporate office who then left for eastman kodak to serve as coo ,  was named permanent chairman and ceo of lucent in 2002, succeeding schacht who remained on the board of directors . 
soracte ,  north of rome ,  had elements in common with the roman lupercalia . 
horace's ode iii ,  18 alludes to the lupercalia . 
william shakespeare's play `` julius caesar '' begins during the lupercalia . 
lupercalia was also called `` dies februatus '' ,  after the instruments of purification called `` februa '' ,  which give the month of february ``  -lrb-  februarius  -rrb- ``  its name . 
lupercalia was celebrated in parts of italy and gaul; `` luperci '' are attested by inscriptions at velitrae ,  praeneste ,  nemausus  -lrb-  modern nîmes  -rrb-  and elsewhere . 
linked lists are among the simplest and most common data structures . 
one of lisp's major data structures is the linked list . 
linked lists allow insertion and removal of nodes at any point in the list ,  and allow doing so with a constant number of operations by keeping the link previous to the link being added or removed in memory during list traversal . 
on the other hand ,  since simple linked lists by themselves do not allow random access to the data or any form of efficient indexing ,  many basic operations—such as obtaining the last node of the list ,  finding a node that contains a given datum ,  or locating the place where a new node should be inserted—may require iterating through most or all of the list elements . 
with amplification ,  logic gates can be cascaded in the same way that boolean functions can be composed ,  allowing the construction of a physical model of all of boolean logic ,  and therefore ,  all of the algorithms and mathematics that can be described with boolean logic . 
logic gates are primarily implemented using diodes or transistors acting as electronic switches ,  but can also be constructed using vacuum tubes ,  electromagnetic relays  -lrb-  relay logic  -rrb-  ,  fluidic logic ,  pneumatic logic ,  optics ,  molecules ,  or even mechanical elements . 
it sequentially checks each element of the list until a match is found or the whole list has been searched . 
linear search is usually very simple to implement ,  and is practical when the list has only a few elements ,  or when performing a single search in an unordered list . 
the search will reach the sentinel if the target is not contained within the list . 
in computer science ,  linear search or sequential search is a method for finding an element within a list . 
if the list is ordered such that  ,  the search can establish the absence of the target more quickly by concluding the search once exceeds the target . 
if the algorithm reaches the end of the list ,  the search terminates unsuccessfully . 
the use of land mines is controversial because of their potential as indiscriminate weapons . 
a land mine may cause damage by direct blast effect ,  by fragments that are thrown by the blast ,  or by both . 
originating from the congo region ,  these loa include the many simbi loa . 
loa  -lrb-  also spelled `` lwa ''  -rrb-  are the spirits of haitian vodou and louisiana voodoo . 
the petro loa are generally the more fiery ,  occasionally aggressive and warlike loa ,  and are associated with haiti and the new world . 
it also includes marinette ,  a fierce and much feared female loa . 
households are suppliers of labour . 
the demand for labour of this firm can be summed with the demand for labour of all other firms in the economy to obtain the aggregate demand for labour . 
labour economics seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for wage labour . 
a firm's labour demand is based on its marginal physical product of labour  -lrb-  mpp  -rrb-  . 
there are two sides to labour economics . 
the marginal revenue product of labour can be used as the demand for labour curve for this firm in the short run . 
labour economics looks at the suppliers of labour services  -lrb-  workers  -rrb-  and the demanders of labour services  -lrb-  employers  -rrb-  ,  and attempts to understand the resulting pattern of wages ,  employment ,  and income . 
models that assume perfect competition in the labour market ,  as discussed below ,  conclude that workers earn their marginal product of labour . 
wage differences exist ,  particularly in mixed and fully/partly flexible labour markets . 
however ,  the labour market differs from other markets  -lrb-  like the markets for goods or the financial market  -rrb-  in several ways . 
there are many ways to overcome adverse selection in labour market . 
in economics ,  labour is a measure of the work done by human beings . 
the labour market ,  as institutionalised under today's market economic systems ,  has been criticised ,  especially by both mainstream socialists and anarcho-syndicalists ,  who utilise the term wage slavery as a pejorative for wage labour . 
contrasting the labour market to other markets also reveals persistent compensating differentials among similar workers . 
the model of a monopsonistic labour market gives a lower quantity of employment and a lower equilibrium wage rate than does the competitive model . 
in many parts of england ,  tenants were bound to present freshly harvested wheat to their landlords on or before the first day of august . 
lammas has coincided with the feast of st .  peter in chains ,  commemorating st .  peter's miraculous deliverance from prison ,  but in the liturgical reform of 1969, the feast of st .  alphonsus liguori was transferred to this day ,  the day of st .  alphonsus' death . 
the blessing of first fruits was performed annually in both the eastern and western churches on the first or the sixth of august  -lrb-  the latter being the feast of the transfiguration of christ  -rrb-  . 
in medieval times the feast was sometimes known in england and scotland as the `` gule of august '' ,  but the meaning of `` gule '' is unclear . 
in the medieval agricultural year ,  lammas also marked the end of the hay harvest that had begun after midsummer . 
the longmeadow public school system operates six schools . 
more than 30% of the town is permanent open space . 
longmeadow is a town in hampden county ,  massachusetts ,  in the united states . 
approximately 50% of the students at longmeadow high school participate in the music program . 
longmeadow has a town common ,  commonly referred to as `` the green '' ,  located along u . s .  route 5 on the west side of town . 
in the town ,  the population was spread out with 26.8% under the age of 18, 4.6% from 18 to 24, 22.0% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 17.8% who were 65 years of age or older . 
the town government consists of a select board with five members ,  elected by the town . 
the most common relative directions are left ,  right ,  forward -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  backward -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  up ,  and down . 
after noon ,  it points to the `` right '' . 
left-right discrimination  -lrb-  lrd  -rrb-  refers to a person's ability to differentiate between left and right . 
proper right and proper left are terms mainly used to describe images ,  and overcome the potential confusion that a figure's right or `` proper right '' hand is on the left hand as the viewer of a frontal image sees it . 
results showed differences in neural activity patterns in the right cerebellum ,  right superior temporal gyrus ,  and left temporoparietal junction during the encoding phase ,  and indicated differential neural activity in the inferior parietal ,  right superior temporal ,  and right cerebellum regions in the working memory tests . 
in other words ,  children may learn the terms for left and right without having developed a cognitive representation to allow for the accurate application of such spatial distinctions . 
until 2006 it was thought that among lizards ,  only the gila monster and the mexican beaded lizard were venomous . 
acoustic communication is less common in lizards . 
most lizards are fairly small animals . 
suborder lacertilia  -lrb-  sauria  -rrb-  –  -lrb-  lizards  -rrb- 
sex determination in lizards can be temperature-dependent . 
lizards range in size from chameleons and geckos a few centimeters long to the 3 meter long komodo dragon . 
most lizard species are harmless to humans . 
lizards may be able to recognise individuals of the same species by their scent . 
most social interactions among lizards are between breeding individuals . 
some species ,  like the common basilisk ,  can run across water . 
some lizards such as chameleons have prehensile tails ,  assisting them in climbing among vegetation . 
the majority of lizard species are predatory and the most common prey items are small ,  terrestrial invertebrates ,  particularly insects . 
lizards make use of their senses of sight ,  touch ,  olfaction and hearing like other vertebrates . 
lizards such as the gila monster produce toxins with medical applications . 
most lizards are quadrupedal ,  running with a strong side-to-side motion . 
lizards appear in myths and folktales around the world . 
larger species ,  such as monitor lizards ,  can feed on larger prey including fish ,  frogs ,  birds ,  mammals and other reptiles . 
chapters 17–26 are the holiness code . 
the consistent theme of chapters 17–26 is the repeated phrase ,  `` be holy ,  for i the lord your god am holy . `` 
chapters 8–10 describe the consecration by moses of aaron and his sons as the first priests ,  the first sacrifices ,  and god's destruction of two of aaron's sons for ritual offenses . 
the book of leviticus  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the third book of the torah and of the old testament . 
the rituals ,  especially the sin and guilt offerings ,  provide the means to gain forgiveness for sins  -lrb-  leviticus 4–5 -rrb- and purification from impurities  -lrb-  leviticus 11–16 -rrb- so that god can continue to live in the tabernacle in the midst of the people . 
through sacrifice the priest `` makes atonement '' for sin and the offerer is forgiven  -lrb-  but only if god accepts the sacrifice—forgiveness comes only from god  -rrb-  . 
in hebrew the book is called `` vayikra ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  from the opening of the book ,  `` va-yikra '' `` and he <nowiki></nowiki>god<nowiki></nowiki> called . `` 
the role of atonement is reflected structurally in two-part division of the book: chapters 1–16 call for the establishment of the institution for atonement ,  and chapters 17–27 call for the life of the atoned community in holiness . 
the majority of scholars have concluded that the pentateuch received its final form during the persian period  -lrb-  538–332 bc  -rrb-  . 
chapters 1–5 describe the various sacrifices from the sacrificers' point of view ,  although the priests are essential for handling the blood . 
many scholars argue that the rituals of leviticus have a theological meaning concerning israel's relationship with its god . 
in 1905, baum declared plans for an oz amusement park . 
scholars have found few political references in baum's oz books after 1902.
on may 5, 1919, baum suffered a stroke . 
baum made use of several pseudonyms for some of his other non-oz books . 
some of baum's contacts with suffragists of his day seem to have inspired much of his second oz story `` the marvelous land of oz '' . 
baum could never stay away long from the stage . 
in july 1888, baum and his wife moved to aberdeen ,  dakota territory where he opened a store called `` baum's bazaar '' . 
the only other stories with such elements were `` the scarecrow of oz '' and `` tik-tok of oz '' ,  both based on dramatizations ,  which baum regarded warily until his readers accepted them . 
his final oz book ,  `` glinda of oz '' ,  was published on july 10, 1920, a year after his death . 
baum went on to write thirteen more novels based on the places and people of the land of oz . 
baum abandoned his oz park project after the failure of `` the woggle-bug '' ,  which was playing at the garrick theatre in 1905.
baum also anonymously wrote `` the last egyptian: a romance of the nile '' . 
baum's description of kansas in `` the wonderful wizard of oz '' is based on his experiences in drought-ridden south dakota . 
morosco ,  incidentally ,  quickly turned to film production ,  as did baum . 
in 1900, baum and denslow  -lrb-  with whom he shared the copyright  -rrb-  published `` the wonderful wizard of oz '' to much critical acclaim and financial success . 
in 1914, baum started his own film production company the oz film manufacturing company ,  which came as an outgrowth of the uplifters . 
baum was born in chittenango ,  new york in 1856 into a devout methodist family . 
the basin of lake ladoga includes about 50,000 lakes and 3,500 rivers longer than 10 km . 
 ''ladoga lacus '' ,  a methane lake on saturn's moon titan ,  is named after the lake . 
lake ladoga is navigable ,  being a part of the volga-baltic waterway connecting the baltic sea with the volga river . 
the ladoga canal bypasses the lake in the southern part ,  connecting the neva to the svir . 
during the ancylus lake subsequent regression ,  around 8,800 bp ladoga became isolated . 
at 9,500 bp ,  lake onega ,  previously draining into the white sea ,  started emptying into ladoga via the river svir . 
this means if a branch off of a proto-language is 4 branches down and there is also a sister language to that fourth branch ,  than each of the two sister languages are more closely related to each other than to that common ancestral proto-language . 
 -lrb-  ancestors are not considered to be distinct members of a family .   -rrb- 
a speech variety may also be considered either a language or a dialect depending on social or political considerations . 
a language isolated in its own branch within a family ,  such as albanian and armenian within indo-european ,  is often also called an isolate ,  but the meaning of the word `` isolate '' in such cases is usually clarified with a modifier . 
a sprachbund is a geographic area having several languages that feature common linguistic structures . 
 -lrb-  thus ,  the term `` family '' is analogous to the biological term `` clade '' .   -rrb- 
looe island  -lrb-   ,  meaning `` island of the monk's enclosure ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as st george's island ,  and historically st michael's island is a small island a mile from the mainland town of looe off cornwall ,  england . 
people have been living on looe island since the iron age . 
from the 13th to the 16th centuries it was known as st michael's island but after the dissolution of the monasteries ,  it was rededicated in 1594 as st george's island . 
in the 20th century ,  looe island was owned  -lrb-  and inhabited  -rrb-  by two sisters ,  babs and evelyn atkins ,  who wrote two books: `` we bought an island ''  -lrb-  1976,   -rrb-  and its sequel `` tales from our cornish island ''  -lrb-  1986,   -rrb-  . 
latex  -lrb-   or ; a shortening of lamport tex  -rrb-  is a document preparation system . 
latex is free software and is distributed under the latex project public license  -lrb-  lppl  -rrb-  . 
latex uses the tex typesetting program for formatting its output ,  and is itself written in the tex macro language . 
within the typesetting system ,  its name is stylised as latex . 
wikipedia contains calendars of saints for particular denominations ,  listed by the day of the year on which they are traditionally venerated ,  as well as a chronological list of saints and blesseds ,  listed by their date of death . 
similarly ,  any individuals commemorated in the lutheran calendar of saints will be listed as well . 
given a subset formula_1, with the length of interval formula_2 given by formula_3, the lebesgue outer measure formula_4 is defined as
for any set in the lebesgue `` σ ''-algebra ,  its lebesgue measure is given by its lebesgue outer measure formula_9.
such sets do exist ,  i . e .  ,  the lebesgue `` σ ''-algebra is strictly contained in the power set of formula_10.
lake champlain is in the lake champlain valley between the green mountains of vermont and the adirondack mountains of new york ,  drained northward by the -long richelieu river into the st .  lawrence river at sorel-tracy ,  quebec ,  northeast and downstream of montreal ,  quebec . 
lake champlain drains nearly half of vermont ,  and approximately 250,000 people get their drinking water from the lake . 
in quebec ,  it is fed by the pike river . 
lambda calculus consists of constructing lambda terms and performing reduction operations on them . 
from this point of view ,  perceptual encoding is not essentially about `` discarding '' data ,  but rather about a `` better representation '' of data . 
the original data contains a certain amount of information ,  and there is a lower limit to the size of file that can carry all the information . 
in many cases ,  files or data streams contain more information than is needed for a particular purpose . 
the amount of data reduction possible using lossy compression is much higher than through lossless techniques . 
lossless compression is a class of data compression algorithms that allows the original data to be perfectly reconstructed from the compressed data . 
lossless data compression is used in many applications . 
frequently encountered  -rrb-  data will produce shorter output than `` improbable '' data . 
there are two primary ways of constructing statistical models: in a `` static '' model ,  the data is analyzed and a model is constructed ,  then this model is stored with the compressed data . 
lossless compression methods may be categorized according to the type of data they are designed to compress . 
lossless compression is used in cases where it is important that the original and the decompressed data be identical ,  or where deviations from the original data would be unfavourable . 
niven was born in los angeles . 
laurence van cott niven  -lrb-  ; born april 30, 1938 -rrb- is an american science fiction writer . 
niven is the author of numerous science fiction short stories and novels ,  beginning with his 1964 story `` the coldest place '' . 
in 1976, he won the hugo award for best novelette for `` the borderland of sol '' . 
a linux distribution  -lrb-  often abbreviated as distro  -rrb-  is an operating system made from a software collection ,  which is based upon the linux kernel and ,  often ,  a package management system . 
a typical linux distribution comprises a linux kernel ,  gnu tools and libraries ,  additional software ,  documentation ,  a window system  -lrb-  the most common being the x window system  -rrb-  ,  a window manager ,  and a desktop environment . 
following the 1957 season the team left brooklyn . 
the dodgers were founded in 1883 as the brooklyn atlantics ,  taking the name of a defunct team that had played in brooklyn before them . 
their last meeting was in september 2016, when the dodgers won two out of three games in new york . 
sportswriters started using the name `` trolley dodgers '' to refer to the brooklyn team early in the 1895 season . 
the dodgers' rivalry with the san francisco giants dates back to the 19th century ,  when the two teams were based in new york; the rivalry with the new york yankees took place when the dodgers were based in new york ,  but was revived with their east coast/west coast world series battles in 1963, 1977, 1978, and 1981.
the dodgers were the first major league baseball team to ever play in los angeles . 
the `` conclusive shift '' came in 1933, when both home and road jerseys for the team bore the name `` dodgers '' . 
in brooklyn ,  the dodgers won the nl pennant several times  -lrb-  1890, 1899, 1900, 1916, 1920, 1941, 1947, 1949, 1952, 1953, 1955, 1956 -rrb- and the world series in 1955.
o'malley wanted to build a new ,  state of the art stadium in brooklyn . 
moses and the city considered this an empty threat ,  and did not believe o'malley would go through with moving the team from new york city . 
in all ,  the dodgers have appeared in 20 world series: 9 in brooklyn and 11 in los angeles . 
new york would remain a one-team town with the new york yankees until 1962, when joan payson founded the new york mets and brought national league baseball back to the city . 
for most of the first half of the 20th century ,  no major league baseball team employed an african american player . 
the name was shortened to ,  on occasion ,  the `` brooklyn dodgers '' as early as 1898.
although the rivalry's significance arose from the two teams' numerous world series meetings ,  the yankees and dodgers have not met in the world series since  . 
the team was known alternatively as the bridegrooms ,  grooms ,  superbas ,  robins ,  and trolley dodgers before officially becoming the brooklyn dodgers in the 1930s . 
andriessen was born in utrecht into a musical family ,  the son of the composer hendrik andriessen  -lrb-  1892–1981 -rrb- ,  brother of composers jurriaan andriessen  -lrb-  1925–1996 -rrb- and caecilia andriessen  -lrb-  born 1931 -rrb- ,  and nephew of willem andriessen  -lrb-  1887–1964 -rrb- . 
in 1969 andriessen co-founded steim in amsterdam . 
andriessen ,  a widower ,  was married to guitarist jeanette yanikian  -lrb-  1935–2008 -rrb- . 
in 1965, peltier relocated to seattle ,  washington . 
peltier's trial was held in fargo ,  north dakota ,  where a jury convicted peltier of the murders of coler and williams . 
during this time period ,  peltier had seven children from two marriages and adopted two children . 
both peltier’s thumbprint and agent coler’s handgun were discovered under the rv’s front seat . 
peltier later obtained a general equivalency degree . 
in april 1977, peltier was convicted and sentenced to two consecutive life sentences . 
on december 22, 1975, peltier was named to the fbi ten most wanted fugitives list . 
 ''lambdamoo '' was founded in late 1990 or early 1991 by pavel curtis at xerox parc . 
lambdamoo is an online community of the variety called a moo . 
the question as to precisely who used the armour is debated . 
the `` lorica segmentata '' has come to be viewed as iconic of the roman legions ,  in popular culture . 
however ,  on another trajanic monument  -lrb-  the adamclisi `` tropaeum ''  -rrb-  the `` lorica segmentata '' does not appear at all ,  and legionaries and `` auxilia '' alike are depicted wearing either mail or scales  -lrb-  `` lorica squamata ''  -rrb-  . 
the lorica segmentata  -lrb-  segmented cuirass  -rrb-  is a type of personal armour used by soldiers of the roman empire ,  consisting of metal strips  -lrb-  `` girth hoops '' fashioned into circular bands  -rrb-  ,  fastened to internal leather straps . 
within the tales of known space ,  the epithet `` known space '' refers to a relatively small region in the milky way galaxy ,  one centered on earth . 
stories in the known space series include events and places outside of the region called `` known space '' such as the ringworld ,  the pierson's puppeteers' fleet of worlds and the pak homeworld . 
homer was graduated from ss . 
homer and dahl struggled with the hijackers ,  which was transmitted to air traffic control . 
his widow melodie homer established the leroy w .  homer jr .  foundation ,  which awards scholarships related to aviation . 
he graduated on may 27, 1987, and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the u . s .  air force . 
the 2003 short film `` la puppé '' is both an homage to and a parody of `` la jetée '' . 
he further observes that marker himself did not refer to `` la jetée '' as a film ,  but as photo novel . 
in 2012, in correspondence with the `` sight & sound '' poll ,  the british film institute deemed `` la jetée '' as the 50th greatest film of all time . 
it won the prix jean vigo for short film . 
the final track on the album ,  `` je viens de la '' ,  is inspired by `` la jetée '' and describes the journey of the film's protagonist . 
in region 2, the film is available with english subtitles in the `` la jetée/sans soleil '' digipack released by arte video . 
in 2010, `` time '' ranked `` la jetée '' first in its list of `` top 10 time-travel movies '' . 
there is also a penguin centre located on the island where the penguins can be viewed in captivity . 
similar preferences were found in the adélie penguin ,  yellow-eyed penguin and magellanic penguin . 
the little penguin  -lrb-  `` eudyptula minor ''  -rrb-  is the smallest species of penguin . 
south of perth ,  western australia ,  visitors to penguin island are able to view penguin feeding within a penguin rehabilitation centre and may also encounter wild penguins ashore in their natural habitat . 
visitors to kangaroo island ,  south australia ,  have nightly opportunities to observe penguins at the kangaroo island marine centre in kingscote and at the penneshaw penguin centre . 
the largest colony in new south wales is on montague island . 
however ,  the population on granite island  -lrb-  which is a fox ,  cat and dog-free island  -rrb-  has been severely depleted ,  from around 2000 penguins in 2001 down to 146 in 2009.
the largest colony of little penguins in western australia is believed to be located on penguin island ,  where an estimated 1,000 pairs nest during winter . 
the little penguin breeds along the entire coastline of new zealand ,  the chatham islands ,  and southern australia  -lrb-  including roughly 20,000 pairs on babel island  -rrb-  . 
overall ,  little penguin populations in new zealand have been decreasing . 
historical accounts of little penguins on newdegate island at the mouth of deep river and on breaksea island near torbay also exist . 
at phillip island ,  victoria ,  a viewing area has been established at the phillip island nature park to allow visitors to view the nightly `` penguin parade '' . 
like those of all penguins ,  the little penguin's wings have developed into flippers used for swimming . 
colonies were targeted for this purpose in various parts of tasmania including bruny island and west island ,  south australia . 
it is still not known what caused the deaths of the little penguins ,  and it was decided not to return the 12 surviving penguins to the same enclosure in which the penguins became ill .  a new enclosure for the little penguin colony was opened at sea world in 2008.
oil spills can be lethal for penguins and other sea birds . 
a fox was believed responsible for the deaths of 53 little penguins over several nights on granite island in 1994.
some little penguins are drowned when amateur fishermen set gill nets near penguin colonies . 
examples of colonies affected by dog attacks include manly ,  new south wales ,  penneshaw ,  south australia ,  red chapel beach ,  tasmania ,  low head ,  tasmania ,  penguin island ,  western australia and little kaiteriteri beach ,  new zealand . 
little penguins mature at different ages . 
a population of about 5,000 breeding pairs exists on bowen island . 
little penguins on middle island off warrnambool ,  victoria were subject to heavy predation by foxes ,  which were able to reach the island at low tide by a tidal sand bridge . 
lake balaton  -lrb-    ,   ,    -rrb-  is a freshwater lake in the transdanubian region of hungary . 
in hungarian ,  the lake is known simply as `` balaton '' . 
the german name for the lake is ' . 
lake balaton affects the local area precipitation . 
the major resorts around the lake are siófok ,  keszthely ,  and balatonfüred . 
the libro de juegos contains an extensive collection of writings on chess ,  with over 100 chess problems and variants . 
the game of `` ajedrex '' ,  or chess ,  is not the only game explicated in the `` libro de juegos '' ,  but it does occupy the primary position in the text and is given the most attention to detail . 
the `` libro de juegos '' manuscript was a castilian translation of arabic texts ,  which were themselves translations of persian manuscripts . 
the libro de los juegos ,   -lrb-  `` book of games ''  -rrb-  ,  or libro de axedrez ,  dados e tablas ,   -lrb-  `` book of chess ,  dice and tables '' ,  in old spanish  -rrb-  was commissioned by alfonso x of castile ,  galicia and león and completed in his scriptorium in toledo in 1283, is an exemplary piece of alfonso’s medieval literary legacy . 
other visual details contemporaneous of alfonso’s court and social and cultural milieu infuse the `` libro de juegos '' . 
the miniatures in the `` libro de juegos '' vary between half- and full-page illustrations . 
in the miniatures of this style ,  the emphasis seems to be more on the posture of the player than the detail of their faces; this crossed ,  lounging style is only found in the folios of the `` libro de tablas '' ,  the third section of the `` libro de juegos '' which explicates the game of backgammon ,  again perhaps indicative of the work of a particular artist . 
lithium carbonate is an inorganic compound ,  the lithium salt of carbonate with the formula  . 
lithium carbonate is generated by combining lithium peroxide with carbon dioxide . 
lithium carbonate is an important industrial chemical . 
this finding led lithium ,  specifically lithium carbonate ,  to be used to treat mania associated with bipolar disorder . 
lithium carbonate ,  and other carbonates of group 1, do not decarboxylate readily . 
lrvs were used for greater surface mobility during the apollo j-class missions ,  apollo 15, apollo 16, and apollo 17.
the rover used on apollo 15 was left at hadley-apennine  -lrb-  
these three lrvs remain on the moon . 
lrvs were transported to the moon on the apollo lunar module  -lrb-  lm  -rrb-  of each successive mission and ,  once unpacked on the surface ,  could carry two astronauts ,  their equipment ,  and lunar samples . 
the lunar roving vehicle  -lrb-  lrv  -rrb-  is a battery-powered four-wheeled rover used on the moon in the last three missions of the american apollo program  -lrb-  15, 16, and 17 -rrb- during 1971 and 1972.
without it ,  the major scientific discoveries of apollo 15, 16, and 17 would not have been possible; and our current understanding of lunar evolution would not have been possible . `` 
the lunar roving vehicle had a mass of  ,  and was designed to hold a payload of  . 
the apollo lunar roving vehicle was an electric-powered vehicle designed to operate in the low-gravity vacuum of the moon and to be capable of traversing the lunar surface ,  allowing the apollo astronauts to extend the range of their surface extravehicular activities . 
on 11 july 1969, just before the successful moon landing of apollo 11, a request for proposal for the final development and building the apollo lrv was released by marshall . 
the concept of a lunar rover predated apollo ,  with a 1952–1954 series in `` collier's weekly '' magazine by wernher von braun and others ,  `` man will conquer space soon ! `` 
the rovers were designed with a top speed of about  ,  although eugene cernan recorded a maximum speed of  ,  giving him the  -lrb-  unofficial  -rrb-  lunar land-speed record . 
on the third and final attempt  -lrb-  apollo 17 -rrb- ,  the launch and ascent were successfully tracked . 
bell aerospace was already under contract for studies of lunar flying vehicles . 
the labyrinth society provides a locator for modern labyrinths all over the world . 
these labyrinths are thought to be 2,000–3,000 years old . 
in the 2000s ,  archaeologists explored other potential sites of the labyrinth . 
in english ,  the term `` labyrinth '' is generally synonymous with `` maze '' . 
the labyrinth is also treated in contemporary fine arts . 
there are examples of labyrinths in many disparate cultures . 
in recent years ,  there has been a resurgence of interest in labyrinths and a revival in labyrinth building ,  of both unicursal and multicursal patterns . 
over the same general period ,  some 500 or more non-ecclesiastical labyrinths were constructed in scandinavia . 
the use of labyrinths has recently been revived in some contexts of christian worship . 
labyrinths have on various occasions been used in christian tradition as a part of worship . 
many labyrinths have been constructed recently in churches ,  hospitals ,  and parks . 
schuster also observes the common theme of the labyrinth being a refuge for a trickster; in india ,  the demon ravana has dominion over labyrinths ,  the trickster djonaha lives in a labyrinth according to sumatran bataks ,  and europeans say it is the home of a rogue . 
by 1985, lyon & healy also made folk harps ,  also known as `` irish harps '' ,  which are even smaller than the troubadour . 
lyon & healy also made various percussion instruments . 
george w .  lyon patented his cottage upright in 1878 and it was sold under the lyon & healy name . 
in the 1980s ,  lyon & healy also began to manufacture electroacoustic harps and ,  later ,  solid body electric harps . 
in 1890, lyon & healy introduced the style 23 harp ,  still a popular and recognizable design . 
lyon would later form a new company with e . a . 
lyon and healy now primarily manufactures four types of harps—the `` lever harp '' ,  `` petite pedal harp '' ,  `` semi-grande pedal harp '' ,  and `` concert grand harp '' . 
lyon & healy is an american musical instrument manufacturer based in chicago ,  illinois . 
the mimrans sold lamborghini to the chrysler corporation in 1987.
lamborghini was an engine supplier in formula one for the 1989 through 1993 formula one seasons . 
in 1998, mycom setdco and v'power sold lamborghini to the volkswagen group where it was placed under the control of the group's audi division . 
lamborghini produces sports cars and v12 engines for offshore powerboat racing . 
ferruccio lamborghini ,  an italian manufacturing magnate ,  founded automobili ferruccio lamborghini s . p . a .  in 1963 to compete with established marques ,  including ferrari . 
in the mid-1970s ,  while lamborghini was under the management of georges-henri rossetti ,  lamborghini entered into an agreement with bmw to develop ,  then manufacture 400 cars for bmw in order to meet group 4 homologation requirements . 
the u . s . 
hours before walter lagrand was due to be executed ,  germany applied for the court to grant a provisional court order ,  requiring the united states to delay the execution of walter lagrand ,  which the court granted . 
the lagrand case was a legal action heard before the international court of justice  -lrb-  icj  -rrb-  which concerned the vienna convention on consular relations . 
the court also found that the united states violated the vienna convention through its application of procedural default . 
it was the ibm pc's first killer application ,  was hugely popular in the 1980s and contributed significantly to the success of the ibm pc . 
this later became `` wk3 '' for version 3.0 and `` wk4 '' for version 4.0.
lotus 1-2-3 is a discontinued spreadsheet program from lotus software  -lrb-  later part of ibm  -rrb-  . 
1-2-3 quickly overtook visicalc ,  as well as multiplan and supercalc ,  two visicalc competitors . 
there will be no replacement programs . `` 
the first spreadsheet ,  visicalc ,  had helped launch the apple ii as one of the earliest personal computers in business use . 
by the time these versions were released in 1989, microsoft had eroded much of lotus' market share . 
on 11 june 2013, ibm announced it would withdraw the lotus brand: ibm lotus 123 millennium edition v9.x ,  ibm lotus smartsuite 9.x v9.8.0, and organizer v6.1.0.
microsoft's early spreadsheet multiplan eventually gave way to excel ,  which debuted on the macintosh in 1985.
the reliance on the specific hardware of the ibm pc led to 1-2-3 being utilized as one of the two stress test applications ,  along with microsoft flight simulator ,  for true 100% compatibility when pc clones appeared in the early 1980s . 
in the netherlands ,  liberation day  -lrb-    -rrb-  is celebrated each year on may the 5th to mark the end of the occupation by nazi germany during world war ii . 
on may 4 the dutch hold `` dodenherdenking '' remembrance of the dead for the people who fought and died during world war ii and in wars in general . 
over-illumination is the excessive use of light . 
light trespass can be reduced by selecting light fixtures which limit the amount of light emitted more than 80° above the nadir . 
by limiting light at this 90° mark they have also reduced the light output in the 80–90° range which creates most of the light trespass issues . 
since not everyone is irritated by the same lighting sources ,  it is common for one person's light `` pollution '' to be light that is desirable for another . 
light pollution ,  also known as photopollution ,  is the presence of anthropogenic light in the night environment . 
light pollution is caused by inefficient ,  unappealing ,  or  -lrb-  arguably  -rrb-  unnecessary use of artificial light . 
several planets have trojan satellites near their l and l points with respect to the sun . 
the three collinear lagrange points  -lrb-  l ,  l ,  l  -rrb-  were discovered by leonhard euler a few years before joseph-louis lagrange discovered the remaining two . 
a lucid dream is a dream during which the dreamer is aware that they are dreaming . 
psychotherapists have applied lucid dreaming as a part of therapy . 
during a lucid dream ,  the dreamer may gain some amount of control over the dream characters ,  narrative ,  and environment; however ,  this is not necessary for a dream to be described as lucid . 
j allen hobson responded that lucid dreaming must be a state of both waking and dreaming . 
films like `` waking life ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- and `` inception ''  -lrb-  2010 -rrb- refer to lucid dreaming . 
paul tholey laid the epistemological basis for the research of lucid dreams ,  proposing seven different conditions of clarity that a dream must fulfill in order to be defined as a lucid dream:
some have suggested that the term is a misnomer because van eeden was referring to a phenomenon more specific than a lucid dream . 
green was also the first to link lucid dreams to the phenomenon of false awakenings . 
later ,  in 1992, a study by deirdre barrett examined whether lucid dreams contained four `` corollaries '' of lucidity: barrett found less than a quarter of lucidity accounts exhibited all four . 
a light-emitting diode  -lrb-  led  -rrb-  is a semiconductor light source that emits light when current flows through it . 
this method involves coating leds of one color  -lrb-  mostly blue leds made of ingan  -rrb-  with phosphors of different colors to form white light; the resultant leds are called phosphor-based or phosphor-converted white leds  -lrb-  pcleds  -rrb-  . 
some `` remote phosphor '' led light bulbs use a single plastic cover with yag phosphor for several blue leds ,  instead of using phosphor coatings on single chip white leds . 
this yag phosphor causes white leds to look yellow when off . 
multicolor leds also offer a new means to form light of different colors . 
there are several types of multicolor white leds: di- ,  tri- ,  and tetrachromatic white leds . 
sic leds had very low efficiency ,  no more than about 0.03% ,  but did emit in the blue portion of the visible light spectrum . 
this led to relatively high-power white-light leds for illumination ,  which are replacing incandescent and fluorescent lighting . 
some phosphor-based white leds encapsulate ingan blue leds inside phosphor-coated epoxy . 
multiple led dies attached to a flexible backing tape form an led strip light . 
white light is obtained by using multiple semiconductors or a layer of light-emitting phosphor on the semiconductor device . 
even though white light can be created using individual red ,  green and blue leds ,  this results in poor color rendering ,  since only three narrow bands of wavelengths of light are being emitted . 
the 'whiteness' of the light produced is engineered to suit the human eye . 
the blue and red leds approach their theoretical limits . 
another method used to produce experimental white light leds used no phosphors at all and was based on homoepitaxially grown zinc selenide  -lrb-  znse  -rrb-  on a znse substrate that simultaneously emitted blue light from its active region and yellow light from the substrate . 
light output and efficiency of blue and near-ultraviolet leds rose and the cost of reliable devices fell . 
led producers continue to use these methods . 
the design and production of a light source or light fixture using a monochrome emitter with phosphor conversion is simpler and cheaper than a complex rgb system ,  and the majority of high-intensity white leds presently on the market are manufactured using phosphor light conversion . 
mixing red ,  green ,  and blue sources to produce white light needs electronic circuits to control the blending of the colors . 
in luxembourg ,  50.9% of citizens can speak luxembourgish . 
luxembourgish ,  luxemburgish  -lrb-     -rrb-  or letzeburgesch  -lrb-   or   -rrb-   -lrb-  luxembourgish: `` lëtzebuergesch ''  -rrb-  is a west germanic language that is spoken mainly in luxembourg . 
the consonant inventory of luxembourgish is quite similar to that of standard german . 
about 390,000 people speak luxembourgish worldwide . 
in the german eifel and hunsrück regions ,  similar local moselle franconian dialects of german are spoken . 
luxembourgish is the national language of luxembourg and one of three administrative languages ,  alongside french and german . 
lev kuleshov died in moscow in 1970.
lev vladimirovich kuleshov  -lrb-  ; – 29 march 1970 -rrb- was a russian and soviet filmmaker and film theorist ,  one of the founders of the world's first film school ,  the moscow film school . 
lev kuleshov was born in 1899 into an intellectual russian family . 
while this term may indicate that some engineers may feel that a system is out of date ,  a legacy system can continue to be used for a variety of reasons . 
the term `` legacy support '' is often used in conjunction with legacy systems . 
in computing ,  a legacy system is an old method ,  technology ,  computer system ,  or application program ,  `` of ,  relating to ,  or being a previous or outdated computer system , ``  yet still in use . 
thus any new system that started the certification process becomes a `` de facto '' legacy system by the time it is approved for flight . 
this can also imply that the system is out of date or in need of replacement . 
even if it is no longer used ,  a legacy system may continue to impact the organization due to its historical role . 
the first use of the term `` legacy '' to describe computer systems probably occurred in the 1970s . 
thus ,  many organizations are rediscovering the value of both their legacy systems and the theortical underpinnings of those systems . 
legacy was often heard during a conversion process ,  for example ,  when moving data from the legacy system to a new database . 
a penumbral lunar eclipse occurs when the moon passes through earth's penumbra . 
a lunar eclipse occurs when the moon passes directly behind earth and into its shadow . 
a partial lunar eclipse occurs when only a portion of the moon enters earth's umbra ,  while a total lunar eclipse occurs when the entire moon enters the planet's umbra . 
due to this reddish color ,  a totally eclipsed moon is sometimes called a blood moon . 
during a total lunar eclipse ,  earth completely blocks direct sunlight from reaching the moon . 
a central lunar eclipse is a total lunar eclipse during which the moon passes through the centre of earth's shadow ,  contacting the antisolar point . 
similarly to the mayans ,  the incans believed that lunar eclipses occurred when a jaguar would eat the moon ,  which is why a blood moon looks red . 
the ancient mesopotamians believed that a lunar eclipse was when the moon was being attacked by seven demons . 
while both involve interactions between the sun ,  earth ,  and the moon ,  they are very different in their interactions . 
the second extends from pope urban vi  -lrb-  1378–1389 -rrb- to pope pius ii  -lrb-  1458–1464 -rrb- . 
pope adrian ii  -lrb-  867–872 -rrb- is the last pope for which there are extant manuscripts of the original `` liber pontificalis '': the biographies of pope john viii ,  pope marinus i ,  and pope adrian iii are missing and the biography of pope stephen v  -lrb-  885–891 -rrb- is incomplete . 
an independent continuation appeared in the reign of pope eugene iv  -lrb-  1431–1447 -rrb- ,  appending biographies from pope urban v  -lrb-  1362–1370 -rrb- to pope martin v  -lrb-  1417–1431 -rrb- ,  encompassing the period of the western schism . 
the liber pontificalis  -lrb-  latin for 'pontifical book' or `` book of the popes ''  -rrb-  is a book of biographies of popes from saint peter until the 15th century . 
boso drew on bonizo of sutri for popes from john xii to gregory vii ,  and wrote from his own experiences about the popes from gelasius ii  -lrb-  1118–1119 -rrb- to alexander iii  -lrb-  1179–1181 -rrb- . 
guillermi's version is mostly copied from other works with small additions or excisions from the papal biographies of pandulf ,  nephew of hugo of alatri ,  which in turn was copied almost verbatim from the original `` liber pontificalis ''  -lrb-  with the notable exception of the biography of pope leo ix  -rrb-  ,  then from other sources until pope honorius ii  -lrb-  1124–1130 -rrb- ,  and with contemporary information from pope paschal ii  -lrb-  1099–1118 -rrb- to pope urban ii  -lrb-  1088–1099 -rrb- . 
duchesne and others believe that the author of the first addition to the `` liber pontificalis '' was a contemporary of pope silverius  -lrb-  536–537 -rrb- ,  and that the author of another  -lrb-  not necessarily the second  -rrb-  addition was a contemporary of pope conon  -lrb-  686–687 -rrb- ,  with later popes being added individually and during their reigns or shortly after their deaths . 
thus it was during the classical latin period that the latin alphabet contained 23 letters:
the term `` latin alphabet '' may refer to either the alphabet used to write latin  -lrb-  as described in this article  -rrb-  ,  or other alphabets based on the latin script ,  which is the basic set of letters common to the various alphabets descended from the classical latin alphabet ,  such as the english alphabet . 
the latin or roman alphabet is the writing system originally used by the ancient romans to write the latin language . 
for the latin sounds represented by the various letters see latin spelling and pronunciation; for the names of the letters in english see english alphabet . 
latin included 21 different characters . 
the spread of the latin alphabet among previously illiterate peoples has inspired the creation of new writing systems ,  such as the avoiuli alphabet in vanuatu ,  which replaces the letters of the latin alphabet with alternative symbols . 
the etruscans ,  who ruled early rome ,  adopted the cumaean greek alphabet ,  which was modified over time to become the etruscan alphabet ,  which was in turn adopted and further modified by the romans to produce the latin alphabet . 
the latin alphabet spread ,  along with the latin language ,  from the italian peninsula to the lands surrounding the mediterranean sea with the expansion of the roman empire . 
lugh's father is cian of the tuatha dé danann ,  and his mother is ethniu ,  daughter of balor ,  of the fomorians . 
lugh's son is the hero cú chulainn ,  who is believed to be an incarnation of lugh . 
lugh has several magical possessions . 
as a young man lugh travels to tara to join the court of king nuada of the tuatha dé danann . 
lugh is given command over the tuatha dé danann ,  and he begins making preparations for war . 
these elements ,  along with the chemically similar elements scandium and yttrium ,  are often collectively known as the rare earth elements . 
group 2 is known as the alkaline earth elements for much the same reason . 
the `` rare '' in the `` rare earths '' name has much more to do with the difficulty of separating out each of the individual lanthanide elements than scarcity of any of them . 
they are called lanthanides because the elements in the series are chemically similar to lanthanum . 
