female jazz performers and composers have contributed to jazz throughout its history . 
duke ellington ,  one of jazz's most famous figures ,  said ,  `` it's all music . `` 
in the opinion of jazz historian ernest borneman ,  what preceded new orleans jazz before 1890 was `` afro-latin music '' ,  similar to what was played in the caribbean at the time . 
other styles and genres abound in the 2000s ,  such as latin and afro-cuban jazz . 
some of the most distinctive improvisers ,  composers ,  and bandleaders in jazz have been women . 
since the emergence of bebop ,  forms of jazz that are commercially oriented or influenced by popular music have been criticized . 
for some african americans ,  jazz has drawn attention to african-american contributions to culture and history . 
intellectuals around the world have hailed jazz as `` one of america's original art forms '' . 
by avoiding the creation of norms ,  jazz allows avant-garde styles to emerge . 
swift graduated in 1682, when he was 15.
swift ''  -lrb-  1739 -rrb- swift recalled this as one of his best achievements . 
jonathan swift was born on 30 november 1667 in dublin ,  ireland . 
swift had residence in trim ,  county meath ,  after 1700.
swift was a prolific writer ,  notable for his satires . 
swift returned to england one more time in 1727 and stayed with alexander pope once again . 
swift became increasingly active politically in these years . 
in 1690, swift left temple for ireland because of his health but returned to moor park the following year . 
swift's father joined his older brother ,  godwin ,  in the practice of law in ireland . 
jonathan swift wrote his own epitaph: w .  b .  yeats poetically translated it from the latin as:
before the fall of the tory government ,  swift hoped that his services would be rewarded with a church appointment in england . 
swift's benefactor and uncle godwin swift  -lrb-  1628–1695 -rrb- took primary responsibility for the young man ,  sending him with one of his cousins to kilkenny college  -lrb-  also attended by philosopher george berkeley  -rrb-  . 
during his visits to england in these years ,  swift published `` a tale of a tub '' and `` the battle of the books ''  -lrb-  1704 -rrb- and began to gain a reputation as a writer . 
with the return of the whigs ,  swift's best move was to leave england and he returned to ireland in disappointment ,  a virtual exile ,  to live `` like a rat in a hole '' . 
biafra is 1/8th jewish . 
biafra received 10 votes . 
this group debuted during biafra five-o . 
biafra has a cameo role in the 1988 film `` tapeheads '' . 
biafra married theresa soder ,  a . k . a . 
as of late 2005, biafra was performing with the band the melvins under the name `` jello biafra and the melvins '' ,  though fans sometimes refer to them as `` the jelvins . `` 
biafra was an anarchist in the 1980s ,  but has shifted away from his former anti-government views . 
after the dead kennedys disbanded ,  biafra's new songs were recorded with other bands ,  and he released only spoken word albums as solo projects . 
in the summer of 2011 jello biafra and his band were scheduled to play at the barby club in tel aviv . 
biafra ,  along with a camera crew  -lrb-  dubbed by biafra as `` the camcorder truth jihad ''  -rrb-  ,  later reported for the independent media center at the republican and democratic conventions . 
now in control of the dead kennedys name ,  biafra's former bandmates went on tour with a new lead vocalist . 
biafra also provided lyrics for the song `` biotech is godzilla '' for sepultura's 1993 album `` chaos a . d . ``  . 
in october 1998, three former members of the dead kennedys sued biafra for nonpayment of royalties . 
in 1999, biafra and other members of the anti-globalization movement protested the wto meeting of 1999 in seattle . 
the exception being live albums released after the band's break-up ,  which the other band members compiled from recordings in the band partnership's vaults without biafra's input or endorsement .  .  biafra has been the owner of the company since its founding ,  though he does not receive a salary for his position; biafra has referred to his position in the company as `` absentee thoughtlord '' . 
in 1988, biafra ,  with al jourgensen and paul barker of the band ministry ,  and jeff ward ,  formed lard . 
biafra believes the trial was politically motivated; it was often reported that the pmrc took biafra to court as a cost-effective way of sending a message out to other musicians with content considered offensive in their music . 
grierson was a member of the jury for the canadian film awards in 1970.
during this time ,  grierson was also involved in scrutinizing the film industries of other countries . 
grierson's emerging and outspoken film philosophies caught the attention of new york film critics at the time . 
in 1938, grierson was invited by the canadian government to study the country's film production . 
in 1965, grierson was the patron of the commonwealth film festival which took place in cardiff in that year . 
arthur elton ,  edgar anstey ,  john taylor ,  and grierson's sister ruby grierson ,  1935 -rrb- . 
he also pushed for a french unit in the national film board . 
that some of grierson's notions regarding the social and political uses of film were influenced by reading lenin's writing about film as education and propaganda .   -rrb- 
in 1939, canada created the national film commission ,  which would later become the national film board of canada . 
in february 1948, grierson was appointed the controller of the central office of information's film operations to co-ordinate the work of the crown film unit and films division ,  and to take overall charge of the planning ,  production and distribution of government films . 
this wonderful world changed the title to john grierson presents . 
at the edinburgh film festival in the same year ,  a dinner was held in grierson's honour to celebrate twenty-five years of documentary . 
on 26 february 1942, grierson attended the academy awards and received the award on behalf of the national film board for `` churchill's island '' . 
in late 1929 grierson and his cameraman ,  basil emmott completed his first film ,  `` drifters '' ,  which he wrote ,  produced and directed . 
in his review of robert flaherty's film `` moana ''  -lrb-  1926 -rrb- in the `` new york sun ''  -lrb-  8 february 1926 -rrb- ,  grierson wrote that it had 'documentary' value . 
after this success ,  grierson moved away from film direction into a greater focus on production and administration within the emb . 
in 1963, he was busy with this wonderful world and the films of scotland committee but still found time to attend the twenty-fifth anniversary of the national film board in montreal . 
recommendations for the future running were made for the national film board ,  and grierson was persuaded to stay for a further six months to oversee the changes . 
hurd and cameron were married from 1985 to 1989.
it was the highest-grossing film from 1998 until 2010, when cameron's 2009 film `` avatar '' surpassed its gross . 
cameron is an advocate for stereoscopic digital 3d films . 
cameron originally intended `` avatar '' to be 3d-only . 
in the mid-1990s ,  cameron announced that he would make a `` spider-man '' film . 
cameron next began the sequel to `` alien '' ,  the 1979 film by ridley scott . 
cameron met with yamaguchi just days before he died in 2010.
after his film `` true lies ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- ,  cameron took on his biggest film at the time ,  `` titanic ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- ,  which earned him academy awards for best picture ,  best director and best film editing . 
after working with cameron on `` titanic '' ,  kate winslet decided she would not work with cameron again unless she earned `` a lot of money '' . 
in 2012, cameron ,  his wife and his children adopted a vegan diet . 
on september 24, 2010, james cameron was named number 1 in the 2010 guardian film power 100 list . 
cameron's directorial style has had significant influence within the hollywood film industry . 
in august 2013, cameron announced his intention to film three sequels to `` avatar '' simultaneously ,  to be released in december 2016, 2017, and 2018.
however ,  cameron and `` avatar '' lost to his former wife kathryn bigelow and her film ,  `` the hurt locker '' . 
cameron had initially next planned to do a film of the comic-book character spider-man ,  a project developed by menahem golan of cannon films . 
cameron was hired as the special effects director for the sequel to `` piranha '' ,  entitled ``  '' in 1982.
cameron had originally wanted to incorporate this advanced-model-terminator into the first film ,  but the special effects at the time were not advanced enough . 
cameron accepted the degree in person and gave the convocation address . 
cameron and his wife are featured in `` eating you alive '' ,  a 2016 american documentary . 
in 2010, `` time '' magazine listed cameron among the 100 most influential people in the world . 
cameron expressed interest in the 1912 sinking of the ship and decided to script and film his next project based on this event . 
in addition ,  linda hamilton first appeared in this film in her iconic role of sarah connor ,  and later married cameron . 
cameron became an expert on deep-sea exploration in conjunction with his research and underwater filming for `` the abyss ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- and `` titanic ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- . 
cameron was born in 1954 in kapuskasing ,  ontario ,  canada ,  the son of shirley  -lrb-  née lowe  -rrb-  ,  an artist and nurse ,  and phillip cameron ,  an electrical engineer . 
cameron quit his job as a truck driver to enter the film industry after seeing `` star wars '' in 1977.
james cameron announced a third `` terminator '' film many times during the 1990s ,  but without coming out with any finished scripts . 
cameron won the golden globe ,  while bigelow won the oscar and the bafta for best director ,  becoming the first woman to win either . 
in 1999, cameron was labeled selfish and cruel by one collaborator ,  author orson scott card ,  who had been hired a decade earlier to work with cameron on the novelization of `` the abyss '' . 
avatar's success made cameron the highest earner in hollywood for 2010, netting him $257 million as reported by `` vanity fair '' . 
it was co-written ,  produced ,  and co-edited by cameron ,  her ex-husband ,  and co-written by jay cocks . 
cameron did not receive any major mainstream filmmaking awards prior to `` titanic '' . 
during the early 1980s ,  cameron wrote three screenplays simultaneously: `` the terminator '' ,  `` aliens '' ,  and the first draft of ``  '' . 
it became the second film to gross more than $2 billion worldwide  -lrb-  the first being avatar  -rrb-  . 
the history of judaism spans more than 3,000 years . 
judaism  -lrb-  originally from hebrew  ,  `` yehudah '' ,  `` judah ''; via latin and greek  -rrb-  is the religion of the jewish people . 
according to rabbinical jewish tradition ,  god gave both the written law  -lrb-  the torah  -rrb-  and the oral law to moses on mount sinai . 
within judaism there are a variety of movements ,  most of which emerged from rabbinic judaism ,  which holds that god revealed his laws and commandments to moses on mount sinai in the form of both the written and oral torah . 
jews are an ethnoreligious group including those born jewish ,  in addition to converts to judaism . 
the mishnah consists of 63 tractates codifying jewish law ,  which are the basis of the `` talmud . `` 
moreover ,  some have argued that judaism is a non-creedal religion that does not require one to believe in god . 
jewish philosophy refers to the conjunction between serious study of philosophy and jewish theology . 
with between 14.5 and 17.4 million adherents worldwide ,  judaism is the tenth largest religion in the world . 
the basis of jewish law and tradition  -lrb-  halakha  -rrb-  is the torah  -lrb-  also known as the pentateuch or the five books of moses  -rrb-  . 
ethical monotheism is central in all sacred or normative texts of judaism . 
scholars throughout jewish history have proposed numerous formulations of judaism's core tenets ,  all of which have met with criticism . 
mill was a notably precocious child . 
mill engaged in written debate with whewell . 
in 1851, mill married harriet taylor after 21 years of intimate friendship . 
john stuart mill  -lrb-  20 may 1806 – 8 may 1873 -rrb- ,  usually cited as j .  s .  mill ,  was a british philosopher ,  political economist ,  and civil servant . 
mill went through months of sadness and pondered suicide at twenty years of age . 
mill had been engaged in a pen-friendship with auguste comte ,  the founder of positivism and sociology ,  since mill first contacted comte in november 1841.
as `` noisy junk science . `` 
the phrase `` junk science '' appears to have been in use prior to 1985.
in his 2006 book `` junk science '' ,  dan agin emphasized two main causes of junk science: fraud ,  and ignorance . 
peter w .  huber popularized the term with respect to litigation in his 1991 book `` galileo's revenge: junk science in the courtroom . `` 
as the subtitle of huber's book ,  `` junk science in the courtroom '' ,  suggests ,  his emphasis was on the use or misuse of expert testimony in civil litigation . 
the expression junk science is used to describe scientific data ,  research ,  or analysis considered by the person using the phrase to be spurious or fraudulent . 
in some contexts ,  junk science is counterposed to the `` sound science '' or `` solid science '' that favors one's own point of view . 
cook returned to hawaii in 1779.
artists also sailed on cook's first voyage . 
cook's voyages were involved in another unusual first . 
james cook was born on 7 november 1728  -lrb-  n . s .   -rrb- 
another shuttle ,  `` discovery '' ,  was named after cook's  . 
it is here that james cook made first contact with an aboriginal tribe known as the gweagal . 
cook has no direct descendants—all of his children died before having children of their own . 
shortly after his return from the first voyage ,  cook was promoted in august 1771 to the rank of commander . 
cook's contributions to knowledge were internationally recognised during his lifetime . 
cook commanded on this voyage ,  while tobias furneaux commanded its companion ship ,   . 
cook's journal recorded the date of the goat's death: 28 march 1772.
after their arrival in england ,  king completed cook's account of the voyage . 
cook attempted to kidnap and ransom the king of hawaiʻi ,  kalaniʻōpuʻu . 
though this view was first suggested by members of cook's expedition ,  the idea that any hawaiians understood cook to be lono ,  and the evidence presented in support of it ,  were challenged in 1992.
in 2002 cook was placed at number 12 in the bbc's poll of the 100 greatest britons . 
historians have speculated that this is where cook first felt the lure of the sea while gazing out of the shop window . 
by the second week of august 1778, cook was through the bering strait ,  sailing into the chukchi sea . 
the australian museum acquired its `` cook collection '' in 1894 from the government of new south wales . 
ever the observer ,  cook was the first european to have extensive contact with various people of the pacific . 
several officers who served under cook went on to distinctive accomplishments . 
he practised as a printer in birmingham ,  england . 
baskerville's most notable typeface baskerville represents the peak of transitional type face and bridges the gap between old style and modern type design . 
john baskerville  -lrb-  baptised 28 january 1706 – 8 january 1775 -rrb- was an english businessman ,  in areas including japanning and papier-mâché ,  but he is best remembered as a printer and type designer . 
stalin's soviet union has been characterised as a totalitarian state ,  with stalin its authoritarian leader . 
stalin's death was announced on 6 march . 
in 1926, stalin published `` on questions of leninism '' . 
in november 1929 stalin removed him from the politburo . 
in adulthood ,  stalin measured tall . 
after stalin's death ,  svetlana changed her surname from stalin to allilueva ,  and defected to the u . s . 
in november 1943, stalin met with churchill and roosevelt in tehran ,  a location of stalin's choosing . 
stalin was born in the georgian town of gori on  . 
in his later years ,  stalin was in poor health . 
stalin faced problems in his family life . 
stalin adhered to the leninist variant of marxism . 
within the soviet union ,  there was widespread civic disgruntlement against stalin's government . 
a vast literature devoted to stalin has been produced . 
after the war ,  stalin was—according to service—at the `` apex of his career '' . 
in march 1908, stalin was arrested and interned in bailov prison . 
in february 1913, stalin was arrested while back in saint petersburg . 
trotsky and several other soviet figures promoted the idea that stalin was a mediocrity . 
according to stalin biographer dmitri volkogonov ,  de-kulakisation was `` the first mass terror applied by stalin in his own country '' . 
although millions of soviet citizens despised him ,  support for stalin was nevertheless widespread throughout soviet society . 
that month ,  stalin travelled to the port city of batumi . 
the soviet victory there marked a major turning point in the war; in commemoration ,  stalin declared himself marshal of the soviet union . 
the only part of the former soviet union where admiration for stalin has remained consistently widespread is georgia . 
stalin publicly condemned anti-semitism ,  although was repeatedly accused of it . 
while stalin was in exile ,  russia entered the first world war ,  and in october 1916 stalin and other exiled bolsheviks were conscripted into the russian army ,  leaving for monastyrskoe . 
while stalin was in exile ,  the first bolshevik central committee had been elected at the prague conference ,  after which lenin and grigory zinoviev invited stalin to join it . 
according to beria ,  stalin had affairs with several jewish women . 
friendship was important to stalin ,  and he used it to gain and maintain power . 
montefiore suggested that this charm was `` the foundation of stalin's power in the party '' . 
in october 1899, stalin began work as a meteorologist at a tiflis observatory . 
stalin often gave conflicting signals regarding state repression . 
stalin's push for soviet westward expansion into eastern europe resulted in accusations of russian imperialism . 
against the advice of zhukov and other generals ,  stalin emphasised attack over defence . 
after the war ,  stalin sought to retain soviet dominance across eastern europe while expanding its influence in asia . 
as a marxist ,  stalin believed in an inevitable class war between the world's proletariat and bourgeoise . 
on this trip ,  stalin met with his son yakov ,  and brought him back to moscow; nadya had given birth to another of stalin's sons ,  vasily ,  in march 1921.
keenly interested in the arts ,  stalin admired artistic talent . 
stalin was a keen and accomplished billiards player ,  and collected watches . 
stalin referred to himself as a `` praktik '' ,  meaning that he was more of a practical revolutionary than a theoretician . 
in mid-1903, stalin was sentenced to three years of exile in eastern siberia . 
he was supported in this by bukharin ,  who like stalin believed that the left opposition's proposals would plunge the soviet union into instability . 
stalin denied to foreign visitors that he was a dictator ,  stating that those who labelled him such did not understand the soviet governance structure . 
stalin was attracted to women and there are no reports of any homosexual tendencies; according to montefiore ,  in his early life stalin `` rarely seems to have been without a girlfriend '' . 
throughout the 1920s and beyond ,  stalin placed a high priority on foreign policy . 
in 1928, stalin declared that class war between the proletariat and their enemies would intensify as socialism developed . 
in 1935–36, stalin oversaw a new constitution; its dramatic liberal features were designed as propaganda weapons ,  for all power rested in the hands of stalin and his politburo . 
stalin wanted to avoid direct soviet conflict with the u . s .  ,  convincing the chinese to aid the north . 
january is the first month of the year in the julian and gregorian calendars and the first of seven months to have a length of 31 days . 
traditionally ,  the original roman calendar consisted of 10 months totaling 304 days ,  winter being considered a month-less period . 
according to theodor mommsen ,  1 january became the first day of the year in 600 auc of the roman calendar  -lrb-  153 bc  -rrb-  ,  due to disasters in the lusitanian war . 
january 2 unless that day is a sunday ,  in which case january 3: january 2  first sunday of the year ,  unless the sunday falls on january 1, 6, or 7, then january 2: january 2 first friday: january 4  monday after january 6: january 7  first monday: january 7 second saturday: january 12  sunday following january 6: january 13  day after plough sunday: january 14 second monday: january 14 friday before third monday: january 18 third friday: january 18 sunday closest to january 22: january 19 third full week of january: january 20–26  last full week of january: january 20–26  third sunday: january 20  third monday: january 21 no fixed date: january 22–27 wednesday of the third full week of january: january 23  friday between january 19–25: january 25  last saturday: january 26  last sunday: january 27  last monday in january: january 28  january 30 or the nearest sunday: january 27  fourth monday: january 28  monday closest to january 29: january 28
the colts won the game by the score of 35–7.
the team won their first game in 1953, against murray state ,  and lost the rest for a record of 1–7.
in 1957, his first season as the colts full-time starter at quarterback ,  unitas finished first in the nfl in passing yards  -lrb-  2,550 -rrb- and touchdown passes  -lrb-  24 -rrb- as he helped lead the colts to a 7–5 record ,  the first winning record in franchise history . 
namath threw 62 passes and broke his hand on the final play of the game ,  ending his season . 
however ,  the season would end on a disappointing note for the colts as they were upset by the cleveland browns in the 1964 nfl championship game ,  losing 27–0.
unitas finished his 18 nfl seasons with 2,830 completions in 5,186 attempts for 40,239 yards and 290 touchdowns ,  with 253 interceptions . 
unitas threw three interceptions in the game ,  one of which was returned for a touchdown by safety dick anderson . 
he has been consistently listed as one of the greatest nfl players of all time . 
once again ,  the season ended in heartbreak for the colts ,  as they were shut out of the newly instituted four team nfl playoff after losing the divisional tiebreaker to the rams ,  a 34–10 rout in the regular season finale . 
in spite of this ,  unitas topped the 3000 yard passing mark for the first time and led the league in touchdown passes for the fourth consecutive season . 
unitas then led the colts to a repeat championship ,  beating the giants again 31–16 in the title game . 
unitas completed 49 of 95 passes for 470 yards and three touchdowns . 
in 1959, unitas was named the nfl's mvp by the associated press  -lrb-  ap  -rrb-  for the first time ,  as well as united press international's player of the year ,  after leading the nfl in passing yards  -lrb-  2,899 -rrb- ,  touchdown passes  -lrb-  32 -rrb- ,  and completions  -lrb-  193 -rrb- . 
astor's fur trading ventures were disrupted during the war of 1812, when the british captured his trading posts . 
in 1783 or march 1784, astor immigrated to new york city ,  just following the end of the american revolution . 
in 1800, following the example of the `` empress of china '' ,  the first american trading vessel to china ,  astor traded furs ,  teas ,  and sandalwood with canton in china ,  and greatly benefited from it . 
astor began buying land in new york in 1799 and acquired sizable holdings along the waterfront . 
the julian calendar has two types of year: `` normal '' years of 365 days and `` leap '' years of 366 days . 
the three most important of these calendars are the alexandrian calendar ,  the asian calendar and the syro-macedonian calendar . 
this refinement averages the length of the year to 365.25 days over 24 years . 
the julian months were formed by adding ten days to a regular pre-julian roman year of 355 days ,  creating a regular julian year of 365 days . 
likewise in the egyptian calendar ,  a fixed year of 365 days was in use ,  drifting by one day against the sun in four years . 
the julian calendar ,  proposed by julius caesar in 46 bc  -lrb-  708 auc  -rrb-  ,  was a reform of the roman calendar . 
the ordinary year in the previous roman calendar consisted of 12 months ,  for a total of 355 days . 
the alexandrian calendar adapted the egyptian calendar by adding a 6th epagomenal day as the last day of the year in every fourth year ,  falling on 29 august preceding a julian bissextile day . 
caesar's reform only applied to the roman calendar . 
 -lrb-  even then ,  the gregorian calendar diverges from astronomical observations by one day in 3,030 years  -rrb-  . 
the difference in the average length of the year between julian  -lrb-  365.25 days  -rrb-  and gregorian  -lrb-  365.2425 days  -rrb-  is 0.002% ,  making the julian 10.8 minutes longer . 
around that time most of them were replaced as civil calendars by the julian calendar ,  but with a year starting in september to reflect the year of the indiction cycle . 
consequently ,  the julian year drifts over time with respect to the tropical  -lrb-  solar  -rrb-  year  -lrb-  365.24217 days  -rrb-  . 
there is debate about the exact position of the bissextile day in the early julian calendar . 
the julian calendar spread beyond the borders of the roman empire through its use as the christian liturgical calendar . 
because 46 bc was the last of a series of irregular years ,  this extra-long year was ,  and is ,  referred to as the `` last year of confusion '' . 
sacrobosco then thought that julius caesar added one day to every month except february ,  a total of 11 more days to regular months ,  giving the ordinary julian year of 365 days . 
 -lrb-  bearing in mind that 1900 and 2100 are leap years in the julian system but not in the gregorian  -rrb-  . 
though adams and clay had hoped that the campaign would focus on the american system ,  it was instead dominated by personalities of jackson and adams . 
adams had long feared that the united states would enter a war it could not win against britain ,  and by early 1812 he saw such a war as inevitable due to the constant british attacks on american shipping and the british practice of impressment . 
adams's top choice for the role of vice president was general andrew jackson; adams noted that `` the vice-presidency was a station in which jackson could hang no one ,  and in which he would need to quarrel with no one . `` 
the regional strength of each candidate played an important role in the election; adams was popular in new england ,  clay and jackson were strong in the west ,  and jackson and crawford competed for the south . 
after the election ,  many of jackson's supporters claimed that adams and clay had reached a `` corrupt bargain '' in which adams promised clay the position of secretary of state in return for clay's support . 
adams's personality was much like that of his father ,  as were his political beliefs . 
adams's proposal to establish a national bankruptcy law was also defeated . 
in 1778, adams and his father departed for europe ,  where john adams would serve as part of american diplomatic missions in france and the netherlands . 
in 1796, washington appointed adams as the u . s .  ambassador to portugal . 
one of the major foreign policy goals of the adams administration was the expansion of american trade . 
though clay would later regret accepting the position since it reinforced the `` corrupt bargain '' accusation ,  clay's strength in the west and interest in foreign policy made him a natural choice for the top cabinet position . 
though the u . s .  delegation finally won confirmation from the senate ,  it never reached the congress of panama due to the senate's delay . 
texas thus joined the united states as a slave state in 1845.
the presidential election 1824 was contested by adams ,  andrew jackson ,  william h .  crawford ,  and henry clay ,  all of whom were members of the democratic-republican party . 
the british ,  meanwhile ,  declined to risk their recent rapprochement with the united states ,  and did not make a major diplomatic issue out of jackson's execution of two british nationals . 
the domestic agenda of adams and clay ,  which would come to be known as the american system ,  was designed to unite disparate regional interests in the promotion of a thriving national economy . 
in the 1824 presidential election ,  jackson won a plurality in the electoral college ,  taking 99 of the 261 electoral votes ,  while adams won 84, crawford won 41, and clay took 37.
in may 1815, adams learned that president madison had appointed him as the u . s .  ambassador to britain . 
the agreement represented a turning point in united kingdom–united states relations ,  as the u . s .  turned its attention to its southern and western borders and british fears over american expansionism waned . 
the impeachment process did not move forward ,  though ,  in large part because the whigs did not believe that the senate would vote to remove tyler from office . 
with his father's encouragement ,  adams would also translate classical authors like virgil ,  horace ,  plutarch ,  and aristotle . 
the house would decide among the top three electoral vote winners ,  with each state's delegation having one vote; thus ,  unlike his three rivals ,  clay was not eligible to be elected by the house . 
the doctrine became one of the foundational principles of u . s .  foreign policy . 
in the press ,  they were often described as `` adams men '' and `` jackson men . `` 
monroe and adams agreed on most of the major foreign policy issues: both favored neutrality in the latin american wars of independence ,  peace with great britain ,  denial of a trade agreement with the french ,  and expansion ,  peacefully if possible ,  into the north american territories of the spanish empire . 
john quincy adams  -lrb-  ; july 11, 1767 – february 23, 1848 -rrb- was an american statesman who served as the sixth president of the united states from 1825 to 1829.
the jurassic  -lrb-  ; from jura mountains  -rrb-  was a geologic period and system that spanned 56 million years from the end of the triassic period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  to the beginning of the cretaceous period mya . 
the jurassic period is divided into three epochs: early ,  middle ,  and late . 
the jurassic period is divided into three epochs: early ,  middle ,  and late . 
the jurassic is named after the jura mountains within the european alps ,  where limestone strata from the period were first identified . 
however ,  they were a part of another major extinction that happened within the next major time period . 
the rest of the lissamphibia evolved in this period ,  introducing the first salamanders and caecilians . 
the late jurassic life of tendaguru is very similar to that found in western north america's morrison formation . 
in africa ,  early jurassic strata are distributed in a similar fashion to late triassic beds ,  with more common outcrops in the south and less common fossil beds which are predominated by tracks to the north . 
during his lifetime ,  he wrote and published six more novels under the name john wyndham . 
john wyndham parkes lucas beynon harris  -lrb-  ; 10 july 1903 – 11 march 1969 -rrb- was an english science fiction writer best known for his works written using the pen name john wyndham ,  although he also used other combinations of his names ,  such as john beynon and lucas parkes . 
after the war ,  wyndham returned to writing ,  inspired by the success of his brother ,  who had four novels published . 
he eventually turned to writing for money in 1925 and ,  by 1931, was selling short stories and serial fiction to american science fiction magazines ,  most under the pen names `` john beynon '' and `` john beynon harris '' ,  although he also wrote some detective stories . 
in 1984, polanski denied kosiński's story in his autobiography . 
kosiński was also friends with wojciech frykowski and abigail folger . 
kosiński was born józef lewinkopf to jewish parents in łódź ,  poland . 
the book received recommendations from elie wiesel who wrote in `` the new york times book review '' that it was `` one of the best  .  .  . 
after the war ended ,  kosiński and his parents moved to jelenia góra . 
kosiński also studied in the soviet union ,  and served as a sharpshooter in the polish army . 
weinberger alleged in his 2000 book `` karmic traces '' that kosiński was not fluent in english at the time of its writing . 
kosiński wrote his novel `` pinball ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- for his friend george harrison ,  having conceived of the idea for the book at least ten years before writing it . 
 ''newsweek '' complimented kosiński's `` delightfully abrasive '' performance . 
the significant point about jerzy kosiński was that  .  .  .  his books  .  .  .  had a vision and a voice consistent with one another and with the man himself . 
in 1962, kosiński married an american steel heiress ,  mary hayward weir . 
svetlana alliluyeva ,  who had a friendship with kosiński ,  is introduced as a character in his novel `` blind date '' . 
the information showed that rather than wandering the polish countryside ,  as his fictional character did ,  kosiński spent the war years in hiding with polish catholics . 
terence blacker ,  a profitable english publisher  -lrb-  who helped publish kosiński's books  -rrb-  and author of children's books and mysteries for adults ,  wrote an article published in `` the independent '' in 2002:
jeeps were used by every service of the u . s .  military . 
the history of the hmmwv  -lrb-  humvee  -rrb-  has ties with jeep . 
after the war ,  willys did not resume production of its passenger-car models ,  choosing instead to concentrate on jeeps and jeep-branded vehicles ,  launching the jeep station wagon in 1946, the jeep truck in 1947, and the jeepster in 1948.
the jeep wrangler and jeep cherokee are built in the city currently ,  in separate facilities ,  not far from the site of the original willys-overland plant . 
the jeep marque has been headquartered in toledo ,  ohio ,  ever since willys-overland launched production of the first cj or civilian jeep branded models there in 1945.
the `` jeep '' brand has gone through many owners ,  starting with willys-overland ,  which filed the original trademark application for the `` jeep '' brand-name in february 1943.
in 1965, jeep developed the m715 1.25-ton army truck ,  a militarized version of the civilian j-series jeep truck ,  which served extensively in the vietnam war . 
in lowercase ,  the term `` jeep '' continues to be used as a generic term for vehicles inspired by the jeep that are suitable for use on rough terrain . 
after world war ii ,  jeep began to experiment with new designs ,  including a model that could drive under water . 
jeep has been a part of chrysler since 1987, when chrysler acquired the jeep brand ,  along with remaining assets ,  from its previous owner: american motors corporation  -lrb-  amc  -rrb-  . 
at the same time ,  chrysler corporation wanted to capture the jeep brand ,  as well as other assets of amc . 
aside from jeepneys ,  backyard assemblers in the philippines construct replica jeeps with stainless steel bodies and surplus parts ,  and are called `` owner-type jeeps ''  -lrb-  as jeepneys are also called `` passenger-type jeeps ''  -rrb-  . 
a division of fca us llc ,  the most recent successor company to the jeep brand ,  now holds trademark status on the name `` jeep '' and the distinctive 7-slot front grille design . 
jeep advertising has always emphasized the brand's vehicles' off-road capabilities . 
a precursor of the boeing b-17 flying fortress was also referred to as the jeep . 
jamaica is the third largest island in the caribbean . 
jamaica  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an island country situated in the caribbean sea . 
the jamaica defence force  -lrb-  jdf  -rrb-  is the small but professional military force of jamaica . 
it came into force with the jamaica independence act ,  1962 of the united kingdom parliament ,  which gave jamaica independence . 
jamaica's plant life has changed considerably over the centuries . 
christopher columbus claimed jamaica for spain after landing there in 1494.
one species of freshwater turtle is native to jamaica ,  the jamaican slider . 
when the english captured jamaica in 1655, the spanish colonists fled after freeing their slaves . 
jamaica attained full independence by leaving the federation in 1962.
the colony was shaken and almost destroyed by the 1692 jamaica earthquake . 
as elizabeth ii is shared as head of state of fifteen other countries and resides mostly in the united kingdom ,  she is thus often represented as queen of jamaica in jamaica and abroad by the governor-general of jamaica . 
jamaica slowly gained increasing independence from the united kingdom . 
jamaica's current constitution was drafted in 1962 by a bipartisan joint committee of the jamaican legislature . 
the house of assembly in jamaica resented and resisted the new laws . 
none of jamaica's eight species of native snakes is venomous . 
jamaica has traditionally had a two-party system ,  with power often alternating between the people's national party  -lrb-  pnp  -rrb-  and jamaica labour party  -lrb-  jlp  -rrb-  . 
also visible in the waters surrounding jamaica are dolphins ,  parrotfish ,  and the endangered manatee . 
along with their indian counterparts ,  chinese jamaicans have also played an integral part in jamaica's community and history . 
jamaica is a commonwealth realm ,  with queen elizabeth ii as its monarch and head of state . 
jamaica lies about south of cuba ,  and west of hispaniola  -lrb-  the island containing the countries of haiti and the dominican republic  -rrb-  . 
jamaica is a parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy ,  with queen elizabeth ii serving as the jamaican monarch . 
the red-billed streamertail ,  known locally as the , 'doctor bird' ,  is jamaica's national symbol . 
colloquially jamaicans refer to their home island as the `` rock . `` 
by 1660, jamaica had become a refuge for jews in the new world ,  also attracting those who had been expelled from spain and portugal . 
the first irish immigrants came to jamaica in the 1600s as war prisoners and later ,  indentured labor . 
jamaica lies in the hurricane belt of the atlantic ocean and because of this ,  the island sometimes suffers significant storm damage . 
jamaica continues to be a commonwealth realm ,  with the british monarch as queen of jamaica and head of state . 
jamaica received its independence on 6 august 1962.
in the year 1655, the english invaded jamaica ,  defeating the spanish colonists . 
bustamante subsequently became the first prime minister of jamaica . 
when the british captured jamaica in 1655, the spanish colonists fled ,  leaving a large number of african slaves . 
the 2010s look to be a bad time for jamaica's sugarcane industry . 
until it was disestablished in 1870, the church of england in jamaica was the established church . 
christopher columbus is believed to be the first european to reach jamaica . 
because of disturbances in jamaica and the rest of the region ,  the british in 1938 appointed the moyne commission . 
this settlement served as the capital of both spanish and english jamaica ,  from its founding in 1534 until 1872, after which the capital was moved to kingston . 
the first inhabitants of jamaica probably came from islands to the east in two waves of migration . 
although the taino referred to the island as `` xaymaca , ``  the spanish gradually changed the name to `` jamaica . `` 
in the 18th century ,  sugar cane replaced piracy as british jamaica's main source of income . 
at the beginning of the 18th century ,  the number of slaves in jamaica did not exceed 45,000, but by 1800 it had increased to over 300,000.
jamaica's reggae music developed from ska and rocksteady in the 1960s . 
the caribbean island of jamaica was inhabited by the taino tribes prior to the arrival of columbus in 1503.
jamaica's film industry was born in 1972 with the release of `` the harder they come '' ,  the first feature-length film made by jamaicans . 
the spanish also transported hundreds of west africans slaves to the island . 
the first maroon war came to an end with a 1739–40 agreement between the maroons and the british government . 
the second half of the 19th century was a period of severe economic decline for jamaica . 
no planes were going in and out of kingston ,  and telephone lines were jammed from jamaica to florida . 
in 1945 bustamante took office as jamaica's first premier  -lrb-  the pre-independence title for head of government  -rrb-  . 
jamaica ,  in particular ,  set the pace for the region in its demands for economic development from british colonial rule . 
following the 1655 conquest ,  spain repeatedly attempted to recapture jamaica . 
england gained formal possession of jamaica from spain in 1670 through the treaty of madrid . 
as a result ,  the sugar monoculture and slave-worked plantation society spread across jamaica throughout the 18th century ,  decreasing jamaica's dependence on privateers for protection and funds . 
jamaica exports 25% of the sugar it produces to britain and prices for jamaican sugar are expected to fall in the wake of the end of the cap on the eu's subsidised sugar beet industry . 
after world war ii ,  jamaica began a relatively long transition to full political independence . 
manley's pnp came to office for the first time after winning the 1955 elections with an 11-percent majority over the jlp and 50.5 percent of the popular vote . 
patterson stepped down on 26 february 2006, and was replaced by portia simpson-miller ,  jamaica's first female prime minister . 
there were also periodic skirmishes between the british and the mountain communities ,  culminating in the first maroon war of the 1730s and the second maroon war of the 1790s . 
in the four years following coke's capture ,  jamaica's murder rate decreased by nearly half . 
cromwell increased the island's european population by sending indentured servants and prisoners to jamaica . 
the rastafari movement ,  a new religion ,  emerged among impoverished and socially disenfranchised afro-jamaican communities in 1930s jamaica . 
after a few years the maroons were again deported to the new british settlement of sierra leone in west africa . 
sexual violence with the taíno women by the spanish was also common . 
the rise of nationalism ,  as distinct from island identification or desire for self-determination ,  is generally dated to the 1938 labour riots that affected both jamaica and the islands of the eastern caribbean . 
jamaica's political patterns and governmental structure were shaped during two decades of what was called `` constitutional decolonisation , ``  the period between 1944 and independence in 1962.
the pnp government in 1974 also formed the jamaica movement for the advancement of literacy  -lrb-  jamal  -rrb-  ,  which administered adult education programs with the goal of involving 100,000 adults a year . 
jamaica is one of the most indebted countries and spends around half of its annual federal budget on debt repayments . 
two types of climate are found in jamaica . 
jamaica lies south of cuba and west of haiti . 
the coastline of jamaica is one of many contrasts . 
the first recorded hurricane to hit jamaica was in 1519.
alice shoal ,  southwest of the main island of jamaica ,  falls within the jamaica–colombia joint regime . 
the highest area is the blue mountains range . 
legislative power is vested both in the government and in the parliament of jamaica . 
jamaica constitutes an independent commonwealth realm . 
executive power is vested in the queen ,  but exercised mostly by the cabinet of jamaica; led by the prime minister ,  currently andrew holness . 
sugar formed 7.1% of the exports in 1999 and jamaica made up about 4.8% of the total production of sugar in the caribbean . 
by the late 1890, only of jamaica's original of forest remained . 
the unemployment rate in jamaica is about 13.2%  -lrb-  april 2015, statistical institute of jamaica   -rrb-  ,  with youth unemployment more than twice the national rate  -lrb-  38%  -rrb-  . 
in 2000, jamaica experienced its first year of positive growth since 1995.
other fishermen live on the pedro cays ,  to the south of jamaica . 
agricultural production is an important contributor to jamaica's economy . 
by the 1970s ,  jamaica had emerged as a world leader in export of these minerals as foreign investment increased . 
pastures form a good percentage of the land in jamaica . 
tourism is tied with remittances as jamaica's top source of revenue . 
jamaica has deposits of several million tons of gypsum on the southern slopes of the blue mountains . 
jamaica stopped exporting banana in 2008 after suffering from several years of hurricanes that devastated the plantations . 
cocoa is grown throughout jamaica and local sales absorb about 1/3 of the output to be made into instant drinks and confectionery . 
over the last 30 years ,  real per capita gdp increased at an average of just one percent per year ,  making jamaica one of the slowest growing developing countries in the world . 
jamaica was the third-leading producer of bauxite and alumina in 1998, producing 12.6 million tons of bauxite ,  accounting for 10.4% of world production ,  and 3.46 million tons of alumina ,  accounting for 7.4% of world production . 
jamaica ,  which had seen its poverty rate drop almost 20 percent over two decades ,  saw it increase by eight percent in a few years . 
calls from jamaica to the us ,  canada ,  and other nanp caribbean nations ,  are dialed as 1 + nanp area code + 7-digit number . 
phase 2a is the highway between old harbour and ocho rios ,  and phase 2b is the highway between mandeville and montego bay . 
jamaica is an active member of the commonwealth of nations and the non-aligned movement  -lrb-  g-77 -rrb- . 
jan mayen was formed by the jan mayen hotspot . 
jan mayen island is an integral part of the kingdom of norway . 
jan mayen is a norwegian volcanic island situated in the arctic ocean . 
jan mayen consists of two geographically distinct parts . 
jan mayen island has one exploitable natural resource ,  gravel ,  from the site at trongskaret . 
the austrian polar station on jan mayen island was built and equipped in 1882 fully at count wilczek's own expense . 
it has a postal code ,  no-8099 jan mayen ,  but delivery time varies ,  especially during the winter . 
although administered separately ,  in the iso 3166-1 standard jan mayen and svalbard are collectively designated as `` svalbard and jan mayen '' ,  with the two-letter country code `` sj '' . 
during the international polar year 1882–1883 the austro-hungarian north pole expedition stayed one year at jan mayen . 
polar bears appear on jan mayen ,  although in diminished numbers compared with earlier times . 
jan mayen has a hyperoceanic polar climate ,  similar to greenland and svalbard ,  with a köppen classification of `` et '' . 
however much jan mayen may have been known in europe at that time ,  it was subsequently forgotten for some centuries . 
there is no airport on the island ,  nor does the island contain any large terminal or port . 
the us exploring expedition surveyed the island in 1841.
jarvis island  -lrb-  ; formerly known as bunker island ,  or bunker's shoal  -rrb-  is an uninhabited coral island located in the south pacific ocean at  ,  about halfway between hawaii and the cook islands . 
jarvis island was reclaimed by the united states government and colonized from march 26, 1935 onwards ,  under the american equatorial islands colonization project  -lrb-  see also howland island and baker island  -rrb-  . 
in march 1857 the island was claimed for the united states under the guano islands act and formally annexed on february 27, 1858.
the american guano company ,  which was incorporated in 1857, established claims in respect of baker island and jarvis island which was recognized under the u . s . 
all laws of the united states are applicable on the island . 
jersey is not part of the united kingdom ,  and has an international identity separate from that of the uk ,  but the uk is constitutionally responsible for the defence of jersey . 
the latin name `` caesarea '' was also applied to the colony of new jersey as `` nova caesarea '' . 
jersey has a separate relationship to the crown from the other crown dependencies of guernsey and the isle of man ,  although all are held by the monarch of the united kingdom . 
the island of jersey and the other channel islands represent the last remnants of the medieval duchy of normandy that held sway in both france and england . 
the island took the name jersey as a result of viking activity in the area between the 9th and 10th centuries . 
the civil war also divided jersey ,  and while the sympathy of islanders lay with parliament ,  the de carterets  -lrb-  see sir george carteret and sir philippe de carteret ii  -rrb-  held the island for the king . 
because of its position ,  jersey was more or less on a continuous war footing . 
the islands remained part of the duchy of normandy until 1204, when king philip ii augustus of france conquered the duchy from king john of england; thanks to pierre de préaux who decided to support king john ,  the islands remained in the personal possession of the english king and were described as being a peculiar of the crown . 
towards the end of the 17th century ,  jersey strengthened its links with the americas when many islanders emigrated to new england and north east canada . 
methodism arrived in jersey in 1774, brought by fishermen returning from newfoundland . 
the roman name for the channel islands was `` i .  lenuri ''  -lrb-  lenur islands  -rrb-  and were occupied by the britons during their migration to brittany  -lrb-  5th-6th century  -rrb-  . 
although jersey was part of the roman world ,  there is a lack of evidence to give a better understanding of the island during the gallo-roman and early middle ages . 
during the american wars of independence ,  two attempted invasions of the island were made . 
it was 1348 when the black death reached the island ,  ravaging the population . 
jersey is the largest and southernmost of the channel islands . 
the highest point in the island is les platons on the north coast ,  at  . 
<br>0–14 years: 16,1%  -lrb-  male 7,998; female 7,453 -rrb- <br>15–24 years: 14,9%  -lrb-  male 7,243; female 7,000 -rrb- <br>25–54 years: 41,5%  -lrb-  male 19,854; female 19,836 -rrb- <br>55–64 years: 12,1%  -lrb-  male 5,619; female 5,954 -rrb- <br>65 years and over: 15,4%  -lrb-  male 6,307; female 8,468 -rrb-  -lrb-  2013 est .   -rrb- 
<br>0–14 years: 18%  -lrb-  male 8,140; female 7,563 -rrb- <br>15–64 years: 68%  -lrb-  male 30,036; female 30,329 -rrb- <br>65 years and over: 14%  -lrb-  male 5,454; female 7,393 -rrb-  -lrb-  2000 est .   -rrb- 
as one of the crown dependencies ,  jersey is autonomous and self-governing ,  with its own independent legal ,  administrative and fiscal systems . 
at the end of 2008 deposits in jersey banks totalled £206 billion ,  down £6.2 billion from £212.3 billion at the start of the year . 
jersey is one of the top worldwide offshore financial centers it is described by some as a tax haven . 
in 2011 the island's economy ,  as measured by gva ,  declined by 1% to £3.6 billion . 
the first regulated bitcoin fund was established in jersey in july 2014, with the approval of the jersey financial services commission ,  after island leaders expressed a desire for jersey to become a global center for digital currencies . 
there were two stations in st helier:  -lrb-  jr  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  jer  -rrb-  . 
part of the former jersey railway line from st aubin to corbière has been converted into a rail trail for cyclists and walkers . 
historically there were public railway services in the island ,  provided by two railway companies:
the mostly coastal lines operated out of st helier and ran across the southern part of the island ,  reaching gorey harbour in the east and la corbière in the west . 
jersey has a well sign posted island cycle network . 
bus service routes radiate from the liberation station in st helier . 
