the next candidate would be nintendo . 
the nintendo 64 supports 16.8 million colors . 
the nintendo 64, stylized as nintendo and abbreviated as n64, is nintendo's third home video game console for the international market . 
nintendo 64 games are rom cartridge based . 
second-parties of nintendo ,  such as rare ,  helped . 
the nintendo 64 comes in several colors . 
around the end of the 1980s ,  nintendo led the video game industry with its nintendo entertainment system  -lrb-  nes  -rrb-  . 
nintendo's controversial selection of the cartridge medium for the nintendo 64 has been cited as a key factor in nintendo losing its dominant position in the gaming market . 
the aleck 64 is a nintendo 64 design in arcade form ,  designed by seta in cooperation with nintendo ,  and sold from 1998 to 2003 only in japan . 
the nintendo 64 was in heavy demand upon its release . 
most nintendo 64 game cartridges are gray in color ,  but some games have a colored cartridge . 
the nintendo 64 is one of the first gaming consoles to have four controller ports . 
official coverage by nintendo followed later via the `` nintendo power '' website and print magazine . 
the nintendo 64's release date was later delayed again ,  to june 23, 1996.
in its explanation of the delay ,  nintendo claimed it needed more time for nintendo 64 software to mature ,  and for third-party developers to produce games . 
the nintendo 64 received generally positive reviews from critics . 
the nintendo 64 remains one of the most recognized video game systems in history and its games still have impact on the games industry . 
new nintendo 64 game releases were infrequent while new games were coming out rapidly for the playstation . 
the nintendo 64's central processing unit  -lrb-  cpu  -rrb-  is the nec vr4300.
further complicating matters ,  nintendo also faced a backlash from third-party developers unhappy with nintendo's strict licensing policies . 
nintendo successfully outsold sony and sega early in 1997 in the united states; and by the end of its first full year ,  3.6 million units were sold in the u . s .  `` businesswire '' reported that the nintendo 64 was responsible for nintendo's sales having increased by 156% by 1997.
nintendo initially stated that while the nintendo 64 units for each region use essentially identical hardware design ,  regional lockout chips would prevent games from one region from being played on a nintendo 64 console from a different region . 
this announcement coincided with nintendo's august 1993 shoshinkai trade show . 
in february 2001, nano became a part of the gnu project . 
gnu nano ,  like pico ,  is keyboard-oriented ,  controlled with control keys . 
gnu nano was first created in 1999 with the name `` tip ''  -lrb-  `` tip isn't pico ''  -rrb-  ,  by chris allegretta . 
the nieuwe waterweg gives the port of rotterdam its deep-water access to the north sea . 
the point where the nieuwe waterweg enters into the north sea ,  between hook of holland on the north bank and the maasvlakte to the south ,  is called the maasmond . 
in 1872, the nieuwe waterweg was completed and rotterdam was easily accessible . 
the nieuwe waterweg  -lrb-  `` new waterway ''  -rrb-  is a ship canal in the netherlands from het scheur  -lrb-  a branch of the rhine-meuse-scheldt delta  -rrb-  west of the town of maassluis to the north sea at hook of holland: the maasmond ,  where the nieuwe waterweg connects to the maasgeul . 
in 1863, a law was passed that allowed for the provision of a new canal for large ocean-going ships from rotterdam to the north sea . 
the last phase consisted of the removal of the dam separating the new waterway from the sea and river . 
sun lutang from 1915 also published martial arts texts . 
some neijia schools refer to their arts as `` soft style '' martial arts . 
sun lutang identified the following as the criteria that distinguish an internal martial art:
in 1676 huang zongxi's son ,  huang baijia ,  who learned martial arts from wang zhengnan ,  compiled the earliest extant manual of internal martial arts ,  the `` nèijiā quánfǎ '' . 
sun lutang's eponymous style of t'ai chi ch'uan fuses principles from all three arts he named as neijia . 
these styles were enumerated by sun lutang as taijiquan ,  xingyiquan and baguazhang ,  but most also include bajiquan and the legendary wudang sword . 
the term `` neijia '' and the distinction between internal and external martial arts first appears in huang zongxi's 1669 `` epitaph for wang zhengnan '' . 
similar to latitude ,  the longitude of a place on earth is the angular distance east or west of the prime meridian or greenwich meridian . 
roughly ,  the latitude of a place on earth is its angular distance north or south of the equator . 
soon ,  the portuguese sailed further eastward ,  to the spice islands in 1512, landing in china one year later . 
a mariner with a chronometer could check its reading using a lunar determination of greenwich time . 
in navigation ,  a rhumb line  -lrb-  or loxodrome  -rrb-  is a line crossing all meridians of longitude at the same angle ,  i . e . 
if the navigator measures the direction in real life ,  the angle can then be drawn on a nautical chart and the navigator will be on that line on the chart . 
a fictional description based on a true story . 
non-fiction's specific factual assertions and descriptions may or may not be accurate ,  and can give either a true or a false account of the subject in question . 
semi-fiction is fiction implementing a great deal of nonfiction ,  e . g . 
cryptonomicon is a 1999 novel by american author neal stephenson ,  set in two different time periods . 
the action takes place in two periods—world war ii and the late 1990s ,  during the internet boom and asian financial crisis . 
 ''cryptonomicon '' is closer to the genres of historical fiction and contemporary techno-thriller than to the science fiction of stephenson's two previous novels ,  `` snow crash '' and `` the diamond age '' . 
the essay was written before the advent of mac os x . 
 .  .  .  have you embraced the new unix based macos x as the os you want to use when you `` just want to go to disneyland '' ? 
he compares microsoft to disney ,  in that both are selling a vision to their customers ,  who in turn `` want to believe '' in that vision . 
netscape navigator was a proprietary web browser ,  and the original browser of the netscape line ,  from versions 1 to 4.08, and 9.x . 
the netscape navigator web browser was succeeded by the netscape communicator suite in 1997.
the decision came too late for netscape ,  however ,  as internet explorer had by then become the dominant web browser in windows . 
this made the web much more tolerable to the average user . 
through the late 1990s ,  netscape made sure that navigator remained the technical leader among web browsers . 
both microsoft and netscape did this ,  having added many proprietary html tags to their browsers ,  which forced users to choose between two competing and almost incompatible web browsers . 
using this basic code ,  microsoft created internet explorer  -lrb-  ie  -rrb-  . 
the competition between microsoft and netscape dominated the browser wars . 
during development ,  the netscape browser was known by the code name `` mozilla '' ,  which became the name of a godzilla-like cartoon dragon mascot used prominently on the company's web site . 
despite this ,  archived and unsupported versions of the browser remain available for download . 
the latest ie mac release at that time was internet explorer version 3.0 for macintosh ,  but internet explorer 4 was released later that year . 
neurotransmitters are released into and diffuse across the synaptic cleft ,  where they bind to specific receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic neuron . 
some neurons do ,  however ,  communicate via electrical synapses through the use of gap junctions ,  which allow specific ions to pass directly from one cell to another . 
when neutron star core material is presumed to consist mostly of free neutrons ,  it is typically referred to as neutron-degenerate matter in scientific literature . 
although the term is not used in the scientific literature either for a condensed form of matter ,  or as an element ,  there have been reports that ,  besides the free neutron ,  there may exist two bound forms of neutrons without protons . 
science fiction and popular literature frequently use the term `` neutronium '' to refer to a highly dense phase of matter composed primarily of neutrons . 
free neutrons decay with a half-life of 10 minutes and 11 seconds . 
a neutron star has a mass of at least 1.1 and perhaps up to 3 solar masses  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
a neutron star is the collapsed core of a giant star which before collapse had a total of between 10 and 29 solar masses . 
any main-sequence star with an initial mass of above 8 times the mass of the sun  -lrb-    -rrb-  has the potential to produce a neutron star . 
the gravitational field at the neutron star's surface is about  -lrb-  200 billion  -rrb-  times that of the earth . 
at this lower temperature ,  most of the light generated by a neutron star is in x-rays . 
hence ,  the gravitational force of a typical neutron star is huge . 
the energy comes from the gravitational binding energy of a neutron star . 
the gravitational field at a neutron star's surface is about times stronger than on earth ,  at around  . 
the temperature inside a newly formed neutron star is from around 10 to 10 kelvin . 
the name nassau ultimately derives from the town of nassau in germany . 
as the population of nassau grew ,  so did its populated areas . 
nassau developed directly behind the port area . 
cable beach is recognised as the hotel district of nassau . 
in the 1920s and 1930s ,  nassau profited from prohibition in the united states . 
the city centre is the hub for all activities in nassau . 
he oversaw the construction of fort charlotte and fort fincastle in nassau . 
lynden pindling international airport  -lrb-  formerly nassau international airport  -rrb-  is located on the western side of nassau . 
in 1720 the spanish made an unsuccessful attempt to capture nassau . 
nassau  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital and commercial centre of the commonwealth of the bahamas . 
during the wars in the thirteen colonies ,  nassau experienced an economic boom . 
public jitney buses and taxis provide transport in and around nassau . 
kinski reteamed with wenders for the 1984 film `` paris ,  texas '' . 
kinski was born in berlin as nastassja aglaia nakszynski . 
kinski met the director roman polanski at a party in 1976.
kinski began working as a model as a teenager in germany . 
kinski is fluent in four languages: german ,  english ,  french and italian . 
nastassja aglaia kinski  -lrb-  born 24 january 1961 -rrb- is a german actress and former model who has appeared in more than 60 films in europe and the united states . 
the nuremberg trials  -lrb-    -rrb-  were a series of military tribunals held by the allied forces under international law and the laws of war after world war ii . 
because the court was limited to violations of the laws of war ,  it did not have jurisdiction over crimes that took place before the outbreak of war on 1 september 1939.
the first and best known of these trials was that of the major war criminals before the international military tribunal  -lrb-  imt  -rrb-  . 
a precedent for trying those accused of war crimes had been set at the end of world war i in the leipzig war crimes trials held in may to july 1921 before the `` reichsgericht ''  -lrb-  german supreme court  -rrb-  in leipzig ,  although these had been on a very limited scale and largely regarded as ineffectual . 
10 at the u . s .  nuremberg military tribunal  -lrb-  nmt  -rrb-  ,  which included the doctors' trial and the judges' trial . 
the definition of what constitutes a war crime is described by the nuremberg principles ,  a set of guidelines document which was created as a result of the trial . 
the trials were to commence on 20 november 1945, in the bavarian city of nuremberg . 
some 200 german war crimes defendants were tried at nuremberg ,  and 1,600 others were tried under the traditional channels of military justice . 
as a compromise with the soviets ,  it was agreed that while the location of the trial would be nuremberg ,  berlin would be the official home of the tribunal authorities . <ref name= ''pro-lco-2/2980-1 ''></ref><ref name= ''pro-lco-2/2980-2 ''></ref> it was also agreed that france would become the permanent seat of the imt and that the first trial  -lrb-  several were planned  -rrb-  would take place in nuremberg . 
tom steyer's father roy henry steyer was also a prosecutor at the nuremberg trials . 
stott despoja became the leader of her party on 6 april 2001.
stott despoja was born in adelaide to shirley stott despoja ,  an australian-born journalist and mario despoja ,  who was from croatia  -lrb-  then part of yugoslavia  -rrb-  . 
natasha jessica stott despoja am  -lrb-  born 9 september 1969 -rrb- was australia's ambassador for women and girls . 
currently stott despoja is a board member of non-profit organisations the south australian museum and the museum of australian democracy  -lrb-  moad  -rrb-  . 
stott despoja is an honorary visiting research fellow at the university of adelaide . 
stott despoja was appointed to the senate at the age of 26, and was the youngest woman to sit in the parliament of australia . 
stott despoja regularly attends the sydney gay and lesbian mardi gras . 
the origin of the nuremberg code began in pre–world war ii german politics ,  particularly during the 1930s and 1940s . 
the nuremberg code  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a set of research ethics principles for human experimentation created as a result of the nuremberg trials at the end of the second world war . 
the nuremberg code has not been officially accepted as law by any nation or as official ethics guidelines by any association . 
nim is typically played as a `` misère '' game ,  in which the player to take the last object loses . 
this is called normal play because the last move is a winning move in most games ,  even though it is not the normal way that nim is played . 
only tame games can be played using the same strategy as misère nim . 
the goal of the game is to avoid taking the last object . 
anne `` ninon '' de l'enclos also spelled ninon de lenclos and ninon de lanclos  -lrb-  10 november 1620 – 17 october 1705 -rrb- was a french author ,  courtesan ,  and patron of the arts . 
a picture of ninon ,  under the name of damo ,  was sketched in mlle de scudéry's `` clélie ''  -lrb-  1654–1661 -rrb- . 
dorothy parker wrote the poem `` ninon de l'enclos on her last birthday '' and also referred to ninon in another of her poems ,  `` words of comfort to be scratched on a mirror '' ,  writing ,  `` ninon was ever the chatter of france . `` 
impressed ,  christina wrote to cardinal mazarin on ninon's behalf and arranged for her release . 
nist laboratories include:
nist had an operating budget for fiscal year 2007  -lrb-  october 1, 2006september 30, 2007 -rrb- of about $843.3 million . 
due to a changing mission ,  the `` national bureau of standards '' became the `` national institute of standards and technology '' in 1988.
nist is headquartered in gaithersburg ,  maryland ,  and operates a facility in boulder ,  colorado . 
nist ,  known between 1901 and 1988 as the national bureau of standards  -lrb-  nbs  -rrb-  ,  is a measurement standards laboratory ,  also known as a national metrological institute  -lrb-  nmi  -rrb-  ,  which is a non-regulatory agency of the united states department of commerce . 
nato maintains lists of the names . 
the soviet union did not always assign official `` popular names '' to its aircraft ,  but unofficial nicknames were common as in any air force . 
according to the talmud ,  the rabbis agree that the seven laws were given to the sons of noah . 
the seven laws of noah  -lrb-   `` sheva mitzvot b'nei noach ''  -rrb-  ,  also referred to as the noahide laws or the noachide laws  -lrb-  from the hebrew pronunciation of `` noah ''  -rrb-  ,  are a set of imperatives which ,  according to the talmud ,  were given by god as a binding set of laws for the `` children of noah '' – that is ,  all of humanity . 
many contemporary naturists and naturist organisations feel that the practice of social nudity should be asexual . 
current research has begun to explore this complex relationship . 
nordea is the result of the successive mergers and acquisitions of the swedish ,  finnish ,  danish and norwegian banks of nordbanken ,  merita bank ,  unibank and kreditkassen  -lrb-  christiania bank og kreditkasse  -rrb-  that took place between 1997 and 2000.
merita bank was a 1995 merger of the former main rivals in finland ,  the originally svecoman union bank of finland  -lrb-  `` suomen yhdyspankki ''  -rrb-  founded in 1842 and the fennoman national share bank  -lrb-  `` kansallis-osake-pankki ''  -rrb-  founded in 1889.
normal subgroups  -lrb-  and `` only '' normal subgroups  -rrb-  can be used to construct quotient groups from a given group . 
in abstract algebra ,  a normal subgroup is a subgroup that is invariant under conjugation by members of the group of which it is a part . 
munkar and nakir bear some similarity to zoroastrian divinities . 
astrologically ,  munkar and nakir share more clues in their martian characteristics which connect them to nergal . 
meanwhile ,  napalm b became a symbol for the vietnam war . 
napalm was also widely used by the united states during the korean war . 
napalm was used in flamethrowers ,  bombs and tanks in world war ii . 
napalm is effective against dug-in enemy personnel . 
napalm b is the more modern version of napalm  -lrb-  utilizing styrene derivatives  -rrb-  and ,  although distinctly different in its chemical composition ,  is often referred to simply as `` napalm '' . 
other instances of napalm's use include by france during the first indochina war  -lrb-  1946–1954 -rrb- ,  the algerian war  -lrb-  1954–1962 -rrb- ,  the portuguese colonial war  -lrb-  1961–1974 -rrb- ,  the six-day war by israel  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- ,  in nigeria  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- ,  india and pakistan  -lrb-  1965 and 1971 -rrb- ,  egypt  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- ,  by morocco during the western sahara war  -lrb-  1975–1991 -rrb- ,  by argentina  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- ,  by iran  -lrb-  1980–88 -rrb- ,  by iraq  -lrb-  1980–88, 1991 -rrb- ,  by angola during the angolan civil war ,  and yugoslavia  -lrb-  1991–1996 -rrb- . 
napalm was first employed in incendiary bombs and went on to be used as fuel for flamethrowers . 
from 1965 to 1969, the dow chemical company manufactured napalm b for the american armed forces . 
the territory of the former principality of jersika was divided by the bishop of rīga and the livonian order in 1239.
soon thereafter ,  the livonian order established a stone fort at pöide . 
in 1245 pope innocent iv allotted two thirds of conquered courland to the livonian order ,  and one third to the bishopric of courland . 
the most notable campaigns were the livonian and prussian crusades . 
after their decisive defeat in the battle of saule by the samogitians and semigallians ,  the remnants of the swordbrothers were reorganized in 1237 as a subdivision of the teutonic order ,  and became known as the livonian order . 
when the livonian knights were crushed by samogitians in the battle of saule in 1236, coinciding with a series of revolts in estonia ,  the livonian order was inherited by the teutonic order ,  allowing the teutonic knights to exercise political control over large territories in the baltic region . 
the christian kingdoms of denmark and sweden were also greedy for conquests on the eastern shores of the baltic . 
in 1206, a danish army led by king valdemar ii and andreas ,  the bishop of lund landed on saaremaa and attempted to establish a stronghold without success . 
eventually ,  the whole of northern estonia came under danish control . 
the latter one was led by the bishop of lund anders sunesen with his brother . 
the german crusaders enlisted newly baptised livonian warriors to participate in their campaigns against latgallians and selonians  -lrb-  1208–1209 -rrb- ,  estonians  -lrb-  1208–1227 -rrb- and against semigallians ,  samogitians and curonians  -lrb-  1219–1290 -rrb- . 
both neoteny and progenesis cause the retention in adults of traits previously seen only in the young . 
neoteny is commonly seen in flightless insects like the females in the order strepsiptera . 
when the nutrition of a host plant is abundant ,  aphids may not grow wings ,  remaining on the host plant for the duration of their lives; however ,  if the resources become diminished ,  their offspring may develop wings in order to disperse to other host plants . 
some authors define paedomorphism as the retention of larval traits ,  as seen in salamanders . 
two common environments that tend to favor neoteny are high-altitude and cool environments because neotenous individuals have a higher fitness than those that metamorphose into the adult form . 
bogin points out that kollmann had intended the meaning to be `` retaining youth '' ,  but had evidently confused the greek `` teínein '' with the latin `` tenere '' ,  which had the meaning he wanted ,  `` to retain '' ,  so that the new word would mean `` the retaining of youth  -lrb-  into adulthood  -rrb- ``  . 
neoteny is seen in domesticated animals such as dogs and mice . 
 ''national '' rail should not be confused with `` network rail '' . 
national rail services have a common ticketing structure inherited from british rail . 
the london underground also overlaps with network rail in places . 
northern ireland railways were never part of british rail ,  which was limited to england ,  scotland and wales ,  and therefore are not part of the national rail network . 
oyster pay-as-you-go can be used on national rail in greater london from 2 january 2010.
heathrow express and eurostar are also not part of the national rail network despite sharing of stations  -lrb-  heathrow express also share its route with gwr and tfl rail  -rrb-  . 
on the other hand ,  the largely self-contained merseyrail system is part of the national rail network ,  and urban rail networks around birmingham ,  cardiff ,  glasgow and west yorkshire consist entirely of national rail services . 
since all the previous lo routes were operated by national rail franchise silverlink until november 2007, they have continued to be shown in the national rail timetable and are still considered to be a part of national rail . 
disappearing event horizons exist in the kerr metric ,  which is a spinning black hole in a vacuum . 
in generic black holes ,  this is not a problem ,  as an outside viewer cannot observe the space-time within the event horizon . 
at ligo ,  gravitational waves were first detected after the collision of two black holes ,  known as event gw150914.
transforming the kerr metric to boyer–lindquist coordinates ,  it can be shown that the formula_1 coordinate  -lrb-  which is not the radius  -rrb-  of the event horizon is
fadden stood down in favour of labor leader john curtin . 
it also took part in governments in new south wales ,  victoria ,  and western australia . 
queensland is represented by the liberal national party of queensland . 
queensland is the only state in which the nationals have consistently been the stronger coalition partner . 
blunt's successor as leader ,  tim fischer ,  recovered two seats at the 1993 election ,  but lost an additional 1.2% of the vote from its 1990 result . 
in june 2005 party leader john anderson announced that he would resign from the ministry and as leader of the nationals due to a benign prostate condition ,  he was succeeded by mark vaile . 
the rise of labor in formerly safe national-held areas in rural queensland ,  particularly on the coast ,  has been the biggest threat to the queensland nationals . 
however ,  in the 2012 state election ,  the lnp defeated the labor party in a landslide ,  but lost government in the 2015 landslide to labor ,  also losing in 2018.
federally ,  and in new south wales ,  and to an extent in victoria and historically in western australia ,  it has ,  in government ,  been the minor party in a centre-right coalition with the liberal party of australia ,  and its leader has usually served as deputy prime minister . 
the country party's first senators began their terms in 1926, but the party had no official leader in the upper chamber until 1935.
the deputy leader of the nationals ,  since 7 december 2017, is bridget mckenzie . 
however ,  both outgoing nationals leader peter ryan and incoming liberal leader matthew guy indicated they felt the coalition should continue . 
the continued success of the australian labor party at a state level has put pressure on the nationals' links with the liberal party ,  their traditional coalition partner . 
they reconciled after the burke labor government came to power in 1983.
western australia's one-vote-one-value reforms will cut the number of rural seats in the state assembly to reflect the rural population level: this ,  coupled with the liberals' strength in country areas has put the nationals under significant pressure . 
traditionally ,  the leader of the national party serves as deputy prime minister when the coalition is in government . 
the national party of australia  -lrb-  also known as the nationals or simply ,  the nats  -rrb-  is an australian political party . 
in september 2008, joyce replaced clp senator and nationals deputy leader nigel scullion as leader of the nationals in the senate ,  and stated that his party in the upper house would no longer necessarily vote with their liberal counterparts in the upper house ,  which opened up another possible avenue for the rudd labor government to get legislation through . 
the major difference is that rna ,  rather than dna ,  is analyzed in the northern blot . 
the northern blot ,  or rna blot ,  is a technique used in molecular biology research to study gene expression by detection of rna  -lrb-  or isolated mrna  -rrb-  in a sample . 
the advantage that microarrays have over northern blots is that thousands of genes can be visualized at a time ,  while northern blotting is usually looking at one or a small number of genes . 
blotbase is an online database publishing northern blots . 
probes for northern blotting are composed of nucleic acids with a complementary sequence to all or part of the rna of interest ,  they can be dna ,  rna ,  or oligonucleotides with a minimum of 25 complementary bases to the target sequence . 
most narrow-gauge railways are between and  . 
it has about of track . 
gauge railways are commonly used for rack railways . 
these railways were usually built to the same narrow gauge as the mine railways from which they developed . 
a narrow-gauge railway  -lrb-  narrow-gauge railroad in the us  -rrb-  is a railway with a track gauge narrower than standard  . 
in general ,  a narrow-gauge railway is narrower than  . 
the choice was often not between a narrow- and standard-gauge railway ,  but between a narrow-gauge railway and none at all . 
the speed record for narrow-gauge rail is  ,  set in south africa in 1978.
the heavy-duty narrow-gauge railways in queensland ,  south africa and new zealand demonstrate that if track is built to a heavy-duty standard ,  performance almost as good as a standard-gauge line is possible . 
 ,  and were used in europe . 
for example ,  if a curve with standard-gauge rail can allow speed up to  ,  the same curve with narrow-gauge rail can only allow speed up to  . 
a special gauge railcar was built for the otavi mining and railway company with a design speed of 137 km/h . 
neutron activation analysis  -lrb-  naa  -rrb-  is a nuclear process used for determining the concentrations of elements in a vast amount of materials . 
naa can also be used to determine the activity of a radioactive sample . 
naa can vary according to a number of experimental parameters . 
for example ,  an x on the tape in state 3 might allow the ntm to: or
how does the ntm `` know '' which of these actions it should take ? 
however ,  it is possible to simulate ntms with dtms ,  and in fact this can be done in more than one way . 
the 3-tape dtms are easily simulated with a normal single-tape dtm . 
ntms include dtms as special cases ,  so every computation that can be carried out by a dtm can also be carried out by the equivalent ntm . 
if at least one branch of the tree halts with an `` accept '' condition ,  we say that the ntm accepts the input . 
the most straightforward way to avoid nitrogen narcosis is for a diver to limit the depth of dives . 
narcosis may be completely reversed in a few minutes by ascending to a shallower depth ,  with no long-term effects . 
once stabilized ,  the effects generally remain the same at a given depth ,  only worsening if the diver ventures deeper . 
there is no reliable method to predict the depth at which narcosis becomes noticeable ,  or the severity of the effect on an individual diver ,  as it may vary from dive to dive even on the same day . 
these effects are particularly dangerous because a diver may feel they are not experiencing narcosis ,  yet still be affected by it . 
due to its perception-altering effects ,  the onset of narcosis may be hard to recognize . 
a divers' cognition may be affected on dives as shallow as  ,  but the changes are not usually noticeable . 
because of similar and additive effects ,  divers should avoid sedating medications and drugs ,  such as cannabis and alcohol before any dive . 
narcosis while diving  -lrb-  also known as nitrogen narcosis ,  inert gas narcosis ,  raptures of the deep ,  martini effect  -rrb-  is a reversible alteration in consciousness that occurs while diving at depth . 
tests have shown that all divers are affected by nitrogen narcosis ,  though some experience lesser effects than others . 
it can occur during shallow dives ,  but does not usually become noticeable at depths less than  . 
the nsa sorts a fraction of those into 70 separate databases . `` 
the investigation also uncovered nsa's wiretaps on targeted u . s .  citizens . 
due to its ultra-secrecy the u . s .  intelligence community referred to the nsa as `` no such agency '' . 
most of the disclosures were leaked by former nsa contractor ,  edward snowden . 
the nsa relies on a variety of measures to accomplish its mission ,  the majority of which are clandestine . 
the massive extent of the nsa's spying ,  both foreign and domestic ,  was revealed to the public in a series of detailed disclosures of internal nsa documents beginning in june 2013.
the nsa mounted a major effort to secure tactical communications among u . s .  forces during the war with mixed success . 
nsa employees must be retired for more than fifteen years to qualify for the memorial . 
originating as a unit to decipher coded communications in world war ii ,  it was officially formed as the nsa by president harry s .  truman in 1952.
in 1986, the nsa intercepted the communications of the libyan government during the immediate aftermath of the berlin discotheque bombing . 
nsa's infrastructure deteriorated in the 1990s as defense budget cuts resulted in maintenance deferrals . 
the nervous system contains two main categories or types of cells: neurons and glial cells . 
the nervous system of vertebrates  -lrb-  including humans  -rrb-  is divided into the central nervous system  -lrb-  cns  -rrb-  and the peripheral nervous system  -lrb-  pns  -rrb-  . 
the brain is also protected by the skull ,  and the spinal cord by the vertebrae . 
all animals more advanced than sponges have nervous systems . 
sponges have no cells connected to each other by synaptic junctions ,  that is ,  no neurons ,  and therefore no nervous system . 
at the cellular level ,  the nervous system is defined by the presence of a special type of cell ,  called the neuron ,  also known as a `` nerve cell '' . 
at the most basic level ,  the function of the nervous system is to send signals from one cell to others ,  or from one part of the body to others . 
the  -lrb-  cns  -rrb-  is the major division ,  and consists of the brain and the spinal cord . 
mauthner cells have been described as command neurons . 
the central nervous system functions to send signals from one cell to others ,  or from one part of the body to others and to receive feedback . 
the peripheral nervous system  -lrb-  pns  -rrb-  is a collective term for the nervous system structures that do not lie within the cns . 
the nervous system is defined by the presence of a special type of cell—the neuron  -lrb-  sometimes called `` neurone '' or `` nerve cell ''  -rrb-  . 
the development of the nervous system in radiata is relatively unstructured . 
along with neurons ,  the nervous system contains other specialized cells called glial cells  -lrb-  or simply glia  -rrb-  ,  which provide structural and metabolic support . 
the size of the nervous system ranges from a few hundred cells in the simplest worms ,  to around 300 billion cells in african elephants . 
at a more integrative level ,  the primary function of the nervous system is to control the body . 
nervous systems are found in most multicellular animals ,  but vary greatly in complexity . 
furthermore ,  there are projections from the brain to the spinal cord that are capable of enhancing or inhibiting the reflex . 
the basic neuronal function of sending signals to other cells includes a capability for neurons to exchange signals with each other . 
the central nervous system is protected by major physical and chemical barriers . 
a nutcracker is a tool designed to open nuts by cracking their shells . 
some nuts such as walnuts can also be opened by hand ,  by holding the nut in the palm of the hand and applying pressure with the other palm or thumb ,  or using another nut . 
nuts were historically opened using a hammer and anvil ,  often made of stone . 
in this case ,  the pivot point stands opposite the nut ,  at the jaw . 
many animals shell nuts to eat them ,  including using tools . 
abildgaard's professor johan edvard mandelberg supplied the decorations to the room . 
abildgaard was married twice ,  in 1781 and 1803.
nicolai abraham abildgaard  -lrb-  september 11, 1743 – june 4, 1809 -rrb- was a danish neoclassical and royal history painter ,  sculptor ,  architect ,  and professor of painting ,  mythology ,  and anatomy at the new royal danish academy of art in copenhagen ,  denmark . 
he left rome in june 1777 with the hope of becoming professor at the academy in copenhagen . 
there are about 29 national parks in pakistan and about 18 in khyber pakhtunkhwa . 
in 2010 the province was renamed `` khyber pakhtunkhwa . `` 
sikh settlers from punjab were settled in the khyber pakhtunkhwa region . 
khyber pakhtunkhwa was thought to be another leftist region of the country after sindh . 
mughal suzerainty over the khyber pakhtunkhwa region was partially established after babar ,  the founder of the mughal empire ,  invaded the region in 1505 ce via the khyber pass . 
the administration of the pata districts is vested in the president of pakistan and the governor of khyber pakhtunkhwa ,  by articles 246 and 247 of the constitution of pakistan but after fata-kp merger ,  the administration of both pata and fata is transferred to khyber pakhtunkhwa government . 
 ''khyber pakhtunkhwa '' means the `` khyber part of the land of the pashtuns  -lrb-  or pakhtuns  -rrb- ``  ,  while only the word `` pakhtunkhwa '' means `` land of pashtuns '' ,  and according to some scholars ,  it means `` pashtun culture and society '' . 
the climate of khyber pakhtunkhwa varies immensely for a region of its size ,  encompassing most of the many climate types found in pakistan . 
the sikh empire annexed the khyber pakhtunkhwa region following advances from the armies of hari singh nalwa . 
khyber pakhtunkhwa is divided into seven divisions – bannu ,  dera ismail khan ,  hazara ,  kohat ,  malakand ,  mardan and peshawar plus seven agencies of fata ,  which are now part of khyber pakhtunkhwa – each under an appointed commissioner . 
the seasonality of rainfall in central khyber pakhtunkhwa shows very marked gradients from east to west . 
khyber pakhtunkhwa  -lrb-  abbreviated as kp or kpk; ;   -rrb-  is one of the four administrative provinces of pakistan ,  located in the northwestern region of the country along the international border with afghanistan . 
during the times of indus valley civilization  -lrb-  3300 bce – 1300 bce  -rrb-  the modern khyber pakhtunkhwa's khyber pass ,  through hindu kush provided a route to other neighbouring regions and was used by merchants on trade excursions . 
on the other hand ,  mirzali khan and his followers refused to recognise pakistan ,  and launched a campaign against pakistan . 
from 1500 bce ,  indo-aryan peoples started to enter in the region -lrb-  of modern-day iran ,  pakistan ,  afghanistan ,  north india  -rrb-  after having passed khyber pass . 
khyber pakhtunkhwa is also the main theater for pakistan's zarb-e-azb operation – a broad military campaign against militants located in the province ,  and neighboring fata . 
immediately prior to the creation of pakistan in 1947, the british held a referendum in the nwfp to allow voters to choose between joining pakistan or india . 
khyber pakhtunkhwa has been a site of militancy and terrorism that started after the attacks of september 11, 2001, and intensified when the pakistani taliban began an attempt to seize power in pakistan starting in 2004.
as of july 2014, about 929,859 people were reported to be internally displaced from north waziristan to khyber pakhtunkhwa as a result of operation zarb-e-azb . 
the khyber pakhtunkhwa assembly then approved the historic fata-kp merger bill on 28 may 2018 making fata officially part of khyber pakhtunkhwa ,  which was then signed by president mamnoon hussain ,  completing the process of this historic merger . 
rather than re-appointing jehandad khan of khattak ,  ranjit singh selected yar muhammad khan to once again rule the region . 
on march 2, 2017, the government of pakistan considered a proposal to merge the federally administered tribal areas with khyber pakhtunkhwa ,  and to repeal the frontier crimes regulations ,  which are currently applicable to the tribal areas . 
the ancient region of peukelaotis  -lrb-  modern hashtnagar ,  north-west of peshawar  -rrb-  submitted to the greek invasion ,  leading to nicanor ,  a macedonian ,  being appointed satrap of the country west of the indus ,  which includes the modern khyber pakhtunkhwa province . 
after ranjit singh's departure from the region ,  khattak's rule was undermined and power seized by yar muhammad khan . 
as the region came under british control ,  as had been agreed to by the afghan government following the british victory over afghanistan in the second anglo-afghan war and after the treaty ending third anglo-afghan war ,  no option was available to cede the territory to the rule of the afghan king even though afghanistan continued to claim the entire region as it was part of the durrani empire prior the conquest of the region by the sikhs in 1818.
british east india company defeated the sikhs during the second anglo-sikh war in 1849, and incorporated small parts of the region into the province of punjab . 
following the collapse of ghaznavid rule ,  local pashtuns of the delhi sultanate controlled the region . 
naiad  -lrb-   or ;   -rrb-  ,  also known as neptune iii ,  is the innermost satellite of neptune ,  named after the naiads of greek legend . 
naiad was discovered sometime before mid-september 1989 from the images taken by the `` voyager 2 '' probe . 
some of the constituent groups of nilo-saharan are estimated to predate the african neolithic . 
the constituent families of nilo-saharan are quite diverse . 
as indicated by its hyphenated name ,  nilo-saharan is a family of the african interior ,  including the greater nile basin and the central sahara desert . 
nuclear pore complexes allow the transport of molecules across the nuclear envelope . 
the entire nuclear pore complex has a diameter of about 120 nanometers in vertebrates . 
rna polymerase i transcribes most rrna transcripts 28s ,  18s ,  and 5.8s  -rrb-  but the 5s rrna subunit  -lrb-  component of the 60s ribosomal subunit  -rrb-  is transcribed by rna polymerase iii . 
in ribosome biogenesis ,  two of the three eukaryotic rna polymerases  -lrb-  pol i and iii  -rrb-  are required ,  and these function in a coordinated manner . 
in yeast ,  the 5s rdna sequence is localized in the intergenic spacer and is transcribed in the nucleolus by rna pol . 
it is now known that long noncoding rnas originating from intergenic regions of the nucleolus are responsible for this phenomenon . 
in 1966 max l .  birnstiel and collaborators showed via nucleic acid hybridization experiments that dna within nucleoli code for ribosomal rna . 
the mass of the proton and neutron is quite similar: the proton is or  ,  while the neutron is or  . 
the proton and neutron are both baryons and both fermions . 
in the quark model with su -lrb-  2 -rrb- flavour ,  the two nucleons are part of the ground state doublet . 
if the radius of the bag is set to the radius of the nucleon ,  the bag model predicts a nucleon mass that is within 30% of the actual mass . 
the number of nucleons in a nucleus defines an isotope's mass number  -lrb-  nucleon number  -rrb-  . 
protons and neutrons are best known in their role as nucleons ,  i . e .  ,  as the components of atomic nuclei ,  but they also exist as free particles . 
and inside still other nuclides ,  both protons and neutrons are stable and do not change form . 
the magnetic moment of a proton ,  denoted μ ,  is  ,  while the magnetic moment of a neutron is μ =  . 
in chemistry and physics ,  a nucleon is either a proton or a neutron ,  considered in its role as a component of an atomic nucleus . 
according to the stories that developed about him ,  chauvin was born in rochefort ,  around 1780.
his name is the eponym of `` chauvinism '' ,  originally a term for excessive nationalistic fervor ,  but later used to refer to any form of bigotry or bias  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  male chauvinism  -rrb-  . 
while nicotinic acid  -lrb-  niacin  -rrb-  may be used ,  nicotinamide has the benefit of not causing skin flushing . 
nintendo initially showcased three games for the virtual boy . 
the hobbyist community at `` planet virtual boy '' has developed virtual boy software . 
the virtual boy is nintendo's second lowest-selling platform after the 64dd . 
nintendo of america showed the virtual boy at the consumer electronics show on january 6, 1995.
however ,  nintendo pushed the virtual boy to market so that it could focus development resources on the nintendo 64.
a virtual boy can be an opponent in the minigame `` tomodachi quest '' . 
the virtual boy was a 32-bit table-top video game console developed and manufactured by nintendo . 
while nintendo had promised a virtual reality experience ,  the monochrome display limits the virtual boy's potential for immersion . 
the virtual boy was panned by critics and was a commercial failure . 
howard lincoln ,  chairman of nintendo of america ,  said flatly that the virtual boy `` just failed . `` 
 ''the new york times '' previewed the virtual boy on november 13, 1994.
in ``  '' ,  the virtual boy is a furniture prize that can be obtained from a fortune cookie . 
the virtual boy was overwhelmingly panned by critics and was a commercial failure . 
a number of technology demonstrations were used to show the virtual boy's capabilities . 
a network service access point address  -lrb-  nsap address  -rrb-  ,  defined in iso/iec 8348, is an identifying label for a service access point  -lrb-  sap  -rrb-  used in osi networking . 
nsap addresses do not specify where a network terminal is located . 
 ''nr-1 ''s size limited its crew comforts . 
through the 1970s and 1980s ,  `` nr-1 '' conducted numerous classified missions involving recovery of objects from the floor of the deep sea . 
 ''nr-1 '' remained submerged and on station even when heavy weather and rough seas hit the area and forced all other search and recovery ships into port . 
 ''nr-1 '' could travel submerged at approximately for long periods ,  limited only by consumable supplies—primarily food . 
all personnel who crewed `` nr-1 '' were nuclear-trained and specifically screened and interviewed by the director ,  navy nuclear propulsion program . 
the neo geo pocket is forward compatible with the majority of neo geo pocket color titles ,  although games for the color system will play in monochrome on a neo geo pocket . 
likewise ,  the neo geo pocket color is backward compatible and the entire neo geo pocket library can be played on the color system . 
only nine monochrome games were released for the neo geo pocket before it was discontinued:
he was the leader of the labour party and leader of the opposition from 1983 until 1992.
neil gordon kinnock ,  baron kinnock ,   -lrb-  born 28 march 1942 -rrb- is a british labour party politician . 
they have two children – son stephen kinnock  -lrb-  born january 1970, now a labour mp  -rrb-  ,  and daughter rachel kinnock  -lrb-  born 1971 -rrb- . 
kinnock strongly opposes brexit . 
kinnock has been described as an agnostic and an atheist . 
he has been married to glenys kinnock since 1967.
neil kinnock is a cardiff city f . c . 
kinnock announced his resignation as labour party leader on 13 april 1992, ending nearly a decade in the role . 
kinnock ,  an only child ,  was born in tredegar ,  wales . 
in 1988, kinnock was challenged by tony benn for the party leadership . 
he is married to glenys kinnock ,  the uk's minister for africa and the united nations from 2009–2010, and a labour member of the european parliament  -lrb-  mep  -rrb-  from 1994–2009.
significantly ,  labour had gained twenty seats at the election . 
labour overtook the conservatives at the 1989 european elections ,  winning 40% of the vote; the first time labour had finished in first place at a national election in fifteen years . 
following labour's defeat at the 1979 general election ,  james callaghan appointed neil kinnock to the shadow cabinet as education spokesman . 
kinnock led the labour party to a surprise fourth consecutive defeat at the 1992 general election ,  despite the party being ahead in most opinion polls ,  which had predicted either a narrow labour victory or a hung parliament . 
in the three years leading up to the 1992 general election ,  labour had consistently topped the opinion polls ,  with 1991 seeing the conservatives  -lrb-  rejuvenated by the arrival of a new leader with john major the previous november  -rrb-  snatch the lead off labour more than once before labour regained it . 
after labour's landslide defeat in june 1983, michael foot resigned as leader aged sixty nine ,  and from the outset it was expected that the much younger kinnock would succeed him . 
opinion polls showed that voters favoured retaining the united kingdom's nuclear weapons ,   -lrb-  labour's policy ,  supported by kinnock ,  was of unilateral nuclear disarmament  -rrb-  ,  and believed that the conservatives would be better than labour at defending the country . 
the conservatives also regained the fulham seat which it had lost to labour at a by-election just over a year earlier . 
netscape navigator was netscape's web browser from versions 1.0–4.8.
under aol ,  netscape's browser development continued until december 2007 when aol announced that the company would stop supporting the netscape browser as of early 2008.
netscape is a brand name associated with the development of the netscape web browser . 
the re-written source code was in the form of the mozilla web browser ,  on which ,  with a few additions ,  netscape 6 was based . 
the gecko engine would later be used to power the mozilla foundation's firefox browser . 
the company's first product was the web browser ,  called `` mosaic netscape 0.9, '' released on october 13, 1994.
the netscape brand remained with aol . 
a new version of the netscape browser ,  netscape navigator 9, based on firefox 2, was released in october 2007.
but netscape easily remained the number one browser for the time being . 
the browser was once dominant but lost to internet explorer and other competitors after the so-called first browser war ,  its market share falling from more than 90 percent in the mid-1990s to less than 1 percent in 2006.
one year later ,  in august 2004, the last version based on mozilla was released: netscape 7.2, based on mozilla 1.7.2.
between 2005 and 2007, netscape's releases became known as `` netscape browser '' . 
although time warner formally disbanded the company in 2003, the latest version of the netscape browser may still be downloaded from netscape's web site . 
as of 2011, aol has continued to use the netscape brand to market a discount internet service provider . 
however ,  the netscape 7.2 web browser  -lrb-  developed in-house rather than with netscape staff ,  with some work outsourced to sun's beijing development center  -rrb-  was released by aol on august 18, 2004.
newfoundland and labrador  -lrb-   ,  ; ; newfoundland irish:   -rrb-  is the most easterly province of canada . 
population of newfoundland and labrador since 1951
newfoundland is roughly triangular . 
 ''the ode to newfoundland '' is still sung at public events in newfoundland and labrador . 
it was never adopted by the newfoundland government . 
human habitation in newfoundland and labrador can be traced back about 9,000 years . 
newfoundland extends between latitudes 46°36′n and 51°38′n . 
newfoundland and labrador has a population of 519,716, more than half of whom live on the avalon peninsula of newfoundland ,  site of the capital and historical early settlement . 
newfoundland officially joined canada at midnight on march 31, 1949.
in 1854 the british government established newfoundland's responsible government . 
st .  john's is the seat of government ,  home to the house of assembly of newfoundland and labrador and to the highest court in the jurisdiction ,  the newfoundland and labrador court of appeal . 
newfoundland and labrador has a wide range of climates and weather ,  due to its geography . 
newfoundland and labrador is the most easterly province in canada ,  and is located at the north-eastern corner of north america . 
since the early 1800s ,  newfoundland and quebec  -lrb-  or lower canada  -rrb-  had been in a border dispute over the labrador region . 
in 1927, however ,  the british government ruled that the area known as modern-day labrador was to be considered part of the dominion of newfoundland . 
from 1763 to 1767 james cook made a detailed survey of the coasts of newfoundland and southern labrador while commander of  . 
newfoundland remained a colony until acquiring dominion status in 1907.
newfoundland's inuttitut name is meaning `` place of many shoals '' . 
in 1796 a franco-spanish expedition again succeeded in raiding the coasts of newfoundland and labrador ,  destroying many of the settlements . 
newfoundland and labrador's present provincial flag ,  designed by newfoundland artist christopher pratt ,  was officially adopted by the legislature on may 28, 1980, and first flown on `` discovery day '' that year . 
the new oxford american dictionary  -lrb-  noad  -rrb-  is a single-volume dictionary of american english compiled by american editors at the oxford university press . 
oxford university press published `` noad2 '' in electronic form in 2006 at the oxfordamericandictionary . com ,  and in 2010, along with the `` oxford dictionary of english '' ,  as part of oxford dictionaries online . 
it is based on a corpus linguistics analysis of oxford's 200 million word database of contemporary american english . 
 ''noad '' is based upon the `` new oxford dictionary of english ''  -lrb-  `` node ''  -rrb-  ,  published in the united kingdom in 1998, although with substantial editing ,  additional entries ,  and the inclusion of illustrations . 
new latin  -lrb-  also called neo-latin or modern latin  -rrb-  was a revival in the use of latin in original ,  scholarly ,  and scientific works between 1375 and 1900.
by 1900, very few new texts were being created in latin for practical purposes ,  and the production of latin texts had become little more than a hobby for latin enthusiasts . 
ecclesiastical latin ,  the form of new latin used in the roman catholic church ,  remained in use throughout the period and after . 
new latin was inaugurated by the triumph of the humanist reform of latin education ,  led by such writers as erasmus ,  more ,  and colet . 
new latin texts are primarily found in early printed editions ,  which present certain features of spelling and the use of diacritics distinct from the latin of antiquity ,  medieval latin manuscript conventions ,  and representations of latin in modern printed editions . 
in secular academic use ,  however ,  new latin declined sharply and then continuously after about 1700.
a diminishing audience combined with diminishing production of latin texts pushed latin into a declining spiral from which it has not recovered . 
coincident with these changes in latin instruction ,  and to some degree motivating them ,  came a concern about lack of latin proficiency among students . 
the protestant reformation  -lrb-  1520–1580 -rrb- ,  though it removed latin from the liturgies of the churches of northern europe ,  may have advanced the cause of the new secular latin . 
though latin and new latin are considered extinct  -lrb-  having no native speakers  -rrb-  ,  large parts of their vocabulary have seeped into english and several germanic languages . 
new latin had no single pronunciation ,  but a host of local variants or dialects ,  all distinct both from each other and from the historical pronunciation of latin at the time of the roman republic and roman empire . 
despite this variation ,  there are some common characteristics to nearly all of the dialects of new latin ,  for instance:
in spelling ,  new latin ,  in all but the earliest texts ,  distinguishes the letter `` u '' from `` v '' and `` i '' from `` j '' . 
at the same time ,  the philological study of latin appeared to show that the traditional methods and materials for teaching latin were dangerously out of date and ineffective . 
but halmos does let us prove that there are certain sets that cannot contain themselves . 
halmos later stated that it was the fastest book he wrote ,  taking about six months ,  and that the book `` wrote itself '' . 
nitrogen can be fixed by lightning converting nitrogen and oxygen into  -lrb-  nitrogen oxides  -rrb-  . 
nitrogen fixation is a process by which nitrogen in the air is converted into ammonia  -lrb-  nh  -rrb-  or related nitrogenous compounds . 
nitrogen fixation is essential to life because fixed inorganic nitrogen compounds are required for the biosynthesis of all nitrogen-containing compounds . 
alternative systems can be used with floor plan instead of maps for indoor robots ,  combined with localization wireless hardware . 
outdoor robots can use gps in a similar way to automotive navigation systems . 
most of mahfouz's early works were set in cairo . 
mahfouz was born into a lower middle-class muslim egyptian family in old cairo in 1911.
the mahfouz family were devout muslims and mahfouz had a strict islamic upbringing . 
mahfouz's central work in the 1950s was the `` cairo trilogy '' ,  which he completed before the july revolution . 
the egyptian revolution of 1919 had a strong effect on mahfouz ,  although he was at the time only seven years old . 
naguib mahfouz  -lrb-   ``  '' ,  ; december 11, 1911 – august 30, 2006 -rrb- was an egyptian writer who won the 1988 nobel prize for literature . 
mahfouz's prose is characterised by the blunt expression of his ideas . 
the nomenklatura system arose early in soviet history . 
self-interest dictated that members of the nomenklatura submit to the control of their patrons in the party . 
the term was popularized in the west by the soviet dissident michael voslenski ,  who in 1970 wrote a book titled `` nomenklatura: the soviet ruling class ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
thus ,  by promoting his clients' careers ,  the patron could advance his own power . 
clients sometimes could attempt to supplant their patron . 
moreover ,  an official could be both a client  -lrb-  in relation to a higher-level patron  -rrb-  and a patron  -lrb-  to other ,  lower-level officials  -rrb-  . 
because a client was beholden to his patron for his position ,  the client was eager to please his patron by carrying out his policies . 
william calvin proposes true replication in the brain ,  whereas edelman opposes the idea that there are true replicators in the brain . 
neural darwinism ,  a large scale theory of brain function by gerald edelman ,  was initially published in 1978, in a book called `` the mindful brain ''  -lrb-  mit press  -rrb-  . 
functional `` distributed ''  -lrb-  widespread  -rrb-  brain circuits thus emerge as a result . 
edelman theorized that cell proliferation ,  cell migration ,  cell death ,  neuron arbor distribution ,  and neurite branching are also governed by similar selective processes . 
edelman goes into some detail about how brain development depends on a variety of cell adhesion molecules  -lrb-  cams  -rrb-  and substrate adhesion molecules  -lrb-  sams  -rrb-  on cell surfaces which allow cells to dynamically control their intercellular binding properties . 
peart has described his time in the band up to this point as `` a dark tunnel . `` 
olivia louise peart was born later that year . 
peart grew up in port dalhousie ,  ontario ,   -lrb-  now part of st .  catharines  -rrb-  . 
peart soon settled into his new position ,  also becoming the band's primary lyricist . 
on december 7, 2015, peart announced his retirement from music in an interview with `` drumhead magazine '' ,  though bandmate geddy lee insisted peart was quoted out of context ,  and suggested peart was `` simply taking a break '' . 
peart wrote the book as a chronicle of his geographical and emotional journey . 
peart was born in a hamilton hospital to glen and betty peart and lived his early years on his family's farm in hagersville ,  on the outskirts of hamilton . 
the band was working hard to establish themselves as a recording act ,  and peart ,  along with the rest of the band ,  began to undertake extensive touring . 
peart had been rush's primary lyricist ,  and he has also published several memoirs about his travels . 
peart officially joined the band on july 29, 1974,  -lrb-  lee's 21st birthday  -rrb-  ,  two weeks before the group's first us tour . 
it has been invoked only once in nato history: by the united states after the september 11 attacks in 2001.
it was the opinion in august 1965 of the us state department ,  the us defense department and the legal division of nato that an attack on the u . s .  state of hawaii would not trigger the treaty ,  but an attack on the other 49 would . 
it has been invoked three times by turkey: once in 2003 over the second persian gulf war  -lrb-  iraq war  -rrb-  ,  once in june 2012 after the shooting down of a turkish military jet ,  and once again in october 2012 after syrian attacks on turkey and their counterattacks . 
in april 2012, turkish pm erdogan considered invoking article 5 of the nato treaty to protect turkish national security in a dispute over the syrian civil war . 
the handover of control to nato took place on 11 august ,  and marked the first time in nato's history that it took charge of a mission outside the north atlantic area . 
it commits each member state to consider an armed attack against `` one '' member state ,  in europe or north america ,  to be an armed attack against `` them all '' . 
the nitronium ion ,   ,  is a cation . 
however ,  dinitrogen pentoxide in liquid or gaseous state is molecular and does not contain nitronium ions . 
the solid form of dinitrogen pentoxide ,  no ,  actually consists of nitronium and nitrate ions ,  so it is an ionic compound ,   ,  not a molecular solid . 
the neo geo was revived along with the brand overall in december 2012 through the introduction of the neo geo x handheld and home system . 
in a 1993 review ,  `` gamepro '' gave the neo geo a `` thumbs up '' . 
in 2009, the neo geo was ranked 19th out of the 25 best video game consoles of all time by video game website ign . 
the last official game by snk for the neo geo system ,  `` samurai shodown v special '' ,  was released in 2004, 14 years after the system's introduction . 
on august 31, 2007, snk stopped offering maintenance and repairs to neo geo home consoles ,  handhelds ,  and games . 
the neo geo was a very powerful system when released ,  more powerful than any video game console at the time ,  and many arcade systems such as rival capcom's cps ,  which did not surpass it until the cp system ii in 1993.
the neo geo originally launched as the mvs  -lrb-  multi video system  -rrb-  coin-operated arcade machine . 
others criticised the functionality of the site . 
 ''neopets '' is consistently one of the `` stickiest '' sites for children's entertainment . 
the site is regularly updated with features like new games ,  items and content . 
it was a contentious issue with the site with regard to the ethics of marketing to children . 
the site's forums and other user-edited spaces were flooded with adult content and obscene images . 
on the weekend of 27–28 june 2015, the site's chat filters ,  designed to prevent adult language and content ,  stopped working . 
items may also be exchanged through trade or auction . 
users may request other users to be `` neofriends '' or block other users from contacting them . 
users can earn neopoints from playing games . 
media conglomerate viacom purchased `` neopets ,  inc . ``  on june 20, 2005 for $160 million and announced plans to focus more on the use of banner ads over the site's existing immersive advertising . 
one currency ,  called neopoints ,  can be earned within the site ,  and the other ,  neocash ,  can either be purchased with real-world money ,  or won by chance in-game . 
