at the same time ,  the colonization of albania by italians was encouraged . 
on 7 april mussolini's troops invaded albania . 
along with the serbian ruled albania ,  there was also the principality of arbër ,  and later the angevin kingdom of albania . 
in 1932 and 1933, albania could not make the interest payments on its loans from the society for the economic development of albania . 
in 1991, ramiz alia became the first president of albania . 
albania would be a part of the ottoman empire until the early 20th century . 
the germans did not exert heavy-handed control over albania's administration . 
after world war i ,  albania was still under the occupation of serbian and italian forces . 
the history of albania forms a part of the history of europe . 
most of the region of modern albania corresponds to the epirus nova . 
these three entities cover the history of albania between the late 12th century ,  until the half of the 14th century ,  when albanian principalities were created through all albania . 
albania's political confusion continued in the wake of world war i . 
after albania signed trade agreements with yugoslavia and greece in 1934, mussolini made a failed attempt to intimidate the albanians by sending a fleet of warships to albania . 
relations between albania and yugoslavia declined ,  however ,  when the albanians began complaining that the yugoslavs were paying too little for albanian raw materials and exploiting albania through the joint stock companies . 
after the surrender of the italian army in september 1943, albania was occupied by the germans . 
it was a rebellion of the respective populations of northern and southern albania that pushed back the serbs and italians behind the recognized borders of albania . 
the serbs ,  who largely dictated yugoslavia's foreign policy after world war i ,  strove to take over northern albania ,  and the greeks sought to control southern albania . 
the communist partisans regrouped and gained control of southern albania in january 1944.
albania had long had considerable strategic importance for italy . 
enver hoxha ,  who ruled albania for four decades ,  died on 11 april 1985.
albania became dependent on soviet aid and know-how after the break with yugoslavia in 1948.
in february 1920, the government moved to tirana ,  which became albania's capital . 
in the mid-9th century ,  most of eastern albania became part of the bulgarian empire . 
mussolini's forces overthrew king zog when italy invaded albania in 1939.
when mussolini took power in italy he turned with renewed interest to albania . 
albania would remain a part of the ottoman empire as the provinces of scutari ,  monastir and janina until 1912.
a short-lived monarchical state known as the principality of albania  -lrb-  1914–1925 -rrb- was succeeded by an even shorter-lived first albanian republic  -lrb-  1925–1928 -rrb- . 
albania achieved a degree of statehood after world war i ,  in part because of the diplomatic intercession of the united states . 
the national liberation war of the albanian people started with the italian invasion in albanian on 7 april 1939 and ended on 28 november 1944.
he would be the first and only albanian to hold the title of president until 1991.
a collection of communists moved quickly after the second world war to subdue all potential political enemies in albania ,  break the country's landowners and minuscule middle class ,  and isolate albania from western powers in order to establish the people's republic of albania . 
world war i interrupted all government activities in albania ,  while the country was split in a number of regional governments . 
a later reference to albanians from the same attaliates ,  regarding the participation of albanians in a rebellion around 1078, is undisputed . 
soviet and central european technical advisers took up residence in albania ,  and the soviet union also sent albania military advisers and built a submarine installation on sazan island . 
enver hoxha and mehmet shehu emerged as communist leaders in albania ,  and are recognized by most western nations . 
after the failure of the eighth crusade ,  charles of anjou turned his attention to albania . 
in repudiating the 1943 mukaj agreement under pressure from the yugoslavs ,  albania's communists had consented to restore kosovo to yugoslavia after the war . 
shortly thereafter ,  yugoslavia became the first country to recognize albania's provisional government . 
despite these gestures ,  tirana was dissatisfied with moscow's economic policy toward albania . 
victor emmanuel iii appointed francesco jacomoni di san savino ,  a former ambassador to albania ,  to represent him in albania as `` lieutenant-general of the king ''  -lrb-  effectively a viceroy  -rrb-  . 
the country's borders ,  however ,  remained unsettled following the vlora war in which all territory  -lrb-  except saseno island  -rrb-  under italian control in albania was relinquished to the albanian state . 
during the period of socialist construction of albania ,  the country saw rapid economic growth . 
in december 1942, more albanian nationalist groups were organized . 
the deal was done behind the albanians' backs . 
austro-hungarian and bulgarian forces then occupied about two-thirds of the country  -lrb-  bulgarian occupation of albania  -rrb-  . 
zog remained sensitive to steadily mounting disillusion with italy's domination of albania . 
the constitution's preamble also boasted that the foundations of religious belief in albania had been abolished . 
the communist partisans defeated the last balli kombëtar forces in southern albania by mid-summer 1944 and encountered only scattered resistance from the balli kombëtar and legality when they entered central and northern albania by the end of july . 
in supporting the independence of albania ,  the great powers were assisted by aubrey herbert ,  a british mp who passionately advocated the albanian cause in london . 
in 1204, after western crusaders sacked constantinople ,  venice won nominal control over parts of albania and took possession of durrës . 
the parliament elected albania's largest landowner ,  shefqet bej verlaci ,  as prime minister . 
zog refused to accept money in exchange for countenancing a full italian takeover and colonization of albania . 
in the second quarter of the 19th century ,  after the fall of the albanian pashaliks and the massacre of the albanian beys ,  an albanian national awakening took place and many revolts against the ottoman empire were organized . 
several illyrian tribes that resided in the region of albania were the ardiaei ,  taulantii and albanoi in central albania ,  the parthini ,  the abri and the caviii in the north ,  the enchelei in the east ,  the bylliones in the south and several others . 
during the same voyage he also named the islands to the north of new caledonia the new hebrides  -lrb-  now vanuatu  -rrb-  ,  after the islands north of scotland . 
the human history of the solomon islands begins with the first settlement at least 30,000 years ago from new guinea . 
history of the pacific islands covers the history of the islands in the pacific ocean . 
they appear to have occupied these islands as far east as the main islands in the solomon islands  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  including san cristobal  -rrb-  and perhaps even to the smaller islands farther to the east . 
european explorers – first the portuguese in search of the spice islands  -lrb-  indonesia  -rrb-  and then the spanish – reached the carolines in the 16th century ,  with the spanish establishing sovereignty . 
in 1568 spanish navigator álvaro de mendaña was the first european to sail through the islands and sighted nui during his expedition in search of terra australis . 
europeans did not return until 1768, when louis antoine de bougainville rediscovered the islands . 
mendaña visited first fatu hiva and then tahuata before continuing on to the solomon islands . 
the country is named after british captain captain james cook who surveyed and landed on some of the islands between 1774 and 1777.
a referendum was held in december 1974 to determine whether the gilbert islands and ellice islands should each have their own administration . 
colonization took place thereafter and the island was declared as a part of the british empire . 
the history of the niue island can be traced back to a 1,000 years when the polynesian settles came here . 
westerners arrived in caroline islands in 1525, by the portuguese diogo da rocha and his pilot gomes de sequeira ,  naming them the `` sequeira islands '' . 
the ellice islands were administered as british protectorate by a resident commissioner from 1892 to 1916 as part of the british western pacific territories  -lrb-  bwpt  -rrb-  ,  and later as part of the gilbert and ellice islands colony from 1916 to 1974.
brunei was a british protectorate from 1888 to 1984.
the island country became independent in 1974 but still have a free association agreement with new zealand and many of its citizens have become citizens of new zealand . 
later ,  dutch ,  french and british navigators visited the islands; their reception was often hostile . 
in march 1857 the uninhabited island was claimed for the united states under the guano islands act and formally annexed on 27 february 1858.
a multi-course harp is a harp with more than one row of strings ,  as opposed to the more common `` single course '' harp . 
the longest side of the harp is called the column or pillar ,  though some earlier harps ,  such as a `` bow harp '' ,  lack a pillar . 
the laser harp is not a stringed instrument at all ,  but is a harp-shaped synthesized electronic instrument that has laser beams where harps have strings . 
a number of non-harp-like instruments are colloquially referred to as `` harps '' . 
the harp has been used as a political symbol of ireland for centuries . 
the harp is also traditionally used on the flag of leinster . 
though these harps evoke ties to historical european harps ,  their specifics are modern ,  and they are frequently referred to broadly as `` celtic '' harps due to their region of revival and popular association ,  or more generically as `` folk '' harps due to their use in non-classical music ,  or as `` lever '' harps to contrast their modifying mechanism with the larger pedal harp . 
harps vary globally in many ways . 
the harp largely became extinct in east asia by the 17th century; around the year 1000 harps like the `` vajra '' began to replace preceding harps . 
in the americas ,  harps are widely but sparsely distributed ,  except in certain regions where the harp traditions are very strong . 
the term `` harp '' has also been applied to many instruments which are not chordophones . 
the harp was popular in ancient china and neighboring regions ,  though harps are largely extinct in east asia in the modern day . 
harps are essentially triangular and made primarily of wood . 
while one course of european harps led to greater complexity ,  resulting largely in the modern pedal harp ,  other harping traditions maintained simpler diatonic instruments which survived and evolved into modern traditions . 
the inline chromatic harp is generally a single-course harp with all 12 notes of the chromatic scale appearing in a single row . 
the modern celtic harp began to appear in the early 19th century in ireland ,  contemporary with the dying-out of earlier forms of gaelic harp . 
around 1900 bc arched harps in the iraq–iran region were replaced by angular harps with vertical or horizontal sound boxes . 
the hollow earth is a historical concept proposing that the planet earth is entirely hollow or contains a substantial interior space . 
this has been called the `` concave '' hollow earth hypothesis or skycentrism . 
the concept of a hollow earth still recurs in folklore and as the premise for subterranean fiction ,  and a subgenre of adventure fiction  -lrb-  `` journey to the center of the earth '' ,  `` at the earth's core ''  -rrb-  . 
he supported the idea of a hollow earth ,  but without interior shells or inner sun . 
hollow earth proponents have claimed a number of different locations for the entrances which lead inside the earth . 
another set of scientific arguments against a hollow earth or any hollow planet comes from gravity . 
the picture of the structure of the earth that has been arrived at through the study of seismic waves is quite different from the hollow earth hypothesis . 
jeremiah reynolds also delivered lectures on the `` hollow earth '' and argued for an expedition . 
gardner rejects the concave hollow earth hypothesis on the basis of occam's razor . 
an early twentieth-century proponent of hollow earth ,  william reed ,  wrote `` phantom of the poles '' in 1906.
marshall gardner wrote `` a journey to the earth's interior '' in 1913 and published an expanded edition in 1920.
in ancient times ,  the concept of a subterranean land inside the earth appeared in mythology ,  folklore and legends . 
in one chapter of his book `` on the wild side ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  martin gardner discusses the hollow earth model articulated by abdelkader . 
purportedly verifiable hypotheses of a `` concave hollow earth '' need to be distinguished from a thought experiment which defines a coordinate transformation such that the interior of the earth becomes `` exterior '' and the exterior becomes `` interior '' . 
the writer david hatcher childress authored `` lost continents and the hollow earth ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- in which he reprinted the stories of palmer and defended the hollow earth idea based on alleged tunnel systems beneath south america and central asia . 
the 1915 novel `` plutonia `` by vladimir obruchev uses the concept of the hollow earth to take the reader through various geological epochs . 
edmond halley in 1692 put forth the idea of earth consisting of a hollow shell about thick ,  two inner concentric shells and an innermost core . 
in 2007, qatar was ,  with turkey ,  the only country to back hamas after the group ousted the palestinian authority from the gaza strip . 
in january 2004, hamas leader sheikh ahmed yassin said that the group would end armed resistance against israel in exchange for a palestinian state in the west bank ,  gaza strip ,  and east jerusalem ,  and that restoring palestinians' `` historical rights ''  -lrb-  relating to the 1948 palestinian exodus  -rrb-  `` would be left for future generations '' . 
israel has accused hamas of using children as human shields . 
in early february 2006, hamas offered israel a 10-year truce `` in return for a complete israeli withdrawal from the occupied palestinian territories: the west bank ,  gaza strip and east jerusalem , ``  and recognition of palestinian rights including the `` right of return '' . 
from 2001 through may 2008, hamas launched more than 3,000 qassam rockets and 2,500 mortar attacks into israel . 
israel declared a unilateral ceasefire on january 17, 2009.
israeli bombs landed close to civilian structures such as schools ,  and some alleged that israel was deliberately targeting palestinian civilians . 
it details the executions of at least 23 palestinians accused of collaborating with israel and torture of dozens of others ,  many victims of torture were members of the rival palestinian movement ,  fatah . 
in 2010, hamas ,  who have been actively sidelined from the peace talks by israel ,  spearheaded a coordinated effort by 13 palestinian militant groups ,  in attempt to derail the stalled peace talks between israel and mahmoud abbas ,  president of the palestinian authority . 
in the january 2006 palestinian parliamentary elections ,  hamas won a plurality in the palestinian parliament ,  defeating the plo-affiliated fatah party . 
the introduction of the `` qassam-2 '' rocket in 2008 enabled palestinian paramilitary groups to reach ,  from gaza ,  such israeli cities such as ashkelon . 
in addition to killing israeli civilians and armed forces ,  hamas has also murdered suspected palestinian israel collaborators and fatah rivals . 
hamas has made conflicting statements about its readiness to recognize israel . 
to evoke the spirit of jihad  -lrb-  resistance  -rrb-  among palestinians ,  arabs ,  and muslims; to defend palestinians and their land against the zionist occupation and its manifestations; to liberate palestinians and their land that was usurped by the zionist occupation forces and settlers . 
during that period there were conflicts between israeli troops and palestinian protestors in the gaza strip ,  due to the decision of the united states to move their embassy to jerusalem . 
in june 2018, china voted in support of a united nations security council resolution vetoed by the us that criticized israel of excessive ,  disproportionate and indiscriminate force by the israeli forces against palestinian civilians in gaza during the 2018 gaza border protests . 
on 8 july 2014 israel launched operation protective edge to counter increased hamas rocket fire from gaza . 
on december 21, hamas said it was ready to stop the attacks and renew the truce if israel stopped its `` aggression '' in gaza and opened up its border crossings . 
hamas carried out its first attack against israel in 1989, abducting and killing two soldiers . 
it also confirms acceptance of the 1967 borders as the basis for establishing a palestinian state as well as not being an offshoot of the muslim brotherhood . 
on june 9, 2006, during an israeli artillery operation ,  an explosion occurred on a busy gaza beach ,  killing eight palestinian civilians . 
human rights watch investigated 19 incidents involving 53 civilian deaths in gaza that israel said were the result of hamas fighting in densely populated areas and did not find evidence for existence of palestinian fighters in the areas at the time of the israeli attack . 
in july 2009, khaled mashal ,  hamas's political bureau chief ,  stated hamas's willingness to cooperate with a resolution to the arab-israeli conflict ,  which included a palestinian state based on 1967 borders ,  provided that palestinian refugees be given the right to return to israel and that east jerusalem be recognized as the new state's capital . 
a 2017 palestinian center for public opinion poll in the palestinian territories revealed that hamas violence and rhetoric against israelis are unpopular and that a majority of palestinians would rather hamas `` accept a permanent two-state solution based on the 1967 borders . `` 
hamas has used ieds and anti-tank rockets against the idf in gaza . 
the participating groups also include palestinian islamic jihad ,  the popular resistance committees and an unnamed splinter group of fatah . 
hamas formally withdrew from its 16-month ceasefire on june 10, taking responsibility for the subsequent qassam rocket attacks launched from gaza into israel . 
in 2014 chinese foreign minister wang yi called on israel to lift its blockade and advised both israel and hamas to cease fighting . 
according to a translation by palestinian media watch ,  in 2008, fathi hamad ,  a member of the palestinian legislative council ,  stated on al-aqsa tv ,  `` for the palestinian people death became an industry ,  at which women excel and so do all people on this land: the elderly excel ,  the jihad fighters excel ,  and the children excel . 
in an april 2008 meeting between hamas leader khaled mashal and former u . s .  president jimmy carter ,  an understanding was reached in which hamas agreed it would respect the creation of a palestinian state in the territory seized by israel in the 1967 six-day war ,  provided this were ratified by the palestinian people in a referendum . 
on december 27 and 28, israel implemented operation cast lead against hamas . 
when the un-sponsored goldstone commission report on the gaza war was commissioned in 2009, it stated that it `` found no evidence that palestinian combatants mingled with the civilian population with the intention of shielding themselves from attack '' though they deemed credible reports that palestinian militants were `` not always dressed in a way that distinguished them from civilians '' . 
like egypt ,  they designated the brotherhood as a terrorist organization and hamas was viewed as its palestinian equivalent . 
hamas's use of child labor to build tunnels with which to attack israel has also been criticized ,  with at least 160 children killed in the tunnels as of 2012.
hamas would be the beneficiary of this growing discontent in the 2006 palestinian authority legislative elections . 
on june 17, 2008, egyptian mediators announced that an informal truce had been agreed to between hamas and israel . 
until 2007, these activities extended to the west bank ,  but ,  after a plo crackdown ,  now continue exclusively in the gaza strip . 
hamas responded by resuming rocket attacks ,  a total of 190 rockets in november according to israel's military . 
in february 2012, according to the palestinian authority ,  hamas forswore the use of violence . 
also in 2006, a hamas official ruled out recognition of israel with reference to west and east germany ,  which never recognized each other . 
human rights watch interviewed one such person:
israel responded that hamas had boasted repeatedly of targeting and murdering civilians in the media . 
the al-qassam brigades resumed the attacks after the november 4 israeli incursion into gaza . 
in 2008, hamas leader khaled mashal ,  offered that hamas would attack only military targets if the idf would stop causing the deaths of palestinian civilians . 
hamas was founded in 1987, soon after the first intifada broke out ,  as an offshoot of the egyptian muslim brotherhood ,  which in its gaza branch had been non-confrontational towards israel ,  refrained from resistance ,  and was hostile to the plo . 
human rights watch estimates several hundred gazans were `` maimed '' and tortured in the aftermath of the gaza war . 
hamas's budget ,  calculated to be roughly us$70 million  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  is derived in large part  -lrb-  85%  -rrb-  from foreign ,  rather than internal palestinian ,  sources . 
hamas has made great use of guerrilla tactics in the gaza strip and to a lesser degree the west bank . 
the gaza strip interior ministry later issued an arrest warrant for the editor . 
on august 2, 2012, the international federation of journalists  -lrb-  ifj  -rrb-  accused hamas of harassing elected officials belong to the palestinian journalists' syndicate  -lrb-  pjs  -rrb-  in gaza . 
hamas rose as an offshoot of the gaza mujama al-islamiya branch of the egyptian muslim brotherhood ,  which had been actively encouraged by israel to expand as a counterweight to the influence of the secular palestine liberation organization and had since 1973 been quiescent and non-confrontational towards israel . 
hamas has defended suicide attacks as a legitimate aspect of its asymmetric warfare against israel . 
according to human rights watch ,  hamas and other palestinian armed groups have launched thousands of rockets into israel since 2001, killing 15 civilians ,  wounding many more ,  and posing an ongoing threat to the nearly 800,000 israeli civilians who live and work in the weapons' range . 
a 2007 study of palestinian suicide bombings during the second intifada  -lrb-  september 2000 through august 2005 -rrb- found that about 40 percent were carried out by the al-qassam brigades . 
gaza-neglected under egyptian and then israeli control ,  and misgoverned by palestinian leader yasir arafat and his successors-finally has a real government . '
in march 2012 mahmoud abbas stated that there were no political differences between hamas and fatah as they had reached agreement on a joint political platform and on a truce with israel . 
in a 2002 report ,  human rights watch stated that hamas leaders `` should be held accountable '' for `` war crimes and crimes against humanity '' committed by the al-qassam brigades . 
in may 2018, turkish president recep tayyip erdoğan tweeted to the prime minister of israel benjamin netanyahu that hamas is not a terrorist organization but a resistance movement that defends the palestinian homeland against an occupying power . 
in june 2011, the independent commission for human rights based in ramallah published a report whose findings included that the palestinians in the west bank and the gaza strip were subjected in 2010 to an `` almost systematic campaign '' of human rights abuses by the palestinian authority and hamas ,  as well as by israeli authorities ,  with the security forces belonging to the pa and hamas being responsible for torture ,  arrests and arbitrary detentions . 
israel has rejected some truce offers by hamas because it contends the group uses them to prepare for more fighting rather than peace . 
led to the advances at xerox parc . 
in 1975, xerox engineers demonstrated a graphical user interface `` including icons and the first use of pop-up menus '' . 
the gui was first developed at xerox parc by alan kay ,  larry tesler ,  dan ingalls ,  david smith ,  clarence ellis and a number of other researchers . 
in 1981 xerox introduced a pioneering product ,  star ,  a workstation incorporating many of parc's innovations . 
hezbollah and israel fought each other in the 2006 lebanon war . 
it was our presence there that created hezbollah '' . 
from the inception of hezbollah to the present ,  the elimination of the state of israel has been one of hezbollah's primary goals . 
according to hezbollah's deputy-general ,  naim qassem ,  the struggle against israel is a core belief of hezbollah and the central rationale of hezbollah's existence . 
in the 1990s ,  hezbollah transformed from a revolutionary group into a political one ,  in a process which is described as the lebanonisation of hezbollah . 
back in the 1980s ,  the ideology of hezbollah was described as radical . 
these designations are considered to be synonymous with hezbollah by the us ,  israel and canada . 
structurally ,  hezbollah does not distinguish between its political/social activities within lebanon and its military/ ''jihad '' activities against israel . 
translated excerpts from hezbollah's original 1985 manifesto read:
scholars differ as to when hezbollah came to be a distinct entity . 
hezbollah waged a guerilla campaign in south lebanon and as a result ,  israel from lebanon on 24 may 2000, and the sla collapsed and surrendered . 
since the second lebanon war ,  however ,  iran has restructured hezbollah to limit the power of hassan nasrallah ,  and invested billions of dollars `` rehabilitating '' hezbollah . 
various anti-semitic statements have been attributed to hezbollah officials . 
motherland refers to a `` mother country '' ,  i . e . 
a homeland may also be referred to as a `` fatherland '' ,  a `` motherland '' ,  or a `` mother country '' ,  depending on the culture and language of the nationality in question . 
it has been theorized this may have been hanjour . 
hanjour arrived back in the united states in december 2000.
receiving poor marks ,  hanjour dropped out of flight school ,  and returned to saudi arabia at the end of november 1996.
in february ,  hanjour began advanced simulator training in mesa ,  arizona . 
on december 5, hanjour opened a citibank account in deira ,  dubai . 
sometime at the end of may 2001, hanjour rented a one-bedroom apartment in paterson ,  new jersey . 
in april 2001, they relocated to falls church ,  virginia and then paterson ,  new jersey in late may where hanjour took additional flight training . 
bandar al-hazmi and hanjour stayed in arizona ,  continued taking flight lessons at arizona aviation throughout 1998 and early 1999.
hanjour first came to the united states in 1991 to study english at the university of arizona's center for english as a second language . 
hanjour was the fourth of seven children ,  born to a food-supply businessman in ta'if ,  saudi arabia ,  near mecca . 
on july 20, hanjour flew to the montgomery county airpark in maryland from new jersey on a practice flight with fellow hijacker nawaf alhazmi . 
hani saleh hasan hanjour  -lrb-   ,  ; august 30, 1972september 11, 2001 -rrb- was the saudi arabian hijacker-pilot of american airlines flight 77, crashing the plane into the pentagon as part of the september 11 attacks in 2001.
hanjour returned to the washington ,  d . c .  metropolitan area on september 2, 2001, checking into a motel in laurel ,  maryland . 
most of the dog-like hyenas had died off by 1.5 million years ago . 
by 10–12 million years ago ,  the hyena family had split into two distinct groups: dog-like hyenas and bone-crushing hyenas . 
hyenas originated in the jungles of miocene eurasia 22 million years ago ,  when most early feliform species were still largely arboreal . 
hyenas first arose in eurasia during the miocene period from viverrid-like ancestors ,  and diversified into two distinct types: lightly built dog-like hyenas and robust bone-crushing hyenas . 
hershey and chase concluded that dna ,  not protein ,  was the genetic material . 
further research was necessary to conclude that it was solely bacteriophages' dna that entered the cell and not a combination of protein and dna where the protein did not contain any sulfur . 
they concluded that the protein protected the dna from dnase ,  but that once the two were separated and the phage was inactivated ,  the dnase could hydrolyze the phage dna . 
radioactive sulfur-35 was used to label the protein sections of the t2 phage ,  because sulfur is contained in protein but not dna . 
it provided the background knowledge for further applications in dna forensics ,  where dna fingerprinting uses data originating from dna ,  not protein sources ,  to deduce genetic variation . 
thus ,  the hershey–chase experiment helped confirm that dna ,  not protein ,  is the genetic material . 
many religions share common beliefs . 
the study of religion is important: religion and similar concepts have often shaped civilizations' law and moral codes ,  social structure ,  art and music . 
the history of religion refers to the written record of human religious experiences and ideas . 
all of these theories have since been widely criticized; there is no broad consensus regarding the origin of religion . 
soul music and disco influenced house music . 
house music is a genre of electronic dance music created by club djs and music producers in chicago in the early 1980s . 
silk's `` music is the key ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- ,  have also been cited . 
key labels in the rise of house music in the uk included:
however ,  he agreed that `` house '' was a regional catch-all term for dance music ,  and that it was once synonymous with older disco music ,  before it became a way to refer to `` new '' dance music . 
during the 2010s multiple new sounds in house music were developed by djs ,  producers and artists . 
chosen few is an annual event in chicago that celebrates house music in its birthplace . 
detroit techno is an offshoot of chicago house music which developed in the early and mid-1980s . 
ghetto house and acid house were other house music styles that started in chicago . 
house music is created by djs ,  record producers ,  and music artists ,  often with contributions from other performers on synthesizer and other electronic instruments . 
mostly the documentary looks at some of the djs from that genre ,  and how they stumbled into the music . 
in 1989 and going into the early 1990s ,  house music became more popular in the us . 
during the 2010s ,  in the uk and in the usa ,  many records labels stayed true to the original house music sound from the 1990s . 
these tracks were well received in chicago and played on chicago radio and in clubs . 
by this time ,  house music released by chicago-based labels was considered a must-play in clubs . 
chicago house music acts from the early to mid-1980s found success on the us dance charts on various chicago independent record labels that were more open to sign local house music artists . 
one 2009 book states the name house music originated from a chicago club called `` the warehouse '' ,  which existed from 1977 to 1983.
chip e . 's 1985 recording `` it's house '' may also have helped to define this new form of electronic music . 
in detroit a proto-techno music sound began to emerge with the dj recordings and mixes of juan atkins ,  derrick may and kevin saunderson . 
marshall jefferson ,  who would later appear with the chicago house classic `` move your body  -lrb-  the house-music anthem  -rrb- ``  ,   -lrb-  originally released on chicago-based trax records  -rrb-  got involved in house music after hearing ron hardy's music in music box . 
in the uk ,  any house song released by a chicago-based label was routinely considered a `` must-play '' at uk house music clubs . 
the appalachian trail crosses the town . 
hanover is a town along the connecticut river in grafton county ,  new hampshire ,  united states . 
 ''beagle '' set sail from plymouth on 22 may 1826 on her first voyage ,  under the command of captain stokes . 
she was then adapted as a survey barque and took part in three survey expeditions . 
during this survey ,  the beagle channel was identified and named after the ship . 
when `` beagle '' arrived ,  otway put the ship under the command of his aide ,  flag lieutenant robert fitzroy . 
the 23-year-old aristocrat fitzroy proved an able commander and meticulous surveyor . 
the mission was to accompany the larger ship hms `` adventure ''  -lrb-  380 tons  -rrb-  on a hydrographic survey of patagonia and tierra del fuego ,  under the overall command of the australian captain phillip parker king ,  commander and surveyor . 
captain pringle stokes was appointed captain of `` beagle '' on 7 september 1825, and the ship was allocated to the surveying section of the hydrographic office . 
the roman occupation ended between 400 and 450 and it is not known to what extent and for how long roman civilization persisted at st albans . 
st albans is a city in southern hertfordshire ,  england ,  20 miles  -lrb-  32 km  -rrb-  north of london ,  beside the site of a catuvellauni settlement and the roman town of verulamium on the river ver . 
the roman city of verulamium ,  the third largest town in roman britain after londinium and colchester ,  was built alongside the celtic settlement in the valley of the river ver nearer to the present city centre . 
it is hertfordshire's oldest town . 
the 6309 is hitachi's cmos version of the motorola 6809 microprocessor . 
previously ,  consuming untreated corn was thought to cause pellagra  -lrb-  niacin deficiency  -rrb- —either from the corn itself or some infectious element in untreated corn . 
in mexican cooking ,  hominy is finely ground to make masa . 
cornmeal from untreated ground corn cannot form a dough with the addition of water ,  but the chemical changes in masa  -lrb-  aka `` masa nixtamalera ''  -rrb-  make dough formation possible ,  for tortillas and other food . 
his father thomas robinson  -lrb-  1838–1902 -rrb- and brothers thomas heath robinson  -lrb-  1869–1954 -rrb- and charles robinson  -lrb-  1870–1937 -rrb- all worked as illustrators . 
the heath robinson museum opened in october 2016 to house a collection of nearly 1,000 original artworks owned by the william heath robinson trust . 
due to its improvised and ramshackle nature it was often referred to as the `` heath robinson chaff modification '' . 
one of the automatic analysis machines built for bletchley park during the second world war to assist in the decryption of german message traffic was named `` heath robinson '' in his honour . 
the name `` heath robinson '' became part of common parlance in the uk for complex inventions that achieved absurdly simple results following its use as services slang during the 1914–1918 first world war . 
william heath robinson was born at 25 ennis road on 31 may 1872 into a family of artists in an area of london known as stroud green ,  finsbury park ,  north london . 
heraclius's defeat of the persians ended a war that had been going on intermittently for almost 400 years and led to instability in the persian empire . 
the roman army proceeded to armenia ,  inflicted a defeat on an army led by a persian-allied arab chief ,  and then won a victory over the persians under shahrbaraz . 
heraclius took for himself the ancient persian title of `` king of kings '' after his victory over persia . 
by this time ,  the persians had conquered mesopotamia and the caucasus ,  and in 611 they overran syria and entered anatolia . 
although the territorial gains produced by his defeat of the persians were lost to the advance of the muslims ,  heraclius still ranks among the great roman emperors . 
within a short period of time ,  the arabs conquered mesopotamia ,  armenia and egypt . 
in 629 heraclius restored the true cross to jerusalem in a majestic ceremony . 
by the time of heraclius's death in constantinople ,  on february 11, 641, most of egypt had fallen as well . 
in 613, the persian army took damascus with the help of the jews ,  seized jerusalem in 614, damaging the church of the holy sepulchre and capturing the true cross ,  and afterwards capturing egypt in 617 or 618.
edward gibbon in his work `` the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire '' wrote: heraclius was long remembered favourably in the western church for his reputed feat in recovering the true cross ,  which had been with the persians for a period of the time . 
on 23 december 918 conrad i ,  king of east francia and franconian duke ,  died . 
as the first saxon king of east francia ,  henry was the founder of the ottonian dynasty . 
in 921 magyars once again invaded east francia and italy . 
in 925 duke gilbert of lotharingia rebelled . 
henry the fowler  -lrb-   or ``  '';   -rrb-   -lrb-  876 – 2 july 936 -rrb- was the duke of saxony from 912 and the elected king of east francia  -lrb-  germany  -rrb-  from 919 until his death in 936.
henry was elected and crowned king in 919.
duke burchard ii of swabia soon swore fealty to the new king ,  but when he died ,  henry appointed a noble from franconia to be the new duke . 
he was born into the liudolfing line of saxon dukes . 
the roman consuls mounted a siege of capua in 212 bc . 
fabius chose war . 
unlike most battles of the second punic war ,  at zama ,  the romans were superior in cavalry and the carthaginians had the edge in infantry . 
although the long-term consequences of hannibal's war are debatable ,  this war was undeniably rome's `` finest hour '' . 
in 203 bc ,  hannibal was recalled from italy by the war party in carthage . 
the other roman consular army was rushed to the po valley . 
hannibal started the war without the full backing of carthaginian oligarchy . 
hannibal was one of the sons of hamilcar barca ,  a carthaginian leader . 
most of the sources available to historians about hannibal are from romans . 
hannibal was still only 46 at the conclusion of the second punic war in 201 bc and soon showed that he could be a statesman as well as a soldier . 
sulpicius blitho records the death under 181 bc . 
as with greek and roman practice ,  patronymics were a common part of carthaginian nomenclature ,  so that hannibal would also have been known as `` hannibal son of hamilcar '' . 
during the war there are no reports of revolutions among the roman citizens ,  no factions within the senate desiring peace ,  no pro-carthaginian roman turncoats ,  no coups . 
the roman cavalry won an early victory by swiftly routing the carthaginian horse ,  and standard roman tactics for limiting the effectiveness of the carthaginian war elephants were successful ,  including playing trumpets to frighten the elephants into running into the carthaginian lines . 
the tide was slowly turning against him ,  and in favor of rome . 
as a result ,  the roman army was hemmed in with no means of escape . 
hannibal caused great distress to many in roman society . 
he was afterwards betrayed to the romans and committed suicide by poisoning himself . 
the romans followed up their success by attacking antiochus in anatolia and the seleucid empire was decisively defeated at the battle of magnesia in 190 bc by lucius cornelius scipio asiaticus . 
hannibal was a common carthaginian masculine given name . 
in 190 bc ,  hannibal was placed in command of a seleucid fleet but was defeated in the battle of the eurymedon . 
historical events which led to the defeat of carthage during the first punic war when his father commanded the carthaginian army also led hannibal to plan the invasion of italy by land across the alps . 
after carthage's defeat in the first punic war ,  hamilcar set out to improve his family's and carthage's fortunes . 
at this stage ,  the romans intervened and threatened bithynia into giving up hannibal . 
the war in italy settled into a strategic stalemate . 
this strategy was unpopular with many romans ,  who believed that it was a form of cowardice . 
india toured south africa in 1992/93.
in october 1995, south africa won a one-off test with zimbabwe . 
in the odi series he was south africa's top scorer and took 11 wickets at 14.72 as south africa won 6–1.
in the first test ,  cronje scored 70 as south africa saved the match; in the second test ,  he lasted 335 minutes for his 88.
in october 1999, cronje became south africa's highest test run scorer during the first test against zimbabwe . 
in the west indies series of 1998–99, cronje captained south africa to their only whitewash in a five test series . 
the fifth test of the 1999–2000 south africa versus england series at centurion was ruined by rain ,  entering the final day only 45 overs had been possible with south africa 155/6.
in south africa's next test series against sri lanka ,  cronje scored his second test century ,  122 in the second test in colombo; the victory margin of an innings and 208 runs is a south african record . 
south africa won the series with england in the fourth test at cape town ,  cronje's fiftieth as captain . 
in february 1994, there was the return series as australia toured south africa . 
there was another drawn series when south africa toured england in 1994.
south africa lost the first test in johannesburg but before the second test the two teams plus pakistan and sri lanka competed for the mandela trophy ,  new zealand failed to gain a win in the six match round robin stage while south africa beat pakistan in the final . 
wessel johannes `` hansie '' cronje  -lrb-  25 september 1969 – 1 june 2002 -rrb- was a south african cricketer and captain of the south african national cricket team in the 1990s . 
under cronje's captaincy ,  south africa won 27 tests and lost 11, completing series victories against every team except australia . 
however ,  england won the test ,  and the one at headingley ,  to win the series 2–1, cronje finished the series as south africa's top scorer with 401 runs at 66.83.
in 1863 there were eight entities in the area . 
in the age known as the nordic bronze age ,  the area had some shipping of furs to northern germany and the roman army ,  but not much is known from that time other than the area being inhabited; there has also been older finds from 3000-4000 bc . 
the seat is in the town of hultsfred . 
the area continued to be inhabited mainly by farmers until the 20th century . 
the parliament of great britain was formed in 1707 following the ratification of the treaty of union by acts of union passed by the parliament of england and the parliament of scotland ,  both acts of union stating ,  `` that the united kingdom of great britain be represented by one and the same parliament to be styled the parliament of great britain '' . 
the parliament of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland ,  commonly known internationally as the uk parliament ,  british parliament ,  or westminster parliament ,  and domestically simply as parliament ,  is the supreme legislative body of the united kingdom ,  and the british overseas territories . 
the irish free state became independent in 1922, and in 1927 parliament was renamed the parliament of the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland . 
the state opening of parliament is an annual event that marks the commencement of a session of the parliament of the united kingdom . 
both houses of the british parliament are presided over by a speaker ,  the speaker of the house for the commons and the lord speaker in the house of lords . 
the prime minister and government are directly accountable to parliament ,  through its control of public finances ,  and to the public ,  through the election of members of parliament . 
the united kingdom of great britain and ireland was created on 1 january 1801, by the merger of the kingdoms of great britain and ireland under the acts of union 1800.
the government of ireland act 1920 created the parliaments of northern ireland and southern ireland and reduced the representation of both parts at westminster . 
however ,  regardless of the parliament acts of 1911 and 1949, the house of lords has always retained the unrestricted power to veto any bill outright which attempts to extend the life of a parliament . 
the monarch also appoints the prime minister ,  who then forms a government from members of the houses of parliament . 
since the parliament acts 1911 and 1949, the powers of the house of lords have been very much less than those of the house of commons . 
with the global expansion of the british empire ,  the uk parliament has shaped the political systems of many countries as ex-colonies and so it has been called the `` mother of parliaments '' . 
the name of hosea's son ,  lo-ammi ,  which translates as `` not my people '' ,  is chosen as a sign of the lord's displeasure with the people of israel for following those false gods  -lrb-  see hosea 1:8–9 -rrb- . 
one of the early writing prophets ,  hosea used his own experience as a symbolic representation of god and israel . 
little is known about the life or social status of hosea . 
other preachers ,  like charles spurgeon ,  saw hosea as a striking presentation of the mercy of god in his sermon on hosea 1:7 titled the lord's own salvation . 
the name habakkuk ,  or habacuc ,  appears in the hebrew bible only in habakkuk 1:1 and 3:1.
habakkuk has also been commemorated in sculpture . 
habakkuk was a prophet in the hebrew bible ,  described in the book of habakkuk ,  the eighth of the collected twelve minor prophets . 
although not mentioned by name in the qu'ran ,  habakkuk is recognized as an islamic prophet because he is believed to herald the coming of muhammad and the qu'ran in the book of habakkuk . 
the only work attributed to habakkuk is the short book of the bible that bears his name . 
habakkuk is also mentioned in lives of the prophets ,  which also notes his time in babylon . 
habakkuk is called both habaghugh and hayaghugh by the muslim locals . 
habakkuk is unusual among the prophets in that he openly questions the working of god  -lrb-  1:3a ,  1:13b  -rrb-  . 
do you know this and believe in it ? ” the exilarch said ,  “habakkuk the prophet has said this and we do not deny what he said . ”
there is a controversy regarding who edited haggai's works . 
on the eastern orthodox liturgical calendar ,  haggai is commemorated as a saint and prophet . 
haggai ,  in rabbinic writing ,  is often referred to as one of the men of the great assembly . 
haggai supported the officials of his time ,  specifically zerubbabel ,  the governor ,  and joshua the high priest . 
hollerith cards were named after herman hollerith  -lrb-  they eventually reached 128 columns width  -rrb-  ,  as were hollerith constants  -lrb-  a string constant declaration in some computer programming languages ,  sometimes called a hollerith string  -rrb-  . 
hollerith initially did business under his own name ,  as `` the hollerith electric tabulating system '' ,  specializing in punched card data processing equipment . 
hollerith is buried at oak hill cemetery in the georgetown neighborhood of washington ,  d . c . 
on january 8, 1889, hollerith was issued u . s .  patent 395,782, claim 2 of which reads:
african art ,  jewish art ,  islamic art ,  indian art ,  chinese art ,  korean art ,  and japanese art each had significant influence on western art ,  and ,  vice versa . 
african art ,  jewish art ,  islamic art ,  indian art ,  chinese art ,  and japanese art each had significant influence on western art ,  and vice versa . 
the 19thcentury saw the rise of the commercial art gallery ,  which provided patronage in the 20th century . 
the hall of bulls in lascaux ,  dordogne ,  france ,  is one of the best known cave paintings and dates to about 15,000 to 10,000 bc . 
the dialects of hungarian identified by ethnologue are: alföld ,  west danube ,  danube-tisza ,  king's pass hungarian ,  northeast hungarian ,  northwest hungarian ,  székely and west hungarian . 
consonant length is also distinctive in hungarian . 
for example ,  there are more than one hundred thousand hungarian speakers in the hungarian american community and 1.5 million with hungarian ancestry in the united states . 
hungarian has 14 vowel phonemes and 25 consonant phonemes . 
the csángó hungarian group has been largely isolated from other hungarian people ,  and they therefore preserved features that closely resemble earlier forms of hungarian . 
hungarian is a member of the uralic language family . 
a more extensive body of hungarian literature arose after 1300.
hungarian uses vowel harmony to attach suffixes to words . 
approximately 1.6 percent of the romanian lexicon is of hungarian origin . 
hungarian has a four-tiered system for expressing levels of politeness . 
there are numerous regular sound correspondences between hungarian and the other ugric languages . 
hungarian has about 13 million native speakers ,  of whom more than 9.8 million live in hungary . 
at one time ,  hungarian used six verb tenses ,  while today only two or three are used . 
like finnish and estonian ,  hungarian belongs to the uralic language family . 
during the latter half of the 19th century ,  a competing hypothesis proposed a turkic affinity of hungarian . 
hungarian syntax and grammar were not influenced in a similarly dramatic way over these three centuries . 
hungarian  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a finno-ugric language spoken in hungary and several neighbouring countries . 
a hungarian sentence generally has the following order: topic ,  comment  -lrb-  or focus  -rrb-  ,  verb and the rest . 
today the consensus among linguists is that hungarian is a member of the uralic family of languages . 
unlike english ,  hungarian uses case suffixes and mostly postpositions ,  instead of prepositions . 
furthermore ,  all ugric languages ,  not only hungarian ,  feature turkic loanwords related to horse riding . 
the hymenoptera are divided into two groups; the symphyta which have no waist ,  and the apocrita which have a narrow waist . 
however ,  the actual genetic mechanisms of haplodiploid sex determination may be more complex than simple chromosome number . 
diploid biparental males are usually sterile but a few species that have fertile diploid males are known . 
among most or all hymenopterans ,  sex is determined by the number of chromosomes an individual possesses . 
it also occurs in the cape honey bee `` apis mellifera capensis '' . 
the wasps ,  bees ,  and ants together make up the suborder  -lrb-  and clade  -rrb-  apocrita ,  characterized by a constriction between the first and second abdominal segments called a wasp-waist  -lrb-  petiole  -rrb-  ,  also involving the fusion of the first abdominal segment to the thorax . 
a huge number of species are parasitoids as larvae . 
the sting is typically used to immobilise prey ,  but in some wasps and bees may be used in defense . 
in many colonies of bees ,  ants ,  and wasps ,  worker females will remove eggs laid by other workers due to increased relatedness to direct siblings ,  a phenomenon known as worker policing . 
ellen hamlin died in 1925.
hamlin had four sons who grew to adulthood: charles hamlin ,  cyrus hamlin ,  hannibal emery and frank hamlin . 
hamlin county ,  south dakota is named in his honor ,  as are hamlin ,  kansas; hamlin ,  new york; hamlin ,  west virginia; hamlin township; hamlin lake in mason county ,  michigan; and ,  hamlin ,  a small maine village that is a u . s . –canada border crossing with grand falls ,  new brunswick . 
the republicans nominated hamlin for governor of maine in the same year . 
hamlin was born to cyrus hamlin and his wife anna ,  née livermore ,  in paris  -lrb-  now in maine ,  then a part of massachusetts  -rrb-  . 
there are biographies of hamlin by his grandson charles e .  hamlin  -lrb-  published 1899, reprinted 1971 -rrb- and by h .  draper hunt  -lrb-  published 1969 -rrb- . 
hamlin and lincoln were not close personally ,  but had a good working relationship . 
in 1869, hamlin was elected again to the u . s .  senate ,  and he served two terms . 
lincoln and johnson were elected in november 1864, and hamlin's term expired on march 4, 1865.
hamlin received the appointment on june 30, 1881, and held the post until october 17, 1882.
hamlin married sarah jane emery of paris hill in 1833.
for his part ,  hamlin complained ,  `` i am only a fifth wheel of a coach and can do little for my friends . `` 
a democrat at the beginning of his career ,  hamlin supported the candidacy of franklin pierce in 1852.
novels were not eligible for the summer hopwood contest . 
the summer hopwood contest was discontinued in 2017, but archives of winning summer hopwood manuscripts will continue to be held in the hopwood room . 
the hopwood program administers the hopwood award ,  as well as several other awards in writing . 
this causes the release of aldosterone into the blood . 
the blood sugar rises in a condition known as hyperglycemia . 
in response to a lowering of the plasma sodium concentration ,  or to a fall in the arterial blood pressure ,  the juxtaglomerular cells release renin into the blood . 
the low angiotensin ii levels in the blood lower the arterial blood pressure as an inevitable concomitant response . 
the second homeostatic mechanism ,  with its sensors in the thyroid gland ,  releases calcitonin into the blood when the blood ionized calcium rises . 
the brain can regulate blood flow over a range of blood pressure values by vasoconstriction and vasodilation of the arteries . 
a fall in blood glucose ,  causes insulin secretion to be stopped ,  and glucagon to be secreted from the alpha cells into the blood . 
the reabsorption of sodium ions from the tubular fluid as a result of high aldosterone levels in the blood does not ,  of itself ,  cause renal tubular water to be returned to the blood from the distal convoluted tubules or collecting ducts . 
the kidneys measure the oxygen content rather than the partial pressure of oxygen in the arterial blood . 
these cells also respond to rate of blood flow through the juxtaglomerular apparatus ,  which ,  under normal circumstances ,  is directly proportional to the arterial blood pressure ,  making this tissue an ancillary arterial blood pressure sensor . 
blood sugar levels are regulated within fairly narrow limits . 
the effector organs of the first homeostatic mechanism are the bones ,  the kidney ,  and ,  via a hormone released into the blood by the kidney in response to high pth levels in the blood ,  the duodenum and jejunum . 
regardless of the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood ,  the amount of oxygen that can be carried ,  depends on the hemoglobin content . 
an increased level of carbon dioxide in the blood ,  or a decreased level of oxygen ,  will result in a deeper breathing pattern and increased respiratory rate to bring the blood gases back to equilibrium . 
this creates an ionic concentration gradient which results in the reabsorption of sodium  -lrb-  na  -rrb-  ions from the tubular fluid into the blood ,  and secreting potassium  -lrb-  k  -rrb-  ions from the blood into the urine  -lrb-  lumen of collecting duct  -rrb-  . 
hypo-osmolality results in very low plasma adh levels . 
this ,  therefore ,  reinforces the measures described above  -lrb-  under the heading of `` arterial blood pressure ''  -rrb-  ,  which defend the arterial blood pressure against changes ,  especially hypotension . 
these reactions usually correct the low arterial blood pressure  -lrb-  hypotension  -rrb-  very effectively . 
when core temperature falls ,  the blood supply to the skin is reduced by intense vasoconstriction . 
when hydrogen ions are excreted into the urine ,  and bicarbonate into the blood ,  the latter combines with the excess hydrogen ions in the plasma that stimulated the kidneys to perform this operation . 
there are many types of hockey such as bandy ,  field hockey and ice hockey . 
inline hockey is a variation of roller hockey very similar to ice hockey ,  from which it is derived . 
ice sledge hockey or para ice hockey is a form of ice hockey designed for players with physical disabilities affecting their lower bodies . 
the word `` hockey '' itself is of unknown origin . 
the rules are very similar to iihf ice hockey rules . 
in most of the world ,  hockey refers to field hockey ,  while in canada ,  the united states ,  finland ,  sweden ,  latvia ,  the czech republic and slovakia ,  hockey usually refers to ice hockey . 
based on ice sledge hockey ,  inline sledge hockey is played to the same rules as inline puck hockey  -lrb-  essentially ice hockey played off-ice using inline skates  -rrb-  . 
ice hockey is played at a number of levels ,  by all ages . 
hockey is a sport in which two teams play against each other by trying to manoeuvre a ball or a puck into the opponent's goal using a hockey stick . 
at the 2001 census hawick had a resident population of 14,801.
hawick lies in the centre of the valley of the teviot . 
hawick is known for its yearly common riding ,  for its rugby team hawick rugby football club and for its knitwear industry . 
the town was then called bishop's hatfield . 
hatfield is a town and civil parish in hertfordshire ,  england ,  in the borough of welwyn hatfield . 
hatfield is part of welwyn hatfield borough council in the county of hertfordshire . 
the abercrombie plan for london in 1944 proposed a new town in hatfield . 
the town grew up around the gates of hatfield house . 
watford f . c . 
the first xv currently play in the london & south east premier ,  a league . 
in 1903, letchworth became the world's first garden city and stevenage became the first town to redevelop under the new towns act 1946.
hemel stags are a rugby league team based in hemel hempstead . 
stevenage f . c . 
hertfordshire is the county immediately north of london and is part of the east of england region ,  a mainly statistical unit . 
for government statistical purposes ,  it is placed in the east of england region . 
to the east is essex ,  to the west is buckinghamshire and to the north are bedfordshire and cambridgeshire . 
fresh water is supplied to london from ware ,  using the new river built by hugh myddleton and opened in 1613.
who both play in the national league south ,  part of the sixth tier of english football . 
from the 1920s until the late 1980s ,  the town of borehamwood was home to one of the major british film studio complexes ,  including the mgm-british studios . 
tring rugby are rugby union team based in tring ,  who play matches at cow lane ,  tring . 
the club plays in league 1, the of the british rugby league system . 
held in the care of the dutch government ,  the kröller-müller museum was opened in 1938.
today it is the kröller-müller museum and sculpture garden and hoge veluwe national park ,  the largest national park in the netherlands . 
 ''truth and method '' was published twice in english ,  and the revised edition is now considered authoritative . 
hans-georg gadamer  -lrb-  ; ; february 11, 1900 – march 13, 2002 -rrb- was a german philosopher of the continental tradition ,  best known for his 1960 `` magnum opus '' `` truth and method ''  -lrb-  `` wahrheit und methode ''  -rrb-  on hermeneutics . 
for gadamer ,  interpreting a text involves a fusion of horizons  -lrb-  `` horizontverschmelzung ''  -rrb-  . 
the `` meaning '' emerges not as an object that lies in the text or in the interpreter ,  but rather an event that results from the interaction of the two . 
has been considered by many—including heidegger and gadamer himself—as a `` second volume '' or continuation of the argument in `` truth and method '' . 
this fusion of horizons does not mean the interpreter now fully understands some kind of objective meaning ,  but is “an event in which a world opens itself to him . ” the result is a deeper understanding of the subject matter . 
however ,  gadamer argued meaning and understanding are not objects to be found through certain methods ,  but are inevitable phenomena . 
gadamer's philosophical project ,  as explained in `` truth and method '' ,  was to elaborate on the concept of `` philosophical hermeneutics '' ,  which heidegger initiated but never dealt with at length . 
gadamer's `` truth and method '' has become an authoritative work in the communication ethics field ,  spawning several prominent ethics theories and guidelines . 
in many modern languages ,  the word for a honeymoon is a calque  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  in french: `` lune de miel ''  -rrb-  or near-calque . 
one possible source of the word is from persian `` mah-e-asal , ``  which translates to month of honey . 
one 2015 scholarly study concluded that going on a honeymoon is associated with a somewhat lower risk of divorce ,  regardless of how much or little is spent on the honeymoon itself . 
kushner has written a number of other popular theological books ,  such as `` how good do we have to be ? `` 
aaron was born in 1963 and died in 1977; the book was published in 1981.
heapsort is an in-place algorithm ,  but it is not a stable sort . 
in computer science ,  heapsort is a comparison-based sorting algorithm . 
a common implementation of a heap is the binary heap ,  in which the tree is a binary tree  -lrb-  see figure  -rrb-  . 
the maximum number of children each node can have depends on the type of heap . 
