the wreck of the `` mary rose '' was rediscovered in 1971.
the `` mary rose '' represented a transitional ship design in naval warfare . 
the `` mary rose '' was substantially rebuilt in 1536.
the `` mary rose '' was kept in reserve from 1522 to 1545.
animal remains have been found in the wreck of the `` mary rose '' . 
later accounts repeat the explanation that the ship heeled over while going about and that the ship was brought down because of the open gunports . 
two of the largest ships ,  the `` henry grace à dieu '' and the `` mary rose '' ,  led the attack on the french galleys in the solent . 
the `` mary rose '' was one of the largest ships in the english navy through more than three decades of intermittent war and was one of the earliest examples of a purpose-built sailing warship . 
the most recent surveys of the ship indicate that the ship was modified late in her career and have lent support to the idea that the `` mary rose '' was altered too much to be properly seaworthy . 
in 2000, the channel 4 television programme `` what sank the mary rose ? `` 
the construction of the `` mary rose '' began in 1510 in portsmouth and she was launched in july 1511.
the `` mary rose '' first saw battle in 1512, in a joint naval operation with the spanish against the french . 
preservation of the `` mary rose '' and her contents was an essential part of the project from the start . 
the common explanation for the ship's name was that it was inspired by henry viii's favourite sister ,  mary tudor ,  and the rose as the emblem of the tudors . 
after the peace `` mary rose '' was placed in the reserves ,  `` in ordinary '' . 
after the ship had been raised it was determined that about 40% of the original structure had survived . 
it would then be towed into shallower water and the procedure repeated until the whole ship could be raised completely . 
an extensive collection of well-preserved artefacts is on display at the mary rose museum ,  built to display the remains of the ship and its artefacts alongside each other . 
the problem was handled by forming an organisation ,  the mary rose committee ,  aiming `` to find ,  excavate ,  raise and preserve for all time such remains of the ship `` mary rose '' as may be of historical or archaeological interest '' . 
the mary rose is a carrack-type warship of the english tudor navy of king henry viii . 
a separate mary rose museum was housed in a structure called no . 
marsden has speculated that it could even mean that the `` mary rose '' was originally built in a style that was closer to 15th-century ships ,  with a rounded ,  rather than square ,  stern and without the main deck gunports . 
during the early stages of excavation of the wreck ,  it was believed that the ship had originally been built with clinker  -lrb-  or clench  -rrb-  planking ,  a technique where the hull consisted of overlapping planks that bore the structural strength of the ship . 
throughout her 33-year career ,  the crew of the `` mary rose '' changed several times and varied considerably in size . 
the most common explanation for the sinking among modern historians is that the ship was unstable for a number of reasons . 
the hull had four levels separated by three decks . 
the sailing capabilities of the `` mary rose '' were commented on by her contemporaries and were once even put to the test . 
modern experts have been more sceptical to her sailing qualities ,  believing that ships at this time were almost incapable of sailing close against the wind ,  and describing the handling of the `` mary rose '' as being like `` a wet haystack '' . 
as one of the most ambitious and expensive projects in the history of maritime archaeology ,  the `` mary rose '' project broke new ground within this field in the uk . 
since the mid-1980s ,  the hull of the `` mary rose '' has been kept in a covered dry dock while undergoing conservation . 
after the decision to raise the `` mary rose , ``  discussions ensued as to where she would eventually go on permanent display . 
the moulded breadth ,  the widest point of the ship roughly above the waterline ,  was about 12 metres  -lrb-  39 ft  -rrb-  and the keel about 32 metres  -lrb-  105 ft  -rrb-  ,  although the ship's overall length is uncertain . 
the first game in the `` mario kart '' series is `` super mario kart '' which was released for the super nintendo entertainment system in 1992.
there have been six `` mario kart '' games released for home consoles ,  three portable games ,  and four namco co-developed arcade games ,  for a total of thirteen . 
darran jones of nowgamer suggests that the original success of `` super mario kart '' was the result of including characters previously seen in `` mario bros . ``  games ,  while also being a new type of racing game . 
in the `` mario kart '' series ,  players compete in go-kart races ,  controlling one of a selection of characters ,  typically from the `` mario '' franchise . 
a mind map is a diagram used to visually organize information . 
mind maps are similar in radial structure to concept maps ,  developed by learning experts in the 1970s ,  but differ in that the former are simplified by focusing around a single central key concept . 
a similar concept in the 1970s was `` idea sun bursting '' . 
a general-purpose machine gun is usually a lightweight medium machine gun which can either be used with a bipod and drum in the light machine gun role or a tripod and belt feed in the medium machine gun role . 
unlike semi-automatic firearms ,  which require one trigger pull per round fired ,  a machine gun is designed to fire for as long as the trigger is held down . 
some machine guns have in practice sustained fire almost continuously for hours; other automatic weapons overheat after less than a minute of use . 
assault rifles are a compromise between the size and weight of a pistol-calibre submachine gun and a full size battle rifle ,  firing intermediate cartridges and allowing semi-automatic and burst or full-automatic fire options  -lrb-  selective fire  -rrb-  ,  sometimes with both of the latter present . 
her game ,  `` the landlord's game '' ,  was self-published ,  beginning in 1906.
magie patented the game again in 1923.
in 2006, winning moves games released the ``  '' ,  with a 30% larger game-board and revised game play . 
after the game's excellent sales during the christmas season of 1934, parker brothers bought the game's copyrights from darrow . 
parker brothers began selling the game on february 6, 1935.
it is now owned and produced by the american game and toy company hasbro . 
monopoly is a board game in which players roll two six-sided dice to move around the game board ,  buying and trading properties ,  and developing them with houses and hotels . 
in 2015, in honor of the game's 80th birthday ,  hasbro held an online vote to determine which cities would make it into an updated version of the here and now edition of the game . 
hasbro commissioned a major graphic redesign to the u . s .  standard edition of the game in 2008, with some minor revisions . 
victor watson ,  the managing director of waddingtons ,  gave the game to his son norman ,  head of the card games division ,  to test over the weekend . 
in 1936, parker brothers began licensing the game for sale outside the united states . 
the original income tax choice from the 1930s u . s .  board is replaced by a flat rate on the uk board ,  and the $75 luxury tax space is replaced with the £100 super tax space ,  the same as the current german board . 
beginning in the u . k .  in 2005, a revised version of the game ,  titled `` monopoly here and now '' ,  was produced ,  replacing game scenarios ,  properties ,  and tokens with newer equivalents . 
in january 2017, hasbro invited internet users to vote on a new set of game pieces ,  with this new regular edition to be issued in march 2017.
the original version of the game in this format was based on the streets of atlantic city ,  new jersey . 
steiner stated:
now referred to as the `` father of film music '' or the `` dean of film music '' ,  steiner had written or arranged music for over three hundred films by the end of his career . 
in kurt london's `` film music '' ,  london expressed the opinion that american film music was inferior to european film music because it lacked originality of composition; he cited the music of steiner as an exception to the rule . 
steiner ,  was among the first to acknowledge the need for original scores for each film . 
steiner explains his own typical method of scoring:
steiner often followed his instincts and his own reasoning in creating film scores . 
steiner continued to score films produced by warner until the mid sixties . 
in 1963, steiner began writing his autobiography . 
 ''now ,  voyager '' would be the film score for which steiner would win his second academy award . 
with two exceptions ,  steiner was less successful with the film noir genre due to the `` modernistic '' music those films often require . 
the american film institute respectively ranked steiner's scores for `` gone with the wind ''  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- and `` king kong ''  -lrb-  1933 -rrb- #2 and #13 on their list of the 25 greatest film scores . 
director john ford called on steiner to score his film ,  `` the lost patrol ''  -lrb-  1934 -rrb- ,  which lacked tension without music . 
steiner worked in england ,  then broadway ,  and in 1929 he moved to hollywood ,  where he became one of the first composers to write music scores for films . 
the music of edmund eysler was an early influence in the pieces of max steiner . 
the max steiner memorial society was formed in the united kingdom continue the work of the max steiner music society . 
when adding a music score to a picture ,  steiner used a `` spotting process '' in which he and the director of the film would watch the film in its entirety and discuss where underscoring of diegetic music would begin and end . 
like venus ,  mercury orbits the sun within earth's orbit as an `` inferior planet '' ,  and never exceeds 28° away from the sun when viewed from earth . 
mercury is the smallest and innermost planet in the solar system . 
mercury has the most eccentric orbit of all the planets; its eccentricity is 0.21 with its distance from the sun ranging from  . 
reaching mercury from earth poses significant technical challenges ,  because it orbits so much closer to the sun than earth . 
the planet has no known natural satellites . 
mercury is one of four terrestrial planets in the solar system ,  and is a rocky body like earth . 
the observation demonstrated conclusively that mercury orbited around the sun . 
the planet is rendered invisible from earth on both of these occasions because of its being obscured by the sun ,  except its new phase during a transit . 
a proposed alternative approach would use a solar sail to attain a mercury-synchronous orbit around the sun . 
mercury's axis has the smallest tilt of any of the solar system's planets  -lrb-  about degree  -rrb-  . 
mercury is on average the closest planet to the earth: it is closest to earth 46% of the time; venus is closest 36% of the time ,  while mars is closest just 18% of the time . 
this made close observation of both sides of the planet impossible ,  and resulted in the mapping of less than 45% of the planet's surface . 
mercury can ,  like several other planets and the brightest stars ,  be seen during a total solar eclipse . 
is thought to be still orbiting the sun ,  passing close to mercury every few months . 
mercury's magnetic field is strong enough to deflect the solar wind around the planet ,  creating a magnetosphere . 
mercury attains inferior conjunction  -lrb-  nearest approach to earth  -rrb-  every 116 earth days on average ,  but this interval can range from 105 days to 129 days due to the planet's eccentric orbit . 
a rare event in astronomy is the passage of one planet in front of another  -lrb-  occultation  -rrb-  ,  as seen from earth . 
for many years it was thought that mercury was synchronously tidally locked with the sun ,  rotating once for each orbit and always keeping the same face directed towards the sun ,  in the same way that the same side of the moon always faces earth . 
this would indicate an interaction between the magnetosphere and the planet's surface . 
mercury is tidally locked with the sun in a 3:2 spin-orbit resonance ,  and rotates in a way that is unique in the solar system . 
a sidereal day  -lrb-  the period of rotation  -rrb-  lasts about 58.7 earth days . 
mercury's orbit is inclined by 7 degrees to the plane of earth's orbit  -lrb-  the ecliptic  -rrb-  ,  as shown in the diagram on the right . 
alternatively ,  mercury may have formed from the solar nebula before the sun's energy output had stabilized . 
if the effect of gravitational compression were to be factored out from both planets ,  the materials of which mercury is made would be denser than those of earth ,  with an uncompressed density of 5.3 g/cm versus earth's 4.4 g/cm . 
the eccentricity of mercury's orbit makes this resonance stable—at perihelion ,  when the solar tide is strongest ,  the sun is nearly still in mercury's sky . 
mercury's core has a higher iron content than that of any other major planet in the solar system ,  and several theories have been proposed to explain this . 
similar ,  but much smaller ,  effects exist for other solar system bodies: 8.62 arcseconds per century for venus ,  3.84 for earth ,  1.35 for mars ,  and 10.05 for 1566 icarus . 
bursts of energetic particles in the planet's magnetotail indicate a dynamic quality to the planet's magnetosphere . 
it is likely that this magnetic field is generated by a dynamo effect ,  in a manner similar to the magnetic field of earth . 
the resonance makes a single solar day on mercury last exactly two mercury years ,  or about 176 earth days . 
like the moon and venus ,  mercury exhibits phases as seen from earth . 
the film's reputation grew over time . 
 ''monty python and the holy grail '' grossed more than any british film exhibited in the us in 1975.
arthur and his men search the land for clues to the grail . 
nonetheless ,  many of the jokes from the film are present in the show . 
neither terry gilliam nor terry jones had directed a film before ,  and described it as a learning experience in which they would learn to make a film by making an entire full-length film . 
as chronicled in `` the life of python '' ,  `` the first 20 years of monty python '' ,  and `` the pythons' autobiography '' ,  it was revealed that chapman was suffering from acrophobia ,  trembling ,  and bouts of forgetfulness during filming . 
30 years later ,  idle used the film as the basis for the musical `` spamalot '' . 
in the uk ,  readers of `` total film '' magazine ranked it the fifth greatest comedy film of all time; a similar poll of channel 4 viewers placed it sixth  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- . 
in contrast to the group's first film ,  `` and now for something completely different '' ,  a compilation of sketches from the first two television series ,  `` holy grail '' draws on new material ,  parodying the legend of king arthur's quest for the holy grail . 
in 2013, the pythons lost a legal case to mark forstater ,  the film's producer ,  over royalties for the derivative work ,  `` spamalot '' . 
the film had its television premiere 25 february 1977 on the `` cbs late movie '' . 
other types of mutation occasionally create new genes from previously noncoding dna . 
the genomes of rna viruses are based on rna rather than dna . 
novel genes are produced by several methods ,  commonly through the duplication and mutation of an ancestral gene ,  or by recombining parts of different genes to form new combinations with new functions . 
changes in chromosome number may involve even larger mutations ,  where segments of the dna within chromosomes break and then rearrange . 
mercantilist domestic policy was more fragmented than its trade policy . 
mercantilist literature also extended beyond england . 
a systematic and coherent explanation of balance of trade emerged in thomas mun's argument `` england's treasure by forraign trade ,  or the balance of our forraign trade is the rule of our treasure '' - written in the 1620s and published in 1664.
mercantilism was centred on england and france ,  and it was in these states that mercantilist policies were most often enacted . 
mercantilist theory varies in sophistication from one writer to another and has evolved over time . 
the british parliament's repeal of the corn laws under robert peel in 1846 symbolized the emergence of free trade as an alternative system . 
other than von hornick ,  there were no mercantilist writers presenting an overarching scheme for the ideal economy ,  as adam smith would later do for classical economics . 
around 2002, meat puppets dissolved after duplantis left the band . 
meat puppets ii was followed by 1985's `` up on the sun '' . 
meat puppets is an american rock band formed in january 1980 in phoenix ,  arizona . 
 ''rat farm '' ,  the band's 14th album ,  was released in april 2013.
during the rest of the 1980s ,  meat puppets remained on sst and released a series of albums while touring relentlessly . 
as of early 2011 elmo kirkwood ,  son of curt kirkwood and nephew of cris kirkwood ,  was touring regularly with the band playing rhythm guitar . 
the band's thirteenth studio album ,  entitled `` lollipop '' ,  was released on april 12, 2011.
the dandies supported meat puppets on all european dates in 2011.
in april 2006 `` billboard '' reported that the kirkwood brothers would reunite as meat puppets without original drummer derrick bostrom . 
the band broke up twice ,  in 1996 and 2002, but reunited again in 2006.
the meat puppets were picked to open for an 11 show tour is support of the dean ween group in october 2016 after curt kirkwood and drummer chuck treece contribute to `` the deaner album '' . 
the band chose london records because it was the first label that zz top ,  one of their favorite bands ,  was signed to . 
in 1944 polanyi was elected to the royal society . 
polanyi advocates emergence i . e . 
their other son ,  george polanyi ,  who predeceased him ,  became a well-known economist . 
according to polanyi ,  a free society that strives to be value-neutral undermines its own justification . 
in `` transcendence and self-transcendence ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- ,  polanyi criticises the mechanistic world view that modern science inherited from galileo . 
his older brother was karl polanyi ,  the political economist and anthropologist ,  and his niece was eva zeisel ,  a world-renowned ceramist . 
in a series of articles ,  re-published in `` the contempt of freedom ''  -lrb-  1940 -rrb- and `` the logic of liberty ''  -lrb-  1951 -rrb- ,  polanyi claimed that co-operation amongst scientists is analogous to the way agents co-ordinate themselves within a free market . 
in 1909, after leaving his teacher-training secondary school  -lrb-  mintagymnasium  -rrb-  ,  polanyi studied to be a physician ,  obtaining his medical diploma in 1914.
michael polanyi  -lrb-  ; ; 11 march 1891 – 22 february 1976 -rrb- was a hungarian-british polymath ,  who made important theoretical contributions to physical chemistry ,  economics ,  and philosophy . 
methanol is toxic by two mechanisms . 
toxicity to methanol was described as early as 1856.
further advantages for methanol is its ready biodegradability and low toxicity . 
carbon monoxide and hydrogen react over a catalyst to produce methanol . 
methanol is the simplest alcohol ,  consisting of a methyl group linked to a hydroxyl group . 
methanol is the precursor to most simple methylamines ,  methyl halides ,  methyl ethers . 
methanol is occasionally used to fuel internal combustion engines . 
however ,  cases exist of methanol resistance ,  such as that of mike malloy who was the victim of a failed murder attempt by methanol in the early 1930s . 
methanol is a traditional denaturant for ethanol ,  the product being known as `` denatured alcohol '' or `` methylated spirit '' . 
today ,  methanol is mainly produced industrially by hydrogenation of carbon monoxide . 
the definition above precludes non-animal products which resemble dairy milk in color and texture ,  such as almond milk ,  coconut milk ,  rice milk ,  and soy milk . 
the term `` dairy '' relates to animal milk and animal milk production . 
throughout the world ,  more than six billion people consume milk and milk products . 
continued improvements in the efficiency of milk production led to a worldwide glut of milk by 2016.
china and russia were the world's largest importers of milk and milk products until 2016 when both countries became self-sufficient ,  contributing to a worldwide glut of milk . 
a substance secreted by pigeons to feed their young is called `` crop milk '' and bears some resemblance to mammalian milk ,  although it is not consumed as a milk substitute . 
interspecies consumption of milk is not uncommon ,  particularly among humans ,  many of whom consume the milk of other mammals . 
the females of all mammal species can by definition produce milk ,  but cow's milk dominates commercial production . 
a sequel ,  ``  '' ,  was released in march 24, 2005.
a sequel ,  ``  '' ,  was released on march 24, 2005.
the story is set in new york city and san antonio . 
however ,  most of the movie was actually shot in austin ,  texas: scenes depicting the interior of the st .  regis were shot in austin's driskill hotel; the pageant scenes were shot at the bass concert hall at the university of texas at austin; and scenes depicting the pageant contestants in their hotel rooms were shot in the omni austin at south park . 
an electromagnet is a type of magnet in which the magnetic field is produced by an electric current . 
magnetism is a class of physical phenomena that are mediated by magnetic fields . 
like ferromagnetism ,  ferrimagnets retain their magnetization in the absence of a field . 
when an external magnetic field is applied ,  these magnetic moments will tend to align themselves in the same direction as the applied field ,  thus reinforcing it . 
a suitable material can then produce a strong net magnetic field . 
diamagnetism appears in all materials ,  and is the tendency of a material to oppose an applied magnetic field ,  and therefore ,  to be repelled by a magnetic field . 
there are many scientific experiments that can physically show magnetic fields . 
when exposed to a magnetic field ,  the domain boundaries move ,  so that the domains aligned with the magnetic field grow and dominate the structure  -lrb-  dotted yellow area  -rrb-  ,  as shown at the left . 
the magnetic state  -lrb-  or magnetic phase  -rrb-  of a material depends on temperature and other variables such as pressure and the applied magnetic field . 
its response to a magnetic field is qualitatively similar to the response of a paramagnet ,  but much larger . 
thus ,  even in the absence of an applied field ,  the magnetic moments of the electrons in the material spontaneously line up parallel to one another . 
although ferromagnetism is responsible for most of the effects of magnetism encountered in everyday life ,  all other materials are influenced to some extent by a magnetic field ,  by several other types of magnetism . 
however ,  unlike a permanent magnet that needs no power ,  an electromagnet requires a continuous supply of current to maintain the magnetic field . 
a special case of a filter is a filter defined on a set . 
the dual notion of a filter is an ideal . 
the dual notion of a filter ,  i . e . 
a filter is proper if it is not equal to the whole set `` p '' . 
in mathematics ,  a filter is a special subset of a partially ordered set . 
the production of ferrous metals accounts for 95 percent of world metal production . 
the solution is collected and processed to extract valuable metals . 
ore bodies often contain more than one valuable metal . 
the extraction of iron from its ore into a workable metal is much more difficult than for copper or tin . 
shot peening is a cold working process used to finish metal parts . 
extractive metallurgy is the practice of removing valuable metals from an ore and refining the extracted raw metals into a purer form . 
metals under constant stress at elevated temperatures can creep . 
metals are shaped by processes such as: cold-working processes ,  in which the product’s shape is altered by rolling ,  fabrication or other processes while the product is cold ,  can increase the strength of the product by a process called work hardening . 
it is also used to make inexpensive metals look like the more expensive ones  -lrb-  gold ,  silver  -rrb-  . 
that concentrate would then be processed to separate the valuable metals into individual constituents . 
in order to convert a metal oxide or sulphide to a purer metal ,  the ore must be reduced physically ,  chemically ,  or electrolytically . 
common engineering metals include aluminium ,  chromium ,  copper ,  iron ,  magnesium ,  nickel ,  titanium and zinc . 
also ,  intersystems sold ism-11 for the pdp-11  -lrb-  which was identical to dsm-11 -rrb- . 
the original mumps system was ,  like unix a few years later ,  built on a spare dec pdp-7.
the portability was soon useful ,  as mumps was shortly adapted to a dec pdp-15, where it lived for some time . 
mercury is based on the logic programming language prolog . 
it features a strong ,  static ,  polymorphic type system ,  and a strong mode and determinism system . 
it features a strict static type and mode system and a module system . 
by using information obtained at compile time  -lrb-  such as type and mode  -rrb-  ,  programs written in mercury typically perform significantly faster than equivalent programs written in prolog . 
in 1858 faraday retired to live there . 
faraday had a long association with the royal institution of great britain . 
this shielding effect is used in what is now known as a faraday cage . 
faraday married sarah barnard  -lrb-  1800–1879 -rrb- on 12 june 1821.
faraday is best known for his work regarding electricity and magnetism . 
the former uk faraday station in antarctica was named after him . 
faraday's earliest chemical work was as an assistant to humphry davy . 
faraday was the first to report what later came to be called metallic nanoparticles . 
faraday died at his house at hampton court on 25 august 1867, aged 75.
faraday assisted with the planning and judging of exhibits for the great exhibition of 1851 in london . 
since his death ,  faraday's diary has been published ,  as have several large volumes of his letters and faraday's journal from his travels with davy in 1813–1815.
faraday was also active in what would now be called environmental science ,  or engineering . 
faraday was interred in the dissenters'  -lrb-  non-anglican  -rrb-  section of highgate cemetery . 
michael faraday primary school is situated on the aylesbury estate in walworth . 
faraday was a devout christian; his sandemanian denomination was an offshoot of the church of scotland . 
in both his 1897 paper and his nobel acceptance speech ,  zeeman made reference to faraday's work . 
faraday was particularly inspired by the book `` conversations on chemistry '' by jane marcet . 
a child marriage is a marriage where one or both spouses are under the age of 18.
one type of de facto polygyny is concubinage ,  where only one woman gets a wife's rights and status ,  while other women remain legal house mistresses . 
monogamy is a form of marriage in which an individual has only one spouse during their lifetime or at any one time  -lrb-  serial monogamy  -rrb-  . 
in a 1997 article in `` current anthropology '' ,  duran bell describes marriage as `` a relationship between one or more men  -lrb-  male or female  -rrb-  in severalty to one or more women that provides those men with a demand-right of sexual access within a domestic group and identifies women who bear the obligation of yielding to the demands of those specific men . `` 
it is associated with `` partible paternity '' ,  the cultural belief that a child can have more than one father . 
in `` the future of marriage in western civilization ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- ,  he rejected his earlier definition ,  instead provisionally defining marriage as `` a relation of one or more men to one or more women that is recognized by custom or law '' . 
in some areas ,  child marriages and polygamy may occur in spite of national laws against the practice . 
as polygamy in africa is increasingly subject to legal limitations ,  a variant form of `` de facto ''  -lrb-  as opposed to legal or `` de jure ''  -rrb-  polygyny is being practised in urban centres . 
marriages are classified according to the number of legal spouses an individual has . 
governments that support monogamy may allow easy divorce . 
in recognition of a practice by the nuer people of sudan allowing women to act as a husband in certain circumstances  -lrb-  the ghost marriage  -rrb-  ,  kathleen gough suggested modifying this to `` a woman and one or more other persons . `` 
although a society may be classified as polygynous ,  not all marriages in it necessarily are; monogamous marriages may in fact predominate . 
child marriage was common throughout history ,  even up until the 1900s in the united states ,  where in 1880 ce ,  in the state of delaware ,  the age of consent for marriage was 7 years old . 
polygyny usually grants wives equal status ,  although the husband may have personal preferences . 
the name `` middangeard '' occurs six times in the old english epic poem `` beowulf '' ,  and is the same word as midgard in old norse . 
in early germanic cosmology ,  the term stands alongside `` world ''  -lrb-  old english `` weorold '' ,  old saxon `` werold '' ,  old high german `` weralt '' ,  old frisian `` warld '' and old norse `` verǫld ''  -rrb-  ,  from a common germanic compound `` *wira-alđiz '' ,  the `` age of men '' . 
this name occurs in old norse literature as  . 
midgard  -lrb-  an anglicised form of old norse ; old english  ,  swedish and danish `` midgård '' ,  old saxon  ,  old high german  ,  gothic `` midjun-gards ''; `` middle yard ''  -rrb-  is the name for earth  -lrb-  equivalent in meaning to the greek term  ,  `` inhabited ''  -rrb-  inhabited by and known to humans in early germanic cosmology ,  and specifically one of the nine worlds in norse mythology . 
mage: the ascension is a role-playing game based in the world of darkness ,  and was published by white wolf game studio . 
the core rules of the game are similar to those in other world of darkness games; see storyteller system for an explanation . 
in the game ,  mages have always existed ,  though there are legends of the pure ones who were shards of the original ,  divine one . 
in-character ,  only a mage's paradigm can explain what each of these things are ,  what they mean ,  and why it's the way it is . 
the new game features some of the same game mechanics but uses a substantially different premise and setting . 
the marauders are a group of mages that embody dynamism . 
in 2005, white wolf released a new version of the game ,  marketed as ``  '' ,  for the new world of darkness series . 
like other storytelling games mage emphasizes personal creativity and that ultimately the game's powers and traits should be used to tell a satisfying story . 
in order to understand the metaphysics of the mage setting ,  it is important to remember that many of the terms used to describe magic and magi  -lrb-  e . g . 
the idea of magic in `` mage '' is broadly inclusive of diverse ideas about mystical practices as well as other belief systems ,  such as science and religion ,  so that most mages do not resemble typical fantasy wizards . 
fraser returned to australia in mid-1952.
fraser had a political background on both sides of his family . 
fraser was particularly active in foreign policy as prime minister . 
peacock subsequently challenged fraser for the leadership; although fraser defeated peacock ,  these events left him politically weakened . 
gorton never forgave fraser for the role he played in his downfall; to the day gorton died in 2002, he could not bear to be in the same room with fraser . 
john malcolm fraser was born in toorak ,  melbourne ,  victoria ,  on 21 may 1930.
after more than a decade on the backbench ,  fraser was appointed to the cabinet by the prime minister ,  harold holt ,  in 1966.
after whitlam's dismissal ,  fraser was sworn in as prime minister on an initial caretaker basis . 
at the 1954 election ,  fraser lost to the sitting labor member don mcleod by just 17 votes  -lrb-  out of over 37,000 cast  -rrb-  . 
fraser also strongly opposed white minority rule in rhodesia . 
after the liberals lost the 1974 election ,  fraser unsuccessfully challenged snedden for the leadership in november . 
fraser and the coalition lost power at the 1983 election ,  and he left politics a short time later . 
in 1949, fraser moved to england to study at magdalen college ,  oxford ,  which his father had also attended . 
at the 1975 election ,  fraser led the liberal-country party coalition to a landslide victory . 
john malcolm fraser  -lrb-  ; 21 may 1930 – 20 march 2015 -rrb- was an australian politician who served as the 22nd prime minister of australia ,  in office from 1975 to 1983 as leader of the liberal party . 
fraser again challenged snedden on 21 march 1975, this time succeeding and becoming leader of the liberal party and leader of the opposition . 
after 1996, fraser was critical of the howard coalition government over foreign policy issues ,  particularly john howard's alignment with the foreign policy of the bush administration ,  which fraser saw as damaging australian relationships in asia . 
these factors ,  combined with the 1955 labor party split ,  allowed fraser to win a landslide victory . 
the university first opened to students on 6 march 1967 with more students than anticipated . 
founded in 1964 by the new south wales government ,  it was the third university to be established in the metropolitan area of sydney . 
professor webb left the university in 1986 and was succeeded by di yerbury ,  the first female vice-chancellor in australia . 
the university is the first in australia to fully align its degree system with the bologna accord . 
macquarie university  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a public research university based in sydney ,  australia ,  in the suburb of macquarie park . 
in 2018, macquarie university station will close for six months for conversion to a sydney metro station on the sydney metro northwest line . 
the new student organisation originally lacked a true student representative union; however ,  following a complete review and authorisation from the university council ,  a new student union known as macquarie university students association  -lrb-  musra  -rrb-  was established in 2009.
in 2013, the university became the first in australia to fully align its degree system with the bologna accord . 
the first vice-chancellor of macquarie university ,  alexander george mitchell ,  was selected by the university council which met for the first time on 17 june 1964.
after over a decade of service ,  the first vice chancellor professor mitchell was succeeded by professor edwin webb in december 1975.
the idea of founding a third university in sydney was flagged in the early 1960s when the new south wales government formed a committee of enquiry into higher education to deal with a perceived emergency in university enrollments in new south wales . 
macquarie university was formally established in 1964 with the passage of the macquarie university act 1964 by the new south wales parliament . 
in norse mythology ,  muspelheim  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called muspell  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a realm of fire . 
the etymology of `` muspelheim '' is uncertain ,  but may come from `` mund-spilli '' ,  `` world-destroyers '' ,  `` wreck of the world '' . 
the dynamically induced electric field has closed field lines similar to a magnetic field ,  unless superposed by a static  -lrb-  charge induced  -rrb-  electric field . 
in the electric and magnetic field formulation there are four equations that determine the fields for given charge and current distribution . 
the maxwell–faraday version of faraday's law of induction describes how a time varying magnetic field creates  -lrb-  `` induces ''  -rrb-  an electric field . 
equivalent technical statements are that the sum total magnetic flux through any gaussian surface is zero ,  or that the magnetic field is a solenoidal vector field . 
maxwell's addition to ampère's law is particularly important: it makes the set of equations mathematically consistent for non static fields ,  without changing the laws of ampere and gauss for static fields . 
ampère's law with maxwell's addition states that magnetic fields can be generated in two ways: by electric current  -lrb-  this was the original `` ampère's law ''  -rrb-  and by changing electric fields  -lrb-  this was `` maxwell's addition '' ,  which he called displacement current  -rrb-  . 
metrizable spaces inherit all topological properties from metric spaces . 
that is ,  a topological space formula_1 is said to be metrizable if there is a metric
in topology and related areas of mathematics ,  a metrizable space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to a metric space . 
for example ,  a compact hausdorff space is metrizable if and only if it is second-countable . 
max zorn's grandson eric zorn is a columnist for the `` chicago tribune '' . 
zorn's lemma was first postulated by kazimierz kuratowski in 1922, and then independently by zorn in 1935.
zorn was born in krefeld ,  germany . 
the main  -lrb-   is a river in germany . 
the main begins near kulmbach in franconia at the joining of its two headstreams ,  the red main  -lrb-  `` roter main ''  -rrb-  and the white main  -lrb-  `` weißer main ''  -rrb-  . 
the largest cities along the main are frankfurt am main and würzburg . 
in 36 bc ,  octavian and agrippa set sail against sextus . 
agrippa was born between 64–62 bc ,  in an uncertain location . 
agrippa established a standard for roman foot  -lrb-  agrippa's own  -rrb-  in 29 bc ,  and thus a definition of a pace as 5 feet . 
marcus vipsanius agrippa  -lrb-  ; 64/62 bc – 12 bc  -rrb-  was a roman consul ,  statesman ,  general and architect . 
the term via agrippa is used for any part of the network of roadways in gaul built by agrippa . 
agrippa participated in smaller military campaigns in 35 and 34 bc ,  but by the autumn of 34 he had returned to rome . 
in 18 bc ,  agrippa's powers were even further increased to almost match those of augustus . 
piero di cosimo who worked in cosimo rosselli’s workshop introduced albertinelli to flemish techniques . 
mariotto albertinelli ,  in full mariotto di bigio di bindo albertinelli  -lrb-  13 october 1474 – 5 november 1515 -rrb- was an italian renaissance painter of the florentine school . 
he was a close friend and collaborator of fra bartolomeo and their joint works appear as if they have been painted by one hand . 
in addition to name the food stand after the owners' last name or the food sold ,  these food stands were also often named after the owners' nicknames . 
foodservice establishments with names ending with the chinese character `` dian ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or `` dian zihao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
foodservice establishments of this category or lower would not be called upon to perform catering at the customers' homes for special events . 
foodservice establishments with names ending with the chinese character `` fang ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or `` fang zihao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
foodservice establishments with names ending with the chinese character `` guan ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or `` guan zihao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
foodservice establishments with name ending with the chinese character `` pu ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or `` pu zihao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
foodservice establishments with names ending with the chinese character `` tan ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or `` tan zihao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
just like foodservice establishments with names ending with the chinese character `` ju '' ,  when catering at customers’ homes ,  foodservice establishments of this category would also only provide the few specialty dishes they are famous for ,  but they would mostly bring the already-cooked dishes to the location ,  and would only cook on location occasionally . 
in terms of catering at the customers' sites ,  foodservice establishments of this category often only provided dishes strictly according to their menu ,  and would not provide any dishes that were not on the menu . 
many manichaeans took part in rebellions against the song dynasty . 
beginning with the time of its creation by mani ,  the manichaean religion had a detailed description of deities and events that took place within the manichaean scheme of the universe . 
manichaeans in iran tried to assimilate their religion along with islam in the muslim caliphates . 
the manichaeans had sufficient structure to have a head of their community . 
during the early abbasid period ,  the manichaeans underwent persecution . 
manichaeism presented an elaborate description of the conflict between the spiritual world of light and the material world of darkness . 
manichaean monasteries existed in rome in 312 during the time of pope miltiades . 
the appearance of the prophet mani was another attempt by the `` world of light '' to reveal to mankind the true source of the spiritual light imprisoned within their material bodies . 
mani believed that the teachings of gautama buddha ,  zoroaster ,  and jesus were incomplete ,  and that his revelations were for the entire world ,  calling his teachings the `` religion of light '' . 
according to one tradition ,  it was mani himself who invented the unique version of the syriac script known as the manichaean alphabet ,  which was used in all of the manichaean works written within the sasanian empire ,  whether they were in syriac or middle persian ,  and also for most of the works written within the uyghur khaganate . 
mani was also influenced by writings of the assyrian gnostic bardaisan  -lrb-  154–222 -rrb- ,  who ,  like mani ,  wrote in syriac ,  and presented a dualistic interpretation of the world in terms of light and darkness ,  in combination with elements from christianity . 
the manichaeans preserved many apocryphal christian works ,  such as the acts of thomas ,  that would otherwise have been lost . 
in 291, persecution arose in the sasanian empire with the murder of the apostle sisin by emperor bahram ii ,  and the slaughter of many manichaeans . 
spices are used extensively in moroccan food . 
lamb is also heavily consumed ,  and since moroccan sheep breeds store most of their fat in their tails ,  moroccan lamb does not have the pungent flavour that western lamb and mutton have . 
since morocco lies on two coasts ,  the atlantic and the mediterranean ,  moroccan cuisine has ample seafood dishes . 
morocco is endowed with over 3000 km of coastline . 
there are also a number of flat breads and pulled unleavened pan-fried breads . 
moroccan cuisine is influenced by morocco's interactions and exchanges with other cultures and nations over the centuries . 
a big part of the daily meal is bread . 
van buren's home in kinderhook ,  new york ,  which he called lindenwald ,  is now the martin van buren national historic site . 
van buren was small in stature at 5 feet 6 inches tall ,  and some referred to him as `` little van '' . 
martin van buren  -lrb-  ; born maarten van buren ,  december 5, 1782 – july 24, 1862 -rrb- was the eighth president of the united states from 1837 to 1841.
in august 1831 jackson gave van buren a recess appointment as the ambassador to britain ,  and van buren arrived in london in september . 
in 1812, van buren won his party's nomination for a seat in the new york state senate . 
van buren is portrayed by nigel hawthorne in the 1997 film `` amistad '' . 
eight fingers signifies van buren ,  the eighth president . 
van buren hoped that the whigs would nominate clay for president ,  which would allow van buren to cast the 1840 campaign as a clash between van buren's independent treasury system and clay's support for a national bank . 
far from ending van buren's career ,  calhoun's action gave greater impetus to van buren's candidacy for vice president . 
in february 1829, jackson wrote to van buren to ask him to become secretary of state . 
on the expiration of his term ,  van buren returned to his estate of lindenwald in kinderhook . 
once the american civil war began ,  van buren made public his support for the union . 
van buren personally considered slavery to be immoral ,  but sanctioned by the constitution . 
in february 1821, the state legislature elected van buren to represent new york in the united states senate . 
van buren won the election with 764,198 popular votes ,  50.9 percent of the total ,  and 170 electoral votes . 
martin van buren shows up at the studio to begin his free dance lessons . 
van buren was born on december 5, 1782, in the village of kinderhook ,  new york ,  about south of albany on the hudson river . 
van buren was born in kinderhook ,  new york to a family of dutch americans; his father was a patriot during the american revolution . 
van buren's opposition to immediate annexation cost him the support of many pro-slavery democrats . 
van buren was the subject of a popular google search ad aired during the 2013 super bowl . 
boldly reversing jackson's policies ,  van buren sought peace abroad and harmony at home . 
hannah contracted tuberculosis and died on february 5, 1819 at age 35, and van buren never remarried . 
van buren's legal practice continued to flourish ,  and he traveled all over the state to represent various clients . 
in 1816, van buren won re-election to the state senate ,  and he would continue to simultaneously serve as both state senator and as the state's attorney general . 
at the opening of the democratic convention in 1844, van buren was the leading candidate for the party's nomination for the presidency . 
additionally ,  van buren had helped select jackson's cabinet appointees and enjoyed strong working relationships with them . 
in 1881 the original members' stand was sold to the richmond cricket club for £55.
more stands were built in the early 20th century . 
in the 15 years after 1897 the stand capacity at the ground increased to nearly 20,000.
the northern stand ,  also known as the olympic stand ,  was built to replace the old grandstand for the 1956 olympic games . 
when the lillywhite tour stand burnt down in 1884 it was replaced by a new stand which seated 450 members and 4500 public . 
at the time of the land grant the government stipulated that the ground was to be used for cricket and cricket only . 
the maximum capacity of the ground under this configuration ,  as advised by the health department ,  was 84,000 seated and 94,000 standing . 
the first grandstand at the mcg was the original wooden members’ stand built in 1854, while the first public grandstand was a 200-metre long 6000-seat temporary structure built in 1861.
the american aid was not part of the marshall plan . 
all this aid was separate from the marshall plan . 
congress would eventually allocate $12.4 billion in aid over the four years of the plan . 
the marshall plan money was transferred to the governments of the european nations . 
the marshall plan also played an important role in european integration . 
the marshall plan was replaced by the mutual security plan at the end of 1951; that new plan gave away about $7 billion annually until 1961 when it was replaced by another program . 
the marshall plan was originally scheduled to end in 1953.
the uk received 385 million usd of its marshall plan aid in the form of loans . 
he offered aid ,  but the european countries had to organize the program themselves . 
these reparation payments meant the soviet union itself received about the same as 16 european countries received in total from marshall plan aid . 
the proportion of marshall plan loans versus marshall plan grants was roughly 15% to 85% for both the uk and france . 
the reconstruction plan ,  developed at a meeting of the participating european states ,  was drafted on june 5, 1947.
the united states provided similar aid programs in asia ,  but they were not part of the marshall plan . 
the marshall plan ,  just as garioa ,  consisted of aid both in the form of grants and in the form of loans . 
much of the marshall plan aid would be used by the europeans to buy manufactured goods and raw materials from the united states and canada
the marshall plan aid was mostly used for the purchase of goods from the united states . 
thus the plan ended in 1951, though various other forms of american aid to europe continued afterwards . 
thanks to the plan ,  during 1952, it went up 35 percent of the industrial and agricultural . 
the marshall plan money was in the form of grants from the u . s .  treasury that did not have to be repaid . 
large parts of the world devastated by world war ii did not benefit from the marshall plan . 
soviet foreign minister vyacheslav molotov left paris ,  rejecting the plan . 
there was also some hope that the eastern bloc nations would join the plan ,  and thus be pulled out of the emerging soviet bloc ,  but that did not happen . 
also established were counterpart funds ,  which used marshall plan aid to establish funds in the local currency . 
over the next decade ,  a considerable amount of american aid would go to spain ,  but less than its neighbors had received under the marshall plan . 
the marshall plan aid was divided among the participant states on a roughly per capita basis . 
the marshall plan  -lrb-  officially the european recovery program ,  erp  -rrb-  was an american initiative passed in 1948 to aid western europe ,  in which the united states gave over $12 billion  -lrb-  nearly $ billion in us dollars  -rrb-  in economic assistance to help rebuild western european economies after the end of world war ii . 
the marshall plan aid was divided amongst the participant states roughly on a per capita basis . 
agreement was eventually reached and the europeans sent a reconstruction plan to washington ,  which was formulated and agreed upon by the committee of european economic co-operation in 1947.
to combat the effects of the marshall plan ,  the ussr developed its own economic plan ,  known as the molotov plan ,  in spite of the fact that large amounts of resources from the eastern bloc countries to the ussr were paid as reparations ,  for countries participating in the axis power during the war . 
germany ,  which up until the 1953 debt agreement had to work on the assumption that all the marshall plan aid was to be repaid ,  spent its funds very carefully . 
the political effects of the marshall plan may have been just as important as the economic ones . 
the ussr did establish comecon as a riposte to the marshall plan to deliver aid for eastern bloc countries ,  but this was complicated by the soviet efforts to manage their own recovery from the war . 
the speech described the dysfunction of the european economy and presented a rationale for us aid . 
turning the plan into reality required negotiations among the participating nations . 
although all other communist european countries had deferred to stalin and rejected the aid ,  the yugoslavs ,  led by josip broz  -lrb-  tito  -rrb-  ,  at first went along and rejected the marshall plan . 
state department officials ,  however ,  knew that stalin would almost certainly not participate and that any plan that would send large amounts of aid to the soviets was unlikely to get congressional approval . 
