the maximin value of a player is the highest value that the player can be sure to get without knowing the actions of the other players; equivalently ,  it is the lowest value the other players can force the player to receive when they know the player's action . 
with  ,  or approximately 2.25% of the united states ,  minnesota is the 12th-largest state . 
the remainder of the state is known as `` greater minnesota '' or pejoratively `` outstate minnesota '' . 
minnesota  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the upper midwest and northern regions of the united states . 
as of the 2010 census ,  the population of minnesota was 5,303,925.
minnesota's first state park ,  itasca state park ,  was established in 1891, and is the source of the mississippi river . 
minnesota is the second northernmost u . s .  state  -lrb-  after alaska  -rrb-  and northernmost contiguous state . 
the state's nickname ,  `` land of 10,000 lakes '' ,  is apt ,  as there are 11,842 minnesota lakes over in size . 
saint paul ,  in east-central minnesota along the banks of the mississippi river ,  has been minnesota's capital city since 1849, first as capital of the territory of minnesota ,  and then as the state capital since 1858.
approximately of wetlands are within minnesota's borders ,  the most of any state except alaska . 
minnesota's center of population is in hennepin county . 
minnesota's standard of living index is among the highest in the united states ,  and the state is also among the best-educated and wealthiest in the nation . 
the united states census bureau estimates the population of minnesota was 5,489,594 on july 1, 2015, a 3.5 percent increase since the 2010 united states census . 
minnesota is the 12th largest in area and the 22nd most populous of the u . s .  states; nearly 60% of its residents live in the minneapolis–saint paul metropolitan area  -lrb-  known as the `` twin cities ''  -rrb-  . 
saint paul is adjacent to minnesota's most populous city ,  minneapolis; they and their suburbs are known collectively as the twin cities metropolitan area ,  the 16th-largest metropolitan area in the united states ,  and home to about 54 percent of the state's population . 
the missouri river is the longest river in north america . 
in 1990, the missouri river watershed was home to about 12 million people . 
 ''missouri river shipping never achieved its expectations . 
the river then rounds the northern side of st .  louis to join the mississippi river on the border between missouri and illinois . 
of the river is listed as recreational under the national wild and scenic rivers system . 
finally ,  on the south ,  the ozark mountains and other low divides through central missouri ,  kansas and colorado separate the missouri watershed from those of the white river and arkansas river ,  also tributaries of the mississippi river . 
for navigation purposes ,  the missouri river is divided into two main sections . 
the world wide fund for nature divides the missouri river watershed into three freshwater ecoregions: the upper missouri ,  lower missouri and central prairie . 
to the north ,  the much lower laurentian divide separates the missouri river watershed from those of the oldman river ,  a tributary of the south saskatchewan river ,  as well as the souris ,  sheyenne ,  and smaller tributaries of the red river of the north . 
there are no lock and dams on the lower missouri river ,  but there are plenty of wing dams that jettie out into the river and make it harder for barges to navigate . 
when combined with the lower mississippi river ,  it forms the world's fourth longest river system . 
bourgmont established fort orleans ,  the first european settlement of any kind on the missouri river ,  near present-day brunswick ,  missouri ,  in 1723.
the river here drains about  ,  representing about 91% of the entire basin . 
for over 12,000 years ,  people have depended on the missouri river and its tributaries as a source of sustenance and transportation . 
the table at left lists statistics of all fifteen dams on the missouri river ,  ordered downstream . 
when combined with the lower mississippi ,  the missouri and its headwaters form part of the fourth-longest river system in the world ,  at  . 
holter dam ,  about downstream of helena ,  was the third hydroelectric dam built on this stretch of the missouri river . 
over 95 significant tributaries and hundreds of smaller ones feed the missouri river ,  with most of the larger ones coming in as the river draws close to the mouth . 
in this pre-colonial and early-colonial era ,  the missouri river was used as a path of trade and transport ,  and the river and its tributaries often formed territorial boundaries . 
farther on ,  the river passes through the fort peck dam ,  and immediately downstream ,  the milk river joins from the north . 
most rivers and streams in the missouri river basin flow from west to east ,  following the incline of the great plains; however ,  some eastern tributaries such as the james ,  big sioux and grand river systems flow from north to south . 
on the other end of the scale is the tiny roe river in montana ,  which at long is one the world's shortest rivers . 
tonnage of goods shipped by barges on the missouri river has seen a serious decline from the 1960s to the present . 
in 1945, the usace began the missouri river bank stabilization and navigation project ,  which would permanently increase the river's navigation channel to a width of and a depth of  . 
recreational use of missouri river reservoirs is estimated to contribute $85–100 million to the regional economy each year . 
the missouri river was one of the main routes for the westward expansion of the united states during the 19th century . 
since the beginning of the 20th century ,  the missouri river has been extensively engineered for water transport purposes ,  and about 32 percent of the river now flows through artificially straightened channels . 
the united states geological survey operates fifty-one stream gauges along the missouri river . 
archaeological evidence ,  especially in missouri ,  suggests that human beings first inhabited the watershed of the missouri river between 10,000 and 12,000 years ago at the end of the pleistocene . 
the laramide orogeny is essential to modern missouri river hydrology ,  as snow and ice melt from the rockies provide the majority of the flow in the missouri and its tributaries . 
parts of the river itself are designated for recreational or preservational use . 
along with fort peck ,  which was integrated as a unit of the pick-sloan plan in the 1940s ,  these dams now form what is known as the missouri river mainstem system . 
historically ,  the tribe lived in bands near the mouth of the grand river at its confluence with the missouri river; the mouth of the missouri at its confluence with the mississippi river ,  and in present-day saline county ,  missouri . 
the missouria or missouri  -lrb-  in their own language ,  niúachi ,  also spelled niutachi  -rrb-  are a native american tribe that originated in the great lakes region of united states before european contact . 
however ,  these early systems in world war ii were only built in small numbers . 
mendel discovered that ,  when he crossed purebred white flower and purple flower pea plants  -lrb-  the parental or p generation  -rrb-  ,  the result was not a blend . 
the genotypic ratio ,  as seen in the punnett square ,  is 1 `` bb '' : 2 `` bb '' : 1 `` bb '' . 
this is known as the law of independent assortment . 
this shows that each of the two alleles is inherited independently from the other ,  with a 3:1 phenotypic ratio for each . 
an offspring thus receives a pair of alleles for a trait by inheriting homologous chromosomes from the parent organisms: one allele for each trait from each parent . 
an organism that has two different alleles for a gene is said be heterozygous for that gene  -lrb-  and is called a heterozygote  -rrb-  . 
others use machinima in drama . 
machinima has also been used for music video clips . 
game developers have continued to increase support for machinima . 
machinima has been showcased in contests sponsored by game companies . 
machinima can be less expensive than other forms of filmmaking . 
matinee ,  a machinima software tool included with `` unreal tournament 2004 '' ,  popularized scripting in machinima . 
machinima has advantages and disadvantages when compared to other styles of filmmaking . 
some have used machinima to make political statements ,  often from left-wing perspectives . 
machinima productions can remain close to their gaming roots and feature stunts or other portrayals of gameplay . 
after the qml's quake movie oscars ,  dedicated machinima awards did not reappear until the amas created the mackies for its first machinima film festival in 2002.
in digital puppetry ,  machinima creators become virtual actors . 
some general film festivals accept machinima ,  and game companies ,  such as epic games ,  blizzard entertainment and jagex ,  have sponsored contests involving it . 
most often ,  video games are used to generate the computer animation . 
these references to works outside the game ,  often triggered by events within the game ,  are prime examples of the densely intertextual nature of machinima . 
the complex behavior of the tunnel’s virtual director makes it a significant precursor of later application to video games based machinimas . 
machinima has appeared on television ,  starting with g4's series `` portal '' . 
commercial use of machinima has increased . rooster teeth sells dvds of their `` red vs .  blue '' series and ,  under sponsorship from electronic arts ,  helped to promote `` the sims 2 '' by using the game to make a machinima series ,  `` the strangerhood '' . 
yet burnie burns and the machinima team at rooster teeth created an extensive storyline of their own using these game resources . 
another derivative genre termed `` machinima verite '' ,  from cinéma vérité ,  seeks to add a documentary and additional realism to the machinima piece . 
another difference is that machinima is created in real time ,  but other animation is pre-rendered . 
game companies have provided software for and have encouraged machinima ,  but the widespread use of digital assets from copyrighted games has resulted in complex ,  unresolved legal issues . 
dna damage is an abnormal alteration in the structure of dna that cannot ,  itself ,  be replicated when dna replicates . 
some alkylating agents may produce crosslinking of dna . 
of these ,  83 are directly employed in the 5 types of dna repair processes indicated in the chart shown in the article dna repair . 
for example ,  dna may be methylated by s-adenosylmethionine ,  and glycosylated by reducing sugars . 
these processes may be error-prone or error-free . 
dna is not entirely stable in aqueous solution . 
mammalian nuclear dna may sustain more than 60,000 damage episodes per cell per day ,  as listed with references in dna damage  -lrb-  naturally occurring  -rrb-  . 
dna polymerase η may help bypass these lesions in an error-free manner; however ,  individuals with defective dna repair function ,  such as sufferers of xeroderma pigmentosum ,  are sensitive to sunlight and may be prone to skin cancer . 
frequent occurrence of dna damage is likely a problem for all dna- containing organisms ,  and the need to cope with dna damage and minimize their deleterious effects is likely a fundamental problem for life . 
as prime minister ,  bowell faced the manitoba schools question . 
in their 1998 study of the canadian prime ministers up through jean chrétien ,  j .  l .  granatstein and norman hillmer found that a survey of canadian historians ranked bowell #19 out of the 20 prime ministers up until then . 
in december 1894, prime minister sir john sparrow david thompson died suddenly ,  and bowell ,  as the most senior cabinet minister ,  was appointed in thompson's stead by the governor general . 
until 2017, bowell remained the only canadian prime minister without a full-length biography of his life and career . 
in december 1894, prime minister thompson unexpectedly died in office ,  aged only 49.
 ''the accidental prime minister '' ,  by betsy dewar boyce ,  2017, kirby publishing ,  bancroft ,  ontario ,   . 
bowell thus became the second of just two canadian prime ministers  -lrb-  after john abbott  -rrb-  to hold that office while serving in the senate rather than the house of commons . 
the project was also charged with gathering intelligence on the german nuclear weapon project . 
by march 1943 conant decided that british help would benefit some areas of the project . 
the manhattan project was a research and development undertaking during world war ii that produced the first nuclear weapons . 
he discovered that the american project was smaller than the british ,  and not as far advanced . 
one of groves' early problems was to find a director for project y ,  the group that would design and build the bomb . 
as conant and bush told the british ,  the order came `` from the top '' . 
in parallel with the work on uranium was an effort to produce plutonium . 
groves appreciated the early british atomic research and the british scientists' contributions to the manhattan project ,  but stated that the united states would have succeeded without them . 
he just stirred him up all the time by telling him how important he thought the project was . `` 
the land acquisition process dragged on and was not completed before the end of the manhattan project in december 1946.
the british and americans exchanged nuclear information but did not initially combine their efforts . 
heavy water from trail was used for chicago pile 3, the first reactor using heavy water and natural uranium ,  which went critical on 15 may 1944.
murphree was also the head of an unsuccessful separation project using gas centrifuges . 
the advisory committee on uranium became the national defense research committee  -lrb-  ndrc  -rrb-  committee on uranium when that organization was formed on 27 june 1940.
the british wartime participation was crucial to the success of the united kingdom's independent nuclear weapons program after the war when the mcmahon act of 1946 temporarily ended american nuclear cooperation . 
the ndrc committee on uranium became the s-1 section of the osrd; the word `` uranium '' was dropped for security reasons . 
all main-sequence stars have a core region where energy is generated by nuclear fusion . 
stars of luminosity class v belonged to the main sequence . 
the common use of `` dwarf '' to mean main sequence is confusing in another way ,  because there are dwarf stars which are not main-sequence stars . 
in general ,  the more massive a star is ,  the shorter its lifespan on the main sequence . 
the total amount of energy that a star can generate through nuclear fusion of hydrogen is limited by the amount of hydrogen fuel that can be consumed at the core . 
a star remains near its initial position on the main sequence until a significant amount of hydrogen in the core has been consumed ,  then begins to evolve into a more luminous star . 
after condensation and ignition of a star ,  it generates thermal energy in its dense core region through nuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium . 
as evolutionary models of stars were developed during the 1930s ,  it was shown that ,  for stars of a uniform chemical composition ,  a relationship exists between a star's mass and its luminosity and radius . 
after the hydrogen fuel at the core has been consumed ,  the star evolves away from the main sequence on the hr diagram ,  into a supergiant ,  red giant ,  or directly to a white dwarf . 
as non-fusing helium ash accumulates in the core of a main-sequence star ,  the reduction in the abundance of hydrogen per unit mass results in a gradual lowering of the fusion rate within that mass . 
main-sequence stars are called dwarf stars ,  but this terminology is partly historical and can be somewhat confusing . 
the table below shows typical values for stars along the main sequence . 
of the red stars observed by hertzsprung ,  the dwarf stars also followed the spectra-luminosity relationship discovered by russell . 
these stars are fusing hydrogen in their cores and so they mark the lower edge of main sequence fuzziness caused by variance in chemical composition . 
in contrast to memory leaks ,  where the leaked memory is never released ,  the memory consumed by a space leak is released ,  but later than expected . 
memory leaks may not be serious or even detectable by normal means . 
for an imprecise ,  but qualitatively useful ,  discussion of the molecular structure ,  the molecular orbitals can be obtained from the `` linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method '' ansatz . 
here ,  the molecular orbitals are expressed as linear combinations of atomic orbitals . 
where formula_3 and formula_4 are the molecular wavefunctions for the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals ,  respectively ,  formula_5 and formula_6 are the atomic wavefunctions from atoms a and b ,  respectively ,  and formula_7 and formula_8 are adjustable coefficients . 
molecular orbitals were first introduced by friedrich hund and robert s .  mulliken in 1927 and 1928.
they were also completely compatible with the dec kl10, and ran all kl10 binaries  -lrb-  including the operating system  -rrb-  with no modifications at about 2-3 times faster than a kl10.
later ,  systems concepts attempted to produce a compatible replacement for the dec pdp-10 computers . 
 ''the messiah ''  -rrb-  ,  does not occur in the tanakh . 
 ''al-masīḥ ''  -lrb-  proper name ,    -rrb-  is the arabic word for messiah . 
the greek translation of messiah is `` khristos ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  anglicized as `` christ '' ,  and christians commonly refer to jesus as either the `` christ '' or the `` messiah '' . 
the quran identifies jesus  -lrb-  isa  -rrb-  as the messiah  -lrb-  `` masih ''  -rrb-  ,  who will one day return to earth . 
while the term `` messiah '' does appear in islam ,  the meaning is different from that found in christianity and judaism . 
messiahs were not exclusively jewish: the book of isaiah refers to cyrus the great ,  king of the achaemenid empire ,  as a messiah for his decree to rebuild the jerusalem temple . 
in christianity ,  the messiah is called the christ ,  from  ,  translating the hebrew word of the same meaning . 
a kabbalistic tradition within judaism is that the commonly discussed messiah who will usher in a period of freedom and peace ,  messiah ben david ,  will be preceded by messiah ben joseph ,  who will gather the children of israel around him ,  lead them to jerusalem . 
maimonides describes the identity of the messiah in the following terms: even though the eventual coming of the messiah is a strongly upheld belief in judaism ,  trying to predict the actual time when the messiah will come is an act that is frowned upon . 
 ''ha mashiach ''  -lrb-  המשיח ,  `` the messiah '' ,  `` the anointed one ''  -rrb-  ,  often referred to as ``  ''  -lrb-  מלך המשיח `` king messiah ''  -rrb-  ,  is to be a human leader ,  physically descended from the paternal davidic line through king david and king solomon . 
mead was married three times . 
mead was also the aunt of jeremy steig . 
mead had two sisters and a brother ,  elizabeth ,  priscilla ,  and richard . 
mead served as president of the american association for the advancement of science in 1975.
mead also had an exceptionally close relationship with ruth benedict ,  one of her instructors . 
palin was instrumental in setting up the michael palin centre for stammering children in 1993.
palin has also appeared in serious drama . 
from 2009-12 palin was the president of the royal geographical society . 
palin was born in ranmoor ,  sheffield ,  the second child and only son of edward moreton palin  -lrb-  1900-1977 -rrb- . 
the series is a trip along the palin family line . 
all seven of these books were also made available as audio books ,  and all of them are read by palin himself . 
palin is the only python to receive a knighthood  -lrb-  john cleese turned down a cbe in 1996 -rrb- . 
in 1994, palin travelled through ireland for the same series ,  entitled `` derry to kerry '' . 
palin ,  however ,  dropped out of the film after it ran into a financial problem . 
palin continued to work with jones after python ,  co-writing `` ripping yarns '' . 
palin wrote most of his comedic material with fellow python member terry jones . 
in 1982, palin wrote and starred in `` the missionary '' ,  co-starring maggie smith . 
starting in 1989, palin appeared as presenter in a series of travel programmes made for the bbc . 
in honour of his achievements as a traveller ,  especially rail travel ,  palin has two british trains named after him . 
for four of the trips a photography book was made by pao ,  each with an introduction written by palin . 
this field also includes new areas of research such as superconducting materials ,  spintronics ,  metamaterials ,  etc . 
it also helps in the understanding of phase diagrams and phase equilibrium . 
these materials form the basis of our modern computing world ,  and hence research into these materials is of vital importance . 
it serves only to highlight certain important research areas . 
diamond and carbon in its graphite form are considered to be ceramics . 
a biomaterial may also be an autograft ,  allograft or xenograft used as an organ transplant material . 
besides material characterization ,  the material scientist or engineer also deals with extracting materials and converting them into useful forms . 
materials science has received much attention from researchers . 
the interdisciplinary field of materials science ,  also commonly termed materials science and engineering is the design and discovery of new materials ,  particularly solids . 
materials which atoms and molecules form constituents in the nanoscale  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  they form nanostructure  -rrb-  are called nanomaterials . 
the material of choice of a given era is often a defining point . 
thus ,  the processing of materials is vital to the field of materials science . 
radical materials advances can drive the creation of new products or even new industries ,  but stable industries also employ materials scientists to make incremental improvements and troubleshoot issues with currently used materials . 
as mentioned above ,  structure is one of the most important components of the field of materials science . 
a material is defined as a substance  -lrb-  most often a solid ,  but other condensed phases can be included  -rrb-  that is intended to be used for certain applications . 
japan produced more zeros than any other model of combat aircraft during the war . 
a prototype zero with the new engine was first flown on july 15, 1941.
the zero resembled the 1937 british gloster f . 5/34.
the mitsubishi a6m `` zero '' is a long-range fighter aircraft formerly manufactured by mitsubishi aircraft company ,  a part of mitsubishi heavy industries ,  and operated by the imperial japanese navy from 1940 to 1945.
the zero had ruled the roost totally and was the finest fighter in the world until mid-1943. ''
by the time they were redeployed a year later ,  the zeros had shot down 99 chinese aircraft  -lrb-  266 according to other sources  -rrb-  . 
it has been claimed that the zero's design showed a clear influence from british and american fighter aircraft and components exported to japan in the 1930s ,  and in particular on the american side ,  the vought v-143 fighter . 
mitsubishi is unable to state with certainty that it ever used the designation `` a6m4 '' or model numbers for it . 
according to a theory ,  the very late production model 22 might have had wings similar to the shortened ,  rounded-tip wing of the model 52.
soon after ,  it was realized that it was simply a new model of the `` zeke '' and was termed `` zeke 32 '' . 
approximately 560 aircraft of the new type had been produced in the meantime by mitsubishi jukogyo k . k . 
the zero quickly gained a fearsome reputation . 
while the engine cowling is the same of previous model 32 and 22, the theory proposes that the plane is an early production model 52.
that engine kept its designation in spite of changes in the exhaust system for the model 52.
american test pilots found that the zero's controls were `` very light '' at  ,  but stiffened at faster speeds  -lrb-  above   -rrb-  to safeguard against wing failure . 
allied pilots soon developed tactics to cope with the zero . 
nonetheless ,  in competent hands ,  the zero could still be deadly . 
in their quest to attain the spiritual goal of life ,  some hindus choose the path of monasticism  -lrb-  sannyasa  -rrb-  . 
the christian monk embraces the monastic life as a vocation for god . 
the rules of monastic life are codified in the `` counsels of perfection '' . 
the rule of st basil ,  the rule of st benedict  -rrb-  and ,  in modern times ,  the church law of the respective apostolic christian churches that have forms of monastic living . 
monasticism in christianity ,  which provides the origins of the words `` monk '' and `` monastery '' ,  comprises several diverse forms of religious living . 
the sangha or community of ordained buddhist bhikkhus  -lrb-  `` beggar '' or `` one who lives by alms '' .   -rrb- 
mathematical logic is a subfield of mathematics exploring the applications of formal logic to mathematics . 
these results helped establish first-order logic as the dominant logic used by mathematicians . 
zermelo  -lrb-  1908b  -rrb-  provided the first set of axioms for set theory . 
in the early decades of the 20th century ,  the main areas of study were set theory and formal logic . 
fraenkel  -lrb-  1922 -rrb- proved that the axiom of choice cannot be proved from the axioms of zermelo's set theory with urelements . 
mathematical logic emerged in the mid-19th century as a subfield of mathematics ,  reflecting the confluence of two traditions: formal philosophical logic and mathematics  -lrb-  ferreirós 2001, p .  443 -rrb- . 
these foundations use toposes ,  which resemble generalized models of set theory that may employ classical or nonclassical logic . 
gödel's theorem shows that a consistency proof of any sufficiently strong ,  effective axiom system cannot be obtained in the system itself ,  if the system is consistent ,  nor in any weaker system . 
this work summarized and extended the work of boole ,  de morgan ,  and peirce ,  and was a comprehensive reference to symbolic logic as it was understood at the end of the 19th century . 
in his doctoral thesis ,  kurt gödel  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- proved the completeness theorem ,  which establishes a correspondence between syntax and semantics in first-order logic . 
a second difficulty in reaching molecular nanotechnology is design . 
molecular nanotechnology is one of the technologies that some analysts believe could lead to a technological singularity . 
molecular manufacturing is a potential future subfield of nanotechnology that would make it possible to build complex structures at atomic precision . 
the desire in molecular nanotechnology would be to balance molecular reactions in positionally-controlled locations and orientations to obtain desired chemical reactions ,  and then to build systems by further assembling the products of these reactions . 
for the future ,  some means have to be found for mnt design evolution at the nanoscale which mimics the process of biological evolution at the molecular scale . 
even cryonics would be feasible ,  as cryopreserved tissue could be fully repaired . 
molecular nanotechnology  -lrb-  mnt  -rrb-  is a technology based on the ability to build structures to complex ,  atomic specifications by means of mechanosynthesis . 
yet another proposed application of mnt would be phased-array optics  -lrb-  pao  -rrb-  . 
the feasibility of drexler's proposals largely depends ,  therefore ,  on whether designs like those in `` nanosystems '' could be built in the absence of a universal assembler to build them and would work as described . 
in this early proposal ,  sufficiently capable nanorobots would construct more nanorobots in an artificial environment containing special molecular building blocks . 
molecular surgical tools ,  guided by molecular computers and injected into the blood stream could find and destroy cancer cells or invading bacteria ,  unclog arteries ,  or provide oxygen when the circulation is impaired . 
despite the current early developmental status of nanotechnology and molecular nanotechnology ,  much concern surrounds mnt's anticipated impact on economics and on law . 
mnt would involve combining physical principles demonstrated by biophysics ,  chemistry ,  other nanotechnologies ,  and the molecular machinery of life with the systems engineering principles found in modern macroscale factories . 
drexler argues that we may need to wait until our conventional nanotechnology improves before solving these issues: `` molecular manufacturing will result from a series of advances in molecular machine systems ,  much as the first moon landing resulted from a series of advances in liquid-fuel rocket systems . 
a mnt nanosensor would resemble a smart material ,  involving a small component within a larger machine that would react to its environment and change in some fundamental ,  intentional way . 
while conventional chemistry uses inexact processes obtaining inexact results ,  and biology exploits inexact processes to obtain definitive results ,  molecular nanotechnology would employ original definitive processes to obtain definitive results . 
the products of molecular manufacturing could range from cheaper ,  mass-produced versions of known high-tech products to novel products with added capabilities in many areas of application . 
oxide films can also be grown by the technique of thermal oxidation ,  in which the  -lrb-  typically silicon  -rrb-  wafer is exposed to oxygen and/or steam ,  to grow a thin surface layer of silicon dioxide . 
even though the electronics industry provides an economy of scale for the silicon industry ,  crystalline silicon is still a complex and relatively expensive material to produce . 
the nitrides of silicon ,  aluminium and titanium as well as silicon carbide and other ceramics are increasingly applied in mems fabrication due to advantageous combinations of material properties . 
physical vapor deposition  -lrb-  `` pvd ''  -rrb-  consists of a process in which a material is removed from a target ,  and deposited on a surface . 
as well as making for highly repeatable motion ,  this also makes silicon very reliable as it suffers very little fatigue and can have service lifetimes in the range of billions to trillions of cycles without breaking . 
minsky wrote the book `` perceptrons ''  -lrb-  with seymour papert  -rrb-  ,  which became the foundational work in the analysis of artificial neural networks . 
he was on the mit faculty from 1958 to his death . 
recent drafts of the book are freely available from his webpage . 
marvin lee minsky  -lrb-  august 9, 1927 – january 24, 2016 -rrb- was an american cognitive scientist concerned largely with research of artificial intelligence  -lrb-  ai  -rrb-  ,  co-founder of the massachusetts institute of technology's ai laboratory ,  and author of several texts concerning ai and philosophy . 
in 1986, minsky published `` the society of mind '' ,  a comprehensive book on the theory which ,  unlike most of his previously published work ,  was written for the general public . 
minsky also built ,  in 1951, the first randomly wired neural network learning machine ,  snarc . 
friedman was also a supporter of gay rights . 
on february 12, 1945, his son ,  david d .  friedman was born . 
friedman was the main proponent of the monetarist school of economics . 
friedman was born in brooklyn ,  new york on july 31, 1912.
in 1977, at the age of 65, friedman retired from the university of chicago after teaching there for 30 years . 
friedman was also a recipient of the nobel memorial prize in economics . 
in this discussion friedman also stated that he did not receive any money for delivering that lecture . 
friedman was also known for his work on the consumption function ,  the permanent income hypothesis  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  which friedman himself referred to as his best scientific work . 
milton friedman is known now as one of the most influential economists of the 20th century . 
friedman also supported libertarian policies such as legalization of drugs and prostitution . 
friedman advocated for free markets which undermined `` political centralization and political control '' . 
although keynesian nobel laureate paul krugman praised friedman as a `` great economist and a great man '' after friedman's death in 2006, and acknowledged his many ,  widely accepted contributions to empirical economics ,  krugman had been ,  and remains ,  a prominent critic of friedman . 
friedman once said ,  `` if you want to see capitalism in action ,  go to hong kong . `` 
in 2016, the friedman foundation changed its name to edchoice to honor the friedmans' desire to have the educational choice movement live on without their names attached to it after their deaths . 
during 2005, friedman and more than 500 other economists advocated discussions regarding the economic benefits of the legalization of marijuana . 
laar won the 2006 milton friedman prize for advancing liberty ,  awarded by the cato institute . 
because of his involvement with the pinochet government ,  there were international protests when friedman was awarded the nobel prize in 1976.
friedman was an economic adviser to republican presidential candidate barry goldwater during 1964.
michael walker of the fraser institute and friedman hosted a series of conferences from 1986 to 1994.
in 1962, friedman criticized social security in his book `` capitalism and freedom '' arguing that it had created welfare dependency . 
friedman died of heart failure at the age of 94 years in san francisco on november 16, 2006.
towards the end of his life milton friedman expressed doubt about the validity of targeting the quantity of money . 
he said friedman's great popular contribution was `` in convincing people of the importance of allowing free markets to operate . `` 
during the latter half of the 1940s ,  friedman began a collaboration with anna schwartz ,  an economic historian at the bureau ,  that would ultimately result in the 1963 publication of a book co-authored by friedman and schwartz ,  `` a monetary history of the united states ,  1867–1960 '' . 
friedman's ideas strongly influenced thatcher and her allies when she became prime minister in 1979.
econometrician david hendry criticized part of friedman's and anna schwartz's 1982 `` monetary trends '' . 
friedman was a supporter of the candidacy of barry goldwater against lyndon johnson following kennedy in 1964.
that year ,  friedman formed what would prove to be lifelong friendships with george stigler and w .  allen wallis . 
the internet is quickly becoming the center of mass media . 
the term `` mass media '' is sometimes erroneously used as a synonym for `` mainstream media '' . 
some argue that video games have developed into a distinct mass form of media . 
the mass media is a diversified collection of media technologies that reach a large audience via mass communication . 
video games may also be evolving into a mass medium . 
broadcast media transmit information electronically via media such as films ,  radio ,  recorded music ,  or television . 
event organizing and public speaking can also be considered forms of mass media . 
blogging ,  too ,  has become a pervasive form of media . 
in the late 20th century ,  mass media could be classified into eight mass media industries: books ,  the internet ,  magazines ,  movies ,  newspapers ,  radio ,  recordings ,  and television . 
the internet  -lrb-  also known simply as `` the net '' or less precisely as `` the web ''  -rrb-  is a more interactive medium of mass media ,  and can be briefly described as `` a network of networks '' . 
alternative media are also `` mass media '' outlets in the sense that they use technology capable of reaching many people ,  even if the audience is often smaller than the mainstream . 
the question ,  then ,  is whether this is a form of mass communication . 
while a telephone is a two-way communication device ,  mass media communicates to a large group . 
when broadcasting is done via the internet the term webcasting is often used . 
the organizations that control these technologies ,  such as movie studios ,  publishing companies ,  and radio and television stations ,  are also known as the mass media . 
the mahābhārata  -lrb-   ,  ;  ,  ``  '' ,    -rrb-  is one of the two major sanskrit epics of ancient india ,  the other being the `` rāmāyaṇa '' . 
traditionally ,  the authorship of the `` mahābhārata '' is attributed to vyāsa . 
the first section of the mahābhārata states that it was gaṇeśa who wrote down the text to vyasa's dictation . 
the `` mahābhārata '' is an epic legendary narrative of the kurukṣetra war and the fates of the kaurava and the pāṇḍava princes . 
the `` mahābhārata '' is the longest epic poem known and has been described as `` the longest poem ever written '' . 
the mahābhārata itself ends with the death of krishna ,  and the subsequent end of his dynasty and ascent of the pandava brothers to heaven . 
the epic is traditionally ascribed to the sage vyāsa ,  who is also a major character in the epic . 
in indian cinema ,  several film versions of the epic have been made ,  dating back to 1920.
research on the mahābhārata has put an enormous effort into recognizing and dating layers within the text . 
he serves as prime minister  -lrb-  mahamantri or mahatma  -rrb-  to king pandu and king dhritarashtra . 
the oldest surviving sanskrit text dates to the kushan period  -lrb-  200 ce  -rrb-  . 
the earliest known references to the mahābhārata and its core `` bhārata '' date to the `` aṣṭādhyāyī ''  -lrb-  sutra 6.2.38 -rrb- of pāṇini  -lrb-  `` fl . `` 
according to the `` mahābhārata '' itself ,  the tale is extended from a shorter version of 24,000 verses called simply `` bhārata '' . 
dhritarashtra has a hundred sons through gandhari ,  all born after the birth of yudhishthira . 
krishna takes part in a non-combatant role ,  as charioteer for arjuna . 
shantanu has two sons by satyavati ,  chitrāngada and vichitravirya . 
the pañcavimśa brahmana  -lrb-  at 25.15.3 -rrb- enumerates the officiant priests of a `` sarpasattra '' among whom the names dhṛtarāṣtra and janamejaya ,  two main characters of the `` mahābhārata '''s `` sarpasattra '' ,  as well as takṣaka ,  the name of a snake in the `` mahābhārata '' ,  occur . 
both duryodhana and yudhishthira claim to be first in line to inherit the throne . 
the `` mahābhārata '' offers one of the first instances of theorizing about `` dharmayuddha '' ,  `` just war '' ,  illustrating many of the standards that would be debated later across the world . 
krishna accepts the curse ,  which bears fruit 36 years later . 
shortly after this ,  arjuna elopes with and then marries krishna's sister ,  subhadra . 
later she is reborn to king drupada as shikhandi  -lrb-  or shikhandini  -rrb-  and causes bhishma's fall ,  with the help of arjuna ,  in the battle of kurukshetra . 
several stories within the mahābhārata took on separate identities of their own in classical sanskrit literature . 
jain versions of mahābhārata can be found in the various jain texts like `` harivamsapurana ''  -lrb-  the story of harivamsa  -rrb-  `` trisastisalakapurusa caritra ''  -lrb-  hagiography of 63 illustrious persons  -rrb-  ,  `` pandavacaritra ''  -lrb-  lives of pandavas  -rrb-  and `` pandavapurana ''  -lrb-  stories of pandavas  -rrb-  . 
mein kampf  -lrb-   ,  `` my struggle ''  -rrb-  is a 1925 autobiographical book by nazi party leader adolf hitler . 
the book was edited by hitler's deputy rudolf hess . 
multiple virtual storage ,  more commonly called mvs ,  was the most commonly used operating system on the system/370 and system/390 ibm mainframe computers . 
thus ,  with each error the system captured diagnostic data ,  and attempted to perform a repair and keep the system up . 
it was developed by ibm ,  but is unrelated to ibm's other mainframe operating systems ,  e . g .  ,  vse ,  vm ,  tpf . 
multiple copies of mvs  -lrb-  or other ibm operating systems  -rrb-  could share the same machine if that machine was controlled by vm/370.
ibm and users almost unanimously called the new system mvs from the start ,  and ibm continued to use the term `` mvs '' in the naming of later `` major '' versions such as mvs/xa . 
ibm included additional criteria for a major software problem that required ibm service . 
mvs systems are traditionally accessed by 3270 terminals or by pcs running 3270 emulators . 
ibm introduced an on-demand hypervisor ,  a major serviceability tool ,  called dynamic support system  -lrb-  dss  -rrb-  ,  in the first release of mvs . 
in the early 1970s ibm sought to mitigate these difficulties by introducing virtual memory  -lrb-  which ibm called `` virtual storage ''  -rrb-  ,  which allowed programs to request address spaces larger than physical memory . 
the system is typically used in business and banking ,  and applications are often written in cobol . 
in other words ,  a monoid is a semigroup with an identity element . 
monoids are studied in semigroup theory ,  because they are semigroups with identity . 
more precisely ,  if formula_1 is a continuous function on the closed interval formula_2, and differentiable on the open interval formula_3, then there exists a point formula_4 in formula_3 such that:
in his introduction ,  bloch wrote to lebvre . 
bloch's later close collaborator ,  lucien febvre ,  visited the bloch family at home in 1902.
marc bloch was not a tall man ,  being in height . 
both marc and louis bloch volunteered for service in the french army . 
the first critical biography of bloch did not appear until carole fink's `` marc bloch: a life in history '' was published in 1989.
marc bloch was born in lyon on 6 july 1886, one of two children to gustave and sarah bloch née ebstein . 
bloch's first book was `` l'ile de france '' ,  published in 1913.
following the armistice in november 1918, bloch was demobilized on 13 march 1919.
bloch was certainly agnostic ,  if not atheist ,  in matters of religion . 
marc léopold benjamin bloch  -lrb-  ; ; 6 july 1886 – 16 june 1944 -rrb- was a french historian . 
regarding the facts of life ,  bloch told etienne to attempt always to avoid what bloch termed `` contaminated females '' . 
bloch intended to turn his thesis into a book ,  but the first world war intervened . 
bloch joined the 46th infantry regiment based at pithiviers from 1905 to 1906.
bloch's research at the fondation—especially his research into the capetian kings—laid the groundwork for his career . 
this was the catalyst for bloch's decision to join the french resistance sometime between late 1942 and march 1943.
in autumn 1939, just before the outbreak of war ,  bloch published the first volume of `` feudal society '' . 
bloch began working energetically ,  and later said that the most productive years of his life were spent at strasbourg . 
intellectual historian peter burke named bloch the leader of what he called the `` french historical revolution '' ,  and bloch became an icon for the post-war generation of new historians . 
for some time bloch's death was merely a `` dark rumour '' until it was confirmed to febvre . 
bloch's biographer karen stirling ascribed significance to the era in which bloch was born: the middle of the french third republic ,  so `` after those who had founded it and before the generation that would aggressively challenge it '' . 
 ''strange defeat '' has been called bloch's autopsy of the france of the inter-war years . 
bloch did not see social history as being a separate field within historical research . 
the war was fundamental in re-arranging bloch's approach to history ,  although he never acknowledged it as a turning point . 
gustave bloch remained in france ,  wishing to be close to his sons at the front . 
photographs of these tablets by archaeologist alison frantz facilitated ventris's later decipherment of the linear b script . 
michael george francis ventris ,  obe  -lrb-  ; 12 july 1922 – 6 september 1956 -rrb- was an english architect ,  classicist and philologist who deciphered linear b ,  the ancient mycenaean greek script . 
shortly before world war ii ,  american archaeologist carl blegen discovered a further 600 or so tablets of linear b in the mycenaean palace of pylos . 
in doing so he uncovered a great many clay tablets inscribed with two unknown scripts ,  linear a and linear b .  evans attempted to decipher both in the following decades ,  with little success . 
alice kober was a classics professor at brooklyn college and had done extensive work on linear b .  ventris acknowledged her work as having made a significant contribution to his own work . 
because of `` maniac mansion ''s imperfections ,  gilbert considers it his favorite of his games . 
maniac mansion is a 1987 graphic adventure video game developed and published by lucasfilm games . 
 ''maniac mansion '' was conceived in 1985 when lucasfilm games employees ron gilbert and gary winnick were assigned to create an original game . 
lucasfilm games re-submitted the edited version of `` maniac mansion '' to nintendo ,  which then manufactured 250,000 cartridges . 
when the company replied that the content was reasonable ,  lucasfilm games submitted `` maniac mansion '' for approval . 
initially ,  gilbert and winnick struggled to choose a gameplay genre for `` maniac mansion '' . 
initially released for the commodore 64 and apple ii ,  `` maniac mansion '' was lucasfilm games' first self-published product . 
in 2011, richard cobbett summarized `` maniac mansion '' as `` one of the most intricate and important adventure games ever made '' . 
 ''maniac mansion '' is a graphic adventure game in which the player uses a point-and-click interface to guide characters through a two-dimensional game world and to solve puzzles . 
 ''maniac mansion ''s story and structure were designed before coding commenced . 
company management provided little oversight in the creation of `` maniac mansion '' ,  a trend to which gilbert credited the success of several of his games for lucasfilm . 
although gilbert wrote much of the foundational code for `` maniac mansion '' ,  the majority of the game's events were programmed by lucasfilm employee david fox . 
the `` maniac mansion '' team wanted to retain the structure of a text-based adventure game ,  but without the standard command-line interface . 
tim schafer ,  who later designed `` maniac mansion ''s sequel `` day of the tentacle '' ,  received his first professional credit as a playtester for the nes version of `` maniac mansion '' . 
they signed ,  now billed as `` groucho ,  chico ,  harpo ,  marx bros . `` 
the group is almost universally known today by their stage names: chico ,  harpo ,  groucho ,  gummo ,  and zeppo . 
as with groucho ,  three explanations exist for herbert's name `` zeppo '':
chico was an excellent pianist ,  groucho a guitarist and singer ,  and zeppo a vocalist . 
during this time ,  groucho discontinued his `` german '' stage personality . 
the on-stage personalities of groucho ,  chico ,  and harpo were said to have been based on their actual traits . 
the core of the act was the three elder brothers: chico ,  harpo ,  and groucho ,  each of whom developed a highly distinctive stage persona . 
groucho talked about her in his 1972 carnegie hall concert . 
 ''in england now , ``  said groucho ,  `` they were called 'birds' . ``   -rrb- 
the reason that julius was named groucho is perhaps the most disputed . 
he authored several books ,  including `` groucho and me ''  -lrb-  1959 -rrb- ,  `` memoirs of a mangy lover ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- and `` the groucho letters ''  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- . 
minnie marx came from a family of performers . 
the reasons behind chico's and harpo's stage names are undisputed ,  and gummo's is fairly well established . 
in 1966 filmation produced a pilot for a marx brothers cartoon . 
in `` all in the family '' ,  rob reiner often did imitations of groucho ,  and sally struthers dressed as harpo in one episode in which she  -lrb-  as gloria stivic  -rrb-  and rob  -lrb-  as mike stivic  -rrb-  were going to a marx brothers film festival ,  with reiner dressing as groucho . 
during this period chico and groucho starred in a radio comedy series ,  `` flywheel ,  shyster and flywheel '' . 
harpo marx appeared as himself in a sketch on `` i love lucy '' in which he and lucille ball reprised the mirror routine from `` duck soup '' ,  with lucy dressed up as harpo . 
the marx brothers were spoofed in the second act of the broadway review `` a day in hollywood/a night in the ukraine '' . 
grouch bags were worn on manly chests long before there was a groucho . 
mpeg-2 audio  -lrb-  mpeg-2 part 3 -rrb- should not be confused with mpeg-2 aac  -lrb-  mpeg-2 part 7 – iso/iec 13818-7 -rrb- . 
mp3  -lrb-  formally mpeg-1 audio layer iii or mpeg-2 audio layer iii  -rrb-  is a coding format for digital audio . 
the moving picture experts group  -lrb-  mpeg  -rrb-  designed mp3 as part of its mpeg-1, and later mpeg-2, standards . 
further work on mpeg audio was finalized in 1994 as part of the second suite of mpeg standards ,  mpeg-2, more formally known as international standard iso/iec 13818-3  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
the algorithms for mpeg-1 audio layer i ,  ii and iii were approved in 1991 and finalized in 1992 as part of mpeg-1, the first standard suite by mpeg ,  which resulted in the international standard iso/iec 11172-3  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
a backwards-compatible mpeg-2 audio  -lrb-  mpeg-2 part 3 -rrb- extension with lower sample- and bit-rates was published in 1995 as iso/iec 13818-3:1995.
mpeg-2.5 was not developed by mpeg  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  and was never approved as an international standard . 
mp3  -lrb-  or mp3 -rrb- as a file format commonly designates files containing an elementary stream of mpeg-1 audio and video encoded data ,  without other complexities of the mp3 standard . 
a third generation of `` mp3 '' style data streams  -lrb-  files  -rrb-  extended the `` mpeg-2 '' ideas and implementation but was named `` mpeg-2.5 '' audio ,  since mpeg-3 already had a different meaning . 
an mp3 coded with mpeg-2 results in half of the bandwidth reproduction of mpeg-1 appropriate for piano and singing . 
an mp3 file is made up of mp3 frames ,  which consist of a header and a data block . 
a reference simulation software implementation ,  written in the c language and later known as `` iso 11172-5 '' ,  was developed  -lrb-  in 1991–1996 -rrb- by the members of the iso mpeg audio committee in order to produce bit compliant mpeg audio files  -lrb-  layer 1, layer 2, layer 3 -rrb- . 
