the actual fourth line is `` and `` laid him on the green '' . `` 
american writer sylvia wright coined the term in 1954, writing about how as a girl she had misheard the lyric ``  .  .  . and laid him on the green '' in a scottish ballad as ``  .  .  . and lady mondegreen '' . 
in computer science ,  merge sort  -lrb-  also commonly spelled mergesort  -rrb-  is an efficient ,  general-purpose ,  comparison-based sorting algorithm . 
belford d .  maule  -lrb-  1911–1995 -rrb- designed his first aircraft ,  the m-1 starting at age 19.
in 1953 he began design work ,  and started aircraft production with the `` bee-dee '' m-4 in 1957.
morita masatake  -lrb-  1874-1938 -rrb- ,  also read as morita shoma  -lrb-  森田 正馬  -rrb-  ,  was a contemporary of sigmund freud and the founder of morita therapy ,  a branch of clinical psychology strongly influenced by zen buddhism . 
when once asked what shy people should do ,  morita replied ,  `` sweat . `` 
mooney is a family name ,  which is probably predominantly derived from the irish ó maonaigh . 
according to irish lore ,  the mooney family comes from one of the largest and most noble irish lines . 
through the 2017 season ,  the team has fielded 18 american league batting champions . 
the team started the 2012 season with a league worst 10-24 record . 
in 2015, the team had a winning season  -lrb-  83-79 -rrb- ,  following four consecutive seasons of 90 or more losses . 
success came quickly to the team in minnesota . 
the team played their inaugural game in new target field on april 12, 2010.
the minnesota twins are an american professional baseball team based in minneapolis ,  minnesota . 
the team has hosted five all-star games: 1937 and 1956 in washington ,  d . c ,  and 1965, 1985 and 2014 in minneapolis-st .  paul . 
the franchise moved from washington ,  d . c .  to minnesota for the start of the 1961 season . 
this rule was changed for the start of the 2009 season ,  making the site for any tiebreaker game to be determined by the winner of the regular season head-to-head record between the teams involved . 
the team announced the honor on december 18, 2018, with a formal ceremony to be held during the 2019 season on june 15.
after a year where the twins played  . 500 baseball for most of the season ,  the team won 17 of their last 21 games to tie the detroit tigers for the lead in the central division . 
upon league approval ,  the team moved to minnesota after the 1960 season ,  setting up shop in metropolitan stadium ,  while washington fielded a brand new `` washington senators ''  -lrb-  which later became the texas rangers prior to the 1972 season  -rrb-  . 
in 2016, the minnesota twins finished last in the al central ,  with a 59-103 record . 
the team name was officially changed to washington senators around the time of clark griffith's death . 
the team was founded in washington ,  d . c .  in as one of the eight original teams of the american league ,  named the washington senators or washington nationals  -lrb-  both names had been used in the clubs early years and no official name was used thereafter  -rrb-  . 
despite an al-worst 63-99 record ,  the team drew over 3 million fans for the second consecutive year . 
after a winning season in 1992 but falling short of oakland in the division ,  the twins fell into a years-long stretch of mediocrity ,  posting a losing record each season for the next eight: 71–91 in 1993, 50–63 in 1994, 56–88 in 1995, 78–84 in 1996, 68–94 in 1997, 70–92 in 1998, 63–97 in 1999 and 69–93 in 2000.
however killebrew played seven seasons as a senator ,  including two full seasons as a regular prior to the move to minnesota in 1961.
after repeating as al central champions in 2010, the twins entered 2011 with no players on the disabled list ,  and the team seemed poised for another strong season . 
heading into the final weekend of the 1967 season ,  when rod carew was named the a . l . 
in fluid dynamics ,  the mach number  -lrb-  m or ma  -rrb-   -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a dimensionless quantity representing the ratio of flow velocity past a boundary to the local speed of sound . 
the mpeg standards consist of different `` parts '' . 
joint collaborative team on video coding  -lrb-  jct-vc  -rrb-  is a group of video coding experts from itu-t study group 16  -lrb-  vceg  -rrb-  and iso/iec jtc 1/sc 29/wg 11  -lrb-  mpeg  -rrb-  . 
in addition ,  the following standards ,  while not sequential advances to the video encoding standard as with mpeg-1 through mpeg-4, are referred to by similar notation:
mpeg-1 is a standard for lossy compression of video and audio . 
 -lrb-  see: video compression  -rrb- 
due in part to the similarity between the two codecs ,  the mpeg-2 standard includes full backwards compatibility with mpeg-1 video ,  so any mpeg-2 decoder can play mpeg-1 videos . 
part 2 of the mpeg-1 standard covers video and is defined in iso/iec-11172-2.
mpeg-1 has a unique frame type not found in later video standards . 
mpeg-1 operates on video in a series of 8x8 blocks for quantization . 
for this reason ,  i-frame-only mpeg videos are used in editing applications . 
development of the mpeg-1 standard began in may 1988.
high-speed seeking through an mpeg-1 video is only possible to the nearest i-frame . 
mpeg-1 video exploits perceptual compression methods to significantly reduce the data rate required by a video stream . 
elementary streams  -lrb-  es  -rrb-  are the raw bitstreams of mpeg-1 audio and video encoded data  -lrb-  output from an encoder  -rrb-  . 
for this reason ,  d-frames are seldom actually used in mpeg-1 video encoding ,  and the d-frame feature has not been included in any later video coding standards . 
d-frames are only used for fast previews of video ,  for instance when seeking through a video at high speed . 
a macroblock is the smallest independent unit of  -lrb-  color  -rrb-  video . 
this structure was later named an mpeg program stream: `` the mpeg-1 systems design is essentially identical to the mpeg-2 program stream structure . `` 
perhaps the best-known part of the mpeg-1 standard is the mp3 audio format it introduced . 
part 1 of the mpeg-1 standard covers `` systems '' ,  and is defined in iso/iec-11172-1.
mpeg-1 videos are most commonly seen using source input format  -lrb-  sif  -rrb-  resolution: 352x240, 352x288, or 320x240.
before encoding video to mpeg-1, the color-space is transformed to y'cbcr  -lrb-  y'=luma ,  cb=chroma blue ,  cr=chroma red  -rrb-  . 
two anchor frames  -rrb-  . 
the first three parts  -lrb-  systems ,  video and audio  -rrb-  of iso/iec 11172 were published in august 1993.
mpeg-1 systems specifies the logical layout and methods used to store the encoded audio ,  video ,  and other data into a standard bitstream ,  and to maintain synchronization between the different contents . 
he returned to philadelphia . 
he was born wesley cook in philadelphia ,  pennsylvania ,  where he grew up . 
on january 19, 2010, the supreme court ordered the appeals court to reconsider its decision to rescind the death penalty . 
on march 26, 2012 the supreme court of pennsylvania rejected his appeal for retrial . 
they also discussed support for the death penalty . 
on december 6, 2005, the third circuit court of appeals admitted four issues for appeal of the ruling of the district court:
this sentence was reaffirmed by the superior court of pennsylvania on july 9, 2013.
the third circuit court heard oral arguments in the appeals on may 17, 2007, at the united states courthouse in philadelphia . 
the supreme court of pennsylvania on march 6, 1989, heard and rejected a direct appeal of his conviction . 
mumia abu-jamal  -lrb-  born wesley cook; april 24, 1954 -rrb- is a political activist and journalist who was convicted of murder and sentenced to death in 1982 for the 1981 murder of philadelphia police officer daniel faulkner . 
his commentaries later were published in may 1995 as part of his first book ,  `` live from death row . `` 
the supreme court declined to hear the case in october . 
on june 1, 1995, abu-jamal's death warrant was signed by pennsylvania governor tom ridge . 
in 2001 judge william h .  yohn ,  jr .  of the united states district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania upheld the conviction ,  saying that abu-jamal did not have the right to a new trial . 
he was elected president of the philadelphia association of black journalists . 
faulkner died at the scene from the gunshot to his head . 
the family of daniel faulkner ,  the commonwealth of pennsylvania ,  the city of philadelphia ,  politicians ,  and the fraternal order of police have continued to support the original trial and sentencing of the journalist . 
in 2008, the supreme court of pennsylvania rejected a further request from abu-jamal for a hearing into claims that the trial witnesses perjured themselves ,  on the grounds that he had waited too long before filing the appeal . 
the prosecution presented four witnesses to the court about the shootings . 
particularly ,  he said that
both parties appealed . 
when his death sentence was overturned by a federal court in 2001, he was described as `` perhaps the world's best known death-row inmate '' by `` the new york times . `` 
on april 6, 2009, the united states supreme court refused to hear abu-jamal's appeal ,  allowing his conviction to stand . 
after the press conference on the sentence ,  widow maureen faulkner said that she did not want to relive the trauma of another trial . 
in number theory ,  a multiplicative function is an arithmetic function `` f '' -lrb-  `` n ''  -rrb-  of a positive integer `` n '' with the property that `` f '' -lrb-  1 -rrb- = 1 and whenever `` a '' and `` b '' are coprime ,  then
mpeg-2  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
the video section ,  part 2 of mpeg-2, is similar to the previous mpeg-1 standard ,  but also provides support for interlaced video ,  the format used by analog broadcast tv systems . 
mpeg-2 systems is formally known as iso/iec 13818-1 and as itu-t rec . 
meditation refers to a mental or spiritual `` state '' that may be attained by such practices ,  and also refers to the `` practice '' of that state . 
the use of the term `` meditatio '' as part of a formal ,  stepwise process of meditation goes back to the 12th-century monk guigo ii . 
meditation is a practice where an individual uses a technique – such as mindfulness ,  or focusing their mind on a particular object ,  thought or activity – to train attention and awareness ,  and achieve a mentally clear and emotionally calm state . 
in the old testament ,  `` hāgâ ''  -lrb-  hebrew: `` הגה ''  -rrb-  means to sigh or murmur ,  and also ,  to meditate . 
taylor noted that to refer only to meditation from a particular faith  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  `` hindu '' or `` buddhist ''  -rrb- 
 ''one style ,  focused attention  -lrb-  fa  -rrb-  meditation ,  entails the voluntary focusing of attention on a chosen object ,  breathing ,  image ,  or words . 
aac  -lrb-  advanced audio coding  -rrb-  was standardized as an adjunct to mpeg-2  -lrb-  as part 7 -rrb- before mpeg-4 was issued . 
mpeg-4 provides the following functions:
mpeg-4 is still an evolving standard and is divided into a number of parts . 
mpeg-4 provides a large and rich set of tools for encoding . 
before the industrial era ,  travel by water was often easier than over land . 
since the last ice age sea level has risen as much as  . 
the sea floor elsewhere in the mediterranean holds countless archaeological sites . 
in addition to many discoveries in the sea ,  some wrecks have been examined in lakes . 
therefore ,  a great deal of the record of human activity throughout the ice age is now to be found under water . 
the flooding of the area now known as the black sea  -lrb-  when a land bridge ,  where the bosporus is now ,  collapsed under the pressure of rising water in the mediterranean sea  -rrb-  submerged a great deal of human activity that had been gathered round what had been an enormous ,  fresh-water lake . 
a close collection of artefacts on the sea bed may imply that artefacts were from a ship ,  even if there are no remains of the actual vessel . 
archaeological material in the sea or in other underwater environments is typically subject to different factors than artifacts on land . 
ships wrecked in the sea have probably not survived ,  although remains of cargo  -lrb-  particularly bronze material  -rrb-  have been discovered ,  such as those at the salcombe b site . 
archaeological sites can also be found on the foreshore today that would have been on dry land when they were constructed . 
the archaeology of shipwrecks can be divided into a three-tier hierarchy ,  of which the first tier considers the wrecking process itself: how does a ship break up ,  how does a ship sink to the bottom ,  and how do the remains of the ship ,  cargo and the surrounding environment evolve over time ? 
salt water provides for greater organic activity than freshwater ,  and in particular ,  the shipworm ,  terredo navalis ,  lives only in salt water ,  so some of the best preservation in the absence of sediments has been found in the cold ,  dark waters of the great lakes in north america and in the  -lrb-  low salinity  -rrb-  baltic sea  -lrb-  where `` vasa '' was preserved  -rrb-  . 
in 1969, ueshiba became ill . 
in 1903, ueshiba was called up for military service . 
in 1932, ueshiba's daughter matsuko was married to the swordsman kiyoshi nakakura ,  who was adopted as ueshiba's heir under the name morihiro ueshiba . 
in 1926 takeshita invited ueshiba to visit tokyo again . 
ueshiba later designated his son kisshomaru as the heir to his martial art . 
ueshiba moved to tokyo in 1926, where he set up the aikikai hombu dojo . 
in 1942, when ueshiba's group joined the dai nippon butoku kai ,  the martial art that ueshiba developed finally came to be known as aikido . 
the young ueshiba was raised in a somewhat privileged setting . 
takeda visited ueshiba in ayabe to provide instruction ,  although he was not a follower of ōmoto and did not get along with deguchi ,  which led to a cooling of the relationship between him and ueshiba . 
the study of kotodama was to become one of ueshiba's passions in later life ,  and nakanishi's work inspired ueshiba's concept of `` takemusu aiki '' . 
the early form of training under ueshiba was noticeably different from later forms of aikido . 
a major influence on ueshiba's early education was his elementary schoolteacher tasaburo nasu ,  who was a shinto priest and who introduced ueshiba to the religion . 
in november 1919, ueshiba learned that his father yoroku was ill ,  and was not expected to survive . 
after it is assembled ,  the microprogram is then loaded to a control store to become part of the logic of a cpu's control unit . 
a microassembler is a computer program that helps prepare a microprogram ,  called `` firmware '' ,  to control the low level operation of a computer in much the same way an assembler helps prepare higher level code for a processor . 
the mac-10 and mac-11 were 1970s blowback designed weapons with the magazine in the pistol grip and a fire selector switch . 
however ,  he also stated that machine pistols are ``  .  .  .  -lrb-  h  -rrb- ard to control in full-auto fire '' ,  which means that there is nothing that a machine pistol ``  .  .  . can do that other weapons available today can't do more efficiently . `` 
the pistol's rate of fire in fully automatic mode is approximately 1100–1200 rounds/min . 
personal defense weapons  -lrb-  pdws  -rrb-  such as the heckler & koch mp7 are also often called machine pistols . 
machine pistols are considered a special purpose weapon with limited utility . 
the 9×18mm makarov stechkin automatic pistol  -lrb-  aps  -rrb-  is a russian selective-fire machine pistol introduced into the russian army in 1951.
during world war i ,  the austrians introduced the world's first machine pistol the steyr repetierpistole m1912/p16.
king ,  however ,  was not present . 
hester was an old friend of king's father ,  and was an important influence on king . 
in his 1967 massey lecture ,  king stated:
king was born on january 15, 1929, in atlanta ,  georgia ,  to the reverend martin luther king sr .  and alberta williams king . 
king's reputation improved immensely . 
king next attempted to organize a march for march 9.
it was later acknowledged by the king center that billy graham was the one who bailed king out of jail during this time . 
jackson stated after the shooting that he cradled king's head as king lay on the balcony ,  but this account was disputed by other colleagues of king; jackson later changed his statement to say that he had `` reached out '' for king . 
king suffered from depression through much of his life . 
in 1948, king graduated at the age of 19 from morehouse with a b . a . 
king delivered a 17-minute speech ,  later known as `` i have a dream '' . 
at the u . n .  king also brought up issues of civil rights and the draft . 
king later became a member of the junior choir in his church . 
king was initially skeptical of many of christianity's claims . 
king's main legacy was to secure progress on civil rights in the u . s .  just days after king's assassination ,  congress passed the civil rights act of 1968.
king then vowed to no longer personally use arms . 
king's admiration of gandhi's nonviolence did not diminish in later years . 
in 1997, king's son dexter scott king met with ray ,  and publicly supported ray's efforts to obtain a new trial . 
significant debate exists on how to interpret king's plagiarism . 
king's wife coretta scott king followed in her husband's footsteps and was active in matters of social justice and civil rights until her death in 2006.
king was criticized by many groups during the course of his participation in the civil rights movement . 
william f .  pepper represented the king family in the trial . 
king was arrested and jailed early in the campaign—his 13th arrest out of 29.
king researchers david garrow and gerald posner disagreed with william f .  pepper's claims that the government killed king . 
growing up in atlanta ,  king attended booker t .  washington high school . 
king also criticized american opposition to north vietnam's land reforms . 
king and the sclc called on the government to invest in rebuilding america's cities . 
dr .  martin luther king jr .  was an avid supporter of native american rights . 
dr .  king assisted native american people in south alabama in the late 1950s . 
the campaign officially began in memphis ,  on may 2, at the hotel where king was murdered . 
two years later ,  king's widow coretta scott king and the couple's children won a wrongful death claim against loyd jowers and `` other unknown co-conspirators . `` 
king has become a national icon in the history of american liberalism and american progressivism . 
during their marriage ,  king limited coretta's role in the civil rights movement ,  expecting her to be a housewife and mother . 
king was hit by a brick during one march but continued to lead marches in the face of personal danger . 
king said that his father regularly whipped him until he was 15; a neighbor reported hearing the elder king telling his son `` he would make something of him even if he had to beat him to death . `` 
the martin luther king jr .  memorial on the national mall in washington ,  d . c .  ,  was dedicated in 2011.
internationally ,  king's legacy includes influences on the black consciousness movement and civil rights movement in south africa . 
according to king ,  `` that agreement was dishonored and violated by the city '' after he left town . 
in 1968, king and the sclc organized the `` poor people's campaign '' to address issues of economic justice . 
king's role in the bus boycott transformed him into a national figure and the best-known spokesman of the civil rights movement . 
in march 1964, king and the sclc joined forces with robert hayling's then-controversial movement in st .  augustine ,  florida . 
king later stated and abernathy wrote that the movement received a worse reception in chicago than in the south . 
on february 4, 1968, at the ebenezer baptist church ,  in speaking about how he wished to be remembered after his death ,  king stated:
a familiar use of modular arithmetic is in the 12-hour clock ,  in which the day is divided into two 12-hour periods . 
according to the definition below ,  12 is congruent not only to 12 itself ,  but also to 0, so the time called `` 12:00 '' could also be called `` 0:00 '' ,  since 12 is congruent to 0 modulo 12.
'twice hundred myriad'  -rrb-  . 
the largest number named in ancient greek was the myriad myriad  -lrb-  written   -rrb-  or hundred million . 
twelve myriads of parasangs '' . 
 ''myriad '' is also infrequently used in english as the specific number 10,000.
the noun `` myriad '' has appeared in the works of such writers as milton  -lrb-  plural 'myriads'  -rrb-  and thoreau  -lrb-  'a myriad of'  -rrb-  ,  and it continues to occur frequently in reputable english . `` 
diana and charles divorced in 1996.
under al-fayed fulham f . c . 
following the baker inquest ,  al-fayed said that he was abandoning his campaign to prove that diana and dodi were murdered in a conspiracy ,  and said that he would accept the verdict of the jury . 
in 1998, al fayed bought princess diana's old boarding school in kent and helped found the new school at west heath for traumatised children there . 
diana's friend ,  the journalist richard kay ,  confirmed that diana was involved in `` her first serious romance '' since her divorce . 
fayed had a son ,  dodi ,  from his first marriage to samira khashoggi from 1954 to 1956.
al-fayed bought the freehold of west london professional football club fulham f . c . 
al-fayed and dodi first met diana and charles when they were introduced at a polo tournament in july 1986, that had been sponsored by harrods . 
harrods was sold for £1.5 billion . 
an inquest headed by lord justice scott baker into the deaths of diana and dodi began at the royal courts of justice ,  london ,  on 2 october 2007 and lasted for six months . 
dodi and diana went on a second private cruise on the `` jonikal '' in the third week of august ,  and returned from sardinia to paris on 30 august . 
lady diana spencer was born in 1961, and married the heir to the british throne ,  charles ,  prince of wales ,  in 1981, becoming the princess of wales . 
it was suggested that the feud with rowland contributed to fayed's being refused british citizenship the first time . 
the jury verdict ,  given on 7 april 2008, was that diana and dodi had been `` unlawfully killed '' through the grossly negligent driving of chauffeur henri paul ,  who was intoxicated ,  and the pursuing vehicles . 
in 1979, fayed bought the ritz hotel in paris ,  france for us$30 million . 
marmite is rich in b vitamins including thiamin  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  ,  riboflavin  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  ,  niacin  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  ,  folic acid  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  and vitamin b . 
marmite  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a british food spread produced by unilever . 
vitamin b is not naturally found in yeast extract ,  but is added to marmite during manufacture . 
because of the local product named marmite ,  british marmite is sold by the name `` our mate '' in australia and new zealand . 
by 1912, the discovery of vitamins was a boost for marmite ,  as the spread is a rich source of the vitamin b complex; with the vitamin b deficiency beri-beri being common during world war i ,  the spread became more popular . 
other products include ozemite ,  which is made by dick smith foods; cenovis ,  a swiss spread; and vegex ,  an autolyzed yeast product available in the united states since 1913.
the spread had been a standard vitamin supplement for british-based german pows during the second world war . 
a similar spread named marmite has been manufactured in new zealand since 1919.
canadian versions of marmite and the other products would still be permitted to be sold in canada . 
the name `` mabon '' is derived from the common brittonic and gaulish deity name `` maponos '' `` great son '' ,  from the proto-celtic root `` *makwo- '' `` son '' . 
mabon ap modron is a prominent figure from welsh literature and mythology ,  the son of modron and a member of arthur's war band . 
culhwch's father ,  king cilydd ,  the son of celyddon ,  loses his wife goleuddydd after a difficult childbirth . 
commercial implementations are in the 2.3 ghz ,  2.5 ghz ,  3.5 ghz and 5.8 ghz ranges . 
p band is sometimes used for k band . 
dvb-sh and s-dmb use 1.452 to 1.492 ghz ,  while proprietary/incompatible satellite radio in the u . s .  uses around 2.3 ghz for dars . 
to avoid this problem ,  the original k band was split into a lower band ,  k ,  and upper band ,  k . 
in descriptions of the electromagnetic spectrum ,  some sources classify microwaves as radio waves ,  a subset of the radio wave band; while others classify microwaves and radio waves as distinct types of radiation . 
wireless lan protocols ,  such as bluetooth and the ieee 802.11 specifications used for wi-fi ,  also use microwaves in the 2.4 ghz ism band ,  although 802.11a uses ism band and u-nii frequencies in the 5 ghz range . 
microwaves emitted by astronomical radio sources; planets ,  stars ,  galaxies ,  and nebulas are studied in radio astronomy with large dish antennas called radio telescopes . 
when radars were first developed at k band during world war ii ,  it was not known that there was a nearby absorption band  -lrb-  due to water vapor and oxygen in the atmosphere  -rrb-  . 
microwaves were first generated in the 1880s and 1890s in some of the earliest radio experiments by physicists who thought of them as a form of `` invisible light '' . 
one set of microwave frequency bands designations by the radio society of great britain  -lrb-  rsgb  -rrb-  ,  is tabulated below:
frequencies in the microwave range are often referred to by their ieee radar band designations: s ,  c ,  x ,  k ,  k ,  or k band ,  or by similar nato or eu designations . 
 ''p '' for `` previous '' was a radar band used in the uk ranging from 250 to 500 mhz and now obsolete per ieee std 521.
his historic experiments demonstrated that radio waves like light exhibited refraction ,  diffraction ,  polarization ,  interference and standing waves ,  proving that radio waves and light waves were both forms of maxwell's electromagnetic waves . 
microwave radio is used in broadcasting and telecommunication transmissions because ,  due to their short wavelength ,  highly directional antennas are smaller and therefore more practical than they would be at longer wavelengths  -lrb-  lower frequencies  -rrb-  . 
microwaves occupy a place in the electromagnetic spectrum with frequency above ordinary radio waves ,  and below infrared light:
most satellite communications systems operate in the c ,  x ,  k ,  or k bands of the microwave spectrum . 
starting in the early 1950s ,  frequency division multiplex was used to send up to 5,400 telephone channels on each microwave radio channel ,  with as many as ten radio channels combined into one antenna for the `` hop '' to the next site ,  up to 70 km away . 
bands of frequencies in the microwave spectrum are designated by letters . 
long distance radars use the lower microwave frequencies since at the upper end of the band atmospheric absorption limits the range ,  but millimeter waves are used for short range radar such as collision avoidance systems . 
a major recent focus of microwave radio astronomy has been mapping the cosmic microwave background radiation  -lrb-  cmbr  -rrb-  discovered in 1964 by radio astronomers arno penzias and robert wilson . 
radar and satellite communication motivated the development of modern microwave antennas; the parabolic antenna  -lrb-  the most common type  -rrb-  ,  cassegrain antenna ,  lens antenna ,  slot antenna ,  and phased array . 
antennas used include short whip antennas ,  rubber ducky antennas ,  sleeve dipoles ,  patch antennas ,  and increasingly the printed circuit inverted f antenna  -lrb-  pifa  -rrb-  used in cell phones . 
global navigation satellite systems  -lrb-  gnss  -rrb-  including the chinese beidou ,  the american global positioning system  -lrb-  introduced in 1978 -rrb- and the russian glonass broadcast navigational signals in various bands between about 1.2 ghz and 1.6 ghz . 
military communications run primarily over x or k-band links ,  with k band being used for milstar . 
at the conclusion of the 2004 season ,  doohan and honda parted company . 
in 1994 however ,  he won his first 500 cc world championship . 
michael `` mick '' sydney melbourne doohan ,   -lrb-  born 4 june 1965 -rrb- is an australian former grand prix motorcycle road racing world champion ,  who won five consecutive 500 cc world championships . 
in june 2011, doohan made an appearance at the isle of man tt . 
doohan was made a member of the order of australia in 1996 and received an australian sports medal in 2000.
there have been two manga series based on `` mobile suit gundam '' . 
the third movie ,  `` mobile suit gundam: encounters in space '' ,  was released in 1982.
in 1979, before the end of the anime ,  yoshiyuki tomino himself created the first novelizations of the original gundam anime series . 
there have been many video games based on or with mobile suits from the original `` gundam '' series . 
in february 1980, `` mobile suit gundam '' was aired in italy ,  the first country to broadcast the show outside japan . 
additionally ,  he commented he `` packed his frustrations '' when making `` gundam '' . 
following the success of the `` mobile suit gundam '' tv series ,  in 1981 tomino reworked the footage into three separate compilation movies . 
 ''mobile suit gundam iii: encounters in space '' was 1982's fourth highest-grossing japanese film ,  grossing 1.29billion . 
in 1998, the three compilation movies were first released directly to vhs subtitled into english as part of bandai's animevillage releases ,  which makes them among the first `` gundam '' works released in english . 
in order to explain how could such a young man as amuro pilot the gundam ,  the team came up with the idea of making him a newtype . 
two manga adaptations of the series have also been written by two manga artists . 
in 1884, most canadian methodists were brought under the umbrella of the methodist church ,  canada . 
it is a member church of the world methodist council . 
the first methodist church was dedicated in 1819 at royapettah . 
it has fraternal links with the british methodist and united methodist churches worldwide . 
the wesleyan methodist church of australia was founded on his work . 
most methodist denominations in africa follow the british methodist tradition and see the methodist church of great britain as their mother church . 
the protestant-methodist church  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the name of the united methodist church in germany and austria . 
in 1947 the wesleyan methodist church in india merged with presbyterians ,  anglicans and other protestant churches to form the church of south india while the american methodist church remained affiliated as the methodist church in southern asia  -lrb-  mcsa  -rrb-  to the mother church in usa- the united methodist church until 1981, when by an enabling act the methodist church in india  -lrb-  mci  -rrb-  became an autonomous church in india . 
the united methodist church  -lrb-  umc  -rrb-  was formed in 1968 as a result of a merger between the evangelical united brethren church  -lrb-  eub  -rrb-  and the methodist church . 
there are also the iemelif reform movement  -lrb-  irm  -rrb-  ,  the wesleyan  -lrb-  pilgrim holiness  -rrb-  church of the philippines ,  the philippine bible methodist church ,  inc .  ,  the pentecostal free methodist church ,  inc .  ,  the fundamental christian methodist church ,  the reformed methodist church ,  inc .  ,  the methodist church of the living bread ,  inc .  ,  and the wesley evangelical methodist church & mission ,  inc . 
in addition to the united methodist church ,  there are over 40 other denominations that descend from john wesley's methodist movement . 
from the mid-1980s a number of independent methodist churches were founded by missionaries and other members from the methodist churches of malaysia and singapore . 
in 1947, the methodist church in the republic of china celebrated its centenary . 
there are smaller methodist denominations that have seceded from the parent church . 
other methodist denominations in britain include: the salvation army ,  founded by methodist minister william booth in 1865; the free methodist church ,  a holiness church; the church of the nazarene; the wesleyan reform union ,  an early secession from the wesleyan methodist church; and the independent methodist connexion . 
the largest group was the wesleyan methodist church ,  but there were a number of others that joined together to form the methodist church of south africa ,  later known as the methodist church of southern africa . 
today ,  the united methodist church in hungary ,  known locally as the hungarian methodist church  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  has 453 professing members in 30 congregations . 
in a much larger split ,  in 1845 at louisville ,  the churches of the slaveholding states left the methodist episcopal church and formed the methodist episcopal church ,  south . 
today the united methodist church in norway  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the largest church in the region with 10,684 members in total  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
accordingly ,  many methodist converts were those disconnected from the church of england; wesley remained a cleric of the established church and insisted that methodists attend their local parish church as well as methodist meetings . 
it helps facilitate methodist relationships with the wider church ,  especially the roman catholic church . 
methodism was brought to china in the autumn of 1847 by the methodist episcopal church . 
the only sizable methodist group outside this new structure were the lay methodists . 
methodist churches generally recognise sacraments to be a means of grace . 
there are many korean-language methodist churches in north america catering to korean-speaking immigrants ,  not all of which are named as methodist . 
the methodist church of australasia merged with the majority of the presbyterian church of australia and the congregational union of australia in 1977, becoming the uniting church . 
in july 1961, the methodist church in ghana became autonomous ,  and was called the methodist church ghana ,  based on a deed of foundation ,  part of the church's `` constitution and standing orders '' . 
methodist church ghana is one of the largest methodist denominations ,  with around 800,000 members in 2,905 congregations ,  ministered by 700 pastors . 
certainly ,  methodists have been deeply involved in early examples of church union ,  especially the united church of canada and the church of south india . 
in the 1960s ,  the methodist church of great britain made ecumenical overtures to the church of england ,  aimed at denominational union . 
in 1857, the methodist episcopal church started its work in india ,  and with prominent evangelists like william taylor the emmanuel methodist church ,  vepery ,  was born in 1874.
today ,  the methodist church in india is governed by the general conference of the methodist church of india headed by six bishops ,  with headquarters at methodist centre ,  21 ymca road ,  mumbai ,  india . 
today ,  the nigerian methodist church has a prelate ,  eight archbishops and 44 bishops . 
today ,  millions belong to methodist churches ,  which are present on all populated continents . 
 ,  the brazilian methodist church is divided into eight annual conferences with 162,000 members . 
there is no single methodist church with universal juridical authority; methodists belong to multiple independent denominations or `` connexions '' . 
in 1968 the wesleyan methodist church and pilgrim holiness church merged to form the wesleyan church; a significant amount dissented from this decision resulting in the indepedence of the allegheny wesleyan methodist connection and the formation of the bible methodist connection of churches ,  both of which fall within the conservative holiness movement . 
the methodist church of great britain is a member of several ecumenical organisations ,  including the world council of churches ,  the conference of european churches ,  the community of protestant churches in europe ,  churches together in britain and ireland ,  churches together in england ,  action of churches together in scotland and cytûn  -lrb-  wales  -rrb-  . 
the nigerian methodist church is one of the largest methodist denominations in the world and one of the largest christian churches in nigeria ,  with around two million members in 2000 congregations . 
in 1936, german methodists elected their first bishop . 
the wesleyan methodist church of australia and some independent congregations chose not to join the union . 
the korean methodist church  -lrb-  kmc  -rrb-  is one of the largest churches in south korea with around 1.5 million members and 8,306 ministers . 
in 1972 the methodist church in the republic of china became autonomous and the first bishop was installed in 1986.
the kmc is a member of the world methodist council and hosted the first asia methodist convention in 2001.
this second attempt resulted in the emergence of the methodist church in the caribbean and the americas in may 1967.
in the 1990s and early 21st century ,  the british methodist church was involved in the scottish church initiative for union ,  seeking greater unity with the established and presbyterian church of scotland ,  the scottish episcopal church and the united reformed church in scotland . 
in 1968, the evangelical united brethren church's canadian congregations joined after their american counterparts joined the united methodist church . 
italian methodism has its origins in the italian free church ,  british wesleyan methodist missionary society ,  and the american methodist episcopal mission . 
some southerners ,  conservative in theology ,  opposed the merger ,  and formed the southern methodist church in 1940
like other board games ,  mancala games have led to psychological studies . 
most mancala games share a common general game play . 
although more than 800 names of traditional mancala games are known ,  some names denote the same game ,  while some names are used for more than one game . 
the name is a classification or type of game ,  rather than any specific game . 
mancala is one of the oldest known games to still be widely played today . 
mancala is a game that first appeared in africa ,  and later ,  the ancient near east . 
versions of the game date back to the 7th century ,  and evidence suggests the game existed in ancient egypt . 
board configurations vary among different games but also within variations of a given game; for example endodoi is played on boards from 2×6 to 2×10.
french troops occupied maastricht from 1673 to 1678.
it is not known when the romans arrived in maastricht ,  or whether the settlement was founded by them . 
another siege of maastricht  -lrb-  1673 -rrb- took place during the franco-dutch war . 
maastricht developed from a roman settlement to a medieval religious centre . 
unlike most dutch towns ,  maastricht did not receive city rights at a certain date . 
for twenty years maastricht remained the capital of the french département of meuse-inférieure . 
like the rest of the netherlands ,  maastricht remained neutral during world war i . 
neanderthal remains have been found to the west of maastricht  -lrb-  belvédère excavations  -rrb-  . 
maastricht consists of five districts  -lrb-  `` stadsdelen ''  -rrb-  and 44 neighbourhoods  -lrb-  `` wijken ''  -rrb-  . 
in escher's own words:
escher foundation . 
escher's work is inescapably mathematical . 
escher returned to italy and lived in rome from 1923 to 1935.
the escher intellectual property is controlled by the m . c . 
in one of his papers ,  escher emphasized the importance of dimensionality:
escher and jetta later had two more sons – arthur and jan . 
in his early years ,  escher sketched landscapes and nature . 
in 1935, the political climate in italy  -lrb-  under mussolini  -rrb-  became unacceptable to escher . 
the care that escher took in creating and printing this woodcut can be seen in a video recording . 
escher was also fascinated by mathematical objects such as the möbius strip ,  which has only one surface . 
escher worked primarily in the media of lithographs and woodcuts ,  although the few mezzotints he made are considered to be masterpieces of the technique . 
escher are the escher museum in the hague; the national gallery of art  -lrb-  washington ,  dc  -rrb- ; the national gallery of canada  -lrb-  ottawa  -rrb- ; the israel museum  -lrb-  jerusalem  -rrb- ; and the huis ten bosch  -lrb-  nagasaki ,  japan  -rrb-  . 
he was one of the major inspirations of douglas hofstadter's pulitzer prize-winning 1979 book `` gödel ,  escher ,  bach '' . 
escher's special way of thinking and rich graphics have had a continuous influence in mathematics and art ,  as well as in popular culture . 
during the `` marvel now ! `` 
in the ultimate marvel universe ,  shang-chi first appeared in `` ultimate marvel team-up '' #15.
following another battle against fu manchu ,  shang-chi quit mi-6.
sending shang-chi to an incursion point in japan ,  shang-chi was exposed to cosmic-level radiation that transformed shang-chi into a mutate capable of creating duplicates of himself . 
shang-chi first appeared in `` special marvel edition '' #15  -lrb-  december 1973 -rrb- by steve englehart and jim starlin . 
's pocket dimension of earth-13584, shang-chi appears as a member of spider-man's gang . 
in the battleworld ,  shang-chi fights against his father ,  zheng zu ,  the emperor of k'un-l'un . 
shang-chi  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a fictional character ,  often called the `` master of kung fu '' ,  appearing in american comic books published by marvel comics . 
in `` secret avengers '' ,  steve rogers tracks shang-chi down to help turn back the shadow council ,  which has resurrected shang-chi's father ,  zheng zu ,  and employed the hai-dai ,  a squad of assassins ,  to hunt shang-chi down . 
shang-chi never realizes his father's evil doings before his death at magneto's hands . 
some time later ,  shang-chi returned from china and rejoined tarr ,  reston and wu . 
in 2018, sports broadcast journal speculated that albert might be the first network play-by-play broadcaster to continue into his 80s ,  will marv albert be the first network play-by-play announcer to call games into his 80s
an `` albert achievement awards '' video was released in 1993.
marv albert was the lead play-by-play broadcaster for the `` nba on nbc '' for most of its run from 1990 to 2002, calling every nba finals during that timeframe except for 1998, 1999, and 2000.
albert was usually teamed with rich gannon on broadcasts . 
on june 6, 2011, it was announced that albert was joining cbs sports to call play-by-play for `` the nfl on cbs '' . 
albert currently works for turner sports ,  serving as lead announcer for nba games on tnt . 
albert said that he `` felt it was the wiser move to go primarily nba at this stage '' . 
albert left the rangers after the 1994–95 season at the same time rose took the job as play-by-play announcer of the new york islanders . 
albert hosts a basketball-focused interview show on nba tv ,  which also airs later on yes . 
albert continues to be the lead play-by-play announcer for national basketball association games on tnt ,  a position he assumed in 1999.
the vikings won their first nine games of 1973 and finished the season with a 12–2 record . 
the 2010–11 season was a step down for the minnesota vikings . 
in 2000, the vikings went 11–5.
in 1969, the vikings secured a 12–2 record . 
the vikings finished the season 6–10 with a 20–13 loss against the detroit lions . 
the vikings won the central division again in 1974 with a 10–4 record . 
from the team's first season in 1961 to 1981, the team called metropolitan stadium in suburban bloomington home . 
the vikings ,  however ,  lost 32–14.
following the strike-shortened 1987 season ,  the 8–7 vikings ,  who had finished 8–4 in regular games but 0–3 using strike-replacement players ,  pulled two upsets in the playoffs . 
since the team's first season in 1961, the vikings have had one of the highest winning percentages in the nfl . 
the vikings played their first game at the metrodome in a preseason matchup against the seattle seahawks on august 21, 1982 in a game minnesota won ,  7–3.
in 2006, the team returned to black shoes for first time since the 1983 season . 
the team finished with a 3–13 record ,  tied with the 1984 vikings for the second worst record in franchise history . 
minnesota began the 2006 season 4–2  -lrb-  with childress becoming the first vikings coach to start his career 2–0 -rrb- ,  but finished the year at 6–10, receiving the 7th pick in the nfl draft; with it ,  the vikings selected adrian peterson out of the university of oklahoma . 
despite a strong push in the middle of the season ,  winning five straight games ,  the vikings lost their final two games to finish the season at 8–8 and missed the playoffs . 
in 1977, the vikings again won the central division with a 9–5 record and advanced to their 4th nfc championship game in 5 years ,  but were defeated by the eventual super bowl champion cowboys ,  23–6, at texas stadium . 
the nfl introduced `` color rush '' uniforms for all 32 teams in the 2016 season ,  specifically for `` thursday night football '' games . 
the vikings played their final game at metropolitan stadium on december 20 to conclude the 1981 nfl season by losing to the kansas city chiefs ,  10–6.
the vikings played their last game at the metrodome on december 29, 2013, defeating the detroit lions 14–13 to end the season . 
in the first week of the 2010 nfl regular season ,  the vikings played the defending super bowl champions ,  the new orleans saints . 
peterson's first career touchdown was a 60-yard screen pass against the atlanta falcons in his first career game . 
in 2001, after a disappointing 5–11 season ,  the vikings bought out the contract of dennis green ,  despite his successful coaching tenure with the team . 
the vikings therefore had the fifth highest winning percentage among all nfl teams during the regular season in the 1990s . 
robert smith ,  who ran for 1,521 yards that season ,  retired at the end of the year after only playing eight nfl seasons . 
the team wore black armbands for the last four games in 1978 in memory of jack `` jocko '' nelson ,  an assistant coach who died during the season . 
however ,  they lost to the seattle seahawks 10–9 after blair walsh missed a 27-yard field goal in the third coldest game in nfl playoff history . 
after serving as the interim head coach for the final six games of the season  -lrb-  finishing with a 3–3 record  -rrb-  ,  defensive coordinator leslie frazier was officially named the head coach on january 3, 2011, after signing a three-year contract . 
peterson had 19 carries for 109 yards and added a touchdown during the game . 
in 2010, he won another ibiza dj award ,  for the third time . 
through the 1990s he was a regular dj in the chill out room at return to the source parties in london ,  around the uk and abroad . 
in 1998 he joined the uk's ninja tune record label ,  with whom he toured as a dj and made three releases . 
mixmaster morris  -lrb-  born morris gould ,  30 december 1965 -rrb- is an english ambient dj and underground musician . 
in 2003 he released the mix cd `` god bless the chilled '' for the return to the source ambient meditations series . 
in 1995, he played at the first the big chill festival ,  and then became a resident for the next 16 years . 
the language is usually referred to in english as `` manx '' . 
following the decline in the use of manx during the 19th century ,   -lrb-  the manx language society  -rrb-  was founded in 1899.
 ''the manx '' ,  `` the gaelic '' ,  in ways not generally seen in standard english . 
manx is used in the annual tynwald ceremony and manx words are used in official tynwald publications . 
little secular manx literature has been preserved . 
manx is a goidelic language ,  closely related to irish and scottish gaelic . 
those who have learned manx as a second language as part of the manx language revival speak what has been called `` neo-manx '' . 
scottish gaelic is often referred to in english as simply `` gaelic '' ,  but this is less common with manx and irish . 
as far as is known ,  there was no distinctively manx written literature before the reformation . 
to distinguish it from the two other forms of gaelic ,  the phrases `` gaelg ''/ ''gailck vannin ''  -lrb-  gaelic of mann  -rrb-  and `` gaelg ''/ ''gailck vanninnagh ''  -lrb-  manx gaelic  -rrb-  also are used . 
the revival of manx has been made easier because the language was well-recorded; for example ,  the bible had been translated into manx ,  and audio recordings had been made of native speakers . 
two weekly programmes in manx are available on medium wave on manx radio: `` traa dy liooar '' on monday and `` jamys jeheiney '' on friday . 
these suevi were probably a mix of suevian groups from the area north of danube and pannonian basin such as the marcomanni ,  quadi and buri . 
this was also the first mention of bavarians and they are also often proposed to have had marcomanni in their ancestry . 
the marcomanni were a germanic tribal confederation who eventually came to live in a powerful kingdom north of the danube ,  somewhere in the region near modern bohemia ,  during the peak of power of the nearby roman empire . 
soon after ,  the pannonian and danubian area went into a long period of turmoil . 
maroboduus  -lrb-  born `` circa '' 30 bc ,  died in ad 37 -rrb- ,  was a romanized king of the germanic suebi ,  who under pressure from the wars of the cherusci and romans ,  and losing the suevic semnones and langobardi from his kingdom ,  moved with the marcomanni into the forests of bohemia ,  near to the quadi . 
in 17 ad ,  war broke out between arminius and maroboduus ,  and after an indecisive battle ,  maroboduus withdrew into the hilly forests of bohemia ,  in 18 ad . 
he was the first documented ruler of bohemia . 
muons have a mass of  ,  which is about 207 times that of the electron . 
the dominant muon decay mode  -lrb-  sometimes called the michel decay after louis michel  -rrb-  is the simplest possible: the muon decays to an electron ,  an electron antineutrino ,  and a muon neutrino . 
in formulaic terms ,  these two decays are:
the decay distributions of the electron in muon decays have been parameterised using the so-called michel parameters . 
these interactions usually produce pi mesons initially ,  which most often decay to muons . 
also ,  the mu meson's decay products included both a neutrino and an antineutrino ,  rather than just one or the other ,  as was observed in the decay of other charged mesons . 
to be precise: in the standard model with neutrino mass ,  a decay like → + is technically possible ,  for example by neutrino oscillation of a virtual muon neutrino into an electron neutrino ,  but such a decay is astronomically unlikely and therefore should be experimentally unobservable: less than one in 10 muon decays should produce such a decay . 
for the decay of the muon ,  the expected decay distribution for the standard model values of michel parameters is where formula_6 is the angle between the muon's polarization vector formula_7 and the decay-electron momentum vector ,  and formula_8 is the fraction of muons that are forward-polarized . 
because muons have a very large mass and energy compared with the decay energy of radioactivity ,  they are never produced by radioactive decay . 
the mean lifetime ,  = / ,  of the  -lrb-  positive  -rrb-  muon is  -lrb-   . 
due to the muons decaying by the weak interaction ,  parity conservation is violated . 
the michael j .  muuss research award ,  set up by friends and family of muuss ,  memorializes him at johns hopkins university . 
michael john muuss  -lrb-  october 16, 1958 – november 20, 2000 -rrb- was the american author of the freeware network tool ping . 
hot mousses often get their light texture from the addition of beaten egg whites . 
various desserts consisting of whipped cream in pyramidal shapes with coffee ,  liqueurs ,  chocolate ,  fruits ,  and so on either in the mixture or poured on top were called `` crème en mousse '' 'cream in a foam' ,  `` crème mousseuse '' 'foamy cream' ,  `` mousse '' 'foam' ,  and so on ,  as early as 1768.
there was also an alternate navy blue jersey that had the same features as the home jersey . 
the home cap was completely navy blue ,  while the away cap featured a navy blue crown and a forest green bill . 
the blue alternate jersey placed the player's number on the lower left side instead of the logo . 
in 2016, the brewers replaced their road navy and home gold alternates with a new navy alternate jersey . 
the road jerseys were the first uniforms in franchise history to feature player names on the back; names were added to the home jerseys beginning in 1993.
ultimately ,  it was decided to keep blue and gold as the team colors ,  and they have remained so ever since . 
the brewers unveiled new uniforms for the 1978 season . 
in 2013, a gold alternate jersey with `` brewers '' on the front was introduced ,  as well . 
since 2017, both alternate navy uniforms are used regardless of home or road games . 
the team's only world series appearance came in  . 
the montreal expos  -lrb-    -rrb-  were a canadian professional baseball team based in montreal ,  quebec . 
the team created the montreal expos hall of fame to celebrate the franchise's 25th season in 1993.
the final season of the montreal expos came in  ,  and was again split between montreal and san juan . 
the team fared little better in the following seasons; the expos went 73–89 in and 71–90 in  . 
the team's best player ,  and first star ,  in its early seasons was rusty staub . 
the expos introduced their first mascot during the 1978 season . 
the expos won more games between 1979 and 1983 than any other team in the nl east ,  but had only one postseason appearance to show for it . 
on the field ,  the expos continued to fare poorly; the team won 75 games in 1977, and 76 in  . 
dawson's reluctance to be enshrined as an expo stemmed ,  in part ,  from the breakdown of his relationship with the team during mlb's collusion scandal of 1986–87, when he claims the team not only `` threw him out '' of montreal ,  but tried to prevent other teams from signing him as a free agent . 
the team payroll for 2000 increased to $33 million ,  nearly double the $17.9 million from the previous season . 
as of 2018, pitcher bartolo colon ,  who played half a season with the team in 2002, is the last active former montreal expo player in the major leagues . 
less than a year after the city was awarded a team ,  the expos took to the field to begin the season . 
rose batted only  . 259 and failed to hit a home run in 95 games before he was traded back to his original team ,  cincinnati ,  and montreal finished with a losing record on the season . 
interest in the team continued to decline ,  as both fans and businesses were unwilling to lend their support to a noncompetitive team . 
the expos finished with an 83–79 record – their first winning season since 1996 – but finished second in the nl east ,  19 games out of both the division lead and the wild card . 
on september 29, 2004, mlb announced the franchise would relocate to washington ,  d . c .  for the season ,  and the expos played their final home game in montreal . 
professional baseball in montreal dates back to 1890 when teams briefly played in the international association . 
keri later wrote that the expos would not have been in this position had a better-financed `` champion '' with the resources and the patience to shepherd the team through the 1990s bought the team . 
immediately after the minor league triple-a montreal royals folded in 1960, political leaders in montreal sought an mlb franchise ,  and when the national league evaluated expansion candidates for the 1969 season ,  it awarded a team to montreal . 
the team ended their 36-year run with an all-time record of 2,753 wins ,  2,943 losses and 4 ties . 
to bolster the team's finances ,  loria tried to renegotiate the expos' broadcasting deals ,  which were far less valuable than that of any other team . 
the team failed to post a winning season in its first ten years and finished fifth or sixth in the six-team nl east eight times . 
dave van horne ,  the team's english-language play-by-play announcer since the team's inception ,  left at the season's end to work for the florida marlins . 
the media ,  meanwhile ,  had taken to calling the expos a `` triple-a team '' as the team seemed to enter a period where they would develop players only to move them on to other organizations . 
mlb's chief disciplinarian frank robinson was appointed as the team's manager . 
bronfman hoped to sell the team for around $50 million ,  but both he and brochu found it impossible to find a local businessman willing to take primary ownership of the team . 
according to then-team president claude brochu ,  the team's late-season decline in 1989 proved too much for bronfman ,  who asked him to seek a buyer for the team . 
nonetheless ,  the expos improved on the field; they won 87 games in 1992, 94 in 1993 and finished second in the nl east both seasons . 
there are exceptions ,  such as uranocene ,  which has two cyclooctatetraene rings sandwiching a uranium atom . 
in metallocene names ,  the prefix before the `` -ocene '' ending indicates what metallic element is between the cp groups . 
the first metallocene to be classified was ferrocene ,  and was discovered simultaneously in 1951 by kealy and pauson ,  and miller et al . 
domitia would die in 151.
it was the first time that rome was ruled by two emperors . 
marcus kept in close touch with fronto ,  but would ignore fronto's scruples . 
fronto was hugely pleased . 
marcus would remain in rome ,  as the city `` demanded the presence of an emperor '' . 
in 149, faustina gave birth again ,  to twin sons . 
on november 30, 147, faustina gave birth to a girl named domitia faustina . 
in 165, roman forces moved on mesopotamia . 
he would not mention herodes at all in his `` meditations '' ,  in spite of the fact that they would come into contact many times over the following decades . 
although educated in rome ,  in his `` meditations '' ,  marcus would write his inmost thoughts in greek . 
fronto's letters continued through marcus' early reign . 
marcus was born into a roman patrician family . 
his tribunican powers would be renewed with antoninus' on 10 december 147.
he wrote fronto a letter on his birthday ,  claiming to love him as he loved himself ,  and calling on the gods to ensure that every word he learned of literature ,  he would learn `` from the lips of fronto '' . 
marcus was born in rome on 26 april 121.
marcus aurelius  -lrb-   or ; ; 26 april 121 – 17 march 180 -rrb- ,  called the philosopher ,  was roman emperor from  . 
marcus married his first cousin faustina in 145.
he would criticize himself in the `` meditations '' for `` abusing court life '' in front of company . 
in 159 and 160, faustina gave birth to daughters: fadilla and cornificia ,  named respectively after faustina's and marcus' dead sisters . 
as quaestor ,  marcus would have had little real administrative work to do . 
in other times of famine ,  the emperors are said to have provided for the italian communities out of the roman granaries . 
marcus spent time with fronto's wife and daughter ,  both named cratia ,  and they enjoyed light conversation . 
upon his accession he also devalued the roman currency . 
occupied armenia was reconstructed on roman terms . 
fronto returned to his roman townhouse at dawn on 28 march ,  having left his home in cirta as soon as news of his pupils' accession reached him . 
it would mean the end of the `` felicitas temporum ''  -lrb-  `` happy times ''  -rrb-  that the coinage of 161 had proclaimed . 
immediately after hadrian's death ,  antoninus approached marcus and requested that his marriage arrangements be amended: marcus' betrothal to ceionia fabia would be annulled ,  and he would be betrothed to faustina ,  antoninus' daughter ,  instead . 
on 1 january 145, marcus was made consul a second time . 
the campaign had lasted only three days . 
the equestrian statue of marcus aurelius in rome is the only roman equestrian statue which has survived into the modern period . 
a significant amount of the correspondence between fronto and marcus has survived . 
the early days of marcus' reign were the happiest of fronto's life: marcus was beloved by the people of rome ,  an excellent emperor ,  a fond pupil ,  and ,  perhaps most importantly ,  as eloquent as could be wished . 
lucius was less esteemed by fronto than his brother ,  as his interests were on a lower level . 
dio adds that from marcus' first days as counsellor to antoninius to his final days as emperor of rome ,  `` he remained the same  -lrb-  person  -rrb-  and did not change in the least . `` 
in the first two centuries of the christian era ,  it was local roman officials who were largely responsible for the persecution of christians . 
his mother lucilla did not remarry . 
there had been reverses in rome's past ,  fronto writes ,  but ,  in the end ,  romans had always prevailed over their enemies: `` always and everywhere  -lrb-  mars  -rrb-  has changed our troubles into successes and our terrors into triumphs . `` 
fronto would again remind his pupil of the tension between his role and his philosophic pretensions: `` suppose ,  caesar ,  that you can attain to the wisdom of cleanthes and zeno ,  yet ,  against your will ,  not the philosopher's woolen cape . `` 
in 1633 maria eleonora returned to sweden with the embalmed body of her husband . 
in denmark ,  maria eleonora became the guest of king christian iv . 
maria eleonora of brandenburg  -lrb-  11 november 1599 – 28 march 1655 -rrb- was a german princess and queen consort of sweden . 
in the year after christina's birth ,  maria eleonora was described as being in a state of hysteria owing to her husband's absences . 
she bore her husband a daughter ,  christina ,  in 1626.
in the autumn of 1623 maria eleonora gave birth to a daughter ,  but the baby died the next year . 
maria eleonora was not included in the regency government during the minority of her daughter ,  as the council of the state did not consider her suitable as regent . 
maria eleonora had plunged into a prolonged period of emotional dysregulation due to grief . 
when the regency council tried to separate christina from her mother ,  maria eleonora wept and protested so bitterly that nothing was done . 
in the year 1620, maria eleonora married the swedish king gustavus adolphus with her mother's consent ,  but against the will of her brother george william ,  elector of brandenburg ,  who had just succeeded her father . 
mazes can be built with snow . 
maze solving is the act of finding a route through the maze from the start to finish . 
maze generation is the act of designing the layout of passages and walls within a maze . 
like their modern relatives ,  mammoths were quite large . 
the woolly mammoth  -lrb-  `` m .  primigenius ''  -rrb-  was the last species of the genus . 
an estimated 150 million mammoths are buried in the frozen siberian tundra . 
the fat also allowed the mammoths to increase their muscle mass ,  allowing the mammoths to fight against enemies and live longer . 
this was determined by examining the isotopic data from the european mammoth teeth . 
depending on the species or race of mammoth ,  the diet differed somewhat depending on location ,  although all mammoths ate similar things . 
european mammoths had a major diet of c3 carbon fixation plants . 
among many now extinct clades ,  the mastodon is only a distant relative of the mammoths ,  and part of the separate mammutidae family ,  which diverged 25 million years before the mammoths evolved . 
according to one research team ,  a mammoth cannot be recreated ,  but they will try to eventually grow in an `` artificial womb '' a hybrid elephant with some woolly mammoth traits . 
recent research of sediments in alaska indicates mammoths survived on the american mainland until 10,000 years ago . 
mexican food in the united states is based on the food of northern mexico . 
corn in mexico is not only eaten ,  but also drunk as a beverage . 
corn is the staple food in the region . 
this is also the area where most of mexico’s haute cuisine can be found . 
the other basic ingredient in all parts of mexico is the chile pepper . 
cheesemaking in mexico has evolved its own specialties . 
sometimes landrace corn from mexico is imported and ground on the premises . 
another popular street food ,  especially in mexico city and the surrounding area is the torta . 
the main meal of the day in mexico is the `` comida '' ,  meaning 'meal' in spanish . 
mexican street food is one of the most varied parts of the cuisine . 
the foods eaten in what is now the north of mexico have differed from those in the south since the pre-hispanic era . 
for example ,  the spanish brought rice to mexico and it has since grown well in veracruz . 
alternatively ,  with more americans experiencing mexican food in mexico ,  there is a growing demand for more authentic flavors . 
since the 20th century ,  there have been an interchange of food influences between mexico and the united states . 
the chile pepper was used as food ,  ritual and as medicine . 
because it is just a city ,  the main feature of mexico city cooking is that it has been influenced by those of the other regions of mexico ,  as well as a number of foreign influences . 
the influence of american fast food on mexican street food grew during the late 20th century . 
they are wrapped in corn husks in the highlands and desert areas of mexico and in banana leaves in the tropics . 
the best known of mexico’s street foods is the taco ,  whose origin is based on the pre-hispanic custom of picking up other foods with tortillas as utensils were not used . 
in most of mexico ,  especially in rural areas ,  much of the food is consumed in the home with the most traditional mexican cooking done domestically based on local ingredients . 
another important festive food is the tamale ,  also known as `` tamal '' in spanish . 
like elsewhere in mexico ,  corn is the dietary staple and indigenous elements are still strong in the cuisine . 
many of the most popular beverages can be found sold by street vendors and juice bars in mexico . 
in northeastern mexico ,  during the spanish colonial period ,  nuevo león was founded and settled by spanish families of jewish origin  -lrb-  crypto-jews  -rrb-  . 
west of mexico city are the states of michoacán ,  jalisco and colima ,  as well as the pacific coast . 
bionico is also a popular dessert in the guadalajara area . 
the program counter has 32 bits . 
mips i has thirty-two 32-bit general-purpose registers . 
several optional extensions are also available ,  including mips-3d which is a simple set of floating-point simd instructions dedicated to common 3d tasks ,  mdmx  -lrb-  madmax  -rrb-  which is a more extensive integer simd instruction set using the 64-bit floating-point registers ,  mips16e which adds compression to the instruction stream to make programs take up less room ,  and mips mt ,  which adds multithreading capability . 
the two low-order bits always contain zero since mips i instructions are 32 bits long and are aligned to their natural word boundaries . 
