all octopuses are venomous ,  but only the blue-ringed octopuses are known to be deadly to humans . 
cirrate octopuses lack the ink sac . 
octopuses can replace lost limbs . 
the reproduction of octopuses has been studied in only a few species . 
octopuses also have an excellent sense of touch . 
like other cephalopods ,  octopuses can distinguish the polarisation of light . 
most octopuses swim by expelling a jet of water from the mantle through the siphon into the sea . 
octopuses use camouflage when hunting ,  and to avoid predators . 
this colour-changing ability is also used to communicate with or warn other octopuses . 
octopuses generally avoid humans ,  but incidents have been verified . 
octopuses bring captured prey back to the den where they can eat it safely . 
octopuses have a closed circulatory system ,  in which the blood remains inside blood vessels . 
nearly all octopuses are predatory; bottom-dwelling octopuses eat mainly crustaceans ,  polychaete worms ,  and other molluscs such as whelks and clams; open-ocean octopuses eat mainly prawns ,  fish and other cephalopods . 
octopuses that are diurnal and live in shallow water have evolved more complex skin than their nocturnal and deep-sea counterparts . 
all species are venomous ,  but only blue-ringed octopuses have venom that is lethal to humans . 
young octopuses learn nothing from their parents ,  as adults provide no parental care beyond tending to their eggs until the young octopuses hatch . 
octopuses are gonochoric and have a single ,  posteriorly-located gonad which is associated with the coelom . 
cirrate octopuses cannot produce jet propulsion and rely on their fins for swimming . 
octopuses mainly move about by relatively slow crawling ,  with some swimming in a head-first position . 
bites have been recorded from captive octopuses of other species; they leave swellings which disappear in a day or two . 
aside from humans ,  octopuses may be preyed on by fishes ,  seabirds ,  sea otters ,  pinnipeds ,  cetaceans ,  and other cephalopods . 
octopuses have a food conversion efficiency greater than that of chickens ,  making octopus aquaculture a possibility . 
most young octopuses hatch as paralarvae and are planktonic for weeks to months ,  depending on the species and water temperature . 
octopuses have a relatively short life expectancy; some species live for as little as six months . 
octopuses live in every ocean ,  and different species have adapted to different marine habitats . 
if it does ,  then god cannot be said to be omniscient since there is then a form of knowledge that god lacks access to . 
it is argued that if humans are free to choose between alternatives ,  god could not know what this choice will be . 
some modern christian theologians argue that god's omniscience is inherent rather than total ,  and that god chooses to limit his omniscience in order to preserve the freewill and dignity of his creatures . 
they are said to be of two kinds:
some philosophers ,  such as patrick grim ,  linda zagzebski ,  stephan torre and william mander have discussed the issue of whether the apparent exclusively first-person nature of conscious experience is compatible with god's omniscience . 
the original chipset appeared in amiga models built between 1985 and 1990: the amiga 1000, amiga 2000, amiga cdtv ,  and amiga 500.
the line mode can also be used to draw rotated bobs: each line of bob data is used as line pattern while the line mode draws the tilted bob line by line . 
the blitter's line mode draws single-pixel thick lines using bresenham's line algorithm . 
denise is the main video processor . 
in hold-and-modify  -lrb-  ham  -rrb-  mode ,  each 6-bit pixel is interpreted as two control bits and four data bits . 
there can also be a sixth bitplane ,  which can be used in three special graphics modes:
the blitter runs either from the start of the block to the end ,  known as `` ascending '' mode ,  or in reverse ,  `` descending '' mode . 
the blitter's filling mode is used to fill per-line horizontal spans . 
the `` blitter '' is a sub-component of agnus . 
later amigas tended to use a combination of a faster cpu and blitter for many operations . 
polygon filling  -rrb-  and line drawing . 
optic neuritis is a demyelinating inflammation of the optic nerve . 
inflammation of the optic nerve causes loss of vision ,  usually because of the swelling and destruction of the myelin sheath covering the optic nerve . 
some other common causes of optic neuritis include infection  -lrb-  e . g . 
when an inflammatory recurrent optic neuritis is not demyelinating ,  it is called `` chronic relapsing inflammatory optic neuropathy ''  -lrb-  crion  -rrb- 
headquartered in the united states capital washington ,  d . c .  ,  the oas's members are the 35 independent states of the americas . 
the oie's headquarters are located in paris ,  in the 17th arrondisment . 
on 16 march 2009, the oie purchased a large part of the building at 14 rue de prony ,  adjoining its headquarters . 
in 1981, smith made his first all-star game appearance as a reserve player . 
meanwhile ,  smith was winning recognition for his accomplishments on the field . 
smith has also been an entrepreneur in a variety of business ventures . 
following the 1987 season ,  smith was awarded the largest contract in the national league at $2,340,000.
after the world series championship ,  smith and the cardinals agreed on a new contract in january 1983 that paid smith $1 million per year . 
smith contributed a triple during the series ,  and the cardinals won the contest in seven games . 
smith was born in mobile ,  alabama ,  the second of clovi and marvella smith's six children  -lrb-  five boys and one girl  -rrb-  . 
while smith was attending junior high school ,  his parents divorced . 
as smith entered the 1996 season ,  he finalized a divorce from his wife denise during the first half of the year . 
in 1985, smith amassed a  . 276 batting average ,  31 stolen bases ,  and 591 assists in the field . 
smith also served as host of the television show `` this week in baseball '' from 1997 to 1998.
after working with a hitting instructor during the offseason ,  smith failed to record a base hit in his first 32 at-bats of the 1979 season . 
just as herzog had predicted when he told smith the cardinals would win the pennant with him on the team ,  smith found himself as the team's starting shortstop in the best-of-seven 1982 world series against the milwaukee brewers . 
upon joining the cardinals ,  smith helped the team win the 1982 world series . 
the oc-135b modifications center around four cameras installed in the rear of the aircraft . 
the oc-135b open skies united states air force observation aircraft supports the treaty on open skies . 
two barco vga color monitors display camera annotation and other camera data on screen for the sensor operator and observer use . 
the aircraft are assigned to air combat command at the 55th wing ,  45th reconnaissance squadron ,  offutt air force base near omaha ,  nebraska ,  for operations ,  training and maintenance . 
the aircraft are being upgraded with the block 30 pacer crag navigational system upgrade ,  a first step in making them compliant with icao mandated global air traffic management and global air navigation standards guidelines . 
negotiated by the then-members of nato and the warsaw pact ,  the agreement was signed in helsinki ,  finland ,  on march 24, 1992.
list a cricket is a classification of the limited-overs  -lrb-  one-day  -rrb-  form of the sport of cricket . 
100-ball cricket ,  another form of one-day cricket with 100 deliveries per side ,  will launch in england in 2020.
for more details ,  see history of cricket . 
limited overs cricket ,  also known as one-day cricket ,  which includes list a cricket and twenty20 cricket ,  is a version of the sport of cricket in which a match is generally completed in one day ,  whereas test and first-class matches can take up to five days to complete . 
most cricketing nations have some form of domestic list a competition . 
list a is a classification of the limited-overs  -lrb-  one-day  -rrb-  form of cricket ,  technically as the domestic level . 
twenty20, a curtailed form of one-day cricket with 20 overs per side ,  was first played in england in 2003.
the idea for a one-day ,  limited 50-over cricket tournament ,  was first played in the inaugural match of the all india pooja cricket tournament in 1951 in the small town of thrippunithura in kerala . 
the osce's secretariat is located in vienna ,  austria . 
chairmanship of the osce is held by a member state on a calendar-year basis ,  with the minister for foreign affairs of that state performing the function of chairman-in-office . 
it has its origins in the 1975 conference on security and co-operation in europe  -lrb-  csce  -rrb-  held in helsinki ,  finland . 
the origin of the institution lies with the charter of paris for a new europe  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- ,  the helsinki document 1992 formally institutionalized this function . 
in addition to the ministerial council and permanent council ,  the forum for security co-operation is also an osce decision-making body . 
the responsibilities of the chairman-in-office  -lrb-  cio  -rrb-  include the chairmanship rotates annually ,  and the post of the chairman-in-office is held by the foreign minister of the participating state which holds the chairmanship . 
political direction to the organization is given by heads of state or government during summits . 
the collapse of the soviet union required a change of role for the csce . 
omri  -lrb-   ,  `` ‘omri ''; fl . 
omri became king of israel in the 31st year of asa ,  king of judah and reigned for 12 years ,  6 years of which were in tirzah . 
the short-lived dynasty founded by omri constituted a new chapter in the history of the northern kingdom of israel . 
assyrian kings frequently referred to omri's successors as belonging to the `` house of omri ''  -lrb-  `` bit hu-um-ri-a ''  -rrb-  . 
it took omri four years to subdue tibni and at last proclaim himself undisputed king of israel . 
nothing is said in scripture about the lineage of omri . 
also in 1969, the school opened its first two co-ed dormitories ,  and two more followed a year later . 
the college's first term began a year later with 27 male and 13 female students ,  and tuition of $50 a year . 
these dorms include newcomb hall ,  wylie hall ,  erdman hall ,  haines hall ,  rangeview hall and stearns hall . 
for the first three years at occidental ,  all students are guaranteed housing on campus and for seniors it is optional . 
the core program requires students to achieve the following:
the school also created a permanent sexual misconduct advisory board made up of students ,  faculty and staff . 
occidental launched one of the country's first upward bound programs in 1966, aimed at increasing the number of low-income ,  underrepresented high school students who become the first in their family to go to college . 
after a student's first year ,  he or she can choose to live in a number of dorms that house sophomores ,  juniors ,  and seniors; one-third of all these halls are reserved for each grade . 
the school also took down the crosses in the chapel in an attempt to `` broaden occidental's appeal among non-christian students . `` 
the 4,886-panel installation was completed in spring 2013 and inaugurated on the school's 126 year anniversary . 
there are also traditional groups such as glee club ,  greek organizations ,  and student media outlets . 
admittance to the program enables students to earn a bachelor's degree from occidental and a law degree from columbia in six years . 
the team forfeited two games and was outscored in the other three 170-19.
as of the 2016–17 school year ,  the `` weekly '' publishes biweekly in print and weekly online . 
at the end of the five years ,  the student receives two degrees ,  a bachelor of arts in the combined plan from occidental and a bachelor of science in the selected field of engineering from the engineering school . 
with a competitive gpa and lsat scores ,  columbia law school admits students upon completion of their junior year at occidental into its accelerated interdisciplinary program in legal education . 
the average class size is 18 students and most students take four classes per semester . 
at the beginning of every school year ,  freshmen participate in convocation ,  a formal ceremony welcoming new students to the college in which the faculty wear their full academic regalia and students don robes . 
in july 2009, jonathan veitch ,  formerly dean of the new school's eugene lang college ,  became occidental's 15th president and the first to be a native angeleno . 
approximately 25 percent of the student body participates in a varsity sports program . 
the final portion of the core program requires students to pass a senior comprehensive examination in their chosen field . 
after years of occasional skirmishes with libya over libyan territorial claims to the gulf of sidra ,  the united states contemplated a military attack to strike targets within the libyan mainland . 
two u . s .  air force captains—fernando l .  ribas-dominicci and paul f .  lorence—were killed when their f-111 fighter-bomber was shot down over the gulf of sidra . 
the libyan air defense network was extensive ,  and included: covering tripoli alone were:
libyan agents who had carried out the operation from the libyan embassy in east germany were identified and prosecuted by germany in the 1990s . 
gaddafi said reconciliation between libya and the united states was impossible so long as reagan was in the white house; of the president he said ,  `` he is mad . 
the 1986 united states bombing of libya ,  code-named operation el dorado canyon ,  comprised air strikes by the united states against libya on tuesday ,  april 15, 1986.
the attack began at 0200 hours  -lrb-  libyan time  -rrb-  ,  and lasted about twelve minutes ,  with 60 tons of munitions dropped . 
libya responded with aggressive counter-maneuvers on 24 march that led to a naval engagement in the gulf of sidra . 
as a simple example ,  if `` v '' = 1 v and r = `` r '' ,  `` v '' will be 2 v ,  exactly the amount required to keep `` v '' at 1 v .  because of the feedback provided by the `` r '' ,  `` r '' network ,  this is a `` closed-loop '' circuit . 
since there is no feedback from the output to either input ,  this is an `` open-loop '' circuit acting as a comparator . 
the output voltage of the op-amp `` v '' is given by the equation where `` a '' is the open-loop gain of the amplifier  -lrb-  the term `` open-loop '' refers to the absence of a feedback loop from the output to the input  -rrb-  . 
high input impedance at the input terminals and low output impedance at the output terminal -lrb-  s  -rrb-  are particularly useful features of an op-amp . 
the amplifier's differential inputs consist of a non-inverting input  -lrb-  +  -rrb-  with voltage `` v '' and an inverting input  -lrb-  –  -rrb-  with voltage `` v ''; ideally the op-amp amplifies only the difference in voltage between the two ,  which is called the `` differential input voltage '' . 
each player now bids for the number of tricks he believes he can win . 
a game consists of a fixed number of hands ,  and each hand consists of dealing a certain number of cards to each player ,  depending on the variation and the number of players . 
the dealer  -lrb-  initially determined by cutting cards  -rrb-  deals out the cards one by one ,  starting with the player to his left ,  in a clockwise direction ,  until the required number of cards has been dealt . 
during a hand ,  each player bids for a number of tricks ,  then attempts to take exactly that many tricks during the hand . 
vom kriege  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a book on war and military strategy by prussian general carl von clausewitz  -lrb-  1780–1831 -rrb- ,  written mostly after the napoleonic wars ,  between 1816 and 1830, and published posthumously by his wife marie von brühl in 1832.
modern perceptions of war are based on the concepts clausewitz put forth in `` on war '' ,  though these have been diversely interpreted by various leaders  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  moltke ,  vladimir lenin ,  dwight d .  eisenhower ,  mao zedong ,  etc . 
clausewitz was among those intrigued by the manner in which the leaders of the french revolution ,  especially napoleon ,  changed the conduct of war through their ability to motivate the populace and gain access to the full resources of the state ,  thus unleashing war on a greater scale than had previously been seen in europe . 
some of the key ideas  -lrb-  not necessarily original to clausewitz or even to his mentor gerhard von scharnhorst  -rrb-  discussed in `` on war '' include  -lrb-  in no particular order of importance  -rrb- :
it was the most picturesque element of polish opposition to stalinist authoritarianism . 
a statue of a dwarf ,  dedicated to the memory of the movement ,  stands today on świdnicka street in wrocław ,  in the place where events took place . 
philip had allied himself with the french king ,  philip ii ,  while otto was supported at first by richard i ,  and after his death in 1199 by his brother john . 
the support that philip ii of france was giving to frederick forced king john of england to throw his weight behind his nephew otto . 
otto refused ,  and as the civil war was again about to recommence ,  philip was murdered on 21 june 1208.
otto's election pulled the empire into the conflict between england and france . 
it is said that philip ii had sent to frederick the imperial eagle which otto had left lying on the battlefield . 
after philip's death ,  otto made amends with the staufen party and became engaged to philip's daughter beatrix . 
otto was forced to retire to his possessions near brunswick ,  leaving philip virtually uncontested as german king . 
student involvement in the classroom is a key part of obe . 
obe can be compared across different institutions . 
obe has been practiced in malaysia since the 1950s; however ,  as of 2008, obe is being implemented at all levels of education ,  especially tertiary education . 
obe was introduced to south africa in the late 1990s by the post-apartheid government as part of its curriculum 2005 program . 
outcome-based education  -lrb-  obe  -rrb-  is an educational theory that bases each part of an educational system around goals  -lrb-  outcomes  -rrb-  . 
in the early 1990s ,  all states and territories in australia developed intended curriculum documents largely based on obe for their primary and secondary schools . 
instructors will also find their work load increased if they chose to use an assessment method that evaluates students holistically . 
it also highlights the importance of using technology ,  especially the internet ,  in learning to make it relevant to students . 
olga was reportedly from pskov . 
after igor's death on 945, olga ruled kievan rus as regent on behalf of their son svyatoslav . 
saint olga  -lrb-   ,  old norse: ``  ''; died 969 ad in kiev  -rrb-  was a regent of kievan rus' for her son svyatoslav from 945 until 960.
the drevlians wanted olga to marry their prince mal ,  making him the ruler of kievan rus' ,  but olga was determined to remain in power and preserve it for her son . 
as a shield volcano ,  olympus mons resembles the shape of the large volcanoes making up the hawaiian islands . 
being a shield volcano ,  olympus mons has a very gently sloping profile . 
large shield volcanoes grow not only by adding material to their flanks as erupted lava ,  but also by spreading laterally at their bases . 
olympus mons  -lrb-  ; latin for mount olympus  -rrb-  is a very large shield volcano on the planet mars . 
similarly ,  an observer near the summit would be unaware of standing on a very high mountain ,  as the slope of the volcano would extend far beyond the horizon ,  a mere 3 kilometers away . 
the depth of this depression is greater on the northwest side of the mountain than on the southeast side . 
unlike on earth ,  the crust of mars remains fixed over a stationary hotspot ,  and a volcano can continue to discharge lava until it reaches an enormous height . 
an object database is a database management system in which information is represented in the form of objects as used in object-oriented programming . 
jains are therefore lacto vegetarians ,  not ovo-lacto vegetarians . 
in the western world ,  ovo-lacto vegetarians are the most common type of vegetarian . 
an ovo-lacto vegetarian or lacto-ovo vegetarian is a vegetarian who consumes some animal products ,  such as eggs and dairy . 
the emperor feels the need to assert his own authority over the black ghoul . 
the emperor next expresses his boredom and demands `` unusual '' entertainment ,  while the black ghoul notes that the night is almost over . 
as the full moon appears ,  the black ghoul summons the first dancer of the night ,  a native american woman  -lrb-  bunny glaser  -rrb-  . 
the emperor himself summons the third dancer ,  a woman who worshiped gold above else . 
the film's graveyard prologue is a recreation of the opening scene from ed wood's then-unreleased 1958 film `` night of the ghouls '' . 
the emperor is puzzled when a human skull appears instead of the next dancer . 
the ostwald process is a chemical process for making nitric acid  -lrb-  hno  -rrb-  . 
ammonia is converted to nitric acid in 2 stages . 
heaviside did much to develop and advocate vector methods and the vector calculus . 
two years later he took a job as a telegraph operator with the danish great northern telegraph company laying a cable from newcastle to denmark using british contractors . 
in 1880, heaviside researched the skin effect in telegraph transmission lines . 
in later years his behavior became quite eccentric . 
heaviside was familiar with the laplace transform method but considered his own method more direct . 
heaviside's equations helped further the implementation of the telegraph . 
heaviside developed the transmission line theory  -lrb-  also known as the `` telegrapher's equations ''  -rrb-  ,  which had the effect of increasing the transmission rate over transatlantic cables by a factor of ten . 
heaviside also independently discovered the poynting vector . 
between 1883 and 1887 these averaged 2–3 articles per month and these articles later formed the bulk of his `` electromagnetic theory '' and `` electrical papers '' . 
wheatstone took a strong interest in his nephew's education and in 1867 sent him north to work with his own ,  older brother arthur ,  who was managing one of wheatstone's telegraph companies in newcastle-upon-tyne . 
the book of omni is one of the books that make up the book of mormon . 
nephi created a book of metal plates for engraving a record . 
the ozone layer absorbs 97 to 99 percent of the sun's medium-frequency ultraviolet light  -lrb-  from about 200 nm to 315 nm wavelength  -rrb-  ,  which otherwise would potentially damage exposed life forms near the surface . 
the ozone layer or ozone shield is a region of earth's stratosphere that absorbs most of the sun's ultraviolet radiation . 
uv radiation capable of penetrating nitrogen is divided into three categories ,  based on its wavelength; these are referred to as uv-a  -lrb-  400–315 nm  -rrb-  ,  uv-b  -lrb-  315–280 nm  -rrb-  ,  and uv-c  -lrb-  280–100 nm  -rrb-  . 
lay people were cautious about a depletion of the ozone layer and the risks of skin cancer . 
then ,  the ozone-rich air is carried to higher latitudes and drops into lower layers of the atmosphere . 
although the concentration of the ozone in the ozone layer is very small ,  it is vitally important to life because it absorbs biologically harmful ultraviolet  -lrb-  uv  -rrb-  radiation coming from the sun . 
the ozone layer is mainly found in the lower portion of the stratosphere ,  from approximately above earth ,  although its thickness varies seasonally and geographically . 
the ozone layer was discovered in 1913 by the french physicists charles fabry and henri buisson . 
public enemy was one of the first hip-hop groups to do well internationally . 
their debut album ,  `` yo ! 
public enemy is an american hip hop group consisting of chuck d ,  flavor flav ,  professor griff ,  khari wynn ,  dj lord ,  sammy sam ,  and the s1w group . 
public enemy held a strong ,  pro-black ,  political stance . 
in 2014 chuck d launched pe 2.0 with oakland rapper jahi as a spiritual successor and `` next generation '' of public enemy . 
the band had previously sampled public enemy on their 1991 single motown junk . 
the group consisted of kyle jason ,  chuck d  -lrb-  under the name mistachuck  -rrb-  and professor griff . 
in 1999 the group released an album entitled `` there's a poison goin' on '' . 
zoe williams defended public enemy against charges of homophobia by stating that:
the 1991 song `` by the time i get to arizona '' from `` apocalypse 91. .  . 
poet and hip-hop artist saul williams uses a sample from public enemy's `` welcome to the terrordome '' in his song `` trnigger '' on the `` niggy tardust '' album . 
by  bp ,  the first humans set foot in australia . 
undisputed evidence of art only becomes common in the upper paleolithic . 
humankind gradually evolved from early members of the genus `` homo— ''such as `` homo habilis '' ,  who used simple stone tools—into anatomically modern humans as well as behaviorally modern humans by the upper paleolithic . 
both `` homo erectus '' and `` homo neanderthalensis '' became extinct by the end of the paleolithic . 
the entire population of europe between 16,000 and 11,000 bp likely averaged some 30,000 individuals ,  and between 40,000 and 16,000 bp ,  it was even lower at 4,000–6,000 individuals . 
it extends from the earliest known use of stone tools by hominins c .  3.3 million years ago ,  to the end of the pleistocene c .  11,650 cal bp . 
at the end of the upper paleolithic ,  a group of humans crossed beringia and quickly expanded throughout the americas . 
the lower paleolithic `` homo erectus '' possibly invented rafts  -lrb-   bp  -rrb-  to travel over large bodies of water ,  which may have allowed a group of `` homo erectus '' to reach the island of flores and evolve into the small hominin `` homo floresiensis '' . 
during the upper paleolithic ,  further inventions were made ,  such as the net or  bp  -rrb-  bolas ,  the spear thrower  -lrb-   bp  -rrb-  ,  the bow and arrow  -lrb-   or  bp  -rrb-  and the oldest example of ceramic art ,  the venus of dolní věstonice  -lrb-   bce  -rrb-  . 
upper paleolithic  -lrb-  and possibly middle paleolithic  -rrb-  humans used flute-like bone pipes as musical instruments ,  and music may have played a large role in the religious lives of upper paleolithic hunter-gatherers . 
both neanderthals and modern humans took care of the elderly members of their societies during the middle and upper paleolithic . 
for most of the lower paleolithic ,  human societies were possibly more hierarchical than their middle and upper paleolithic descendants ,  and probably were not grouped into bands ,  though during the end of the lower paleolithic ,  the latest populations of the hominin `` homo erectus '' may have begun living in small-scale  -lrb-  possibly egalitarian  -rrb-  bands similar to both middle and upper paleolithic societies and modern hunter-gatherers . 
hominin fossils not belonging either to `` homo neanderthalensis '' or to `` homo sapiens '' species ,  found in the altai mountains and indonesia ,  were radiocarbon dated to  bp and  bp respectively . 
the earliest paleolithic stone tool industry ,  the oldowan ,  began around 2.6 million years ago . 
paleolithic humans made tools of stone ,  bone ,  and wood . 
lower paleolithic humans used a variety of stone tools ,  including hand axes and choppers . 
fire was used by the lower paleolithic hominins `` homo erectus '' and `` homo ergaster '' as early as 300,000 to 1.5 million years ago and possibly even earlier by the early lower paleolithic  -lrb-  oldowan  -rrb-  hominin `` homo habilis '' or by robust `` australopithecines '' such as `` paranthropus '' . 
for example ,  microliths or small stone tools or points were invented around 70,000–65,000 bp and were essential to the invention of bows and spear throwers in the following upper paleolithic . 
at the end of the paleolithic ,  specifically the middle or upper paleolithic ,  humans began to produce works of art such as cave paintings ,  rock art and jewellery and began to engage in religious behavior such as burial and ritual . 
the existence of anthropomorphic images and half-human ,  half-animal images in the upper paleolithic may further indicate that upper paleolithic humans were the first people to believe in a pantheon of gods or supernatural beings ,  though such images may instead indicate shamanistic practices similar to those of contemporary tribal societies . 
lower paleolithic acheulean tool users ,  according to robert g .  bednarik ,  began to engage in symbolic behavior such as art around 850,000 bp . 
by  bp ,  groups of hominins began leaving africa and settling southern europe and asia . 
similar in name to the medal of freedom ,  but much closer in meaning and precedence to the medal for merit ,  the presidential medal of freedom is currently the supreme civilian decoration in precedence in the united states ,  whereas the medal of freedom was inferior in precedence to the medal for merit; the medal of freedom was awarded by any of three cabinet secretaries ,  whereas the medal for merit was awarded by the president ,  as is the presidential medal of freedom . 
when the medal with distinction is awarded ,  the star may be presented descending from a neck ribbon and can be identified by its larger size than the standard medal  -lrb-  compare size of medals in pictures below  -rrb-  . 
both medals may also be worn in miniature form on a ribbon on the left chest ,  with a silver north american bald eagle with spread wings on the ribbon ,  or a golden north american bald eagle for a medal awarded with distinction . 
under this definition ,  the solar system is considered to have eight planets . 
the discovery of extrasolar planets led to another ambiguity in defining a planet: the point at which a planet becomes a star . 
there is no official definition of extrasolar planets . 
several thousands of planets around other stars  -lrb-  `` extrasolar planets '' or `` exoplanets ''  -rrb-  have been discovered in the milky way . 
the 2006 resolution defines planets within the solar system as follows:
with the discovery during the latter half of the 20th century of more objects within the solar system and large objects around other stars ,  disputes arose over what should constitute a planet . 
around one in five sun-like stars is thought to have an earth-sized planet in its habitable zone . 
the planets were thought by ptolemy to orbit earth in deferent and epicycle motions . 
thus ,  earth became included in the list of planets ,  whereas the sun and moon were excluded . 
six of the planets are orbited by one or more natural satellites . 
in the 20th century ,  pluto was discovered . 
the reasons for this perception were that stars and planets appeared to revolve around earth each day and the apparently common-sense perceptions that earth was solid and stable and that it was not moving but at rest . 
the first civilization known to have a functional theory of the planets were the babylonians ,  who lived in mesopotamia in the first and second millennia bc . 
these parks included paramount's great america ,  paramount canada's wonderland ,  paramount's carowinds ,  paramount's kings dominion ,  and paramount's kings island . 
by the early 1960s ,  paramount's future was doubtful . 
viacom and paramount had planned to merge as early as 1989.
on august 25, 1983, paramount studios caught fire . 
both paramount and cic entered the video market with paramount home video  -lrb-  now paramount home entertainment  -rrb-  and cic video ,  respectively . 
on july 7, 1994 paramount communications inc .  was sold to viacom following the purchase of 50.1% of paramount's shares for $9.75 billion . 
in 2006, paramount became the parent of dreamworks pictures . 
also paramount launched its own network ,  paramount television network ,  in 1948 through its television unit ,  television productions ,  inc . 
paramount is the last major film studio located in hollywood proper . 
dreamworks films ,  acquired by paramount but still distributed internationally by universal ,  are included in paramount's market share . 
on november 16, 2018, paramount signed a multi-picture film deal with netflix as part of viacom's growth strategy ,  making paramount the first major film studio to do so . 
the driving force behind paramount's rise was zukor . 
paramount's most important property ,  however ,  was `` star trek '' . 
it marks paramount's return to having its own animated division for the first time since 1967, when paramount cartoon studios shut down  -lrb-  it was formerly famous studios until 1956 -rrb- . 
in 1938, paramount bought a stake in television manufacturer dumont laboratories . 
in april 2018, paramount posted its first quarterly profit since 2015.
prior to the deal ,  paramount's films in italy were distributed by universal pictures . 
around the same time ,  viacom bought out spelling entertainment ,  incorporating its library into that of paramount itself . 
both of these companies had their names changed to reflect new ownership: tvx became known as the paramount stations group ,  while keco was renamed to paramount parks . 
paramount pictures corporation  -lrb-  also known simply as paramount  -rrb-  is an american film studio based in hollywood ,  california ,  that has been a subsidiary of the american media conglomerate viacom since 1994.
also ,  famous players and lasky were privately owned while paramount was a corporation . 
more so than most ,  paramount's slate of films included many remakes and television spin-offs; while sometimes commercially successful ,  there have been few compelling films of the kind that once made paramount the industry leader . 
paramount pictures was not connected to either paramount records  -lrb-  1910s-1935 -rrb- or abc-paramount records  -lrb-  1955–66 -rrb- until it purchased the rights to use the name  -lrb-  but not the latter's catalog  -rrb-  in the late 1960s . 
paramount pictures is a member of the motion picture association of america  -lrb-  mpaa  -rrb-  . 
mcgrath also headed up paramount's initiative for the creation and launch of the blu-ray disc . 
on december 11, 2005, the paramount motion pictures group announced that it had purchased dreamworks skg  -lrb-  which was co-founded by former paramount executive jeffrey katzenberg  -rrb-  in a deal worth $1.6 billion . 
on december 7, 2017, it was reported that paramount sold the international distribution rights to `` annihilation '' to netflix . 
in 2009, cbs stopped using the paramount name in its series and changed the name of the production arm to cbs television studios ,  eliminating the paramount name from television ,  to distance itself from the latter . 
as always ,  paramount films continued to emphasize stars; in the 1920s there were swanson ,  valentino ,  and clara bow . 
in 1916, zukor maneuvered a three-way merger of his famous players ,  the lasky company ,  and paramount . 
in march 2010, paramount founded insurge pictures ,  an independent distributor of `` micro budget '' films . 
paramount's home entertainment unit continues to distribute the paramount tv library through cbs dvd ,  as both viacom and cbs corporation are controlled by sumner redstone's national amusements . 
today the field of behaviorism is also commonly referred to as behavior modification or behavior analysis . 
in this field ,  a professional or researcher is called a psychologist and can be classified as a social ,  behavioral ,  or cognitive scientist . 
behavioral research ever aspires to improve the effectiveness of techniques for behavior modification . 
keeping this in mind ,  psychologists can use certain research techniques on animals that could not be used on humans . 
psychologists take human behavior as a main area of study . 
health psychologists can also educate doctors and conduct research on patient compliance . 
research designed to answer questions about the current state of affairs such as the thoughts ,  feelings ,  and behaviors of individuals is known as `` descriptive research '' . 
questions are more directly tackled by behavioral genetics research ,  which aims to understand how genes and environment impact behavior . 
active research continues to understand the genetic and environmental bases of behavior and their interaction . 
cognitive psychology studies cognition ,  the mental processes underlying mental activity . 
mental health care today involves psychologists and social workers in increasing numbers . 
psychologists in the field of public health use a wide variety of interventions to influence human behavior . 
early behavioral researchers studied stimulus–response pairings ,  now known as classical conditioning . 
the contemporary field of behavioral neuroscience focuses on physical causes underpinning behavior . 
psychopharmacology is the study of drug-induced mental effects . 
it assumes that any given behavior or mental process affects and is affected by dynamically interrelated biological ,  psychological ,  and social factors . 
researchers in psychology must gain approval of their research projects before conducting any experiment to protect the interests of human participants and laboratory animals . 
school psychologists are trained in educational and behavioral assessment ,  intervention ,  prevention ,  and consultation ,  and many have extensive training in research . 
social psychology is the study of how humans think about each other and how they relate to each other . 
psychology encompasses many subfields and includes different approaches to the study of mental processes and behavior:
behaviorism notwithstanding ,  the unconscious mind has maintained its importance in psychology . 
wittmer focused on mental testing of children; scott ,  on selection of employees . 
sechenov advanced the idea of brain reflexes and aggressively promoted a deterministic viewpoint on human behavior . 
quantitative psychological research lends itself to the statistical testing of hypotheses . 
developmental psychologists draw on the full range of psychological theories to inform their research . 
prototypical experimental research is conducted in a laboratory with a carefully controlled environment . 
the study of mental illnesses is called abnormal psychology . 
as a social science it aims to understand individuals and groups by establishing general principles and researching specific cases . 
today mental testing is a routine phenomenon for people of all ages in western societies . 
just as jane goodall studied chimpanzee social and family life by careful observation of chimpanzee behavior in the field ,  psychologists conduct naturalistic observation of ongoing human social ,  professional ,  and family life . 
embraced and extended by clark l .  hull ,  edwin guthrie ,  and others ,  behaviorism became a widely used research paradigm . 
jean grimshaw ,  for example ,  argues that mainstream psychological research has advanced a patriarchal agenda through its efforts to control behavior . 
psychology is the science of behavior and mind ,  including conscious and unconscious phenomena ,  as well as feeling and thought . 
however ,  researchers in the emerging field of neuro-psychoanalysis today defend some of freud's ideas on scientific grounds ,  while scholars of the humanities maintain that freud was not a `` scientist at all ,  but  .  .  .  an interpreter '' . 
 ''qualitative research '' is descriptive research that is focused on observing and describing events as they occur ,  with the goal of capturing all of the richness of everyday behavior and with the hope of discovering and understanding phenomena that might have been missed if only more cursory examinations have been made . 
the measurement and operationalization of important constructs is an essential part of these research designs
in 1890, william james defined `` psychology '' as `` the science of mental life ,  both of its phenomena and their conditions '' . 
research in cognition had proven practical since world war ii ,  when it aided in the understanding of weapons operation . 
comparative psychology refers to the scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals ,  especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history ,  adaptive significance ,  and development of behavior . 
following the army alpha and army beta tests for soldiers in world war i ,  mental testing became popular in the us ,  where it was soon applied to school children . 
using crossover design ,  researchers can further increase the strength of their results by testing both of two treatments on two groups of subjects . 
this degree is intended to train practitioners who might conduct scientific research . 
exploratory data analysis refers to a variety of practices which researchers can use to visualize and analyze existing sets of data . 
experimental researchers typically use a statistical hypothesis testing model which involves making predictions before conducting the experiment ,  then assessing how well the data supports the predictions . 
all researched psychological traits are influenced by both genes and environment ,  to varying degrees . 
with version 1.5.0 php 4 was deprecated . 
the first version ,  by steve wainstead ,  was in december 1999 and was the first wiki written in php to be publicly released . 
all of the lines must rhyme and have the same rhythm . 
the `` khlong ''  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is among the oldest thai poetic forms . 
these basic units of poetic form are often combined into larger structures ,  called `` poetic forms '' or poetic modes  -lrb-  see the following section  -rrb-  ,  as in the sonnet or haiku . 
specific poetic forms have been developed by many cultures . 
it is usually regarded as an advanced and sophisticated poetic form . 
some forms of poetry carry a consistent and well-defined rhyming scheme ,  such as the chant royal or the rubaiyat ,  while other poetic forms have variable rhyme schemes . 
other poems may be organized into verse paragraphs ,  in which regular rhymes with established rhythms are not used ,  but the poetic tone is instead established by a collection of rhythms ,  alliterations ,  and rhymes established in paragraph form . 
the most common metrical feet in english are:
kindred forms of resonance may exist ,  between individual verses ,  in their patterns of rhyme or rhythm . 
prosody also may be used more specifically to refer to the scanning of poetic lines to show meter . 
most rhyme schemes are described using letters that correspond to sets of rhymes ,  so if the first ,  second and fourth lines of a quatrain rhyme with each other and the third line do not rhyme ,  the quatrain is said to have an `` aa-ba '' rhyme scheme . 
for example ,  a couplet may be two lines with identical meters which rhyme or two lines held together by a common meter alone . 
verse fables have used a variety of meter and rhyme patterns . 
lines of poems are often organized into stanzas ,  which are denominated by the number of lines included . 
a limerick is a poem that consists of five lines and is often humorous . 
prosody is the study of the meter ,  rhythm ,  and intonation of a poem . 
many medieval poems were written in verse paragraphs ,  even where regular rhymes and rhythms were used . 
the methods for creating poetic rhythm vary across languages and between poetic traditions . 
in many languages ,  including modern european languages and arabic ,  poets use rhyme in set patterns as a structural element for specific poetic forms ,  such as ballads ,  sonnets and rhyming couplets . 
the formal patterns of meter used in modern english verse to create rhythm no longer dominate contemporary english poetry . 
another element of poetic diction can be the use of vivid imagery for effect . 
poetic diction treats the manner in which language is used ,  and refers not only to the sound but also to the underlying meaning and its interaction with sound and form . 
the degree of richness of a language's rhyming structures plays a substantial role in determining what poetic forms are commonly used in that language . 
as with other forms with a long history in many languages ,  many variations have been developed ,  including forms with a quasi-musical poetic diction in urdu . 
poetry is often separated into lines on a page . 
for example ,  the strophe ,  antistrophe and epode of the ode form are often separated into one or more stanzas . 
in addition to specific forms of poems ,  poetry is often thought of in terms of different genres and subgenres . 
in the western poetic tradition ,  meters are customarily grouped according to a characteristic metrical foot and the number of feet per line . 
some common metrical patterns ,  with notable examples of poets and poems who use them ,  include:
in many forms of poetry ,  stanzas are interlocking ,  so that the rhyming scheme or other structural elements of one stanza determine those of succeeding stanzas . 
the types and use of differing rhyming schemes are discussed further in the main article . 
the probability of an event `` a '' is written as formula_4, formula_5, or formula_6.
the `` opposite '' or `` complement '' of an event `` a '' is the event not `` a ''  -lrb-  that is ,  the event of `` a '' not occurring  -rrb-  ,  often denoted as formula_7, or formula_8; its probability is given by  . 
in probability theory and applications ,  bayes' rule relates the odds of event formula_26 to event formula_27, before  -lrb-  prior to  -rrb-  and after  -lrb-  posterior to  -rrb-  conditioning on another event formula_28.
if two events are mutually exclusive then the probability of both occurring is denoted as formula_10.
if the results that actually occur fall in a given event ,  the event is said to have occurred . 
 ''conditional probability '' is the probability of some event `` a '' ,  given the occurrence of some other event `` b '' . 
if two events ,  `` a '' and `` b '' are independent then the joint probability is for example ,  if two coins are flipped the chance of both being heads is formula_12.
if either event `` a '' or event `` b '' but never both occurs on a single performance of an experiment ,  then they are called mutually exclusive events . 
see complementary event for a more complete treatment . 
probability is the measure of the likelihood that an event will occur . 
if two events `` a '' and `` b '' occur on a single performance of an experiment ,  this is called the intersection or joint probability of `` a '' and `` b '' ,  denoted as formula_10.
for example ,  the chance of rolling a 1 or 2 on a six-sided is formula_17
for example ,  in a bag of 2 red balls and 2 blue balls  -lrb-  4 balls in total  -rrb-  ,  the probability of taking a red ball is formula_24; however ,  when taking a second ball ,  the probability of it being either a red ball or a blue ball depends on the ball previously taken ,  such as ,  if a red ball was taken ,  the probability of picking a red ball again would be formula_25 since only 1 red and 2 blue balls would have been remaining . 
more than 1% of poland's territory ,   ,  is protected within 23 polish national parks . 
poland has 70 mountains over in elevation ,  all in the tatras . 
poland  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of poland  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a country located in central europe . 
poland is a developed market and regional power . 
also ,  jews and armenians began to settle and flourish in poland during this era  -lrb-  see history of the jews in poland and armenians in poland  -rrb-  . 
poland is the fourth most forested country in europe . 
more than a century after the partitions of poland at the end of the 18th century ,  poland regained its independence in 1918 with the treaty of versailles . 
in 1611, the tsar of russia paid homage to the king of poland . 
during the battle of britain polish squadrons such as the no . 
feminism in poland started in the 1800s in the age of the foreign partitions . 
the largest forest complex in poland is lower silesian wilderness . 
world war ii began with the nazi german invasion of poland on 1 september 1939, followed by the soviet invasion of poland on 17 september . 
the constitution of poland is the supreme law in contemporary poland ,  and the polish legal system is based on the principle of civil rights ,  governed by the code of civil law . 
after the signing of truce of deulino ,  poland had in the years 1618–1621 an area of about  . 
poland is the sixth most populous member state of the european union and has a grand total of 51 representatives in the european parliament . 
in 2011, the presidency of the council of the european union responsible for the functioning of the council was awarded to poland . 
in 1863, a new polish uprising against russian rule began . 
poland is the european union's fourth largest supplier of pork after germany ,  spain and france . 
since poland's accession to the european union in 2004, polish agriculture has performed extremely well and the country has over two million private farms . 
poland is the most important breeding ground for a variety of european migratory birds . 
poland's rivers have been used since early times for navigation . 
the highest part of the carpathians is the tatra mountains ,  along poland's southern border . 
despite this ,  poland was at the time considered to be one of the least oppressive states of the soviet bloc . 
the freedoms ,  rights and obligations of persons and citizens  -rrb-  of the constitution of poland . 
in 1807, napoleon i of france temporarily recreated a polish state as the satellite duchy of warsaw ,  after a successful greater poland uprising of 1806 against prussian rule . 
phytogeographically ,  poland belongs to the central european province of the circumboreal region within the boreal kingdom . 
in 1945, poland's borders were shifted westwards ,  resulting in considerable territorial losses . 
the most important mission of the armed forces is the defence of polish territorial integrity and polish interests abroad . 
poland is a member state of the european union ,  the schengen area ,  the united nations ,  nato ,  the oecd ,  the three seas initiative ,  and the visegrád group . 
currently ,  poland's military is going through a significant modernization phase ,  which will be completed in 2022.
the establishment of the polish state can be traced back to ad 966, when mieszko i ,  ruler of the realm coextensive with the territory of present-day poland ,  converted to christianity . 
poland has 16 voivodeships ,  380 powiats  -lrb-  including 66 cities with `` powiat '' status  -rrb-  ,  and 2,478 `` gminas '' . 
unemployment also gradually decreased; in september 2018 the unemployment rate in poland was estimated at 5.7% ,  one of the lowest in the european union . 
poland made the fourth-largest troop contribution in europe and its troops served both the polish government in exile in the west and soviet leadership in the east . 
the inter-war period heralded in a new era of polish politics . 
the people's republic of poland  -lrb-  `` polska rzeczpospolita ludowa ''  -rrb-  was officially proclaimed in 1952.
the polish army's size is estimated at around 101,500 soldiers  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- . 
by the late 1930s ,  poland's government had become increasingly rigid; with a number of radical political parties that threatened the stability of the country such as the communist party of poland banned . 
despite widespread objections ,  the new polish government accepted the soviet annexation of the pre-war eastern regions of poland  -lrb-  in particular the cities of wilno and lwów  -rrb-  and agreed to the permanent garrisoning of red army units on poland's territory . 
poland is a representative democracy ,  with a president as a head of state ,  whose current constitution dates from 1997.
the second highest mountain group in poland is the beskids ,  whose highest peak is babia góra ,  at  . 
the massacres were part of a vicious ethnic clensing campaign waged by ukrainian nationalists against the local polish population in the german-occupied territories of eastern poland . 
among the first lakes whose shores were settled are those in the greater polish lake district . 
with almost ten thousand closed bodies of water covering more than each ,  poland has one of the highest numbers of lakes in the world . 
the origin of the name `` poland '' derives from the west slavic tribe of polans  -lrb-  `` polanie ''  -rrb-  that inhabited the warta river basin of the historic greater poland region starting in the 6th century . 
lakes have always played an important role in polish history and continue to be of great importance to today's modern polish society . 
live performances before an audience are a form of entertainment . 
performing arts are a form of art in which artists use their voices ,  bodies or inanimate objects to convey artistic expression . 
modern physics began in the early 20th century with the work of max planck in quantum theory and albert einstein's theory of relativity . 
on this scale ,  ordinary ,  commonsense notions of space ,  time ,  matter ,  and energy are no longer valid . 
optics ,  the study of light ,  is concerned not only with visible light but also with infrared and ultraviolet radiation ,  which exhibit all of the phenomena of visible light except visibility ,  e . g .  ,  reflection ,  refraction ,  interference ,  diffraction ,  dispersion ,  and polarization of light . 
both quantum theory and the theory of relativity find applications in all areas of modern physics . 
classical physics is generally concerned with matter and energy on the normal scale of observation ,  while much of modern physics is concerned with the behavior of matter and energy under extreme conditions or on a very large or very small scale . 
the two chief theories of modern physics present a different picture of the concepts of space ,  time ,  and matter from that presented by classical physics . 
quantum mechanics would come to be pioneered by werner heisenberg ,  erwin schrödinger and paul dirac . 
physics was known as natural philosophy until the late 18th century . 
the most notable innovations were in the field of optics and vision ,  which came from the works of many scientists like ibn sahl ,  al-kindi ,  ibn al-haytham ,  al-farisi and avicenna . 
it was a step toward the modern ideas of inertia and momentum . 
physics  -lrb-  from  ,  from `` phýsis '' `` nature ''  -rrb-  is the natural science that studies matter and its motion and behavior through space and time and that studies the related entities of energy and force . 
major developments in this period include the replacement of the geocentric model of the solar system with the heliocentric copernican model ,  the laws governing the motion of planetary bodies determined by johannes kepler between 1609 and 1619, pioneering work on telescopes and observational astronomy by galileo galilei in the 16th and 17th centuries ,  and isaac newton's discovery and unification of the laws of motion and universal gravitation that would come to bear his name . 
however ,  inaccuracies in classical mechanics for very small objects and very high velocities led to the development of modern physics in the 20th century . 
many physicists have written about the philosophical implications of their work ,  for instance laplace ,  who championed causal determinism ,  and erwin schrödinger ,  who wrote on quantum mechanics . 
papua new guinea is a commonwealth realm . 
this was later referred to as `` papua new guinea '' . 
papua new guinea is a megadiverse country . 
at  ,  papua new guinea is the world's fifty-fourth-largest country . 
the papua new guinea defence force  -lrb-  pngdf  -rrb-  is the military organisation responsible for the defence of papua new guinea . 
homosexual acts are prohibited by law in papua new guinea . 
these plant families are still present in papua new guinea . 
the western half of new guinea forms the indonesian provinces of papua and west papua . 
papua new guinea has positive ties with australia and countries in oceania . 
papua new guinea is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world . 
the border between papua new guinea and indonesia was confirmed by treaty with australia before independence in 1974.
in 2012, despite a refugee crisis at the border of papua new guinea and west papua ,  the country was steadfast in its support of indonesia ,  which promised papua new guinea a greater role in asean in the future . 
papua new guinea  -lrb-  png;  ,  ; ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the independent state of papua new guinea ,  is an oceanian country that occupies the eastern half of the island of new guinea and its offshore islands in melanesia ,  a region of the southwestern pacific ocean north of australia . 
papua new guinea is classified as a developing economy by the international monetary fund . 
papua new guinea is surrounded by coral reefs which are under close watch ,  in the interests of preservation . 
numerous chinese have worked and lived in papua new guinea ,  establishing chinese-majority communities . 
papua new guinea is often ranked as likely the worst place in the world for violence against women . 
the mainland of the country is the eastern half of new guinea island ,  where the largest towns are also located ,  including port moresby  -lrb-  capital  -rrb-  and lae; other major islands within papua new guinea include new ireland ,  new britain ,  manus and bougainville . 
from march to april 2018, a chain of earthquakes hit papua new guinea ,  causing various damage . 
in homer ,  poseidon is the master of the sea . 
the origins of the name `` poseidon '' are unclear . 
poseidon was known in various guises ,  denoted by epithets . 
at least a few sources deem poseidon as a `` prehellenic ''  -lrb-  i . e . 
poseidon  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  was one of the twelve olympians in ancient greek religion and myth . 
it is almost sure that once poseidon was worshiped as a horse ,  and this is evident by his cult in peloponnesos . 
in plato's `` timaeus '' and `` critias '' ,  the island of atlantis was poseidon's domain . 
the area of a sexual population is the area where inter-breeding is potentially possible between any pair within the area ,  and where the probability of interbreeding is greater than the probability of cross-breeding with individuals from other areas . 
traditional behaviorism dictates all human behavior is explained by classical conditioning and operant conditioning . 
psychological egoism is the view that humans are always motivated by self-interest and selfishness ,  even in what seem to be acts of altruism . 
psychological egoism is controversial . 
it is ,  however ,  related to several other normative forms of egoism ,  such as ethical egoism and rational egoism . 
thus ,  behaviorism uses but does not strictly support psychological hedonism over other understandings of the ultimate drive of human behavior . 
for the hedonistic mechanism to produce the behavior of caring for offspring ,  the parent must believe that the caring behavior will produce pleasure or avoidance of pain for the parent . 
in modern philosophy ,  jeremy bentham asserted ,  like epicurus ,  that human behavior is governed by a need to increase pleasure and decrease pain . 
bentham endeavored to find the ideal human behavior based on hedonic calculus or the measurement of relative gains and losses in pain and pleasure to determine the most pleasurable action a human could choose in a situation . 
a specific form of psychological egoism is psychological hedonism ,  the view that the ultimate motive for all voluntary human action is the desire to experience pleasure or to avoid pain . 
