for a century and a half following the norman conquest of england in 1066, normandy and england were linked by norman and frankish rulers . 
norman  -rrb-  denotes a norwegian person . 
the inhabitants of normandy are known as normans ,  and the region is the historic homeland of the norman language . 
besides the conquest of england and the subsequent subjugation of wales and ireland ,  the normans expanded into other areas . 
french normandy was occupied by english forces during the hundred years' war in 1345–1360 and again in 1415–1450.
normans laboured under a heavy fiscal burden . 
in 1204, during the reign of john lackland ,  mainland normandy was taken from england by france under king philip ii . 
in the epilogue ,  molly leaves case . 
in the matrix ,  case hears inhuman laughter ,  a trait associated with pauley during case's work with his rom construct ,  thus suggesting that pauley was not erased after all ,  but instead transformed and exists in the matrix . 
the novel was also nominated for a british science fiction award in 1984.
neuromancer is a 1984 science fiction novel by american-canadian writer william gibson . 
in the end ,  while logged into the matrix ,  case catches a glimpse of himself ,  his dead girlfriend linda lee ,  and neuromancer . 
henry dorsett case is a low-level hustler in the dystopian underworld of chiba city ,  japan . 
the 1999 cyberpunk science fiction film `` the matrix '' particularly draws from `` neuromancer '' both eponym and usage of the term `` matrix '' . 
case and molly continue to investigate armitage ,  discovering his former identity of colonel willis corto . 
the diversion allows molly to penetrate the building and steal dixie's rom with case unlocking the computer safeguards on the way in and out from within the matrix . 
the poison in case's bloodstream is washed out ,  and he ,  molly ,  and maelcum are profusely paid for their efforts ,  while pauley's rom construct is apparently erased ,  at his own request . 
the new york mets are an american professional baseball team based in the new york city borough of queens . 
one of baseball's first expansion teams ,  the mets were founded in 1962 to replace new york's departed nl teams ,  the brooklyn dodgers and the new york giants . 
mr .  met is the official mascot of the new york mets . 
the mets are one of two major league clubs based in new york city; the other is the new york yankees of the american league east . 
the mets held the new york baseball single-season attendance record for 29 years . 
blue and orange are also the colors of new york city ,  as seen on its flag . 
in their 1962 inaugural season ,  the mets posted a record of 40–120, the worst regular season record since mlb went to a 162-game schedule  -lrb-  two games were canceled  -rrb-  . 
this was the team's second back-to-back playoff appearance ,  the first occurring during the 1999 and 2000 seasons . 
as of the end of the 2018 mlb season ,  the mets overall win-loss record is 4362–4732, good for a  . 480 win percentage . 
from the mid-16th century nursery rhymes begin to be recorded in english plays ,  and most popular rhymes date from the 17th and 18th centuries . 
the term mother goose rhymes is interchangeable with nursery rhymes . 
about half of the currently recognised `` traditional '' english rhymes were known by the mid-18th century . 
a nursery rhyme is a traditional poem or song for children in britain and many other countries ,  but usage of the term only dates from the late 18th/early 19th century . 
the first english collections ,  `` tommy thumb's song book '' and a sequel ,  `` tommy thumb's pretty song book '' ,  are both thought to have been published by mary cooper in london before 1744, with such songs becoming known as 'tommy thumb's songs' . 
publisher john newbery's stepson ,  thomas carnan ,  was the first to use the term mother goose for nursery rhymes when he published a compilation of english rhymes ,  `` mother goose's melody ,  or ,  sonnets for the cradle ''  -lrb-  london ,  1780 -rrb- . 
in 2010, ninja tune celebrated 20 years of releasing music . 
ninja tune also released actress' fourth album ,  `` ghettoville '' in january 2014.
leif podhajsky again collaborated with ninja tune on the artwork for kelis' 2014 album `` food '' . 
invisible's `` rispah '' also won album of the year . 
mr .  scruff's second album on ninja tune ,  `` trouser jazz '' ,  was released on 9 september 2002.
in 2009, ninja's longest-serving artist ,  dj food a . k . a . 
2008 also marked daedelus' first official ninja album ,  `` love to make music to '' ,  after his previous albums `` exquisite corpse '' and `` denies the day's demise '' had been licensed by ninja tune . 
also in 2001 cornwall's luke vibert joined ninja tune . 
ninja tune is an english independent record label based in london . 
in october 2011, ninja tune's massive `` ninja tune xx '' campaign won `` innovative marketing campaign of the year '' at the 2011 aim awards . 
in addition to solid steel ,  ninja tune has conducted regular podcast interviews with their roster under the name `` the ninja tune podcast '' . 
in 2001, roots manuva delivered his second album ,  `` run come save me '' ,  which was deemed one of the albums of the year by `` the independent '' ,  and `` not just a landmark uk hip hop album ,  but a landmark hip hop album period '' by mojo . 
another popular ninja tune artist ,  travis stewart ,  a . k . a . 
 ''a moment apart '' ,  odesza's third studio album was released on 8 september 2017 on ninja tune imprint counter records . 
in the independent's `` album of the week '' review ,  the compilation was deemed `` a glorious celebration of ninja tune's audio splendour '' . 
for the release of bonobo's sixth album `` migration '' in january 2017, the album artwork was designed by neil krug . 
kid koala cut two further highly acclaimed albums for ninja ,  2003's `` some of my best friends are djs '' and 2006's `` your mom's favorite dj '' . 
on 19 may 2017, ninja tune founders coldcut and adrian sherwood released their collaborative debut album `` outside the echo chamber '' via ninja imprint ahead of our time . 
in 1995, the herbaliser ,  one of the more purely hip-hop oriented acts on ninja tune's roster at that point released their debut album `` remedies '' . 
ninja tune scored well at gilles peterson's worldwide awards 2013, with brainfeeder winning `` label of the year '' - and ninja tune scoring 2nd - with the public vote . 
in 1995, matt black created `` pipe '' ,  ninja's first website . 
also in 2010, bonobo's own `` black sands '' album marked his fourth full-length . 
as part of ninja tune's 20th anniversary in 2010, 3500 ninja tune xx box sets were released ,  all housed in limited edition hi-spec packaging designed and conceived by ninja artwork legend openmind . 
french urban vinyl specialists rolito also marketed a foakes-designed toy ninja ,  who came armed with a 3 '' cd of ninja tunes . 
this is the album i've wanted to make for a long time . `` 
with the album ,  nme called her: `` one to seriously watch '' . 
bonobo released his sixth album ,  `` migration '' ,  in january 2017.
around the same time ,  ninja tune began organizing its first package tours across the uk and europe . 
with their first releases in the early 1990s ,  ninja tune went on to ,  according to pitchfork ,  `` usher in trip-hop/instrumental hip hop '' . 
in 1997 stealth finished at the blue note  -lrb-  in hoxton  -rrb-  ,  and ninja tune's sister label big dada was launched . 
as part of the 20th anniversary ,  ninja tune produced 20 different events around the world . 
the album was `` sure-footed and big-hearted ,  accessible and yet cerebral '' . 
in 1994, ninja tune's first sister imprint was ntone ,  a label that initially specialised in avant-garde music and in more electronically inclined ambience . 
steinski ,  a big inspiration behind coldcut's initial forays into music ,  released his first ninja tune ep as steinski and mass media in the same year . 
in mid 2012, the bug announced that after `` london zoo , ``  he set out a new genre and sub-label with ninja tune: acid ragga . 
solid steel is also the name of a series of dj mix cds from the label and various club nights showcasing the talents of the solid steel dj's and a number of ninja tune artists . 
while 2007's `` well deep '' multimedia package shed light on big dada ,  ninja cuts drew a healthy cross-section from all three ninja associated labels . 
in may 2012, ninja tune released an amon tobin box set  -lrb-  7 × cd ,  2 × dvd ,  6 × vinyl ,  10 ''  -rrb-  . 
in 2011, an updated version of the niv was released . 
the niv underwent a minor revision in 1984.
the new testament was released in 1973 and the full bible in 1978.
the new international version  -lrb-  niv  -rrb-  is an english translation of the bible first published in 1978 by biblica  -lrb-  formerly the international bible society  -rrb-  . 
a revised english edition titled `` today's new international version ''  -lrb-  tniv  -rrb-  released a new testament in march 2002, with the complete bible published february 2005.
an 'easy-reader' version ,  `` new international reader's version ''  -lrb-  nirv  -rrb-  ,  was published in 1996; it was written at a third grade reading level . 
in 1997 a new version was published in the uk as the `` new international version inclusive language edition '' ,  but was not published in the u . s .  because of opposition from conservative evangelical groups there to inclusive language . 
the `` niv '' is published by zondervan in the united states and hodder & stoughton in the uk . 
adolf hitler was released from prison on 20 december 1924.
hitler was appointed as chancellor of germany on 30 january 1933.
as hitler became the recognised head of the german nationalists ,  other groups declined or were absorbed . 
nazi power over germany remained virtual ,  not absolute . 
in addition to the nazi party proper ,  several paramilitary groups existed which `` supported '' nazi aims . 
in 1933, when adolf hitler assumed power of the german government ,  usage of the designation `` nazi '' diminished in germany ,  although austrian anti-nazis continued to use the term derogatorily . 
by the end of the year ,  party membership was recorded at 2,000, many of whom hitler and röhm had brought into the party personally ,  or for whom hitler's oratory had been their reason for joining . 
the nazis failed to remain unified in the dp ,  as in the north ,  the right-wing volkish nationalist supporters of the nazis moved to the new german völkisch freedom party ,  leaving the north's left-wing nazi members ,  such as joseph goebbels retaining support for the party . 
later ,  both the social democrats and the communists accused each other of having facilitated hitler's rise to power by their unwillingness to compromise . 
in the 1920s ,  the nazi party expanded beyond its bavarian base . 
while strasser had used his position to promote his own leftish version of national socialism ,  goebbels was totally loyal to hitler and worked only to improve hitler's image . 
in 1934, hitler founded a separate body for the chairman ,  chancellery of the führer ,  with its own sub-units . 
the votes that the nazis received in the 1932 elections established the nazi party as the largest parliamentary faction of the weimar republic government . 
the `` reichstag '' fire on 27 february 1933 gave hitler a pretext for suppressing his political opponents . 
when the fascists came to power in 1922 in italy through their coup attempt called the `` march on rome '' ,  hitler began planning his own coup . 
the term `` nazi '' derives from the name given in german to a party member ``  ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  and was coined in response to the german term `` sozi ''  -lrb-  pronounced   -rrb-  ,  an abbreviation of `` sozialdemokrat ''  -lrb-  member of the social democratic party of germany  -rrb-  . 
in discussing the new age ,  academics have varyingly referred to `` new age spirituality '' and `` new age religion '' . 
some new agers and new age sympathizers responded to such criticisms . 
there are also differences in how this new age is envisioned . 
there is no central authority within the new age phenomenon that can determine what counts as new age and what does not . 
new age religiosity is typified by its eclecticism . 
the new age is also a form of western esotericism . 
hanegraaff terms the broader development the `` new age sensu lato '' ,  or `` new age in the wider sense '' . 
in 1994, christoph bochinger published his study of the new age in germany ,  ``  ''new age '' und moderne religion '' . 
initially ,  academic interest in the new age was minimal . 
the degree to which individuals are involved in the new age varies . 
hanegraaff termed this early core of the movement the `` new age sensu stricto '' ,  or `` new age in the strict sense '' . 
all of these groups created the backdrop from which the new age movement emerged . 
there are other christian groups that have adopted a more positive view of the new age ,  among them the new age catholics ,  christaquarians ,  and christians awakening to a new awareness ,  all of which believe that new age ideas can enhance a person's christian faith . 
hanegraaff identified `` new age science '' as a form of `` naturphilosophie '' . 
scholars have noted several new age political groups . 
from a historical perspective ,  the new age phenomenon is rooted in the counterculture of the 1960s . 
the term `` new age '' ,  along with related terms like `` new era '' and `` new world '' ,  long predate the emergence of the new age movement ,  and have widely been used to assert that a better way of life for humanity is dawning . 
not everyone who came to be associated with the new age phenomenon openly embraced the term `` new age '' ,  although it was popularised in books like david spangler's 1977 work `` revelation: the birth of a new age '' and mark satin's 1979 book `` new age politics: healing self and society '' . 
similarly ,  chryssides stated that the new age could not be seen as `` a religion '' in itself . 
a common belief among the new age is that humanity has entered ,  or is coming to enter ,  a new period known as the age of aquarius ,  which melton has characterised as a `` new age of love ,  joy ,  peace ,  abundance ,  and harmony .  .  .  the golden age heretofore only dreamed about . `` 
by the late 1980s ,  some publishers dropped the term `` new age '' as a marketing device . 
the extent to which new age spokespeople mix religion and politics varies . 
new age ideas influenced the development of rave culture in the late 1980s and 1990s . 
some new agers have entered the political system in an attempt to advocate for the societal transformation that the new age promotes . 
mainstream christianity has typically rejected the ideas of the new age; christian critiques often emphasise that the new age places the human individual before god . 
in the mid-1990s ,  the new age was found primarily in the united states and canada ,  western europe ,  and australia and new zealand . 
examples of such groups included the aetherius society ,  founded in the uk in 1955, and the heralds of the new age ,  established in new zealand in 1956.
the term `` new age '' came to be used increasingly widely by the popular media in the 1990s . 
hanegraaff believed that the new age's direct antecedents could be found in the ufo religions of the 1950s ,  which he termed a `` proto-new age movement '' . 
there is no ethical cohesion within the new age phenomenon ,  although hanegraaff argued that the central ethical tenet of the new age is to cultivate one's own divine potential . 
new age theoretician david spangler tried to distance himself from what he called the `` new age glamour '' of crystals ,  talk-show channelers ,  and other easily commercialized phenomena ,  and sought to underscore his commitment to the new age as a vision of genuine social transformation . 
the new age has also been identified by various scholars of religion as part of the cultic milieu . 
by the early 1970s ,  use of the term `` new age '' was increasingly common within the cultic milieu . 
scholars call this new esoteric trend `` occultism '' ,  and this occultism was a key factor in the development of the worldview from which the new age emerged . 
other political thinkers and activists saw new age politics less positively . 
another recurring element of new age is an emphasis on healing and alternative medicine . 
while the term `` new age '' may have fallen out of favor ,  scholar george chryssides notes that the new age by whatever name is `` still alive and active '' in the 21st century . 
togashi and takeuchi married in 1999.
takeuchi started to work on the reprints of `` sailor moon '' and `` sailor v '' ,  and published `` toki*meca '' in `` nakayoshi '' . 
takeuchi departed kodansha for shueisha . 
after the production of `` pretty guardian sailor moon '' ended in 2004, takeuchi continued to work on `` toki*meca '' . 
she has won several awards ,  including the 1993 kodansha manga award for `` sailor moon '' . 
takeuchi was born in kofu ,  yamanashi ,  japan ,  to parents kenji and ikuko takeuchi . 
in 2003 takeuchi became heavily involved in producing `` pretty guardian sailor moon '' ,  a tokusatsu television series based on `` sailor moon '' . 
at the series' end ,  takeuchi worked on `` pq angels '' for `` nakayoshi '' . 
if a defendant refuses to enter a plea ,  the court will record a plea of `` not guilty '' . 
in california ,  a ' plea is known as a west plea after a seminal case involving plea bargains ,  `` people v .  west ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- 3 cal . 3d 595.
a ' plea has the same immediate effects as a plea of guilty ,  but may have different residual effects or consequences in future actions . 
in texas ,  the right to appeal the results of a plea bargain taken from a plea of either ' or `` guilty '' is highly restricted . 
a no contest plea prevents the court from eliciting a defendant's admission of guilt ,  but the result of the defendant's plea not to contest the charges against him or her is the same as if the defendant had admitted guilt . 
nationalism as an ideology is modern . 
that state broke up in the 1990s . 
the arab league was established in 1945 to promote arab interests and cooperation between the new arab states . 
national symbols and flags ,  national anthems ,  national languages ,  national myths and other symbols of national identity are highly important in nationalism . 
nationalism is often combined with other ideologies ,  such as conservatism  -lrb-  national conservatism  -rrb-  or socialism  -lrb-  socialist nationalism  -rrb-  for example . 
in the late 19th and early 20th century ,  many polish nationalist leaders endorsed the piast concept . 
modernism proposes that nationalism is a recent social phenomenon that needs the socio-economic structures of modern society to exist . 
in the 19th century german nationalism was promoted by hegelian-oriented academic historians who saw prussia as the true carrier of the german spirit ,  and the power of the state as the ultimate goal of nationalism . 
austria-hungary ,  with german backing ,  tried to crush serbia in 1914, thus igniting the first world war in which austria-hungary dissolved into nation states . 
napoleon's conquests of the german and italian states around 1800–06 played a major role in stimulating nationalism and the demands for national unity . 
the evolutionary theory of nationalism perceives nationalism to be the result of the evolution of human beings into identifying with groups ,  such as ethnic groups ,  or other groups that form the foundation of a nation . 
the rise of globalism in the late 20th century led to a rise in nationalism and populism in europe and north america . 
when communism fell in yugoslavia ,  serious conflict arose ,  which led to the rise in extreme nationalism . 
when communism fell in yugoslavia ,  serious conflict arose ,  which led to the rise in extreme nationalism . 
in contrast with the jagiellon concept ,  there was no concept for a multi-ethnic poland . 
arab nationalism ,  a movement toward liberating and empowering the arab peoples of the middle east ,  emerged during the latter 19th century ,  inspired by other independence movements of the 18th and 19th centuries . 
slovenia ,  one of the four regions not under communist control ,  favoring a democratic state . 
in the 1980s yugoslavia began to break into fragments . 
many scholars have noted the relationship between state-building ,  war ,  and nationalism . 
the cause of polish nationalism was repeatedly frustrated before 1918.
after all the killings ,  including nazi german occupation ,  terror in poland and population transfers during and after the war ,  the nation was officially declared as 99% ethnically polish . 
jewish nationalism arose in the latter half of the 19th century and it was largely correlated with the zionist movement . 
barry posen argues that nationalism increases the intensity of war ,  and that states deliberately promote nationalism with the aim of improving their military capabilities . 
max weber claimed the change that developed modern society and nations is the result of the rise of a charismatic leader to power in a society who creates a new tradition or a rational-legal system that establishes the supreme authority of the state . 
within yugoslavia ,  separating croatia and slovenia from the rest of yugoslavia is an invisible line of previous conquests of the region . 
the invasion was only partly successful and led to decades of clashes between the arab and jewish nationalist ideologies . 
in recent decades ,  many african countries have undergone the triumph and defeat of nationalistic fervor ,  changing in the process the loci of the centralizing state power and patrimonial state . 
it is thought that these circles may have been formed in response to dianic wicca . 
gardnerian wicca and other more traditional groups form their covens from male-female pairs . 
although not specifically wiccan ,  one branch of traditional witchcraft has provided a home for many neo-pagan lgbt men and women . 
the brotherhood and sisterhood are oath-bound ,  initiatory mystery religions which use a ritual framework descended from gardnerian wicca . 
an exception to the traditional male/female dualism is dianic wicca  -lrb-  also known as feminist witchcraft and/or feminist spirituality  -rrb-  ,  practiced almost exclusively by women . 
dianic wicca is a religion that welcomes lesbian pagans and celebrates their perspectives on feminism ,  sexism ,  and women's empowerment within patriarchal culture . 
ernest renan's `` what is a nation ? `` 
 ''black's law dictionary '' defines a nation as follows: nation ,  `` n . ``   -lrb-  14c  -rrb-  1.
northern sotho is one of the sotho languages of the bantu family . 
northern sotho is written in the latin alphabet . 
very little published information is available on these other dialects of northern sotho ,  but these have been reported:
however ,  the pan south african language board and the northern sotho national lexicography unit now specifically endorse the names `` northern sotho '' or `` sesotho sa leboa '' . 
sepulana  -lrb-  also sepulane  -rrb-  exists in unwritten form and forms part of the standard northern sotho . 
the ravens won the game 34–7.
the giants were successful in their first season ,  finishing with an 8–4 record . 
the giants finished the season with a 6–10 record and missed the playoffs . 
the giants finished the season with a 7–9 record ,  fassel's first losing season as head coach . 
after a disappointing 7–9 record in 2001, the giants finished the 2002 season with a record of 10–6, qualifying for the playoffs as a wild card . 
the new york giants won super bowl xlvi against the new england patriots with a score of 21–17.
the overall series is tied 16–16, as is the postseason series ,  4–4.
in 1990, the giants went 13–3 and ,  at the time ,  set an nfl record for fewest turnovers in a season  -lrb-  14 -rrb- . 
one of the notable games of that season was a win over the eventual super bowl champion denver broncos in week 15, giving the broncos their first loss of the season after starting 13–0.
after a dismal 2003 season in which the giants finished with a 4–12 record ,  jim fassel was released by the giants . 
the giants won 17–14, but the packers beat the bears 10–3, so the giants missed out on the playoffs again ,  ending a collapse in which the giants went 4–4 in their last eight games . 
they were used once in 2004 against the philadelphia eagles and in three consecutive years – 2005, 2006, and 2007 – against the dallas cowboys . 
barber retired at the end of the 2006 season . 
they added their third nfl championship in 1938 with a 23–17 win over the green bay packers . 
the 1985 giants compiled a 10–6 record and avenged their loss against san francisco by beating them in the wild card round 17–3.
the giants began the 2008 nfl season with a record of 11–1, but lost three of their last four regular season games partially due to a self-inflicted gunshot wound to wide receiver plaxico burress . 
this was also the first time since 1983 in which the giants finished the regular season with three or less wins ,  and their worst record since the 16 game season was adopted in the nfl . 
the giants played their first game as an away game against all new britain in new britain ,  connecticut ,  on october 4, 1925.
however ,  the following season would end with the giants winning their first super bowl championship . 
the 2018 season began with pat shurmur being hired as the new head coach . 
in the divisional round of the playoffs ,  the giants lost 23–11 to the philadelphia eagles at home . 
in its third season ,  the team finished with the best record in the league at 11–1–1 and was awarded the nfl title . 
reeves was fired following the 1996 season . 
after having high expectations due to their 11–5 record in 2016, the giants had an unexpected 0–5 start to the season ,  before pulling a massive upset versus the broncos at sports authority field at mile high for their first win of the season . 
the patriots  -lrb-  18–0 -rrb- entered the super bowl undefeated and were 12 point favorites going into game weekend . 
the 2013 new york giants season began with hope that the giants could become the first team to play in the super bowl in their home stadium ,  as metlife stadium was scheduled to host super bowl xlviii that february . 
the 49ers defeated the giants 21–10 in the divisional round . 
in 2000, the giants were looking to make the playoffs for the first time in three seasons . 
as in super bowl xlii ,  eli manning was super bowl mvp ,  defeating the new england patriots for a second time in the super bowl . 
from 1964 to 1978, the giants registered only two winning seasons and no playoff appearances . 
they won this game 20–17, in overtime ,  with tynes scoring the winning field goal as he did four years earlier in the same game against the packers . 
new malden is a suburb of south-west london ,  england . 
under the district councils act 1895, the maldens & coombe urban district council was created  -lrb-  the plural relating to old malden and new malden  -rrb-  . 
the busy a3 trunk road runs through part of new malden . 
new malden forms part of the historic county of surrey . 
the an/fps-133 air force space surveillance system ,  colloquially known as the space fence ,  was a u . s .  government multistatic radar system built to detect orbital objects passing over america . 
the united states national film preservation board  -lrb-  nfpb  -rrb-  is the board selecting films for preservation in the library of congress' national film registry . 
the national film preservation foundation was created by the u . s .  congress in 1996, at the recommendation of the library of congress ,  following four years of hearings and research conducted by the national film preservation board . 
the nominative case marks the subject of a verb . 
english is then said to have two cases: the subjective and the objective . 
the nominative case  -lrb-  abbreviated   -rrb-  ,  subjective case ,  straight case or upright case is one of the grammatical cases of a noun or other part of speech ,  which generally marks the subject of a verb or the predicate noun or predicate adjective ,  as opposed to its object or other verb arguments . 
in active–stative languages ,  there is a case ,  sometimes called nominative ,  that is the `` most '' marked case and is used for the subject of a transitive verb or a voluntary subject of an intransitive verb but not for an involuntary subject of an intransitive verb . 
the name itself ,  in fact ,  is not even spelled in proper italian . 
in the 1930s ,  nbc also developed a network for shortwave radio stations ,  called the nbc white network . 
the 2011–12 season was another tough season for nbc . 
nbc officially started broadcasting on november 15, 1926.
general electric acquired rca in 1986, and with it nbc ,  signaling the beginning of the end of nbc radio . 
the block ,  nbc kids ,  premiered on july 7, 2012, replacing the `` qubo on nbc '' block . 
in addition to the nbc programming there is also available by the nbc sister network telemundo ,  a spanish network based in the united states . 
key anchors from nbc news are also used during nbc sports coverage of the olympic games . 
in 1996, the channel was renamed nbc europe ,  but was ,  from then on ,  almost always referred to on-air as simply `` nbc '' . 
in 1986, bob wright was appointed as chairman of nbc . 
nbc outgrew the fifth avenue facilities in 1933.
 ,  nbc provides 87 hours of regularly scheduled network programming each week . 
nbc news radio has been distributed by iheartmedia and its ttwn networks since july 2016.
the 2014–15 season was something of a mixed bag for nbc ,  but still successful . 
nbc also operated nbc super sports ,  a 24-hour channel devoted to televising sporting events . 
the post-war 1940s and early 1950s brought success for nbc in the new medium . 
the three-note sequence remains in use by the nbc television network ,  most notably incorporated into the john williams-composed theme music used by nbc news ,  `` the mission ''  -lrb-  first composed in 1985 for `` nbc nightly news ''  -rrb-  . 
the nbc television network grew from its initial post-war lineup of four stations . 
kevin reilly became the new president of nbc entertainment . 
founded in 1926 by the radio corporation of america  -lrb-  rca  -rrb-  ,  nbc is the oldest major broadcast network in the united states . 
notable nbc news productions past and present include `` today '' ,  `` nbc nightly news ''  -lrb-  and its immediate predecessor ,  the `` huntley-brinkley report ''  -rrb-  ,  `` meet the press ''  -lrb-  which has the distinction of the longest continuously running program in the history of american television  -rrb-  ,  `` dateline nbc '' ,  `` early today '' ,  `` nbc news at sunrise '' ,  `` nbc nightside '' and `` rock center with brian williams '' . 
nbc no longer exists outside the americas as a channel in its own right . 
weaf and wjz ,  the flagships of the two earlier networks ,  were operated side-by-side for about a year as part of the new nbc . 
a report published by the commission in 1939 found that nbc's two networks and its owned-and-operated stations dominated audiences ,  affiliates and advertising in american radio; this led the commission to file an order to rca to divest itself of either nbc red or nbc blue . 
in 1959, nbc premiered a televised version of the radio program `` the bell telephone hour '' ,  which aired in color from its debut; the program would continue on the nbc television network for nine more years until it ended in 1968.
currently ,  new jersey is the only u . s .  state where nbc does not have a locally licensed affiliate . 
these shows helped nbc through the disastrous 1983–84 season ,  which saw none of its nine new fall shows gaining a second year . 
in american samoa ,  nbc was affiliated with kkhj-lp in pago pago from 2005 to 2012.
nbc became home to many of the most popular performers and programs on the air . 
jeff zucker then succeeded ancier as president of nbc entertainment in 2000.
in guam ,  the entire nbc programming lineup is carried by hagåtña affiliate kuam-tv  -lrb-  which has been an nbc affiliate since 1956 -rrb- via the network's east coast satellite feed . 
ben silverman left the network in 2009, with jeff gaspin replacing him as president of nbc entertainment . 
news coverage has long been an important part of nbc's operations and public image ,  dating to the network's radio days . 
in 1936, the orange network affiliate stations became part of the red network ,  and at the same time the gold network became part of the blue network . 
nbc is currently the home to only one daytime program ,  the hour-long soap opera `` days of our lives '' ,  which has been broadcast on the network since 1965.
in these areas ,  nbc programs are available in english and in spanish via second audio program . 
nbc began the transition with a few shows in 1954, and broadcast its first program to air all episodes in color beginning that summer ,  `` the marriage '' . 
seven also rebroadcasts some of nbc's news and current affairs programming during the early morning hours  -lrb-  usually from 3:00 to 5:00 a . m .  local time  -rrb-  ,  including the weekday and weekend editions of `` today ''  -lrb-  which it brands as `` nbc today '' to differentiate it from the unrelated morning program on the nine network  -rrb-  ,  `` dateline nbc '' and `` meet the press '' . 
in hong kong ,  english language free-to-air channel tvb pearl  -lrb-  operated by tvb  -rrb-  airs live broadcasts of `` nbc nightly news '' ,  as well as other select nbc programs . 
in 1999, nbc europe ceased broadcasting in most of europe outside of germany; the network was concurrently relaunched as a german-language technology channel aimed at a younger demographic ,  with the new series `` nbc giga '' as its flagship program . 
the 2015–16 season was successful for nbc ,  with the successful launch of the new drama `` blindspot '' premiering after `` the voice '' ,  then subsequently being renewed for a second season in november 2015.
in the caribbean ,  many subscription providers carry either select u . s . -based nbc affiliated stations or the main network feed from nbc o&os wnbc in new york city or wtvj in miami . 
children's programming has played a part in nbc's programming since its initial roots in television . 
the iconic three-note nbc chimes came about after several years of development . 
in 2003, westwood one began distributing nbc news radio ,  a new service featuring minute-long news updates read by television anchors and reporters from nbc news and msnbc ,  with content written by westwood one employees . 
by the late 1990s ,  westwood one was producing nbc radio-branded newscasts on weekday mornings . 
in 1979, nbc launched the source ,  a modestly successful secondary network providing news and short features to fm rock stations . 
nbc's last major radio programming push ,  beginning on june 12, 1955, was `` monitor '' ,  a creation of nbc president sylvester `` pat '' weaver ,  who also created the innovative programs `` today '' ,  `` the tonight show '' and `` home '' for the companion television network . 
notable past daytime talk shows that have aired on nbc have included `` home ''  -lrb-  1954–1957 -rrb- ,  `` the ernie kovacs show ''  -lrb-  1955–1956 -rrb- ,  `` the merv griffin show ''  -lrb-  1962–1963 -rrb- ,  `` leeza ''  -lrb-  1994–1999 -rrb- and `` later today ''  -lrb-  1999–2000 -rrb- . 
cnbc europe also broadcast daily airings of `` nbc nightly news '' at 00:30 cet monday to fridays . 
at the start of the 2000s ,  nbc's fortunes started to take a rapid turn for the worse . 
on june 18, 1975, nbc launched the nbc news and information service  -lrb-  nis  -rrb-  ,  which provided up to 55 minutes of news per hour around the clock to local stations that wanted to adopt an all-news radio format . 
on february 18, 2015, nbc began providing live programming streams of local nbc stations in select markets ,  which are only available to authenticated subscribers of participating pay television providers . 
the 2016–17 season brought more success for nbc with new comedy-drama `` this is us '' which was well received by critics and ratings and was renewed for two additional seasons in january 2017.
pain is also `` gated '' by signals that descend from the brain to the spinal cord to suppress  -lrb-  and in other cases enhance  -rrb-  incoming nociception  -lrb-  pain  -rrb-  information . 
once this threshold is reached a signal is passed along the axon of the neuron into the spinal cord . 
the gate control theory of pain ,  proposed by patrick david wall and ronald melzack ,  postulates that nociception  -lrb-  pain  -rrb-  is `` gated '' by non-nociception stimuli such as vibration . 
trp channels that detect noxious stimuli  -lrb-  mechanical ,  thermal ,  and chemical pain  -rrb-  relay that info to nociceptors that generate an action potential . 
in some conditions ,  excitation of pain fibers becomes greater as the pain stimulus continues ,  leading to a condition called hyperalgesia . 
the main sub-classes of novae are classical novae ,  recurrent novae  -lrb-  rne  -rrb-  ,  and dwarf novae . 
since then ,  four other novae have been proposed as helium novae . 
classical nova eruptions are the most common type of nova . 
recurrent nova processes are the same as the classical nova ,  except that the fusion ignition may be repetitive because the companion star can again feed the dense atmosphere of the white dwarf . 
ironically ,  despite the term `` stellar nova '' meaning `` new star '' ,  novae most often take place as a result of white dwarfs: remnants of extremely `` old '' stars . 
all observed novae involve closely located binary stars  -lrb-  the progenitors  -rrb-  ,  either a pair of red dwarfs in the process of merging ,  or a white dwarf and another star . 
consequently ,  the interval is shorter for high-mass white dwarfs . 
there are other types of nuclear weapons as well . 
all existing nuclear weapons derive some of their explosive energy from nuclear fission reactions . 
the system used to deliver a nuclear weapon to its target is an important factor affecting both nuclear weapon design and nuclear strategy . 
nuclear disarmament refers to both the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free world ,  in which nuclear weapons are eliminated . 
the other basic type of nuclear weapon produces a large proportion of its energy in nuclear fusion reactions . 
nuclear warfare strategy is a set of policies that deal with preventing or fighting a nuclear war . 
by the 1960s ,  steps were taken to limit both the proliferation of nuclear weapons to other countries and the environmental effects of nuclear testing . 
nuclear weapons have also been opposed by agreements between countries . 
different forms of nuclear weapons delivery  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  allow for different types of nuclear strategies . 
proponents of nuclear disarmament say that it would lessen the probability of nuclear war ,  especially accidentally . 
a nuclear weapon is an explosive device that derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions ,  either fission  -lrb-  fission bomb  -rrb-  or from a combination of fission and fusion reactions  -lrb-  thermonuclear bomb  -rrb-  . 
the threat of potentially suicidal terrorists possessing nuclear weapons  -lrb-  a form of nuclear terrorism  -rrb-  complicates the decision process . 
a fourth generation nuclear weapon design is related to ,  and relies upon ,  the same principle as antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion . 
during the starfish prime high-altitude nuclear test in 1962, an unexpected effect was produced which is called a nuclear electromagnetic pulse . 
critics of nuclear war strategy often suggest that a nuclear war between two nations would result in mutual annihilation . 
the partial nuclear test ban treaty  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- restricted all nuclear testing to underground nuclear testing ,  to prevent contamination from nuclear fallout ,  whereas the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- attempted to place restrictions on the types of activities signatories could participate in ,  with the goal of allowing the transference of non-military nuclear technology to member countries without fear of proliferation . 
nuclear weapons for use on a battlefield in military situations are called `` tactical weapons . `` 
almost all of the nuclear weapons deployed today use the thermonuclear design because it is more efficient . 
another deterrence position is that nuclear proliferation can be desirable . 
the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons aims to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons ,  but its effectiveness has been questioned ,  and political tensions remained high in the 1970s and 1980s . 
there are two basic types of nuclear weapons: those that derive the majority of their energy from nuclear fission reactions alone ,  and those that use fission reactions to begin nuclear fusion reactions that produce a large amount of the total energy output . 
this method is the primary means of nuclear weapons delivery; the majority of u . s .  nuclear warheads ,  for example ,  are free-fall gravity bombs ,  namely the b61.
the most commonly used fissile materials for nuclear weapons applications have been uranium-235 and plutonium-239.
over 500 atmospheric nuclear weapons tests were conducted at various sites around the world from 1945 to 1980.
as recently as 2006 a central asian nuclear weapon free zone was established among the former soviet republics of central asia prohibiting nuclear weapons . 
japanese opposition to nuclear weapons tests in the pacific ocean was widespread ,  and `` an estimated 35 million signatures were collected on petitions calling for bans on nuclear weapons '' . 
hawthorne also wrote nonfiction . 
at the old manse ,  hawthorne wrote most of the tales collected in `` mosses from an old manse '' . 
he wrote about his experiences in the essay `` chiefly about war matters '' in 1862.
he was born in 1804 in salem ,  massachusetts ,  to nathaniel hathorne and the former elizabeth clarke manning . 
the family returned to the wayside in 1860, and that year saw the publication of `` the marble faun '' ,  his first new book in seven years . 
his wife sophia and daughter una were originally buried in england . 
nathaniel hawthorne  -lrb-  ; né hathorne; 1804–1864 -rrb- was an american novelist ,  dark romantic ,  and short story writer . 
edgar allan poe wrote important reviews of both `` twice-told tales '' and `` mosses from an old manse '' . 
like hawthorne ,  sophia was a reclusive person . 
nathaniel hawthorne was born on july 4, 1804, in salem ,  massachusetts; his birthplace is preserved and open to the public . 
bloom sees hawthorne's greatest works to be principally `` the scarlet letter '' ,  followed by `` the marble faun '' and certain short stories ,  including `` my kinsman ,  major molineux '' ,  `` young goodman brown '' ,  `` wakefield '' ,  and `` feathertop '' . 
i should be happier if i could write . 
his later writings also reflect his negative view of the transcendentalism movement . 
during world war ii ,  the american atomic bombings of hiroshima and nagasaki made nagasaki the second and ,  to date ,  last city in the world to experience a nuclear attack  -lrb-  at 11:02 a . m .  ,  august 9, 1945 'japan standard time  -lrb-  utc+9 -rrb-'  -rrb-  . 
during the meiji period ,  nagasaki became a center of heavy industry . 
it is believed that as much as one-third of the population of nagasaki at this time may have been chinese . 
these connections with the japanese war effort made nagasaki a major target for strategic bombing by the allies during the war . 
nagasaki and nishisonogi peninsulas are located within the city limits . 
nagasaki is a japanese port city that was founded by the portuguese in the late 16th century . 
nagasaki lies at the head of a long bay that forms the best natural harbor on the island of kyūshū . 
the fat man bomb was somewhat more powerful than the one dropped over hiroshima ,  but because of nagasaki's more uneven terrain ,  there was less damage . 
with christianity legalized and the kakure kirishitan coming out of hiding ,  nagasaki regained its earlier role as a center for roman catholicism in japan . 
the region is also well known as dongnan  -lrb-   ,  south east ,  the southeast  -rrb-  and jiangnan  -lrb-   ,  and river south ,  south of yangtze  -rrb-  . 
this marked the first time a chinese dynastic capital moved to southern china . 
the jianwen emperor ruled from 1398 to 1402.
nanjing  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  formerly romanized as nanking and nankin ,  is the capital of jiangsu province of the people's republic of china and the second largest city in the east china region ,  with an administrative area of and a total population of 8,270,500  . 
his short reign was described by later historians as the first reign of the so-called southern ming dynasty . 
nanjing ,  one of the nation's most important cities for over a thousand years ,  is recognized as one of the four great ancient capitals of china . 
meanwhile ,  a yangtze river deep-water channel is under construction to enable nanjing to handle the navigation of 50,000 dwt vessels from the east china sea . 
a dense wave of smog began in the central and east parts of china on 2 december 2013 across a distance of around  ,  including tianjin ,  hebei ,  shandong ,  jiangsu ,  anhui ,  shanghai and zhejiang . 
nanjing borders yangzhou to the northeast  -lrb-  one town downstream when following the north bank of the yangtze  -rrb- ; zhenjiang to the east  -lrb-  one town downstream when following the south bank of the yangtze  -rrb- ; and changzhou to the southeast . 
prevailing winds blew low-hanging air masses of factory emissions  -lrb-  mostly so  -rrb-  towards china's east coast . 
over two centuries after the removal of the capital to beijing ,  nanjing was destined to become the capital of a ming emperor one more time . 
nanjing is at the intersection of the yangtze river ,  an east-west water transport artery ,  and the nanjing–beijing railway ,  a north-south land transport artery ,  hence the name “door of the east and west ,  throat of the south and north” . 
in 1958, a museum was established in the ninth fort . 
from 1948 to 1958, farm organizations were managed from the ninth fort . 
from 1924 on ,  the ninth fort was used as the kaunas city prison . 
during the years of nazi occupation ,  the ninth fort was put to use as a place of mass murder . 
the following data is taken from kaiser and shevoroshkin  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- and bengtson  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- and transcribed into the  . 
it is frequently grouped with dravidian as elamo-dravidian . 
the following table is compiled from data given by kaiser and shevoroshkin  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- and starostin . 
illich-svitych also prepared the first dictionary of the hypothetical language . 
nearly all also include the kartvelian and dravidian language families . 
eurasiatic ,  a similar grouping ,  was proposed by joseph greenberg  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- and endorsed by merritt ruhlen: it is taken as a subfamily of nostratic by bomhard  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- . 
the three groups universally accepted among nostraticists are indo-european ,  uralic ,  and altaic; the validity of the altaic family ,  while itself controversial ,  is taken for granted by nostraticists . 
proto-nostratic would have been spoken between 15,000 and 12,000 bce ,  in the epipaleolithic period ,  close to the end of the last glacial period . 
 -lrb-  starostin's list of affricate and fricative correspondences does not mention afroasiatic or dravidian ,  and kaiser and shevoroshkin don't mention these sounds much; hence the holes in the table .   -rrb- 
similarly ,  the paper by kaiser and shevoroshkin is much older than the newest `` altaic etymological dictionary ''  -lrb-  2003; see altaic languages article  -rrb-  and therefore assumes a somewhat different phonological system for proto-altaic . 
it typically comprises kartvelian ,  indo-european ,  and uralic languages; some languages from the disputed altaic family; the afroasiatic languages spoken in north africa ,  the horn of africa ,  the arabian peninsula and the near east; and the dravidian languages of the indian subcontinent  -lrb-  sometimes also elamo-dravidian ,  which connects india and the iranian plateau  -rrb-  . 
in early 2014, allan bomhard published his latest monograph on nostratic ,  `` a comprehensive introduction to nostratic comparative linguistics '' . 
recent proposals thus differ mainly on the precise placement of kartvelian and dravidian . 
element names are defined by the developer . 
within the namespace of the doe family ,  just `` jane '' suffices to unambiguously designate this person ,  while within the `` global '' namespace of all people ,  the full name must be used . 
the tomb of nahum is supposedly inside the synagogue at alqosh ,  although there are other places outside iraq which also lay claim to being the original `` elkosh '' from which nahum hailed . 
nahum ,  called `` the elkoshite '' ,  is the seventh in order of the minor prophets . 
the prophet nahum is venerated as a saint in eastern christianity . 
as of early 2017, the tomb was in significant disrepair and was threatened by the rise of isis in iraq . 
newfoundland english is often called `` newfinese '' . 
the dialects that compose newfoundland english developed because of newfoundland's history as well as its geography . 
the ottoman flag  -lrb-  now the flag of turkey  -rrb-  was adopted in 1844.
in fact ,  they only occur in the symbols of flags ,  such as in the spanish flag . 
all national flags are rectangular ,  except for the flag of nepal . 
a national flag is a flag that represents and symbolizes a country . 
very few countries use a war flag that differs from the state flag . 
on land ,  there is a distinction between civil flags  -lrb-  fiav symbol   -rrb-  ,  state flags  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and war or military flags  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in most cases ,  the civil flag is a simplified version of the state flag ,  with the difference often being the presence of a coat of arms on the state flag that is absent from the civil flag . 
also the flag of italy and the flag of hungary uses the same colours ,  in the same order ,  only the direction differs  -lrb-  the italian flag is vertical and the hungarian flag is horizontal  -rrb- 
the flags of switzerland and the vatican city are the only national flags which are exact squares . 
the flag of the united states is not defined in the constitution but rather in a separate flag resolution passed in 1777.
the addition of european players changed the style of play in the nhl and european style hockey has been integrated into the nhl game . 
the league co-owns the nhl network ,  a television specialty channel devoted to the nhl . 
as of the 2017–18 season ,  the nhl has players from 17 different countries ,  with 46.0% coming from canada and 26.0% from the united states ,  players from a further 15 countries make up 26.4% of nhl rosters . 
the nhl holds one of the most affluent fan bases . 
in the stanley cup final ,  the team with the most points during the regular season has home-ice advantage . 
the nhl consists of 31 teams ,  24 of which are based in the united states and seven in canada . 
thus ,  nhl players generally only join their respective country's team in the world championships if their respective nhl team has been eliminated from stanley cup contention ,  or did not make the playoffs . 
as well as participating in the above international club competitions ,  the nhl and the national hockey league players' association organizes the world cup of hockey . 
the national hockey league  -lrb-  nhl;   -rrb-  is a professional ice hockey league in north america ,  currently comprising 31 teams: 24 in the united states and 7 in canada . 
the nhl replaced the nha as one of the leagues that competed for the stanley cup ,  which was an interleague competition back then . 
the number of nhl teams held constant at 30 teams from the 2000–01 season when the minnesota wild and the columbus blue jackets joined the league as expansion teams ,  until 2017.
the most prestigious team award is the stanley cup ,  which is awarded to the league champion at the end of the stanley cup playoffs . 
the next most successful nhl franchise is the toronto maple leafs with 13 stanley cup championships ,  most recently in 1967.
the debut of the winter classic ,  an outdoor regular season nhl game held on new year's day 2008, was a major success for the league . 
this television contract has boosted viewership metrics for the nhl . 
the current nhl champions are the washington capitals ,  who defeated the vegas golden knights four games to one in the 2018 stanley cup finals . 
during the regular season ,  clubs play each other in a predefined schedule . 
the nhl immediately took the nha's place as one of the leagues that contested for the stanley cup in an annual interleague competition before a series of league mergers and folds left the nhl as the only league left competing for the stanley cup in 1926.
a lockout at the start of the 1994–95 season forced the league to reduce the schedule from 84 games to just 48, with the teams playing only intra-conference games during the reduced season . 
the national hockey league season is divided into a regular season  -lrb-  from early october through early to mid april  -rrb-  and a postseason  -lrb-  the stanley cup playoffs  -rrb-  . 
the team that has the most points in the regular season is awarded the presidents' trophy . 
it was the last time a non-nhl team won the trophy ,  as the stanley cup became the `` de facto '' nhl championship in 1926 after the wchl ceased operation . 
the nhl operates two subscription-based services allowing access to live ,  out-of-market games . 
in addition to canadian and american born and trained players ,  who have historically composed a large majority of nhl rosters ,  the nhl also draws players from an expanding pool of other nations where organized and professional hockey is played . 
the national hockey league's rules are one of the two standard sets of professional ice hockey rules in the world . 
wayne gretzky played one season in the wha for the indianapolis racers  -lrb-  eight games  -rrb-  and the edmonton oilers  -lrb-  72 games  -rrb-  before the oilers joined the national hockey league for the 1979–80 season . 
the international ice hockey federation  -lrb-  iihf  -rrb-  considers the stanley cup to be one of the `` most important championships available to the sport '' . 
from 1952 to 1955, marguerite norris served as president of the detroit red wings ,  the first woman nhl executive and the first woman to have her name engraved on the stanley cup . 
coverage of the playoffs and the finals is split between the two networks ,  with other games shown on cnbc ,  usa network ,  nhl network . 
northern michigan university  -lrb-  nmu  -rrb-  is a public university in marquette ,  michigan . 
northern michigan university's eight-member governing board ,  the board of trustees ,  is appointed by the governor of michigan and confirmed by the michigan senate for a eight-year terms . 
northern michigan university was established in 1899 by the michigan legislature as northern state normal school to offer teacher preparation programs in michigan's then-wild and sparsely populated upper peninsula . 
 ''naked news '' launched a japanese version of the show in 2006.
naked news is a canadian news and entertainment program owned by naked broadcasting network . 
following the success of `` the naked truth '' ,  a similar show on russian television ,  `` naked news '' launched `` naked news tv ! 
thus ,  an alternate rendering of `` ariyo aṭṭhaṅgiko maggo '' is `` eightfold path of the noble ones '' ,  or `` eightfold aryan path '' . 
the eightfold path consists of eight practices: right view ,  right resolve ,  right speech ,  right conduct ,  right livelihood ,  right effort ,  right mindfulness ,  and right `` samadhi ''  -lrb-  'meditative absorption or union'  -rrb-  . 
the pali term ``  ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is typically translated in english as `` noble eightfold path '' . 
a national park is a park in use for conservation purposes . 
while this type of national park had been proposed previously ,  the united states established the first `` public park or pleasuring-ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people '' ,  yellowstone national park ,  in 1872.
the largest national park in the world meeting the iucn definition is the northeast greenland national park ,  which was established in 1974.
the vanoise national park in the alps was the first french national park ,  created in 1963 after public mobilization against a touristic project . 
the world's first national park service was established 19 may 1911, in canada . 
tourism to national parks has increased considerably over time . 
national parks are almost always open to visitors . 
a nuncio is usually an archbishop . 
an apostolic nuncio  -lrb-  also known as a papal nuncio or simply as a nuncio  -rrb-  is an ecclesiastical diplomat ,  serving as an envoy or a permanent diplomatic representative of the holy see to a state or to an international organization . 
an apostolic nuncio is generally equivalent in rank to that of ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary ,  although in catholic countries the nuncio often ranks above ambassadors in diplomatic protocol . 
in the holy see hierarchy ,  these usually rank equally to a nuncio ,  but they do not have formal diplomatic status ,  though in some countries they have some diplomatic privileges . 
the newlyn school was an art colony of artists based in or near newlyn ,  a fishing village adjacent to penzance ,  on the south coast of cornwall ,  from the 1880s until the early twentieth century . 
a present-day newlyn school of art was formed in 2011 with arts council funding providing art courses taught by many of the best-known artists working in cornwall today . 
the natural law party  -lrb-  nlp  -rrb-  is a transnational party founded in 1992 on `` the principles of transcendental meditation '' , <ref name= ''cowan/bromley ''></ref> the laws of nature ,  and their application to all levels of government . 
according to the maharishi ,  the natural law party  -lrb-  nlp  -rrb-  was first founded in the united kingdom in march 1992 and was later established in the united states ,  france ,  austria ,  germany ,  croatia ,  israel ,  japan ,  spain ,  the netherlands ,  italy ,  australia ,  norway ,  sweden ,  new zealand ,  chile ,  thailand and canada . 
the natural law party advocates using the transcendental meditation technique and the tm-sidhi program as tools to enliven natural law and reduce or eliminate problems in society . 
in like manner ,  if one cannot determine good human action from bad ,  then one does not really know what the human person is . 
a criticism of the concept of the naturalistic fallacy is that while `` descriptive '' statements  -lrb-  used here in the broad sense about statements that purport to be about facts regardless of whether they are true or false ,  used simply as opposed to normative statements  -rrb-  about specific differences in effects can be inverted depending on values  -lrb-  such as the statement `` people x are predisposed to eating babies '' being normative against group x only in the context of protecting children while the statement `` individual or group x is predisposed to emit greenhouse gases '' is normative against individual/group x only in the context of protecting the environment  -rrb-  ,  the statement `` individual/group x is predisposed to harm whatever values others have '' is universally normative against individual/group x . 
the term `` naturalistic fallacy '' is sometimes used to describe the deduction of an `` ought '' from an `` is ''  -lrb-  the is–ought problem  -rrb-  . 
moore argues it would be fallacious to explain that which is good reductively ,  in terms of natural properties such as `` pleasant '' or `` desirable '' . 
bentham ,  in discussing the relations of law and morality ,  found that when people discuss problems and issues they talk about how they wish it would be as opposed to how it actually is . 
it will do no good to read the dictionary and learn that `` yellow '' names the colour of egg yolks and ripe lemons ,  or that `` yellow '' names the primary colour between green and orange on the spectrum ,  or that the perception of yellow is stimulated by electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of between 570 and 590 nanometers ,  because yellow is all that and more ,  by the open question argument . 
we can have no certain knowledge of morality from them ,  being incapable of deducing how things ought to be from the fact that they happen to be arranged in a particular manner in experience . 
it is the first type of ice cream to combine three flavors . 
consequently ice creams were often called 'italian ice creams' or 'neapolitan ice creams' throughout the nineteenth century ,  and the purveying of such confections became associated with italian immigrants . `` 
neapolitan ice cream ,  sometimes known as harlequin ice cream ,  is a flavor made up of three separate blocks of vanilla ,  chocolate ,  and strawberry ice cream arranged side by side in the same container ,  typically with no packaging in between . 
according to their relationship to human life . 
human-made analogs of life may also be considered to be life . 
these life forms are found in almost every location on the earth where there is liquid water ,  including in the earth's interior . 
over nine-tenths of the total biomass on earth is plant life ,  on which animal life depends very heavily for its existence . 
the first form of life to develop on the earth were microbes ,  and they remained the only form of life until about a billion years ago when multi-cellular organisms began to appear . 
over the past 66 million years ,  mammalian life diversified . 
water is a chemical substance that is composed of hydrogen and oxygen and is vital for all known forms of life . 
if life exists at all on mars ,  it is most likely to be located underground where liquid water can still exist . 
life may also be said to be simply the characteristic state of organisms . 
although the earth is the only body within the solar system known to support life ,  evidence suggests that in the distant past the planet mars possessed bodies of liquid water on the surface . 
once life had appeared ,  the process of evolution by natural selection resulted in the development of ever-more diverse life forms . 
the biosphere is the part of earth's outer shell – including land ,  surface rocks ,  water ,  air and the atmosphere – within which life occurs ,  and which biotic processes in turn alter or transform . 
with the ozone layer absorbing harmful ultraviolet radiation ,  life colonized the surface of earth . 
but it has been conjectured that europa ,  the fourth-largest moon of jupiter ,  may possess a sub-surface ocean of liquid water and could potentially host life . 
earth is the only planet known to support life ,  and its natural features are the subject of many fields of scientific research . 
when basic forms of plant life developed the process of photosynthesis the sun's energy could be harvested to create conditions which allowed for more complex life forms . 
the origin of life on earth is not well understood ,  but it is known to have occurred at least 3.5 billion years ago ,  during the hadean or archean eons on a primordial earth that had a substantially different environment than is found at present . 
additionally ,  a minute amount of the earth's water is contained within biological bodies and manufactured products . 
this hypothesis has been termed the `` snowball earth '' ,  and it is of particular interest as it precedes the cambrian explosion in which multicellular life forms began to proliferate about 530–540 million years ago . 
an ocean is a major body of saline water ,  and a principal component of the hydrosphere . 
bacterial life is sometimes included in flora ,  and some classifications use the term `` bacterial flora '' separately from `` plant flora '' . 
although humans are part of nature ,  human activity is often understood as a separate category from other natural phenomena . 
the entire earth contains over 75 billion tons  -lrb-  150 `` trillion '' pounds or about 6.8×10 kilograms  -rrb-  of biomass  -lrb-  life  -rrb-  ,  which lives within various environments within the biosphere . 
although humans comprise only a minuscule proportion of the total living biomass on earth ,  the human effect on nature is disproportionately large . 
in astronomy ,  the new moon is the first lunar phase ,  when the moon and sun have the same ecliptic longitude . 
an approximate formula to compute the mean moments of new moon  -lrb-  conjunction between sun and moon  -rrb-  for successive months is:
a lunation or synodic month is the average time from one new moon to the next . 
the original meaning of the term `` new moon '' ,  which is still sometimes used in non-astronomical contexts ,  was the first visible crescent of the moon ,  after conjunction with the sun . 
note that these satisfy formula_21 for all formula_7 because for any formula_7 exactly one of the formula_24, and all the others are zero . 
a spline of order formula_4 is a piecewise polynomial function of degree formula_6 in a variable formula_7.
the resulting formula_13 spline functions are called b-splines . 
the north pole is at the center of the northern hemisphere . 
in may 1937 the world's first north pole ice station ,  north pole-1, was established by soviet scientists by air 20 kilometres  -lrb-  13 mi  -rrb-  from the north pole . 
the north pole is the northernmost point on the earth ,  lying diametrically opposite the south pole . 
fish have been seen in the waters at the north pole ,  but these are probably few in number . 
the north pole ,  also known as the geographic north pole or terrestrial north pole ,  is  -lrb-  subject to the caveats explained below  -rrb-  defined as the point in the northern hemisphere where the earth's axis of rotation meets its surface . 
on 6 may 1986 uss `` archerfish ''  -lrb-  ssn 678 -rrb- ,  uss `` ray ''  -lrb-  ssn 653 -rrb- and uss `` hawkbill ''  -lrb-  ssn-666 -rrb- surfaced at the north pole ,  the first tri-submarine surfacing at the north pole . 
on 18 may 1987 uss `` billfish ''  -lrb-  ssn 676 -rrb- ,  uss `` sea devil ''  -lrb-  ssn 664 -rrb- and hms `` superb ''  -lrb-  s 109 -rrb- surfaced at the north pole ,  the first international surfacing at the north pole . 
 ''gurnard '' surfaced at the north pole on april 18, in the company of the uss `` seahorse ''  -lrb-  ssn-669 -rrb- . 
the sun at the north pole is continuously above the horizon during the summer and continuously below the horizon during the winter . 
on 21 april 1987 shinji kazama of japan became the first person to reach the north pole on a motorcycle . 
in may 1945 an raf lancaster of the `` aries '' expedition became the first commonwealth aircraft to overfly the north geographic and north magnetic poles . 
the sea depth at the north pole has been measured at by the russian mir submersible in 2007 and at 4,087 m  -lrb-  13,410 ft  -rrb-  by uss `` nautilus '' in 1958.
hence the north and south poles experience the slowest rates of sunrise and sunset on earth . 
currently ,  under international law ,  no country owns the north pole or the region of the arctic ocean surrounding it . 
in some children's western cultures ,  the geographic north pole is described as the location of santa claus' workshop and residence ,  although the depictions have been inconsistent between the geographic and magnetic north pole . 
the russian book of records recognized it as the first successful vehicle trip from land to the geographical north pole . 
on 17 august 1977 the soviet nuclear-powered icebreaker `` arktika '' completed the first surface vessel journey to the north pole . 
in 1907 canada invoked a `` sector principle '' to claim sovereignty over a sector stretching from its coasts to the north pole . 
the exact point of intersection of the earth's axis and the earth's surface ,  at any given moment ,  is called the `` instantaneous pole '' ,  but because of the `` wobble '' this cannot be used as a definition of a fixed north pole  -lrb-  or south pole  -rrb-  when metre-scale precision is required . 
trips from the camp to the pole itself may be arranged overland or by helicopter . 
polarstern again reached the pole exactly 10 years later with the `` healy '' . 
commercial airliner flights on the polar routes may pass within viewing distance of the north pole . 
the nanometre is often used to express dimensions on an atomic scale: the diameter of a helium atom ,  for example ,  is about 0.1 nm ,  and that of a ribosome is about 20 nm . 
 ,  robert sumwalt is chairman of the ntsb . 
however ,  the ntsb does not have the authority to enforce its safety recommendations . 
 ,  the ntsb has not adopted these recommendations and instead continues to rely on the party system . 
the ntsb considers the party system crucial to the investigative process ,  as it provides the ntsb with access to individuals with specialized expertise relevant to a particular investigation . 
in response to political pressure after the boeing incident ,  the ntsb commissioned the nonprofit rand corporation to conduct an independent study of the ntsb's aircraft investigation process . 
nucleosomes are the basic packing unit of dna built from histone proteins around which dna is coiled . 
the nucleosome core particle is composed of dna and histone proteins . 
the organization of the dna that is achieved by the nucleosome cannot fully explain the packaging of dna observed in the cell nucleus . 
linker histones such as h1 and its isoforms are involved in chromatin compaction and sit at the base of the nucleosome near the dna entry and exit binding to the linker region of the dna . 
a nucleosome is a basic unit of dna packaging in eukaryotes ,  consisting of a segment of dna wound in sequence around eight histone protein cores . 
histones h3 and h4 from disassembled old nucleosomes are kept in the vicinity and randomly distributed on the newly synthesized dna . 
adjacent nucleosomes are joined by a stretch of free dna termed `` linker dna ''  -lrb-  which varies from 10 - 80 bp in length depending on species and tissue type  -rrb-  . 
the nucleosome core particle  -lrb-  shown in the figure  -rrb-  consists of about 146 bp of dna wrapped in 1.67 left-handed superhelical turns around the histone octamer ,  consisting of 2 copies each of the core histones h2a ,  h2b ,  h3, and h4.
what is shared between all ,  and indeed the hallmark of atp-dependent chromatin remodeling ,  is that they all result in altered dna accessibility . 
h3 can be replaced by h3.3  -lrb-  which correlates with activate genes and regulatory elements  -rrb-  and in centromeres h3 is replaced by cenpa . 
work from the widom laboratory has shown that nucleosomal dna is in equilibrium between a wrapped and unwrapped state . 
non-condensed nucleosomes without the linker histone resemble `` beads on a string of dna '' under an electron microscope . 
in `` conventional open surgery '' the neurosurgeon opens the skull ,  creating a large opening to access the brain . 
neuropathology is a specialty within the study of pathology focused on the disease of the brain ,  spinal cord ,  and neural tissue . 
using `` stereotaxy '' neurosurgeons can approach a minute target in the brain through a minimal opening . 
history of electrodes in the brain: in 1878 richard canton discovered that electrical signals transmitted through an animal's brain . 
some of the techniques include implantation of deep brain stimulators ,  spinal cord stimulators ,  peripheral stimulators and pain pumps . 
 ''neurosurgery of the spine '' covers the cervical ,  thoracic and lumbar spine . 
history of tumor removal: in 1879 after locating it via neurological signs alone ,  scottish surgeon william macewen  -lrb-  1848-1924 -rrb- performed the first successful brain tumor removal . 
in 1998 researcher philip kennedy implanted the first brain computer interface  -lrb-  bci  -rrb-  into a human subject . 
these sophisticated computerized systems are used before and during surgery to help orient the surgeon with three-dimensional images of the patient’s anatomy including the tumor . 
there was not much advancement in neurosurgery until late 19th early 20th century ,  when electrodes were placed on the brain and superficial tumors were removed . 
neurosurgery ,  or neurological surgery ,  is the medical specialty concerned with the prevention ,  diagnosis ,  surgical treatment ,  and rehabilitation of disorders which affect any portion of the nervous system including the brain ,  spinal cord ,  peripheral nerves ,  and extra-cranial cerebrovascular system . 
common applications of neuropathology include studying samples of tissue in patients who have parkinson's disease ,  alzheimer's disease ,  dementia ,  huntington's disease ,  amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ,  mitochondria disease ,  and any disorder that has neural deterioration in the brain or spinal cord . 
