karnataka  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the south western region of india . 
karnataka also has the only 3 naturally sanskrit-speaking districts in india . 
the economy of karnataka is the fifth-largest state economy in india with in gross domestic product and a per capita gdp of  . 
most of these rivers flow out of karnataka eastward ,  reaching the sea at the bay of bengal . 
after india's independence ,  the maharaja ,  jayachamarajendra wodeyar ,  allowed his kingdom's accession to india . 
though several etymologies have been suggested for the name karnataka ,  the generally accepted one is that `` karnataka '' is derived from the kannada words `` karu '' and `` nādu '' ,  meaning `` elevated land '' . 
kashrut  -lrb-  also kashruth or kashrus ,    -rrb-  is a set of jewish religious dietary laws . 
most of the basic laws of `` kashrut '' are derived from the torah's books of leviticus and deuteronomy . 
wenham argued that since the impact of the food laws was a public affair ,  this would have enhanced jewish attachment to them as a reminder of their distinct status as jews . 
the laws of `` kashrut '' can be classified according to the origin of the prohibition  -lrb-  biblical or rabbinical  -rrb-  and whether the prohibition concerns the food itself or a mixture of foods . 
food that may be consumed according to `` halakha ''  -lrb-  jewish law  -rrb-  is termed kosher  -lrb-   in english ,    -rrb-  ,  from the ashkenazi pronunciation of the hebrew term `` kashér ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  meaning `` fit ''  -lrb-  in this context ,  fit for consumption  -rrb-  . 
in 1930, klm carried 15,143 passengers . 
in 1980, klm carried 9,715,069 passengers . 
the first klm flight took place on 17 may 1920.
in 2019, klm celebrates its centennial ,  as it was founded in 1919.
klm's stake in northwest airlines was increased to 25% in 1994.
the boeing 747-400 was introduced into klm's fleet in june 1989.
on 20 february 2013, klm announced that peter hartman would resign as president and ceo of klm on 1 july 2013.
klm introduced the boeing 767-300er in july 1995.
beginning in september 2010, klm integrated the passenger division of martinair into klm ,  transferring all personnel and routes . 
key business and operating results of klm are shown below . 
the team finished the season in fourth place with a 75–87 record . 
the 2012 team saw more of the same ,  as they improved by one game to 72–90.
from the 2004 season through the 2012 season ,  the royals posted nine consecutive losing records – the longest streak in team history . 
the team ended the regular season with a record of 95–67, best in the american league ,  and the organization's best since 1980.
the royals finished the season 86–76, securing the team's best winning percentage since 1994.
the worst seasons came in 2004–2006, when the royals lost at least 100 games each year and set the franchise's all-time record for losses  -lrb-  56–106 in 2005 -rrb- . 
through the 2016 season ,  the cardinals hold the series advantage 51–39.
in 2002, the royals set a new team record for futility ,  losing 100 games for the first time in franchise history . 
the 2003 season saw a temporary end to the losing ,  when manager tony peña ,  in his first full season with the club ,  guided the team to its first winning record  -lrb-  83–79 -rrb- since 1994 and finished in third place in the al central . 
the royals began the 2010 season with a rocky start ,  and after the team's record fell to 12–23, manager trey hillman was fired . 
the royals went on to win the 2015 world series – the first championship for the royals since 1985 – beating the new york mets four games to one . 
in the 2013 season ,  the royals remained over  . 500 nearly most of april during regular season play . 
indeed ,  the royals set a franchise low with a  . 398 winning percentage  -lrb-  64–97 record  -rrb-  in 1999, and lost 97 games again in 2001.
the royals entered the 2015 all-star break with the best record in the american league  -lrb-  52–34 -rrb- . 
after setting an al record by winning eight straight games to reach the world series ,  the royals opened the series by losing 7–1 in the first game against starter madison bumgarner . 
prior to the 2009 season ,  the royals renovated kauffman stadium . 
the royals followed this up by winning the team's first central division title in 2015 and defeating the new york mets for their first world series title in 30 years . 
in their inaugural game ,  on april 8, 1969, the royals defeated the minnesota twins 4–3 in 12 innings . 
though the team dropped out of contention from 1990 to 1992, the royals still could generally be counted on to post winning records through the strike-shortened 1994 season . 
they had home-field advantage ,  due to the american league's win in the 2014 all-star game . 
two `` non-canon '' dialects of klingon are hinted at in the novelization of ``  '' ,  as saavik speaks in klingon to the only klingon officer aboard cpt . 
the opera `` codice_3 '' is entirely in klingon . 
the play `` a klingon christmas carol '' is the first production that is primarily in klingon  -lrb-  only the narrator speaks english  -rrb-  . 
a small number of people are capable of conversing in klingon . 
a sequel ,  ``  '' ,  was released for the game boy in 1991.
it was later re-released for the game boy advance in japan in 2004.
 ''gamespot ''s frank provo reviewed the virtual console version of the game . 
kid icarus ,  known in japan as light mythology: palutena's mirror ,  is an action platform video game for the family computer disk system in japan and the nintendo entertainment system in europe and north america . 
the game world is divided into three stages – the underworld ,  the over world  -lrb-  earth  -rrb-  and the sky world . 
it was included in several lists of the best games compiled by `` ign '' and `` nintendo power '' . 
 ''kid icarus '' was included in `` ign ''s lists of the top 100 nes games and the top 100 games of all time; it came in 20th and 84th place ,  respectively . 
a game boy sequel to `` kid icarus '' ,  titled ``  '' ,  was released in north america in november 1991, and in europe on may 21, 1992.
in august 2004, `` myth of light: the mirror of palutena '' was re-released as part of the `` famicom mini disk system selection '' for the game boy advance . 
1 in the uk and australia . 
in the us ,  the album was nominated at the 2009 grammy awards for best electronic/dance album . 
 '' ,  reached the top twenty on the uk singles chart ,  while the album peaked at number four on the uk albums chart ,  eventually selling 250,000 copies . 
incorporating styles of dance music with funk ,  disco and r&b ,  the album was listed on `` q ''s `` best albums of 2003 '' . 
minogue's second album `` enjoy yourself '' was released in october 1989.
in march 2014, minogue released her twelfth studio album ,  `` kiss me once '' . 
minogue's third album ,  `` rhythm of love '' was released in november 1990 and was described as `` leaps and bounds more mature '' than her previous albums . 
in october 2001, minogue released her eighth studio album `` fever '' . 
in july 2010, minogue released her eleventh studio album ,  `` aphrodite '' . 
channel 4 listed her as one of the world's greatest pop stars . 
from minogue's work on her sixth studio album ,  `` impossible princess '' ,  her songwriting and musical content began to change . 
minogue has received a number of accolades ,  including a grammy award ,  three brit awards ,  two mtv video music award and two mtv europe music award . 
as part of the promotion of her album ,  minogue was featured in ``  '' ,  a documentary filmed during 2006 and 2007 as she resumed her showgirl: the homecoming tour . 
in musical terms ,  minogue has worked with many genres in pop and dance music . 
minogue has one of the largest gay followings in the world . 
in november 2007, minogue released her tenth and much-discussed `` comeback '' album ,  `` x '' . 
in june 2012, the official chart company revealed that minogue is the 12th best selling singer in the united kingdom to date ,  and the third best selling female artist ,  selling over 10.1 million albums . 
the singles from the album ,  `` what kind of fool '' and her cover version of kool & the gang's `` celebration '' both reached the top twenty of the uk singles chart . 
minogue's holiday album `` kylie christmas '' ,  was re-released in november entitled as ``  '' . 
the word `` knight '' ,  from old english `` cniht ''  -lrb-  `` boy '' or `` servant ''  -rrb-  ,  is a cognate of the german word `` knecht ''  -lrb-  `` servant ,  bondsman ,  vassal ''  -rrb-  . 
middle high german had the phrase `` guoter kneht '' ,  which also meant knight; but this meaning was in decline by about 1200.
a knight is a man granted an honorary title of knighthood by a monarch ,  bishop or other political or religious leader for service to the monarch or a christian church ,  especially in a military capacity . 
there are many islands and island groups in the kara sea . 
the kara sea  -lrb-   ,  `` karskoye more ''  -rrb-  is part of the arctic ocean north of siberia . 
this section represents rather fully the natural and biological diversity of arctic sea islands of the eastern part of the kara sea . 
unlike the other marginal seas of the arctic ,  where most islands lie along the coasts ,  in the kara sea many islands ,  like the arkticheskiy institut islands ,  the izvesti tsik islands ,  the kirov islands ,  uedineniya or lonely island ,  vize island ,  and voronina island are located in the open sea of its central regions . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the kara sea as follows:
despite the high latitude all islands are unglaciated except for ushakov island at the extreme northern limit of the kara sea . 
after the russian revolution in 1917, the scale and scope of exploration of the kara sea increased greatly as part of the work of developing the northern sea route . 
in 1983, abdul-jabbar's house burned down . 
in the 1976–77 season ,  abdul-jabbar had another strong performance . 
abdul-jabbar met habiba abdul-jabbar  -lrb-  born janice brown  -rrb-  at a lakers game during his senior year at ucla . 
abdul-jabbar is also a best-selling author and cultural critic . 
on offense ,  abdul-jabbar was a dominant low-post threat . 
abdul-jabbar maintained a dominant presence on defense . 
as a result of the injury to his hand ,  abdul-jabbar was out for two months ,  and it was unnecessary for the nba to suspend him . 
abdul-jabbar remained relatively injury-free throughout his nba career ,  but he twice broke one of his hands . 
at the time of his retirement ,  abdul-jabbar held the record for most games played by a single player in the nba; this would later be broken by robert parish . 
on june 28, 1989, abdul-jabbar was 42 years old when announced that he would retire at the end of the season after twenty years in the nba . 
abdul-jabbar is the nba's all-time leading scorer with 38,387 points and won a league-record six mvp awards . 
since 2005, abdul-jabbar has served as a special assistant coach for the lakers . 
in april 2018, abdul-jabbar was announced as one of the celebrities who competed on season 26 of `` dancing with the stars '' . 
abdul-jabbar has also appeared with robert hays  -lrb-  ted striker  -rrb-  in a 2014 `` airplane ! `` 
abdul-jabbar's play remained strong during the next two seasons ,  being named to the all-nba second team twice ,  the all-defense first team once ,  and the all-defense second team once . 
over his 20-year nba career ,  his team succeeded in making the playoffs 18 times and past the first round in 14 of them; his team reached the nba finals 10 times . 
the football player had also been an athlete at ucla . 
abdul-jabbar has spoken about the thinking that was behind his name change when he converted to islam . 
in 2007, abdul-jabbar participated in the national ucla alumni commercial entitled `` my big ucla moment '' . 
in april 2015, abdul-jabbar was admitted to hospital when he was diagnosed with cardiovascular disease . 
many basketball observers ,  in addition to abdul-jabbar himself ,  believe that his reticence ,  whether through disdain for the press or simply because of introversion ,  contributed to the dearth of coaching opportunities offered to abdul-jabbar by the nba . 
abdul-jabbar combined dominance during his career peak with the longevity and sustained excellence of his later years . 
abdul-jabbar has also created the 2011 documentary `` on the shoulders of giants '' ,  based on the all-black basketball team new york renaissance . 
some martial arts movements can be found in chinese opera and some martial artists can be found as performers in chinese operas . 
martial arts themes can also be found on television networks . 
in modern times ,  chinese martial arts have spawned the genre of cinema known as the kung fu film . 
there are many forms of kung fu ,  namely shaolin kung fu ,  wing chun ,  tai chi ,  etc . 
chiang assumed leadership of the kmt on 6 july 1926.
after 2000, the kmt's financial holdings appeared to be more of a liability than a benefit ,  and the kmt started to divest itself of its assets . 
in 2005, ma ying-jeou became kmt chairman defeating speaker wang jin-pyng in the first public election for kmt chairmanship . 
support for the kmt in taiwan encompasses a wide range of groups . 
full-scale civil war between the communists and the nationalists  -lrb-  kmt  -rrb-  erupted in 1946.
the kmt also has strong support in the labor sector because of the many labor benefits and insurance implemented while the kmt was in power . 
on 25 june 2009, president ma launched his bid to regain kmt's leadership and registered as the sole candidate for the election of the kmt chairmanship . 
conflicts between kmt and cpc were still common during the war ,  and documented claims abound of cpc attacks upon the kmt forces and vice versa . 
there ,  with renewed support ,  he resurrected the kmt on 10 october 1919, under the name kuomintang of china  -lrb-    -rrb-  and established its headquarters in canton in 1920.
these two elections gave the kmt firm control of both the executive and legislative yuans . 
this period of kmt rule in china between 1927 and 1937 was relatively stable and prosperous and is still known as the nanjing decade . 
the kmt government demanded that the foreign powers renegotiate the treaties on equal terms . 
traditional opponents of the kmt included strong supporters of taiwan independence and rural residents ,  particularly in southern taiwan . 
a split ,  however ,  erupted between the chinese communist party and the kmt ,  which threatened the northern expedition . 
as of 1987, taiwan is no longer a single-party state and political reforms beginning in the 1990s have loosened the kmt's grip on power . 
the kmt moved into a smaller building on bade road in the eastern part of the city . 
in 1923, the kmt and its canton government accepted aid from the soviet union after being denied recognition by the western powers . 
muslim generals in kansu waged war against the guominjun in favor of the kmt during the conflict in gansu in 1927-1930.
although opposition parties were not permitted ,  tangwai  -lrb-  or ,  `` outside the kmt ''  -rrb-  representatives were tolerated . 
by the end of 1949, the cpc controlled almost all of mainland china ,  as the kmt retreated to taiwan with a significant amount of china's national treasures and 2 million people ,  including military forces and refugees . 
following the death of sun yat-sen ,  chiang kai-shek emerged as the kmt leader and launched the northern expedition to defeat the northern warlords and unite china under the party . 
the republic of china in taiwan retained china's seat in the united nations until 1971.
according to the traditional understanding ,  kabbalah dates from eden . 
jewish kabbalists originally developed their own transmission of sacred texts within the realm of jewish tradition ,  and often use classical jewish scriptures to explain and demonstrate its mystical teachings . 
it is hard to clarify with any degree of certainty the exact concepts within kabbalah . 
from the renaissance onwards jewish kabbalah texts entered non-jewish culture ,  where they were studied and translated by christian hebraists and hermetic occultists . 
kabbalah  -lrb-   ,  literally `` reception ,  tradition '' or `` correspondance ''  -rrb-  is an esoteric method ,  discipline ,  and school of thought of judaism . 
one of the fundamental kabbalistic texts ,  the `` zohar '' ,  was first published in the 13th century ,  and the almost universal form adhered to in modern judaism is lurianic kabbalah . 
during the 20th-century ,  academic interest in kabbalistic texts led primarily by the jewish historian gershom scholem has inspired the development of historical research on kabbalah in the field of judaic studies . 
kagoshima was also the birthplace of tōgō heihachirō . 
all areas were merged into kagoshima city on 1 november 2004.
there are many types of sweets produced in kagoshima prefecture . 
kagoshima prefecture has a distinct and rich food culture . 
satsuma age ,  or deep-fried fish cake ,  comes in great variety in kagoshima . 
kagoshima prefecture  -lrb-  also known as the satsuma domain  -rrb-  was the center of the territory of the shimazu clan for many centuries . 
in recent years ,  a few townships were developed in kajang ,  such as taman prima saujana ,  sungai chua and taman kajang perdana  -lrb-  kajang highlands  -rrb-  . 
kajang town is located on the eastern banks of the langat river . 
in 1909, the `` blitzen benz '' was built in mannheim by benz & cie . 
benz graduated 9 july 1864 aged 19.
on 20 july 1872, karl benz and bertha ringer married . 
in 1912, karl benz liquidated all of his shares in benz sons and left the family-held company in ladenburg to eugen and richard ,  but he remained as a director of benz & cie . 
 ''benz & cie . ``  had grown in the interim from 50 employees in 1889 to 430 in 1899.
benz's sons eugen and richard left benz & cie .  in 1903, but richard returned to the company in 1904 as the designer of passenger vehicles . 
karl benz ,  bertha benz ,  and their son ,  eugen ,  moved east of mannheim to live in nearby ladenburg ,  and solely with their own capital ,  founded the private company ,  c .  benz sons  -lrb-  german: `` benz söhne ''  -rrb-  in 1906, producing automobiles and gas engines . 
karl benz was a member of the new `` daimler-benz '' board of management for the remainder of his life . 
then ,  without consulting benz ,  the other directors hired some french designers . 
in 1895, benz designed the first truck with an internal combustion engine in history . 
the brand name used the first initial of the french variant of benz's first name ,  `` carl '' . 
benz began to sell the vehicle  -lrb-  advertising it as ``  ''benz patent motorwagen '' ''  -rrb-  in the late summer of 1888, making it the first commercially available automobile in history . 
on 4 april 1929, karl benz died at home in ladenburg at the age of eighty-four from a bronchial inflammation . 
along with continuing as a director of benz & cie .  ,  karl benz would soon found another company ,  `` c .  benz söhne '' ,   -lrb-  with his son eugen and closely held within the family  -rrb-  ,  a privately held company for manufacturing automobiles . 
karl friedrich benz  -lrb-  ; 25 november 1844 – 4 april 1929 -rrb- was a german engine designer and automobile engineer . 
when he was two years old ,  his father died of pneumonia ,  and his name was changed to karl friedrich benz in remembrance of his father . 
the tree is cultivated for the seed fibre ,  particularly in south-east asia ,  and is also known as the java cotton ,  java kapok ,  silk-cotton ,  samauma ,  or ceiba . 
the referenced reports make it clear that c .  pentandra is among the largest trees in the world . 
ceiba pentandra is a tropical tree of the order malvales and the family malvaceae  -lrb-  previously separated in the family bombacaceae  -rrb-  ,  native to mexico ,  central america and the caribbean ,  northern south america ,  and  -lrb-  as the variety `` c .  pentandra '' var . 
in the 8th century taihō code reforms ,  dazaifu was established as a special administrative term for the region . 
the technology of kab-500l is also used for larger bombs ,  such as the kab-1500l family . 
the kab-500l is long and weighs  . 
the ka-50-2 is a tandem cockpit variant of the ka-50.
by year-end 2017, egypt had received 19 ka-52s . 
manufacturing of the first ka-52 airframe began in mid-1996.
the ka-50 is the production version of the v-80sh-1 prototype . 
neither of the ka-50 night attack versions has entered full production . 
the kamov ka-50 `` black shark ''  -lrb-   ,  'kitefin shark' ,  nato reporting name: hokum a  -rrb-  is a single-seat russian attack helicopter with the distinctive coaxial rotor system of the kamov design bureau . 
egypt plans to arm its ka-52s with russian anti-tank guided missiles . 
the ka-52 is approved for day ,  night and adverse weather conditions . 
the kamov ka-50 is also fitted with an electronic radio and sighting-piloting-navigating system allowing flights at day and night in vfr and ifr weather conditions . 
kamov also designed another two-seat variant ,  the kamov ka-52 `` alligator ''  -lrb-   ,  nato reporting name: hokum b  -rrb-  . 
egypt's helicopter is a modified version of the basic ka-52 alligator that serves in the russian air force . 
from the time the ka-50 was ordered in 1987, it was known that the limited night-time capability of the original ka-50 version would have to be upgraded to meet night attack requirements . 
it is the world's first operational helicopter with a rescue ejection system . 
the 1986–87 season was trophyless for liverpool . 
dalglish scored six goals for celtic in a 7–2 win . 
following the end of the season ,  liverpool dismissed dalglish on 16 may 2012.
in october 2013, dalglish returned to liverpool as a non-executive director . 
in 1966 dalglish had unsuccessful trials at west ham and liverpool . 
dalglish was the manager of liverpool at the time of the hillsborough disaster on 15 april 1989.
on 12 may 2011, liverpool announced that dalglish had been given a three-year contract . 
dalglish was made celtic captain in the 1975–76 season ,  during which celtic failed to win a trophy for the first time in 12 years . 
after the game ,  dalglish admitted that liverpool faced `` a big challenge '' . 
in the summer of 1988, dalglish re-signed ian rush . 
dalglish signed a provisional contract with celtic in may 1967.
in february 2012, dalglish led liverpool to their first trophy in six years ,  with victory in the 2011–12 football league cup . 
however ,  dalglish's side lost the 1988 fa cup final to underdogs wimbledon . 
dalglish has been married to marina since 26 november 1974.
by the end of his first season with liverpool ,  dalglish had played 62 times and scored 31 goals ,  including the winning goal in the 1978 european cup final at wembley against bruges . 
in addition to expert systems ,  other researchers developed the concept of frame based languages in the mid 1980s . 
each of these offers a way to see some part of the world . 
in order to tackle non-toy problems ,  ai researchers such as ed feigenbaum and frederick hayes-roth realized that it was necessary to focus systems on more constrained problems . 
expert systems gave us the terminology still in use today where ai systems are divided into a knowledge base with facts about the world and rules and an inference engine that applies the rules to the knowledge base in order to answer questions and solve problems . 
rather than general problem solvers ,  ai changed its focus to expert systems that could match human competence on a specific task ,  such as medical diagnosis . 
knowledge representation makes complex software easier to define and maintain than procedural code and can be used in expert systems . 
another area of knowledge representation research was the problem of common sense reasoning . 
currently one of the most active areas of knowledge representation research are projects associated with the semantic web . 
knowledge-representation is the field of artificial intelligence that focuses on designing computer representations that capture information about the world that can be used to solve complex problems . 
it was the failure of these efforts that led to the cognitive revolution in psychology and to the phase of ai focused on knowledge representation that resulted in expert systems in the 1970s and 80s ,  production systems ,  frame languages ,  etc . 
the justification for knowledge representation is that conventional procedural code is not the best formalism to use to solve complex problems . 
it wasn't long before the frame communities and the rule-based researchers realized that there was synergy between their approaches . 
kabaddi is a contact team sport . 
women’s kabaddi challenge is a women's kabaddi league . 
kabaddi is a popular sport in india and asia . 
kabaddi has been played at the asian games since 1990.
the pro kabaddi league was established in 2014.
kabaddi is one of the national sports of nepal . 
the iran amateur kabaddi federation was formed in 2004.
the governing body for kabaddi in the united kingdom is the england kabaddi federation uk . 
kerameikos  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  also known by its latinized form ceramicus ,  is an area of athens ,  greece ,  located to the northwest of the acropolis ,  which includes an extensive area both within and outside the ancient city walls ,  on both sides of the dipylon  -lrb-  δίπυλον  -rrb-  gate and by the banks of the eridanos river . 
kabir bedi  -lrb-  born 16 january 1946 -rrb- is an indian film actor . 
in the early 1990s ,  bedi married tv and radio presenter nikki bedi . 
kabir bedi began his career in indian theatre and then moved on to hindi films . 
bedi married four times and had three children ,  pooja ,  siddharth  -lrb-  deceased  -rrb-  and adam . 
the ka-20 was displayed at the 1961 tushino aviation day display . 
kainite is only found in comparatively few places ,  among them in salt mines in central and northern germany ,  bad ischl  -lrb-  austria  -rrb-  ,  on pasquasia in sicily ,  in whitby  -lrb-  uk  -rrb-  ,  and in the carlsbad potash district in new mexico ,  in volcanic deposits in kamchatka and in iceland ,  and in salt lakes in western china . 
kainite was discovered in the stassfurt salt mines in today's saxony-anhalt ,  germany in 1865 by the mine official schöne and was first described by carl friedrich jacob zincken . 
in 2008, the name was shortened to `` kaist '' . 
kaist has two campuses in daejeon and one campus in seoul . 
up to 80% of courses taught in kaist are conducted in english . 
kaist is organized into 6 colleges ,  2 schools and 33 departments/divisions . 
this has led to researchers from 30 countries boycotting kaist ,  which has denied existence of the program . 
kaist has approximately 10,200 full-time students and 1,140 faculty researchers and had a total budget of us$765 million in 2013, of which us$459 million was from research contracts . 
on average ,  about 600 international students from more than 70 different countries come to study at kaist ,  making kaist one of the most ethnically diverse universities in the country . 
kaist produced a total of 48,398 alumni from 1975 to 2014, with 13,743 bachelor's ,  24,776 master's ,  and 9,879 doctorate degree holders . 
rocks that are rich in kaolinite are known as kaolin or china clay . 
kaolin production in the us during 2011 was 5.5 million tons . 
below  ,  exposure to dry air will slowly remove liquid water from the kaolin . 
kaolin is also known for its capabilities to induce and accelerate blood clotting . 
in the us ,  the main kaolin deposits are found in central georgia ,  on a stretch of the atlantic seaboard fall line between augusta and macon . 
the second aspect of the low-temperature synthesis of kaolinite is that the aluminium cations must be hexacoordinated with respect to oxygen  -lrb-  caillère and hénin ,  1947; caillère et al .  ,  1953; hénin and robichet ,  1955 -rrb- . 
in the `` institut national pour l'etude agronomique au congo belge ''  -lrb-  ineac  -rrb-  classification system ,  soils in which the clay fraction is predominantly kaolinite are called `` kaolisol ''  -lrb-  from kaolin and soil  -rrb-  . 
it can be seen ,  that five molecules of water must be removed from the reaction for every molecule of kaolinite formed . 
121 were built between 1940 and 1943.
the kawasaki ki-56 was derived from the lockheed model 14 super electra aircraft that the `` kawasaki kokuki kogyo kabushiki kaisha ''  -lrb-  the kawasaki aircraft engineering company limited  -rrb-  had built under licence . 
less than 40 minutes after being struck ,  `` wilhelm gustloff '' was lying on her side . 
the three torpedoes which were fired successfully all struck `` wilhelm gustloff '' on her port side . 
about 1,000 german naval officers and men were aboard during ,  and died in ,  the sinking of `` wilhelm gustloff '' . 
 ''wilhelm gustloff '' was constructed by the blohm & voss shipyards . 
all four captains on `` wilhelm gustloff '' survived her sinking ,  but an official naval inquiry was started only against wilhelm zahn . 
the most prolific german author and historian on the subject of `` wilhelm gustloff '' is heinz schön ,  one of the shipwreck's survivors ,  whose books  -lrb-  in german  -rrb-  include:
mv `` wilhelm gustloff '' was a german military transport ship which was sunk on 30 january 1945 by in the baltic sea while evacuating german civilians ,  german officials ,  refugees from prussia ,  lithuania ,  latvia ,  poland ,  estonia and croatia and military personnel from gotenhafen  -lrb-  now gdynia  -rrb-  as the red army advanced . 
about 20 minutes after the torpedoes' impact ,  `` wilhelm gustloff '' listed dramatically to port so that the lifeboats lowered on the high starboard side crashed into the ship's tilting side ,  destroying many lifeboats and spilling their occupants across the ship's side . 
as `` wilhelm gustloff '' had been fitted with anti-aircraft guns ,  and the germans ,  in obedience to the rules of war ,  did not mark her as a hospital ship ,  no notification of her operating in a hospital capacity had been given and ,  as she was transporting military personnel ,  she did not have any protection as a hospital ship under international accords . 
the first torpedo struck `` wilhelm gustloff '''s bow ,  causing the watertight doors to seal off the bow which contained quarters where off-duty crew members were sleeping . 
the ship was soon sighted by the  ,  under the command of captain alexander marinesko . 
while microsoft uses and extends the kerberos protocol ,  it does not use the mit software . 
several versions of the protocol exist; versions 1–3 occurred only internally at mit . 
in contrast ,  when either client or server or both are not joined to a domain  -lrb-  or not part of the same trusted domain environment  -rrb-  ,  windows will instead use ntlm for authentication between client and server . 
kerberos is used as preferred authentication method: in general ,  joining a client to a windows domain means enabling kerberos as default protocol for authentications from that client to services in the windows domain and all domains with trust relationships to that domain . 
version 5 appeared as rfc 1510, and was made obsolete by rfc 4120 in 2005.
the client then sends the ticket to the service server  -lrb-  ss  -rrb-  along with its service request . 
ketamine may be used for postoperative pain management . 
it may also be used as an intravenous analgesic with opiates to manage otherwise intractable pain ,  particularly if this pain is neuropathic . 
ketamine is also used as a recreational drug . 
low doses of ketamine may reduce morphine use ,  nausea ,  and vomiting after surgery . 
they increased their own trading with the kickapoo . 
today there are three federally recognized kickapoo tribes in the united states: kickapoo tribe of indians of the kickapoo reservation in kansas ,  the kickapoo tribe of oklahoma ,  and the kickapoo traditional tribe of texas . 
the kickapoo in mexico are known for their whistled speech . 
the kickapoo people  -lrb-  kickapoo: kiikaapoa or kiikaapoi  -rrb-  are an algonquian-speaking native american and indigenous mexican tribe . 
katyusha weapons of world war ii included the bm-13 launcher ,  light bm-8, and heavy bm-31.
the katyusha multiple rocket launcher  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a type of rocket artillery first built and fielded by the soviet union in world war ii . 
after world war ii ,  bm-13s were based on soviet-built zil-151 trucks . 
the m-13 rocket of the bm-13 system was long ,  in diameter and weighed  . 
the 82 mm bm-8 was approved in august 1941, and deployed as the bm-8-36 on truck beds and bm-8-24 on t-40 and t-60 light tank chassis . 
in 1944 it became the basis for the bm-31-12 truck-mounted launcher . 
based on the m-13, the m-30 rocket was developed in 1942.
in 2013, the acker award was launched and named for kathy acker . 
acker was associated with the new york punk movement of the late 1970s and early 1980s . 
in 1966, she married robert acker ,  and changed her last name from alexander to acker . 
during the 1970s acker often moved back and forth between san diego ,  san francisco and new york . 
acker wrote the script for the 1983 film `` variety '' . 
acker published her first book ,  `` politics '' ,  in 1972.
in 2007, amandla publishing re-published acker's articles that she wrote for the `` new statesman '' from 1989–91.
in 1984, acker's first british publication ,  the novel `` blood and guts in high school '' was published soon after its publication by grove press in new york . 
in the 1970s ,  before the term `` postmodernism '' was popular ,  acker began writing her books . 
in april 1996 acker was diagnosed with breast cancer and she elected to have a double mastectomy . 
in 2002, new york university staged `` discipline and anarchy '' ,  a retrospective exhibition of her works ,  while in 2008 london's institute of contemporary arts screened an evening of films influenced by acker . 
the koh-i-noor is not a stolen object '' . 
the koh-i-noor  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  also spelt kohinoor and koh-i-nur ,  is one of the largest cut diamonds in the world ,  weighing  ,  and part of the british crown jewels . 
it was transferred to the crown of queen mary in 1911, and finally to the crown of queen elizabeth the queen mother in 1937.
after queen victoria's death ,  the koh-i-noor was set in the crown of queen alexandra ,  the wife of edward vii ,  that was used to crown her at their coronation in 1902.
you know also how i dislike wearing the koh-i-noor '' . 
the koh-i-noor was formally presented to queen victoria on 3 july 1850 at buckingham palace by the deputy chairman of the east india company . 
originally ,  the stone was of a similar cut to other mughal era diamonds which are now in the iranian crown jewels . 
all these crowns are on display in the jewel house at the tower of london with crystal replicas of the diamond set in the older crowns . 
its new owner ,  ranjit singh ,  willed the diamond to the east india company-administered hindu jagannath temple in puri ,  in modern-day odisha ,  india . 
when queen victoria showed the re-cut diamond to the young maharaja duleep singh ,  the koh-i-noor's last non-british owner ,  he was apparently unable to speak for several minutes afterwards . 
the government of india ,  believing the gem was rightfully theirs ,  first demanded the return of the koh-i-noor as soon as independence was granted in 1947.
the diamond had been stolen from the tower of london by a parisian gang leader who replaced it with a replica stone . 
originally ,  the diamond had 169 facets and was long ,  wide ,  and deep . 
one of his consorts said ,  `` if a strong man were to throw four stones – one north ,  one south ,  one east ,  one west ,  and a fifth stone up into the air – and if the space between them were to be filled with gold ,  all would not equal the value of the koh-i-noor '' . 
they often specialized in particular kinds of kvass: strawberry kvass ,  apple kvass ,  etc . 
coca-cola responded by buying kvass manufacturers as well as making kvass at their own soft drink plants . 
kvass was once sold during the summer only ,  but is now produced ,  packaged ,  and sold year-round . 
kvass has also appeared in russian fantasy novels ,  such as the 2008 `` twilight watch '' . 
even though kvass isn't as popular as it used to be ,  it is gaining more and more popularity once again . 
kvass is also popular in harbin and xinjiang ,  china ,  where russian culture has had an influence . 
in the united kingdom ,  kvass is practically unknown ,  as there are no cultural ties to it within the nation's history and there are no renowned kvass breweries in the country . 
kvass was invented by the slavs and became the most popular among east slavs . 
in lithuania kvass is known as `` gira '' and is widely available in bottles and draft . 
the kolmogorov–arnold–moser  -lrb-  kam  -rrb-  theorem is a result in dynamical systems about the persistence of quasiperiodic motions under small perturbations . 
the kam theorem quantifies the level of perturbation that can be applied for this to be true . 
the kam theorem is usually stated in terms of trajectories in phase space of an integrable hamiltonian system . 
the kam theorem states that if the system is subjected to a weak nonlinear perturbation ,  some of the invariant tori are deformed and survive ,  while others are destroyed . 
the most common problem being solved is the 0-1 knapsack problem ,  which restricts the number `` formula_1 '' of copies of each kind of item to zero or one . 
the unbounded knapsack problem  -lrb-  ukp  -rrb-  places no restriction on the number of copies of each kind of item . 
informally ,  the problem is to maximize the sum of the values of the items in the knapsack so that the sum of the weights is less than or equal to the knapsack's capacity . 
a 1998 study of the stony brook university algorithm repository showed that ,  out of 75 algorithmic problems ,  the knapsack problem was the 19th most popular and the third most needed after suffix trees and the bin packing problem . 
the knapsack problem is interesting from the perspective of computer science for many reasons:
kernite ,  also known as rasorite is a hydrated sodium borate hydroxide mineral with formula  . 
ketoprofen topical patches are being used for treatment of musculoskeletal pain . 
there is evidence for topic ketoprofen for osteoarthritis but not other chronic musculoskeletal pain . 
in lithuania ,  ketoprofen is called ketoprofenum and ketoprofenas . 
ketoprofen is also available as a 2.5% gel for topical application ,  and it is also available as a patch for topical analgesia and anti-inflammatory action . 
it is available in the uk as ketoflam and oruvail ,  in ireland as fastum gel ,  in estonia as keto ,  ketonal ,  and fastum gel ,  in finland as ketorin ,  keto ,  ketomex ,  and orudis; in france as profénid ,  bi-profénid and ketum; in italy as ketodol ,  fastum gel ,  lasonil ,  orudis and oki; in poland ,  serbia ,  slovenia and croatia as knavon and ketonal; in romania as ketonal and fastum gel; in mexico as arthril; in norway as zon and orudis; in russia as оки  -lrb-  oki  -rrb-  ,  fastum gel and ketonal; in spain as actron and fastum gel; and in venezuela as ketoprofeno as an injectable solution of 100 mg and 150 mg capsules . 
during the genroku era ,  kabuki thrived . 
the modern all-male kabuki ,  known as `` yarō-kabuki ''  -lrb-  young man kabuki  -rrb-  ,  was established during these decades . 
kabuki ,  in a sense ,  initiated pop culture in japan . 
kent state had a fall 2015 acceptance rate of 85% . 
kent state had a fall 2015 acceptance rate of 85% . 
greek life at kent state is overseen by the center for student involvement located in the kent student center . 
kent state university is an eight-campus system in northeastern ohio ,  with the main administrative center in kent . 
in addition to the kent campus ,  there are seven regional campuses . 
 ,  kent state is one of the largest universities in ohio with an enrollment of 39,367 students in the eight-campus system and 28,972 students at the main campus in kent . 
kent state university  -lrb-  ksu  -rrb-  is a large ,  primarily residential ,  public research university in kent ,  ohio ,  united states . 
kent state operates twenty-five on-campus residence halls ,  all of which are located on the main campus in kent . 
regional campuses include:
kent state at salem is located in salem township ,  just south of the city of salem . 
in 1929, the state of ohio changed the name to kent state college as it allowed the school to establish a college of arts and sciences . 
mcgilvrey's vision for kent was not shared by many others outside the school ,  particularly at the state level and at other state schools . 
kent state university was established in 1910 as an institution for training public school teachers . 
kent state was again in the national spotlight in 1977 when construction was set to begin on the memorial gym annex ,  adjacent to the area where the kent state shootings had occurred in 1970.
he was known as the `` dean of science fiction artists '' and he was the second artist inducted by the science fiction hall of fame . 
no other artist in science fiction has consistently matched his record . 
the science fiction hall of fame inducted him in 2006, the second artist after chesley bonestell . 
the knock-knock joke is a question-and-answer joke ,  typically ending with a pun . 
moon's drumming has been praised by critics . 
moon enjoyed being the life of the party . 
moon led a destructive lifestyle . 
moon's death came shortly after the release of `` who are you '' . 
reed later said that moon `` showed me the way to insanity . `` 
moon's arrival in the who changed the dynamics of the group . 
these antics earned him the nickname `` moon the loon . `` 
fletcher considers the drumming on this album to be the best of moon's career . 
in 1998 tony fletcher published a biography of moon ,  `` dear boy: the life of keith moon '' ,  in the united kingdom . 
entwistle has said that moon and the who reached their live peak in 1975–76.
moon may have inspired the name for led zeppelin . 
moon's lifestyle began to undermine his health and reliability . 
those close to moon said that he was haunted by boland's death for the rest of his life . 
before the 1998 release of tony fletcher's `` dear boy: the life of keith moon '' ,  moon's date of birth was presumed to be 23 august 1947.
moon played a four ,  then a five-piece drum kit during his early career . 
guitarist joe walsh enjoyed socialising with moon . 
butler quit in 1978, and later wrote of his experiences in a book entitled `` full moon: the amazing rock and roll life of keith moon '' . 
subsequently ,  in 1973, moon himself filled in for john peel in `` a touch of the moon '' ,  a series of four programmes produced by john walters . 
police determined that there were 32 clomethiazole pills in moon's system . 
keith john moon  -lrb-  23 august 1946 – 7 september 1978 -rrb- was an english drummer for the rock band the who . 
clem burke of blondie has said `` early on all i cared about was keith moon and the who . 
moon and entwistle left the who for a week  -lrb-  with moon hoping to join the animals or the nashville teens  -rrb-  ,  but they changed their minds and returned . 
the incorrect date had been supplied by moon in interviews before it was corrected by fletcher to 1946.
in 1975 moon began a relationship with swedish model annette walter-lax ,  who later said that moon was `` so sweet when he was sober ,  that i was just living with him in the hope that he would kick all this craziness . `` 
early in the who's career ,  moon got to know the beatles . 
daltrey ,  townshend ,  robin gibb and moon's mother kit were present at the ceremony . 
the beatles became friends with moon ,  leading to occasional collaborations . 
moon's favourite stunt was to flush powerful explosives down toilets . 
moon idolised the beach boys; roger daltrey later said that given the opportunity ,  moon would have left to play for the california band even at the peak of the who's fame . 
he followed moon when the drummer relocated to los angeles ,  but felt that the drug culture prevalent at the time was bad for moon: `` my job was to have eyes in the back of my head . `` 
kerosene ,  also known as paraffin ,  lamp oil ,  and coal oil  -lrb-  an obsolete term  -rrb-  ,  is a combustible hydrocarbon liquid which is derived from petroleum . 
paraffin wax is a waxy solid extracted from petroleum . 
the american society for testing and materials standard specification d-3699-78 recognizes two grades of kerosene: grades 1-k  -lrb-  less than 0.04% sulfur by weight  -rrb-  and 2-k  -lrb-  0.3% sulfur by weight  -rrb-  . 
kwashiorkor is a form that severe protein malnutrition characterized by edema ,  and an enlarged liver with fatty infiltrates . 
kwashiorkor is a severe form of malnutrition ,  caused by a deficiency in dietary protein . 
protein should be supplied only for anabolic purposes . 
the defining sign of kwashiorkor in a malnourished child is pitting edema  -lrb-  swelling of the ankles and feet  -rrb-  . 
kundalini is described as being coiled up at the base of the spine . 
these techniques come from any of the four main branches of yoga ,  and some forms of yoga ,  such as kriya yoga ,  kundalini yoga and sahaja yoga . 
the following are either common signs of an awakened kundalini or symptoms of a problem associated with an awakening kundalini:
in his preface to `` the serpent power '' woodroffe clarifies the concept of kundalini:
swami vivekananda describes kundalini briefly in his book `` raja yoga '' as follows:
there are two broad approaches to kundalini awakening: active and passive . 
kundalini is considered to occur in the chakra and nadis of the subtle body . 
the experience of kundalini awakening can happen when one is either prepared or unprepared . 
the kundalini always awakens spontaneously when the person least expects it . 
according to shamdasani ,  jung claimed that the symbolism of kundalini yoga suggested that the bizarre symptomatology that patients at times presented ,  actually resulted from the awakening of the kundalini . 
in his article on kundalini in the `` yoga journal '' ,  david eastman narrates two personal experiences . 
the spiritual teacher meher baba emphasized the need for a master when actively trying to awaken kundalini: kundalini is a latent power in the higher body . 
gopi krishna reports having experienced his first kundalini awakening at age 34.
kundalini is described as a sleeping ,  dormant potential force in the human organism . 
sometimes kundalini gets awakened in this way ,  depending upon a person's type . '
when kundalini shakti is conceived as a goddess ,  then ,  when it rises to the head ,  it unites itself with the supreme being of  -lrb-  lord shiva  -rrb-  . 
kaj harald leininger munk  -lrb-  commonly called kaj munk  -rrb-   -lrb-  13 january 1898 – 4 january 1944 -rrb- was a danish playwright and lutheran pastor ,  known for his cultural engagement and his martyrdom during the occupation of denmark of world war ii . 
four thousand danes attended munk's funeral . 
munk's body was returned to his parish church ,  vedersø ,  where it is buried outside the choir . 
he was born kaj harald leininger petersen on the island of lolland ,  denmark ,  and raised by a family named munk after the death of his parents . 
in 1938 the danish newspaper `` jyllands-posten '' published on its front page an open letter to benito mussolini written by kaj munk criticising the persecutions against jews . 
the bulbous kohlrabi stem is frequently used raw in salad or slaws . 
kohlrabi  -lrb-  from the german for cabbage turnip; `` brassica oleracea '' gongylodes group  -rrb-  ,  also called german turnip ,  is a biennial vegetable ,  a low ,  stout cultivar of wild cabbage . 
kohlrabi also comes in three different colors: white ,  purple ,  and pale green . 
kohlrabi is an important part of the kashmiri cuisine and one of the most commonly cooked foods . 
it has a texture similar to that of a broccoli stem ,  but with a flavor that is sweeter and less vegetal . 
the louder and more fluent the trill ,  the higher the fitness of the male . 
the second male to mate with the female at the termination of her refractory period is usually cuckolded . 
the males provide a nuptial gift for the females in the form of a spermatophylax ,  a body attached to the males' spermatophore and consumed by the female ,  to distract her from eating the male's spermatophore and thereby increase his paternity . 
the common name katydid is also onomatopoeic and comes from the particularly loud ,  three-pulsed song ,  ka-ty-did ,  of the nominate subspecies of the north american `` pterophylla camellifolia '' ,  often called the common true katydid . 
tettigoniids range in size from as small as to as large as  . 
the males of tettigoniids have sound-producing organs located on the hind angles of their front wings . 
oftentimes in species which produce larger food gifts ,  the female seeks out the males to copulate . 
the size of the insect ,  the spacing of the ridges ,  and the width of the scraper all influence what sound is made . 
the kennelly–heaviside layer ,  named after arthur e .  kennelly and oliver heaviside ,  also known as the e region or simply the heaviside layer ,  is a layer of ionised gas occurring between roughly 90–150 km  -lrb-  56–93 mi  -rrb-  above the ground — one of several layers in the earth's ionosphere . 
the itu standard model of absorption and reflection of radio waves by the heaviside layer was developed by the british ionospheric physicist louis muggleton in the 1970s . 
knots weaken the rope in which they are made . 
relative knot strength ,  also called knot efficiency ,  is the breaking strength of a knotted rope in proportion to the breaking strength of the rope without the knot . 
even if the rope does not break ,  a knot may still fail to hold . 
the efficiency of common knots ranges between 40—80% of the rope's original strength . 
killer whales are found in all oceans and most seas . 
killer whales have helped humans hunting other whales . 
killer whales are notable for their complex societies . 
fish-eating killer whales prey on around 30 species of fish . 
this washes the prey into the water ,  where other killer whales lie in wait . 
the vocalizations of killer whales in other parts of the world have also been studied . 
dialects of killer whales not only distinguish them between pods ,  but also between types . 
resident killer whales swim alongside porpoises ,  other dolphins ,  seals ,  and sea lions ,  which are common prey for transient killer whales . 
killer whales are the largest extant members of the dolphin family . 
killer whales in many areas may prey on cormorants and gulls . 
killer whales also appear to regularly occur off the galápagos islands . 
killer whales are very sophisticated and effective predators of marine mammals . 
killer whales are apex predators ,  meaning that they themselves have no natural predators . 
prior to the advent of industrial whaling ,  great whales may have been the major food source for killer whales . 
of the very few confirmed attacks on humans by wild killer whales ,  none have been fatal . 
competition with fishermen also led to killer whales being regarded as pests . 
in the tales and beliefs of the siberian yupik people ,  killer whales are said to appear as wolves in winter ,  and wolves as killer whales in summer . 
unlike wild killer whales ,  captive killer whales are reported to have made nearly two dozen attacks on humans since the 1970s ,  some of which have been fatal . 
japan's fisheries agency estimated 2,321 killer whales were in the seas around japan . 
killer whales feature strongly in the mythologies of indigenous cultures ,  with their reputation ranging from being the souls of humans to merciless killers . 
an individual killer whale can often be identified from its dorsal fin and saddle patch . 
competition between killer whales and white sharks is probable in regions where their diets overlap . 
the tlingit of southeastern alaska regarded the killer whale as custodian of the sea and a benefactor of humans . 
the killer whale or orca  -lrb-  `` orcinus orca ''  -rrb-  is a toothed whale belonging to the oceanic dolphin family ,  of which it is the largest member . 
scientist ken balcomb has extensively studied killer whales since 1976; he is the research biologist responsible for discovering u . s .  navy sonar may harm killer whales . 
killer whales have the second-heaviest brains among marine mammals  -lrb-  after sperm whales ,  which have the largest brain of any animal  -rrb-  . 
western attitudes towards killer whales have changed dramatically in recent decades . 
in western cultures ,  killer whales were historically feared as dangerous ,  savage predators . 
day-to-day killer whale behaviour generally consists of foraging ,  travelling ,  resting and socializing . 
as with residents and transients ,  the lifestyle of these whales appears to reflect their diet; fish-eating killer whales in alaska and norway have resident-like social structures ,  while mammal-eating killer whales in argentina and the crozet islands behave more like transients . 
according to some authors ,  the name `` killer whale '' is a mistranslation of the 18th century spanish name `` asesina-ballenas ''  -lrb-  `` killer of '' `` whales ''  -rrb-  ,  possibly given by basque whalers after observing pods of orcas hunting baleen whales . 
killer whales have good eyesight above and below the water ,  excellent hearing ,  and a good sense of touch . 
