at  ,  madagascar is the world's 47th largest country and the fourth-largest island . 
madagascar is subdivided into 22 regions  -lrb-  `` faritra ''  -rrb-  . 
madagascar was declared a colony of france in 1897.
the annual population growth rate in madagascar was approximately 2.9 percent in 2009.
a number of traditional pastimes have emerged in madagascar . 
antananarivo is the administrative capital and largest city of madagascar . 
madagascar  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of madagascar  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  and previously known as the malagasy republic ,  is an island country in the indian ocean ,  approximately off the coast of east africa . 
most hindus in madagascar speak gujarati or hindi at home . 
during the second world war ,  the island was the site of the battle of madagascar between the vichy government and the british . 
in the malagasy language ,  the island of madagascar is called `` madagasikara '' and its people are referred to as `` malagasy '' . 
during madagascar's first republic ,  france heavily influenced madagascar's economic planning and policy and served as its key trading partner . 
madagascar's varied fauna and flora are endangered by human activity . 
madagascar's gdp in 2015 was estimated at us$9.98 billion ,  with a per capita gdp of $411.82.
islam is also practiced on the island . 
until the late 18th century ,  the island of madagascar was ruled by a fragmented assortment of shifting sociopolitical alliances . 
in  ,  the population of madagascar was estimated at /1e6 round 0 million ,  up from 2.2 million in 1900.
a wide variety of oral and written literature has developed in madagascar . 
there were an estimated 25,000 comorans ,  18,000 indians ,  and 9,000 chinese living in madagascar in the mid-1980s . 
a number of other mammals ,  including the cat-like fossa ,  are endemic to madagascar . 
in 2010, madagascar had approximately of paved roads ,  of railways and of navigable waterways . 
western recreational activities were introduced to madagascar over the past two centuries . 
in 2003, ravalomanana announced the durban vision ,  an initiative to more than triple the island's protected natural areas to over or 10 percent of madagascar's land surface . 
the plastic arts are also widespread throughout the island . 
the malagasy ethnic group forms over 90 percent of madagascar's population and is typically divided into 18 ethnic subgroups . 
like its flora ,  madagascar's fauna is diverse and exhibits a high rate of endemism . 
by the end of the 19th century ,  madagascar had the most developed and modern school system in pre-colonial sub-saharan africa . 
the first archaeological evidence for human foraging on madagascar may have occurred as much as 10,000 years ago . 
eleven countries have established embassies in madagascar ,  including france ,  the united kingdom ,  the united states ,  china and india ,  while madagascar has embassies in sixteen other countries . 
the traveler's palm ,  known locally as `` ravinala '' and endemic to the eastern rain forests ,  is highly iconic of madagascar and is featured in the national emblem as well as the air madagascar logo . 
more than 80 percent of madagascar's 14,883 plant species are found nowhere else in the world ,  including five plant families . 
the main economic resources of madagascar are tourism ,  textiles ,  agriculture ,  and mining . 
chinese ,  indian and comoran minorities are present in madagascar ,  as well as a small european  -lrb-  primarily french  -rrb-  populace . 
madagascar belongs to the group of least developed countries ,  according to the united nations . 
the island is home to two-thirds of the world's chameleon species ,  including the smallest known ,  and researchers have proposed that madagascar may be the origin of all chameleons . 
in 2017, madagascar had an outbreak of the bubonic plague  -lrb-  also known as the black death  -rrb-  that affected urban areas . 
in either case ,  these dates make madagascar one of the last major landmasses on earth to be settled by humans . 
as a result of the island's long isolation from neighboring continents ,  madagascar is home to various plants and animals found nowhere else on earth . 
exports formed 28 percent of gdp in 2009.
endemic fish of madagascar include two families ,  15 genera and over 100 species ,  primarily inhabiting the island's freshwater lakes and rivers . 
updates incorporating more recent research were published as the apg ii system in 2003, the apg iii system in 2009, and the apg iv system in 2016.
the characteristic feature of angiosperms is the flower . 
in most taxonomies ,  the flowering plants are treated as a coherent group . 
angiosperm stems are made up of seven layers as shown above . 
the flowering plants ,  also known as angiosperms ,  angiospermae or magnoliophyta ,  are the most diverse group of land plants ,  with 416 families ,  approximately 13,164 known genera and c .  369,000 known species . 
the flower may consist only of these parts ,  as in willow ,  where each flower comprises only a few stamens or two carpels . 
the malvales are an order of flowering plants . 
the order is placed in the eurosids ii ,  which are part of the eudicots . 
many species of malvaceae `` sensu lato '' are known for their wood ,  with that of `` ochroma ''  -lrb-  balsa  -rrb-  being known for its lightness ,  and that of `` tilia ''  -lrb-  lime ,  linden ,  or basswood  -rrb-  as a popular wood for carving . 
the apgiii system agrees with the older cronquist circumscriptions of treating psiloxylaceae and heteropyxidaceae within myrtaceae ,  and memecyclaceae within melastomataceae . 
the cronquist system gives essentially the same composition ,  except the vochysiaceae are removed to the order polygalales ,  and the thymelaeaceae are included . 
the com clade is part of an unranked group known as fabidae or eurosids i . 
in 2012, `` xi et al . `` 
the fabids ,  in turn ,  are part of a group that has long been recognized ,  namely ,  the rosids . 
identified 12 additional clades and three major ,  basal clades . 
malpighiales is a member of a supraordinal group called the com clade ,  which consists of the orders celastrales ,  oxalidales ,  and malpighiales . 
molecular clock calculations estimate the origin of stem group malpighiales at around 100 million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  and the origin of crown group malpighiales at about 90 mya . 
you have the right to remain silent . 
the right to counsel includes:
simply advising the suspect of their rights does not fully comply with the miranda rule . 
a valid miranda waiver operates as a waiver of sixth amendment right . 
while the exact language above is not required by `` miranda '' ,  the police must advise the suspect that: there is no precise language that must be used in advising a suspect of their miranda rights . 
the fifth amendment right to counsel ,  a component of the `` miranda '' rule ,  is different from the sixth amendment right to counsel . 
as a result ,  american english developed the verb `` mirandize '' ,  meaning `` read the `` miranda '' rights to '' a suspect  -lrb-  when the suspect is arrested  -rrb-  . 
the ruling states:
it is unclear if this statement is admissible because of the original miranda statement . 
those rights may be considerably more limited than those available to u . s .  criminal defendants under the `` miranda '' ruling . 
the courts have since ruled that the warning must be `` meaningful '' ,  so it is usually required that the suspect be asked if they understand their rights . 
the circumstances triggering the miranda safeguards ,  i . e . 
the circumstances triggering the `` miranda '' safeguards ,  i . e . 
therefore ,  for miranda to apply ,  six requirements must be fulfilled:
assuming that the six factors are present ,  the miranda rule would apply unless the prosecution can establish that the statement falls within an exception to the miranda rule . 
the waiver must be `` knowing and intelligent '' and it must be `` voluntary '' . 
assuming that a miranda violation occurred—the six factors are present and no exception applies—the statement will be subject to suppression under the miranda exclusionary rule . 
thus ,  the jurisprudential rule of `` miranda '' must yield in `` a situation where concern for public safety must be paramount to adherence to the literal language of the prophylactic rules enunciated in miranda '' . 
the definition of `` deliberate elicitation '' is not the same as the definition of `` interrogation '' under the miranda rule . 
notably ,  the `` miranda '' rights do not have to be read in any particular order ,  and they do not have to precisely match the language of the `` miranda '' case as long as they are adequately and fully conveyed  -lrb-  `` california v .  prysock '' ,    -rrb-  . 
the concept of ``  ''miranda '' rights '' was enshrined in u . s .  law following the 1966 `` miranda v .  arizona '' supreme court decision ,  which found that the fifth and sixth amendment rights of ernesto arturo miranda had been violated during his arrest and trial for armed robbery ,  kidnapping ,  and rape of a mentally handicapped young woman  -lrb-  miranda was subsequently retried and convicted ,  based primarily on his estranged ex-partner ,  who had been tracked down by the original arresting officer via miranda's own parents ,  suddenly claiming that miranda had confessed to her when she had visited him in jail; miranda's lawyer later confessed that he 'goofed' the trial  -rrb-  . 
if the suspect responds `` no '' to the first question ,  the officer is required to re-read the miranda warning ,  while saying `` no '' to the second question invokes the right at that moment; in either case the interviewing officer or officers cannot question the suspect until the rights are waived . 
a waiver must also be clear and unequivocal . 
the consequences of assertion of sixth amendment right to counsel are stricter . 
in the north american system ,  the mississippian is subdivided into four stages:
the mississippian is so named because rocks with this age are exposed in the mississippi river valley . 
the four main steps of meiosis ii are: prophase ii ,  metaphase ii ,  anaphase ii ,  and telophase ii . 
during these stages ,  two centrosomes ,  containing a pair of centrioles in animal cells ,  migrate to the two poles of the cell . 
in meiosis ,  dna replication is followed by two rounds of cell division to produce four daughter cells ,  each with half the number of chromosomes as the original parent cell . 
cells may enter a period of rest known as interkinesis or interphase ii . 
therefore ,  meiosis includes the stages of meiosis i  -lrb-  prophase i ,  metaphase i ,  anaphase i ,  telophase i  -rrb-  and meiosis ii  -lrb-  prophase ii ,  metaphase ii ,  anaphase ii ,  telophase ii  -rrb-  . 
no dna replication occurs during this stage . 
meiosis uses many of the same mechanisms as mitosis ,  the type of cell division used by eukaryotes to divide one cell into two identical daughter cells . 
in some species ,  cells enter a resting phase known as interkinesis between meiosis i and meiosis ii . 
sister chromatids remain attached during telophase i . 
nuclear envelopes re-form and cleavage or cell plate formation eventually produces a total of four daughter cells ,  each with a haploid set of chromosomes . 
meiosis is divided into meiosis i and meiosis ii which are further divided into karyokinesis i and cytokinesis i and karyokinesis ii and cytokinesis ii respectively . 
although the process of meiosis is related to the more general cell division process of mitosis ,  it differs in two important respects: meiosis begins with a diploid cell ,  which contains two copies of each chromosome ,  termed homologs . 
meiosis ii is the second meiotic division ,  and usually involves equational segregation ,  or separation of sister chromatids . 
minix is now developed as open-source software . 
minix 3 currently supports ia-32 and arm architecture systems . 
early versions of minix were created by andrew s .  tanenbaum for educational purposes . 
minix 1 was system-call compatible with seventh edition unix . 
andrew s .  tanenbaum created minix at vrije universiteit in amsterdam to exemplify the principles conveyed in his textbook ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1987 -rrb- . 
muscular dystrophy  -lrb-  md  -rrb-  is a group of muscle diseases that results in increasing weakening and breakdown of skeletal muscles over time . 
the mongols  -lrb-   ,  `` mongolchuud '' ,    -rrb-  are an east-central asian ethnic group native to mongolia and to china's inner mongolia autonomous region . 
broadly defined ,  the term includes the mongols proper  -lrb-  also known as the khalkha mongols  -rrb-  ,  buryats ,  oirats ,  the kalmyk people and the southern mongols . 
the khitan  -rrb-  . 
in 2007, about 70% of all comics sold in germany were manga . 
simultaneously ,  tokyopop introduced original english-language manga  -lrb-  oel manga  -rrb-  later renamed `` global manga '' . 
 ''manga no kuni '' handed its title to `` sashie manga kenkyū '' in august 1940.
in japan ,  people of all ages read manga . 
at a `` manga kissa '' ,  people drink coffee ,  read manga and sometimes stay overnight . 
writers on manga history have described two broad and complementary processes shaping modern manga . 
manga stories are typically printed in black-and-white ,  although some full-color manga exist  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  `` colorful ''  -rrb-  . 
some of the manga featured speech balloons ,  where other manga from the previous eras did not use speech balloons and were silent . 
the kyoto international manga museum maintains a very large website listing manga published in japanese . 
the manga industry has expanded worldwide ,  where distribution companies license and reprint manga into their native languages . 
francophone artists have also developed their own versions of manga  -lrb-  `` manfra ''  -rrb-  ,  like frédéric boilet's `` la nouvelle manga '' . 
in 2006 they represented about a tenth of manga books and magazines sales . 
by the 21st century several u . s .  manga publishers had begun to produce work by u . s .  artists under the broad marketing-label of manga . 
the rise web manga has also been credited to smartphones and computers as more and more readers read manga on their phones rather than from a print publication . 
in recent years ,  there has been a recent rise in manga released digitally . 
in japanese ,  `` manga '' refers to all kinds of cartooning ,  comics ,  and animation . 
 ''manga '' as a term used outside japan refers to comics originally published in japan . 
manga has influenced european cartooning in a way that is somewhat different from in the u . s .  broadcast anime in france and italy opened the european market to manga during the 1970s . 
mexico city is located in the valley of mexico ,  sometimes called the basin of mexico . 
greater mexico city is formed by mexico city ,  60 municipalities from the state of mexico and one from the state of hidalgo . 
in 1980 half of all the industrial jobs in mexico were located in mexico city . 
the above municipalities are located in the state of mexico but are part of the greater mexico city area . 
mexico city is known for having some of the freshest fish and seafood in mexico's interior . 
the boroughs of mexico city with their 2010 populations are:
mexico city ,  or the city of mexico  -lrb-   ,  ; abbreviated as cdmx ,    -rrb-  ,  is the capital of mexico and the most populous city in north america . 
in 1921, mexico city had less than one million inhabitants . 
mexico city's hdi for the 2005 report was of 0.9012  -lrb-  very high  -rrb-  ,  and its 2010 value of 0.9225  -lrb-  very high  -rrb-  ,  or  -lrb-  by newer methodology  -rrb-  0.8307, was mexico's highest . 
texcoco and then toluca became the capital of the state of mexico . 
mexico city offers a variety of cuisines . 
greater mexico city has a gdp of $411 billion in 2011, making greater mexico city one of the most productive urban areas in the world . 
mexico city primarily rests on what was lake texcoco . 
in terms of population ,  the biggest municipalities that are part of greater mexico city  -lrb-  excluding mexico city proper  -rrb-  are:
the battle for mexico city was the series of engagements from september 8 to 15, 1847, in the general vicinity of mexico city during the u . s .  mexican war . 
only a small section of the original lake remains ,  located outside mexico city ,  in the municipality of atenco ,  state of mexico . 
the net migration rate of mexico city from 1995 to 2000 was negative . 
mexico city is a destination for many foreign tourists . 
the net migration rate of mexico city proper from 1995 to 2000 was negative ,  which implies that residents are moving to the suburbs of the metropolitan area ,  or to other states of mexico . 
mexico city ,  being the seat of the powers of the union ,  belongs not to any particular state but to all of them . 
mexico city is one of the most important economic hubs in latin america . 
greater mexico city was the fastest growing metropolitan area in the country until the late 1980s . 
tenochtitlan was renamed `` mexico '' because the spanish found the word easier to pronounce . 
the secretariat of public security of mexico city  -lrb-  secretaría de seguridad pública de la ciudad de méxico – ssp  -rrb-  manages a combined force of over 90,000 officers in mexico city . 
the legislative assembly of mexico city is formed ,  as it is the case for state legislatures in mexico ,  by both single-seat and proportional seats ,  making it a system of parallel voting . 
mexico city has one of the world's fastest-growing economies and its gdp is set to double by 2020.
mexico city is home to a number of orchestras offering season programs . 
by that time ,  the total number of municipalities within mexico city was twenty-two . 
the two main candidates to become the capital were mexico city and querétaro . 
the investigative judicial police of mexico city  -lrb-  policía judicial de la ciudad de méxico – pjcdmx  -rrb-  is organized under the office of the attorney general of mexico city  -lrb-  the procuraduría general de justicia de la ciudad de méxico  -rrb-  . 
mexico city is served by the `` sistema de transporte colectivo '' ,  a metro system ,  which is the largest in latin america . 
after the mexican revolution ,  an avant-garde artistic movement originated in mexico city: muralism . 
according to the 44th article of the mexican constitution ,  if the powers of the union move to another city ,  mexico city would become a new state ,  the `` state of the valley of mexico '' ,  with the new limits set by the congress of the union . 
under the rule of porfirio díaz ,  mexico city experienced a massive transformation . 
current estimates are as high as 700,000 u . s .  americans living in mexico city ,  while in 1999 the u . s .  bureau of consular affairs estimated over 440,000 americans lived in the mexico city metropolitan area . 
historically ,  and since pre-columbian times ,  the valley of anahuac has been one of the most densely populated areas in mexico . 
on january 29, 2016, mexico city ceased to be the `` federal district ''  -lrb-  spanish: `` distrito federal '' or d . f .   -rrb-  . 
many of mexico city's major attractions and landmarks were built during this era in this style . 
mexico city has numerous museums dedicated to art ,  including mexican colonial ,  modern and contemporary art ,  and international art . 
this area did not include the population centers of the towns of coyoacán ,  xochimilco ,  mexicaltzingo and tlalpan ,  all of which remained as part of the state of mexico . 
mexico city is home to the largest population of u . s .  americans living outside the united states . 
approximately 75%  -lrb-  10 million  -rrb-  of the state of méxico's population live in municipalities that are part of greater mexico city's conurbation . 
in 2002, mexico city had a human development index score of 0.915, identical to that of south korea . 
the most recognizable icon of mexico city is the golden angel of independence on the wide ,  elegant avenue paseo de la reforma ,  modeled by the order of the emperor maximilian of mexico after the champs-élysées in paris . 
northwest of mexico city itself is ciudad satélite ,  a vast middle to upper-middle-class residential and business area . 
the central department was integrated by the former municipalities of mexico city ,  tacuba ,  tacubaya and mixcoac . 
between 1325 and 1521, tenochtitlan grew in size and strength ,  eventually dominating the other city-states around lake texcoco and in the valley of mexico . 
the city had been the capital of the aztec empire and in the colonial era ,  mexico city became the capital of new spain . 
up to the 1990s ,  the federal district was the most populous federal entity in mexico ,  but since then its population has remained stable at around 8.7 million . 
in 2009, there were plantings of swiss merlot . 
merlot is a dark blue-colored wine grape variety ,  that is used as both a blending grape and for varietal wines . 
merlot is the most commonly grown grape variety in france . 
in romania ,  merlot is the most widely exported red wine grape variety with in cultivation in 2008.
in switzerland ,  merlot accounts for nearly 85% of the wine production in ticino where it is often made in a pale `` white merlot '' style . 
along with cabernet sauvignon ,  cabernet franc ,  malbec and petit verdot ,  merlot is one of the primary grapes used in bordeaux wine ,  and it is the most widely planted grape in the bordeaux wine regions . 
merlot grapes are identified by their loose bunches of large berries . 
in areas that are too warm ,  merlot will ripen too early . 
the `` strada del merlot '' is a popular tourist route through italian merlot regions along the isonzo river . 
the area planted to merlot has continued to increase ,  with in 2015.
in germany ,  there were of merlot growing in 2008 with the grape mostly planted in the warmer german wine regions of the palatinate and rheinhessen . 
over the years ,  merlot has spawned a color mutation that is used commercially ,  a pink-skinned variety known as `` merlot gris '' . 
on may 20, 2010, the film was scorsese's highest-grossing film . 
the film was released on december 23, 2016.
paramount pictures will distribute the film . 
2 on their list of the top 10 gangster films  -lrb-  after `` the godfather ''  -rrb-  . 
scorsese often casts the same actors in his films ,  particularly robert de niro ,  who collaborated with scorsese for eight feature films and one short film . 
this film was intended to be the first of scorsese's semiautobiographical j .  r .  trilogy ,  which also would have included a later film ,  `` mean streets '' . 
since the 1990s ,  scorsese has increased his role as a film producer . 
 ''the departed '' also received the academy award for the best motion picture of 2006, best adapted screenplay ,  and best film editing by longtime scorsese editor thelma schoonmaker ,  her third win for a scorsese film . 
german director wim wenders numbered it among his 15 favorite films . 
in the 2012 `` sight & sound '' polls ,  held every 10 years to select the greatest films of all time ,  contemporary directors were asked to select 10 films of their choice . 
many of his films are also known for their depiction of violence and liberal use of profanity . 
following the film's release ,  cassavetes encouraged scorsese to make the films that he wanted to make ,  rather than someone else's projects . 
however ,  scorsese's commitments to other projects delayed the release of the film until 1978.
the film also marked the first time scorsese used wide-screen panavision with an aspect ratio of 2.35:1.
 ''hugo '' is scorsese's first 3d film and was released in the united states on november 23, 2011.
during the filming scorsese played a background part as a gambler at one of the tables . 
the film also met with widespread box office success and gained academy recognition . 
its world premiere was at the opening of the 58th berlinale film festival on february 7, 2008.
 ''taxi driver '' won the palme d'or at the 1976 cannes film festival ,  also receiving four oscar nominations ,  including best picture . 
scorsese attended new york university's tisch school of the arts  -lrb-  b . a .  ,  english ,  1964; m . f . a .  ,  film ,  1966 -rrb- making the short films `` what's a nice girl like you doing in a place like this ? `` 
the documentary foreshadowed the director's next project ,  the epic `` gangs of new york ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- ,  influenced by  -lrb-  amongst many others  -rrb-  major italian directors such as luchino visconti and filmed in its entirety at rome's famous cinecittà film studios . 
the film premiered in october 2015 in conjunction with the grand opening of studio city . 
on february 12, 2012, at the 65th british academy film awards ,  scorsese was the recipient of the bafta academy fellowship award . 
 ''the aviator '' was nominated for six golden globe awards ,  including best motion picture—drama ,  best director ,  best screenplay ,  and best actor—motion picture drama for leonardo dicaprio . 
he lives and works in new york city . 
martin scorsese's direction of `` the departed '' earned him his second golden globe for best director ,  as well as a critics' choice award ,  his first directors guild of america award ,  and the academy award for best director . 
more recently ,  his films have featured corrupt authority figures ,  such as policemen in `` the departed '' and politicians in `` gangs of new york '' and `` the aviator '' . 
he is a recipient of the afi life achievement award for his contributions to the cinema ,  and has won an academy award ,  a palme d'or ,  cannes film festival best director award ,  silver lion ,  grammy award ,  emmys ,  golden globes ,  baftas ,  and directors guild of america awards . 
in february 2003, `` gangs of new york '' received 10 academy award nominations ,  including best picture ,  best director ,  and best actor for daniel day-lewis; however ,  it did not win in any category . 
he has directed works such as the crime film `` mean streets ''  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- ,  the vigilante-thriller `` taxi driver ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  the biographical sports drama `` raging bull ''  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- ,  the black comedies `` the king of comedy ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- ,  and `` after hours ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- ,  the religious epic drama `` the last temptation of christ ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- ,  the crime film `` goodfellas ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- ,  the psychological thriller `` cape fear ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- and the crime film `` casino ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  some of which he collaborated on with actor and close friend robert de niro . 
the film was well received by most critics; some even hailed it as one of the most original american films of all time . 
 ''time out '' magazine called it `` one of the best american films of the decade '' . 
mean streets is a 1973 american crime film directed by martin scorsese and co-written by scorsese and mardik martin . 
 ''mean streets '' was released on vhs and betamax in 1985.
apart from his first actual feature ,  `` who's that knocking at my door '' ,  and a directing project given him by early independent film maker roger corman ,  `` boxcar bertha '' ,  this was scorsese's first feature film of his own design . 
four of achard's plays also had broadway runs . 
these themes were expanded upon in two of his most popular plays of the period—1929's `` jean de la lune '' `` john of the moon '' a/k/a `` the dreamer '' and 1932's `` domino '' . 
achard's greatest successes and popularity were in the period between the two world wars when contemporary critics favorably compared him to some of his renowned french predecessors such as pierre de marivaux and alfred de musset . 
marcel achard wrote his first play in 1922 and had a major success the following year when renowned actor-director charles dullin staged his play `` voulez-vous jouer avec moâ ? `` 
he was survived by his wife ,  lily . 
mg is an autoimmune synaptopathy . 
difficulty in holding the head upright may occur . 
weakness of the muscles involved in speaking may lead to dysarthria and hypophonia . 
myasthenia gravis  -lrb-  mg  -rrb-  is a long-term neuromuscular disease that leads to varying degrees of skeletal muscle weakness . 
the weakness of the muscles involved in swallowing may lead to swallowing difficulty  -lrb-  dysphagia  -rrb-  . 
in 1990, microsoft introduced its office suite ,  microsoft office . 
in june 2016, microsoft announced a project named microsoft azure information protection . 
microsoft suffered a loss of more than us$32 billion . 
on march 29, 2013, microsoft launched a patent tracker . 
in august 2018, microsoft released two projects called microsoft accountguard and defending democracy . 
on january 21, 2015, microsoft announced the release of their first interactive whiteboard ,  microsoft surface hub . 
on september 4, 2012, microsoft released windows server 2012.
microsoft's share of the u . s .  smartphone market in january 2016 was 2.7% . 
once microsoft informed ibm of nt ,  the os/2 partnership deteriorated . 
later in the month it converted microsoft teams to gratis . 
microsoft moved to a new home in bellevue ,  washington in january 1979.
since 1988, microsoft's use of per processor licenses has increased . `` 
on july 10, 2018, microsoft revealed the surface go platform to the public . 
the novel was a radical departure from coupland's previous novel ,  `` life after god '' . 
the plot of the novel has two distinct movements: the events at microsoft in redmond ,  washington ,  and the move to silicon valley and the `` oop ! `` 
the novel begins in redmond as the characters are working on different projects at microsoft's main campus . 
project . 
the story would later be expanded into the novel . 
coupland's novel anticipated the outcome of the late-1990s dot-com bubble with his depiction of the oop ! 
moscow is one of russia's federal cities . 
moscow is also one of the twelve hero cities . 
moscow is the seat of power of the government of russia ,  being the site of the moscow kremlin ,  a medieval city-fortress that is today the residence for work of the president of russia . 
in oceanography ,  it is sometimes called the `` eurafrican mediterranean sea '' or the `` european mediterranean sea '' to distinguish it from mediterranean seas elsewhere . 
the ancient greeks called the mediterranean simply 'the sea' or sometimes 'the great sea' ,  'our sea' ,  or 'the sea around us' . 
the temperature of the water in the deepest part of the mediterranean sea is  . 
the long artificial suez canal in the southeast connects the mediterranean sea to the red sea . 
in 2015, more than one million migrants crossed the mediterranean sea into europe . 
the carthaginians called it the `` syrian sea '' . 
the mediterranean sea has an average depth of and the deepest recorded point is in the calypso deep in the ionian sea . 
the mediterranean sea ,  including the sea of marmara  -lrb-  connected by the dardanelles to the aegean sea  -rrb-  ,  has a surface area of approximately 2,510,000 square km  -lrb-  970,000 square miles  -rrb-  . 
other arabic names were `` baḥr al-šām -lrb-  ī  -rrb- ``   -lrb-    -rrb-  'the sea of syria' and `` baḥr al-maghrib ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  'the sea of the west' . 
the original meaning may have been 'the sea in the middle of the earth' ,  rather than 'the sea enclosed by land' . 
in turkish ,  it is the `` akdeniz '' 'the white sea'; in ottoman ,  ﺁق دكيز ,  which sometimes means only the aegean sea . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the mediterranean sea as follows:
the teacher and learner were then separated such that they could communicate ,  but not see each other . 
if correct ,  the teacher would read the next word pair . 
the experimenter also had prods to use if the teacher made specific comments . 
the actor would always claim to have drawn the slip that read `` learner '' ,  thus guaranteeing that the subject would always be the `` teacher '' . 
the subjects believed that for each wrong answer ,  the learner was receiving actual shocks . 
next ,  the teacher and learner were taken into an adjacent room where the learner was strapped into what appeared to be an electric chair . 
if the teacher said that the learner clearly wants to stop ,  the experimenter replied ,  `` whether the learner likes it or not ,  you must go on until he has learned all the word pairs correctly ,  so please go on . `` 
at some point prior to the actual test ,  the teacher was given a sample electric shock from the electroshock generator in order to experience firsthand what the shock that the learner would supposedly receive during the experiment would feel like . 
they predicted that by the 300-volt shock ,  when the victim refuses to answer ,  only 3.73 percent of the subjects would still continue and ,  they believed that `` only a little over one-tenth of one percent of the subjects would administer the highest shock on the board . `` 
the miocene  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the first geological epoch of the neogene period and extends from about  -lrb-  ma  -rrb-  . 
in the seas of the miocene ,  kelp forests made their first appearance and soon became one of earth's most productive ecosystems . 
a king can also be a queen's husband and a queen can be a king's wife . 
a monarch is a sovereign head of state in a monarchy . 
while traditionally most monarchs have been male ,  female monarchs have also ruled ,  and the term queen regnant refers to a ruling monarch ,  as distinct from a queen consort ,  the wife of a reigning king . 
a monarch usually reigns for life or until abdication . 
in modern history ,  between 1925 and 1979, iran was ruled by two emperors from the pahlavi dynasty that used the title of `` shahanshah ''  -lrb-  or `` king of kings ''  -rrb-  . 
monarchs ,  as such ,  bear a variety of titles – king or queen ,  prince or princess  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  sovereign prince of monaco  -rrb-  ,  emperor or empress  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  emperor of china ,  emperor of ethiopia ,  emperor of japan ,  emperor of india  -rrb-  ,  archduke ,  duke or grand duke  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  grand duke of luxembourg  -rrb-  ,  emir  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  emir of qatar  -rrb-  or sultan  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  sultan of oman  -rrb-  . 
a monarch can reign in multiple monarchies simultaneously . 
if a young child is crowned the monarch ,  a regent is often appointed to govern until the monarch reaches the requisite adult age to rule . 
thailand and bhutan are like the united kingdom in that they are constitutional monarchies ruled by a king . 
most modern constitutional monarchies  -rrb-  real leadership does not depend on the monarch . 
in some monarchies ,  such as saudi arabia ,  succession to the throne usually first passes to the monarch's next eldest brother and so on through his other brothers ,  and only after them to the monarch's children  -lrb-  `` agnatic seniority ''  -rrb-  . 
in the horn of africa ,  the kingdom of aksum and later the zagwe dynasty ,  ethiopian empire  -lrb-  1270–1974 -rrb- ,  and aussa sultanate were ruled by a series of monarchs . 
as part of the scramble for africa ,  europeans conquered ,  bought ,  or established african kingdoms and styled themselves as monarchs due to them . 
most states only have a single person acting as monarch at any given time ,  although two monarchs have ruled simultaneously in some countries ,  a situation known as diarchy . 
the sixteen separate commonwealth realms are sometimes described as being in a personal union with queen elizabeth ii as monarch ,  however ,  they can also be described as being in a shared monarchy . 
monarchies are associated with political or sociocultural hereditary rule ,  in which monarchs rule for life  -lrb-  although some monarchs do not hold lifetime positions: for example ,  the yang di-pertuan agong of malaysia serves a five-year term  -rrb-  and pass the responsibilities and power of the position to their child or another member of their family when they die . 
the chinese ,  japanese and nepalese monarchs continued to be considered living gods into the modern period . 
the role of the roman emperor as the protector of christianity was conflated with the sacral aspects held by the germanic kings to create the notion of `` divine right of kings '' in the christian middle ages . 
in a personal union ,  separate independent states share the same person as monarch ,  but each realm retains its separate laws and government . 
the word `` monarch ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  comes from the greek language word μονάρχης ,  `` monárkhēs ''  -lrb-  from μόνος `` monos '' ,  `` one ,  singular '' ,  and ἄρχω `` árkhō '' ,  `` to rule ''  -lrb-  compare ἄρχων `` arkhon '' ,  `` leader ,  ruler ,  chief ''  -rrb-   -rrb-  which referred to a single ,  at least nominally absolute ruler . 
in 1988, mr .  t starred in the television series `` t .  and t '' . 
mr .  t entered the world of professional wrestling in 1985.
in 2008, mr .  t appeared on the american channel `` shopping tv '' selling his `` mr .  t flavorwave oven . `` 
starting in 2011, mr .  t presented a clip show on bbc three named `` world's craziest fools '' . 
the year 1983 also marked the release of the only film that can be called a mr .  t vehicle ,  `` dc cab '' . 
on march 1, 2017, mr .  t was revealed as one of the contestants who would compete on season 24 of `` dancing with the stars '' . 
a .  baracus ,  mr .  t observed quietly ,  `` it takes a smart guy to play dumb . `` 
in 1984, mr .  t released an album titled `` mr .  t's commandments ''  -lrb-  columbia/cbs records  -rrb-  ,  in much the same tone as his 1984 educational video ,  which instructed children to stay in school and to stay away from drugs . 
his role in `` the a-team '' led to him making an appearance in the long-running sit-com `` diff'rent strokes '' in the sixth season opener `` mr t .  and mr .  t ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- ,  in which an episode of `` the a-team '' is supposedly filmed in the family's penthouse apartment . 
remaining with the wwf ,  mr .  t became a special `` wwf boxer '' in light of his character in `` rocky iii '' . 
on april 10, 2017, mr .  t and herjavec were the third couple to be eliminated from the competition ,  finishing in 10th place . 
piper has said that he and other fellow wrestlers disliked mr .  t because he was an actor and had never paid his dues as a professional wrestler . 
the brand ,  owned by coca-cola ,  also briefly centered its social profiles and website around mr .  t . 
another seven years later mr .  t appeared in the front row of the november 19, 2001, episode of `` wwf raw '' . 
 ''malmö tätort '' is to be distinguished from `` malmö stad ''  -lrb-  the city of malmö  -rrb-  ,  which is a semi-official name of malmö municipality . 
by 1985, malmö had lost 35,000 inhabitants and was down to 229,000.
the leaders in malmö created a commission for a socially sustainable malmö in november 2010.
after 1971, malmö had 265,000 inhabitants ,  but the population then dropped to 229,000 by 1985.
by the dawn of the 18th century ,  malmö had about 2,300 inhabitants . 
the malmö metropolitan region is home to over 700,000 people ,  and the øresund region ,  which includes malmö ,  is home to 4 million people . 
on 18 and 19 december 1914, the `` three kings meeting '' was held in malmö . 
 -lrb-  svedala was ,  for a few years in the early 1970s ,  a part of malmö municipality .   -rrb- 
the earliest written mention of malmö as a city dates from 1275.
malmö  -lrb-  `` malmö tätort ''  -rrb-  consists of the urban part of the municipality together with the small town of arlöv in the burlöv municipality . 
within sports ,  malmö has mostly been associated with football . 
in 1914  -lrb-  15 may to 4 october  -rrb-  malmö hosted the baltic exhibition . 
malmö ,  like the rest of southern sweden ,  has an oceanic climate . 
the metric system is a decimal system of measurement based on its units for length ,  the metre and for mass ,  the kilogram . 
there are two types of si units ,  base units and derived units . 
measurements most commonly use the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  as a comparison framework . 
the metric system features a single base unit for many physical quantities . 
the international system of units  -lrb-  abbreviated as si from the french language name `` système international d'unités ''  -rrb-  is the modern revision of the metric system . 
before si units were widely adopted around the world ,  the british systems of english units and later imperial units were used in britain ,  the commonwealth and the united states . 
the island is designated as the `` malden island wildlife sanctuary '' . 
the total area of the island is about  . 
other nearby islands  -lrb-  all uninhabited  -rrb-  include jarvis island ,  to the northwest ,  vostok island ,  to the south-southeast ,  and caroline  -lrb-  millennium  -rrb-  island ,  to the southeast . 
the island is very low ,  no more than above sea level at its highest point . 
malden was claimed by the u . s . 
malden island is located south of the equator ,  south of honolulu ,  hawaii ,  and more than west of the coast of south america . 
this company and its successors exploited the island continuously from the 1860s through 1927.
malden island ,  sometimes called independence island in the nineteenth century ,  is a low ,  arid ,  uninhabited atoll in the central pacific ocean ,  about in area . 
this tramway remained in use on malden as late as 1924, and its roadbed still exists on the island today . 
there is no standing fresh water on malden island ,  though a fresh water lens may exist . 
the yod and waw in particular are more often vowels than they are consonants . 
at the end of a word ,  he can also be used to indicate that a vowel `` a '' should be pronounced . 
in pre-exilic hebrew ,  there was a significant development of the use of the letter he to indicate word final vowels other than `` ī '' and `` ū '' . 
syriac-aramaic vowels are classified into three groups: the alap  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  the waw  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and the yod  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
historically ,  the practice of using `` matres lectionis '' seems to have originated when and diphthongs ,  written with the yod and the waw consonant letters respectively ,  monophthongized to simple long vowels and  . 
the difference between the spelling of the third-person singular possessive suffix  -lrb-  as attached to singular nouns  -rrb-  with he in early hebrew vs .  with waw in later hebrew has become an issue in the authentication of the jehoash inscription . 
after some weeks ,  eliza is introduced to freddy eynsford-hill . 
eliza's final test requires her to pass as a lady at the embassy ball . 
eliza's accent is now refined ,  and she is now being educated on how to function as a debutante in high society . 
in suppressed joy at their reunion ,  professor higgins scoffs and asks ,  `` eliza ,  where the devil are my slippers ? `` 
martial arts films are a subgenre of action films ,  which feature numerous martial arts fights between characters . 
martial arts films contain many characters who are martial artists ,  and these roles are often played by actors who are real martial artists . 
in the chinese-speaking world ,  martial arts films are commonly divided into two subcategories: the `` wuxia '' period films  -lrb-  武俠片  -rrb-  ,  and the more modern kung fu films  -lrb-  功夫片 ,  best epitomized in the films of bruce lee  -rrb-  . 
as with other action films ,  martial arts films are dominated by action to varying degrees; many martial arts films have only a minimal plot and amount of character development and focus almost exclusively on the action ,  while other martial arts films have more creative and complex plots and characters along with action scenes . 
hollywood released more than 100 musical films in 1930, but only 14 in 1931.
the musical film was a natural development of the stage musical after the emergence of sound film technology . 
musical short films were made by lee de forest in 1923–24.
pixar also produced `` coco '' ,  the very first computer-animated musical film by the company . 
musical film is a film genre in which songs sung by the characters are interwoven into the narrative ,  sometimes accompanied by dancing . 
a number of film musicals were still being made that were financially and/or critically less successful than in the musical's heyday . 
many animated films of the period – predominately from disney – included traditional musical numbers . 
in addition to the academy award for best original song  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- ,  the film earned an ascap film and television award  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- for bob hope's signature song `` thanks for the memory . 
the 1930s through the early 1950s are considered to be the golden age of the musical film ,  when the genre's popularity was at its highest in the western world . 
the most successful musicals of the 1960s created specifically for film were `` mary poppins '' and `` the jungle book '' ,  two of disney's biggest hits of all time . 
motala municipality  -lrb-  `` motala kommun ''  -rrb-  is a municipality in östergötland county in southeast sweden . 
maltese has five short vowels ,   ,  written `` a e i o u ''; six long vowels ,   ,  written `` a e ie i o u ''; and seven diphthongs: both written `` għi '' ,  both written `` għu '' ,  and written `` ew iw oj '' . 
it remains the only standardized semitic language written in the latin script . 
many examples of written maltese exist from before this period ,  always in the latin alphabet ,  `` il cantilena '' being the earliest example of written maltese . 
final vowels with grave accents  -lrb-  à ,  è ,  ì ,  ò ,  ù  -rrb-  are also found in some maltese words of italian origin ,  such as `` libertà ''  -lrb-  `` freedom ''  -rrb-  ,  `` sigurtà ''  -lrb-  old italian: `` sicurtà '' ,  `` security ''  -rrb-  ,  or `` soċjetà ''  -lrb-  italian: `` società '' ,  `` society ''  -rrb-  . 
the first written reference to the maltese language is in a will of 1436, where it is called `` lingua maltensi '' . 
urban varieties of maltese are closer to standard maltese than rural varieties ,  which have some characteristics that distinguish them from standard maltese . 
in general ,  rural maltese is less distant from its siculo-arabic ancestor than standard maltese . 
during the british colonial period ,  the use of english was encouraged through education ,  with italian regarded as the next-most important language . 
sil reports six varieties ,  besides standard maltese: gozo ,  port maltese ,  rural central maltese ,  rural east maltese ,  rural west maltese ,  and zurrieq . 
in contrast to sicily  -lrb-  where siculo-arabic became extinct ,  replaced by sicilian  -rrb-  ,  the vernacular in malta continued to develop alongside italian ,  eventually replacing it as official language in 1934  -lrb-  alongside english  -rrb-  . 
j .  gordon melton ,  in his `` encyclopedia of american religions '' ,  subdivides the mormons into `` utah mormons '' ,  `` missouri mormons '' ,  `` polygamy-practicing mormons '' ,  and `` other mormons '' . 
nor do most `` missouri mormons '' live in missouri . 
the term `` mormon '' applies to the religion of mormonism ,  as well as its culture ,  texts ,  and art . 
the term `` mormon '' is most often used to refer to members of the lds church . 
the terms `` utah mormon '' and `` missouri mormon '' can be problematic if interpreted to mean more than the location of the various groups' headquarters . 
the mariana trench or marianas trench is located in the western pacific ocean approximately east of the mariana islands ,  and has the deepest natural trench in the world . 
the deepest area at the plate boundary is the mariana trench proper . 
on 26 march ,  he reached the bottom of the mariana trench in the submersible vessel `` deepsea challenger '' . 
during this survey ,  the deepest part of the trench was recorded when the `` challenger ii '' measured a depth of at  ,  known as the challenger deep . 
in 2009, the marianas trench was established as a united states national monument . 
during surveys carried out between 1997 and 2001, a spot was found along the mariana trench that had depth similar to that of the challenger deep ,  possibly even deeper . 
the mariana trench is part of the izu-bonin-mariana subduction system that forms the boundary between two tectonic plates . 
the trench is not the part of the seafloor closest to the centre of the earth . 
the mariana trench is named for the nearby mariana islands  -lrb-  in turn named las marianas in honor of spanish queen mariana of austria ,  widow of philip iv of spain  -rrb-  . 
 ,  at least two other teams are planning piloted submarines to reach the bottom of the mariana trench . 
prior to the codification of the standard language  -lrb-  standard macedonian  -rrb-  ,  macedonian dialects were described by linguists as being either dialects of bulgarian or serbian . 
all south slavic languages ,  including macedonian ,  form a dialect continuum . 
bulgarian and macedonian are the only indo-european languages that make use of the narrative mood . 
the term is derived from french `` municipalité '' and latin `` municipalis '' . 
a municipality can be any political jurisdiction from a sovereign state ,  such as the principality of monaco ,  to a small village ,  such as west hampton dunes ,  new york . 
all other metals are light metals . 
a heavy metal is any relatively dense metal or metalloid . 
a metal may be a chemical element such as iron ,  or an alloy such as stainless steel . 
metallic scandium was produced for the first time in 1937.
an alloy is a substance having metallic properties and which is composed of two or more elements at least one of which is a metal . 
other significant metallic alloys are those of aluminium ,  titanium ,  copper and magnesium . 
the methods used depend on the metal and their contaminants . 
metals are relatively good conductors of heat . 
the earth's crust is made of approximately 25% of metals by weight ,  of which 80% are light metals such as sodium ,  magnesium ,  and aluminium . 
a metallic glass  -lrb-  also known as an amorphous or glassy metal  -rrb-  is a solid metallic material ,  usually an alloy ,  with disordered atomic-scale structure . 
globally ,  metal recycling is generally low . 
when a metal ore is an ionic compound of that metal and a non-metal ,  the ore must usually be smelted—heated with a reducing agent—to extract the pure metal . 
in alchemy and numismatics ,  the term base metal is contrasted with precious metal ,  that is ,  those of high economic value . 
while pure metallic titanium  -lrb-  99.9%  -rrb-  was first prepared in 1910 it was not used outside the laboratory until 1932.
chemically ,  the precious metals  -lrb-  like the noble metals  -rrb-  are less reactive than most elements ,  have high luster and high electrical conductivity . 
by 1900 three metals with atomic numbers less than lead  -lrb-  #82 -rrb- ,  the heaviest stable metal ,  remained to be discovered: elements 71, 72, 75.
other precious metals include the platinum group metals: ruthenium ,  rhodium ,  palladium ,  osmium ,  iridium ,  and platinum ,  of which platinum is the most widely traded . 
the strength of metallic bonds for different elemental metals reaches a maximum around the center of the transition metal series ,  as these elements have large numbers of delocalized electrons . 
precious metals were historically used as coinage ,  but in the modern era ,  coinage metals have extended to at least 23 of the chemical elements . 
the history of metals is thought to begin with the use of copper about 11,000 years ago . 
in materials science ,  metallurgy ,  and engineering ,  a refractory metal is a metal that is extraordinarily resistant to heat and wear . 
ulloa was the first person to write a scientific description of the metal ,  in 1748.
the thermal conductivity of metals is useful for containers to heat materials over a flame . 
metals are present in nearly all aspects of modern life . 
metals are usually inclined to form cations through electron loss . 
silver is substantially less expensive than these metals ,  but is often traditionally considered a precious metal in light of its role in coinage and jewelry . 
the high reflectivity of some metals enables their use in mirrors ,  including precision astronomical instruments ,  and adds to the aesthetics of metallic jewelry . 
in chemistry ,  the term `` base metal '' is used informally to refer to a metal that is easily oxidized or corroded ,  such as reacting easily with dilute hydrochloric acid  -lrb-  hcl  -rrb-  to form a metal chloride and hydrogen . 
some metals and metal alloys possess high structural strength per unit mass ,  making them useful materials for carrying large loads or resisting impact damage . 
metals are also used for heat sinks to protect sensitive equipment from overheating . 
in astrophysics the term `` metal '' is cast more widely to refer to all chemical elements in a star that are heavier than the lightest two ,  hydrogen and helium ,  and not just traditional metals . 
metals are primarily found as lithophiles  -lrb-  rock-loving  -rrb-  or chalcophiles  -lrb-  ore-loving  -rrb-  . 
other metals discovered and prepared during this time were cobalt ,  nickel ,  manganese ,  molybdenum ,  tungsten ,  and chromium; and some of the platinum group metals ,  palladium ,  osmium ,  iridium ,  and rhodium . 
multipurpose internet mail extensions  -lrb-  mime  -rrb-  is an internet standard that extends the format of email to support:
