x x + 101 = 11
a second book was planned but never written that would have added four more sections to the dictionary: `` matter '' ,  `` earth '' ,  `` life '' and `` behavior 2 '' . 
the book separately teaches ver and fal for true and false . 
note the difference between `` good '' and `` bad '' as compared to `` true '' and `` false ''; 10/4 is a true answer to the question ,  so `` ver ''  -lrb-  `` true ''  -rrb-  would be a valid response ,  but since it wasn't reduced to lowest terms ,  it wasn't what ha wanted and so he responded `` mal ''  -lrb-  `` bad ''  -rrb-  instead . 
an example of lincos from section 3 of freudenthal's book ,  showing one individual asking another individual questions:
as of 2008, the cave contained black mold . 
the opening of lascaux cave after world war ii changed the cave environment . 
lascaux  -lrb-   ,  `` lascaux cave '';  ,    -rrb-  is the setting of a complex of caves near the village of montignac ,  in the department of dordogne in southwestern france . 
on september 12, 1940, the entrance to the lascaux cave was discovered by 18-year-old marcel ravidat when his dog fell in a hole . 
the lascaux valley is located some distance from the major concentrations of decorated caves and inhabited sites ,  most of which were discovered further downstream . 
lascaux was inducted into the unesco world heritage sites list in 1979, as element of the `` prehistoric sites and decorated caves of the vézère valley '' . 
in 2007, a new fungus ,  which has created grey and black blemishes ,  began spreading in the real cave . 
the problem is ongoing ,  as are efforts to control the microbial and fungal growths in the cave . 
luthor then muses about the potential uses of kryptonite on superman . 
 ''birthright '' was initially intended to establish a new origin for superman and luthor . 
luthor has shown an unusual level of compassion for conner kent ,  a hybrid clone created from the dna of superman and luthor himself . 
luthor's obsessive hatred of superman came later in the character's development . 
luthor serves fewer than three years . 
james d .  hudnall's ``  '' further expands on luthor's origin . 
the pre-crisis luthor also has a niece named nasthalthia luthor  -lrb-  apparently luthor had an older sister who had run away  -rrb-  who is an occasional thorn in supergirl's side . 
in the last panel ,  amazing man is in jail and he tells superboy he will regret it as sure as his name is luthor and superboy thinks that he will be superman by the time luthor gets out and that luthor's talents might make him an archenemy . 
lex luthor first appeared in `` action comics '' #23  -lrb-  april 1940 -rrb- and has since endured as the archenemy of superman . 
after a disastrous defeat by superman ,  luthor decides to retire and go to lexor permanently . 
in the pre- ''crisis '' continuity ,  luthor is shown as having very few personal attachments . 
after its debut ,  lexor appears sporadically in various superman comics as a retreat for luthor while he continues to wage assaults on superman . 
luthor also had a pseudo-romantic relationship with the `` loisbot '' ,  and regularly slept with it . 
the modern age lex luthor is a product of child abuse and early poverty . 
the war department later asked for dailies of the `` superman '' comic strip to be pulled in april 1945 which depicted lex luthor bombarding superman with the radiation from a cyclotron . 
for his efforts ,  luthor receives a presidential pardon for his past crimes . 
lex luthor has the physical capabilities of a normal adult human with no metahuman abilities . 
over the years ,  luthor has made liberal use of kryptonite weapons capable of injuring superman and other kryptonians . 
during the `` blackest night '' storyline ,  lex luthor's father lionel luthor was featured where it was revealed that he died of an allergic reaction to his medicine during clark kent's days as superboy . 
when superman's identity is exposed as part of vandal savage's plot to drain his powers ,  superman consults luthor for help ,  but luthor expresses disbelief at the idea that superman could ever be someone like clark kent ,  going along with superman's request for help just to find out the 'real' plan . 
consequently ,  luthor has become extremely skilled in close-range combat . 
in dc's 2016 line-wide relaunch `` dc rebirth '' ,  following the death of the new 52 superman ,  luthor decides to assume superman's symbol in a new suit of battle armor to protect metropolis ,  but he is confronted by the pre- ''flashpoint '' superman ,  who refuses to believe that luthor's intentions are as noble . 
while merged with the entity ,  luthor had the power to bring peace and bliss to the entire universe ,  potentially becoming a hero greater even than superman ,  but luthor fought against that power simply because he would have had to share that bliss with superman as well . 
in both `` jla '' and `` 52 '' ,  grant morrison states that luthor's ego leads him to believe that the only reason superman commits good deeds is to somehow strike at luthor and prove who is better ,  arguing that it is impossible for superman to be as good as he appears to be . 
while investigating luthor in order to root out his motive ,  natasha irons discovers that luthor has been testing himself to see if he is compatible with the artificial metagene treatment . 
in the pre- ''crisis '' continuity ,  lex luthor's driving ambitions are to kill superman and enslave earth as a stepping stone to dominating the universe . 
in the end ,  luthor becomes a permanent prisoner in his own body ,  unable to even blink ,  and swearing vengeance on superman . 
luthor does not physically appear in `` the man of steel '' until the fourth issue ,  which takes place over a year after superman's arrival in metropolis . 
as outlined in a backup profile in the `` 52 '' weekly series ,  the post- ''action comics '' #850 lex luthor in this continuity is the son of business mogul lionel luthor and his socialite spouse ,  leticia . 
in 1944 lex luthor was the first character in a comic book  -lrb-  and one of the first in fiction  -rrb-  to use an atomic bomb . 
the silver/bronze age lex luthor met his non-canonical end in the `` whatever happened to the man of tomorrow ? `` 
afterward ,  luthor is subsequently returned to prison with all his memories of the alliance forgotten . 
lutes are made almost entirely of wood . 
the long lutes were the more ancient lutes; the `` arabic tanbūr .  .  . faithfully preserved the outer appearance of the ancient lutes of babylonia and egypt . `` 
thus an 8-course renaissance lute usually has 15 strings ,  and a 13-course baroque lute has 24.
renaissance and baroque forms of lute music are similar to keyboard music of the periods . 
the interest in lute music was revived only in the second half of the 20th century . 
the line of short-necked lutes was further developed to the east of mesopotamia ,  in bactria and gandhara ,  into a short ,  almond-shaped lute . 
he names among the long lutes ,  the pandura and the tanbur
the earliest surviving lute music is italian ,  from a late 15th-century manuscript . 
the player of a lute is called a `` lutenist '' ,  `` lutanist '' or `` lutist '' ,  and a maker of lutes  -lrb-  or any similar string instrument ,  or violin family instruments  -rrb-  is referred to as a `` luthier '' . 
the lute's design makes it extremely light for its size . 
such concerns are moot when more recent compositions for the lute are performed . 
medieval lutes were 4- or 5-course instruments ,  plucked using a quill as a plectrum . 
musicologist richard dumbrill today uses the word lute more categorically to discuss instruments that existed millennia before the term `` lute '' was coined . 
the history of german written lute music started with arnolt schlick  -lrb-   1460–after 1521 -rrb- ,  who ,  in 1513, published a collection of pieces that included 14 voice and lute songs ,  and three solo lute pieces ,  alongside organ works . 
the lute enjoyed a revival with the awakening of interest in historical music around 1900 and throughout the century . 
 -lrb-  much renaissance lute music can be played on a guitar by tuning the guitar's third string down by a half tone .   -rrb- 
some sorts of lute were still used for some time in germany ,  sweden ,  ukraine . 
however ,  the following seems to have been `` generally '' true of the renaissance lute . 
discoveries since then have pushed the existence of the lute back to c .  3100 b . c . 
the last stage of french lute music is exemplified by robert de visée  -lrb-   1655–1732/3 -rrb- ,  whose suites exploit the instrument's possibilities to the fullest . 
thus an 8-course tenor renaissance lute would be tuned to  ,  and a 10-course to  . 
the little boy pre-assemblies were designated l-1, l-2, l-3, l-4, l-5, l-6, l-7, and l-11.
l-11 was the assembly used for the hiroshima bomb . 
when of uranium-235 undergoes complete fission ,  the yield is 8 kilotons . 
because uranium-235 was known to be fissionable ,  it was the first material pursued in the approach to bomb development . 
inside the weapon ,  the uranium-235 material was divided into two parts ,  following the gun principle: the `` projectile '' and the `` target '' . 
little boy was named by others as an allusion to thin man ,  since it was based on its design . 
although all of its components had been tested ,  no full test of a gun-type nuclear weapon occurred before the little boy was dropped over hiroshima . 
physicist robert serber named the first two atomic bomb designs during world war ii based on their shapes: thin man and fat man . 
the simplified weapon was short enough to fit into a b-29 bomb bay . 
the hiroshima bombing was the second nuclear explosion in history ,  after the trinity test ,  and the first uranium-based detonation . 
after leaving `` creem '' in 1976, he wrote for `` the village voice '' ,  `` penthouse '' ,  `` playboy '' ,  `` new musical express '' ,  and many other publications . 
the music critic jim derogatis called him `` america's greatest rock critic '' . 
bangs's criticism was filled with cultural references ,  not only to rock music but also to literature and philosophy . 
his 1970 review of black sabbath's first album in `` rolling stone '' was scathing ,  rating them as imitators of the band cream:
leslie conway `` lester '' bangs  -lrb-  december 14, 1948 – april 30, 1982 -rrb- was an american music journalist ,  critic ,  author ,  and musician . 
bangs began freelancing for detroit-based `` creem '' in 1970.
– music for theremin '' project . 
lydia kavina is an active promoter of new experimental music for the theremin . 
lydia yevgenyevna kavina  -lrb-  ; born 8 september 1967 -rrb- is a russian-british theremin player . 
mahattaya ,  a one-time deputy leader of ltte ,  was accused of treason by the ltte and killed in 1994.
in 1996, ltte executed 207 military officers and soldiers who had surrendered to the ltte during battle of mullaitivu  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- . 
the ltte was founded on 5 may 1976 as the successor to the tamil new tigers . 
later ,  in 1999 it was confirmed that the vessel had been hijacked by the ltte . 
ipkf had failed to capture it from ltte during its offensive in 1988.
most of the smuggling of tamil people to western countries was carried out by ltte . 
as tamils turned to the ltte for support ,  the muslims were left with the sri lankan state as their sole defender ,  and so to the ltte ,  the muslims had legitimised the role of the state ,  and were thus viewed as sri lankans . 
another practice that increased support by tamil people was ltte's members taking an oath of loyalty which stated ltte's goal of establishing a state for the sri lankan tamils . 
at its peak in 2000, the ltte was in control of 76% of the landmass in the northern and eastern provinces of sri lanka . 
the liberation tigers of tamil eelam  -lrb-   ,   ,  commonly known as the ltte or the tamil tigers  -rrb-  was a tamil militant organization that was based in northeastern sri lanka . 
moreover ,  millions of dollars were also passed on to the ltte . 
ltte had coerced sri lankan tamil diaspora and tamil civilians in sri lanka to give it money ,  by threatening the safety of their relatives or property in areas under its control . 
32 countries currently list the ltte as a terrorist organisation . 
ltte used female cadres for military engagements . 
the european union banned ltte as a terrorist organisation on 17 may 2006.
ltte is also known to use the internet for criminal profit . 
a ceasefire held between ltte and the government from june 1989 to june 1990, but broke down as ltte massacred 600 police officers in the eastern province . 
the ltte has been accused of recruiting and using child soldiers to fight against sri lankan government forces . 
with the end of the hostilities ,  11,664 ltte members ,  including 595 child soldiers surrendered to the sri lankan military . 
the ltte has launched attacks on civilian targets several times . 
the first country to ban the ltte was its brief one-time ally ,  india . 
arms procurement and shipping activities of ltte were largely clandestine . 
this gives a semblance of illusion that the whole society is behind the ltte . `` 
ltte was also involved in credit card fraud ,  in the united kingdom . 
this ,  in turn motivated ltte cadres to join the black tiger wing . 
uma maheswaran left ltte and formed people's liberation organisation of tamil eelam  -lrb-  plote  -rrb-  in 1980.
in december 2009, sri lanka navy apprehended a merchant vessel belonged to ltte ,  `` princess chrisanta '' in indonesia and brought it back to sri lanka . 
tamil united liberation front leader appapillai amirthalingam ,  who was in 1977 elected as the opposition leader of sri lanka parliament ,  clandestinely supported the ltte . 
major sections within the political wing include international peace secretariat ,  led by pulidevan ,  ltte police ,  ltte court ,  bank of tamil eelam ,  sports division and the `` voice of tigers '' radio broadcasting station of ltte . 
ltte's last shipment of weapons was in march 2009, towards the end of the war . 
selvarasa pathmanathan succeeded prabhakaran as leader of the ltte ,  but he was later arrested in malaysia and handed over to the sri lankan government in august 2009.
after three months of tensions ,  ltte declared war on ipkf on 7 october 1987.
the ltte argues that instances of child recruitment occurred mostly in the east ,  under the purview of former ltte regional commander colonel karuna . 
the laplace transform is very similar to the fourier transform . 
the laplace transform of a function  ,  defined for all real numbers  ,  is the function  ,  which is a unilateral transform defined by
the laplace transform is invertible on a large class of functions . 
in mathematics ,  the laplace transform is an integral transform named after its inventor pierre-simon laplace  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the egyptian and nigerian schools are universities with a liberal arts component ,  but al akhawayn was founded on the model of an american liberal arts college . 
three institutions in africa are members of the global liberal arts alliance: al akhawayn university in morocco ,  american university of cairo in egypt ,  and american university of nigeria . 
the liberal arts college model took root in the united states in the 19th century ,  as institutions spread that followed the model of early schools like harvard ,  yale ,  and dartmouth ,  although none of these early american schools are regarded as liberal arts colleges today . 
the oldest liberal arts college in america is considered to be washington college ,  the first college chartered after american independence . 
most liberal arts colleges outside the united states follow this model . 
the liberal arts model has traditionally not been part of the educational landscape in the middle east or north africa . 
with the exception of pioneering institutions such as franklin university switzerland ,  established as a europe-based ,  us-style liberal arts college in 1969, saint louis university madrid campus ,  established in 1967, and richmond ,  the american international university in london ,  established in 1972 only recently have efforts been made to import the american liberal arts college model to continental europe . 
the curriculum is patterned after the academic programs that are offered by the university of the philippines and is composed of administrators and faculty members who are also members of the up academic community . 
the smaller size also makes it feasible for liberal arts colleges to adopt relatively experimental or divergent approaches ,  such as the great books curriculum at st .  john's or shimer ,  or the radically interdisciplinary curriculum of marlboro . 
the global liberal arts alliance ,  which incorporates institutions on five continents ,  refers to itself as `` an international ,  multilateral partnership of american style liberal arts institutions . `` 
other researchers have adopted similar definitions . 
there is also reason to believe that children use various heuristics to properly infer the meaning of words . 
deaf children's visual-manual language acquisition not only parallel spoken language acquisition but by the age of 30 months ,  most deaf children that were exposed to a visual language had a more advanced grasp with subject-pronoun copy rules than hearing children . 
children learn ,  on average ,  ten to fifteen new word meanings each day ,  but only one of these words can be accounted for by direct instruction . 
at a very young age ,  children can already distinguish between different sounds but cannot produce them yet . 
despite certain myths about deaf children signing ,  their acquisition of a signed language not only develops normally ,  it exceeds that of a hearing child's at certain points . 
additionally ,  the evidence of such rules in their native language is all indirect—adult speech to children cannot encompass what children know by the time they've acquired their native language . 
language acquisition can be modeled as a machine learning process using grammar induction algorithms . 
at this point in development ,  a child has many more neural connections than he or she will have as an adult ,  allowing for the child to be more able to learn new things than he or she would be as an adult . 
therefore ,  as many studies have shown ,  language acquisition by deaf children parallel the language acquisition of a spoken language by hearing children because humans are biologically equipped for language regardless of the modality . 
generative grammar ,  associated especially with the work of noam chomsky ,  is currently one of the approaches to children's acquisition of syntax . 
language acquisition has been studied from the perspective of developmental psychology and neuroscience ,  which looks at learning to use and understand language parallel to a child's brain development . 
however ,  deaf children of deaf parents tend to do better with language ,  even though they are isolated from sound and speech because their language uses a different mode of communication that is accessible to them; the visual modality of language . 
a child cannot carry out on their own at a given time ,  but can learn to carry out if assisted by an able adult . 
however ,  cochlear implants may not always work . 
statistical learning theory suggests that ,  when learning language ,  a learner would use the natural statistical properties of language to deduce its structure ,  including sound patterns ,  words ,  and the beginnings of grammar . 
the capacity to acquire and use language is a key aspect that distinguishes humans from other beings . 
in the developing child's mind ,  retrieval of that `` block '' may fail ,  causing the child to erroneously apply the regular rule instead of retrieving the irregular . 
since 1980, linguists studying children ,  such as melissa bowerman ,  and psychologists following jean piaget ,  like elizabeth bates and jean mandler ,  came to suspect that there may indeed be many learning processes involved in the acquisition process ,  and that ignoring the role of learning may have been a mistake . 
language acquisition is the process by which humans acquire the capacity to perceive and comprehend language ,  as well as to produce and use words and sentences to communicate . 
 -lrb-  binary parameters are common to digital computers ,  but may not be applicable to neurological systems such as the human brain .   -rrb- 
its sequel ,  `` left behind ii: tribulation force '' ,  was released in 2009.
there are also graphic novels ,  cds ,  a `` left behind '' series for teens ,  and movies . 
some premillennialists ,  while accepting many of the basic beliefs behind the series ,  describe problems with specific prophetical teachings in the `` left behind '' books . 
indeed ,  the title `` left behind '' echoes the refrain of `` thief '' early christian rock theme song by larry norman ,  `` i wish we'd all been ready , ``  in which he sings ,  `` there's no time to change your mind ,  the son has come and you've been left behind . `` 
laurie goodstein ,  writing in 1998 for `` the new york times '' ,  placed what she called the ``  '' ''left behind '' phenomenon '' '' in the calendrical context of the approaching year 2000.
the books are written from a protestant viewpoint . 
in 2007, the evangelical christian publishers association  -lrb-  ecpa  -rrb-  recognized the `` left behind '' series at its cba & ecpa awards celebration in atlanta ,  georgia with the ecpa pinnacle award . 
along with some other rapture fiction novels ,  the `` left behind '' series demonstrates a specific understanding of the gospel and the christian life ,  one with which many have taken issue theologically . 
the lollards stated that the catholic church had been corrupted by temporal matters and that its claim to be the true church was not justified by its heredity . 
lollardy  -lrb-  lollardism ,  lollard movement  -rrb-  was a pre-protestant christian religious movement that existed from the mid-14th century to the english reformation . 
two other possibilities for the derivation of `` lollard '' are mentioned by the `` oxford english dictionary '' , 
they formulated their beliefs in the twelve conclusions of the lollards . 
the similarity between lollards and later english protestant groups such as the baptists ,  puritans and quakers also suggests some continuation of lollard ideas through the reformation . 
despite the debate about the extent of lollard influence there are ample records of the persecution of lollards from this period . 
the church used art as an anti-lollard weapon . 
lollards were effectively absorbed into protestantism during the english reformation ,  in which lollardy played a role . 
with regard to the eucharist ,  lollards such as john wycliffe ,  william thorpe ,  and john oldcastle ,  taught a view of the real presence of christ in holy communion known as `` consubstantiation '' and did not accept the doctrine of transubstantiation ,  taught by the roman catholic church in 1215.
one group of lollards petitioned parliament with the twelve conclusions of the lollards by posting them on the doors of westminster hall in february 1395.
of the built-up area ,  industrial buildings made up 1.6% of the total area while housing and buildings made up 21.6% and transportation infrastructure made up 12.5% . 
all the water in the municipality is in lakes . 
of the rest of the land ,  or 44.6% is settled  -lrb-  buildings or roads  -rrb-  ,  or 0.1% is either rivers or lakes and or 0.0% is unproductive land . 
the most important geographical feature of the area surrounding lausanne is lake geneva  -lrb-  `` lac léman '' in french  -rrb-  . 
lausanne has an area ,   ,  of  -lrb-  depending on calculation method  -rrb-  . 
the metropolitan area of lausanne-geneva  -lrb-  including vevey-montreux ,  yverdon-les-bains ,  and foreign parts  -rrb-  was over 1.2 million inhabitants in 2000.
in marketing generally and in retailing more specifically ,  a loyalty card ,  rewards card ,  points card ,  advantage card ,  or club card is a plastic or paper card ,  visually similar to a credit card ,  debit card ,  or digital card that identifies the card holder as a participant in a loyalty program . 
all major australian banks offer credit cards with reward programs . 
few states regulate club cards . 
the first iranian loyalty program launched in 1996 by iran credit card group zarrin card . 
in georgia the biggest loyalty card program is run by universal card corporation since 2010.
cards typically have a barcode or magstripe that can be easily scanned ,  although some are chip cards or proximity cards . 
east credit card group kish launched its loyalty program in 2005.
safeway's abc card was discontinued in 2000.
the largest norwegian loyalty program is  . 
in singapore ,  the three largest loyalty programs are plus !  ,  worldcard and safra card . 
other stores such as interio ,  a furniture retailer ,  are also joining the market with loyalty cards and store-based incentivised credit cards . 
kachingo was a short-lived `` card free '' programme . 
alternatively ,  some banks and credit card companies have their own programs ,  with points being either redeemable or transferable to various airline rewards programs . 
loyalty programs are very popular in finland . 
indian oil's fleet card program xtrapower and retail program xtrarewards claim a combined customer base of 3 million . 
among other australian retailers ,  the largest programs are myer's myer one program ,  the priceline club card ,  amcal club ,  millers retail club ,  and the bb retail capital pulse rewards program . 
in the republic of ireland loyalty cards have been in operation since 1993, when superquinn introduced its superclub loyalty card scheme . 
malina is a russian coalition program . 
one of the first loyalty cards backed by a major chain is believed to be the sainsbury's homebase spend and save card in 1982.
in the philippines ,  several brands of establishments and stores offer membership cards that the card owner can use to earn points and redeem rewards . 
after trials in 1994, tesco launched its clubcard program ,  the uk's first nationwide supermarket-only loyalty card scheme ,  in 1995 with dunnhumby . 
this was replaced by the nectar card in 2002, which was launched in partnership with other major brands . 
the gigantic shopping mall chain ,  sm supermalls offers the sm advantage card or smac that can be used as a loyalty card that earns points as you shop and its partner bank ,  bdo unibank also offers bdo rewards card that functions the same as the sm advantage card . 
boots uk began planning a loyalty card in november 1993, but building a crm-focussed loyalty program . 
the largest loyalty program in germany is payback ,  which was launched in 2000.
another russian loyalty program is mnogo . ru . 
professor ludwig von drake is one of walt disney's cartoon and comic book characters . 
paul frees was the original voice of ludwig von drake . 
ludwig von drake comes from vienna ,  austria and has a fascination with knowledge . 
elvira could have an austrian ascendancy to explain her kinship to ludwig . 
los altos  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city in santa clara county ,  california ,  in northern silicon valley ,  in the san francisco bay area . 
homes and other real estate are costly in los altos . 
lems associated with lung cancer may be more severe . 
some may also experience problems with coordination  -lrb-  ataxia  -rrb-  . 
the pupillary light reflex may be sluggish . 
the antibodies found in lems associated with lung cancer also bind to calcium channels in the cancer cells ,  and it is presumed that the antibodies originally develop as a reaction to these cells . 
if the disease is associated with cancer ,  direct treatment of the cancer often relieves the symptoms of lems . 
it has been suggested that the immune reaction to the cancer cells suppresses their growth and improves the prognosis from the cancer . 
if lems is caused by an underlying cancer ,  treatment of the cancer usually leads to resolution of the symptoms . 
in most of these cases ,  lems is the first symptom of the lung cancer ,  and it is otherwise asymptomatic . 
in lems associated with lung cancer ,  most have no suggestive symptoms of cancer at the time ,  such as cough ,  coughing blood ,  and unintentional weight loss . 
the alcohol and tobacco tax and trade bureau regulates liqueurs similarly to canada ,  requiring that alcohol be mixed with plant products and sweeteners be added to at least 2.5% by weight . 
under the food and drug regulations  -lrb-  c . r . c .  ,  c .  870 -rrb- ,  liqueurs are produced from mixing alcohol with plant materials . 
liqueurs generally contain a lower alcohol content  -lrb-  15–30% abv  -rrb-  than spirits and it has sweetener mixed ,  while some can have an abv as high as 55% . 
in some parts of the united states and canada ,  liqueurs may be referred to as cordials ,  or schnapps . 
the talmudic and yiddish use of `` lilith '' is cognate with the hebrew . 
archibald sayce  -lrb-  1882 -rrb- considered that hebrew `` lilit ''  -lrb-  or `` lilith ''  -rrb-  and the earlier akkadian `` līlītu '' are from proto-semitic . 
eberhard schrader  -lrb-  1875 -rrb- and moritz abraham levy  -lrb-  1885 -rrb- suggest that lilith was a goddess of the night ,  known also by the jewish exiles in babylon . 
lilith  -lrb-  ; `` lîlîṯ ''  -rrb-  is a figure in jewish mythology ,  developed earliest in the babylonian talmud  -lrb-  3rd to 5th centuries  -rrb-  . 
a connection between the gilgamesh `` ki-sikil-lil-la-ke '' and the jewish lilith was rejected by dietrich opitz  -lrb-  1932 -rrb- and rejected on textual grounds by sergio ribichini  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- . 
the only occurrence is in the book of isaiah 34:14, describing the desolation of edom ,  where the hebrew word `` lilit ''  -lrb-  or `` lilith ''  -rrb-  appears in a list of eight unclean animals ,  some of which may have demonic associations . 
samuel noah kramer  -lrb-  1932, published 1938 -rrb- translated `` ki-sikil-lil-la-ke '' as `` lilith '' in `` tablet xii '' of the epic of gilgamesh dated c . 600 bc . 
the force f acting on a particle of electric charge `` q '' with instantaneous velocity v ,  due to an external electric field e and magnetic field b ,  is given by  -lrb-  in si units  -rrb- :
hendrik lorentz derived it in 1895, a few years after heaviside . 
lorenzo rallied the citizens . 
lorenzo's heir was his eldest son ,  piero di lorenzo de' medici ,  known as `` piero the unfortunate '' . 
lorenzo adopted his nephew giulio di giuliano de' medici  -lrb-  1478-1534 -rrb- ,  the illegitimate son of his slain brother giuliano . 
lorenzo's grandfather ,  cosimo de' medici ,  was the first member of the medici family to lead the republic of florence and run the medici bank simultaneously . 
in 1529, lorenzo's nephew giulio - whom lorenzo had raised as his own son and then reigned as pope clement vii - formalized medici rule of florence by installing alessandro de' medici as the city's first hereditary duke . 
lorenzo played a role in bringing savonarola to florence . 
lorenzo himself was an artist and wrote poetry in his native tuscan . 
lorenzo married clarice orsini by proxy on 7 february 1469.
he is buried in the medici chapel in florence . 
in 1559, the bodies of lorenzo de' medici  -lrb-  `` the magnificent ''  -rrb-  and his brother giuliano were interred in the new sacristy in an unmarked tomb beneath michelangelo's statue of the madonna . 
there is no formal distinction between a lemma and a theorem ,  only one of intention – see theorem terminology . 
in mathematics ,  a `` helping theorem '' or lemma  -lrb-  plural lemmas or lemmata  -rrb-  is a proven proposition which is used as a stepping stone to a larger result rather than as a statement of interest by itself . 
francesco did not meet lucrezia until 1502.
he married lucrezia on 12 june 1493 in rome . 
lucrezia borgia was born on 18 april 1480 at subiaco ,  near rome . 
following her annulment from sforza ,  lucrezia was married to the neapolitan alfonso of aragon ,  the half-brother of sancha of aragon who was the wife of lucrezia's brother gioffre borgia . 
lucrezia and alfonso had one child ,  rodrigo of aragon ,  who was born in 1499 and predeceased his mother in august 1512 at the age of 12.
giovanni went to stay with lucrezia in ferrara after alexander's death ,  where he was accepted as her half-brother . 
lucrezia borgia  -lrb-  ; ; 18 april 1480 – 24 june 1519 -rrb- was a spanish-italian noblewoman of the house of borgia who was the daughter of pope alexander vi and vannozza dei cattanei . 
lucrezia also had a love affair with the poet pietro bembo during her third marriage . 
after the death of lucrezia's second husband ,  her father ,  pope alexander vi ,  arranged a third marriage . 
the motorola 68020 was the first 32-bit mac processor ,  first used on the macintosh ii . 
the motorola 68000 was the first apple macintosh processor . 
the powerpc 601 was the first mac processor to support the 32-bit powerpc instruction set architecture . 
it was a great band . ”
nonetheless ,  he was fired from hawkwind . 
in august 1971, lemmy joined the space rock band hawkwind ,  who were based in ladbroke grove ,  london ,  as a bassist and vocalist . 
he once said of hawkwind: ``  ''i did like being in hawkwind ,  and i believe i’d still be playing with them today if i hadn’t been kicked out . 
according to the band ,  his cancer had only been diagnosed two days prior to his death . 
ian fraser kilmister  -lrb-  24 december 1945 – 28 december 2015 -rrb- ,  better known as lemmy ,  was an english singer ,  songwriter ,  and musician who founded and fronted the rock band motörhead . 
he soon started to show an interest in rock and roll music ,  girls ,  and horses . 
after hawkwind ,  lemmy formed a new band called `` bastard '' with guitarist larry wallis  -lrb-  former member of the pink fairies ,  steve took's shagrat and ufo  -rrb-  and drummer lucas fox . 
lemmy is one of the characters in the book `` sex tips from rock stars '' by paul miles . 
lactose comprises about 2–8% of milk by weight . 
whey or milk plasma is the liquid remaining after milk is curdled and strained ,  for example in the production of cheese . 
infant mammals nurse on their mothers to drink milk ,  which is rich in lactose . 
it is used in the food industry . 
for example ,  lactose may be used to sweeten stout beer; the resulting beer is usually called a milk stout or a cream stout . 
dairy products such as yoghurt ,  cream and fresh cheeses have lactose contents similar to that of milk . 
in toxicology ,  the median lethal dose ,  ld  -lrb-  abbreviation for `` lethal dose ,  50% ''  -rrb-  ,  lc  -lrb-  lethal concentration ,  50%  -rrb-  or lct is a measure of the lethal dose of a toxin ,  radiation ,  or pathogen . 
a lower ld is indicative of increased toxicity . 
for this reason ,  ld figures are often qualified with the mode of administration ,  e . g .  ,  `` ld i . v . `` 
the related quantities ld/30 or ld/60 are used to refer to a dose that without treatment will be lethal to 50% of the population within  -lrb-  respectively  -rrb-  30 or 60 days . 
measures such as `` ld '' and `` ld ''  -lrb-  dosage required to kill 1% or 99% ,  respectively ,  of the test population  -rrb-  are occasionally used for specific purposes . 
in 2011, the u . s .  food and drug administration approved alternative methods to ld for testing the cosmetic drug botox without animal tests . 
lactase can be purchased as a food supplement ,  and is added to milk to produce `` lactose-free '' milk products . 
without lactase ,  lactose intolerant people pass the lactose undigested to the colon where bacteria break it down creating carbon dioxide and that leads to bloating and flatulence . 
linkin park is an american rock band from agoura hills ,  california . 
linkin park has sold more than 100 million records . 
the band's seventh album ,  `` one more light '' ,  was released on may 19, 2017.
linkin park became the first rock band to achieve more than one billion youtube hits . 
linkin park began working on new material for a seventh studio album in november 2015.
the band was no . 39 in the top artists chart ,  no . 84 in the `` billboard '' 200 artists chart ,  no . 11 in the social 50 chart ,  no . 6 in the top rock artists chart ,  no . 9 in the rock songs artists chart ,  no . 16 in the rock albums chart ,  no . 4 in the hard rock albums chart ,  and no . 7 in the alternative songs chart . 
 ''s rock 100 list . 
in may 2009, linkin park announced they were working on a fourth studio album ,  which was planned to be released in 2010.
on april 15, 2012, shinoda announced that `` living things '' would be the title of linkin park's fifth album . 
in 2003, mtv2 named linkin park the sixth-greatest band of the music video era and the third-best of the new millennium . 
in 2003, mtv2 named linkin park the sixth-greatest band of the music video era and the third-best of the new millennium . 
linkin park released `` hybrid theory '' on october 24, 2000.
linkin park returned to the recording studios in 2006 to work on new material . 
in an interview with fuse ,  shinoda confirmed that linkin park had begun recording their sixth studio album in may 2013.
 ''hybrid theory '' is also in the riaa's `` top 100 albums '' . 
their following studio album `` meteora '' continued the band's success ,  topping the `` billboard '' 200 album chart in 2003, and was followed by extensive touring and charity work . 
linkin park performed at download festival on june 14, 2014, where they played their debut album ,  `` hybrid theory '' ,  in its entirety . 
only two songs on the album's tracklist feature rap vocals and the majority of the album can be considered alternative rock . 
on april 17, 2018, linkin park was nominated for three awards at the 2018 billboard music awards ,  but did not win any of them . 
it is difficult to disguise the flipper entirely when bowling ,  as the hand action is distinctly different from a leg break . 
the flipper is the name of a particular bowling delivery used in cricket ,  generally by a leg spin bowler . 
the flipper is bowled on the opposite side to a slider ,  much in the same way that the top-spinner is bowled . 
lake nicaragua or cocibolca or granada  -lrb-   ,   ,  or   -rrb-  is a freshwater lake in nicaragua . 
lake nicaragua ,  despite being a freshwater lake ,  has sawfish ,  tarpon ,  and sharks . 
it is intermittently joined by the tipitapa river to lake managua . 
in france ,  the first labour law was voted in 1841.
the 1802 factory act was the first labour law in the uk . 
in france ,  the first labour laws were waldeck rousseau's laws passed in 1884.
other labour laws involve safety concerning workers . 
labour law  -lrb-  also known as labor law or employment law  -rrb-  mediates the relationship between workers ,  employing entities ,  trade unions and the government . 
in canadian law ,  `` labour law '' refers to matters connected with unionized workplaces ,  while `` employment law '' deals with non-unionized employees . 
collective labour law concerns the relationship between employer ,  employee and trade unions . 
the labour law of switzerland covers all standards governing the employment of some kind . 
the beginnings of halakhic labour law are in the bible ,  in which two commandments refer to this subject: the law against delayed wages  -lrb-  lev . 
some labour law explicitly bans such activity ,  none explicitly allows it . 
the factory acts  -lrb-  first one in 1802, then 1833 -rrb- and the 1823 master and servant act were the first laws regulating labour relations in the united kingdom . 
mexican labour law reflects the historic interrelation between the state and the confederation of mexican workers . 
conflicts of laws  -lrb-  or private international law  -rrb-  issues arise where workers work in multiple jurisdictions . 
in the people's republic of china the basic labour laws are the `` labour law of people's republic of china ''  -lrb-  promulgated on 5 july 1994 -rrb- and the `` labour contract law of the people's republic of china ''  -lrb-  adopted at the 28th session of the standing committee of the 10th national people's congress on june 29, 2007, effective from january 1, 2008 -rrb- . 
the state of labour law at any one time is therefore both the product of ,  and a component of struggles between various social forces . 
the eight-hour movement led to the first law on the length of a working day ,  passed in 1833 in england . 
minimum wages are regulated and stipulated in some countries that lack explicit laws . 
in sweden ,  participation is regulated through the `` law on board representation '' . 
the basic feature of labour law in almost every country is that the rights and obligations of the worker and the employer are mediated through a contract of employment between the two . 
over fifty national and many more state-level laws govern work in india . 
child labour was not seen as a problem throughout most of history ,  only disputed with the beginning of universal schooling and the concepts of labourers' and children's rights . 
such laws also control whether workers who work longer hours must be paid additional compensation . 
in the european union ,  18 out of 28 member states have national minimum wages as of 2011.
the international labour organization and the world trade organization have been a primary focus among international bodies for regulating labour markets . 
laws are either acts of parliament called statutes ,  statutory regulations  -lrb-  made by a secretary of state under an act of parliament  -rrb-  or case law  -lrb-  developed by various courts  -rrb-  . 
louis riel was born there in 1844, near modern winnipeg ,  manitoba ,  to louis riel ,  sr .  and julie lagimodière . 
the first resistance led by riel became known as the red river rebellion of 1869–1870.
the head of the delegation to riel was gabriel dumont ,  a respected buffalo hunter and leader of the saint-laurent métis who had known riel in manitoba . 
in late august ,  riel denounced the survey in a speech ,  and on 11 october 1869, the survey's work was disrupted by a group of métis that included riel . 
riel was first educated by roman catholic priests at st .  boniface . 
this was supplemented by an additional £600 from smith for the care of riel's family . 
riel was the eldest of eleven children in a locally well-respected family . 
the riels were noted for their devout catholicism and strong family ties . 
arguably ,  riel has received more scholarly attention than any other figure in canadian history . 
in 1884 riel was called upon by the métis leaders in saskatchewan to articulate their grievances to the canadian government . 
listerine is a brand of antiseptic mouthwash product . 
there has been concern that the use of alcohol-containing mouthwash such as listerine may increase the risk of developing oral cancer . 
in 2009, johnson and johnson launched a new alcohol-free version of the product called listerine zero . 
nine different kinds of listerine are on the market in the u . s .  and elsewhere: original ,  cool mint ,  freshburst ,  natural citrus ,  naturals ,  soft mint  -lrb-  vanilla mint  -rrb-  ,  ultraclean  -lrb-  formerly advanced listerine  -rrb-  ,  tooth defense  -lrb-  mint shield  -rrb-  ,  and whitening pre-brush rinse  -lrb-  clean mint  -rrb-  . 
it became widely known and entered common household use after jordan wheat lambert's son gerard lambert joined the company and promoted an aggressive marketing campaign . 
the royal navy took ludo and converted it into the board game uckers . 
pachisi was rediscovered in india by the 6th century . 
and in zimbabwe ,  life expectancy was 60 in 1990, 43 in 2000, and 54 in 2011.
economic circumstances also affect life expectancy . 
life expectancy is also used in plant or animal ecology; life tables  -lrb-  also known as actuarial tables  -rrb-  . 
actual life expectancy in botswana declined from 65 in 1990 to 49 in 2000 before increasing to 66 in 2011.
the seriously mentally ill have a 10- to 25-year reduction in life expectancy . 
mathematically ,  life expectancy is the mean number of years of life remaining at a given age ,  assuming age-specific mortality rates remain at their most recently measured levels . 
in societies with life expectancies of 30, for instance ,  a 40 year remaining timespan at age 5 may not be uncommon ,  but a 60 year one was . 
the term `` maximum life span '' has a quite different meaning and is more related to longevity . 
life expectancy increases with age as the individual survives the higher mortality rates associated with childhood . 
a 2013 study found a pronounced relationship between economic inequality and life expectancy . 
most of the difference in life expectancy between the sexes is accounted for by differences in the rate of death by cardiovascular diseases among persons aged 50-70.
life expectancy at birth takes account of infant mortality but not prenatal mortality . 
the starting point for calculating life expectancy is the age-specific death rates of the population members . 
public health measures are credited with much of the recent increase in life expectancy . 
the partitions of poland began earlier in lesser poland than in other provinces of the country . 
lesser poland  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a historical region  -lrb-  `` dzielnica ''  -rrb-  of poland; its capital is the city of kraków . 
among major lesser poland's cities founded by the king ,  there are:
lesser poland was one of main centers of the bar confederation . 
it should not be confused with the modern lesser poland voivodeship ,  which covers only the south-western part of lesser poland  -lrb-  darker rose on map to the right  -rrb-  . 
in the wider sense  -lrb-  see lesser poland province of the polish crown  -rrb-  ,  lesser poland from the 14th century also encompassed red ruthenia . 
in the kingdom of poland ,  lesser poland was made of three voivodeships – kraków voivodeship ,  sandomierz voivodeship ,  and lublin voivodeship ,  created in 1474 out of eastern part of the sandomierz voivodeship . 
in the 15th and 16th centuries ,  lesser poland remained the most important part of the country . 
the period in polish history known as the polish golden age was very fortunate for lesser poland . 
in 1919, the legislative election took place in lesser poland without major problems . 
after the conflict ,  lesser poland began a recovery ,  which was hampered by several other factors . 
historical lesser poland was much bigger than the current voivodeship that bears its name . 
lesser poland stretches from the carpathians in the south to pilica and liwiec rivers to the north . 
in the 16th century ,  lesser poland retained its position as the most important province of the country . 
at that time lesser poland ,  like other provinces of the country ,  faced several problems . 
the invaders quickly retreated ,  but a few months later ,  lesser poland was flooded by the swedes . 
the partners once had $1.9 billion of their own money invested in ltcm ,  all of which was wiped out . 
in may and june 1998 returns from the fund were -6.42% and -10.14% respectively ,  reducing ltcm's capital by $461 million . 
in q4 1997, a year in which it earned 27% ,  ltcm returned capital to investors . 
ltcm lost $286 million in equity pairs trading and more than half of this loss is accounted for by the royal dutch shell trade . 
after helping unwind ltcm ,  meriwether launched jwm partners . 
by 24 february 1994, the day ltcm began trading ,  the company had amassed just over $1.01 billion in capital . 
after ltcm failed to raise more money on its own ,  it became clear it was running out of options . 
ltcm quickly became the largest client of the hedge fund desk ,  generating $15 million in fees annually . 
victor haghani ,  a partner at ltcm ,  said about this time `` it was as if there was someone out there with our exact portfolio .  .  .  only it was three times as large as ours ,  and they were liquidating all at once . `` 
ltcm attempted to create a splinter fund in 1996 called ltcm-x that would invest in even higher risk trades and focus on latin american markets . 
ltcm turned to ubs to invest in and write the warrant for this new spin-off company . 
ltcm was founded in 1994 by john w .  meriwether ,  the former vice-chairman and head of bond trading at salomon brothers . 
although 1997 had been a very profitable year for ltcm  -lrb-  27%  -rrb-  ,  the lingering effects of the 1997 asian crisis continued to shape developments in asset markets into 1998.
thanks to their collaboration ,  ilia state university became the first higher education institution in georgia to establish a liberal arts program . 
grammar ,  logic ,  and rhetoric were the core liberal arts  -lrb-  the trivium  -rrb-  ,  while arithmetic ,  geometry ,  the theory of music ,  and astronomy also played a part in education  -lrb-  as the quadrivium  -rrb-  . 
in addition to the usual curriculum ,  students of a liberal arts education often study latin and ancient greek . 
international christian university in tokyo is the first and one of the very few liberal arts universities in japan . 
the liberal arts education at the secondary school level prepares the student for higher education at a university . 
some subsections of the liberal arts are in the trivium—the verbal arts of grammar ,  logic ,  and rhetoric—and in the quadrivium—the numerical arts of music and astronomy . 
during the middle ages ,  logic gradually came to take predominance over the other parts of the `` trivium '' . 
liberal arts education  -lrb-  from latin `` free '' and `` art or principled practice ''  -rrb-  can claim to be the oldest programme of higher education in western history . 
in 1936 st .  john's college changed its curriculum to focus on the great books of western civilization in order to provide a new sort of education that separated itself from the increasingly specialized nature of higher schooling . 
east slavic languages contrast and but do not have l . 
for the most common laterals ,  the tip of the tongue makes contact with the upper teeth  -lrb-  see dental consonant  -rrb-  or the upper gum  -lrb-  see alveolar consonant  -rrb-  ,  but there are many other possible places for laterals to be made . 
an example of a lateral consonant is the english `` l '' ,  as in `` larry '' . 
also ,  a devoicing diacritic may be added to the approximant . 
english has two liquid phonemes ,  one lateral ,  and one rhotic ,   ,  exemplified in the words led '' and red '' . 
polynesian languages typically have only one liquid ,  which may be either a lateral or a rhotic . 
many other european languages have one lateral and one rhotic phoneme . 
'jirga' itself is a well-known term of mongolian origin . 
when the afghans took power they tried to legitimize their hold with such a jirga . 
from amanullah until the reign of mohammed zahir shah  -lrb-  1933–1973 -rrb- and mohammed daoud khan  -lrb-  1973–1978 -rrb- the jirga was recognized as a common meeting of regional pashtun leaders . 
laura maureen bertram  -lrb-  born september 5, 1978 -rrb- is a canadian actress best known for her role as trance gemini in `` andromeda '' . 
bertram has won two gemini awards for `` best performance in a children's or youth program or series '' for `` ready or not '' in 1995 and for `` best performance in a children's or youth program or series '' for `` ready or not '' in 1998.
in 1977, ferrigno was cast as the hulk in `` the incredible hulk '' . 
ferrigno has his own line of fitness equipment called ferrigno fitness . 
the documentary made ferrigno famous . 
lou ferrigno was born in brooklyn ,  new york ,  to victoria and matt ferrigno ,  a police lieutenant . 
ferrigno's voice was used  -lrb-  in composite  -rrb-  for the hulk in the 2012 film `` the avengers '' and its 2015 sequel ``  '' . 
ferrigno appeared as himself in the 2009 feature film comedy `` i love you ,  man '' . 
lou has filed suit against his brother ,  andy ferrigno ,  on two occasions over the use of the name ferrigno in business ventures . 
during competition ,  ferrigno at weighed 268 lb  -lrb-  130 kg  -rrb-  in 1975, and 315 lb  -lrb-  142 kg  -rrb-  in 1992.
ferrigno married susan groff in 1978, divorcing a year later . 
in november 1978 and again in may 1979 ferrigno appeared in `` battle of the network stars '' . 
the russian civil war  -lrb-  1917–1922 -rrb- thus included left-wing uprisings against the bolsheviks  -lrb-  1918–1924 -rrb- that were suppressed in the russian socialist federative soviet republic  -lrb-  rsfsr  -rrb-  before incorporation to the union of soviet socialist republics  -lrb-  ussr  -rrb-  in 1922.
marxist social democracy was strongest in germany throughout the 19th century and the social democratic party of germany inspired lenin and other russian marxists . 
developed by and named for the russian revolutionary vladimir lenin ,  leninism comprises socialist political and economic theories ,  developed from marxism and lenin's interpretations of marxist theories ,  for practical application to the socio-political conditions of the russian empire of the early 20th century . 
from 1942 to 1944, the legion of merit was awarded for a fairly wide range of achievements . 
the legion of merit is similar to the french legion of honor in both its design ,  a five-armed cross ,  and in that it is awarded in multiple degrees . 
the meritorious service medal  -lrb-  msm  -rrb-  was established in 1969 as a `` junior '' version of the legion of merit . 
ltjg bernatitus was also the first recipient of the legion of merit authorized to wear a combat `` v '' with the medal . 
the msm is awarded more frequently and to lower ranking military personnel than the legion of merit ,  so that today the award of the legion of merit to officers in pay grade o-5, or to senior chief warrant officers ,  or to e-9s other than those in the most senior enlisted leadership positions in their respective services ,  is exceedingly rare and by exception . 
when the legion of merit is awarded to members of the uniformed services of the united states ,  it is awarded without reference to degree . 
about the 1980s ,  the legion of merit began to be awarded more frequently to senior ranking warrant officers  -lrb-  w-4 and w-5 -rrb- ,  as well as to senior enlisted service members  -lrb-  e-8 and e-9 -rrb- ,  usually as a retirement award . 
the term originates from a unix utility that examined c language source code . 
for example ,  gimpel's pc-lint ,  used to analyze c++ source code ,  is still being sold even though it was introduced in 1985.
stephen c .  johnson ,  a computer scientist at bell labs ,  came up with lint in 1978 while debugging the yacc grammar he was writing for c and dealing with portability issues stemming from porting unix to a 32-bit machine . 
because the newborn fish are large compared to the fry of oviparous fish ,  they are easier to feed than the fry of egg-laying species ,  such as characins and cichlids . 
the advantages of livebearing to the aquarist are that the newborn juvenile fish are larger than newly-hatched fry ,  have a lower chance of mortality and are easier to care for . 
livebearers are aquarium fish that retain the eggs inside the body and give birth to live ,  free-swimming young . 
adriano la regina  -lrb-  formerly rome’s archaeological superintendent 1976–2004, professor of etruscology at sapienza university of rome  -rrb-  ,  professor fausto zevi  -lrb-  professor of roman archaeology at rome's la sapienza university  -rrb-  and professor henner von hesberg  -lrb-  head of the german archaeological institute ,  rome  -rrb-  denied the identification of the grotto with lupercal on topographic and stylistic grounds . 
the current scholarly consensus is that the grotto is not the lupercal and that the cave was located lower southwest ,  closer to piazza sant'anastasia al palatino . 
durst named the band limp bizkit because he wanted a name that would repel listeners . 
limp bizkit is an american rap rock band from jacksonville ,  florida . 
bands citing limp bizkit as an influence on their music include the progressive metal band proyecto eskhata . 
16 on the `` billboard '' 200; however ,  the band left interscope after the album's release . 
limp bizkit has been nominated for and won several awards . 
in 1998, limp bizkit toured with soulfly and cold on soulfly's first european tour . 
on october 11, 2012, dj lethal posted an apology to the band on twitter ,  but was ultimately not allowed back into the band . 
due to creative differences ,  borland left the band at this point . 
the album was called `` new old songs '' . 
despite the success of live performances of the band's cover of the song `` faith '' ,  robinson was opposed to recording it ,  and tried to persuade the band not to play it on the album . 
during the band's halloween performance on the tour ,  each of the band's members dressed as elvis presley at various stages in his career . 
limp bizkit's music is noted for its `` kinetic ,  frenzied energy '' . 
as of 2018, the band is currently recording their sixth studio album ,  `` stampede of the disco elephants '' . 
following the radio success of `` faith '' ,  the band was determined to record the follow-up to their first album in order to show that they weren't a korn soundalike or a cover band; the band began writing an album which dealt with issues deriving from their newfound fame . 
in october 2014, fred durst revealed that the band had left cash money ,  and became independent again . 
durst saw the band as being scapegoated for the event's controversy ,  and reflected on the criticisms surrounding the band in his music video for the single `` re-arranged '' ,  which depicted the band members receiving death sentences for their participation in the concerts . 
in 1999, the band won the maximum vision award at the billboard music video awards for their music video `` nookie '' . 
however ,  the band also continued to be criticized by the media; an article profiling the band in `` spin '' and discussing `` significant other '' claimed that `` limp bizkit had yet to write a good song '' ,  and musicians marilyn manson and trent reznor criticized the band . 
this plan successfully increased the band's female fanbase . 
in 2000, durst announced that the band's third studio album would be titled `` chocolate starfish and the hot dog flavored water '' . 
after recording another album without smith ,  the band scrapped the new sessions and assembled a new album combining songs from different sessions . 
the mood and tone set by robinson in the studio allowed the band to improvise; a recording of the band improvising appeared as the last track on the album ,  `` everything '' . 
despite the minimal response to his band's album ,  durst was appointed senior vice president of a&r at interscope . 
lazio  -lrb-   ,  ; ;   -rrb-  is one of the 20 administrative regions of italy . 
industrial development in lazio is limited to the areas south of rome . 
 ''see also: list of museums in lazio '' the italian word lazio descends from the latin word latium . 
the northern border of lazio was the tiber river ,  which divided it from etruria . 
the capital of lazio is rome ,  which is also italy's capital and the country's largest city . 
the part of today's lazio south of the tiber river – together with the present region of campania immediately to the southeast of lazio and the seat of neapolis – became region i  -lrb-  `` latium et campania ''  -rrb-  ,  while modern upper lazio became part of `` regio vii - etruria '' ,  and today's province of rieti joined `` regio iv - samnium '' . 
the `` warcraft '' universe sports the villain edwin van cleef ,  who is inspired by lee van cleef . 
van cleef's screen debut came in `` high noon '' . 
van cleef ,  born of partial dutch ancestry on january 9, 1925, in somerville ,  new jersey ,  was the son of marion lavinia van fleet and clarence leroy van cleef . 
in all ,  van cleef is credited with 90 movie roles and 109 television appearances over a 38-year span . 
the band primus has a song about lee van cleef on their album `` green naugahyde '' . 
in 1958, a severe car crash nearly cost van cleef his life and career . 
van cleef later had a supporting role in john carpenter's cult film `` escape from new york ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- . 
van cleef is portrayed by the film's director peter richardson ,  though it rather suggests van cleef the personage is unrealistically playing tony benn ,  a british member of parliament . 
the year 1903 was fundamental to the life of pirandello . 
in 1880, the pirandello family moved to palermo . 
in the meantime ,  pirandello intensified his collaborations with newspaper editors and other journalists in magazines such as `` la critica '' and `` la tavola rotonda '' in which he published ,  in 1895, the first part of the `` dialoghi tra il gran me e il piccolo me '' . 
pirandello then registered at the university of palermo in the departments of law and of letters . 
in 1902 he published the first series of `` beffe della morte e della vita '' and his second novel ,  `` il turno '' . 
as italy entered the first world war ,  pirandello's son stefano volunteered for service and was taken prisoner by the austro-hungarians . 
for the remainder of his life ,  pirandello was always under close surveillance by the secret fascist police ovra . 
pirandello's conception of the theatre underwent a significant change at this point . 
luigi pirandello  -lrb-  ; 28 june 1867 – 10 december 1936 -rrb- was an italian dramatist ,  novelist ,  poet ,  and short story writer whose greatest contributions were his plays . 
in 1909 the first part of `` i vecchi e i giovani '' was published in episodes . 
between 1925 and 1926 pirandello's last and perhaps greatest novel ,  `` uno ,  nessuno e centomila ''  -lrb-  `` one ,  no one and one hundred thousand ''  -rrb-  ,  was published serially in the magazine `` fiera letteraria '' . 
the gospel of luke does not name its author . 
luke's presence in rome with the apostle paul near the end of paul's life was attested by 2 timothy 4:11: `` only luke is with me '' . 
analysis of the gospel presents the possibility that luke may have been a woman . 
most scholars understand luke's works  -lrb-  luke–acts  -rrb-  in the tradition of greek historiography . 
an awareness of this ,  has been ,  for many ,  the final nail in luke the historian's coffin . `` 
there is some disagreement about how best to treat luke's writings ,  with some historians regarding luke as highly accurate ,  and others taking a more critical approach . 
in the last chapter of the book of acts ,  widely attributed to luke ,  there are several accounts in the first person also affirming luke's presence in rome ,  including : `` and when we came to rome .  .  . ``  according to some accounts ,  luke also contributed to the authorship of the epistle to the hebrews . 
this comment has traditionally caused commentators to conclude that luke was a gentile . 
the gospel of luke and the acts of the apostles make up a two-volume work which scholars call luke–acts . 
luke never stated ,  however ,  that he lived in troas ,  and this is the only evidence that he did . 
the band released its first post-reunion album in 1991, entitled `` lynyrd skynyrd 1991. ''
the band released a christmas album ,  entitled `` christmas time again '' in 2000.
michael cartellone has recorded and toured with the band since 1999.
during this time ,  the band experienced some lineup changes for the first time . 
the band re-formed in 1987 for a reunion tour with ronnie's brother ,  johnny van zant ,  as its lead vocalist . 
medlocke and thomasson would also become major contributors to the band's songwriting along with rossington and van zant . 
by 1975 personal issues began to take their toll on the band . 
despite the growing number of post-reunion albums that band had released up to this time ,  setlists showed that the band was playing mostly 1970s-era material in concert . 
scottish rock band gun performed as special guests for the uk leg of skynyrd's tour in 2010.
in 1987, lynyrd skynyrd reunited for a full-scale tour with five major members of the pre-crash band: crash survivors gary rossington ,  billy powell ,  leon wilkeson and artimus pyle ,  along with guitarist ed king ,  who had left the band two years before the crash . 
in january 2018, lynyrd skynyrd announced their farewell tour . 
wilkeson's death resulted in the band with two remaining members from the classic pre-crash lineups . 
the reunited band was intended to be a one-time tribute to the original lineup ,  captured on the double-live album `` southern by the grace of god: lynyrd skynyrd tribute tour 1987 '' . 
still known as the one percent in 1969, van zant sought a new name after growing tired of taunts from audiences that the band had `` 1% talent '' . 
latin place names are not always exclusive to one place — for example ,  there were several roman cities whose names began with `` colonia '' and then a more descriptive term . 
the modern canonical name is listed first . 
born in bologna ,  italy ,  lodovico's grandfather ,  bartholomew de ferrari ,  was forced out of milan to bologna . 
