the earliest likeness of bruno is an engraving published in 1715 and cited by salvestrini as `` the only known portrait of bruno '' . 
algernon charles swinburne wrote a poem honouring giordano bruno in 1889, when the statue of bruno was constructed in rome . 
few astronomers of bruno's time accepted copernicus's heliocentric model . 
the vatican has published few official statements about bruno's trial and execution . 
giordano bruno  -lrb-  ; ; ; born filippo bruno ,  1548 – 17 february 1600 -rrb- was an italian dominican friar ,  philosopher ,  mathematician ,  poet ,  and cosmological theorist . 
in paris bruno enjoyed the protection of his powerful french patrons . 
bertold brecht wrote one of his `` calendar stories ''  -lrb-  kalendergeschichten  -rrb-  on bruno giordano . 
in 1973 the biographical drama `` giordano bruno '' was released ,  an italian/french movie directed by giuliano montaldo ,  starring gian maria volontè as bruno . 
luigi firpo speculates the charges made against bruno by the roman inquisition were:
born filippo bruno in nola  -lrb-  in campania ,  then part of the kingdom of sicily ,  known as the kingdom of naples  -rrb-  in 1548, he was the son of giovanni bruno ,  a soldier ,  and fraulissa savolino . 
bruno's overall contribution to the birth of modern science is still controversial . 
during the seven years of his trial in rome ,  bruno was held in confinement ,  lastly in the tower of nona . 
giordano bruno features as the hero in a series of historical crime novels by s . j . 
in his later years bruno claimed that the pope accepted his dedication to him of the lost work `` on the ark of noah '' at this time . 
when  .  .  .  bruno  .  .  .  was burned at the stake as a heretic ,  it had nothing to do with his writings in support of copernican cosmology . `` 
with the earth move  .  .  .  all things that are on the earth . 
an idealized animated version of bruno appears in the first episode of the 2014 television series ``  '' . 
discussing bruno's experience of rejection when he visited oxford university ,  feingold suggests that `` it might have been bruno's manner ,  his language and his self-assertiveness ,  rather than his ideas '' that caused offence . 
bruno wrote that other worlds `` have no less virtue nor a nature different from that of our earth '' and ,  like earth ,  `` contain animals and inhabitants '' . 
bruno is sometimes cited as being the first to propose that the universe is infinite ,  which he did during his time in england ,  but an english scientist ,  thomas digges ,  put forth this idea in a published work in 1576, some eight years earlier than bruno . 
bruno's true ,  if partial ,  vindication would have to wait for the implications and impact of newtonian cosmology . 
in april 1583, bruno went to england with letters of recommendation from henry iii as a guest of the french ambassador ,  michel de castelnau . 
bruno plays a small but significant role in martin seay's 2016 novel `` the mirror thief '' . 
bruno's infinite universe was filled with a substance—a `` pure air , ``  aether ,  or `` spiritus ''—that offered no resistance to the heavenly bodies which ,  in bruno's view ,  rather than being fixed ,  moved under their own impetus  -lrb-  momentum  -rrb-  . 
lee married nancy young in 1976.
the bulk of lee's work in music has been with rush  -lrb-  see rush discography  -rrb-  . 
today ,  lee considers himself a cultural jew . 
lee began playing music in school when he was 10 or 11, and got his first acoustic guitar at 14.
lee's first solo effort ,  `` my favourite headache '' ,  was released in 2000.
in 2018 lee published the “geddy lee’s big beautiful book of bass” ,  which highlights his collection of over 250 basses along with interviews with some of leading bass players and bass techs
geddy lee weinrib ,   -lrb-  born gary lee weinrib; july 29, 1953 -rrb- ,  known professionally as geddy lee ,  is a canadian musician ,  singer ,  and songwriter best known as the lead vocalist ,  bassist ,  and keyboardist for the canadian rock group rush . 
in 1982, lee produced the first  -lrb-  and only  -rrb-  album from toronto new wave band boys brigade . 
like cream ,  rush followed the model of a `` power trio '' ,  with lee both playing bass and singing . 
in 2017, lee performed with yes during the band's rock and roll hall of fame induction ,  playing bass for the song `` roundabout . `` 
the geologic time scale  -lrb-  gts  -rrb-  is a system of chronological dating that relates geological strata  -lrb-  stratigraphy  -rrb-  to time . 
the following table summarizes the major events and characteristics of the periods of time making up the geologic time scale . 
the ics's `` geologic time scale 2012 '' book which includes the new approved time scale also displays a proposal to substantially revise the precambrian time scale to reflect important events such as the formation of the earth or the great oxidation event ,  among others ,  while at the same time maintaining most of the previous chronostratigraphic nomenclature for the pertinent time span . 
the first serious attempts to formulate a geologic time scale that could be applied anywhere on earth were made in the late 18th century . 
when william smith and sir charles lyell first recognized that rock strata represented successive time periods ,  time scales could be estimated only very imprecisely since estimates of rates of change were uncertain . 
the first geologic time scale that included absolute dates was published in 1913 by the british geologist arthur holmes . 
the chinese naturalist shen kuo  -lrb-  1031–1095 -rrb- also recognized the concept of `` deep time '' . 
the height of each table entry does not correspond to the duration of each subdivision of time . 
early work on developing the geologic time scale was dominated by british geologists ,  and the names of the geologic periods reflect that dominance . 
in the late 17th century nicholas steno  -lrb-  1638–1686 -rrb- pronounced the principles underlying geologic  -lrb-  geological  -rrb-  time scales . 
assuming a fair coin:
in general ,  if `` a '' is the event where toss `` i '' of a fair coin comes up heads ,  then:
if a fair coin is flipped 21 times ,  the probability of 21 heads is 1 in 2,097,152.
roney and trick told participants in their experiment that they were betting on either two blocks of six coin tosses ,  or on two blocks of seven coin tosses . 
if after tossing four heads in a row ,  the next coin toss also came up heads ,  it would complete a run of five successive heads . 
the probability of at least one win is now:
for example ,  if the `` a priori '' probability of a biased coin is say 1% ,  and assuming that such a biased coin would come down heads say 60% of the time ,  then after 21 heads the probability of a biased coin has increased to about 32% . 
the gambler's fallacy can be illustrated by considering the repeated toss of a fair coin . 
some researchers believe that it is possible to define two types of gambler's fallacy: type one and type two . 
by losing one toss ,  the player's probability of winning drops by two percentage points . 
while a run of five heads has a probability of = 0.03125  -lrb-  a little over 3%  -rrb-  ,  the misunderstanding lies in not realizing that this is the case only before the first coin is tossed . 
the probability of winning will eventually equal the probability of winning a single toss ,  which is  -lrb-  6.25%  -rrb-  and occurs when only one toss is left . 
since the first four tosses turn up heads ,  the probability that the next toss is a head is:
in accordance with bayes' theorem ,  the likely outcome of each flip is the probability of the fair coin ,  which is  . 
on january 1, 2015, the town of gilbert plains relinquished its town status when it amalgamated with the rural municipality of gilbert plains to form the gilbert plains municipality . 
the local newspaper ,  the exponent ,  services both gilbert plains and its neighboring town ,  grandview . 
his depiction of how members of the council were elected to the senate ,  for example ,  aimed to emphasise the way the electoral system prevented factionalism from occurring ,  instead making sure that “public benefits are largely extended among the citizens” rather than narrowly amongst “one family”  . 
he was born in venice ,  the eldest son of alvise contarini ,  of the ancient noble house of contarini ,  and his wife polissena malpiero . 
his description of the doge's close relationship with the saint ,  through the “solemn pomp” with which he attends mass at the saint's chapel ,  attaches him to the aforementioned “exceeding honour” ,  in a similar fashion to the way in which sanudo glorifies venice as a whole by constantly referring to the beauty and worth of st .  mark's square and chapel as part of his panoramic praise of the city . 
gasparo contarini  -lrb-  16 october 1483 – 24 august 1542 -rrb- was an italian diplomat ,  cardinal and bishop of belluno . 
as cardinal ,  contarini figured among the most prominent of the `` spirituali '' ,  the leaders of the movement for reform within the roman church . 
citing from egyptian papyri ,  john f .  nunn identified significant knowledge of gastrointestinal diseases among practicing physicians during the periods of the pharaohs . 
irynakhty ,  of the tenth dynasty ,  c .  2125 b . c .  ,  was a court physician specializing in gastroenterology ,  sleeping ,  and proctology . 
the gulag . 
mortality in gulag camps in 1934–40 was 4–6 times higher than average in the soviet union . 
the area along the indigirka river was known as `` the gulag inside the gulag '' . 
it was renamed as the gulag in november of that year . 
up until world war ii ,  the gulag system expanded dramatically to create a soviet `` camp economy '' . 
the gulag is recognized as a major instrument of political repression in the soviet union . 
western authors use the term `` gulag '' to denote all the prisons and internment camps in the soviet union . 
 -lrb-  see also foreign forced labor in the soviet union .   -rrb- 
she also argues that the function of the gulag system was not truly economic . 
from these times ,  siberia gained its fearful connotation of punishment ,  which was further enhanced by the soviet gulag system . 
between 1990 and 1992, the first precise statistical data on the gulag based on the gulag archives were published by viktor zemskov . 
prior to the dissolution of the soviet union ,  estimates of gulag victims ranged from 2.3 to 17.6 million  -lrb-  see a history of gulag population estimates section  -rrb-  . 
the institutional analysis of the soviet concentration system is complicated by the formal distinction between gulag and gupvi . 
some suggest that 14 million people were imprisoned in the gulag labor camps from 1929 to 1953  -lrb-  the estimates for the period 1918–1929 are more difficult to calculate  -rrb-  . 
the gulag possessed both punitive and economic functions . 
in addition to food shortages ,  the gulag suffered from labor scarcity at the beginning of the war . 
there were several camps outside the soviet union ,  in czechoslovakia ,  hungary ,  poland ,  and mongolia ,  which were under the direct control of the gulag . 
these data allowed scholars to conclude that during the period of 1928–53, about 14 million prisoners passed through the system of gulag `` labour camps '' and 4–5 million passed through the `` labour colonies '' . 
the 1931–32 archives indicate the gulag had approximately 200,000 prisoners in the camps; while in 1935, approximately 800,000 were in camps and 300,000 in colonies  -lrb-  annual averages  -rrb-  . 
the gulag was an administration body that watched over the camps; eventually its name would be used for these camps retrospectively . 
hannah arendt argued that as part of a totalitarian system of government ,  the camps of the gulag system were experiments in `` total domination . `` 
this period accounts for about half of all gulag deaths ,  according to russian statistics . 
anne applebaum and steven rosefielde estimate that 1.2 to 1.5 million people were in gulag system's prison camps and colonies when the war started . 
for the soviet political prisoners ,  like solzhenitsyn ,  all foreign civilian detainees and foreign pows  -lrb-  prisoners of war  -rrb-  were imprisoned in the gulag; the surviving foreign civilians and pows considered themselves prisoners in the gulag . 
throughout the history of the soviet union ,  there were at least 476 separate camp administrations . 
prisoners sentenced to `` katorga works '' were sent to gulag prison camps with the most harsh regime and many of them perished . 
most gulag inmates were not political prisoners ,  although significant numbers of political prisoners could be found in the camps at any one time . 
although conquest cited beria's report to the politburo of the labor camp numbers at the end of 1938 stating there were almost 7 million prisoners in the labor camps ,  more than three times the archival figure for 1938 and an official report to stalin by the soviet minister of state security in 1952 stating there were 12 million prisoners in the labor camps . 
the gulag spanned nearly four decades of soviet and east european history and affected millions of individuals . 
at the beginning of 1953 the total number of prisoners in prison camps was more than 2.4 million of which more than 465,000 were political prisoners . 
prisoners were relatively well off compared to what the prisoners would have to go through in the final years of the gulag . 
the intended detection application of a geiger counter dictates the tube design used . 
some beta particles can also be detected by a thin-walled `` windowless '' geiger-müller tube ,  which has no end-window ,  but allows high energy beta particles to pass through the tube walls . 
geiger counters are widely used to detect gamma radiation and x-rays collectively known as photons ,  and for this the windowless tube is used . 
modern versions of the geiger counter use the halogen tube invented in 1947 by sidney h .  liebson . 
there are two main limitations of the geiger counter . 
a geiger counter is an instrument used for detecting and measuring ionizing radiation . 
there is a particular type of gamma instrument known as a `` hot spot '' detector which has the detector tube on the end of a long pole or flexible conduit . 
a geiger counter consists of a geiger-müller tube  -lrb-  the sensing element which detects the radiation  -rrb-  and the processing electronics ,  which displays the result . 
a chrome steel g-m tube is about 1% efficient over a wide range of energies . 
the original detection principle was realized in 1908, at the cavendish laboratory ,  but it was not until the development of the geiger-müller tube in 1928 that the geiger counter could be produced as a practical instrument . 
gamma and x-ray detectors generally use an `` integral '' design so the geiger–müller tube is conveniently within the electronics enclosure . 
in the church of england ,  the general synod ,  which was established in 1970  -lrb-  replacing the church assembly  -rrb-  ,  is the legislative body of the church . 
from time to time ,  other names are given the `` -mander '' suffix to tie a particular effort to a particular politician or group . 
where an electoral system has not changed over time ,  it is possible that the interplay between a static voting structure and changing demographics will introduce disproportionality into the system . 
when mapped ,  one of the contorted districts in the boston area was said to resemble the shape of a mythological salamander . 
a more complicated example is where a system is specifically designed  -lrb-  even on a good faith basis  -rrb-  to ensure that it has modifications to the principle of one person ,  one  -lrb-  equal  -rrb-  vote: for instance by granting multiple votes to a certain demographic ,  or to certain geographical areas . 
it should ,  however ,  be noted that where a system is created on a good faith basis to have modifications to a basic one person one vote structure ,  it is possible that changing circumstances will inadvertently  -lrb-  from the basis of the structure's designers  -rrb-  lead to gerrymandering . 
in northern ireland ,  the system which kept protestants in a position of advantage was defended on that basis ,  though it was known to be for discriminatory purposes only . 
both the american and northern irish examples show that ,  as a system becomes biased as a passive process ,  such changes have the capacity to alter the attitude of operatives within it from good to bad faith actors . 
gerrymander is a portmanteau of the governor's last name and the word `` salamander '' . 
in the eu ,  the minimum bottled alcoholic strength for gin ,  distilled gin ,  and london gin is 37.5 per cent abv . 
either compounded or distilled gin can be labelled as dry gin or london dry gin if it does not contain any sweetening agents . 
a well known gin cocktail is the martini ,  traditionally made with gin and dry vermouth . 
the 18th century gave rise to a style of gin referred to as `` old tom gin '' ,  which is a softer ,  sweeter style of gin ,  often containing sugar . 
gin in the 18th century was produced in pot stills ,  and was somewhat sweeter than the london gin known today . 
gin produced only through distillation or redistillation of aromatics with an alcoholic wash can be further distinguished and marketed as `` distilled gin '' . 
the canadian food and drug regulation recognises gin with three different definitions  -lrb-  genever ,  gin ,  london or dry gin  -rrb-  that loosely approximate the us definitions . 
according to some unconfirmed accounts gin originated in italy . 
dutch or belgian gin ,  also known as `` jenever '' or `` genever '' ,  evolved from malt wine spirits ,  and is a distinctly different drink from later styles of gin . 
as a result of this evolution ,  gins can be broadly differentiated into three basic styles . 
the u . s .  state of massachusetts and boston public schools began phasing in these maps in march 2017, becoming the first public school district and state in the united states to adopt gall–peters maps as their standard . 
the gall–peters projection is a rectangular map projection that maps all areas such that they have the correct sizes relative to each other . 
under hillman's direction ,  the group recorded one more studio album before dissolving in the autumn of 1971.
a cleveland ,  ohio area band ,  new soft shoe ,  performs as a tribute band to parsons' music . 
 ''sweetheart of the rodeo '' was originally conceived by band leader roger mcguinn as a sprawling ,  double album history of american popular music . 
we were the outlaw country band for a brief period . `` 
a music festival called gram fest or the cosmic american music festival was held annually in honor of parsons in joshua tree ,  california ,  between 1996 and 2006.
for his next and final album ,  1974's posthumously released `` grievous angel '' ,  he again used harris and members of the tcb band for the sessions . 
although parsons was an equal contributor to the band ,  he was not regarded as a full member of the byrds by the band's record label ,  columbia records . 
parsons attempted to rekindle his relationship with the band on their 1972 american tour to no avail . 
in a recent interview with `` american songwriter '' chris hillman explained that `` the greatest legacy of the flying burrito brothers and gram is we were the alternative country band . 
he did not become seriously interested in country music until his time at harvard ,  where he heard merle haggard for the first time . 
in 1966, he and other musicians from the boston folk scene formed a group called the international submarine band . 
in february 2008, gram's protégée ,  emmylou harris ,  was inducted into the country music hall of fame . 
however ,  these comments overlook the fact that parsons ,  like kelley ,  was considered a bona fide member of the band during 1968 and ,  as such ,  was given equal billing alongside mcguinn ,  hillman ,  and kelley on the `` sweetheart of the rodeo '' album and in contemporary press coverage of the band . 
the album was released four days before parsons died . 
ultimately—and to the chagrin of hillman ,  who was not keen on the song amid the band's creative malaise—jagger and richards consented to the cover version . 
although parsons only contributed two new songs to the album  -lrb-  `` in my hour of darkness '' and `` return of the grievous angel ''  -rrb-  ,  he was highly enthused with his new sound and seemed to have finally adopted a diligent mindset to his musical career ,  limiting his intake of alcohol and opiates during most of the sessions . 
faced with a dearth of new material ,  most of the album was hastily written in the studio by leadon ,  hillman ,  and parsons ,  with two `` gilded palace of sin '' outtakes thrown into the mix . 
 ''safe at home '' would remain unreleased until mid-1968, by which time the international submarine band had broken up . 
in the fall of 2012 florida festival promoter and musician randy judy presented his bio-musical `` farther along – the music and life of gram parsons '' at magnoliafest at the spirit of the suwannee music park . 
hillman replied `` he's still dead ,  ralph . `` 
recording sessions for `` sweetheart of the rodeo '' commenced at columbia records' recording studios in the music row area of nashville on march 9, 1968.
a go-fast boat is a small ,  fast boat designed with a long narrow platform and a planing hull to enable it to reach high speeds . 
these boats are difficult to detect by radar except on flat calm seas or at close range . 
the corridor also leads into the council chamber . 
the mace is made from gold-plated silver ,  and was presented to the council in 1912.
the new city chambers initially housed glasgow town council from 1888 to 1895, when it was replaced by glasgow corporation . 
the city chambers has been the headquarters of glasgow city council since april 1996, when it replaced the district council with the abolition of the strathclyde region . 
inaugurated in august 1888 by queen victoria ,  the first council meeting was held within the chambers in october 1889.
adjacent to the council chamber ,  there are three rooms used for civic functions and large meetings: the satinwood salon ,  octagonal room ,  and the mahogany salon . 
scarlett is a widow again . 
rhett ,  more drunk than scarlett has ever seen him ,  returns home from the party long after scarlett . 
when rhett returns ,  scarlett waits for him at the top of the stairs . 
however ,  scarlett is not always willing to conform . 
one year later ,  scarlett and rhett announce their engagement ,  which becomes the talk of the town . 
for young scarlett ,  the ideal southern belle is represented by her mother ,  ellen o'hara . 
though she misses the old rhett at times ,  scarlett is content to leave well enough alone . 
aunt pittypat is living with melanie in atlanta and invites scarlett to stay with them . 
they waltz to the tune of `` when this cruel war is over , ``  and scarlett sings the words . 
scarlett avows that she and her family will survive and never be hungry again . 
the novel's heroine ,  scarlett o'hara ,  charming though not beautiful ,  is a classic southern belle . 
 ''gone with the wind '' was published in june 1936.
melanie gives birth to a boy ,  beau ,  with scarlett's assistance . 
 ''gone with the wind '' is the only novel by mitchell published during her lifetime . 
rhett butler ,  who has a reputation as a rogue ,  had been alone in the library when ashley and scarlett entered and felt it wiser to stay unseen during the argument . 
gone with the wind is a novel by american writer margaret mitchell ,  first published in 1936.
scarlett o'hara uses the title phrase when she wonders to herself if her home on a plantation called `` tara '' is still standing ,  or if it had `` gone with the wind which had swept through georgia . `` 
when scarlett is feeling well again ,  she makes a trip to the mill and talks to ashley ,  who is alone in the office . 
the long tiring struggle for survival begins that has scarlett working in the fields . 
in `` a study in scarlett '' ,  published in `` the new yorker '' ,  claudia roth pierpont wrote:
scarlett feels restricted by these conventions and bitterly misses her life as a young ,  unmarried woman . 
the characters in the novel are organized into two basic groups along class lines: the white planter class ,  such as scarlett and ashley ,  and the black house servant class . 
always wanting her to be happy and radiant ,  frank gives scarlett the money to pay the taxes . 
margaret mitchell arranged `` gone with the wind '' chronologically ,  basing it on the life and experiences of the main character ,  scarlett o'hara ,  as she grew from adolescence into adulthood . 
he consulted with carver . 
carver never married . 
there are some rumors that carver was castrated . 
due to his frugality ,  carver's life savings totaled $60,000, all of which he donated in his last years and at his death to the carver museum and to the george washington carver foundation . 
from 1935 to 1937, carver participated in the usda disease survey . 
in 1941, `` time '' magazine dubbed carver a `` black leonardo '' . 
even as an adult carver spoke with a high pitch . 
carver taught as the first black faculty member at iowa state . 
other popular media tended to exaggerate carver's impact on the peanut industry . 
george washington carver  -lrb-  1860s – january 5, 1943 -rrb- ,  was an american agricultural scientist and inventor . 
the united peanut associations of america invited carver to speak at their 1920 convention . 
carver's testifying to congress made him widely known as a public figure . 
carver had specialized in plant diseases and mycology for his master's degree . 
one of carver's duties was to administer the agricultural experiment station farms . 
in 1911, carver complained that his laboratory had not received the equipment which washington had promised 11 months before . 
carver believed he could have faith both in god and science and integrated them into his life . 
carver had been frugal in his life ,  and in his seventies he established a legacy by creating a museum of his work ,  as well as the george washington carver foundation at tuskegee in 1938 to continue agricultural research . 
it's a shame programmers don't grok that better . `` 
the book `` perl best practices '' defines `` grok '' as understanding a portion of computer code in a profound way . 
grok is a neologism coined by american writer robert a .  heinlein for his 1961 science fiction novel `` stranger in a strange land '' . 
heinlein describes martian words as `` guttural '' and `` jarring '' . 
 ''we are geelong '' is the song sung after a game won by the geelong football club . 
they finally met in a grand final in 2011, which geelong won by 38 points; geelong inflicted collingwood's only three losses for the 2011 season . 
the rivalry between hawthorn and geelong is defined by two grand finals: those of 1989 and 2008.
geelong have since won a further two premierships in 2009 and 2011.
the club's official team song and anthem is `` we are geelong '' . 
in september 2003, china joined the galileo project . 
the countries that contribute most to the galileo project are germany and italy . 
galileo is intended to be an eu civilian gnss that allows all users access to it . 
in july 2004, israel signed an agreement with the eu to become a partner in the galileo project . 
in april 2008, the eu transport ministers approved the galileo implementation regulation . 
in december 2010, eu ministers in brussels voted prague ,  in the czech republic ,  as the headquarters of the galileo project . 
an anonymous eu official claimed that the us officials implied that they might consider shooting down galileo satellites in the event of a major conflict in which galileo was used in attacks against american forces . 
some us officials became especially concerned when chinese interest in galileo was reported . 
the first galileo test satellite ,  the giove-a ,  was launched 28 december 2005, while the first satellite to be part of the operational system was launched on 21 october 2011.
on 17 january 2002, a spokesman for the project stated that ,  as a result of us pressure and economic difficulties ,  `` galileo is almost dead . `` 
china was to invest €230 million  -lrb-  us$302 million ,  gbp 155 million ,  cny 2.34 billion  -rrb-  in the project over the following years . 
in mid-2006 the public/private partnership fell apart ,  and the european commission decided to nationalise the galileo programme . 
the house where gavrilo princip lived in sarajevo was destroyed during world war i . 
on 28 june 1914, gavrilo princip participated in the assassination in sarajevo of the austrian archduke franz ferdinand and his wife ,  duchess sophie chotek of austria . 
gavrilo princip was born in the remote hamlet of obljaj ,  near bosansko grahovo ,  on  . 
there is still a plaque in front of the museum at the spot where gavrilo princip stood when he fired the shots . 
gavrilo princip  -lrb-   ,  ; 25 july 189428 april 1918 -rrb- was a bosnian serb member of young bosnia ,  a yugoslavist organization seeking an end to austro-hungarian rule in bosnia and herzegovina . 
at first ,  princip was rejected at a recruitment office in belgrade because of his small stature . 
a serb family ,  the princips had lived in northwestern bosnia for many centuries and adhered to the serbian orthodox christian faith . 
princip was a yugoslav nationalist associated with the movement mlada bosna  -lrb-  young bosnia  -rrb-  which predominantly consisted of serbs ,  but also bosniaks and croats . 
on the path ,  the christopher street ,  ninth street ,  and 14th street stations are in greenwich village . 
for example ,  west 4th street runs east-west across most of manhattan ,  but runs north-south in greenwich village ,  causing it to intersect with west 10th ,  11th ,  and 12th streets before ending at west 13th street . 
greenwich village is located in new york's 10th congressional district ,  new york's 25th state senate district ,  new york's 66th state assembly district ,  and new york city council's 3rd district . 
two of new york's private colleges ,  new york university  -lrb-  nyu  -rrb-  and the new school ,  are located in greenwich village . 
the neighborhood is bordered by broadway to the east ,  the north river  -lrb-  part of the hudson river  -rrb-  to the west ,  houston street to the south ,  and 14th street to the north ,  and roughly centered on washington square park and new york university . 
well into the 19th century ,  the district of washington square was considered separate from greenwich village . 
all received parcels of land what is now greenwich village . 
unlike the streets of most of manhattan above houston street ,  streets in the village typically are named rather than numbered . 
greenwich village residents are zoned to two elementary schools: ps 3, melser charrette school ,  and ps 41, greenwich village school . 
greenwich village  -lrb-    ,   ,    -rrb-  often referred to by locals as simply `` the village '' ,  is a neighborhood on the west side of lower manhattan ,  new york city . 
a large section of greenwich village ,  made up of more than 50 northern and western blocks in the area up to 14th street ,  is part of a historic district established by the new york city landmarks preservation commission . 
greenwich village was allowed to keep the 18th century street pattern of what is now called the west village: areas that were already built up when the plan was implemented ,  west of what is now greenwich avenue and sixth avenue ,  resulted in a neighborhood whose streets are dramatically different ,  in layout ,  from the ordered structure of the newer parts of manhattan . 
greenwich village is home to new york university ,  which owns large sections of the area and most of the buildings around washington square park . 
into the early 20th century ,  greenwich village was distinguished from the upper-class neighborhood of washington square—based on the major landmark of washington square park or empire ward in the 19th century . 
as one press critic put it in 2013, `` for decades ,  new york university has waged architectural war on greenwich village . `` 
greenwich village includes several collegiate institutions . 
from the late 19th century until the present ,  the hotel albert has served as a cultural icon of greenwich village . 
kaufman: `` shoot her . `` 
many of kaufman's plays were adapted into hollywood films . 
it would be more than a year before kaufman appeared on tv again . 
in every broadway season from 1921 through 1958, there was a play written or directed by kaufman . 
kaufman took his editorial responsibilities seriously . 
kaufman produced many of his own plays as well as those of other writers . 
kaufman joined the theatre club ,  the lambs ,  in 1944.
kaufman was married to his first wife beatrice from 1917 until her death in 1945.
george s .  kaufman was born to joseph s .  kaufman ,  a hatband manufacturer ,  and nettie meyers in pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania . 
most of lewis’ lasting interests originated during his harvard years . 
a third major interest that originated during lewis’ harvard years was his valence theory . 
lewis’ early papers also reveal an unusually advanced awareness of j .  w .  gibbs’s and p .  duhem’s ideas of free energy and thermodynamic potential . 
after his stay in nernst's lab ,  lewis returned to harvard in 1901 as an instructor for three more years . 
lewis hall at berkeley ,  built in 1948, is named in his honor . 
lewis later cited these notes in his classic 1916 paper on chemical bonding ,  as being the first expression of his ideas . 
in 1946, a graduate student found lewis's lifeless body under a laboratory workbench at berkeley . 
this year he also published a monograph on his theories of the chemical bond . 
in 1916, he published his classic paper on chemical bonding ``  ''the atom and the molecule '' '' in which he formulated the idea of what would become known as the covalent bond ,  consisting of a shared pair of electrons ,  and he defined the term odd molecule  -lrb-  the modern term is free radical  -rrb-  when an electron is not shared . 
in 1926, he coined the term `` photon '' for the smallest unit of radiant energy  -lrb-  light  -rrb-  . 
she is eligible for a second term under michigan's term limits ,  which limit a governor to only two ,  four-year terms . 
the governor of michigan is the chief executive of the u . s .  state of michigan . 
hagen recoils in fear . 
siegfried rejoins the hunters ,  who include gunther and hagen . 
hagen ,  left on guard duty ,  gloats that his so-called masters are unwittingly bringing the ring to him  -lrb-  monologue: hagen's watch  -rrb-  . 
they sing a trio in which brünnhilde and gunther vow in the name of wotan ,  `` guardian of oaths '' ,  to kill siegfried ,  while hagen repeats his pledge to alberich: to acquire the ring and rule the world through its power . 
gunther and gutrune agree enthusiastically with this plan . 
siegfried appears at gibichung hall ,  seeking to meet gunther . 
during the run ,  on 12 march 1889, sullivan wrote to gilbert , 
 ''the gondoliers '' was gilbert and sullivan's last great success . 
the works of gilbert and sullivan are themselves frequently pastiched and parodied . 
sullivan insisted that the next opera must be a grand opera . 
gilbert and sullivan scored their first international hit with `` h . m . s . 
gilbert was born in london on 18 november 1836.
 ''princess ida '' was the first of the gilbert and sullivan operas that ,  by the partnership's previous standards ,  was not a success . 
gilbert and sullivan expert and enthusiast ian bradley agrees:
after the success of `` trial by jury '' ,  gilbert and sullivan were suddenly in demand to write more operas together . 
sullivan and burnand's second opera ,  `` the contrabandista ''  -lrb-  1867 -rrb- was not as successful . 
sullivan was born in london on 13 may 1842.
after sullivan's death ,  gilbert wrote only one more comic opera ,  `` fallen fairies ''  -lrb-  1909; music by edward german  -rrb-  ,  which was not a success . 
gilbert and sullivan refers to the victorian-era theatrical partnership of the dramatist w .  s .  gilbert  -lrb-  1836–1911 -rrb- and the composer arthur sullivan  -lrb-  1842–1900 -rrb- and to the works they jointly created . 
there continue to be hundreds of amateur companies performing the gilbert and sullivan works worldwide . 
this event cleared the way for carte ,  gilbert and sullivan to form the d'oyly carte opera company ,  which then produced all of their succeeding operas . 
political humour based on gilbert and sullivan's style and characters continues to be written . 
as with many of the gilbert and sullivan operas ,  a surprise twist changes everything dramatically near the end of the story . 
fred sullivan was the prototype for the `` patter ''  -lrb-  comic  -rrb-  baritone roles in the later operas . 
 ''iolanthe ''  -lrb-  1882 -rrb- was the first of the operas to open at the savoy . 
in early 1876, carte requested that gilbert and sullivan create another one-act opera on the theme of burglars ,  but this was never completed . 
the carl rosa opera company staged the cantata as an opera in 1898.
he built the savoy theatre in 1881 to present their joint works  -lrb-  which came to be known as the savoy operas  -rrb-  and founded the d'oyly carte opera company ,  which performed and promoted gilbert and sullivan's works for over a century . 
 '' ,  `` multiplication tables with garfield '' ,  `` garfield kart '' ,  and `` garfield's match up '' . 
garfield is a comic created by jim davis . 
and recent additions for mobile devices are `` garfield's diner '' and `` garfield's zombie defense '' . 
 ''garfield '' quickly became a commercial success . 
in 2012, a series of garfield video games was launched by french publisher anuman interactive ,  including `` my puzzles with garfield ! 
through the garfield strips ,  there have been many additional characters ,  but the main ones are described here . 
acres '' strip  -rrb-  . 
studios launched in may 2012 a monthly `` garfield '' comic book ,  with the first issue featuring a story written by mark evanier  -lrb-  who has supervised `` garfield and friends '' and `` the garfield show ''  -rrb-  and illustrated by davis's long-time assistant gary barker . 
chapman was frequently late for rehearsing or recording ,  leading to the other pythons calling him `` the late graham chapman '' . 
in 1976, chapman began writing a pirate film ,  `` yellowbeard ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- ,  which came out of conversations between chapman and moon while in los angeles . 
the series was the first to feature chapman's sketch of wrestling with himself . 
chapman died on 4 october 1989 in maidstone hospital . 
chapman was educated at melton mowbray grammar school . 
chapman was born in leicester and was raised in melton mowbray . 
chapman played the lead role in two python films ,  `` holy grail '' and `` life of brian '' . 
in 1997, sherlock allowed jim yoakum to start the `` graham chapman archives '' . 
during the 1970s ,  chapman became increasingly concerned about the python's income and finances . 
in 1959, chapman began to study medicine at emmanuel college ,  cambridge . 
chapman first met his long term partner david sherlock in ibiza in 1966.
in 1988, chapman appeared in the iron maiden video `` can i play with madness '' . 
gray whale had not been observed on commander islands until 2016.
the gray whale  -lrb-  `` eschrichtius robustus ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the grey whale ,  gray back whale ,  pacific gray whale ,  or california gray whale ,  is a baleen whale that migrates between feeding and breeding grounds yearly . 
as of 2001, the californian gray whale population had grown to about 26,000.
killer whales are `` a prime predator of gray whale calves . `` 
humpback whales have been observed defending gray whale calves from orcas . 
the gestation period for gray whales is approximately 13  months . 
the japanese began to catch gray whales beginning in the 1570s . 
in may 2013, a gray whale was sighted off walvis bay ,  namibia . 
in 1936, gray whales became protected in the united states . 
a mature gray whale can reach  ,  with a typical range of  . 
the gray whale became extinct in the north atlantic in the 18th century . 
some gray whales have also been seen off western kamchatka ,  but to date all whales photographed there are also known from the piltun area . 
gray whales are known to occur in taiwan strait even in recent years . 
many other names have been ascribed to the gray whale ,  including desert whale ,  devilfish ,  gray back ,  mussel digger and rip sack . 
as of 2008, the iucn regards the gray whale as being of `` least concern '' from a conservation perspective . 
from 1891 to 1966, an estimated 1,800–2,000 gray whales were caught ,  with peak catches of between 100 and 200 annually occurring in the 1910s . 
more ships followed in the two following winters ,  after which gray whaling in the bay was nearly abandoned because `` of the inferior quality and low price of the dark-colored gray whale oil ,  the low quality and quantity of whalebone from the gray ,  and the dangers of lagoon whaling . `` 
as of 2011, the population of western pacific  -lrb-  seas near korea ,  japan ,  and kamchatka  -rrb-  gray whales was an estimated 130.
currently ,  the annual quota for the gray whale catch in the region is 140 per year . 
calf gray whales drink of their mothers' 53% fat milk per day . 
south korea and china list gray whales as protected species of high concern . 
the iwc bowhead ,  right and gray whale subcommittee in 2011 reiterated the conservation risk to western gray whales is large because of the small size of the population and the potential anthropogenic impacts . 
in mid-1980, there were three gray whale sightings in the eastern beaufort sea ,  placing them further east than their known range at the time . 
the two populations of pacific gray whales  -lrb-  east and west  -rrb-  are morphologically and phylogenically different . 
the origin of the word jinn remains uncertain . 
the exact origins of belief in jinn are not entirely clear . 
besides the jinn ,  islam acknowledges the existence of demons  -lrb-  `` shayāṭīn ''  -rrb-  . 
it is often considered a dialect of southern corsican ,  or even a transitional language between corsican and sardinian . 
gallurese is classified by some linguists as a dialect of corsican ,  and by others as a dialect of sardinian . 
sophy recommended busey take valproic acid  -lrb-  depakote  -rrb-  ,  with which busey agreed . 
in 1971, busey's wife judy helkenberg gave birth to their son ,  william jacob `` jake '' busey . 
in february 2010, busey's fiancée steffanie sampson gave birth to their son ,  luke sampson busey . 
william gary busey  -lrb-  ; born june 29, 1944 -rrb- is an american actor . 
busey has a daughter named alectra from a previous relationship . 
busey began his show business career as a drummer in the rubber band . 
the growth was found after busey began suffering nose bleeds . 
during the filming of the second season of `` celebrity rehab '' in 2008, busey was referred to psychiatrist dr .  charles sophy . 
busey was born in goose creek ,  texas ,  the son of sadie virginia  -lrb-  née arnett  -rrb-  ,  a homemaker ,  and delmer lloyd busey ,  a construction design manager . 
it is unclear whether this was the answer given on the grant show ,  or what the precise wording had been . 
another similar one is words ending in `` -cion '' ,  of which the common words are `` coercion '' ,  `` scion '' ,  and `` suspicion '' . 
the most notable is `` words ending in `` -dous '' '' ,  which has been popular since the 1880s . 
the -gry puzzle is a popular word puzzle that asks for the third english word that ends with the letters `` -gry '' other than `` angry '' and `` hungry '' . 
this topic is a source of lively interest ,  both to lovers of word puzzles and lovers of words . 
various proposed answers exist ,  stating that the question is one of the following:
the most similar to the gry puzzle in form is to find three words that contain the letter sequence `` shion '' ,  to which the answer is `` cushion '' ,  `` fashion '' ,  and `` parishioner ''; this is typically stated by giving `` cushion '' and `` fashion '' ,  and requesting the third word ,  namely `` parishioner '' . 
giosuè alessandro giuseppe carducci  -lrb-  ; also giosue carducci in later years; 27 july 1835 – 16 february 1907 -rrb- was an italian poet ,  writer ,  literary critic and teacher . 
here ,  one of his students was giovanni pascoli ,  who became a poet himself and later succeeded him at the university . 
he translated book 9 of homer's `` iliad '' into italian . 
these were difficult years for carducci: his father died ,  and his brother committed suicide . 
yellowstone includes the world's tallest active geyser  -lrb-  steamboat geyser in norris geyser basin  -rrb-  ,  as well as the renowned old faithful geyser ,  beehive geyser ,  giantess geyser ,  lion geyser ,  plume geyser ,  aurum geyser ,  castle geyser ,  sawmill geyser ,  grand geyser ,  oblong geyser ,  giant geyser ,  daisy geyser ,  grotto geyser ,  the fan & mortar geysers ,  & the riverside geyser ,  all in the upper geyser basin which alone contains nearly 180 geysers . 
some of these are incorrectly called geysers ,  but because they are not periodic in nature they are not considered true geysers . 
he had `` simply opened up a dead geyser '' . 
geysers are temporary geological features . 
yellowstone is the largest geyser locale ,  containing thousands of hot springs ,  and approximately 300 to 500 geysers . 
there are various other types of geysers which are different in nature compared to the normal steam-driven geysers . 
the resultant boiling of the pressurized water results in the geyser effect of hot water and steam spraying out of the geyser's surface vent  -lrb-  a hydrothermal explosion  -rrb-  . 
the resulting froth of expanding steam and hot water then sprays out of the geyser vent . 
geysers are generally aligned along faults . 
the average geyser eruption height at el tatio is about  . 
the valley of geysers  -lrb-  `` dolina geyzerov '' in russian  -rrb-  located in the kamchatka peninsula of russia is the only geyser field in eurasia and the second largest concentration of geysers in the world . 
grand geyser ,  the tallest predictable geyser on earth ,   -lrb-  although geysir in iceland is taller ,  it is not predictable  -rrb-  ,  also at yellowstone national park ,  is an example of a fountain geyser . 
there are three types of elementary row operations which may be performed on the rows of a matrix:
for each row in a matrix ,  if the row does not consist of only zeros ,  then the leftmost nonzero entry is called the `` leading coefficient ''  -lrb-  or `` pivot ''  -rrb-  of that row . 
instead of stopping once the matrix is in echelon form ,  one could continue until the matrix is in `` reduced '' row echelon form ,  as it is done in the table . 
using row operations to convert a matrix into reduced row echelon form is sometimes called gauss–jordan elimination . 
for example ,  the following matrix is in row echelon form ,  and its leading coefficients are shown in red . 
to perform row reduction on a matrix ,  one uses a sequence of elementary row operations to modify the matrix until the lower left-hand corner of the matrix is filled with zeros ,  as much as possible . 
it is in echelon form because the zero row is at the bottom ,  and the leading coefficient of the second row  -lrb-  in the third column  -rrb-  ,  is to the right of the leading coefficient of the first row  -lrb-  in the second column  -rrb-  . 
these row operations are labelled in the table as
for example ,  in the following sequence of row operations  -lrb-  where multiple elementary operations might be done at each step  -rrb-  ,  the third and fourth matrices are the ones in row echelon form ,  and the final matrix is the unique reduced row echelon form . 
guantanamo bay naval base  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially known as naval station guantanamo bay or nsgb  -lrb-  also called gtmo because of the abbreviation of `` guantanamo '' or gitmo because of the common pronunciation of this word by the u . s .  military  -rrb-  ,  is a united states military base and detention camp located on 120 square kilometers  -lrb-  45 sq mi  -rrb-  of land and water at guantánamo bay ,  cuba ,  which the u . s .  leased for use as a coaling station and naval base in 1903.
he is a rival of donald for the love of donald's girlfriend daisy duck . 
also because of his good fortune ,  gladstone is most often characterized to be very snobbish and a gloat; especially  -lrb-  and in some stories exclusively  -rrb-  toward his cousin donald to whom he also can be very aggravating . 
he also has a con artist cousin  -lrb-  not on donald's side of the family  -rrb-  named disraeli . 
donald eventually loses the wager but gladstone later on loses a wager of his own ,  brought to light by daisy duck ,  and thus donald's house is returned to him . 
he appears as a main character in the big little book series book `` luck of the ducks ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- . 
occasionally ,  he is a rival to scrooge mcduck himself who resents his complete reliance on his uncanny good luck . 
he's the younger brother of actor jaimz woolvett . 
the word gypsum is derived from the greek word γύψος  -lrb-  `` gypsos ''  -rrb-  ,  `` plaster '' . 
gypsum was known in old english as `` spærstān '' ,  `` spear stone '' ,  referring to its crystalline projections . 
growth factors typically act as signaling molecules between cells . 
for example ,  epidermal growth factor  -lrb-  egf  -rrb-  enhances osteogenic differentiation ,  while fibroblast growth factors and vascular endothelial growth factors stimulate blood vessel differentiation  -lrb-  angiogenesis  -rrb-  . 
growth factors are important for regulating a variety of cellular processes . 
the year 1908 was important for peano . 
by 1901, peano was at the peak of his mathematical career . 
russell was so struck by peano's innovative logical symbols that he left the conference and returned home to study peano's text . 
also in 1908, peano took over the chair of higher analysis at turin  -lrb-  this appointment was to last for only two years  -rrb-  . 
giuseppe peano  -lrb-  ; ; 27 august 1858 – 20 april 1932 -rrb- was an italian mathematician and glottologist . 
suggested ratios of gin to tonic are between 1:1 and 1:3.
a gin and tonic is a highball cocktail made with gin and tonic water poured over ice . 
gin and tonic is a popular cocktail during the summer . 
gin and tonic is one of john constantine's drinks of choice in the `` hellblazer '' comics . 
the popularity of this variation of the gin and tonic has led to the establishment of gin-tonic bars ,  in which customers can choose their preferred gin ,  tonic ,  and garnish from a menu . 
a gimlet is always a small tool . 
modern french uses the term `` vrille '' ,  also the french for a tendril . 
the geometric mean is also one of the three classical pythagorean means ,  together with the aforementioned arithmetic mean and the harmonic mean . 
for all positive data sets containing at least one pair of unequal values ,  the harmonic mean is always the least of the three means ,  while the arithmetic mean is always the greatest of the three and the geometric mean is always in between  -lrb-  see inequality of arithmetic and geometric means .   -rrb- 
the geometric mean can be understood in terms of geometry . 
on 16 may 1880 eliot married john cross and again changed her name ,  this time to mary anne cross . 
these include the george eliot school ,  middlemarch junior school ,  george eliot hospital ,   -lrb-  formerly nuneaton emergency hospital  -rrb-  ,  and george eliot road ,  in foleshill ,  coventry . 
throughout her career ,  eliot wrote with a politically astute pen . 
after the success of `` adam bede '' ,  eliot continued to write popular novels for the next fifteen years . 
eliot's `` middlemarch '' has been described by the novelists martin amis and julian barnes as the greatest novel in the english language . 
she also adopted a nom-de-plume ,  george eliot; as she explained to her biographer j .  w .  cross ,  george was lewes's forename ,  and eliot was `` a good mouth-filling ,  easily pronounced word ''
working as a translator ,  eliot was exposed to german texts of religious ,  social ,  and moral philosophy such as friedrich strauss’s `` life of jesus '' ,  feuerbach’s `` the essence of christianity '' ,  and spinoza’s `` ethics '' . 
she wrote seven novels ,  including `` adam bede ''  -lrb-  1859 -rrb- ,  `` the mill on the floss ''  -lrb-  1860 -rrb- ,  `` silas marner ''  -lrb-  1861 -rrb- ,  `` romola ''  -lrb-  1862–63 -rrb- ,  `` middlemarch ''  -lrb-  1871–72 -rrb- ,  and `` daniel deronda ''  -lrb-  1876 -rrb- ,  most of which are set in provincial england and known for their realism and psychological insight . 
the revelations about eliot's private life surprised and shocked many of her admiring readers ,  but this did not affect her popularity as a novelist . 
the various film and television adaptations of eliot's books have re-introduced her to the wider reading public . 
a statue of eliot is in newdegate street ,  nuneaton ,  and nuneaton museum & art gallery has a display of artifacts related to her . 
the alert occurred when there was a fatal problem with the system . 
however ,  it did not save the user from all errors ,  as one may have still seen this error occasionally . 
the top bit will be set if the error is a dead end alert . 
recoverable alerts are non-critical crashes in the computer system . 
the term `` guru meditation error '' originated as an in-house joke in amiga's early days . 
a new way is the new subsystem for linux in windows 10 release 1709  -lrb-  wsl  -rrb-  . 
creation of windows version was complicated by bugs in old windows gtk+ versions . 
this could be also a new start for a new native windows 64-bit version of gnumeric . 
gdb is still actively developed . 
gdb offers a `` remote '' mode often used when debugging embedded systems . 
the same mode is also used by kgdb for debugging a running linux kernel on the source level with gdb . 
gdb was first written by richard stallman in 1986 as part of his gnu system ,  after his gnu emacs was `` reasonably stable '' . 
the first public version  -lrb-  galeon 0.6 -rrb- was released in june 2000.
apart from that ,  galeon had several features that were uncommon in browsers at that time:
some of galeon's features were subsequently ported to epiphany  -lrb-  now called web  -rrb-  – the descendant of galeon . 
galeon was widely seen as one of the best linux browsers available . 
with the release of new version of the gtk+ widget toolkit ,  which was used to construct the user interface of galeon ,  the team decided to write a new version of galeon from scratch . 
the linux-only galeon was the second most popular ,  after cross-platform firefox ,  at that time known as phoenix . 
by 1886, the gun was capable of firing more than 400 rounds per minute . 
the smallest-caliber gun also had a broadwell drum feed in place of the curved box of the other guns . 
the gatling gun was first used in warfare during the american civil war . 
the royal navy used gatling guns during the 1882 anglo-egyptian war . 
each barrel had its own firing mechanism . 
the innovative features of the gatling gun were its independent firing mechanism for each barrel and the simultaneous action of the locks ,  barrels ,  carrier and breech . 
the gatling gun was itself an early form of rotary cannon ,  and today modern rotary cannons are often referred to as `` gatling guns '' . 
because of infighting within army ordnance ,  gatling guns were used by the u . s .  army during the spanish–american war . 
the m1893, with minor revisions ,  became the m1895, and 94 guns were produced for the u . s .  army by colt . 
on july 17, 1863, gatling guns were purportedly used to new york anti-draft rioters . 
the gatling gun is one of the best-known early rapid-fire spring loaded ,  hand cranked weapons and a forerunner of the modern machine gun and rotary cannon . 
all models of gatling guns were declared obsolete by the u . s .  military in 1911, after 45 years of service . 
there were four periods in east german political history . 
east germany considered east berlin to be its capital ,  and the soviet union and the rest of the eastern bloc diplomatically recognized east berlin as the capital . 
 -lrb-  see uprising of 1953 in east germany .   -rrb- 
the east german state promoted an anti-imperialist line that was reflected in all its media and all the schools . 
in response ,  the gdr closed the inner german border ,  and on the night of 12 august 1961, east german soldiers began erecting the berlin wall . 
until the 1960s ,  east germans endured shortages of basic foodstuffs such as sugar and coffee . 
the german war reparations owed to the ussr impoverished the soviet zone of occupation and severely weakened the east german economy . 
this made east german economy the richest in all of the soviet bloc until 1990 after the fall of communism in the country . 
over time ,  however ,  the abbreviation `` ddr '' was also increasingly used colloquially by west germans and west german media . 
between 1956 and 1971 the leadership of the east german lutheran churches gradually changed its relations with the state from hostility to cooperation . 
the centre of political power in east berlin was referred to as `` pankow '' . 
throughout ,  the attention paid to atheism in east germany was never intended to jeopardise the cooperation that was desired from those east germans who were religious . 
the soviet zone surrounded west berlin but did not include it; as a result ,  west berlin remained outside the jurisdiction of the gdr . 
on 9 november 1989, a few sections of the berlin wall were opened ,  resulting in thousands of east germans crossing freely into west berlin and west germany for the first time in nearly 30 years . 
east germany held its last elections in march 1990.
as west germany was reorganised and gained independence from its occupiers ,  the german democratic republic was established in east germany in 1949.
the new government introduced a new east german constitution which defined the german democratic republic as a `` republic of workers and peasants '' . 
geographically ,  the german democratic republic bordered the baltic sea to the north; poland to the east; czechoslovakia to the southeast and west germany to the southwest and west . 
east germany ,  officially the german democratic republic  -lrb-  gdr;  ,    -rrb-  was a state that existed from 1949 to 1990, when the eastern portion of germany was part of the eastern bloc during the cold war . 
this was primarily a result of emigration—about one quarter of east germans left the country before the berlin wall was completed in 1961, and after that time ,  east germany had very low birth rates ,  except for a recovery in the 1980s when the birth rate in east germany was considerably higher than in west germany . 
in the 1970s ,  east german leaders acknowledged that former construction soldiers were at a disadvantage when they rejoined the civilian sphere . 
until 1952, east germany comprised the capital ,  east berlin  -lrb-  though legally ,  it was not fully part of the gdr's territory  -rrb-  ,  and the five german states of mecklenburg-vorpommern  -lrb-  in 1947 renamed mecklenburg  -rrb-  ,  brandenburg ,  saxony-anhalt ,  thuringia ,  and saxony ,  their post-war territorial demarcations approximating the pre-war german demarcations of the middle german `` länder ''  -lrb-  states  -rrb-  and `` provinzen ''  -lrb-  provinces of prussia  -rrb-  . 
the east german administrative reform of 1952 established 14 `` bezirke ''  -lrb-  districts  -rrb-  and `` de facto '' disestablished the five `` länder '' . 
it left only one avenue open for krenz and the sed ,  that of completely abolishing travel restrictions between east and west . 
in 1969 the regional protestant churches in east germany and east berlin broke away from the ekd and formed the `` federation of protestant churches in the german democratic republic ''  -lrb-   ,  bek  -rrb-  ,  in 1970 also joined by the moravian `` herrnhuter brüdergemeine '' . 
within two days 22,000 east germans crossed into austria ,  with tens of thousands following in the coming weeks . 
the east german population declined by three million people throughout its forty-one year history ,  from 19 million in 1948 to 16 million in 1990; of the 1948 population ,  some 4 million were deported from the lands east of the oder-neisse line . 
the allies countered the soviets with the berlin airlift  -lrb-  1948–49 -rrb- of food ,  fuel ,  and supplies to west berlin . 
the massive demonstration in east berlin on november 4th coincided with czechoslovakia formally opening its border into west germany . 
according to the hallstein doctrine  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- ,  west germany also did not establish  -lrb-  formal  -rrb-  diplomatic ties with any country – except the ussr – that recognized east german sovereignty . 
explaining the internal impact of the ddr regime from the perspective of german history in the long term ,  historian gerhard a .  ritter  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- has argued that the east german state was defined by two dominant forces – soviet communism on the one hand ,  and german traditions filtered through the interwar experiences of german communists on the other . 
granville is located west of the sydney central business district ,  split between the local government areas of cumberland council and the city of parramatta . 
the area evolved primarily after 1855, when it became the final stop of the first railway line of new south wales . 
granville is a suburb in western sydney ,  in the state of new south wales ,  australia . 
this led to the development of this area ,  which attracted speculators and some local industries . 
equally important for the history of music were telemann's publishing activities . 
telemann's music was one of the driving forces behind the late baroque and the early classical styles . 
today each of telemann's works is usually given a twv number ,  which stands for `` telemann-werke-verzeichnis ''  -lrb-  telemann works catalogue  -rrb-  . 
telemann was born in magdeburg ,  then the capital of the duchy of magdeburg ,  brandenburg-prussia . 
telemann took a few small trips outside of germany at this time . 
georg philipp telemann  -lrb-   – 25 june 1767 -rrb-  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a german baroque composer and multi-instrumentalist . 
the train driver ,  edward olencewicz ,  was exonerated by the inquiry . 
soon after ,  the bridge settled a further two inches onto the train ,  trapping two rescuers and crushing a portable generator `` like butter '' . 
the granville rail/train disaster occurred on tuesday 18 january 1977 at granville ,  new south wales ,  a western suburb of sydney when a crowded commuter train derailed ,  running into the supports of a road bridge that collapsed onto two of the train's passenger carriages . 
the train driver ,  the assistant crewman ,  the `` second man '' ,  and the motorists driving on the fallen bridge all survived . 
george gershwin asked to study with ravel . 
daly was a frequent arranger ,  orchestrator and conductor of gershwin's music ,  and gershwin periodically turned to him for musical advice . 
gershwin's friends and fans were shocked and devastated . 
in 1924, gershwin composed his first major classical work ,  `` rhapsody in blue '' ,  for orchestra and piano . 
gershwin was of russian jewish and lithuanian jewish ancestry . 
on march 1, 2007, the first gershwin prize was awarded to paul simon . 
after ira and george ,  another boy arthur gershwin  -lrb-  1900–1981 -rrb- ,  and a girl frances gershwin  -lrb-  1906–1999 -rrb- were born into the family . 
in 1934, in an effort to earn money to finance his planned folk opera ,  gershwin hosted his own radio program titled `` music by gershwin '' . 
orchestral  solo piano operas london musicals broadway musicals films for which gershwin wrote original scores
the orchestrations in gershwin's symphonic works often seem similar to those of ravel; likewise ,  ravel's two piano concertos evince an influence of gershwin . 
it took gershwin several months to compose and orchestrate . 
gershwin died intestate ,  and his estate passed to his mother . 
in the late 1910s ,  gershwin met songwriter and music director william daly . 
compared to the piano rolls ,  there are few accessible audio recordings of gershwin's playing . 
in 2007, the library of congress named their prize for popular song after george and ira gershwin . 
gershwin can be heard ,  rather briefly ,  on the recording during the slow section . 
a third account of gershwin's musical relationship with his teacher was written by gershwin's close friend vernon duke ,  also a schillinger student ,  in an article for `` the musical quarterly '' in 1947.
gershwin had a ten-year affair with composer kay swift ,  whom he frequently consulted about his music . 
gershwin was influenced by french composers of the early twentieth century . 
in 1913, gershwin left school at the age of 15 and found his first job as a `` song plugger '' . 
