the photoelectric effect is the emission of electrons or other free carriers when light shines on a material . 
where formula_9 is the threshold frequency for the metal . 
according to classical electromagnetic theory ,  this effect can be attributed to the transfer of energy from the light to an electron . 
the maximum kinetic energy formula_1 of an ejected electron is given by
it is an interaction between the incident photon and the outermost electrons . 
where formula_3 is the planck constant and formula_4 is the frequency of the incident photon . 
if `` q '' is the charge on the electron and formula_13 is the stopping potential ,  then the work done by the retarding potential in stopping the electron is formula_14, so we have
other phenomena where light affects the movement of electric charges include the photoconductive effect  -lrb-  also known as photoconductivity or photoresistivity  -rrb-  ,  the photovoltaic effect ,  and the photoelectrochemical effect . 
the maximum kinetic energy of an ejected electron is then
mammals began a rapid diversification during this period . 
when the tertiary period is divided into two periods instead of directly into five epochs ,  the periods are more closely comparable to the duration of 'periods' of the preceding mesozoic and paleozoic eras . 
the paleogene  -lrb-  ; also spelled palaeogene or palæogene; informally lower tertiary or early tertiary  -rrb-  is a geologic period and system that spans 43 million years from the end of the cretaceous period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  to the beginning of the neogene period mya . 
if a preorder is also antisymmetric ,  that is ,  `` a '' ≤ `` b '' and `` b '' ≤ `` a '' implies `` a '' = `` b '' ,  then it is a partial order . 
a set that is equipped with a preorder is called a preordered set  -lrb-  or proset  -rrb-  . 
an antisymmetric preorder is a partial order ,  and a symmetric preorder is an equivalence relation . 
freud first used the term `` psychoanalysis ''  -lrb-  in french  -rrb-  in 1896.
both freud and psychoanalysis have been criticized in very extreme terms . 
three years later ,  he summarised the ideas of id ,  ego ,  and superego in `` the ego and the id '' . 
ego psychology was initially suggested by freud in `` inhibitions ,  symptoms and anxiety ''  -lrb-  1926 -rrb- . 
there are also 25 psychoanalytic societies . 
through the analysis of these conflicts ,  which includes interpreting the transference and countertransference  -lrb-  the analyst's feelings for the patient  -rrb-  ,  the analyst confronts the patient's pathological defenses to help the patient gain insight . 
a major step forward was anna freud's work on defense mechanisms ,  first published in her book `` the ego and the mechanisms of defence ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- . 
also ,  it was the first appearance of his `` structural theory '' consisting three new concepts id ,  ego ,  and superego . 
in `` on narcissism ''  -lrb-  1915 -rrb- freud turned his attention to the subject of narcissism . 
when the patient reclines on a couch with the analyst out of view ,  the patient tends to remember more experiences ,  more resistance and transference ,  and is able to reorganize thoughts after the development of insight – through the interpretive work of the analyst . 
topographic theory was named and first described by sigmund freud in `` the interpretation of dreams ''  -lrb-  1899 -rrb- . 
the fact that many of such patients also demonstrate deficits above makes diagnosis and treatment selection difficult . 
the analyst might also explore the identifications with parents and others that led to the guilt . 
the notion of the `` silent analyst '' has been criticized . 
also ,  clinical technique is taught . 
this section above is partial to ego psychoanalytic theory `` autonomous ego functions '' . 
also in 1936, anna freud ,  sigmund's daughter ,  published her seminal book ,  `` the ego and the mechanisms of defense '' ,  outlining numerous ways the mind could shut upsetting things out of consciousness . 
analysts can also use reconstruction to estimate what may have happened in the past that created some current issue . 
at the same time ,  langs’ model of the mind differs from freud’s in that it understands the mind in terms of evolutionary biological principles . 
around the same time freud attempted to develop a neuro-physiological theory of unconscious mental mechanisms ,  which he soon gave up . 
others have found effect sizes of  . 44– . 68.
cognitive scientists ,  in particular ,  have also weighed in . 
this method would later on be left aside by freud ,  giving free association a bigger role . 
in 1896 freud also published his so-called seduction theory which proposed that the preconditions for hysterical symptoms are sexual excitations in infancy ,  and he claimed to have uncovered repressed memories of incidents of sexual abuse for all his current patients . 
there is what is known among psychoanalysts as `` classical technique '' ,  although freud throughout his writings deviated from this considerably ,  depending on the problems of any given patient . 
the cost to the patient of psychoanalytic treatment ranges widely from place to place and between practitioners . 
exchanges between critics and defenders of psychoanalysis have often been so heated that they have come to be characterized as the `` freud wars '' . 
the transferring of these internal conflicts onto the analyst is called `` transference '' . 
by 1899, freud had theorised that dreams had symbolic significance ,  and generally were specific to the dreamer . 
the ego and the super-ego are both partly conscious and partly unconscious . 
there is also a continuing influence of psychoanalytic thinking in mental health care . 
structural theory divides the psyche into the id ,  the ego ,  and the super-ego . 
when hitler's power grew ,  the freud family and many of their colleagues fled to london . 
many psychoanalysts who work with children have studied the actual effects of child abuse ,  which include ego and object relations deficits and severe neurotic conflicts . 
the idea of psychoanalysis  -lrb-    -rrb-  first started to receive serious attention under sigmund freud ,  who formulated his own theory of psychoanalysis in vienna in the 1890s . 
an evaluation may include one or more other analysts' independent opinions and will include discussion of the patient's financial situation and insurances . 
overall istdp had an effect size of 1.18 compared to no treatment . 
hanyu pinyin  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  often abbreviated to pinyin ,  is the official romanization system for standard chinese in mainland china and to some extent in taiwan . 
pinyin vowels are pronounced in a similar way to vowels in romance languages . 
the pinyin system was developed in the 1950s by many linguists ,  including zhou youguang ,  based on earlier form romanizations of chinese . 
 ''hanyu pinyin '' was based on several existing systems: `` gwoyeu romatzyh '' of 1928, `` latinxua sin wenz '' of 1931, and the diacritic markings from `` zhuyin ''  -lrb-  bopomofo  -rrb-  . 
in each cell below ,  the first line indicates ipa ,  the second indicates pinyin for a standalone  -lrb-  no-initial  -rrb-  form ,  and the third indicates pinyin for a combination with an initial . 
pinyin superseded older romanization systems such as wade–giles  -lrb-  1859; modified 1892 -rrb- and postal romanization ,  and replaced zhuyin as the method of chinese phonetic instruction in mainland china . 
beginning in the early 1980s ,  western publications addressing mainland china began using the hanyu pinyin romanization system instead of earlier romanization systems; this change followed the normalization of diplomatic relations between the united states and the prc in 1979.
when a foreign writing system with one set of coding/decoding system is taken to write a language ,  certain compromises may have to be made . 
pinyin has become a tool for many foreigners to learn mandarin pronunciation ,  and is used to explain both the grammar and spoken mandarin coupled with chinese characters  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the spelling of chinese geographical or personal names in pinyin has become the most common way to transcribe them in english . 
pinyin was created by chinese linguists ,  including zhou youguang ,  as part of a chinese government project in the 1950s . 
the first late qing reformer to propose that china adopt a system of spelling was song shu  -lrb-  1862–1910 -rrb- . 
the parable of the pearl  -lrb-  also called the pearl of great price  -rrb-  is one of the parables of jesus . 
there are a variety of definitions of pantheism . 
it was subsequently translated into english as `` pantheism '' in 1702.
pantheism is the view that everything is part of an all-encompassing ,  immanent god . 
 ''ethics '' was the major source from which western pantheism spread . 
in the early nineteenth century ,  the german theologian julius wegscheider defined pantheism as the belief that god and the world established by god are one and the same . 
to them ,  pantheism is the view that the universe  -lrb-  in the sense of the totality of all existence  -rrb-  and god are identical  -lrb-  implying a denial of the personality and transcendence of god  -rrb-  . 
philosophers and theologians have often suggested that pantheism implies monism . 
pantheism is the belief that reality is identical with divinity ,  or that all-things compose an all-encompassing ,  immanent god . 
in george henry lewes's words  -lrb-  1846 -rrb- ,  `` pantheism is as old as philosophy . 
it may also be possible to distinguish two types of pantheism ,  one being more religious and the other being more philosophical . 
other examples of determinism-inclined pantheisms include those of ralph waldo emerson ,  and hegel . 
 ''pantheism '' derives from the greek πᾶν `` pan ''  -lrb-  meaning `` all ,  of everything ''  -rrb-  and θεός `` theos ''  -lrb-  meaning `` god ,  divine ''  -rrb-  . 
baruch spinoza later claimed that `` whatsoever is ,  is in god ,  and without god nothing can be ,  or be conceived . `` 
god has infinitely many other attributes which are not present in our world . 
this form of panentheism helps in overcoming the problem of evil and in proposing that god's love for the world is essential to who god is . 
in the essay titled `` the god conception of buddhism '' he attempts to explain how a buddhist looks at the ultimate without an anthropomorphic god figure while still being able to relate to the term god in a buddhist sense:
panentheistic conceptions of god occur amongst some modern theologians . 
in christianity ,  creation is not considered a literal `` part of '' god ,  and divinity is essentially distinct from creation  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  transcendent  -rrb-  . 
according to german philosopher karl jaspers ,  when spinoza wrote `` deus sive natura ''  -lrb-  god or nature  -rrb-  spinoza did not mean to say that god and nature are interchangeable terms ,  but rather that god's transcendence was attested by his infinitely many attributes ,  and that two attributes known by humans ,  namely thought and extension ,  signified god's immanence . 
the former suggests two poles separated such as god influencing creation and it in turn its creator  -lrb-  bangert 2006:168 -rrb- ,  whereas bipolarity completes god’s being implying interdependence between temporal and eternal poles . 
thus ,  sexual sadism would become sexual sadism disorder; sexual masochism would become sexual masochism disorder ,  and so on . `` 
sexual arousal in association with objects that were designed for sexual purposes is not diagnosable . 
in preferred paraphilias ,  a person prefers the paraphilia to conventional sexual activities ,  but also engages in conventional sexual activities . 
sexual masochism has been found to be the most commonly observed paraphilia in women ,  with approximately 1 in 20 cases of sexual masochism being female . 
paraphilia  -lrb-  previously known as sexual perversion and sexual deviation  -rrb-  is the experience of intense sexual arousal to atypical objects ,  situations ,  fantasies ,  behaviors ,  or individuals . 
paraphilial psychopathology is not the same as psychologically normative adult human sexual behaviors ,  sexual fantasy ,  and sex play . 
martin kafka writes ,  `` sexual disorders once considered paraphilias  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  homosexuality  -rrb-  are now regarded as variants of normal sexuality . `` 
homosexuality ,  now widely considered a normal variant of human sexuality ,  was at one time discussed as a sexual deviation . 
some paraphilias may interfere with the capacity for sexual activity with consenting adult partners . 
the dsm-iv  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- retained the sexual disorders classification for paraphilias ,  but added an even broader category ,  `` sexual and gender identity disorders , ``  which includes them . 
pharmacological treatments can help people control their sexual behaviors ,  but do not change the content of the paraphilia . 
in 1981, an article published in `` american journal of psychiatry '' described paraphilia as `` recurrent ,  intense sexually arousing fantasies ,  sexual urges ,  or behaviors generally involving:
some groups ,  seeking greater understanding and acceptance of sexual diversity ,  have lobbied for changes to the legal and medical status of unusual sexual interests and practices . 
as such ,  the term `` sexual perversion '' or the epithet `` pervert '' have historically referred to gay men ,  as well as other non-heterosexuals  -lrb-  people who fall out of the perceived norms of sexual orientation  -rrb-  . 
in american psychiatry ,  prior to the publication of the dsm-i ,  paraphilias were classified as cases of `` psychopathic personality with pathologic sexuality '' . 
pediatricians must undertake further training in their chosen field . 
the swedish physician nils rosén von rosenstein  -lrb-  1706–1773 -rrb- is considered to be the founder of modern pediatrics as a medical specialty ,  while his work `` the diseases of children ,  and their remedies ''  -lrb-  1764 -rrb- is considered to be `` the first modern textbook on the subject '' . 
this may take from four to eleven or more years ,   -lrb-  depending on jurisdiction and the degree of specialization  -rrb-  . 
pediatricians work both in hospitals ,  particularly those working in its subspecialties such as neonatology ,  and as primary care physicians . 
pediatrics  -lrb-  also spelled paediatrics or pædiatrics  -rrb-  is the branch of medicine that involves the medical care of infants ,  children ,  and adolescents . 
once attending medical school ,  student courses will focus on basic medical sciences like human anatomy ,  physiology ,  chemistry ,  etc .  ,  for the first three years ,  the second year of which is when medical students start to get hands-on experience with actual patients . 
although there are differences between animal ,  plant ,  and microbial cells ,  the basic physiological functions of cells can be divided into the processes of cell division ,  cell signaling ,  cell growth ,  and cell metabolism . 
plant physiology is a subdiscipline of botany concerned with the functioning of plants . 
human physiology seeks to understand the mechanisms that work to keep the human body alive and functioning ,  through scientific enquiry into the nature of mechanical ,  physical ,  and biochemical functions of humans ,  their organs ,  and the cells of which they are composed . 
physiology  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the scientific study of the functions and mechanisms which work within a living system . 
william beaumont was the first american to utilize the practical application of physiology . 
in the 20th century ,  biologists became interested in how organisms other than human beings function ,  eventually spawning the fields of comparative physiology and ecophysiology . 
the study of human physiology as a medical field originates in classical greece ,  at the time of hippocrates  -lrb-  late 5th century bc  -rrb-  . 
according to the type of investigated organisms ,  the field can be divided into ,  animal physiology  -lrb-  including that of humans  -rrb-  ,  plant physiology ,  cellular physiology and microbial physiology . 
the physiologic state is the condition occurring from normal body function ,  while the pathological state is centered on the abnormalities that occur in animal diseases ,  including humans . 
the number  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a mathematical constant . 
like all irrational numbers ,  cannot be represented as a common fraction  -lrb-  also known as a simple or vulgar fraction  -rrb-  ,  by the very definition of `` irrational number ''  -lrb-  that is ,  `` not a rational number ''  -rrb-  . 
is an irrational number ,  meaning that it cannot be written as the ratio of two integers  -lrb-  fractions such as are commonly used to approximate  ,  but no common fraction  -lrb-  ratio of whole numbers  -rrb-  can be its exact value  -rrb-  . 
it is also called archimedes' constant . 
the number is then defined as half the magnitude of the derivative of this homomorphism . 
but every irrational number ,  including  ,  can be represented by an infinite series of nested fractions ,  called a continued fraction:
being an irrational number ,  cannot be expressed as a common fraction  -lrb-  equivalently ,  its decimal representation never ends and never settles into a permanently repeating pattern  -rrb-  . 
postmodern music is either music of the postmodern era ,  or music that follows aesthetic and philosophical trends of postmodernism . 
postmodern classical music as well is not a musical `` style '' ,  but rather refers to music of the postmodern era . 
the term `` postmodern '' was first used around the 1880s . 
in 1921 and 1925, postmodernism had been used to describe new forms of art and music . 
but ,  of course ,  that's not postmodernism; that's modernism ! `` 
the postmodern impulse in classical music arose in the 1960s with the advent of musical minimalism . 
postmodern music ,  on the other hand ,  shares characteristics with postmodernist art—that is ,  art that comes `` after '' and reacts `` against '' modernism . 
criticisms of postmodernism are intellectually diverse ,  including the assertions that postmodernism is meaningless and promotes obscurantism . 
the connection between postmodernism ,  posthumanism ,  and cyborgism has led to a challenge of postmodernism ,  for which the terms `` postpostmodernism '' and `` postpoststructuralism '' were first coined in 2003:
graphic design in the postmodern age brought forth ideas that challenged the orderly feel of modernism . 
yet ,  while postmodern design did not consist of one unified graphic style ,  the movement was an expressive and playful time for designers who searched for more and more ways to go against the system . 
 ''postmodernist '' describes part of a movement; `` postmodern '' places it in the period of time since the 1950s ,  making it a part of contemporary history . 
the idea of postmodernism in architecture began as a response to the perceived blandness and failed utopianism of the modern movement . 
peter drucker suggested the transformation into a post-modern world happened between 1937 and 1957  -lrb-  when he was writing  -rrb-  . 
literary postmodernism was officially inaugurated in the united states with the first issue of `` boundary 2 '' ,  subtitled `` journal of postmodern literature and culture '' ,  which appeared in 1972.
the exhibition `` postmodernism – style and subversion 1970–1990 '' at the victoria and albert museum  -lrb-  london ,  24 september 2011 – 15 january 2012 -rrb- was billed as the first show to document postmodernism as a historical movement . 
in 1949 the term was used to describe a dissatisfaction with modern architecture ,  and led to the postmodern architecture movement ,  and a response to the modernist architectural movement known as the international style . 
jonathan kramer posits the idea  -lrb-  following umberto eco and jean-françois lyotard  -rrb-  that postmodernism  -lrb-  including `` musical '' postmodernism  -rrb-  is less a surface style or historical period  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  condition  -rrb-  than an `` attitude '' . 
formal ,  academic critiques of postmodernism can also be found in works such as `` beyond the hoax '' and `` fashionable nonsense '' . 
the movie camera is a type of photographic camera which takes a rapid sequence of photographs on recording medium . 
such cameras have long been realized by using film and more recently in digital electronic methods  -lrb-  including cell phone cameras  -rrb-  . 
the camera  -lrb-  or 'camera obscura'  -rrb-  is a dark room or chamber from which ,  as far as possible ,  all light is excluded except the light that forms the image . 
besides the camera ,  other methods of forming images with light are available . 
instant color film ,  used in a special camera which yielded a unique finished color print only a minute or two after the exposure ,  was introduced by polaroid in 1963.
the arab physicist ibn al-haytham  -lrb-  alhazen  -rrb-   -lrb-  965–1040 -rrb- also invented a camera obscura and pinhole camera . 
the camera is the image-forming device ,  and a photographic plate ,  photographic film or a silicon electronic image sensor is the capture medium . 
kodachrome ,  the first modern `` integral tripack ''  -lrb-  or `` monopack ''  -rrb-  color film ,  was introduced by kodak in 1935.
more than 99% of photographs taken around the world are through digital cameras ,  increasingly through smartphones . 
color photography was explored beginning in the 1840s . 
this was common for reproduction photography of flat copy when large film negatives were used  -lrb-  see process camera  -rrb-  . 
glass plates were the medium for most original camera photography from the late 1850s until the general introduction of flexible plastic films during the 1890s . 
photographers control the camera and lens to `` expose '' the light recording material to the required amount of light to form a `` latent image ''  -lrb-  on plate or film  -rrb-  or raw file  -lrb-  in digital cameras  -rrb-  which ,  after appropriate processing ,  is converted to a usable image . 
autochrome plates were one of several varieties of additive color screen plates and films marketed between the 1890s and the 1950s . 
autochrome ,  the first commercially successful color process ,  was introduced by the lumière brothers in 1907.
early experiments in color required extremely long exposures  -lrb-  hours or days for camera images  -rrb-  and could not `` fix '' the photograph to prevent the color from quickly fading when exposed to white light . 
talbot's famous tiny paper negative of the oriel window in lacock abbey ,  one of a number of camera photographs he made in the summer of 1835, may be the oldest camera negative in existence . 
in 1981, sony unveiled the first consumer camera to use a charge-coupled device for imaging ,  eliminating the need for film: the sony mavica . 
the first flexible photographic roll film was marketed by george eastman in 1885, but this original `` film '' was actually a coating on a paper base . 
color photography may form images as positive transparencies ,  which can be used in a slide projector ,  or as color negatives intended for use in creating positive color enlargements on specially coated paper . 
the image was recorded on a ccd ,  an electronic photographic film . 
a color print on paper could be produced by superimposing carbon prints of the three images made in their complementary colors ,  a subtractive method of color reproduction pioneered by louis ducos du hauron in the late 1860s . 
film continues to be the preference of some photographers because of its distinctive `` look '' . 
science uses image technology that has derived from the design of the pin hole camera . 
the first permanent color photograph was taken in 1861 using the three-color-separation principle first published by scottish physicist james clerk maxwell in 1855.
their work enabled the first quantitative measure of film speed to be devised . 
around the year 1800, british inventor thomas wedgwood made the first known attempt to capture the image in a camera obscura by means of a light-sensitive substance . 
russian photographer sergei mikhailovich prokudin-gorskii made extensive use of this color separation technique ,  employing a special camera which successively exposed the three color-filtered images on different parts of an oblong plate . 
postmodern philosophy also has strong relations with the substantial literature of critical theory . 
the most influential early postmodern philosophers were jean baudrillard ,  jean-françois lyotard ,  and jacques derrida . 
jean-françois lyotard defined philosophical postmodernism in `` the postmodern condition '' ,  writing `` simplifying to the extreme ,  i define postmodern as incredulity towards meta narratives .  .  . ``  where what he means by metanarrative is something like a unified ,  complete ,  universal ,  and epistemically certain story about everything that is . 
many postmodern claims are a deliberate repudiation of certain 18th-century enlightenment values . 
philosopher john deely has argued for the contentious claim that the label `` postmodern '' for thinkers such as derrida `` et al . `` 
according to  ,  postmodern music:
postmodern music is not a distinct musical style ,  but rather refers to music of the postmodern era . 
postmodernism in music is not a distinct musical style ,  but rather refers to music of the postmodern era . 
pumps can be classified by their method of displacement into positive displacement pumps ,  impulse pumps ,  velocity pumps ,  gravity pumps ,  steam pumps and valveless pumps . 
mechanical pumps may be submerged in the fluid they are pumping or be placed external to the fluid . 
a positive displacement pump must not operate against a closed valve on the discharge side of the pump ,  because it has no shutoff head like centrifugal pumps . 
pumps can be classified into three major groups according to the method they use to move the fluid: `` direct lift '' ,  `` displacement '' ,  and `` gravity '' pumps . 
a positive displacement pump can be further classified according to the mechanism used to move the fluid:
a pump is a device that moves fluids  -lrb-  liquids or gases  -rrb-  ,  or sometimes slurries ,  by mechanical action . 
pressure  -lrb-  symbol: `` p '' or `` p ''  -rrb-  is the force applied perpendicular to the surface of an object per unit area over which that force is distributed . 
various units are used to express pressure . 
a polygonal boundary may be allowed to cross over itself ,  creating star polygons and other self-intersecting polygons . 
a simple polygon is one which does not intersect itself . 
polygons are primarily classified by the number of sides . 
video games typically have one player character for each person playing the game . 
a player character  -lrb-  also known as pc and playable character  -rrb-  is a fictional character in a role-playing game or video game whose actions are directly controlled by a player of the game rather than the rules of the game . 
the player character functions as a fictional ,  alternate body for the player controlling the character . 
in role playing games such as `` dungeons & dragons '' or `` final fantasy , ``  a player typically creates or takes on the identity of a character that may have nothing in common with the player . 
its association with the parish church remains paramount . 
the parish is also the basic level of church administration in the church of scotland . 
in the catholic church ,  each parish normally has its own parish priest  -lrb-  in some countries called pastor  -rrb-  ,  who has responsibility and canonical authority over the parish . 
in england this church property was technically in ownership of the parish priest `` ex-officio '' ,  vested in him on his institution to that parish . 
the church of england geographical structure uses the local parish church as its basic unit . 
some larger parishes or parishes that have been combined under one parish priest may have two or more such churches ,  or the parish may be responsible for chapels  -lrb-  or chapels of ease  -rrb-  located at some distance from the mother church for the convenience of distant parishioners . 
each diocese  -lrb-  administrative region  -rrb-  is divided into parishes ,  each with their own central church called the parish church ,  where religious services take place . 
if this hypothesis were correct ,  the `` secret history '' would not be proof that procopius hated justinian or theodora . 
a number of historical novels based on procopius's works  -lrb-  along with other sources  -rrb-  have been written . 
among the more titillating  -lrb-  and dubious  -rrb-  revelations in the `` secret history '' is procopius's account of theodora's thespian accomplishments:
 ''histories '' ,  a continuation of procopius's work in a similar style ,  was undertaken by agathias in the 570s . 
theodora ,  who was dead when this panegyric was written ,  is mentioned only briefly ,  but procopius's praise of her beauty is fulsome . 
apart from his own writings ,  the main source for procopius's life is an entry in the `` suda '' ,  a greek encyclopaedia written sometime after 975, which discusses his early life . 
in the eyes of many scholars ,  the `` secret history '' reveals an author who had become deeply disillusioned with emperor justinian ,  his wife theodora ,  the general belisarius ,  and his wife antonina . 
in sociology and anthropology ,  property is often defined as a relationship between two or more individuals and an object ,  in which at least one of these individuals holds a bundle of rights over the object . 
a title ,  or a right of ownership ,  establishes the relation between the property and other persons ,  assuring the owner the right to dispose of the property as the owner sees fit . 
positive law defines such rights ,  and the judiciary can adjudicate and enforce property rights . 
according to adam smith ,  the expectation of profit from `` improving one's stock of capital '' rests on private property rights . 
in 1789 the u . s . 
it is better to prevent crimes than to punish them . 
there was also a system of investigative `` juries '' . 
there was no concept of public prosecution ,  so victims of crime or their families had to organize and manage the prosecution themselves . 
in some cases ,  police are assigned to work `` undercover '' ,  where they conceal their police identity to investigate crimes ,  such as organized crime or narcotics crime ,  that are unsolvable by other means . 
these districts may be known as neighborhood improvement districts ,  crime prevention districts ,  or security districts . 
in 1566, the first police investigator of rio de janeiro was recruited . 
royal assent to the metropolitan police act 1829 was given and the metropolitan police service was established on september 29, 1829 in london as the first modern and professional police force in the world . 
first attested in english in the early 15th century ,  initially in a range of senses encompassing ' -lrb-  public  -rrb-  policy; state; public order' ,  the word `` police '' comes from middle french `` police ''  -lrb-  'public order ,  administration ,  government'  -rrb-  ,  in turn from latin `` politia '' ,  which is the latinisation of the greek πολιτεία  -lrb-  `` politeia ''  -rrb-  ,  `` citizenship ,  administration ,  civil polity '' . 
in india ,  the police is under the control of respective states and union territories and is known to be under state police services  -lrb-  sps  -rrb-  . 
a police force is a constituted body of persons empowered by a state to enforce the law ,  to protect people and property ,  and to prevent crime and civil disorder . 
the first use of the word police  -lrb-  `` polles ''  -rrb-  in english comes from the book `` the second part of the institutes of the lawes of england '' published in 1642.
other duties associated with modern policing ,  such as investigating crimes ,  were left to the citizens themselves . 
later historians would attribute the perception of england's `` appearance of orderliness and love of public order '' to the preventive principle entrenched in peel's police system . 
the english system of maintaining public order since the norman conquest was a private system of tithings ,  led by a constable ,  which was based on a social obligation for the good conduct of the others; more common was that local lords and nobles were responsible for maintaining order in their lands ,  and often appointed a constable ,  sometimes unpaid ,  to enforce the law . 
law enforcement is only part of policing activity . 
michel foucault claims that the contemporary concept of police as a paid and funded functionary of the state was developed by german and french legal scholars and practitioners in public administration and statistics in the 17th and early 18th centuries ,  most notably with nicolas delamare's `` traité de la police ''  -lrb-  `` treatise on the police ''  -rrb-  ,  first published in 1705.
peel ,  widely regarded as the father of modern policing ,  was heavily influenced by the social and legal philosophy of jeremy bentham ,  who called for a strong and centralised ,  but politically neutral ,  police force for the maintenance of social order ,  for the protection of people from crime and to act as a visible deterrent to urban crime and disorder . 
in canada ,  the royal newfoundland constabulary was founded in 1729, making it the first police force in present-day canada . 
the concept of the `` prefecture system '' spread to other cultures such as korea and japan . 
on march 12, 1829, a government decree created the first uniformed police in france ,  known as `` sergents de ville ''  -lrb-  `` city sergeants ''  -rrb-  ,  which the paris prefecture of police's website claims were the first uniformed policemen in the world . 
by contrast ,  the peelian principles argue that `` the power of the police .  .  . is dependent on public approval of their existence ,  actions and behavior '' ,  a philosophy known as policing by consent . 
the word `` police '' was borrowed from french into the english language in the 18th century ,  but for a long time it applied only to french and continental european police forces . 
by 1841 this force numbered over 8,600 men . 
the original pdp-10 processor is the ka10, introduced in 1968.
projects to extend the pdp-10 line were eclipsed by the success of the unrelated vax superminicomputer ,  and the cancellation of the pdp-10 line was announced in 1983.
the pdp-10's architecture is almost identical to that of dec's earlier pdp-6, sharing the same 36-bit word length and slightly extending the instruction set  -lrb-  but with improved hardware implementation  -rrb-  . 
pdp-10 computers running the tops-10 operating system were labeled `` decsystem-10 '' as a way of differentiating them from the pdp-11.
programmed data processor  -lrb-  pdp  -rrb-  ,  referred to by some customers ,  media and authors as `` programmable data processor ,  is a term used by the digital equipment corporation from 1957 to 1990 for several lines of minicomputers . 
segmented mirror configurations are used to get around the size limitation on single primary mirrors . 
the hubble space telescope has a 2.4 m  -lrb-  7 ft 10 in  -rrb-  primary mirror . 
a tree is the ideal that each of us holds that allows us to identify the imperfect reflections of trees all around us . 
some commentators hold that plato argued that truth is an abstraction . 
proteins can bind to other proteins as well as to small-molecule substrates . 
short amino acid sequences within proteins often act as recognition sites for other proteins . 
many proteins are composed of several protein domains ,  i . e . 
the study of proteins `` in vivo '' is often concerned with the synthesis and localization of the protein within the cell . 
proteins can be informally divided into three main classes ,  which correlate with typical tertiary structures: globular proteins ,  fibrous proteins ,  and membrane proteins . 
proteins are not entirely rigid molecules . 
the set of proteins expressed in a particular cell or cell type is known as its proteome . 
proteins are assembled from amino acids using information encoded in genes . 
in animals ,  amino acids are obtained through the consumption of foods containing protein . 
many more gene sequences are known than protein structures . 
once formed ,  proteins only exist for a certain period and are then degraded and recycled by the cell's machinery through the process of protein turnover . 
proteins can interact with many types of molecules ,  including with other proteins ,  with lipids ,  with carboyhydrates ,  and with dna . 
most proteins fold into unique 3-dimensional structures . 
digestion breaks the proteins down for use in the metabolism . 
the process of synthesizing a protein from an mrna template is known as translation . 
proteins can also work together to achieve a particular function ,  and they often associate to form stable protein complexes . 
predicting and analysing protein disorder is ,  therefore ,  an important part of protein structure characterisation . 
dirigent proteins are members of a class of proteins that dictate the stereochemistry of a compound synthesized by other enzymes . 
proteins are always biosynthesized from n-terminus to c-terminus . 
transmembrane proteins can also serve as ligand transport proteins that alter the permeability of the cell membrane to small molecules and ions . 
most proteins consist of linear polymers built from series of up to 20 different -α- amino acids . 
the sh3 domain binds to proline-rich sequences in other proteins  -rrb-  . 
proteins are large biomolecules ,  or macromolecules ,  consisting of one or more long chains of amino acid residues . 
key questions in kinetics include how the rate of reaction depends on temperature and on the concentrations of reactants and catalysts in the reaction mixture ,  as well as how catalysts and reaction conditions can be engineered to optimize the reaction rate . 
which reactions do occur and how fast is the subject of chemical kinetics ,  another branch of physical chemistry . 
the first scientific journal specifically in the field of physical chemistry was the german journal ,  `` zeitschrift für physikalische chemie '' ,  founded in 1887 by wilhelm ostwald and jacobus henricus van 't hoff . 
some journals that deal with physical chemistry include zeitschrift für physikalische chemie  -lrb-  1887 -rrb-; journal of physical chemistry a  -lrb-  from 1896 as `` journal of physical chemistry '' ,  renamed in 1997 -rrb-; physical chemistry chemical physics  -lrb-  from 1999, formerly faraday transactions with a history dating back to 1905 -rrb-; macromolecular chemistry and physics  -lrb-  1947 -rrb-; annual review of physical chemistry  -lrb-  1950 -rrb-; molecular physics  -lrb-  1957 -rrb-; journal of physical organic chemistry  -lrb-  1988 -rrb-; journal of physical chemistry b  -lrb-  1997 -rrb-; chemphyschem  -lrb-  2000 -rrb-; journal of physical chemistry c  -lrb-  2007 -rrb-; and journal of physical chemistry letters  -lrb-  from 2010, combined letters previously published in the separate journals  -rrb- 
see group contribution method ,  lydersen method ,  joback method ,  benson group increment theory ,  quantitative structure–activity relationship
in particular ,  the perimeter of a rectangle of width formula_9 and length formula_10 equals formula_11
an equilateral polygon is a polygon which has all sides of the same length  -lrb-  for example ,  a rhombus is a 4-sided equilateral polygon  -rrb-  . 
the perimeter of a polygon equals the sum of the lengths of its sides  -lrb-  edges  -rrb-  . 
if is a regular polygon's radius and is the number of its sides ,  then its perimeter is
to calculate the perimeter of an equilateral polygon ,  one must multiply the common length of the sides by the number of sides . 
between two phases in equilibrium there is a narrow region where the properties are not that of either phase . 
within each phase ,  the properties are uniform but between the two phases properties differ . 
as many as eight immiscible liquid phases have been observed . 
at the triple point ,  all three phases can coexist . 
another interesting though not unusual feature of the phase diagram is the point where the solid–liquid phase line meets the liquid–gas phase line . 
water in a closed jar with an air space over it forms a two phase system . 
the term `` phase '' is sometimes used as a synonym for state of matter ,  but there can be several immiscible phases of the same state of matter . 
the results of such experiments can be plotted in phase diagrams . 
physical science is a branch of natural science that studies non-living systems ,  in contrast to life science . 
gasoline is produced in oil refineries . 
on average ,  a barrel of crude oil yields about of gasoline after processing in an oil refinery ,  though this varies based on the crude oil assay . 
the terms above are the jargon used in the oil industry and terminology varies . 
these would often be used in aircraft engines . 
had the japanese destroyed the oil , ``  he added ,  `` it would have prolonged the war another two years . `` 
britain eventually solved its naval oil dependence by securing oil from royal dutch shell and the anglo-persian oil company and this determined from where and of what quality its gasoline would come . 
prior to the american entry into world war i ,  the european allies used fuels derived from crude oils from borneo ,  java and sumatra ,  which gave satisfactory performance in their military aircraft . 
japan ,  like germany ,  had almost no domestic oil supply and by the late 1930s produced only 7% of its own oil while importing the rest – 80% from the united states . 
in the 1950s oil refineries started to focus on high octane fuels ,  and then detergents were added to gasoline to clean the jets in carburetors . 
initially ,  all the programs were related to volatility and fuel consumption ,  ease of starting ,  crankcase oil dilution and acceleration . 
 ''gasoline '' is a north american word that refers to fuel for automobiles . 
by 1941, principally through the efforts of the cooperative fuel research committee ,  the number of grades for aviation fuels was reduced to three: 73, 91 and 100 octane . 
oil and its byproducts ,  especially high-octane aviation gasoline ,  would prove to be a driving concern for how germany conducted the war . 
one journal stated ,  ``  .  .  . on a multi-cylinder engine in a high-priced car we are diluting the oil in the crankcase as much as 40 percent in a 200-mile run ,  as the analysis of the oil in the oil-pan shows . `` 
in the same year ,  the u . s .  army air force specified fuels rated at 87 octane for its aircraft as a result of studies it conducted . 
the presence of these degradation products in the fuel tank or fuel lines plus a carburetor or fuel injection components makes it harder to start the engine or causes reduced engine performance . 
the debate inside the japanese government as to its oil and gasoline situation was leading to invasion of the dutch east indies but this would mean war with the u . s .  whose pacific fleet was a threat to their flank . 
this was a major concern for aircraft designers and the needs of the aviation industry provoked the search for fuels that could be used in higher-compression engines . 
the search for fuels with octane ratings above 100 led to the extension of the scale by comparing power output . 
the one deoxypentose has two steroisomers ,  for two total steroisomers . 
the 2-ketopentoses have two chiral centers; therefore ,  four  -lrb-  2 -rrb- different stereoisomers are possible . 
propane is also being used increasingly for vehicle fuels . 
 ,  6.2 million american households use propane as their primary heating fuel . 
commercially available `` propane '' fuel ,  or lpg ,  is not pure . 
a further saving for propane fuel vehicle operators ,  especially in fleets ,  is that pilferage is much more difficult than with gasoline or diesel fuels . 
propane is also used as fuel for small engines ,  especially those used indoors or in areas with insufficient fresh air and ventilation to carry away the more toxic exhaust of an engine running on gasoline or diesel fuel . 
propane is bought and stored in a liquid form  -lrb-  lpg  -rrb-  ,  and thus fuel energy can be stored in a relatively small space . 
propane has replaced many older other traditional fuel sources . 
this property makes propane generally unsuitable as a fuel for boats . 
hd-5 is currently being used in all propane applications . 
the density of liquid propane at 25 °c  -lrb-  77 °f  -rrb-  is 0.493 g/cm ,  which is equivalent to 4.11 pounds per u . s .  liquid gallon or 493 g/l . 
propane is denser than air . 
propane is used as fuel in furnaces for heat ,  in cooking ,  as an energy source for water heaters ,  laundry dryers ,  barbecues ,  portable stoves ,  and motor vehicles . 
since it can be transported easily ,  it is a popular fuel for home heat and backup electrical generation in sparsely populated areas that do not have natural gas pipelines . 
the precambrian accounts for 88% of the earth's geologic time . 
the supercontinent rodinia is thought to have formed about 1.13–1.071 billion years ago ,  to have embodied most or all of earth's continents and to have broken up into eight continents around 750–600 million years ago . 
the precambrian  -lrb-  or pre-cambrian ,  sometimes abbreviated pє ,  or cryptozoic  -rrb-  is the earliest part of earth's history ,  set before the current phanerozoic eon . 
there is a fairly solid record of bacterial life throughout the remainder  -lrb-  proterozoic eon  -rrb-  of the precambrian . 
the precambrian could be divided into five `` natural '' eons ,  characterized as follows:
it spans from the formation of earth about 4.6 billion years ago  -lrb-  ga  -rrb-  to the beginning of the cambrian period ,  about million years ago  -lrb-  ma  -rrb-  ,  when hard-shelled creatures first appeared in abundance . 
pcr amplifies a specific region of a dna strand  -lrb-  the dna target  -rrb-  . 
as pcr progresses ,  the dna generated is itself used as a template for replication ,  setting in motion a chain reaction in which the original dna template is exponentially amplified . 
a basic pcr set-up requires several components and reagents ,  including a `` dna template '' that contains the dna target region to amplify; a `` dna polymerase ''; an enzyme that polymerizes new dna strands; heat-resistant taq polymerase is especially common ,  as it is more likely to remain intact during the high-temperature dna denaturation process; two dna `` primers '' that are complementary to the 3'  -lrb-  three prime  -rrb-  ends of each of the sense and anti-sense strands of the dna target  -lrb-  dna polymerase can only bind to and elongate from a double-stranded region of dna; without primers there is no double-stranded initiation site at which the polymerase can bind  -rrb- ; specific primers that are complementary to the dna target region are selected beforehand ,  and are often custom-made in a laboratory or purchased from commercial biochemical suppliers; `` deoxynucleoside triphosphates '' ,  or dntps  -lrb-  sometimes called `` deoxynucleotide triphosphates ''; nucleotides containing triphosphate groups  -rrb-  ,  the building blocks from which the dna polymerase synthesizes a new dna strand; a `` buffer solution '' providing a suitable chemical environment for optimum activity and stability of the dna polymerase; `` bivalent cations '' ,  typically magnesium  -lrb-  mg  -rrb-  or manganese  -lrb-  mn  -rrb-  ions; mg is the most common ,  but mn can be used for pcr-mediated dna mutagenesis ,  as a higher mn concentration increases the error rate during dna synthesis; and `` monovalent cations '' ,  typically potassium  -lrb-  k  -rrb-  ions
the scandal proved fatal to macdonald's government . 
despite the short-term defeat ,  the scandal was not a mortal wound to macdonald ,  the conservative party ,  or the canadian pacific railway . 
two groups competed for the contract to build the railway ,  hugh allan's canada pacific railway company and david lewis macpherson's inter-oceanic railway company . 
macdonald resigned as prime minister on 5 november 1873.
he would hold the office of prime minister to his death in 1891, and the canadian pacific would be completed by 1885 with macdonald still in office . 
dna sequencing is used to determine the nucleotides in a dna strand . 
the lagging strand of dna is that strand of the dna double helix that is orientated in a 5′ to 3′ manner . 
in vivo dna replication utilizes short strands of rna called rna primers to initiate dna synthesis on both the leading and lagging strands – dna primers are not seen in vivo in humans . 
a primer is a short single strand of rna or dna  -lrb-  generally about 18-22 bases  -rrb-  that serves as a starting point for dna synthesis . 
in pcr ,  primers are used to determine the dna fragment to be amplified by the pcr process . 
dna polymerases are then able to use the free 3′-oh groups on the rna primers to synthesize dna in the 5′→3′ direction . 
these rna primers can be made `` de novo '' . 
they are hybridized to a target dna ,  which is then copied by the polymerase . 
purine is both a very weak acid  -lrb-  pk 2.39 -rrb- and an even weaker base  -lrb-  pk 8.93 -rrb- . 
if dissolved in pure water ,  the ph will be half way between these two pk values . 
purines are found in high concentration in meat and meat products ,  especially internal organs such as liver and kidney . 
higher levels of meat and seafood consumption are associated with an increased risk of gout ,  whereas a higher level of consumption of dairy products is associated with a decreased risk . 
purines and pyrimidines make up the two groups of nitrogenous bases ,  including the two groups of nucleotide bases . 
because of this ,  there is nearly an equal amount of both substances in the cell at all times . 
in dna and rna ,  these bases form hydrogen bonds with their complementary purines . 
three nucleobases found in nucleic acids ,  cytosine  -lrb-  c  -rrb-  ,  thymine  -lrb-  t  -rrb-  ,  and uracil  -lrb-  u  -rrb-  ,  are pyrimidine derivatives:
very rarely ,  thymine can appear in rna ,  or uracil in dna ,  but when the other three major pyrimidine bases are represented ,  some minor pyrimidine bases can also occur in nucleic acids . 
other hydrogen bonding modes  -lrb-  `` wobble pairings ''  -rrb-  are available in both dna and rna ,  although the additional 2′-hydroxyl group of rna expands the configurations ,  through which rna can form hydrogen bonds . 
in rna ,  the complement of adenine  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  is uracil  -lrb-  u  -rrb-  instead of thymine  -lrb-  t  -rrb-  ,  so the pairs that form are adenine:uracil and guanine:cytosine . 
pyrimidine can be hydrogenated to give tetrahydropyrimidine . 
in nucleic acids ,  three types of nucleobases are pyrimidine derivatives: cytosine  -lrb-  c  -rrb-  ,  thymine  -lrb-  t  -rrb-  ,  and uracil  -lrb-  u  -rrb-  . 
pyrimidine also photolytically decomposes into uracil under ultraviolet light . 
pyrimidine is also found in meteorites ,  but scientists still do not know its origin . 
play-by-mail games ,  or play-by-post games ,  are games ,  of any type ,  played through postal mail or email . 
by gathering turn cards from a number of players and processing them all at the same time ,  games can provide simultaneous actions for all players . 
with the rise of the internet ,  email and websites have largely replaced postal gaming and postal games zines . 
such adjudications were often published in postal game zines ,  some of which contained far more than just games . 
in the case of a two player game such as chess ,  players would simply send their moves to each other alternately . 
an increasingly popular format for play-by-email games is play-by-web . 
play by mail games are often referred to as pbm games ,  and play by email is sometimes abbreviated pbem—as opposed to face to face  -lrb-  ftf  -rrb-  or over the board  -lrb-  otb  -rrb-  games which are played in person . 
in the 1980s ,  play-by-mail games reached their peak of popularity with the advent of `` gaming universal '' ,  `` paper mayhem '' and `` flagship magazine '' ,  the first professional magazines devoted to play-by-mail games . 
when a program supports plug-ins ,  it enables customization . 
in computing ,  a plug-in  -lrb-  or plugin ,  add-in ,  addin ,  add-on ,  or addon  -rrb-  is a software component that adds a specific feature to an existing computer program . 
from 1927 to 1928, teilhard based himself in paris . 
teilhard traveled again to china in april 1926.
teilhard de chardin and his followers ''  -lrb-  aas ,  6 august 1962 -rrb- . 
 ''the evolution of teilhard de chardin '' ,  a documentary film on teilhard's life ,  was scheduled for released in 2015.
8 is titled `` hommage à teilhard de chardin '' . 
further resistance to teilhard's work arose elsewhere . 
teilhard de chardin wrote two comprehensive works ,  `` the phenomenon of man '' and `` the divine milieu '' . 
teilhard wrote `` l'esprit de la terre ''  -lrb-  `` the spirit of the earth ''  -rrb-  . 
teilhard was nominated to the french academy of sciences in 1950.
several college campuses honor teilhard . 
teilhard and his work continue to influence the arts and culture . 
teilhard was known as 德日進  -lrb-  pinyin: dérìjìn  -rrb-  in china . 
during 1930–1931, teilhard stayed in france and in the united states . 
in 1941, teilhard submitted to rome his most important work ,  `` le phénomène humain '' . 
in the meantime ,  teilhard earned a licentiate in literature in caen in 1902.
that same year ,  teilhard's superiors in the jesuit order forbade him to teach any longer . 
the philosopher dietrich von hildebrand criticized severely the work of teilhard . 
founded in 1978, george addair based much of omega vector on teilhard's work . 
teilhard studied theology in hastings ,  in sussex  -lrb-  united kingdom  -rrb-  ,  from 1908 to 1912.
while in china ,  teilhard developed a deep and personal friendship with lucile swan . 
for teilhard ,  evolution was `` the natural landscape where the history of salvation is situated . `` 
teilhard made sense of the universe by assuming it had a vitalist evolutionary process . 
 ''the de chardin project '' ,  a play celebrating teilhard's life ,  ran from 20 november to 14 december 2014 in toronto ,  canada . 
the football is moved by a series of jumps over adjacent men . 
the objective is to score goals by using the men  -lrb-  the black stones  -rrb-  to move the football  -lrb-  the white stone  -rrb-  onto or over the opponent's goal line . 
papyrus was first manufactured in egypt as far back as the fourth millennium bce . 
the word for the material papyrus is also used to designate documents written on sheets of it ,  often rolled up into scrolls . 
by the 12th century ,  parchment and paper were in use in the byzantine empire ,  but papyrus was still an option . 
 ''papyrus '' is also the etymon of 'paper' ,  a similar substance . 
early christian writers soon adopted the codex form ,  and in the græco-roman world ,  it became common to cut sheets from papyrus rolls to form codices . 
papyrus is made from the stem of the papyrus plant ,  `` cyperus papyrus '' . 
 ''pixels '' can be used as a unit of measure such as: 2400 pixels per inch ,  640 pixels per line ,  or spaced 10 pixels apart . 
the word is a combination of `` pix '' ,  for picture ,  and `` element '' . 
the word `` pixel '' is a portmanteau of `` pix ''  -lrb-  from `` pictures '' ,  shortened to `` pics ''  -rrb-  and `` el ''  -lrb-  for `` element ''  -rrb- ; similar formations with ' ''el ''' include the words `` voxel '' and `` texel '' . 
pixel counts can be expressed as a single number ,  as in a `` three-megapixel '' digital camera ,  which has a nominal three million pixels ,  or as a pair of numbers ,  as in a `` 640 by 480 display '' ,  which has 640 pixels from side to side and 480 from top to bottom  -lrb-  as in a vga display  -rrb-  ,  and therefore has a total number of 640×480 = 307,200 pixels or 0.3 megapixels . 
in digital imaging ,  a pixel ,  pel ,  dots ,  or picture element is a physical point in a raster image ,  or the smallest addressable element in an all points addressable display device; so it is the smallest controllable element of a picture represented on the screen . 
the pixels ,  or color samples ,  that form a digitized image  -lrb-  such as a jpeg file used on a web page  -rrb-  may or may not be in one-to-one correspondence with screen pixels ,  depending on how a computer displays an image . 
a prime number  -lrb-  or a prime  -rrb-  is a natural number greater than 1 that cannot be formed by multiplying two smaller natural numbers . 
the largest known prime number has 24,862,048 decimal digits . 
anthony and his wife made a deal: if he could sell a piece of writing within one year ,  she would continue to work to support him . 
he is most famous for his set in the fictional realm of xanth . 
the series also spawned the board game `` xanth '' by mayfair games . 
after leaving the army ,  he spent a brief stint as a public school teacher before trying his hand at becoming a full-time writer . 
the first perfect number is 6.
this is followed by the perfect numbers 496 and 8128  . 
it is not known whether there are any odd perfect numbers ,  nor whether infinitely many perfect numbers exist . 
in about 300 bc euclid showed that if 2 − 1 is prime then 2-lrb- 2 − 1 -rrb- is perfect . 
the parthenon is regarded as the finest example of greek architecture . 
measured at the stylobate ,  the dimensions of the base of the parthenon are  . 
the parthenon itself replaced an older temple of athena ,  which historians call the pre-parthenon or older parthenon ,  that was destroyed in the persian invasion of 480 bc . 
some time before the close of the fifteenth century ,  the parthenon became a mosque . 
the origin of the parthenon's name is from the greek word παρθενών  -lrb-  `` parthenon ''  -rrb-  ,  which referred to the `` unmarried women's apartments '' in a house and in the parthenon's case seems to have been used at first only for a particular room of the temple; it is debated which room this is and how the room acquired its name . 
a major fire broke out in the parthenon shortly after the middle of the third century ad which destroyed the parthenon's roof and much of the sanctuary's interior . 
the cella of the parthenon housed the chryselephantine statue of athena parthenos sculpted by phidias and dedicated in 439 or 438 bc . 
in 1975, the greek government began a concerted effort to restore the parthenon and other acropolis structures . 
because the parthenon was dedicated to the greek goddess athena ,  it has sometimes been referred to as the temple of minerva ,  the roman name for athena ,  particularly during the 19th century . 
the parthenon is a peripteral octastyle doric temple with ionic architectural features . 
the only piece of sculpture from the parthenon known to be from the hand of phidias was the statue of athena housed in the `` naos '' . 
it was previously presumed that the missing metopes were destroyed during the morosini explosion of the parthenon in 1687.
in 1687, the parthenon was extensively damaged in the greatest catastrophe to befall it in its long history . 
hill claimed that the karrha limestone step dörpfeld thought was the highest of parthenon i was in fact the lowest of the three steps of parthenon ii ,  whose stylobate dimensions hill calculated at  . 
in the final decade of the sixth century ad ,  the parthenon was converted into a christian church dedicated to the virgin mary . 
on the north side of the parthenon ,  the metopes are poorly preserved ,  but the subject seems to be the sack of troy . 
the dispute centres around the parthenon marbles removed by thomas bruce ,  7th earl of elgin ,  from 1801 to 1803, which are in the british museum . 
the parthenon  -lrb-  ; ;  ,  `` parthenónas ''  -rrb-  is a former temple on the athenian acropolis ,  greece ,  dedicated to the goddess athena ,  whom the people of athens considered their patron . 
saint pachomius  -lrb-   ,  ca . 
examples of purely coptic literature are the works of abba antonius and abba pachomius ,  who spoke only coptic ,  and the sermons and preachings of abba shenouda ,  who chose to write only in coptic . 
in the lutheran church ,  the saint is remembered as a renewer of the church ,  along with his contemporary  -lrb-  and fellow desert saint  -rrb-  ,  anthony of egypt on january 17.
pachomius established his first monastery between 318 and 323 at tabennisi ,  egypt . 
one of these is the new wittgenstein approach . 
we can see each of the steps in wittgenstein's method:
wittgenstein also argues that one couldn't possibly `` use '' the words of a private language . 
no such thing was in question here ,  only how the word 'five' is used . 
for wittgenstein ,  this is a grammatical point ,  part of the way in which the language-game involving the word `` pain '' is played . 
wittgenstein rejects a variety of ways of thinking about what the meaning of a word is ,  or how meanings can be identified . 
wittgenstein rejects the idea that ostensive definitions can provide us with the meaning of a word . 
such a language wittgenstein calls a `` private language '' . 
wittgenstein presents several perspectives on the topic . 
one might even use the word as code by members of a secret society . 
one general characteristic of games that wittgenstein considers in detail is the way in which they consist in following rules . 
this suggests that in quite an early section of the book ,  wittgenstein may think that meaning cannot be so easily glossed as how the word is used . 
wittgenstein develops this discussion of games into the key notion of a `` language-game '' . 
wittgenstein does not limit the application of his concept of language games to word-meaning . 
 ''philosophical investigations '' was not ready for publication when wittgenstein died in 1951.
this german sense of the word may help readers better understand wittgenstein's context in the remarks regarding games . 
clearly ,  wittgenstein did not want to be a behaviorist ,  nor did he want to be a cognitivist or a phenomenologist . 
anderson supplies the beer . 
in 1965 algis budrys said that anderson `` has for some time been science fiction's best storyteller '' . 
anderson set much of his work in the past ,  often with the addition of magic ,  or in alternate or future worlds that resemble past eras . 
anderson and his wife were among those who in 1968 signed a pro-vietnam war advertisement in `` galaxy science fiction '' . 
poul anderson was born on november 25, 1926, in bristol ,  pennsylvania ,  of scandinavian parents . 
in many stories ,  anderson commented on society and politics . 
the story told in `` the shield of time '' is also an example of a tragic conflict ,  another common theme in anderson's writing . 
anderson was the sixth president of science fiction and fantasy writers of america ,  taking office in 1972.
while horrified by the prospect of the soviets winning complete rule over the earth ,  anderson was not enthusiastic about having americans in that role either . 
while he was an undergraduate student at the university of minnesota ,  anderson's first stories were published by john w .  campbell in `` astounding science fiction '': `` tomorrow's children '' by anderson and f .  n .  waldrop in march 1947 and a sequel ,  `` chain of logic '' by anderson alone ,  in july . 
anderson often returned to right-libertarianism and to the business leader as hero ,  most notably his character nicholas van rijn . 
philip k .  dick's story `` waterspider '' features poul anderson as one of the main characters . 
