he is the president of the norman foster foundation . 
after team 4 went their separate ways ,  foster and wendy cheesman founded foster associates in 1967, which became foster and partners in 1999.
norman foster was born to robert foster and lilian smith in 1935 in reddish ,  stockport ,  cheshire . 
norman robert foster ,  baron foster of thames bank ,   -lrb-  born 1 june 1935 -rrb- is a british architect whose company ,  foster + partners ,  maintains an international design practice famous for high-tech architecture . 
foster said that if the firm had not won the contract it would probably have been bankrupted . 
foster believes that attracting young talent is essential ,  and is proud that the average age of people working for foster and partners is 32, just like it was in 1967.
foster was assigned the brief for a development on the site of the baltic exchange in the 1990s . 
in january 2007, the `` sunday times '' reported that foster had called in catalyst ,  a corporate finance house ,  to find buyers for foster + partners . 
in 1956 foster won a place at the university of manchester school of architecture and city planning . 
wirth was the chief designer of the programming languages euler ,  algol w ,  pascal ,  modula ,  modula-2, oberon ,  oberon-2, and oberon-07.
wirth was born in winterthur ,  switzerland ,  in 1934.
wirth retired in 1999.
these were replaced in the later editions with examples written in modula-2 and oberon respectively . 
mendez recalled:
“a real autocrat ,  and everyone was delighted to have her be an autocrat because that’s what we needed . ”
the comic strip `` dondi '' came about because of a friendship that developed between edson and irwin hasen during a uso trip to korea . 
the national cartoonists society had its origins during world war ii when cartoonists gus edson ,  otto soglow ,  clarence d .  russell ,  bob dunn and others did chalk talks at hospitals for the uso in 1943.
also among the early 32 members were syndicated panel cartoonists dave breger  -lrb-  `` mister breger ''  -rrb-  ,  george clark  -lrb-  `` the neighbors ''  -rrb-  ,  bob dunn  -lrb-  `` just the type ''  -rrb-  and jimmy hatlo  -lrb-  `` they'll do it every time ''  -rrb- ; freelance magazine cartoonists abner dean and mischa richter ,  editorial cartoonists rube goldberg  -lrb-  `` new york sun ''  -rrb-  ,  burris jenkins  -lrb-  `` new york journal american ''  -rrb-  ,  c .  d .  batchelor  -lrb-  `` daily news ''  -rrb-  and richard q .  yardley  -lrb-  `` the baltimore sun ''  -rrb- ; sports cartoonist lou hanlon; illustrator russell patterson and comic book artists joe shuster and joe musial . 
nebraska was admitted as the 37th state of the united states in 1867.
nebraska is a state that lies in both the great plains and the midwestern united states . 
the territorial capital of nebraska was omaha . 
its state capital is lincoln ,  and its largest city is omaha ,  which is on the missouri river . 
it is the only state in the united states whose legislature is unicameral and officially nonpartisan . 
the state is bordered by south dakota to the north; iowa to the east and missouri to the southeast ,  across the missouri river; kansas to the south; colorado to the southwest; and wyoming to the west . 
the area was named the province of new jersey . 
new jersey prospered through the roaring twenties . 
new jersey is often broadly divided into three geographic regions: north jersey ,  central jersey ,  and south jersey . 
new jersey is also at the center of the northeast megalopolis . 
new jersey is a state in the mid-atlantic region of the northeastern united states . 
in 1951, the new jersey turnpike opened ,  permitting fast travel by car and truck between north jersey  -lrb-  and metropolitan new york  -rrb-  and south jersey  -lrb-  and metropolitan philadelphia  -rrb-  . 
new jersey was governed very briefly as two distinct provinces ,  east and west jersey ,  for 28 years between 1674 and 1702, at times part of the province of new york or dominion of new england . 
the dutch became the first europeans to lay claim to lands in new jersey . 
as a result of an order from the new jersey supreme court to fund schools equitably ,  the new jersey legislature passed an income tax bill in 1976.
on december 18, 1787, new jersey became the third state to ratify the united states constitution ,  which was overwhelmingly popular in new jersey ,  as it prevented new york and pennsylvania from charging tariffs on goods imported from europe . 
since the state's inception ,  new jersey has been characterized by ethnic and religious diversity . 
transportation was greatly improved as locomotion and steamboats were introduced to new jersey . 
the 1776 new jersey state constitution gave the vote to `` all inhabitants '' who had a certain level of wealth . 
new mexico received its name long before the present-day nation of mexico won independence from spain and adopted that name in 1821.
before statehood ,  the name `` new mexico '' was applied to various configurations of the u . s .  territory ,  to a mexican state ,  and to a province of new spain ,  all in the same general area ,  but of varying extensions . 
due to their geographic locations ,  northern and eastern new mexico exhibit a colder ,  alpine climate ,  while western and southern new mexico exhibit a warmer ,  arid climate . 
north carolina  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a state in the southeastern region of the united states . 
north carolina has 17 major river basins . 
north carolina was known as a 'slave state' by 1860, in which one-third of the population was enslaved . 
on november 21, 1789, north carolina became the twelfth state to ratify the constitution . 
north carolina is bordered by south carolina on the south ,  georgia on the southwest ,  tennessee on the west ,  virginia on the north ,  and the atlantic ocean on the east . 
demographics of north carolina covers the varieties of ethnic groups that reside in north carolina ,  along with the relevant trends . 
during the antebellum period ,  north carolina was an overwhelmingly rural state ,  even by southern standards . 
it was not until 1992 that another african american was elected as a us representative from north carolina . 
the united states census bureau places north carolina in the south atlantic division of the southern region . 
in april 2011, the worst tornado outbreak in north carolina's history occurred . 
north carolina became one of the english thirteen colonies and with the territory of south carolina was originally known as the province of north-carolina . 
as in the rest of the former confederacy ,  north carolina had become a one-party state ,  dominated by the democratic party . 
of the people residing in north carolina ,  58.5% were born in north carolina ,  33.1% were born in another us state ,  1.0% were born in puerto rico ,  u . s .  island areas ,  or born abroad to american parent -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  and 7.4% were born in another country . 
in 2018, north carolina was ranked number one on forbes' best states for business ranking for a second year in a row . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of north carolina was 10,383,620 on july 1, 2018, a 8.89% increase since the 2010 census . 
on may 20, 1861, north carolina was the last of the confederate states to declare secession from the union ,  13 days after the tennessee legislature voted for secession . 
after the spanish in the 16th century ,  the first permanent european settlers of north carolina were english colonists who migrated south from virginia . 
the english ,  welsh ,  scots-irish ,  and german settlers of western north carolina tended to favor american independence from britain . 
of the 17 basins ,  11 originate within the state of north carolina ,  but only four are contained entirely within the state's border – the cape fear ,  the neuse ,  the white oak ,  and the tar–pamlico basin . 
north dakota is a midwestern state of the united states . 
with an area of  ,  north dakota is the 19th largest state . 
soil is north dakota's most precious resource . 
north dakota  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a u . s .  state in the midwestern and northern regions of the united states . 
eastern north dakota is overall flat; however ,  there are significant hills and buttes in western north dakota . 
farms and ranches cover nearly all of north dakota . 
north dakota is in the u . s .  region known as the great plains . 
north dakota's economy is based more heavily on farming than are the economies of most other states . 
bismarck is the capital of north dakota ,  and fargo is the largest city . 
from fewer than 2,000 people in 1870, north dakota's population grew to near 680,000 by 1930.
north dakota was named for the sioux people who once lived in the territory . 
the original north dakota state capitol in bismarck burned to the ground on december 28, 1930.
as a result ,  a great deal of research has gone into methods of more effectively learning from limited amounts of data . 
such models are generally more robust when given unfamiliar input ,  especially input that contains errors  -lrb-  as is very common for real-world data  -rrb-  ,  and produce more reliable results when integrated into a larger system comprising multiple subtasks . 
recent research has increasingly focused on unsupervised and semi-supervised learning algorithms . 
the following is a list of some of the most commonly researched tasks in natural language processing . 
during the 1970s ,  many programmers began to write `` conceptual ontologies '' ,  which structured real-world information into computer-understandable data . 
up to the 1980s ,  most natural language processing systems were based on complex sets of hand-written rules . 
inhabitants of new south wales are referred to as `` new south welshmen '' . 
in 1841 it was separated from the colony of new south wales to form the new colony of new zealand . 
new south wales is policed by the new south wales police force ,  a statutory authority . 
new south wales  -lrb-  abbreviated as nsw  -rrb-  is a state on the east coast of :australia . 
travelling from new south wales to victoria in those days was very difficult . 
new south wales is divided into 128 local government areas . 
in 1898 popular referenda on the proposed federation were held in new south wales ,  victoria ,  south australia and tasmania . 
the colony of new south wales was founded as a penal colony in 1788.
since 1901 new south wales has been a state of the commonwealth of australia ,  and the australian constitution regulates its relationship with the commonwealth . 
however ,  in the copy held by the admiralty ,  he `` revised the wording '' to `` new south wales '' . 
however ,  the swan river colony has never been administered as part of new south wales . 
the prior inhabitants of new south wales were the aboriginal tribes who arrived in australia about 40,000 to 60,000 years ago . 
white fuming nitric acid ,  pure nitric acid or wfna ,  is very close to anhydrous nitric acid . 
nitrogen oxides  -lrb-  no  -rrb-  are soluble in nitric acid . 
nitric acid is normally considered to be a strong acid at ambient temperatures . 
depending on the amount of nitrogen dioxide present ,  fuming nitric acid is further characterized as white fuming nitric acid at concentrations above 95% ,  or red fuming nitric acid at concentrations above 86% . 
nitric acid reacts with most metals ,  but the details depend on the concentration of the acid and the nature of the metal . 
commercially available nitric acid is an azeotrope with water at a concentration of 68% hno ,  which is the ordinary concentrated nitric acid of commerce . 
nitric acid can act as a base with respect to an acid such as sulfuric acid: the nitronium ion ,   ,  is the active reagent in aromatic nitration reactions . 
nitric acid can oxidize non-active metals such as copper and silver . 
the russian nihilist movement was a russian trend in the 1860s that rejected all authority . 
this mowing away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist ,  although in this ,  the nihilist appears inconsistent:
in it vaccha asks the buddha to confirm one of the following ,  with respect to the existence of the buddha after death:
with the popularizing of the word `` nihilism '' by ivan turgenev ,  a new russian political movement called the nihilist movement adopted the term . 
thus ,  the resolution with which the ant views the world it exists `` within '' is a very important determining factor in how the ant experiences this `` within the world '' feeling . 
he found his nihilistic ways challenged upon falling in love . 
the dadaists claimed that dada was not an art movement ,  but an anti-art movement ,  sometimes using found objects in a manner similar to found poetry . 
cooper writes ,  `` in the widest sense of the word 'morality' ,  moral nihilism is a morality . `` 
in the doctrine of nihilism in the appannaka sutta ,  the buddha describes moral nihilists as holding the following views:
metaphysical nihilism is the philosophical theory that posits that concrete objects and physical constructs might not exist in the possible world ,  or that even if there exist possible worlds that contain some concrete objects ,  there is at least one that contains only abstract objects . 
this movement was significant enough that ,  even in the english speaking world ,  at the turn of the 20th century the word nihilism without qualification was almost exclusively associated with this russian revolutionary sociopolitical movement  . 
the term `` nihilism '' was first used by friedrich heinrich jacobi  -lrb-  1743–1819 -rrb- . 
nietzsche characterized nihilism as emptying the world and especially human existence of meaning ,  purpose ,  comprehensible truth ,  or essential value . 
nihilism  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the philosophical viewpoint that suggests the denial or lack of belief towards the reputedly meaningful aspects of life . 
the concept of nihilism was discussed by the buddha  -lrb-  563 b . c . 
despite the buddha's explanations to the contrary ,  buddhist practitioners may ,  at times ,  still approach buddhism in a nihilistic manner . 
nietzsche's relation to the problem of nihilism is a complex one . 
extreme metaphysical nihilism is commonly defined as the belief that nothing exists as a correspondent component of the self-efficient world . 
still other nebulae form as planetary nebulae . 
thus the nebula radiates by reflected star light . 
other nebulae form as the result of supernova explosions; the death throes of massive ,  short-lived stars . 
a nebula  -lrb-  latin for `` cloud '' or `` fog ''; pl . 
planetary nebulae are the remnants of the final stages of stellar evolution for lower-mass stars . 
most nebulae can be described as diffuse nebulae ,  which means that they are extended and contain no well-defined boundaries . 
the compact object that was created after the explosion lies in the center of the crab nebula and its core is now a neutron star . 
beginning in 1864, william huggins examined the spectra of about 70 nebulae . 
for monotheistic religions ,  this principally involves arguments about the attributes or non-attributes of god ,  and especially the existence of god ,  using arguments that do not involve recourse to supernatural revelation . 
these later influenced the work of william paley . 
in the `` laws '' ,  in answer to the question as to what arguments justify faith in the gods ,  plato affirms: `` one is our dogma about the soul .  .  . the other is our dogma concerning the ordering of the motion of the stars '' . 
the teleological argument was later presented by the early islamic philosophers alkindus and averroes ,  while avicenna presented both the cosmological argument and the ontological argument in `` the book of healing ''  -lrb-  1027 -rrb- . 
natural theology ,  once also termed physico-theology ,  is a type of theology that provides arguments for the existence of god based on reason and ordinary experience of nature . 
st .  thomas aquinas  -lrb-  c .  1225–1274 -rrb- presented several versions of the cosmological argument in his `` summa theologica '' ,  and of the teleological argument in his `` summa contra gentiles '' . 
his major work of this type was `` the religion of geology and its connected sciences ''  -lrb-  1851 -rrb- . 
not considering slang ,  some of these new zealandisms are:
new zealand english  -lrb-  nze  -rrb-  is the variant of the english language spoken and written by most english-speaking new zealanders . 
the dominant influence of māori on new zealand english is lexical . 
new zealand english is most similar to australian english in pronunciation ,  with some key differences . 
the first dictionary with entries documenting new zealand english was probably the `` heinemann new zealand dictionary '' ,  published in 1979.
not all new zealanders have the same accent ,  as the level of cultivation  -lrb-  i . e . 
new zealand-specific dictionaries compiled from the `` collins english dictionary '' include the `` collins new zealand concise english dictionary ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- ,  `` collins new zealand school dictionary ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- and `` collins new zealand paperback dictionary ''  -lrb-  2009.  -rrb- 
every edition has retained a new zealander as advisor for the new zealand content ,  the first being harry orsman and the most recent being noted new zealand lexicographer laurie bauer . 
the english language was established in new zealand by colonists during the 19th century . 
another specific new zealand usage is the way in which new zealanders refer to the country's two main islands . 
in february 2018, clayton mitchell mp from new zealand first led a campaign for english to be recognised as an official language in new zealand . 
new zealand ceased to be part of new south wales and became a british colony on 1 july 1841.
the first dictionary fully dedicated to the new zealand variety of english was `` the new zealand dictionary '' ,  published by new house publishers in 1994 and edited by elizabeth and harry orsman . 
varieties ,  such as general american ,  african-american english ,  chicano english ,  etc . 
north american english  -lrb-  name ,  nae  -rrb-  is the most generalized variety of the english language as spoken in the united states and canada . 
a natural resource may exist as a separate entity such as fresh water ,  air ,  and as well as a living organism such as a fish ,  or it may exist in an alternate form that must be processed to obtain the resource such as metal ores ,  rare earth metals ,  petroleum ,  and most forms of energy . 
natural resources are resources that exist without actions of humankind . 
sinatra was born on june 8, 1940, in jersey city ,  new jersey . 
she is the elder daughter of frank sinatra and nancy  -lrb-  barbato  -rrb-  sinatra ,  and is widely known for her 1966 signature hit `` these boots are made for walkin' . 
today much of what was once new amsterdam is new york city . 
one of new york broadway theatres is the new amsterdam theatre . 
by 1655, the population of new netherland had grown to 2,000 people ,  with 1,500 living in new amsterdam . 
the 1625 date of the founding of new amsterdam is now commemorated in the official seal of new york city . 
the first jews known to have lived in new amsterdam arrived in 1654.
new amsterdam  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  was a 17th-century dutch settlement established at the southern tip of manhattan island that served as the seat of the colonial government in new netherland . 
the beginnings of new amsterdam ,  unlike most other colonies in the new world ,  were thoroughly documented in city maps . 
the scholarly conclusion has largely been that the settlement of new amsterdam is much more like current new york than previously thought . 
on august 27, 1664, while england and the dutch republic were at peace ,  four english frigates sailed into new amsterdam's harbor and demanded new netherland's surrender ,  whereupon new netherland was provisionally ceded by stuyvesant . 
in july 1673, during the third anglo-dutch war ,  the dutch briefly and quickly occupied new york city and renamed it new orange . 
the new amsterdam settlement had a population of approximately 270 people ,  including infants . 
most of the financial district overlaps new amsterdam and has retained the original street layout . 
by 1664, the population had exploded to almost 9,000 people in new netherland ,  2,500 of whom lived in new amsterdam ,  1,000 lived near fort orange ,  and the remainder in other towns and villages . 
the original street plan of new amsterdam has stayed largely intact ,  as have some houses outside manhattan . 
the national park service celebrated in 2009 the 400th anniversary of henry hudson's 1609 voyage on behalf of the dutch with the `` new amsterdam trail '' . 
new amsterdam received municipal rights on february 2, 1653, thus becoming a city . 
the relationship between pagan studies scholars and some practising pagans has at times been strained . 
some unitarian universalists are eclectic pagans . 
at the 2001 census ,  there were a recorded pagans in canada . 
from the 1990s onwards ,  scholars studying the modern pagan movement have established the academic field of pagan studies . 
the pagan relationship with christianity is often strained . 
this usage has been common since the pagan revival in the 1970s . 
another pivotal belief in the contemporary pagan movement is that of animism . 
up to 0.4% of respondents answered `` pagan '' or `` wiccan '' when polled . 
modern paganism ,  also known as contemporary paganism and neopaganism ,  is a collective term for new religious movements influenced by or derived from the various historical pagan beliefs of pre-modern europe ,  north africa and the near east . 
other terms sometimes favored by pagans are `` traditional religion '' ,  `` indigenous religion '' ,  `` nativist religion '' ,  and `` reconstructionism '' . 
establishing precise figures on paganism is difficult . 
not all members of faiths or beliefs regarded as neopagan self-identify as `` pagan '' . 
some christian theologians view modern paganism as a movement that cannot be tolerated but must be fought and defeated . 
they have also been supported by pagan studies scholar graham harvey . 
a number of academics ,  particularly in north america ,  have considered modern paganism to be a form of nature religion . 
for some pagan groups ,  ethnicity is central to their religion ,  and they often restrict membership to those who are of the same ethnic group as themselves . 
beliefs and practices vary widely among different pagan groups; however ,  there are a series of core principles common to most ,  if not all ,  forms of modern paganism . 
many pagans have expressed criticism of the high fees charged by new age teachers ,  something not typically present in the pagan movement . 
prior to the spread of the 20th-century neopagan movement ,  a notable instance of self-identified paganism was in sioux writer zitkala-sa's essay `` why i am a pagan '' . 
one principle of the pagan movement is polytheism ,  the belief in and veneration of multiple gods or goddesses . 
goddess spirituality ,  which is also known as the goddess movement ,  is a pagan religion in which a singular ,  monotheistic goddess is given predominance . 
paganism's public rituals are generally calendrical ,  although the pre-christian festivals that pagans use as a basis varied across europe . 
further ,  the new age movement shows little interest in magic and witchcraft ,  which are conversely core interests of many pagan religions ,  such as wicca . 
paganism generally emphasizes the sanctity of the earth and nature . 
wicca is the largest form of modern paganism ,  as well as the best known form ,  and the most extensively studied by academics . 
an issue of academic debate has been regarding the connection between the new age movement and contemporary paganism ,  or neo-paganism . 
neo-druidism forms the second largest pagan religion after wicca ,  and like wicca in turn shows significant heterogeneity . 
pagan ritual can take place in both a public and private setting . 
it is its inclusion of female deity which distinguishes pagan religions from their abrahamic counterparts . 
various pagans – including those like michael york and prudence jones who are active in pagan studies – have argued that ,  due to similarities in their respective spiritual world-views ,  the modern pagan movement can be treated as part of the same global phenomenon as both pre-christian religion ,  living indigenous religions ,  and world religions like hinduism ,  shinto ,  and afro-american religions . 
there is `` considerable disagreement as to the precise definition and proper usage '' of the term `` modern paganism '' . 
in the western world ,  distinct forms of paganism have been developed by and for members of the lgbt community . 
the belief in magical rituals and spells is held by a `` significant number '' of contemporary pagans . 
the first ntsc standard was developed in 1941 and had no provision for color . 
ntsc-n/ntsc50 is an unofficial system combining 625-line video with 3.58 mhz ntsc color . 
ntsc color encoding is used with the system m television signal ,  which consists of   -lrb-  approximately 29.97 -rrb- interlaced frames of video per second . 
when a transmitter broadcasts an ntsc signal ,  it amplitude-modulates a radio-frequency carrier with the ntsc signal just described ,  while it frequency-modulates a carrier 4.5 mhz higher with the audio signal . 
an ntsc `` frame '' consists of an `` even '' field followed by an `` odd '' field . 
cvbs stands for color ,  video ,  blanking ,  and sync . 
for both analog and digital sets processing an analog ntsc signal ,  the original three color signals  -lrb-  red ,  green and blue  -rrb-  are transmitted using three discrete signals  -lrb-  luminance ,  i and q  -rrb-  and then recovered as three separate colors and combined as a color image . 
this 3.58 mhz subcarrier is then added to the luminance to form the 'composite color signal' which modulates the video signal carrier just as in monochrome transmission . 
the atsc standard ,  for example ,  allows frame rates of 23.976, 24, 29.97, 30, 59.94, and 60 frames per second ,  but not 25 and 50.
there is a large difference in frame rate between film ,  which runs at 24.0 frames per second ,  and the ntsc standard ,  which runs at approximately 29.97  -lrb-  10 mhz×63/88/455/525 -rrb- frames per second . 
by the time the frame rate changed to accommodate color ,  it was nearly as easy to trigger the camera shutter from the video signal itself . 
in january 1950, the committee was reconstituted to standardize color television . 
in ntsc ,  chrominance is encoded using two color signals known as i  -lrb-  in-phase  -rrb-  and q  -lrb-  in quadrature  -rrb-  in a process called qam . 
in december 1953 the fcc unanimously approved what is now called the `` ntsc '' color television standard  -lrb-  later defined as rs-170a  -rrb-  . 
ntsc was the first widely adopted broadcast color system and remained dominant until the 2000s ,  when it started to be replaced with different digital standards such as atsc and others . 
for a color tv to recover hue information from the color subcarrier ,  it must have a zero phase reference to replace the previously suppressed carrier . 
the ntsc standard has been adopted by other countries ,  including most of the americas and japan . 
numbers can be classified into sets ,  called number systems ,  such as the natural numbers and the real numbers . 
the most familiar numbers are the natural numbers  -lrb-  sometimes called whole numbers or counting numbers  -rrb- : 1, 2, 3, and so on . 
numbers should be distinguished from numerals ,  the symbols used to represent numbers . 
in mathematics ,  the notion of number has been extended over the centuries to include 0, negative numbers ,  rational numbers such as and  ,  real numbers such as and  ,  and complex numbers ,  which extend the real numbers by adding a square root of . 
the same term may also refer to number theory ,  the study of the properties of numbers . 
the major categories of numbers are as follows:
the nightclub two step basic step can be counted as one & two - three & four - . 
the quick rock steps should be matched with the quick drum beats in the music . 
the term `` no wave '' was a pun based on the rejection of commercial new wave music . 
the term `` no wave '' was probably inspired by the french new wave pioneer claude chabrol ,  with his remark `` there are no waves ,  only the ocean '' . 
no wave was a short-lived avant-garde music and art scene that emerged in the late 1970s in downtown new york city . 
no wave cinema was an underground film scene in tribeca and the east village . 
anderson claimed that the no wave scene represented `` new york's last stylistically cohesive avant-rock movement '' . 
in 2007–2008, three books on the scene were published: soul jazz's `` new york noise '' ,  marc masters' `` no wave '' ,  and thurston moore and byron coley's `` no wave: post-punk . 
no wave music presented a negative and nihilistic world view that reflected the desolation of late 1970s downtown new york and how they viewed the larger society . 
next computers were first released on the retail market in 1990, for $9,999.
canon also served as next's distributor in japan . 
next changed its business plan in mid-1986.
next released a second generation of workstations in 1990.
as next expanded ,  more office space was needed . 
next computers were delivered with mathematica pre-installed . 
in 1989, canon invested us$100 million in next ,  giving it a 16.67 percent stake ,  making next worth almost $600 million . 
next ,  inc .   -lrb-  later next computer ,  inc .  and next software ,  inc .   -rrb-  was an american computer and software company founded in 1985 by apple computer co-founder steve jobs . 
in 1989, next struck a deal for former compaq reseller businessland to sell next computers in select markets nationwide . 
next withdrew from the hardware business in 1993 and the company was renamed next software inc; consequently ,  300 of the 540 staff employees were laid off . 
next partnered with sun to create openstep which was nextstep without the mach-based kernel . 
next later released much of the nextstep system as a programming environment standard called openstep . 
tim berners-lee used a next computer in 1990 to create the first web browser and web server; accordingly ,  next was instrumental in the development of the world wide web . 
apple purchased next in 1997 for $429 million  -lrb-  equivalent to $ million in   -rrb-  ,  and 1.5 million shares of apple stock . 
next was an engineering computer used by professors for the most serious science challenges ,  and also for developing finished newspaper layouts using news running on next . 
apple computer announced an intention to acquire next on december 20, 1996.
nineveh's greatness was short-lived . 
nineveh is also the setting of the book of tobit . 
in the hebrew bible ,  nineveh is first mentioned in genesis 10:11: `` ashur left that land ,  and built nineveh '' . 
the ruins of nineveh are surrounded by the remains of a massive stone and mudbrick wall dating from about 700 bc . 
nineveh was one of the oldest and greatest cities in antiquity . 
the study of the archaeology of nineveh reveals the wealth and glory of ancient assyria under kings such as esarhaddon  -lrb-  681–669 bc  -rrb-  and ashurbanipal  -lrb-  669–626 bc  -rrb-  . 
at this time ,  the total area of nineveh comprised about  ,  and fifteen great gates penetrated its walls . 
nineveh  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  was an ancient assyrian city of upper mesopotamia ,  located on the outskirts of mosul in modern-day northern iraq . 
the ailing mosul dam is a persistent threat to nineveh as well as the city of mosul . 
the assyrian city of nineveh became one of mitanni's vassals for half a century until the early 14th century bc ,  when the assyrian king ashur-uballit i reclaimed it in 1365 bc while overthrowing the mitanni empire and creating the middle assyrian empire  -lrb-  1365–1050 bc  -rrb-  . 
the city was later said to be devoted to `` the goddess ishtar of nineveh '' and `` nina '' was one of the sumerian and assyrian names of that goddess . 
nebi yunus is located about south of kuyunjik and is the secondary ruin mound at nineveh . 
the regional influence of nineveh became particularly pronounced during the archaeological period known as `` ninevite 5 '' ,  or `` ninevite v ''  -lrb-  2900–2600 bc  -rrb-  . 
the english romantic poet edwin atherstone wrote an epic `` the fall of nineveh '' . 
there is a large body of evidence to show that assyrian monarchs built extensively in nineveh during the late 3rd and 2nd millenniums bc; it appears to have been originally an `` assyrian provincial town '' . 
nineveh's repentance and salvation from evil can be found in the jewish tanakh  -lrb-  also read by christians  -rrb-  and the muslim koran . 
nineveh was the flourishing capital of the assyrian empire and was the home of king sennacherib ,  king of assyria ,  during the biblical reign of king hezekiah  -lrb-  יְחִזְקִיָּהוּ  -rrb-  and the lifetime of judean prophet isaiah  -lrb-  ישעיה  -rrb-  . 
nineveh is also mentioned in rudyard kipling's 1897 poem `` recessional '' and in arthur o'shaughnessy's 1873 poem `` ode '' . 
today ,  nineveh's location is marked by two large mounds ,  kouyunjik and `` nabī yūnus '' `` prophet jonah '' ,  and the remains of the city walls  -lrb-  about in circumference  -rrb-  . 
the historic nineveh is mentioned in the old assyrian empire during reign of shamshi-adad i in about 1800 bc as a centre of worship of ishtar ,  whose cult was responsible for the city's early importance . 
in 1946, nazareth had a population of 15,540, of whom roughly 60% were christians and 40% were muslims . 
nazareth is the largest arab city in israel . 
nazareth was relatively slow to modernize . 
in 1918, nazareth had an estimated population of 8,000, two-thirds christian . 
 ''upper nazareth ''  -rrb-  ,  declared a separate city in june 1974, is built alongside old nazareth ,  and had a jewish population of 40,312 in 2014.
nazareth was in the territory allotted to the arab state under the 1947 un partition plan . 
nazareth is home to dozens of monasteries and churches ,  many of them in the old city . 
in luke's gospel ,  nazareth is first described as 'a town of galilee' and home of mary  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 1099, the crusader tancred captured galilee and established his capital in nazareth . 
arab and palestinian nationalist sentiment continue to influence nazareth's political life . 
in the 1980s ,  the government began attempts to merge the nearby village of ilut with nazareth ,  although this move was opposed by residents from both localities and the nazareth municipality . 
today ,  nazareth still has a significant christian population ,  made up of various denominations . 
however ,  some modern scholars also regard nazareth as the birthplace of jesus . 
for much of the british mandatory period  -lrb-  1922–1948 -rrb- ,  nazareth had a christian majority  -lrb-  mostly orthodox christians  -rrb-  and a muslim minority . 
israel military industries employs `` some 300 '' people in nazareth manufacturing munitions . 
in 1954, 1,200 dunams of nazareth's land ,  which had been slated for future urban expansion by the municipality ,  was confiscated by state authorities for the construction of government offices and ,  in 1957, for the construction of the jewish town of nazareth illit . 
in 2011, nazareth had over 20 arab-owned high-tech companies ,  mostly in the field of software development . 
nazareth has a hot-summer mediterranean climate  -lrb-  köppen climate classification: `` csa ''  -rrb-  . 
in the qur'an ,  christians are referred to as `` naṣārā '' ,  meaning `` followers of an-nāṣirī '' ,  or `` those who follow jesus of nazareth '' . 
he made sure to ensure nazareth's security for other reasons as well ,  among them strengthening ties with france by protecting the christian community and to protect one of his wives who resided in nazareth . 
the greater nazareth metropolitan area includes nazareth illit ,  yafa an-naseriyye ,  reineh ,  migdal haemek ,  ein mahil ,  ilut ,  kafr kanna ,  mashhad and iksal . 
nazareth  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` natzrat '';  ,  `` an-nāṣira '';  ,  `` naṣrath ''  -rrb-  is the capital and the largest city in the northern district of israel . 
in addition to the book of genesis ,  noah is mentioned in the old testament in the first book of chronicles ,  and the books of tobit ,  wisdom ,  sirach ,  isaiah ,  ezekiel ,  2 esdras ,  4 maccabees; in the new testament ,  he is mentioned in the gospels of matthew ,  and luke ,  the epistle to the hebrews ,  1st peter and 2nd peter . 
norwegians are educated in both bokmål and nynorsk . 
bokmål is used in 92% of all written publications ,  and nynorsk in 8%  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- . 
the norwegian alphabet has 29 letters . 
there are two official forms of norwegian ,  `` bokmål ''  -lrb-  literally `` book tongue ''  -rrb-  and `` nynorsk ''  -lrb-  `` new norwegian ''  -rrb-  ,  each with its own variants . 
nynorsk and bokmål provide standards for how to write norwegian ,  but not for how to speak the language . 
bokmål and nynorsk were made closer by a reform in 1938.
agreement with person is lost in norwegian . 
both nynorsk and bokmål have a great variety of optional forms . 
as established by law and government policy ,  the two official forms of `` written '' norwegian are `` bokmål ''  -lrb-  literally `` book tongue ''  -rrb-  and `` nynorsk ''  -lrb-  `` new norwegian ''  -rrb-  . 
nynorsk has forms that are close to the original landsmål and forms that are close to bokmål . 
in norwegian compound words ,  the head ,  i . e . 
today ,  this meaning is often lost ,  and it is commonly mistaken as a `` new '' norwegian in contrast to the `` real '' norwegian bokmål . 
there are some common irregular nouns ,  many of which are irregular in both bokmål and nynorsk ,  like the following:
most adjectives in all norwegian dialects and written forms follow the pattern below . 
in norwegian ,  a definite noun has a suffixed article  -lrb-  cf . 
riksmål and conservative bokmål traditionally have two genders like danish ,  but nynorsk and most speakers of norwegian regional dialects use three genders to different extents . 
norwegian is one of the working languages of the nordic council . 
norwegian nouns belong to three noun classes: masculine ,  feminine and neuter . 
in general ,  almost all nouns in bokmål follow these patterns  -lrb-  like the words in the examples above  -rrb- : in contrast ,  almost all nouns in nynorsk follow these patterns  -lrb-  the noun gender system is more pronounced than in bokmål  -rrb- : unlike in bokmål ,  in nynorsk feminine nouns cannot be inflected using masculine noun class morphology . 
norwegian is a pitch-accent language with two distinct pitch patterns ,  like swedish . 
as with other germanic languages ,  norwegian verbs can be either weak or strong . 
norwegian has five closed classes without inflection ,  i . e . 
meanwhile ,  a nationalistic movement strove for the development of a new written norwegian . 
from the 1840s ,  some writers experimented with a norwegianised danish by incorporating words that were descriptive of norwegian scenery and folk life ,  and adopting a more norwegian syntax . 
the closed class of norwegian determiners are declined in gender and number in agreement with their argument . 
robinson continued:
non-standard analysis was originated in the early 1960s by the mathematician abraham robinson . 
the nation of islam resembles traditional sunni islam with some differences . 
during this time ,  the nation of islam attracted malcolm little . 
jeffery muhammad ,  the nation of islam's longtime leader in dallas ,  texas ,  stated:
the nation of islam has repeatedly denied charges of anti-semitism . 
written lessons from 1930 to 1934 were passed from w .  fard muhammad to his student ,  elijah muhammad . 
he credits his evolving views on islam and race as a reason for leaving the nation of islam and his decision to convert to sunni islam . 
the nation of islam teaches that intermarriage or race mixing should be prohibited . 
the noi was founded in detroit in 1930, by wallace fard muhammad ,  also known as w .  d .  fard muhammad . 
an official nation of islam platform referred to as `` the muslim program '' was written by elijah muhammad in his book `` message to the blackman in america ''  -lrb-  1965 -rrb- . 
at the time of elijah muhammad's death in 1975, there were 75 noi centers across america . 
the nation of islam teaches that black people are the original people ,  and that all other people come from them . 
the first book analyzing the nation of islam was `` the black muslims in america ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- by c .  eric lincoln . 
under farrakhan's leadership ,  the nation was one of the fastest-growing political movements in the country . 
nerve agents attack the nervous system . 
agents sarin and vx are odorless; tabun has a slightly fruity odor and soman has a slight camphor odor . 
there are two main classes of nerve agents . 
the reaction product of the most important nerve agents ,  including soman ,  sarin ,  tabun and vx ,  with acetylcholinesterase were solved by the u . s .  army using x-ray crystallography in the 1990s . 
the g-series naming system was created by the united states when it uncovered the german activities ,  labeling tabun as ga  -lrb-  german agent a  -rrb-  ,  sarin as gb and soman as gd . 
it was found to be more than ten times as potent as tabun . 
this series is the first and oldest family of nerve agents . 
a widely publicized use of nerve agents was the 1995 terrorist attack in which operatives of the aum shinrikyo religious group released sarin into the tokyo subway system . 
on 12 march 2018, british prime minister theresa may stated that the substance used was a novichok nerve agent . 
laser photoacoustic spectroscopy  -lrb-  lpas  -rrb-  is a method that has been used to detect nerve agents in the air . 
the plant was operated by  ,  a subsidiary of ig farben ,  as were all other chemical weapon agent production plants in germany at the time . 
in 1940 the german army weapons office ordered the mass production of sarin for wartime use . 
a small japanese sect made and used sarin several times on other japanese ,  most notably the tokyo subway sarin attack . 
the most studied agent in this family ,  vx ,  was invented in the 1950s at porton down in the united kingdom . 
they are sometimes grouped as `` fourth generation '' agents along with the novichok agents due to their falling outside the definitions of controlled substances under the cwc . 
pralidoxime chloride ,  also known as `` 2-pam chloride '' ,  is also used as an antidote . 
the allies did not learn of these agents until shells filled with them were captured towards the end of the war . 
in the gulf war ,  no nerve agents  -lrb-  nor other chemical weapons  -rrb-  were used ,  but a number of u . s .  and uk personnel were exposed to them when the khamisiyah chemical depot was destroyed . 
 ''evangelion '' won the animation kobe award in 1996, and 1997.
in july 1998 the films were re-released as `` revival of evangelion '' which combined `` evangelion: death -lrb-  true  -rrb- 2 ''  -lrb-  the director's cut of `` death ''  -rrb-  with `` end of evangelion '' . 
 ''evangelion '' has had a significant impact on japanese popular culture . 
the teenaged evangelion pilots are ordered into battle by the steely gendo ikari ,  shinji's father and the commander of nerv . 
 ''neon genesis evangelion '' has scored highly in numerous popularity polls . 
in 1997, hideaki anno and studio gainax released two animated feature films ,  providing an alternative ending for the show: ``  '' and `` the end of evangelion '' . 
 ''neon genesis evangelion '' received critical acclaim ,  and garnered controversy . 
 ''neon genesis evangelion '' received critical acclaim both domestically and internationally . 
in may 1996, gainax announced an `` evangelion '' film in response to fan dissatisfaction with the series finale . 
the popularity of `` neon genesis evangelion '' extends to its merchandising which exceeded $400 million within two years of its release . 
 ''evangelion '' has been interpreted as a deeply personal expression of hideaki anno's own emotional struggles with depression . 
on november 26, 2018, streaming company netflix announced it would be streaming the original anime series ,  as well as `` neon genesis evangelion: death  -lrb-  true  -rrb- ² '' ,  and `` the end of evangelion '' ,  worldwide from q2 2019.
it depicts `` the story of an evangelion's activation ,  rampage and howling in another world '' . 
without training ,  shinji is quickly overwhelmed in the battle ,  causing the evangelion to go berserk and savagely kill the angel on its own . 
film ,  manga ,  home video ,  and other products in the `` evangelion '' franchise have achieved record sales in japanese markets and strong sales in overseas markets ,  with related goods selling over by 2007 and `` evangelion '' pachinko machines selling by 2015.
nijmegen  -lrb-  ; nijmeegs: `` nimwegen ''   -rrb-  is a city in the dutch province of gelderland ,  on the waal river close to the german border . 
the early muslim conquests included north africa by 640.
north africa is a region encompassing the northern portion of the african continent . 
the inhabitants of north africa are roughly divided in a manner corresponding to the principal geographic regions of north africa: the maghreb ,  the nile valley ,  and the sahel . 
the most notable nations of antiquity in western north africa are carthage and numidia . 
the islamic influence in the area is also significant and north africa is a major part of the muslim world . 
some researchers have postulated that north africa rather than east africa served as the exit point for the modern humans who first trekked out of the continent in the out of africa migration . 
the official language or one of the official languages in all of the countries in north africa is arabic . 
the diverse peoples of north africa are usually categorized along ethno-linguistic lines . 
this process of arabization and islamization has defined the cultural landscape of north africa ever since . 
in world war ii from 1940 to 1943 the area was the setting for the north african campaign . 
due to the recent african origin of modern humans ,  the history of prehistoric north africa is important to the understanding of pre-hominid and early modern human history in africa . 
the two teams met again on january 20, 2013, in the afc championship ,  where the ravens won 28–13.
the patriots defeated the colts in back-to-back overtime games ,  23–17 on december 8, 1991, and 37–34 on november 15, 1992.
the patriots played the colts in the playoffs again on january 18, 2015, in the afc title game ,  winning 45–7.
the two teams met once again at gillette stadium in the playoffs on january 10, 2015.
the patriots became the first team to reach ten super bowls in the 2017–18 playoffs but lost to the philadelphia eagles in super bowl lii ,  on february 4, 2018, at u . s .  bank stadium in minneapolis ,  minnesota . 
it was the first time ever that tom brady lost a game at home after leading at halftime ,  and the first time a road team beat the patriots in the afc championship . 
bill belichick achieved his 200th career head coaching win  -lrb-  regular season and playoffs  -rrb-  on november 22, 2012, defeating the jets 49–19; it was his 163rd such win as patriots coach . 
the new england patriots feature 22 former players and two contributors in their team hall of fame ,  established in 1991.
the patriots' current coach ,  bill belichick ,  was hired in 2000, and a new home field ,  gillette stadium ,  was opened in 2002.
the patriots became the first team to reach nine super bowls in the 2016–17 playoffs and faced the atlanta falcons in super bowl li ,  which ended up paving the way for their fifth super bowl victory ,  tying them with the dallas cowboys and the san francisco 49ers for the second-most in nfl history ,  1 behind the pittsburgh steelers with 6; the game was also the first super bowl to go into overtime . 
they did not appear again in an afl or nfl post-season game for another 13 years . 
in 1979, the patriots worked with nfl properties to design a new ,  streamlined logo ,  to replace the complex pat patriot logo . 
the patriots struggled for most of their years in the afl ,  and they never had a regular home stadium . 
the minuteman logo became known as the `` pat patriot '' logo ,  which later became the name of the team's mascot . 
the brady–manning portion of the rivalry began on september 30, 2001, as brady made his first nfl start in a 44–13 patriots win at foxboro; on october 21 the patriots defeated the colts at the rca dome 38–17.
prior to 2002, the patriots played in foxboro stadium dating back to 1971, the team's second year in the nfl after the afl–nfl merger . 
the patriots trailed by as much as 14 twice ,  before beating the ravens 35–31 to advance to the afc championship . 
the new england patriots are a professional american football team based in the greater boston region . 
after the colts left the afc east in 2002, they first met on november 30, 2003, in a 38–34 patriots win decided on a last-second goal line stand by the patriots . 
in 51 seasons  -lrb-  through 2017 -rrb- ,  the saints' record was overall ,  349–432–5 in the regular season and 8–10 in the playoffs . 
it was one of the few highlights of a 3–11 season ,  which set an nfl record for most wins by an expansion team . 
haslett was fired after the 2005 season ,  in which the saints finished 3–13 and did not play any regular season games in new orleans due to hurricane katrina . 
in 2003, the saints again missed the playoffs after finishing 8–8.
the 2009 season was a historic one for the saints . 
for most of their first 20 years ,  the saints were the definition of nfl futility . 
the new orleans saints are a professional american football team based in new orleans ,  louisiana . 
the new york jets are a professional american football team located in the new york metropolitan area . 
new york announced their official all-time four decade team in 2003 which ,  was determined by the fans of the team . 
the jets and the bills represent the same state  -lrb-  new york  -rrb-  ,  and this rivalry represents the differences between new york city and western new york ,  where the bills play . 
hess lured then-disgruntled new england patriots head coach bill parcells to new york in 1997.
team owners voted to have the stadium host super bowl xlviii ,  held in 2014.
the early 1990s saw the team struggling . 
feeling that this arrangement put the jets at a disadvantage ,  the team announced in 1977 that they would play two home games a year during the month of september at the giants' new home in new jersey ,  giants stadium . 
hess had a passion for his team and took losses hard . 
ryan led the team to back-to-back afc championship appearances during his first two years but the team never made the playoffs again during his tenure . 
the team uses both white pants with two parallel green stripes from hip to knee on each side ,  and green pants with white stripes . 
the new york jets previously maintained a high tension rivalry against their in-town counterparts ,  the new york giants ,  that has since diminished due to the infrequency with which the teams meet in the regular season . 
the jets were the first nfl team to wear a `` throwback '' uniform ,  in 1993 for a home game against the cincinnati bengals celebrating the 25th anniversary of the 1968 championship team . 
the team currently holds their annual training camp sessions in florham park ,  new jersey . 
the franchise obtained a new owner in woody johnson in 2000.
the two teams met again on december 6, 2015, with the jets coming from behind and winning 23–20 in overtime . 
for the full season-by-season franchise results ,  see list of new york jets seasons . 
in 2007, the team introduced a new `` throwback '' uniform ,  evoking the original titans of new york and combining elements of the 1960 and 1961–62 uniforms ,  with navy blue helmets and jerseys ,  old gold numerals and helmet stripes ,  gold and white shoulder stripes ,  and gold pants with blue and white stripes on each side . 
in 1977, the jets were to play one september game at giants stadium and an october 2 game at shea . 
green pants were added in 2002, and have been worn with both the white and green jerseys . 
the franchise is legally and corporately registered as new york jets ,  llc . 
the team was founded in 1959 as the titans of new york ,  an original member of the american football league  -lrb-  afl  -rrb- ; later ,  the franchise joined the nfl in the afl–nfl merger in  . 
owner harry wismer sought out a place for the team to play their home games but was only able to secure the dilapidated polo grounds ,  which had not had a major tenant since the baseball new york giants vacated the stadium in 1957.
nonlinear optics explains nonlinear response of properties such as frequency ,  polarization ,  phase or path of incident light . 
the theoretical basis for many nonlinear processes were first described in bloembergen's monograph `` nonlinear optics '' . 
