some writers distinguish between a slippery slope `` event '' and a slippery slope `` argument '' . 
different writers have classified slippery slope arguments in different and often contradictory ways ,  but there are two basic types of argument that have been described as slippery slope arguments . 
the judgmental type may be further sub-divided into conceptual slippery slopes and decisional slippery slopes . 
for these reasons ,  it seems best to propose drawing a distinction between dam burst arguments and slippery slope arguments . `` 
most of the more detailed analysis of slippery slopes has been done by those who hold that genuine slippery slopes are of the decisional kind . 
the key components of slippery slope arguments are three: walton notes that these three features will be common to all slippery slopes but objects that there needs to be more clarity on the nature of the 'mechanism' and a way of distinguishing between slippery slope arguments and arguments from negative consequences . 
in logic and critical thinking textbooks slippery slopes and slippery slope arguments are normally discussed as a form of fallacy although there may be an acknowledgement that non-fallacious forms of the argument can also exist . 
argument from ignorance  -lrb-  from   -rrb-  ,  also known as appeal to ignorance  -lrb-  in which `` ignorance '' represents `` a lack of contrary evidence ''  -rrb-  is a fallacy in informal logic . 
the star wolf 359  -lrb-  cn leonis  -rrb-  ,  one of the nearest stars to earth at 7.8 light-years away ,  is in leo . 
leo is also home to one bright variable star ,  the red giant r leonis . 
the star sdss j102915+172927  -lrb-  caffau's star  -rrb-  is a population ii star in the galactic halo seen in leo . 
it has the lowest metallicity of any known star . 
leo contains many bright galaxies; messier 65, messier 66, messier 95, messier 97, messier 105, and ngc 3628 are the most famous ,  the first two being part of the leo triplet . 
three star systems are known to have planets . 
libra is a constellation of the zodiac . 
delta librae is an algol-type eclipsing variable star ,  304 lightyears from earth . 
alpha librae ,  called zubenelgenubi ,  is a multiple star system divisible into two stars when seen through binoculars ,  the primary  -lrb-  alpha librae  -rrb-  is a blue-white star of magnitude 2.7 and the secondary  -lrb-  alpha librae  -rrb-  is a white star of magnitude 5.2 and spectral type f3v that is 74.9 ± 0.7 light-years from earth . 
the brightest stars in libra form a quadrangle that distinguishes it for the unaided observer . 
in ancient egypt the three brightest stars of libra  -lrb-  α ,  β ,  and σ librae  -rrb-  formed a constellation that was viewed as a boat . 
a steam locomotive is a locomotive whose primary power source is a steam engine . 
by the end of the 20th century ,  almost the only steam power remaining in regular use around the world was on heritage railways . 
the liverpool and manchester railway ,  built by stephenson ,  opened a year later making exclusive use of steam power for passenger and goods trains . 
the steam locomotive remained by far the most common type of locomotive until after world war ii . 
in the year 1900 lars magnus retired from ericsson at the age of 54.
lars magnus ericsson  -lrb-  ; 5 may 1846 – 17 december 1926 -rrb- was a swedish inventor ,  entrepreneur and founder of telephone equipment manufacturer ericsson  -lrb-  incorporated as `` telefonaktiebolaget lm ericsson ''  -rrb-  . 
it was not until they started cooperating with henrik tore cedergren in 1883 that the company would start to grow into the ericsson corporation . 
latin rap ,  and chicano rap continue to develop into larger enterprises . 
latin hip hop or latin rap is hip hop music recorded by latin american artists in the u . s .  and spanish speaking countries in the caribbean ,  central american and south america . 
in 2015, a new movement of trap music referred to as `` latin trap '' began to emerge . 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s ,  most latin rap came from the west coast of the united states . 
in the mid-1980s ,  freestyle music was initially called `` latin hip hop '' . 
the lighthouse remains a civic symbol of the city of alexandria and of the alexandria governorate with which the city is more or less coterminous . 
french archaeologists led by jean-yves empereur re-discovered the physical remains of the lighthouse in late 1994 on the floor of alexandria's eastern harbour . 
the lighthouse of alexandria ,  sometimes called the pharos of alexandria  -lrb-  ; ancient greek: ὁ φάρος τῆς ἀλεξανδρείας ,  contemporary koine   -rrb-  ,  was a lighthouse built by the ptolemaic kingdom ,  during the reign of ptolemy ii philadelphus  -lrb-  280–247 bc  -rrb-  ,  which has been estimated to be in overall height . 
this was so that when the plaster with ptolemy's name fell off ,  sostratus's name would be visible in the stone . 
in 2016 the ministry of state of antiquities in egypt had plans to turn submerged ruins of ancient alexandria ,  including those of the pharos ,  into an underwater museum . 
the fullest description of the lighthouse comes from arab traveller abou haggag youssef ibn mohammed el-balawi el-andaloussi ,  who visited alexandria in a . d .  1166.
before modern strobe lights ,  lenses were used to concentrate the light from a continuous source . 
orient long beach bar light  -lrb-  bug light  -rrb-  is a blend of a screw pile light that was converted to a caisson light because of the threat of ice damage . 
as a result ,  in addition to seeing the side of the light beam ,  the light is directly visible from greater distances ,  and with an identifying light characteristic . 
whale oil was also used with wicks as the source of light . 
most of these have now been replaced by fixed light platforms  -lrb-  such as ambrose light  -rrb-  similar to those used for offshore oil exploration . 
such paired lighthouses are called range lights in the u . s .  and leading lights in the united kingdom . 
the technology was the predominant form of light source in lighthouses from the 1900s through the 1960s ,  when electric lighting had become dominant . 
a fresnel lens can also capture more oblique light from a light source ,  thus allowing the light from a lighthouse equipped with one to be visible over greater distances . 
smaller versions of this design are often used as harbor lights to mark the entrance into a harbor ,  such as new london harbor light . 
in a lighthouse ,  the source of light is called the `` lamp ''  -lrb-  whether electric or fuelled by oil  -rrb-  and the concentration of the light is by the `` lens '' or `` optic '' . 
efficiently concentrating the light from a large omnidirectional light source requires a very large diameter lens . 
in any of these designs an observer ,  rather than seeing a continuous weak light ,  sees a brighter light during short time intervals . 
south foreland lighthouse was the first tower to successfully use an electric light in 1875.
this concentration of light is accomplished with a rotating lens assembly . 
the lighthouse itself consists of a tower structure supporting the lantern room where the light operates . 
when the vessel is on the correct course ,  the two lights line up vertically . 
the rear range light is almost always taller than the front . 
it also became possible to transmit complex signals using the light flashes . 
the library of alexandria was not the first library of its kind . 
the great library of alexandria in alexandria ,  egypt ,  was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world . 
very little is known about the library of alexandria during the time of the roman principate  -lrb-  27 bc–284 ad  -rrb-  . 
in 48 bc ,  during caesar's civil war ,  julius caesar was besieged at alexandria . 
the idea of reviving the ancient library of alexandria in the modern era was first proposed in 1974, when lotfy dowidar was president of the university of alexandria . 
the first recorded head librarian was zenodotus of ephesus  -lrb-  lived 325– 270 bc  -rrb-  . 
aristophanes of byzantium  -lrb-  lived 257– 180 bc  -rrb-  became the fourth head librarian sometime around 200 bc . 
the `` suda '' ,  a tenth-century byzantine encyclopedia ,  calls the mathematician theon of alexandria  -lrb-   ad 335– 405 -rrb- a `` man of the mouseion '' . 
the library of alexandria was one of the largest and most prestigious libraries of the ancient world ,  but it was far from the only one . 
in ad 642, alexandria was captured by the muslim army of 'amr ibn al-'as . 
aristarchus of samothrace  -lrb-  lived 216– 145 bc  -rrb-  was the sixth head librarian . 
during the early second century bc ,  several scholars at the library of alexandria studied works on medicine . 
in 391 ad ,  a group of christian workmen in alexandria uncovered the remains of an old mithraeum . 
after zenodotus either died or retired ,  ptolemy ii philadelphus appointed apollonius of rhodes  -lrb-  lived 295– 215 bc  -rrb-  ,  a native of alexandria and a student of callimachus ,  as the second head librarian of the library of alexandria . 
nonetheless ,  hypatia was not the last pagan in alexandria ,  nor was she the last neoplatonist philosopher . 
it was out of this mixed heritage of both greek and near eastern book collections that the idea for the library of alexandria was born . 
according to legend ,  during the librarianship of apollonius ,  the mathematician and inventor archimedes  -lrb-  lived  287 – 212 bc  -rrb-  came to visit the library of alexandria . 
alexandria came to be regarded as the capital of knowledge and learning ,  in part because of the great library . 
meanwhile ,  in alexandria ,  from the middle of the second century bc onwards ,  ptolemaic rule in egypt grew less stable than it had been previously . 
in addition to the great library ,  many other smaller libraries also began to spring up all around the city of alexandria . 
the third head librarian ,  eratosthenes of cyrene  -lrb-  lived 280– 194 bc  -rrb-  ,  is best known today for his scientific works ,  but he was also a literary scholar . 
a public library provides services to the general public . 
libraries also were not uniformly open to the public . 
their work supplements that of the public schools . 
unlike a public library ,  access was often restricted to members . 
libraries often provide public facilities for access to their electronic resources and the internet . 
public library advocacy is support given to a public library for its financial and philosophical goals or needs . 
the first tax-supported public library in the united states was peterborough ,  new hampshire  -lrb-  1833 -rrb- first supported by state funds then an `` act providing for the establishment of public libraries '' in 1849.
many public libraries also serve as community organizations that provide free services and events to the public ,  such as reading groups and toddler story time . 
often visitors to a city are able to obtain a public library card . 
although by the mid-19th century england could claim 274 subscription libraries and scotland ,  266, the foundation of the modern public library system in britain is the public libraries act 1850.
at the start of the 19th century ,  there were virtually no public libraries in the sense in which we now understand the term i . e . 
one of the most popular programs offered in public libraries are summer reading programs for children ,  families ,  and adults . 
even though the british museum existed at this time and contained over 50,000 books ,  the national library was not open to the public ,  or even to a majority of the population . 
despite the importance of public libraries ,  they are routinely having their budgets cut by state legislature . 
old manuscripts were also used to bind new books because of the costs associated with paper and also because of the scarcity of new paper . 
a library is organized for use and maintained by a public body ,  an institution ,  a corporation ,  or a private individual . 
children's libraries are special collections of books intended for juvenile readers and usually kept in separate rooms of general public libraries . 
a research library is a collection of materials on one or more subjects . 
the bill passed through parliament as most mps felt that public libraries would provide facilities for self-improvement through books and reading for all classes ,  and that the greater levels of education attained by providing public libraries would result in lower crime rates . 
the emergence of the internet ,  however ,  has led to the adoption of electronic catalogue databases  -lrb-  often referred to as `` webcats '' or as online public access catalogues ,  opacs  -rrb-  ,  which allow users to search the library's holdings from any location with internet access . 
in the united kingdom ,  they may be members of research libraries uk  -lrb-  rluk  -rrb-  . 
most of the large roman baths were also cultural centres ,  built from the start with a library ,  a two-room arrangement with one room for greek and one for latin texts . 
in general ,  this condition may have resulted from one or more of the following causes:
the advocacy of ewart and brotherton then succeeded in having a select committee set up to consider public library provision . 
examples of research libraries include the british library ,  the bodleian library at oxford university and the new york public library main branch on 42nd street in manhattan ,  state public scientific technological library of the sibirian branch of the russian academy of science . 
han chinese scholar liu xiang established the first library classification system during the han dynasty ,  and the first book notation system . 
funding has dwindled so badly that many public libraries have been forced to cut their hours and release employees . 
some special libraries ,  such as governmental law libraries ,  hospital libraries ,  and military base libraries commonly are open to public visitors to the institution in question . 
surprisingly ,  old roman textbooks on grammar were still being used at that time . 
patrons may not know how to fully use the library's resources . 
the first true national library was founded in 1753 as part of the british museum . 
philanthropists and businessmen ,  including john passmore edwards ,  henry tate and andrew carnegie ,  helped to increase the number of public libraries from the late 19th century . 
parochial libraries attached to anglican parishes or nonconformist chapels in britain emerged in the early 18th century ,  and prepared the way for local public libraries . 
there is also evidence of libraries at nippur about 1900 bc and those at nineveh about 700 bc showing a library classification system . 
services commonly provided by public libraries may include storytelling sessions for infants ,  toddlers ,  preschool children ,  or after-school programs ,  all with an intention of developing early literacy skills and a love of books . 
during the late antiquity and middle ages periods ,  there was no rome of the kind that ruled the mediterranean for centuries and spawned the culture that produced twenty-eight public libraries in the `` urbs roma '' . 
the committee also selected the librarians who would manage the circulation of materials . 
benjamin franklin led the founding of the first american subscription library . 
teachers also were known to have small personal libraries as well as wealthy bibliophiles who could afford the highly ornate books of the period . 
also ,  in eastern christianity monastery libraries kept important manuscripts . 
a national or state library serves as a national repository of information ,  and has the right of legal deposit ,  which is a legal requirement that publishers in the country need to deposit a copy of each publication with the library . 
special libraries are distinguished from special collections ,  which are branches or parts of a library intended for rare books ,  manuscripts ,  and other special materials ,  though some special libraries have special collections of their own ,  typically related to the library's specialized subject area . 
this `` wall system '' was first introduced on a large scale in spain's el escorial . 
the international date line passes through the line islands . 
the line islands ,  teraina islands or equatorial islands ,  is a chain of atolls  -lrb-  with partially or fully enclosed lagoons  -rrb-  and coral islands  -lrb-  with a surrounding reef  -rrb-  . 
the time is 1 day and 2 hours ahead of some other islands in oceania like baker island ,  which uses  . 
the latin wikipedia has more than 100,000 articles written in latin . 
medieval latin is the written latin in use during that portion of the postclassical period when no corresponding latin vernacular existed . 
by the late roman republic  -lrb-  75 bc  -rrb-  ,  old latin had been standardised into classical latin . 
latin  -lrb-  latin:  ,    -rrb-  is a classical language belonging to the italic branch of the indo-european languages . 
the libretto for the opera-oratorio by igor stravinsky is in latin . 
the earliest known form of latin is old latin ,  which was spoken from the roman kingdom to the later part of the roman republic period . 
there have been several latin translations since ,  including a latin edition of the 1979 usa anglican book of common prayer . 
there are many websites and forums maintained in latin by enthusiasts . 
canada's motto  -lrb-  `` from sea to sea ''  -rrb-  and most provincial mottos are also in latin . 
one key marker of whether a given romance feature was found in vulgar latin is to compare it with its parallel in classical latin . 
latin was originally spoken in the area around rome ,  known as latium . 
for a brief period in the 1990s ,  `` livescript '' was the name of javascript . 
during the same period ,  unix workstations were using tcp/ip networking . 
ethernet and wi-fi are the two most common technologies in use for local area networks . 
network topology describes the layout of interconnections between devices and network segments . 
depending on how the connections are established and secured ,  and the distance involved ,  such linked lans may also be classified as a metropolitan area network  -lrb-  man  -rrb-  or a wide area network  -lrb-  wan  -rrb-  . 
a local area network  -lrb-  lan  -rrb-  is a computer network that interconnects computers within a limited area such as a residence ,  school ,  laboratory ,  university campus or office building . 
lans can maintain connections with other lans via leased lines ,  leased services ,  or across the internet using virtual private network technologies . 
both the institute pasteur and université louis pasteur were named after pasteur . 
pasteur entered primary school in 1831.
scientists before pasteur had studied fermentation . 
pasteur also wrote about alcoholic fermentation . 
louis pasteur university hospital in košice ,  slovakia is also named after pasteur . 
pasteur concluded that the animals were now immune to the disease . 
in 1865, pasteur went to alès and worked for five years until 1870.
pasteur thought that succinic acid inverted sucrose . 
pasteur was motivated to investigate fermentation while working at lille . 
the first of the pasteur institutes was also built on the basis of this achievement . 
pasteur noticed that crystals of tartrates had small faces . 
pasteur was responsible for disproving the doctrine of spontaneous generation . 
his grandson ,  louis pasteur vallery-radot ,  wrote that pasteur had kept from his catholic background only a spiritualism without religious practice . 
pasteur publicly claimed his success in developing the anthrax vaccine in 1881.
in paris ,  he established the pasteur institute in 1887, in which he was its director for the rest of his life . 
later in 1842, pasteur took the entrance test for the école normale supérieure . 
the method became known as pasteurization ,  and was soon applied to beer and milk . 
in 1995, the centennial of the death of louis pasteur ,  a historian of science gerald l .  geison published an analysis of pasteur's private notebooks in his `` the private science of louis pasteur '' ,  and declared that pasteur had given several misleading accounts and played deceptions in his most important discoveries . 
in december 1879, pasteur used a weakened culture of the bacteria to inoculate chickens . 
after developing the rabies vaccine ,  pasteur proposed an institute for the vaccine . 
pasteur performed several experiments to disprove spontaneous generation . 
the lower rate of fermentation aerobically became known as the pasteur effect . 
louis pasteur  -lrb-   ,  ; december 27, 1822 – september 28, 1895 -rrb- was a french biologist ,  microbiologist and chemist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination ,  microbial fermentation and pasteurization . 
as for wittgenstein:
they had 11 children—among them wittgenstein's father . 
wittgenstein left to live in norway . 
in the summer of 1920, wittgenstein worked as a gardener for a monastery . 
at wittgenstein's insistence ,  moore ,  who was now a cambridge don ,  visited him in norway in 1914, reluctantly because wittgenstein exhausted him . 
wittgenstein had romantic relations with both men and women . 
from 1936 to 1937, wittgenstein lived again in norway ,  where he worked on the `` philosophical investigations '' . 
during his time at the institute ,  wittgenstein developed an interest in aeronautics . 
karl wittgenstein died on 20 january 1913, and after receiving his inheritance wittgenstein became one of the wealthiest men in europe . 
on starting at the realschule ,  wittgenstein had been moved forward a year . 
a fragment of music  -lrb-  three bars  -rrb-  ,  composed by wittgenstein ,  was discovered in one of his 1931 notebooks ,  by michael nedo ,  director of the wittgenstein institute in cambridge . 
for example ,  wittgenstein would become one of the century's fiercest critics of scientism . 
wittgenstein was taught by private tutors at home until he was 14 years old . 
wittgenstein was appointed as a lecturer and was made a fellow of trinity college . 
piribauer tried to have wittgenstein arrested ,  but the village's police station was empty ,  and when he tried again the next day he was told wittgenstein had disappeared . 
at glossop wittgenstein worked under professor of physics sir arthur schuster . 
in his own writings wittgenstein frequently referred to himself as jewish ,  at times as part of an apparent self-flagellation . 
of the apologies ,  wittgenstein wrote ,  `` this brought me into more settled waters .  .  .  and to greater seriousness . `` 
several commentators have argued that a school photograph of hitler may show wittgenstein in the lower left corner ,  but hamann says the photograph stems from 1900 or 1901, before wittgenstein's time . 
there is much debate about the extent to which wittgenstein and his siblings ,  who were of 3/4 jewish descent ,  saw themselves as jews . 
it meant `` inter alia '' that the wittgensteins were restricted in whom they could marry or have sex with ,  and where they could work . 
in 1926 wittgenstein was again working as a gardener for a number of months ,  this time at the monastery of hütteldorf ,  where he had also inquired about becoming a monk . 
wittgenstein's relationship with david pinsent  -lrb-  1891–1918 -rrb- occurred during an intellectually formative period ,  and is well documented . 
norman malcolm ,  at the time a post-graduate research fellow at cambridge ,  describes his first impressions of wittgenstein in 1938:
he left so suddenly and quietly that for a time people believed he was the fourth wittgenstein brother to have committed suicide . 
wittgenstein's mother was leopoldine maria josefa kalmus ,  known among friends as poldi . 
reportedly ,  wittgenstein also had trouble tolerating the discussions in the cambridge moral sciences club . 
wittgenstein and hitler were born just six days apart ,  though hitler had to re-sit his mathematics exam before being allowed into a higher class ,  while wittgenstein was moved forward by one ,  so they ended up two grades apart at the `` realschule '' . 
west low german ,  also known as low saxon  -lrb-  german: ' ,  literally `` west low german '' ,  or '  -lrb-  in a stricter sense  -rrb-  ,  literally: `` low saxon ,  nether-saxon ''; ;   -rrb-  is a group of low german  -lrb-  also low saxon; german: ' ,  ' ,  dutch: ``  ''  -rrb-  dialects spoken in parts of the netherlands ,  northwestern germany and southern denmark  -lrb-  in north schleswig by the german minority  -rrb-  . 
dutch low saxon ,  spoken in groningen ,  drenthe ,  overijssel and northern gelderland  -rrb-  and the schleswigsch dialect spoken by the north schleswig germans in the southernmost part of denmark . 
lanthanum usually occurs together with cerium and the other rare earth elements . 
relatively pure lanthanum metal was first isolated in 1923.
lanthanum is a chemical element with symbol la and atomic number 57.
lanthanum is the first element and prototype of the lanthanide series . 
the first historical application of lanthanum was in gas lantern mantles . 
it is extracted from those minerals by a process of such complexity that pure lanthanum metal was not isolated until 1923.
lanthanum fluoride is insoluble in water and can be used as a qualitative test for the presence of la . 
lutetium occurs on the earth in form of two isotopes: lutetium-175 and lutetium-176.
pure lutetium metal was first produced in 1953.
lutetium is a chemical element with symbol lu and atomic number 71.
lutetium's compounds always contain the element in the oxidation state +3.
lutetium metal is slightly unstable in air at standard conditions ,  but it burns readily at 150 °c to form lutetium oxide . 
found with almost all other rare-earth metals but never by itself ,  lutetium is very difficult to separate from other elements . 
soluble lutetium salts are mildly toxic ,  but insoluble ones are not . 
the half-lives of lawrencium isotopes mostly increase smoothly from lr to lr ,  with a dip from lr to lr . 
in 2015, the first ionization energy of lawrencium was measured ,  using the isotope lr . 
lawrencium is a synthetic chemical element with symbol lr  -lrb-  formerly lw  -rrb-  and atomic number 103.
while the lightest  -lrb-  lr to lr  -rrb-  and heaviest  -lrb-  lr  -rrb-  lawrencium isotopes are produced only as alpha decay products of dubnium  -lrb-  `` z '' = 105 -rrb- isotopes ,  the middle isotopes  -lrb-  lr to lr  -rrb-  can all be produced by bombarding actinide  -lrb-  americium to einsteinium  -rrb-  targets with light ions  -lrb-  from boron to neon  -rrb-  . 
both lr and lr have half-lives too short to allow a complete chemical purification process . 
lr can be produced by bombarding californium-249 with 70 mev boron-11 ions  -lrb-  producing lawrencium-256 and four neutrons  -rrb-  ,  while lr can be produced by bombarding berkelium-249 with oxygen-18  -lrb-  producing lawrencium-260, an alpha particle ,  and three neutrons  -rrb-  . 
a lawrencium atom has 103 electrons ,  of which three can act as valence electrons . 
because the name `` lawrencium '' had been in use for a long time by this point ,  it was retained by iupac ,  and in august 1997, the international union of pure and applied chemistry  -lrb-  iupac  -rrb-  ratified the name lawrencium and the symbol `` lr '' during a meeting in geneva . 
anthropogenic lead includes lead from shot and sinkers . 
the lead monoxide is thereby reduced to metallic lead ,  in the midst of a slag rich in lead monoxide . 
in this process ,  lead bullion and slag is obtained directly from lead concentrates . 
soil can be contaminated through particulate accumulation from lead in pipes ,  lead paint ,  and residual emissions from leaded gasoline . 
lead has no confirmed biological role ,  and there is no confirmed safe level of lead exposure . 
if the input is rich in lead ,  as much as 80% of the original lead can be obtained as bullion; the remaining 20% forms a slag rich in lead monoxide . 
lead's toxicity has led to its phasing out for some uses . 
lead-208 has 126 neutrons ,  another magic number ,  which may explain why lead-208 is extraordinarily stable . 
lead is a relatively unreactive post-transition metal . 
the energy storage/release reaction used in these devices involves lead sulfate and lead dioxide:
from 1960 to 1990, lead output in the western bloc grew by about 31% . 
contrary to popular belief ,  pencil leads in wooden pencils have never been made from lead . 
during the classical era  -lrb-  and even up to the 17th century  -rrb-  ,  tin was often not distinguished from lead: romans called lead `` plumbum nigrum ''  -lrb-  `` black lead ''  -rrb-  ,  and tin `` plumbum candidum ''  -lrb-  `` bright lead ''  -rrb-  . 
lead tetrachloride  -lrb-  a yellow oil  -rrb-  decomposes at room temperature ,  lead tetrabromide is less stable still ,  and the existence of lead tetraiodide is questionable . 
in the united states ,  the permissible exposure limit for lead in the workplace ,  comprising metallic lead ,  inorganic lead compounds ,  and lead soaps ,  was set at 50 μg/m over an 8-hour workday ,  and the blood lead level limit at 5 μg per 100 g of blood in 2012.
lead-based semiconductors such as lead telluride and lead selenide are used in photovoltaic cells and infrared detectors . 
primordial lead—which comprises the isotopes lead-204, lead-206, lead-207, and lead-208—was mostly created as a result of repetitive neutron capture processes occurring in stars . 
continual exposure may result in the bioaccumulation of lead . 
the resulting concentrate ,  which has a lead content of 30–80% by mass  -lrb-  regularly 50–60%  -rrb-  ,  is then turned into  -lrb-  impure  -rrb-  lead metal . 
lead shows two main oxidation states: +4 and +2.
lead is toxic ,  and its use was phased out of some applications after this was discovered . 
lead -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  compounds are characteristic of the inorganic chemistry of lead . 
lead tablets were commonly used as a material for letters . 
lead ,  like carbon ,  is predominantly tetravalent in such compounds . 
by the mid-1980s ,  there was significant decline in the use of lead in industry . 
in addition to being the main application for lead metal ,  lead-acid batteries are also the main consumer of lead compounds . 
the primary and secondary lead production processes are similar . 
three of the stable isotopes are found in three of the four major decay chains: lead-206, lead-207, and lead-208 are the final decay products of uranium-238, uranium-235, and thorium-232, respectively . 
some lead compounds exist in formal oxidation states other than +4 or +2.
concentrated alkalis will dissolve lead and form plumbites . 
the rate of skin absorption is lower for inorganic lead . 
other applications of lead compounds are very specialized and often fading . 
for many organic compounds ,  a lead analog does not exist . 
alternatively to the pyrometallurgical processes ,  very pure lead can be obtained by processing smelted lead electrolytically using the betts process . 
lead exposure is a global issue since lead mining and smelting ,  and battery manufacturing/disposal/recycling ,  are common in many countries . 
of the sources of lead for recycling ,  lead–acid batteries are the most important; lead pipe ,  sheet ,  and cable sheathing are also significant . 
in total ,  43 lead isotopes have been synthesized ,  with mass numbers 178–220.
molten lead reacts with the chalcogens to give lead -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  chalcogenides . 
about 10% of sedimentary rocks are limestones . 
limestones may also form in lacustrine and evaporite depositional environments . 
limestone is a sedimentary rock which is often composed of the skeletal fragments of marine organisms such as coral ,  foraminifera and molluscs . 
like most other sedimentary rocks ,  most limestone is composed of grains . 
when conditions are right for precipitation ,  calcite forms mineral coatings that cement the existing rock grains together ,  or it can fill fractures . 
the old part of lübeck is on an island enclosed by the trave . 
lübeck hauptbahnhof links lübeck to a number of railway lines ,  notably the line to hamburg . 
lübeck became the scene of a notable art scandal in the 1950s . 
after its defeat in the count's feud ,  lübeck's power slowly declined . 
the writer thomas mann was a member of the mann family of lübeck merchants . 
during world war ii  -lrb-  1939–1945 -rrb- ,  lübeck became the first german city to suffer substantial royal air force  -lrb-  raf  -rrb-  bombing . 
in 1811, the french empire formally annexed lübeck as part of france; the anti-napoleonic allies liberated the area in 1813, and the congress of vienna of 1815 recognised lübeck as an independent free city . 
in the lao language ,  the country's name is `` muang lao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  or `` pathet lao ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  both literally mean `` lao country '' . 
lao theung constitute about 30 percent of the population . 
it is produced by the lao brewery company . 
ten percent belong to other `` lowland '' groups ,  which together with the lao people make up the lao loum . 
the english word `` laos '' was coined by the french ,  who united the three lao kingdoms in french indochina in 1893 and named the country as the plural of the dominant and most common ethnic group ,  which are the lao people . 
in 1960, amidst a series of rebellions in the kingdom of laos ,  fighting broke out between the royal lao army and the communist north vietnam-backed ,  and soviet union-backed pathet lao guerillas . 
much of laos lacks adequate infrastructure . 
the term `` laotian '' does not necessarily refer to the lao language ,  ethnic lao people ,  language or customs . 
laos has a mostly tropical savanna climate . 
of those hmong who did return to laos ,  some quickly escaped back to thailand ,  describing discrimination and brutal treatment at the hands of lao authorities . 
approximately 77 percent of lao farm households are self-sufficient in rice . 
during world war ii in laos ,  vichy france ,  fascist thailand ,  imperial japan and free france occupied laos . 
human rights violations remain a significant concern in laos . 
in 1968 the north vietnamese army launched a multi-division attack to help the pathet lao to fight the royal lao army . 
laos  -lrb-   ,  ;  ,  `` lāo ''   -rrb-  ,  officially the lao people's democratic republic  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  commonly referred to by its colloquial name of muang lao  -lrb-  lao: ເມືອງລາວ ,  `` muang lao ''  -rrb-  ,  is a socialist state and the only landlocked country in southeast asia at the heart of the indochinese peninsula ,  bordered by myanmar  -lrb-  burma  -rrb-  and china to the northwest ,  vietnam to the east ,  cambodia to the southwest ,  and thailand to the west and southwest . 
in 1955, the us department of defense created a special programs evaluation office to replace french support of the royal lao army against the communist pathet lao as part of the us containment policy . 
in 2004 and 2005, thousands of hmong fled from the jungles of laos to a temporary refugee camp in the thai province of phetchabun . 
the lao economy depends heavily on investment and trade with its neighbours ,  thailand ,  vietnam ,  and ,  especially in the north ,  china . 
on 2 december 2015, laos celebrated its 40th anniversary of the establishment of the republic . 
laos can be considered to consist of three geographical areas: north ,  central ,  and south . 
laos has the youngest population of any country in asia with a median age of 21.6 years . 
during the first indochina war ,  the indochinese communist party formed the pathet lao independence organisation . 
laos is rich in mineral resources and imports petroleum and gas . 
although some accusations of forced repatriation were denied ,  thousands of hmong people refused to return to laos . 
economic development in laos has been hampered by brain drain ,  with a skilled emigration rate of 37.4 percent in 2000.
laos traces its history to the kingdom of lan xang  -lrb-  million elephants  -rrb-  ,  which was founded in the 14th century by a lao prince fa ngum ,  who ,  with 10,000 khmer troops ,  took over vientiane . 
hill people and minority cultures of laos such as the hmong ,  yao  -lrb-  mien  -rrb-  ,  dao ,  shan ,  and several tibeto-burman speaking peoples have lived in isolated regions of laos for many years . 
according to the us committee for refugees ,  he was arrested by lao security forces and was never seen again . 
laos's first ,  french-written and monarchical constitution was promulgated on 11 may 1947, and declared laos an independent state within the french union . 
in 1993 the laos government set aside 21 percent of the nation's land area for habitat conservation preservation . 
laos never had any importance for france other than as a buffer state between thailand and the more economically important annam and tonkin . 
when japan surrendered ,  some lao nationalists  -lrb-  including prince phetsarath  -rrb-  declared laotian independence ,  but by early 1946, french troops had reoccupied the country and conferred limited autonomy on laos . 
the foreign relations of laos after the takeover by the pathet lao in december 1975, were characterized by a hostile posture toward the west ,  with the government of the lao people's democratic republic aligning itself with the soviet bloc ,  maintaining close ties with the soviet union and depending heavily on the soviets for most of its foreign assistance . 
however ,  french control in laos had been sidelined . 
beginning in 1707 the lao kingdom of lan xang was partitioned into regional kingdoms of vientiane ,  luang prabang and later champasak  -lrb-  1713 -rrb- . 
by 1920 the majority of french laos was at peace and colonial order had been established . 
the french would increasingly conduct military campaigns against the haw in both laos and vietnam  -lrb-  tonkin  -rrb-  until the 1880s . 
the french protectorate of laos established two and at times three administrative regions governed from vietnam in 1893.
the modern nation-state laos emerged from the french colonial empire as an independent country in 1953.
the lao response to french colonialism was mixed ,  although the french were viewed as preferable to the siamese by the nobility ,  the majority of lao loum ,  lao theung ,  and lao sung were burdened by regressive taxes and demands for corvee labor to establish colonial outposts . 
tai and lao people southward migration into laos only occurred after the eighth century of the common era . 
population transfers of ethnic lao to siam began in 1779 with siamese suzerainty . 
lan xang  -lrb-  1353–1707 -rrb- was one of the largest kingdoms in southeast asia . 
the french would use the existence of slavery in siam as one of the major professed motivations for establishing a protectorate of laos during the 1880s and 1890s . 
the borders of the modern state of laos were established by the french colonial government in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
as part of french indochina both laos and cambodia were seen as a source of raw materials and labor for the more important holdings in vietnam . 
the result was the paknam incident ,  the franco-siamese war and the ultimate recognition of french territorial claims in laos . 
the result changed the demographics and cultural traditions of thailand and laos and continues today with a five-fold disparity between the ethnic lao living on the west bank of the mekong and those left in the east in what is today laos . 
the history of the tai migrations into laos were preserved in myth and legends . 
the kingdom of luang prabang was the first of the regional kingdoms to emerge in 1707, when king xai ong hue of lan xang was challenged by kingkitsarat ,  the grandson of sourigna vongsa . 
by 1779 general taksin had driven the burmese from siam ,  had overrun the lao kingdoms of champasak and vientiane ,  and forced luang prabang to accept vassalage  -lrb-  luang prabang had aided siam during the siege of vientiane  -rrb-  . 
these earliest societies contributed to the ancestral gene pool of the upland lao ethnicities known collectively as “lao theung , ” with the largest ethnic groups being the khamu of northern laos ,  and the brao and katang in the south . 
lan xang existed as a sovereign kingdom for over 350 years . 
in the area which is modern northern and central laos ,  and northeast thailand the mon people established their own kingdoms during the 8th century ce ,  outside the reach of the contracting chenla kingdoms . 
as a result ,  lao international trade along the mekong was effectively blockaded ,  and heavy duties were imposed on lao merchants who were viewed suspiciously by siam for their trade with both the cambodians and vietnamese . 
in 1713, the southern lao nobility continued the rebellion against xai ong hue under nokasad ,  a nephew of sourigna vongsa ,  and the kingdom of champasak emerged . 
in the north ,  the country is bounded by a mountainous 423-kilometre border with china and shares the 235-kilometre-long mekong river border with myanmar . 
the average temperatures in january ,  coldest month ,  are ,  luang prabang 20.5 °c  -lrb-  minimum 0.8 °c  -rrb-  ,  vientiane 20.3 °c  -lrb-  minimum 3.9 °c  -rrb-  ,  and pakse 23.9 °c  -lrb-  minimum 8.2 °c  -rrb- ; the average temperatures for april ,  usually the hottest month ,  are ,  luang prabang 28.1 °c  -lrb-  maximum 44.8 °c  -rrb-  ,  vientiane 39.4 °c  -rrb-  . 
geographic coordinates: most of the western border of laos is demarcated by the mekong river ,  which is an important artery for transportation . 
together ,  the alluvial plains and terraces of the mekong and its tributaries cover only about 20% of the land area . 
the mekong river is only navigable for about seventy percent of its length due to rapids and low water levels in the dry season . 
inland waterways ,  including the mekong river ,  is the second most important source of transport network . 
also ,  many laotians living in the mekong valley have relatives and friends in thailand . 
only about 4% of the total land area is classified as arable . 
agricultural cultivation is possible during with varying weather on a small portion of land area apart from the vientiane plain and the lowlands along the mekong valley . 
residents in the lower lands and villages of smaller river banks have traditionally traveled in pirogues for fishing ,  trading ,  or visiting up and down the river for limited distances . 
laotians in lowland villages located on the banks of smaller rivers have traditionally traveled in pirogues for fishing ,  trading ,  and visiting up and down the river for limited distances . 
the lowland lao  -lrb-  lao loum  -rrb-  account for 68% ,  upland lao  -lrb-  lao theung  -rrb-  for 22% ,  and the highland lao  -lrb-  lao soung ,  including the hmong and the yao  -rrb-  for 9% . 
collectively ,  they are known as lao sung or highland lao . 
in the central and southern mountains ,  mon–khmer tribes known as lao theung or upland lao ,  predominate . 
there are also four deputy prime ministers . 
the `` de jure '' head of state is president bounnhang vorachith ,  who also is lprp general secretary making him the `` de facto '' leader of laos . 
the national assembly  -lrb-  `` sapha heng xat ''  -rrb-  has 149 members  -lrb-  144 are lprp ,  5 independants  -rrb-  ,  elected for a five-year term . 
the head of government is prime minister thongloun sisoulith . 
as of a cabinet reshuffle on june 8, 2006, they are maj .  gen .  douangchay phichit  -lrb-  also defense minister  -rrb-  ,  thongloun sisoulith  -lrb-  also foreign minister  -rrb-  ,  somsavat lengsavad and maj .  gen .  asang laoly . 
it is also forecasted that laos will sustain at least 7% growth through 2019 as well . 
in fy 1999, foreign grants and loans accounted for more than 20% of gdp and more than 75% of public investment . 
despite rapid growth ,  laos remains one of the poorest countries in southeast asia . 
of the total foreign investment in laos in 2012, the mining industry got 27% followed by electricity generation which has 25% share . 
tourism is the fastest growing industry in the economy and plays a vital role in the lao economy . 
the government opened laos to the world in the 1990s ,  and continues to be a popular destination amongst tourists . 
gdp: purchasing power parity - $14.2 billion  -lrb-  2009 est . 
in 2007, the laotian ministry of transportation entered into discussion with vietnam to discuss the possibility of opening a new railway line from thakhek in laos through the mụ giạ pass to tân ấp railway station in vietnam's quảng bình province ,  on the north–south railway . 
laos has a long history of negotiating with china regarding the possibility of a joint railway project . 
on 2 december 2015, laos with china officially began about the construction of a railway from vientiane to the chinese border . 
the new line replaces the 100-year-old ,  kunming-haiphone line ,  which had a speed of just  . 
in the late 1920s ,  work began on the thakhek–tan ap railway ,  that would have run between thakhek ,  khammouane province and tân ấp railway station ,  quảng bình province ,  vietnam through the mụ giạ pass . 
this is due to cooperation between thailand ,  china ,  and laos . 
in january 2007 work began on a extension of the metre-gauge state railway of thailand network across the thai–lao friendship bridge to thanaleng railway station ,  a new passenger and freight terminal in dongphosy village ,  east of vientiane . 
the railway was abandoned and fell into disrepair ,  although some of the infrastructure is still in place . 
until 1975, the royal lao army were the armed forces of the kingdom of laos . 
laotian and hmong veterans who fought against north vietnam ,  vietnam people's army  -lrb-  vpa  -rrb-  ,  communist pathet lao forces ,  and lpaf to defend the kingdom of laos and us ,  laos and the kingdom of thailand's national security interests during the vietnam war and its aftermath ,  including the lao veterans of america ,  established the laos memorial in arlington national cemetery in 1997.
the lao people's armed forces  -lrb-  lpaf  -rrb-  is the name of the armed forces of the lao people's democratic republic and the institution of the lao people's revolutionary party ,  who are charged with protecting the country . 
according to numerous independent journalists and non-governmental organisations  -lrb-  ngos  -rrb-  ,  including amnesty international ,  human rights watch ,  the centre for public policy analysis ,  lao human rights council ,  united league for democracy in laos and humanitarian and human rights organisations ,  the lao people's army has repeatedly engaged in egregious human rights violations and the practice of corruption in laos . 
laos is also a member of the international olympic commission  -lrb-  ioc  -rrb-  ,  international telecommunication union  -lrb-  itu  -rrb-  ,  mekong group ,  non-aligned movement  -lrb-  nam  -rrb-  ,  pacific alliance  -lrb-  as observer  -rrb-  ,  permanent court of arbitration  -lrb-  pca  -rrb-  ,  united nations ,  united nations convention on trade and development  -lrb-  unctad  -rrb-  ,  united nations educational ,  scientific and cultural organization  -lrb-  unesco  -rrb-  ,  united nations industrial development organization  -lrb-  unido  -rrb-  ,  universal postal union  -lrb-  upu  -rrb-  ,  world federation of trade unions ,  world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  ,  world intellectual property organization  -lrb-  wipo  -rrb-  ,  world meteorological organization  -lrb-  wmo  -rrb-  ,  world tourism organization ,  world trade organization  -lrb-  observer  -rrb-  . 
laos is a member of the following international organizations: agency for cultural and technical cooperation  -lrb-  acct  -rrb-  ,  asean ,  asean free trade area  -lrb-  afta  -rrb-  ,  asean regional forum ,  asian development bank ,  colombo plan ,  economic and social commission for asia and pacific  -lrb-  escap  -rrb-  ,  food and agriculture organization  -lrb-  fao  -rrb-  ,  group of 77, international bank for reconstruction and development  -lrb-  world bank  -rrb-  ,  international civil aviation organization  -lrb-  icao  -rrb-  ,  international development association  -lrb-  ida  -rrb-  ,  international fund for agricultural development  -lrb-  ifad  -rrb-  ,  international finance corporation  -lrb-  ifc  -rrb-  ,  international federation of red cross and red crescent societies ,  international labour organization  -lrb-  ilo  -rrb-  ,  international monetary fund  -lrb-  imf  -rrb-  ,  intelsat  -lrb-  nonsignatory user  -rrb-  ,  and interpol . 
livonian war put an end to the livonian confederacy . 
between 1297 and 1330 the livonian civil war raged ,  which started as a conflict between the bishop of riga and the livonian order . 
livonian confederation ceased to exist during the long livonian war of 1558–82.
before the german invasions started in late 12th century ,  latvia was inhabited by about 135,000 baltic people and 20,000 livonians . 
in 1228 the livonian confederation was established . 
the ice age in the territory of present day latvia ended 14,000–12,000 years ago . 
on the west coast of the baltic sea they became known as the `` baltic vikings . `` 
the order of the livonian brothers of the sword was founded in 1202 to subjugate the local population . 
the history of latvia began around 9000 bc with the end of the last glacial period in northern europe . 
bishop albert of riga founded riga in 1201, and gradually it became the largest city in the southern part of the baltic sea . 
in 1561 the weakened livonian order was dissolved by the treaty of vilnius . 
meinhard was followed by berthold of hanover ,  who was killed in 1198 near the present-day riga by livonians . 
livonians lived along the shores of the gulf of riga and were fishers and traders ,  and they gave the first german name to this territory - livland . 
on 2 august 1560 the forces of ivan the terrible destroyed the last few hundred soldiers of the livonian order and the archibishop of riga at the battle of ērģeme . 
in early 1180s saint meinhard began his mission among daugava livonians . 
a state known as terra mariana ,  later livonian confederation ,  was established in 1207.
latvia cannot claim valuable natural resources . 
smaller rivers include the lielupe ,  in central latvia ,  with an average annual flow of 3.6 cubic kilometers; the venta ,  in the west ,  with 2.9 cubic kilometers; the gauja ,  in the northeast ,  with 2.5 cubic kilometers; and the aiviekste ,  in the east ,  with 2.1 cubic kilometers . 
latvia encompasses 64,589 square kilometers and is an extension of the east european plain . 
latvia lies on the eastern shores of the baltic sea on the level northwestern part of the rising east european platform ,  between estonia and lithuania . 
each year the forests produce 25 million cubic meters of timber ,  while only about 12 - 13 million cubic meters are felled ,  therefore the amount of mature and old forests continue to increase . 
it is about 200 meters wide when it enters latvia ,  increasing to between 650 and 750 meters at riga and to 1.5 kilometers at its mouth . 
latvia has an abundant network of rivers ,  contributing to the visual beauty and the economy of the country . 
although accounting for only one-third of 1% of the territory ,  latvia was responsible for 11% of all artificially drained land in the former soviet union . 
latvia was settled by the baltic tribes some three millennia ago . 
through all this time ,  latvia remained largely under baltic german hegemony ,  with baltic germans comprising the largest land-owners ,  a situation which did not change until latvia's independence . 
latgalians are a distinctive subgroup of latvians inhabiting or coming from eastern latvia . 
historically ,  latvia has had significant german ,  russian ,  jewish ,  polish and lithuanian minorities . 
ethnic latvians have been one of the world's slowest-growing ethnic groups for a century . 
the earliest such event occurred during the conquest of latvia by peter the great in the great northern war with sweden . 
after that date the other citizenship must be renounced upon the acceptance of the latvian citizenship . 
as a transitional clause ,  the latvian law allows dual citizenship for those who were forced to leave latvia during the soviet or nazi occupation and adopted another citizenship while away from latvia . 
the parliament can remove the prime minister and cabinet by means of a vote of no-confidence  -lrb-  constitution of latvia ,  article 59 -rrb- . 
it is estimated that 84% of ethnic latvians voted 'yes' ,  while 91% of ethnic russians voted 'no'  . 
after almost three years of deliberations ,  latvia finalized a citizenship and naturalization law in summer 1994.
in february 1995, the council of europe granted latvia membership . 
as of november 2005, about 109,000 persons have applied for naturalization and about 103,000 of them have been granted latvian citizenship . 
in 2006 approximately 18 per cent of the total population  -lrb-  420,000 inhabitants of latvia ,  slightly less than half of ethnically non-latvian population  -rrb-  had no latvian citizenship . 
the president is elected by parliament for a maximum of two terms of four-years ,  by secret ballot and by an absolute majority of the vote  -lrb-  constitution of latvia ,  articles 35, 36 and 39 -rrb- . 
latvian is the sole state language in latvia; while the threatened livonian language is recognized as `` the language of the indigenous  -lrb-  autochthon  -rrb-  population '' . 
between local elections in 2001 and saeima elections in 2002, two new parties formed: the conservative new era party led by einars repše and christian democratic latvia's first party . 
privatisation in latvia is almost complete . 
by august 2009, latvia's gdp had fallen by 20% year on year ,  with standard & poor's predicting a further 16% contraction to come . 
the economy of latvia is an open economy in northern europe and is part of the european union's  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  single market . 
until the middle of 2008, latvia had the fastest developing economy in europe . 
latvia had the worst economic performance in 2009, with annual growth rate averaging −18% . 
these deficits were smaller than in most of the other countries joining the european union in 2004.
in 2017 about 4381 gwh were produced in hydro power and 150 gwh in wind power . 
telecommunications in latvia include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
<br> ''total: '' 2,347 km  <br> ''russian gauge: '' 2,314 km gauge  -lrb-  270 km electrified  -rrb-   <br> ''narrow gauge: '' 33 km gauge  -lrb-  2002 -rrb-
latvian railways is the main state-owned railyway company in latvia . 
the mission of the national armed forces  -lrb-  naf  -rrb-  is to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the nation and to defend its population against foreign or domestic armed aggression . 
latvia became a member state of nato on march 29, 2004.
the foreign relations of latvia are the primary responsibility of the ministry of foreign affairs . 
this was lebanon's only success in the war . 
lebanon's national legislature is the unicameral parliament of lebanon . 
100,000 palestinians fled to lebanon because of the war . 
lebanon has a moderate mediterranean climate . 
in may 1948, lebanon supported neighbouring arab countries in a war against israel . 
beirut and mount lebanon have been facing a severe garbage crisis . 
 ''lebanon '' as the name of an administrative unit  -lrb-  as opposed to the mountain range  -rrb-  was introduced with the ottoman reforms of 1861, as the `` mount lebanon mutasarrifate ''  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  continued in the name of the `` state of greater lebanon ''  -lrb-   ``  '';   -rrb-  in 1920, and eventually in the name of the sovereign `` republic of lebanon ''  -lrb-     -rrb-  upon its independence in 1943.
he conquered what is now lebanon and other nearby regions of the eastern mediterranean in 332 bce . 
the borders of contemporary lebanon are a product of the treaty of sèvres of 1920.
in 1982, the plo attacks from lebanon on israel led to an israeli invasion . 
during this period lebanon was divided into several provinces: northern and southern mount lebanon ,  tripoli ,  baalbek and beqaa valley and jabal amel . 
lebanon is divided into four distinct physiographic regions: the coastal plain ,  the lebanon mountain range ,  the beqaa valley and the anti-lebanon mountains . 
since 2011, more than 600,000 trees ,  including cedars and other native species ,  have been planted throughout lebanon as part of the lebanon reforestation initiative  -lrb-  lri  -rrb-  . 
on 1 september 1920, france reestablished greater lebanon after the moutasarrifiya rule removed several regions belonging to the principality of lebanon and gave them to syria . 
lebanon has 16 rivers all of which are non navigable; 13 rivers originate from mount lebanon and run through the steep gorges and into the mediterranean sea ,  the other three arise in the beqaa valley . 
in 1975, following increasing sectarian tensions ,  a full-scale civil war broke out in lebanon . 
lebanon gained a measure of independence while france was occupied by germany . 
in 1920, following wwi ,  the area of the mutasarrifate ,  plus some surrounding areas which were predominantly shia and sunni ,  became a part of the state of greater lebanon under the french mandate of syria and lebanon . 
the internal political situation in lebanon significantly changed in the early 2000s . 
lebanon  -lrb-  ; ; ;   -rrb-  ,  officially known as the lebanese republic  -lrb-   ; ;   -rrb-  ,  is a country in western asia . 
the anti-lebanon range runs parallel to the lebanon mountains ,  its highest peak is in mount hermon at  . 
after the fighting ended in lebanon ,  general charles de gaulle visited the area . 
the united kingdom ,  fearing that nazi germany would gain full control of lebanon and syria by pressure on the weak vichy government ,  sent its army into syria and lebanon . 
lebanon's history since independence has been marked by alternating periods of political stability and prosperity based on beirut's position as a regional center for finance and trade ,  interspersed with political turmoil and armed conflict  -lrb-  1948 arab–israeli war ,  lebanese civil war 1975–1990, 2005 cedar revolution ,  2006 lebanon war ,  2007 lebanon conflict ,  2006–08 lebanese protests ,  2008 conflict in lebanon ,  and since 2011 syrian civil war spillover  -rrb-  . 
the 2006 lebanon war was a 34-day military conflict in lebanon and northern israel . 
later ,  in 1976, franjieh would invite the syrians into lebanon . 
on 26 april 2005, the last 250 syrian troops left lebanon . 
the history of lebanon covers the history of the modern republic of lebanon and the earlier emergence of greater lebanon under the french mandate for syria and the lebanon ,  as well as the previous history of the region ,  covered by the modern state . 
on march 5 syrian leader assad declared in a televised speech that syria would withdraw its forces to the bekaa valley in eastern lebanon ,  and then to the border between syria and lebanon . 
the israeli forces finally withdrew from south of lebanon in may 2000, though the syrian occupation of most lebanon still continued . 
the consequences of the plo's arrival in lebanon continue to this day . 
in the aftermath of the 1948 arab–israeli war ,  lebanon became home to more than 110,000 palestinian refugees . 
britain ,  fearing that nazi germany would gain full control of lebanon and syria by pressure on the weak vichy government ,  sent its army into syria and lebanon . 
in february 1989, general aoun launched the `` war of liberation '' ,  a war against the syrian armed forces in lebanon . 
they insist that the latter had been co-opted and that in fact lebanon's government was a syrian puppet . 
in all ,  it is estimated that more than 100,000 were killed ,  and another 100,000 handicapped by injuries ,  during lebanon's 16-year war . 
on may 25, 2000, israel completed its withdrawal from the south of lebanon in accordance with un security council resolution 425.
during ottoman rule the term syria was used to designate the approximate area including present-day lebanon ,  syria ,  jordan ,  and israel/palestine . 
up to 2005, 14–15,000 syrian troops  -lrb-  down from 35,000 -rrb- remained in position in many areas of lebanon ,  although the taif called for an agreement between the syrian and lebanese governments by september 1992 on their redeployment to lebanon's bekaa valley . 
the maans came to lebanon from yemen sometime in the 11th or 12th centuries . 
lebanon was thus divided between a christian government in east beirut and a muslim government in west beirut ,  with no president . 
muslim control of lebanon was reestablished in the late 13th century under the mamluk sultans of egypt . 
about half the population of lebanon starved to death  -lrb-  200,000 killed out of 400,000 of the total populace  -rrb-  throughout the years of 1915–1918 during what is now known as the great famine mount of lebanon . 
during lebanon's civil war ,  syria's troop deployment in lebanon was legitimized by the lebanese parliament in the taif agreement ,  supported by the arab league ,  and is given a major share of the credit for finally bringing the civil war to an end in october 1990.
although fakhr ad-din ii's aspirations toward complete independence for lebanon ended tragically ,  he greatly enhanced lebanon's military and economic development . 
during the conflict between the mamluks and the ottomans ,  the amirs of lebanon linked their fate to that of ghazali ,  governor  -lrb-  pasha  -rrb-  of damascus . 
after the fighting ended in lebanon ,  general charles de gaulle visited the area . 
during the frequent roman–persian wars that lasted for many centuries ,  the sassanid persians occupied what is now lebanon from 619 to 629.
this amendment comes in discordance with the un security council resolution 1559, which called for a new presidential election in lebanon . 
on october 7, 2004, un secretary general kofi annan reported to the security council that syria had failed to withdraw its forces from lebanon . 
although saladin eliminated christian control of the holy land around 1190, the crusader states in lebanon and syria were better defended . 
lebanon was later contested between muslim rulers until the turkish ottoman empire solidified authority over the eastern mediterranean . 
intra-palestinian fighting and plo-israeli conflict continued ,  and july 24, 1981, habib brokered a cease-fire agreement with the plo and israel: the two sides agreed to cease hostilities in lebanon proper and along the israeli border with lebanon . 
the leadership called for syrian intervention in 1976, leading to the presence of syrian troops in lebanon ,  and an arab summit in 1976 was called to stop the crisis . 
after continued plo-israeli exchanges ,  israel invaded lebanon on june 6 in operation peace for galilee . 
the outbreak of hostilities changed this ,  as lebanon was to feel the weight of the conflict in the middle east more heavily than most other areas occupied by the syrians . 
in 2012, the syrian civil war threatened to spill over in lebanon ,  causing more incidents of sectarian violence and armed clashes between sunnis and alawites in tripoli . 
christianity was introduced to the coastal plain of lebanon from neighboring galilee ,  already in the 1st century . 
the government of lebanon should heed the council's repeated calls for the parties to respect the blue line in its entirety . `` 
lebanon has achieved during fakhreddine's reign enormous heights that the country had and would never witness again . 
for its part ,  the plo used its new privileges to establish an effective `` mini-state '' in southern lebanon ,  and to ramp up its attacks on settlements in northern israel . 
on 9 may 2008, hezbollah and amal forces ,  sparked by a government declaration that hezbollah's communications network was illegal ,  seized western beirut ,  leading to the 2008 conflict in lebanon . 
during the 1960s ,  lebanon enjoyed a period of relative calm ,  with beirut-focused tourism and banking sector-driven prosperity . 
the province of lebanon that would be controlled by the maronites ,  but the entire area was placed under direct rule of the governor of damascus ,  and carefully watched by the ottoman empire . 
jamil al sayyed ,  a syrian ally in the lebanese security forces ,  resigned on 25 april ,  just a day before the final syrian troops pulled out of lebanon . 
following the collapse of the ottoman empire after world war i ,  the league of nations mandated the five provinces that make up present-day lebanon to the direct control of france . 
in the face of international pressure ,  the french released the government officials on november 22, 1943 and accepted the independence of lebanon . 
this doubled the territory under the control of beirut ,  at the expense of what would become the state of syria . 
the area of lebanon is  . 
the hilly mediterranean geography has influenced the history of lebanon ,  cuisine of lebanon and culture of lebanon . 
the western range ,  the second major region ,  is the lebanon mountains ,  sometimes called mount lebanon ,  or lebanon proper before 1920.
the biqa valley and the anti-lebanon mountains are shielded from the influence of the sea by the lebanon mountains . 
near its southern end ,  the lebanon mountains branch off to the west to form the shuf mountains . 
the third geographical region is the biqa valley . 
temperatures are cooler than in the biqa valley . 
 -lrb-  see also history of lebanon .   -rrb- 
ethnic background is an important factor in lebanon . 
apart from the palestinians ,  there are approximately 180,000 stateless persons in lebanon . 
about 99% of the population of lebanon includes numerous muslim sects and christian denominations . 
apart from the four and a half million citizens of lebanon proper ,  there is a sizeable lebanese diaspora . 
a figure of 400,000 palestinian refugees would mean that palestinians constitute more than 10% of the resident population of lebanon . 
many shias from southern lebanon resettled in the suburbs south of beirut . 
it is estimated that the christian population in lebanon makes up about 40.5% within the lebanese territory and of the 8.6–14 million lebanese diaspora is believed by some to be about 80% of the total population . 
after the war ,  the pace of christian emigration accelerated ,  as many christians felt discriminated against in a lebanon under increasingly oppressive syrian occupation . 
among the armenian ethnic minority in lebanon ,  armenian language is taught and spoken within the armenian community . 
under the current lebanese nationality law ,  diaspora lebanese do not have an automatic right of return to lebanon . 
during the french mandate of lebanon ,  there was a fairly large french minority and a tiny italian minority . 
palestinians living in lebanon are considered foreigners and are under the same restrictions on employment applied to other foreigners . 
lebanon has by far the largest proportion of christians of any middle eastern country ,  but both christians and muslims are sub-divided into many splinter sects and denominations . 
around 450,000 palestinian refugees were registered in lebanon with the unrwa in 2014, who are refugees or descendants of refugees from the 1948 arab–israeli war . 
a 2012 study conducted by statistics lebanon ,  a beirut-based research firm ,  cited by the united states department of state found that of lebanon's population of approximately 4.3 million is estimated to be:
lebanon operates under a strong semi-presidential system . 
lebanon's judicial system is based on the napoleonic code . 
the following table sets out the confessional allocation of seats in the parliament before and after the taif agreement . 
the president is elected by the parliament for a six-year term and cannot be reelected again until six years have passed from the end of the first term . 
all factions have called for a reform of the political system . 
the parliament is elected by adult suffrage  -lrb-  majority age for election is 21 -rrb- based on a system of majority or `` winner-take-all '' for the various confessional groups . 
seats in the parliament are `` confessionally distributed '' but elected by `` universal suffrage . `` 
the historical reason for the broad powers of the president are that his powers were merged with those of the french high commissioner of greater lebanon ,  thus creating an exceptionally powerful presidency for semi-presidential systems . 
no single party has ever won more than 12.5 percent of the seats in the parliament ,  and no coalition of parties has won more than 35 percent . 
