palmyra atoll  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the northern line islands  -lrb-  southeast of kingman reef and north of kiribati line islands  -rrb-  ,  located almost due south of the hawaiian islands ,  roughly one-third of the way between hawaii and american samoa . 
in 1538, the `` audiencia real de panama '' ,  royal audiencia of panama ,  was established ,  initially with jurisdiction from nicaragua to cape horn . 
the history of panama is about the isthmus of panama region's long history that occurred in central america ,  from pre-columbian cultures ,  during the spanish colonial era ,  through independence and the current country of panama . 
in 1501, rodrigo de bastidas was the first european to explore the isthmus of panama sailing along the eastern coast . 
the tension between the two regions peaked when the first printing press arrived in panama in 1820.
this uneasy relationship between panama and bogotá would persist for a century . 
in 1526, pedrarias was superseded as governor of panama by pedro de los ríos ,  and retired to león in nicaragua ,  where he was named its new governor on july 1, 1527.
explorations and conquest expeditions launched from panama claimed new lands and riches from central and south america . 
panama was part of the spanish empire for over 300 years  -lrb-  1513–1821 -rrb- and its fate changed with the geopolitical importance of the isthmus to the spanish crown . 
on august 28, 1513, the santa maría de la antigua del darién mission was erected with fray juan de quevedo as the first catholic bishop in the continental americas . 
on november 10, 1821, in a special event called grito de la villa de los santos ,  the residents of the azuero declared their separation from the spanish empire . 
the ruins of the original city are a tourist attraction known as `` old panama '' . 
when the `` grito de la villa de los santos '' independence motion occurred ,  veraguas firmly opposed it . 
in 1744, bishop francisco javier de luna victoria y castro established the college of san ignacio de loyola ,  and on june 3, 1749 founded la real y pontificia universidad de san javier . 
panama is located on the narrow and low isthmus of panama . 
panama has a tropical climate . 
the highest point in panama is the volcán barú  -lrb-  formerly known as the volcán de chiriquí  -rrb-  ,  which rises to  . 
panama is a country located in central america ,  bordering both the caribbean sea and the pacific ocean ,  between colombia and costa rica . 
the mountain range of the divide is called the cordillera de talamanca near the costa rican border . 
temperatures are markedly cooler in the higher parts of the mountain ranges ,  and frosts occur in the cordillera de talamanca in western panama . 
nearly 500 rivers lace panama's rugged landscape . 
panama's population was people in  ,  compared to 860,000 in 1950.
the culture ,  customs ,  and language of panama are predominantly caribbean spanish . 
registration of vital events is in panama not complete . 
more than half the population lives in the panama city-colón metropolitan corridor . 
other faiths exist in panama by the country's tolerance and freedom of religion ,  there are large protestant ,  jewish ,  bahá'í ,  muslim and hindu religious groups in panama . 
panamanian politics have historically been corrupt . 
a sign of this is the lack of young votes in the referendum of october 22, 2006, showing a lack of confidence in panamanian politics and politicians . 
the politics of panama take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic with multi-party system ,  whereby the president of panama is both head of state and head of government . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated panama as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
in 2009 agriculture and fisheries made up 7.4% of panama's gdp
in the 1970s and 1980s ,  panama's growth fluctuated with the vagaries of the world economy . 
panama has been affected by the cyclical nature of international trade . 
moscoso's administration successfully handled the panama canal transfer and was effective in the administration of the canal . 
gdp growth in 1983 was a mere 0.4%; in 1984 it was -0.4% . 
 ''diablos rojos '' are not in panama transportation since 2010.
the most important sectors which drove growth were the panama canal and the shipping and port activities of the colón free trade zone which also rebounded from a slow year in 1996.
in 2008, panama had the second most unequal income distribution in latin america . 
the united states completed the canal in 1914, and canal traffic expanded by an average of 15% a year between 1915 and 1930.
also some exports for panama are bananas ,  shrimp ,  sugar ,  coffee ,  and clothing . 
the public transportation system is in need of modernization and other improvements . 
panama is a member of the organization of american states and was a founding member of the rio group . 
panama has established diplomatic relations with following countries: panama is a member of the un general assembly  -lrb-  and most major un agencies  -rrb-  and has served three terms in the un security council . 
the new guinea campaign opened with the battles for new britain and new ireland in the territory of new guinea in 1942.
new guinea was basically a business venture . 
the papua and new guinea act 1949 formally approved the placing of new guinea under the international trusteeship system and confirmed the administrative union under the title of the territory of papua and new guinea . 
following the surrender of the japanese in 1945, civil administration of papua as well as new guinea was restored ,  and under the papua new guinea provisional administration act ,   -lrb-  1945–46 -rrb- ,  papua and new guinea were combined in an administrative union . 
the new guinea campaign was a major campaign of the pacific war . 
following the passage of the papua act in 1905, british new guinea became the territory of papua ,  and formal australian administration began in 1906, although papua remained under their control a british possession until the independence of papua new guinea in 1975.
bitter fighting continued in new guinea between the largely australian force and the japanese 18th army based in new guinea until the japanese surrender in 1945.
numerous chinese have worked and lived in papua new guinea ,  establishing chinese-majority communities . 
much of the territory of new guinea ,  including the islands of bougainville and new britain ,  was occupied by japanese forces before being recaptured by australian and american forces during the final months of the war  -lrb-  see new guinea campaign  -rrb-  . 
most of west papua ,  at that time known as dutch new guinea ,  was occupied ,  as were large parts of the territory of new guinea  -lrb-  the former german new guinea ,  which was also under australian rule after world war i  -rrb-  ,  but papua was protected to a large extent by its southern location and the near-impassable owen stanley ranges to the north . 
shortly after the start of the pacific war ,  the island of new guinea was invaded by the japanese . 
the prehistory of papua new guinea can be traced to about 60,000 years ago ,  when people first migrated towards the australian continent . 
papua new guinea has one land border - that which divides the island of new guinea . 
papua new guinea has a total area of 462 840 km² ,  of which 452 860 km² is land and 9 980 km² is water . 
the geography of papua new guinea describes the eastern half of the island of new guinea ,  the islands of new ireland ,  new britain and bougainville ,  and smaller nearby islands . 
papua new guinea is largely mountainous ,  and much of it is covered with tropical rainforest . 
the indigenous population of papua new guinea is one of the most heterogeneous in the world . 
the traditional papua new guinea social structure includes the following characteristics:
most papua new guineans still adhere strongly to this traditional social structure ,  which has its roots in village life . 
the governor-general of papua new guinea is elected by parliament . 
papua new guinea's judiciary is independent of the government . 
there are several levels ,  culminating in the supreme court of papua new guinea . 
the head of the commonwealth ,  or simply `` queen of papua new guinea '' ,  is represented in papua new guinea by a governor general who acts on the advice of the prime minister and the cabinet . 
they answer politically to parliament . 
papua new guinea has a unicameral national parliament ,  previously known as the house of assembly . 
there is a supreme court of papua new guinea ,  not separately constituted but an appellate full court of the national court . 
papua new guinea has a history of changes in government coalitions and leadership from within parliament during the five-year intervals between national elections . 
legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament . 
this article is about communications in papua new guinea including newspapers ,  radio ,  television ,  and the internet . 
air travel is a very important form of transport in papua new guinea ,  for the transport of humans and high density/value freight . 
transport in papua new guinea is in many cases heavily limited by the mountainous terrain . 
today ,  the pngdf is a small force numbering around 2,100 personnel ,  and consisting of a land element ,  an air element and a maritime element . 
the papua new guinea defence force  -lrb-  pngdf  -rrb-  is the military organisation responsible for the defence of papua new guinea . 
as of 2015, women are permitted to serve in non-combat roles in the pngdf's land element . 
the pngdf is under the political oversight of the minister for defence . 
the size of the pngdf is to be increased under the defence white paper 2013 to 5,000 personnel by 2017 back to the pre reform program level in 2002.
as of 2008 pngdf personnel remain in the solomon islands as part of the scaled down ,  rotational pacific contingent . 
the archipelago includes about 130 small coral islands and reefs ,  most grouped into the northeast amphitrite group or the western crescent group . 
taking as the centre of the paracel islands ,  then the amphitrite group is ene ,  and the crescent group is west . 
the duncan islands  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  consisting of duncan island and palm island ,  lie approximately west of drummond island and about east of antelope reef . 
all of the islands in the group support vegetation except on their small cays . 
the northern section of the group comprises west sand ,  tree island and the qilian yu sub-group  -lrb-  the `` seven sisters '': north island ,  middle island ,  south island ,  north sand ,  middle sand ,  south sand and two small `` sands '' .   -rrb- 
money island lies at the southwest extremity of the group ,  and has some small cays on the southern side . 
paraguay overthrew the local spanish administration on 14 may 1811.
paraguay  -lrb-  ; ;  ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of paraguay  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  is one of only two landlocked countries in south america  -lrb-  the other is bolivia  -rrb-  . 
this marked the beginning of the `` democratic era '' of paraguay . 
the city eventually became the center of a spanish colonial province of paraguay . 
the indigenous guaraní had been living in eastern paraguay for at least a millennium before the arrival of the spanish . 
spanish conquistadores arrived in 1524 after navigating northwards from the río de la plata to the paraná river ,  and finally up the paraguay river . 
after francia's death in 1840, paraguay was ruled by various military officers under a new `` junta '' ,  until carlos antonio lópez  -lrb-  allegedly rodríguez de francia's nephew  -rrb-  came to power in 1841.
after lópez's death in 1862, power was transferred to his eldest son ,  francisco solano lópez . 
conflicts between the factions of the ruling liberal party led to the paraguayan civil war of 1922.
in western paraguay spanish settlement and christianity were strongly resisted by the nomadic guaycuru and other nomads from the 16th century onward . 
slavery existed in paraguay ,  although not in great numbers ,  until 1844, when it was legally abolished in the new constitution . 
paraguay was modernized to some extent under stroessner's regime ,  although his rule was marked by extensive human rights abuses . 
stroessner and the `` colorado '' party ruled the country from 1954 to 1989.
under lópez ,  paraguay's population increased from about 220,000 in 1840 to about 400,000 in 1860.
paraguay was not prepared for a big war . 
on may 14/15, 1811 paraguay declared its independence from spain . 
paraguay celebrates independence day on may 15, from 1811 to now . 
since the 1930s ,  paraguayans have regarded solano lópez as the nation's foremost hero . 
solano lópez accurately assessed the september 1864 brazilian intervention in uruguay as a threat not only to uruguay but paraguay as well . 
in fact ,  paraguay did face many problems . 
observers sharply disagreed about solano lópez . 
paraguay at independence was a relatively undeveloped country . 
despite his greed ,  paraguay prospered under `` el excelentísimo ''  -lrb-  the most excellent one  -rrb-  ,  as lópez was known . 
in february 1868 two brazilian warships sailed up the river paraguay and caused a panic in asunción . 
solano lópez's hostility even extended to united states ambassador to paraguay charles ames washburn . 
the history of paraguay is a result of development and interaction of varying cultures of indigenous peoples in paraguay and overseas immigrants who together have created the modern-day paraguay . 
at the same time ,  a paraguay that was antagonistic to both brazil and argentina would give these countries a reason for uniting . 
born in 1827, francisco solano lópez became the second and final ruler of the lópez dynasty . 
after the first revolutionary years ,  congress in 1814 elected josé gaspar rodríguez de francia to be the supreme dictator  -lrb-  `` supremo ''  -rrb-  of paraguay . 
francia consolidated his power by convincing paraguayans that he was indispensable . 
irala left paraguay prosperous for the europeans and relatively at peace . 
lópez followed this with an invasion of the mato grosso province of brazil ,  in march 1865, an action that proved to be one of paraguay's few successes during the war . 
with solano lópez on the run ,  the country lacked a government . 
however ,  sympathetic paraguayan nationalists and foreign revisionist historians have portrayed solano lópez as a patriot who resisted to his last breath argentine and brazilian designs on paraguay . 
consistent with his plans to start a paraguayan `` third force '' between argentina and brazil ,  solano lópez committed the nation to uruguay's aid . 
under francia ,  paraguay underwent a social upheaval that destroyed the old colonial elites . 
from 1932 to 1935 there were approximately 30,000 paraguayans and 65,000 bolivians casualties in the war . 
lópez ,  a lawyer ,  was one of the most educated men in the country . 
irala's rule set the pattern for paraguay's internal affairs until independence . 
under the treaty ,  these nations vowed to destroy solano lópez's government . 
much of the earliest written history of paraguay comes from records of the spanish colonization ,  beginning in 1516 with the juan díaz de solís' failed expedition to the río de la plata . 
all of paraguay's accomplishments during this period ,  including its existence as a nation ,  were attributed almost entirely to francia . 
foreign relations began to increase in importance under lópez ,  who retained paraguay's traditional mistrust of the surrounding states ,  yet lacked francia's diplomatic skills . 
the eastern part of present-day paraguay was occupied by guaraní peoples for at least 1,000 years before the spanish colonization of the americas . 
based on this ,  paraguay started to gain official international recognition . 
the `` porteños '' bungled their effort to extend control over paraguay by choosing josé espínola y peña as their spokesman in asunción . 
the result was dire poverty in paraguay and an increasingly impoverished empire . 
from 1870 to 1954, paraguay was ruled by 44 different men ,  24 of whom were forced from office in military coups . 
william e .  barrett wrote: `` paraguay is the country of prophecy . 
ruined by war ,  pestilence ,  famine ,  and unpaid foreign indemnities ,  paraguay was on the verge of disintegration in 1870.
when argentina refused solano lópez's request for permission for his army to cross argentine territory to attack the brazilian province of río grande do sul ,  solano lópez had himself declared a marshal ,  and started a war against argentina . 
foreigners who managed to enter paraguay had to remain there in virtual arrest for many years ,  such as botanist aimé bonpland ,  who could not leave paraguay for ten years . 
the eastern region is drained primarily by rivers that flow westward to the río paraguay ,  although some rivers flow eastward to the río paraná . 
paraguay's third largest river ,  the pilcomayo river ,  flows into the paraguay river near asunción after demarcating the entire border between the chaco region and argentina . 
the eastern region extends from the río paraguay eastward to the río paraná ,  which forms the border with brazil and argentina . 
separated from the eastern region by the paraguay river ,  the chaco region is a vast plain with elevations reaching no higher than and averaging  . 
the rivers flowing eastward across the paraneña region as tributaries of the paraná river are shorter ,  faster-flowing ,  and narrower than the tributaries of the paraguay river . 
paraguay experiences a subtropical climate in the paraneña region and a tropical climate in the chaco . 
about 80% of the region lies below in elevation; the lowest elevation ,   ,  occurs in the extreme south at the confluence of the río paraguay and río paraná . 
covering more than 60 percent of paraguay's total land area ,  the chaco plain slopes gently eastward to the río paraguay . 
paraguay falls into two main natural regions: the paraneña region  -lrb-  a mixture of plateaus ,  rolling hills ,  and valleys  -rrb-  and the chaco region  -lrb-  an immense piedmont plain  -rrb-  . 
argentina and paraguay agreed on these boundaries in 1876.
about 4700 km long ,  the paraná river is the second major river in the country . 
the río paraguay has a total course of 2600 km ,  2300 km of which are navigable and 1200 km of which either border on or pass through paraguay . 
sixteen of these rivers and numerous smaller streams enter the paraná river above encarnación . 
registration of vital events is in paraguay not complete . 
the paraguay government encouraged massive settlement of the vast gran chaco . 
paraguay's population is distributed unevenly through the country . 
ethnically ,  culturally ,  and socially ,  paraguay has one of the most homogeneous populations in south america . 
european and middle eastern immigrants began making their way to paraguay in the decades following the paraguayan war of 1864-1860  -lrb-  from 1870 onward  -rrb-  . 
paraguay's highest court is the supreme court of paraguay . 
in paraguay ,  the post of first lady is official ,  and thus the office of the first lady the nation of the republic of paraguay was created . 
it was the first time in 61 years that the colorado party lost a presidential election in paraguay ,  and only a second time that a leftist will serve as president  -lrb-  first time was in 1936–37 -rrb- and first time freely elected . 
the workplace of the president of paraguay is the palacio de los lópez ,  in asuncion . 
during this period ,  paraguay experienced the worst inflation in all of latin america ,  averaging over 100 percent annually in the 1950s . 
to pay its substantial war debt ,  paraguay sold large tracts of land to foreigners ,  mostly argentines . 
manufacturing accounted for 16.3 percent of gdp in 1986 and employed roughly 13 percent of the labor force ,  making paraguay one of the least industrialized nations in latin america . 
in an economic sense ,  the 1970s constituted paraguay's miracle decade . 
paraguay has a market economy highly dependent on agriculture products . 
the food ,  beverages ,  and tobacco subsector has been the core manufacturing activity throughout paraguay's history . 
although industry was becoming more visible in paraguay in the 1980s ,  industry's share of gdp actually declined in the 1970s and 1980s because of more rapid growth in agriculture . 
much of paraguay's rural population ,  however ,  missed out on the economic development . 
after centuries of isolation ,  two devastating regional wars ,  and a civil war ,  in 1954 paraguay entered a period of prolonged political and economic stability under the authoritarian rule of alfredo stroessner . 
throughout the post-world war ii era ,  paraguay had no personal income tax ,  and government revenues as a percentage of gdp were among the lowest in the world . 
one of paraguay's fastest growing industries was the new ,  relatively modern plastics subsector ,  which supplied a wide variety of goods to the local market . 
paraguay's earliest manufacturing industries processed hides and leather from its abundant cattle and tannin from quebracho trees . 
until the spanish established asunción in 1537, economic activity in paraguay was limited to the subsistence agriculture of the guaraní indians . 
telecommunications in paraguay are meager . 
paraguay has the lowest fixed-line telephone density in south america ,  with 5.6 lines per 100 residents ,  compared with 8.7 per 100 in bolivia ,  21.9 in brazil ,  and 24.9 in argentina . 
the total length of rail in paraguay is  . 
paraguay has of inland waterways . 
estimates vary on the total extent of paraguay's road system ,  from more than to less than  . 
the ep features two artillery groups  -lrb-  gac 1–12 88 mm qf-25 and gac 2–12 105mm m-101 -rrb- and one antiaircraft artillery group  -lrb-  gaa 13 40 mm l 40/60, oerlikon 20 mm cannons ,  and six m-55 4x12, 7.0 mm  -rrb-  . 
the constitution of paraguay establishes the president of paraguay as the commander-in-chief . 
the marine corps have 800 marines ,  of which 400 are assigned to one commando unit with the rest being organized into a single battalion consisting of three companies . 
six battalions of combat engineers ,  one communications battalion ,  one special forces battalion ,  seven regiments of infantry ,  six regiments of cavalry  -lrb-  r . c . -2 equipped with 12 m3a1, five operational ,  20 m9 half-tracks modernized and r . c . -3: 24 ee-9 cascavels ,  eight ee-11 urutu apcs plus utility trucks for motorized infantry  -rrb-  . 
unlike any other country in south america ,  paraguay recognizes the republic of china instead of the people's republic of china . 
the current minister of foreign relations as of 2018 is luis alberto castiglioni
peru has ratified the treaty . 
peru embarked on a railroad-building program . 
when the spanish landed in 1531, peru's territory was the nucleus of the highly developed inca civilization . 
by march 23, 1534, pizarro and the spanish had re-founded the inca city of cuzco as a new spanish colonial settlement . 
this organization transformed peru into the principal source of spanish wealth and power in south america . 
in 1542, the spanish crown created the viceroyalty of peru ,  which was reorganized after the arrival of viceroy francisco de toledo in 1572.
the revolutionary left movement  -lrb-  peru  -rrb-  ,  or mir ,  launched an insurrection that had been crushed by 1965, but peru's internal strife would only accelerate until its climax in the 1990s . 
the socialist party of peru ,  later the peruvian communist party ,  was created four years later and it was led by jose c .  mariategui . 
a census taken by the last quipucamayoc indicated that there were 12 million inhabitants of inca peru; 45 years later ,  under viceroy toledo ,  the census figures amounted to only 1,100,000 inca . 
on july 28, 2006 former president alan garcía became the current president of peru . 
on june 5, 2011, ollanta humala was elected president in a run-off against keiko fujimori ,  the daughter of alberto fujimori and former first lady of peru ,  in the 2011 elections ,  making him the first leftist president of peru since juan velasco alvarado . 
there was a final peace treaty in 1929, signed between peru and chile and called the treaty of lima by which tacna returned to peru and peru yielded permanently the formerly rich provinces of arica and tarapacá ,  but kept certain rights to the port activities in arica and restrictions on what chile can do on those territories . 
the transfer of the presidency from belaúnde to garcía on july 28, 1985, was peru's first exchange of power from one democratically elected leader to another for the first time in 40 years . 
in 1894, nicolás de piérola ,  after allying his party with the civil party of peru to organize guerrilla fighters to occupy lima ,  ousted andrés avelino cáceres and once again became president of peru in 1895.
despite these rebellions ,  the criollo oligarchy in perú remained mostly spanish loyalist ,  which accounts for the fact that the viceroyalty of peru became the last redoubt of the spanish dominion in south america . 
after independence ,  peru and its neighbors engaged in intermittent territorial disputes . 
after pizarro's death ,  there were numerous internal problems ,  and spain finally sent blasco núñez vela to be peru's first viceroy in 1544.
his representation on earth was the inca  -lrb-  `` emperor ''  -rrb-  . 
it dominated a territory that included  -lrb-  from north to south  -rrb- : the southwest part of ecuador ,  part of colombia ,  the northern part of chile ,  and the northwest part of argentina; and from east to west ,  from the southwest part of bolivia to the amazonian forests and mainly peru . 
on february 12, 1944 peru was one of the south american nations – following brazil on august 22, 1942, bolivia on april 7, 1943 and colombia on july 26, 1943 to align with the allied forces against the axis . 
for a period ,  pizarro maintained the ostensible authority of the inca ,  recognizing túpac huallpa as the sapa inca after atahualpa's death . 
peru's movement toward independence was launched by an uprising of spanish-american landowners and their forces ,  led by josé de san martín of argentina and simón bolívar of venezuela . 
in late 1999, the governments of peru and chile likewise similarly implemented the last outstanding article of their 1929 border agreement . 
caral is one of the world centers of the rise of civilization . 
according to raúl porras barrenechea ,  peru is not a quechuan nor caribbean word ,  but indo-hispanic or hybrid . 
other inca sites ,  like huanuco viejo ,  were abandoned for cities at lower altitudes more hospitable to the spanish . 
in the years between 1524 and 1526 smallpox ,  introduced from panama and preceding the spanish conquerors swept through the inca empire . 
the incas built the largest and most advanced empire and dynasty of pre-columbian america . 
the economic turbulence of the time acerbated social tensions in peru and partly contributed to the rise of the violent rebel movement shining path . 
nevertheless ,  throughout the eighteenth century ,  further away from lima in the provinces ,  the spanish did not have complete control . 
area: <br>peru has a total land area of 1,279,999 km² and a total water area of 5,220 km² . 
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 27.9% ,  65.3% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 6.8% was 65 years or older . 
the peruvian census does not contain information about ethnicity so only rough estimates are available . 
peru's legal system is based on civil law system . 
there are a total of 180 provinces and 1747 districts in peru . 
the republic of peru is in a state of ongoing democratization . 
after that ,  peru has had all presidents democratically elected . 
the executive branch and congress are attempting to reform the judicial branch ,  antiquated and rife with corruption . 
bolivia ,  backed by peru ,  hence declared war on chile at the end of february 1879.
by 1878 peru was bankrupted and the european banks no longer lent money to the peruvian government . 
peru is an emerging ,  social market economy characterized by a high level of foreign trade . 
 ''the eu and peru sign trade promotion agreement '' ,  with japan free trade agreement with the constitutional monarchy of japan signed on may 31, 2011
again chilean businessmen were being expelled from overseas ,  this time from bolivia . 
the war of the pacific  -lrb-  spanish: guerra del pacífico  -rrb-   -lrb-  1879–1883 -rrb- was fought in western south america ,  between chile and allies bolivia and peru . 
thus many chilean wheat and wine businessmen ,  encouraged by the chilean government decided to diversify and invest abroad in neighboring bolivia and peru . 
after winning independence from spain on july 28, 1821, peru was financially strapped . 
kuraka in charge number of taxpayers hunu kuraka 10,000 pichkawaranqa kuraka 5,000 waranqa kuraka 1,000 pichkapachaka kuraka 500 pachaka kuraka 100 pichkachunka kamayuq 50 chunka kamayuq 10
the chilean government approved its businessmen request ,  hence chile by february 14, 1879 declared war on bolivia . 
peru is classified as `` upper middle income '' by the world bank and is the 39th largest in the world by total gdp . 
privatization began in 1994 when the state-owned companies compañía peruana de teléfonos s . a .   -lrb-  cpt  -rrb-  and entel perú were auctioned to telefónica de españa . 
telefónica del perú continues to dominate the market for basic telephone services . 
the operation of broadcasting companies is governed by the law of radio and television  -lrb-  law nº 28278 -rrb- . 
as part of the peruvian navy ,  the peruvian marines utilize the equipment and logistics of the navy . 
the peruvian marines date back to 6 november 1821, when the peruvian navy requested a battalion of soldiers . 
on may 20, 1929, the aviation divisions of the peruvian army and navy were merged into the peruvian aviation corps  -lrb-  cap ,  `` cuerpo de aviación del peru ''  -rrb-  . 
in 1950, the corps was reorganized again and became the peruvian air force  -lrb-  fap ,  `` fuerza aérea del perú ''  -rrb-  . 
the peruvian armed forces report through the ministry of defense ,  while the national police of peru report through the ministry of interior . 
the peruvian air force is divided into six wing areas ,  headquartered in piura ,  chiclayo ,  lima ,  arequipa ,  rioja and iquitos . 
peru is planning full integration into the andean free trade area . 
under spanish rule ,  they established manila as the capital of the spanish east indies  -lrb-  1571 -rrb- . 
they also traded with vietnam ,  japan ,  and other austronesian islands . 
it is also the largest company in the country . 
the names of many streets ,  towns ,  and provinces are also in spanish . 
before that became commonplace ,  other names such as '  -lrb-  islands of the west  -rrb-  and magellan's name for the islands ' were also used by the spanish to refer to the islands . 
by the end of the war it is estimated that over a million filipinos had died . 
in 2011 manila ranked as the 28th wealthiest urban agglomeration in the world and the 2nd in southeast asia . 
one of the most visible hispanic legacies is the prevalence of spanish names and surnames among filipinos; a spanish name and surname ,  however ,  does not necessarily denote spanish ancestry . 
negritos were also among the archipelago's earliest inhabitants ,  but their first settlement in the philippines has not been reliably dated . 
there are also 250,000 amerasians scattered across the cities of angeles ,  manila ,  clark and olongapo . 
in northern luzon ,  caboloan  -lrb-  pangasinan  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  sent emissaries to china in 1406–1411 as a tributary-state ,  and it also traded with japan . 
they also defeated the chinese warlord limahong . 
poverty incidence also significantly dropped to 21.6% in 2015 from 25.2% in 2012.
languages not indigenous to the islands are also taught in select schools . 
in 2007 there were an estimated 12 million filipinos living overseas . 
metro manila is the most populous of the 3 defined metropolitan areas in the philippines and the 11th most populous in the world . 
during this time ,  manila became the western hub of the trans-pacific trade connecting asia with acapulco in the americas using manila galleons . 
the country is a net importer but it is also a creditor nation . 
after world war ii ,  the philippines was for a time regarded as the second wealthiest in east asia ,  next only to japan . 
islam then started to spread out of mindanao in the south and went into luzon in the north . 
the muslim version of this where bamboo poles are also used is called the singkil . 
philippine literature comprises works usually written in filipino ,  spanish ,  or english . 
sabong or cockfighting is another popular entertainment especially among filipino men ,  and existed prior to the arrival of the spanish . 
the jade is said to have originated nearby in taiwan and is also found in many other areas in insular and mainland southeast asia . 
british forces occupied manila from 1762 to 1764 in an extension of the fighting of the seven years' war . 
in the last quarter of the 19th century ,  spain conquered portions of mindanao and the moro muslims in the sulu sultanate formally recognized spanish sovereignty . 
being at the crossroads of the west and east ,  the philippines is also home to migrants from places as diverse as china ,  spain ,  mexico ,  peru ,  united states ,  india ,  south korea ,  and japan . 
the epic poem nagarakretagama stated that the java-based hindu empire of majapahit had colonized saludong  -lrb-  manila  -rrb-  at luzon and solot  -lrb-  sulu  -rrb-  at the sulu archipelago . 
mindanao represents more of an array of muslim inspired dances and spanish influence was limited to the region of zamboanga . 
the philippines is divided into three island groups: luzon ,  visayas ,  and mindanao . 
along with east timor ,  the philippines is one of southeast asia's predominantly christian nations . 
sultan bolkiah also married laila mecana ,  who is the daughter of sulu sultan amir ul-ombra of newly islamized sulu ,  to expand brunei's influence in both luzon island and the sulu archipelago . 
this was one of the circumstances that made possible the brief british occupation of manila . 
vigan in ilocos sur is also known for the many hispanic-style houses and buildings preserved there . 
after the defeat of the first philippine republic ,  the archipelago was administered under an american insular government . 
philippine waters also sustain the cultivation of pearls ,  crabs ,  and seaweeds . 
the philippines was a former american colony and during the american colonial era ,  there were over 800,000 americans who were born in the philippines . 
in the 19th century ,  philippine ports opened to world trade and shifts started occurring within filipino society . 
philippine media uses mainly filipino and english . 
the philippines is also the first tropical nation to compete at the winter olympic games debuting in the 1972 edition . 
he was also the head of an armada which traded and protected commerce between the indian ocean ,  the strait of malacca ,  the south china sea ,  and the medieval maritime principalities of the philippines . 
filipino and english are the official languages of the country . 
expressways and highways are mostly located on the island of luzon including the pan-philippine highway ,  connecting the islands of luzon ,  samar ,  leyte ,  and mindanao ,  the north luzon expressway ,  south luzon expressway ,  and the subic–clark–tarlac expressway . 
during the spanish era ,  most dances were accompanied by rondalya music usually with 14-string bandurrias that the filipinos invented or by other type of stringed instruments that locally evolved in to the culture as well . 
the reverse voyage also brought asian commercial products and immigrants to the western side of the americas . 
in addition to membership in the united nations ,  the philippines is also a founding and active member of asean  -lrb-  association of southeast asian nations  -rrb-  ,  an organization designed to strengthen relations and promote economic and cultural growth among states in the southeast asian region . 
the rivalries between the datus ,  rajahs ,  sultans ,  and lakans eventually eased spanish colonization . 
both the rajahnates of butuan and cebu were allied to each other and they also maintained contact and had trade routes with kutai ,  a hindu country in south borneo established by indian traders . 
therefore ,  colonization was made easy and the small states of the archipelago quickly became incorporated into the spanish empire and were hispanicized and christianized . 
however ,  certain areas of the country like batanes have slight differences as both spanish and filipino ways of architecture assimilated differently due to the climate . 
at least 51 world intellectual property organization medals have been awarded to filipino inventors . 
this genre is often accompanied by gong music and one well known instrument is the kulintang . 
the longest river is the cagayan river in northern luzon . 
this state became powerful due to the local goldsmith industry and it also had commercial ties and a diplomatic rivalry with the champa civilization . 
the pasig river ferry service serves the major rivers in metro manila ,  including the pasig river and marikina river having numerous stops in manila ,  makati ,  mandaluyong ,  pasig and marikina . 
metro manila's gross regional product was estimated to be ₱468.4 billion  -lrb-  at constant 1985 prices  -rrb-  and accounts for 33% of the nation's gdp . 
the last major earthquake was the 1990 luzon earthquake . 
the philippines is a founding member of the united nations ,  world trade organization ,  association of southeast asian nations ,  the asia-pacific economic cooperation forum ,  and the east asia summit . 
islam is the second largest religion . 
pottery and weaving are among the very first art forms showcasing filipino artistic design and are evident from cave dwellings all over the country . 
caring about what others will think ,  say or do ,  are strong influences on social behavior among filipinos . 
bounded by the south china sea on the west ,  the philippine sea on the east and the celebes sea on the southwest ,  the philippines shares maritime borders with taiwan to the north ,  vietnam to the west ,  palau to the east and malaysia and indonesia to the south . 
film showing resumed in 1900 during the american period . 
the philippines is also one of the favorite retirement destinations for foreigners due to its warm climate all year round ,  beaches and low cost of living . 
during the spanish era rondalya music ,  where traditional string orchestra mandolin type instruments were used ,  was widespread . 
the muslims then proceeded to wage wars and conduct slave-raids against the visayans . 
the philippines bought its first satellite in 1996.
including suburbs in the adjacent provinces  -lrb-  bulacan ,  cavite ,  laguna ,  and rizal  -rrb-  of greater manila ,  the population is around 21 million . 
unlike many asians ,  most filipinos do not eat with chopsticks; they use western cutlery . 
there was no direct trade with spain until 1766.
spanish rule ended in 1898 with spain's defeat in the spanish–american war . 
pangasinan enjoyed full independence until the spanish conquest . 
in the sixteenth century pangasinan was called the `` port of japan '' by the spanish . 
it ruled most parts of mindanao and continued to exist prior to the spanish colonization until the 19th century . 
over the next several decades ,  other spanish expeditions were dispatched to the islands . 
the spanish also invaded northern taiwan and ternate in indonesia ,  using filipino warriors ,  before they were driven out by the dutch . 
the manila galleons which linked manila to acapulco traveled once or twice a year between the 16th and 19th centuries . 
the spanish considered their war with the muslims in southeast asia an extension of the reconquista ,  a centuries-long campaign to retake and rechristianize the spanish homeland which was invaded by the muslims of the umayyad caliphate . 
outside of manila ,  the spanish leader simón de anda y salazar organized a militia of 10,000 of mostly from pampanga to resist british rule . 
the spanish and the moros of the sultanates of maguindanao ,  lanao and sulu also waged many wars over hundreds of years in the spanish-moro conflict ,  not until the 19th century did spain succeed in defeating the sulu sultanate and taking mindanao under nominal suzerainty . 
manila was besieged and fell to the british on october 4, 1762.
in 1571, the spanish ,  their latin-american recruits and their filipino  -lrb-  visayan  -rrb-  allies ,  commanded by able conquistadors such as mexico-born juan de salcedo ,  attacked and occupied the kingdom of tondo as well as maynila ,  a vassal-state of the brunei sultanate ,  establishing manila as the capital of the spanish east indies . 
parts of the philippine islands were known to europeans before the 1521 spanish expedition around the world led by portuguese-born spanish explorer ferdinand magellan  -lrb-  the portuguese conquered malacca city in 1511 and reached maluku islands in 1512   -rrb-  . 
the sultanate also traded and maintained good relations with the chinese ,  dutch ,  and the british . 
the campaign was one of many ,  which also included action in mindanao and sulu . 
it was also during the first millennium bc that early metallurgy was said to have reached the archipelagos of maritime southeast asia via trade with india
in 1766 direct communication was established with spain and trade with europe through a national ship based on spain . 
spanish manila was seen in the 19th century as a model of colonial governance that effectively put the interests of the original inhabitants of the islands before those of the colonial power . 
the philippines survived on an annual subsidy paid by the spanish crown and often procured from taxes and profits accrued by the viceroyalty of new spain  -lrb-  mexico  -rrb-  ,  and the 200-year-old fortifications at manila had not been improved much since first built by the early spanish colonizers . 
the spanish succeeded in invading the capital on april 16, 1578, with the help of pengiran seri lela and pengiran seri ratna . 
there are no other significant documents from this period of pre-hispanic philippine society and culture until the doctrina christiana of the late 16th century ,  written at the start of the spanish period in both native baybayin script and spanish . 
this was one of the circumstances that made possible the brief british occupation of manila between 1762 and 1764.
seri lela's daughter ,  the bruneian princess ,  left with the spanish and went on to marry a christian tagalog ,  named agustín de legazpi of tondo and had children in the philippines . 
the country's most extensive river systems are the pulangi river ,  which flows into the mindanao river  -lrb-  rio grande de mindanao  -rrb- ; the agusan ,  in mindanao which flows north into the mindanao sea; the cagayan in northern luzon; and the pampanga ,  which flows south from east central luzon into manila bay . 
they are found south of cagayan valley ,  northeast of the central luzon plains . 
the philippine archipelago is divided into three island groups: luzon ,  visayas ,  and mindanao . 
the cordilleras consists of 2, sometimes 3, mountain ranges that are found in northwestern central luzon . 
south of the central luzon plains lies the largest inland freshwater lake in southeast asia ,  the laguna de bay . 
the second highest point can be found on luzon at mount pulag ,  a peak above sea level . 
at the northwestern tip of mindanao is the generally mountainous zamboanga peninsula . 
surrounded by three mountain ranges ,  the basin's only opening to the sea is to the northwest at illana bay ,  where the mindanao river empties into the ocean . 
the cordilleras and caraballos ,  together with the sierra madre range ,  form the main mountain system in northern luzon . 
to the north of the diwata mountains at northeast mindanao lie siargao island and the dinagat group of islands . 
lying in the eastern portion of luzon is the longest mountain range in the philippines ,  the sierra madre ,  stretching from quezon province in the south to cagayan in the north . 
situated west of the davao-agusan trough is a complex series of mountain ranges called the central mindanao highlands  -lrb-  also known as the `` central cordillera ''  -rrb-  . 
south of the bukidnon-lanao plateau lies a large depression ,  the cotabato basin ,  which forms the lower river basin of the country's second largest river system ,  the rio grande de cagayan  -lrb-  also known as the `` mindanao river ''  -rrb-  . 
off the coast of eastern mindanao is the philippine trench ,  which descends to a depth of  . 
taal volcano ,  also located on luzon ,  is one of the decade volcanoes . 
these are especially hazardous for northern and eastern luzon and the bicol and eastern visayas regions ,  but manila gets devastated periodically as well . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
the first census in the philippines was held in the year 1591 which counted 667,612 persons . 
by then ,  some 27% of the population could speak english as a second language ,  while the number of spanish speakers as first language had further fallen to 3% from 10-14% at the beginning of the century . 
there are also europeans and latin americans who have migrated to the philippines during the colonial period . 
the most commonly spoken indigenous languages are cebuano and tagalog ,  each with more than 20 million native speakers . 
congress is a bicameral legislature . 
the first meeting of a bicameral commonwealth congress occurred . 
the philippine legal system is a hybrid form based on the spanish civil law and anglo-american common law system ,  muslim regions observe the sharia law as binding legal system in accordance to their islamic traditions
the constitution provides congress with impeachment powers ,  with the house of representatives having the power to impeach ,  and the senate having the power to try the impeached official . 
the constitution is the supreme law of the land and laws passed by the congress shall be consistent with the constitution . 
the constitution mandates that local governments must have local autonomy . 
the president wields considerable political power and may be able to influence other branches via the so-called padrino system . 
the local legislative assemblies may enact local ordinances within their respective territorial and political boundaries in accordance to the local autonomy granted by the local government code . 
regions are the highest administrative divisions but do not have powers possessed under them; however ,  autonomous regions are given wider powers than other local government units . 
the judiciary is composed of the supreme court and other lower courts . 
quezon and osmeña reconciled ,  and both were easily elected as president and vice president respectively ,  in 1935.
elections above the barangay level are held every three years since 1992 on the second monday of may ,  all positions are disputed except for president and vice president; presidential and vice presidential elections are held every six years since 1992.
upon the subjugation of the local population in manila and cebu ,  the spaniards refused the locals any political participation . 
the philippines is one of the largest producers of sugar in the world . 
this trade made the city of manila one of the major global cities in the world ,  improving the growth of the philippine economy in the succeeding years . 
in the years 2012 and 2013, the philippines posted high gdp growth rates ,  reaching 6.8% in 2012 and 7.2% in 2013, the highest gdp growth rates in asia for the first two quarters of 2013, followed by china and indonesia . 
growth gradually began in the next few years of the administration . 
gdp growth at constant 1985 prices in philippine pesos:
the philippine economy is projected to be the 5th largest in asia and 16th biggest in the world by 2050.
additionally ,  training is also available for bpo applicants . 
the economy seemed to be all set for long-run growth ,  as shown by sustainable and promising growth rates from 1994 to 1997.
aside from trade relations ,  the natives were also involved in aquaculture and fishing . 
the gdp of the philippines rose during the martial law ,  rising from p55 million to p193 million in about 8 years . 
the roxas administration also pioneered the foreign policy of the republic . 
the philippines is the world's largest producer of coconuts producing 19,500,000 tons in 2009.
figures below are for the year 2016:
this growth in the industry is further promoted by the philippine government . 
the economy of the philippines is the world's 34th largest economy by nominal gdp according to the 2017 estimate of the international monetary fund's statistics ,  it is the 13th largest economy in asia ,  and the 3rd largest economy in the asean after indonesia and thailand . 
the it and business process association of the philippines  -lrb-  ibpap  -rrb-  also projects that the sector will have an expected total revenue of $25 billion in 2016.
according to the 2012 world wealth report ,  the philippines was the fastest growing economy in the world in 2010 with a gdp growth of 7.3% driven by the growing business process outsourcing and overseas remittances . 
the philippine stock exchange index ended in the year with 5,812.73 points a 32.95% growth from the 4,371.96-finish in 2011.
as of 2017, gdp by purchasing power parity was estimated to be at $986.980 billion . 
a texas instruments plant in baguio has been operating for 20 years and is the largest producer of dsp chips in the world . 
in 2012, filipino americans sent 43% of all remittances sent to the philippines ,  totaling to us$10.6 billion . 
the people also were great agriculturists and the islands especifically luzon has great abundance of rice ,  fowls ,  wine as well as great numbers of carabaos ,  deer ,  wild boar and goats . 
income inequality grew during the era of martial law ,  as the poorest 60 percent of the nation were able to contribute only 22.5 percent of the income at 1980, down from 25.0 percent in 1970.
bpos and the call center industry in general are also credited for the philippines' recent economic growth resulting in investment status upgrades from credit ratings agencies such as fitch and s&p . 
in a greater thrust by the aquino administration to pump billion to employ 7.4 million people by 2016, or about 18.8 per cent of the total workforce ,  contributing 8 per cent to 9 per cent to the nation's gdp . 
with the philippines being the 33rd largest economy in the world ,  the country continues to be a promising prospect for the bpo industry . 
that made it the second richest place in all of asia ,  just a little behind japan  -lrb-  $1,135.00 -rrb- ,  and far ahead of china  -lrb-  $652.00 -rrb- or india  -lrb-  $625.00 -rrb- . 
agriculture remained the largest contributor to economy ,  being the largest producer of coffee in asia as well as a large produce of tobacco . 
the arroyo administration ,  economically speaking ,  was a period of good growth rates simultaneous with the us ,  due perhaps to the emergence of the overseas filipino workers  -lrb-  ofw  -rrb-  and the business process outsourcing  -lrb-  bpo  -rrb-  . 
the philippines is one of the emerging markets and is the sixth richest in southeast asia by gdp per capita values ,  after the regional countries of singapore ,  brunei ,  malaysia ,  thailand and indonesia . 
the administration lifted foreign exchange controls as part of the decontrol program in an attempt to promote national economic stability and growth . 
he was also the head of an armada which traded and protected commerce between the indian ocean ,  the strait of malacca ,  the south china sea ,  and the medieval maritime principalities of the philippines . 
in 2011, the total export output of aerospace products in the philippines reached us$3 billion . 
growth in the bpo industry continues to show significant improvements with an average annual expansion rate of 20% . 
telecommunications in the philippines are well-developed due to the presence of modern infrastructure facilities . 
outside metro manila ,  the macarthur highway links metro manila to the provinces in central and northern luzon . 
the manila light rail transit system or the lrta system ,  is a rapid transit system serving the metro manila area ,  it is the first metro system in southeast asia . 
the north luzon expressway  -lrb-  nlex  -rrb-  is a 4 to 8-lane limited-access toll expressway that connects metro manila to the provinces of the central luzon region . 
rail transportation in the philippines includes services provided by three rapid transit lines and one commuter rail line: the manila light rail transit system  -lrb-  lrt-1 and lrt-2 -rrb- ,  manila metro rail transit system  -lrb-  mrt-3 -rrb- and the pnr metro south commuter line . 
the subic-clark-tarlac expressway is another expressway that serves the region of central luzon ,  the expressway is linked to the north luzon expressway through the mabalacat interchange . 
in 1940, there were of road in the entire country ,  half of which was in central and southern luzon . 
the south luzon expressway  -lrb-  slex  -rrb-  is another important expressway in the country ,  it serves the southern part of luzon . 
consequently ,  discontent in the afp ensued . 
afp units were also sent at the same time to the spratly islands . 
the afp ,  during her term also launched a massive campaign against the cpp-npa after a brief hiatus and also against the mnlf in the south . 
the act include new provision for the acquisition of equipment for all the branches of afp . 
in 1966, an afp battalion was also sent into south vietnam during the vietnam war to ameliorate the economic and social conditions of its people there . 
barbara project '' was initiated by the afp and soon it had its own missiles and the afp itself was undergoing an expansion program too ,  partly due to a national service program started in the late 1970s . 
in 1947 the modern afp first emerged with the upgrade of the paac to the philippine air force . 
the armed forces of the philippines  -lrb-  afp; ;   -rrb-  are the military forces of the philippines . 
the 1987 philippine constitution placed the afp under the control of a civilian ,  the president of the philippines ,  who acts as its commander-in-chief . 
the scarborough shoal  -lrb-  panatag shoal  -rrb-  ,  located west of palauig ,  zambales ,  are claimed by the philippines ,  the people's republic of china and the republic of china . 
sabah ,  the largest region which the philippines claim ,  is now an integral part of malaysia . 
macclesfield bank ,  located east of the paracel islands ,  distantly southwest of the pratas islands and north of the spratly islands ,  is claimed by china and taiwan  -lrb-  republic of china  -rrb-  . 
sipadan and ligitan are technically part of sabah state ,  and thus would be part of the claim of the sulu sultanate's heir ,  the philippines . 
philippine international affairs are influenced by ties to its southeast asian neighbors ,  china ,  the united states ,  and the middle east . 
in 1882, sabah became a british protectorate ,  became a british colony after world war ii ,  and joined the federation of malaysia in 1963.
the case of sipadan and ligitan ,  which were in dispute between malaysia and indonesia ,  was taken into the icj ,  in which the former won . 
the philippines is in tension with rival international claimants to various land and water territories in the south china sea . 
the cuisine of norfolk island is very similar to that of the pitcairn islands ,  as norfolk islanders trace their origins to pitcairn . 
since then ,  the majority of pitcairn islanders have been adventists . 
all settlers of the pitcairn islands arrived by boat or ship . 
the pitcairn islands were formed by a centre of upwelling magma called the pitcairn hotspot . 
in 1938, the three islands ,  along with pitcairn ,  were incorporated into a single administrative unit called the `` pitcairn group of islands '' . 
the pitcairn islands has the smallest population of any democracy in the world . 
freight from tauranga to pitcairn on the  -lrb-  pitcairn island's dedicated passenger and cargo ship chartered by the pitcairn government  -rrb-  is charged at nz$350/m³ for pitcairners and nz$1000/m³ for all other freight . 
the pitcairn reed warbler ,  known by pitcairners as a `` sparrow '' ,  is endemic to pitcairn island; formerly common ,  it was added to the endangered species list in 2008.
the pitcairn islands form the southeasternmost extension of the geological archipelago of the tuamotus of french polynesia ,  and consist of four islands: pitcairn island ,  oeno island  -lrb-  atoll with five islets ,  one of which is sandy island  -rrb-  ,  henderson island and ducie island  -lrb-  atoll with four islets  -rrb-  . 
the earliest known settlers of the pitcairn islands were polynesians who appear to have lived on pitcairn and henderson ,  and on mangareva island to the northwest ,  for several centuries . 
the pitcairn islands are a british overseas territory with a degree of local government . 
the plant species `` glochidion pitcairnense '' is endemic to pitcairn and henderson islands . 
the other islands are at a distance of more than and are not habitable . 
since 2015, same-sex marriage has been legal on pitcairn island ,  although there are no people on the island known to be in such a relationship . 
fish are plentiful in the seas around pitcairn . 
the only permanently inhabited island ,  pitcairn ,  is accessible only by boat through bounty bay . 
most resident pitcairn islanders are descendants of the `` bounty '' mutineers and tahitians  -lrb-  or other polynesians  -rrb-  . 
tourism plays a major role on pitcairn . 
the birds of pitcairn fall into several groups . 
the pitcairn islands  -lrb-  ; pitkern: '  -rrb-  ,  officially pitcairn ,  henderson ,  ducie and oeno islands ,  are a group of four volcanic islands in the southern pacific ocean that form the sole british overseas territory in the south pacific . 
cuisine is not very developed ,  because only 50 people live on pitcairn . 
only two children were born on pitcairn in the 21 years prior to 2012.
the island's children have produced a book in pitkern and english called `` mi bas side orn pitcairn '' or `` my favourite place on pitcairn '' . 
the pitcairners take tourists in turns to accommodate those few tourists who occasionally visit the island . 
the pitcairn islanders reported it was not until 27 december 1795 that the first ship since the `` bounty '' was seen from the island ,  but it did not approach the land and they could not make out the nationality . 
the pitcairn islands consist of four islands: pitcairn island ,  oeno island ,  henderson island and ducie island:
in terms of population ,  the pitcairn islands is the smallest democracy in the world . 
