mental health can be defined as an absence of mental disorder . 
mental disorders are common . 
the terms `` mental breakdown '' or `` nervous breakdown '' may be used by the general population to mean a mental disorder . 
there is also a world mental health day ,  which in the us and canada falls within a mental illness awareness week . 
a mental disorder ,  also called a mental illness or psychiatric disorder ,  is a behavioral or mental pattern that causes significant distress or impairment of personal functioning . 
parenting may affect the child's mental health ,  and evidence suggests that helping parents to be more effective with their children can address mental health needs . 
alternatively ,  a movement for global mental health has emerged ,  defined as 'the area of study ,  research and practice that places a priority on improving mental health and achieving equity in mental health for all people worldwide' . 
some types of mental disorders may be viewed as primarily neurodevelopmental disorders . 
a major option for many mental disorders is psychotherapy . 
treatment and support for mental disorders is provided in psychiatric hospitals ,  clinics or any of a diverse range of community mental health services . 
three quarters of countries around the world have mental health legislation . 
the social stigma associated with mental disorders is a widespread problem . 
the majority of people with serious mental illness are never violent . 
early in the 20th century in the united states ,  a mental hygiene movement developed ,  aiming to prevent mental disorders . 
routine diagnostic practice in mental health services typically involves an interview known as a mental status examination ,  where evaluations are made of appearance and behavior ,  self-reported symptoms ,  mental health history ,  and current life circumstances . 
the insanity defense may be used in a legal trial  -lrb-  known as the mental disorder defence in some countries  -rrb-  . 
more structured approaches are being increasingly used to measure levels of mental illness . 
in 2016, the national institute of mental health re-affirmed prevention as a research priority area . 
many health experts today refer to a nervous breakdown as a `` modern mental health crisis '' . 
disability in this context may or may not involve such things as:
ancient civilizations described and treated a number of mental disorders . 
the mentally ill are stigmatized in chinese society and can not legally marry . 
the world health organization reports that in many instances national mental health legislation takes away the rights of persons with mental disorders rather than protecting rights ,  and is often outdated . 
there are currently two widely established systems that classify mental disorders:
various new types of mental disorder diagnosis are occasionally proposed . 
the term stress ,  having emerged from endocrinology work in the 1930s ,  was increasingly applied to mental disorders . 
the term insanity ,  sometimes used colloquially as a synonym for mental illness ,  is often used technically as a legal term . 
somatoform disorders may be diagnosed when there are problems that appear to originate in the body that are thought to be manifestations of a mental disorder . 
risk factors for mental illness include a propensity for high neuroticism or `` emotional instability '' . 
mental disorders were described ,  and treatments developed ,  in persia ,  arabia and in the medieval islamic world . 
in addition ,  the public perception of the level of disability associated with mental disorders can change . 
the use of drugs  -lrb-  legal or illegal ,  including alcohol  -rrb-  ,  when it persists despite significant problems related to its use ,  may be defined as a mental disorder . 
according to dsm-iv ,  a mental disorder is a psychological syndrome or pattern which is associated with distress  -lrb-  e . g . 
many terms for mental disorder that found their way into everyday use first became popular in the 16th and 17th centuries . 
all human rights oriented mental health laws require proof of the presence of a mental disorder as defined by internationally accepted standards ,  but the type and severity of disorder that counts can vary in different jurisdictions . 
twin studies have revealed a very high heritability for many mental disorders  -lrb-  especially autism and schizophrenia  -rrb-  . 
a major option for many mental disorders is psychiatric medication and there are several main groups . 
this dichotomy has led some academics and clinicians to advocate a postmodernist conceptualization of mental distress and well-being . 
a 2005 review of surveys in 16 european countries found that 27% of adult europeans are affected by at least one mental disorder in a 12-month period . 
suicide ,  which is often attributed to some underlying mental disorder ,  is a leading cause of death among teenagers and adults under 35.
deinstitutionalization gradually occurred in the west ,  with isolated psychiatric hospitals being closed down in favor of community mental health services . 
it has been noted that using the term `` mental ''  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  of the mind  -rrb-  is not necessarily meant to imply separateness from brain or body . 
the consumer/survivor movement  -lrb-  also known as user/survivor movement  -rrb-  is made up of individuals  -lrb-  and organizations representing them  -rrb-  who are clients of mental health services or who consider themselves survivors of psychiatric interventions . 
a spectrum approach may incorporate elements of both . 
moorcock's work is complex and multilayered . 
moorcock's best-selling works have been the `` elric of melniboné '' stories . 
moorcock replaced carnell as `` new worlds '' editor from the may–june 1964 number . 
moorcock's works are noted for their political nature and content . 
he followed this with `` michael moorcock: death is no obstacle '' ,  a book-length interview in 1992.
in the 1990s ,  moorcock moved to texas in the united states . 
in 1983, linda steele became moorcock's third wife . 
moorcock was the subject of two book-length works ,  a monograph and an interview ,  by colin greenland . 
some `` new wave '' stories were not recognisable as traditional science fiction ,  and `` new worlds '' remained controversial for as long as moorcock edited it . 
moorcock talks about much of his writing in `` death is no obstacle '' by colin greenland ,  which is a book-length transcription of interviews with moorcock about the structures in his writing . 
most mandarin varieties have four tones . 
mandarin dialects typically have relatively few vowels . 
these final stops have disappeared in most mandarin dialects ,  with the syllables distributed over the other four modern tones in different ways in the various mandarin subgroups . 
mandarin  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a group of related varieties of chinese spoken across most of northern and southwestern china . 
most han chinese living in northern and southwestern china are native speakers of a dialect of mandarin . 
the subordinative particle `` de ''  -lrb-  的  -rrb-  is characteristic of mandarin dialects . 
by extension ,  the term `` old mandarin '' or `` early mandarin '' is used by linguists to refer to the northern dialects recorded in materials from the yuan dynasty . 
phonological features that are generally shared by the mandarin dialects include:
the frontier areas of northwest china were colonized by speakers of mandarin dialects at the same time ,  and the dialects in those areas similarly closely resemble their relatives in the core mandarin area . 
the singular pronouns in mandarin are  -lrb-    -rrb-  `` i '' ,   -lrb-   or   -rrb-  `` you '' ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  `` you  -lrb-  formal  -rrb- ``  ,  and  -lrb-   ,  or   -rrb-  `` he/she/it '' ,  with -  -lrb-    -rrb-  added for the plural . 
the capital has been within the mandarin area for most of the last millennium ,  making these dialects very influential . 
the middle chinese coda was still present in old mandarin ,  but has merged with in the modern dialects . 
of yuan's four mandarin subgroups ,  the northwestern dialects are the most diverse ,  particularly in the province of shanxi . 
in everyday english ,  `` mandarin '' refers to standard chinese ,  which is often called simply `` chinese '' . 
linguists use the term `` mandarin '' to refer to the diverse group of dialects spoken in northern and southwestern china ,  which chinese linguists call `` guānhuà '' . 
the middle chinese final stops have undergone a variety of developments in different mandarin dialects  -lrb-  see tones below  -rrb-  . 
there are more polysyllabic words in mandarin than in all other major varieties of chinese except shanghainese . 
the middle chinese off-glides and are generally preserved in mandarin dialects ,  yielding several diphthongs and triphthongs in contrast to the larger sets of monophthongs common in other dialect groups  -lrb-  and some widely scattered mandarin dialects  -rrb-  . 
many other linguists continue to include these dialects in the mandarin group ,  pointing out that the lower yangtze dialects also retain the glottal stop . 
many mandarin varieties ,  including the beijing dialect ,  retain retroflex initial consonants ,  which have been lost in southern dialect groups . 
the maximal inventory of initials of a mandarin dialect is as follows ,  with bracketed pinyin spellings given for those present in the standard language:
speakers of forms of mandarin other than the standard typically refer to the variety they speak by a geographic name—for example sichuan dialect ,  hebei dialect or northeastern dialect ,  all being regarded as distinct from the standard language . 
he then released his first album on mute records  -lrb-  elektra in north america  -rrb-  ,  `` everything is wrong '' ,  in 1995.
in 1999, moby released the album `` play '' ,  influenced by the lomax albums that an early friend ,  gregor ,  had lent to moby . 
disillusioned by the lack of feedback he was receiving from the music media ,  who struggled to comprehend the artist's new electronic music and refused to take it very seriously ,  moby decided to release a punk rock album ,  `` animal rights '' ,  in 1996.
moby toured extensively for both `` play '' and `` 18 '' ,  playing well over 500 shows in the course of four years . 
he followed this up in early 1996 with the double album `` everything is wrong—mixed and remixed '' . 
also in 1996, moby contributed the song `` republican party '' to the aids benefit album ``  '' produced by the red hot organization . 
moby began studying music when he was 9 years old ,  and during the 1980s ,  hall led the joy division-inspired awol and played guitar for the hardcore punk band vatican commandos . 
he has sold over 20 million records worldwide ,  and allmusic considers him to be `` one of the most important dance music figures of the early 1990s ,  helping bring the music to a mainstream audience both in the uk and in america '' . 
moby followed the album in 2002 with `` 18 '' ,  which was also successful ,  selling over 5 million copies worldwide and receiving mostly positive reviews . 
soon after ,  the band went on hiatus . 
the band soon left elektra and created their own mötley records . 
the newly formed band did not yet have a name . 
mötley crüe is an american hard rock band formed in los angeles ,  california ,  on january 17, 1981.
a 2001 autobiography entitled `` the dirt '' presented mötley as `` the world's most notorious rock band . `` 
mötley crüe was ranked tenth on mtv's list `` top 10 heavy metal bands of all-time '' and ninth on `` vh1's all time top ten metal bands '' . 
however ,  sixx later announced that the band will not be releasing another album before their retirement . 
it was reportedly designed as `` just something for the fans '' while the band worked on the next `` all new '' album . 
on october 1, 1991, the band's first compilation album ,  `` decade of decadence 81-91 '' ,  was released . 
the band members have also had their share of scrapes with the law and life . 
the band reunited with neil in 1997, after their current manager ,  allen kovac ,  and neil's manager ,  bert stein ,  set up a meeting between neil ,  lee ,  and sixx . 
on september 13, 2018, mötley crüe announced that they had reunited and were working on new music . 
mötley crüe had announced that the movie `` the dirt '' ,  based on the book written by mötley crüe and neil strauss ,  could be released in 2009.
a controversy that hit the band in 1988 was a lawsuit by matthew trippe . 
the management just let one of the biggest bands in the world break up . `` 
mötley crüe co-headlined a mid-year tour with poison and special guests new york dolls in 2011 for the band's 30th anniversary and poison's 25th anniversary . 
mötley crüe has influenced many bands and artists such as poison ,  skid row and cinderella among others . 
mandriva linux  -lrb-  a fusion of the french distribution mandrakelinux or mandrake linux and the brazilian distribution conectiva linux  -rrb-  was a linux distribution by mandriva . 
the last release of mandriva linux was in august 2011.
mandriva linux contained the mandriva control center ,  which eases configuration of some settings . 
as a result of this acquisition and the legal dispute with hearst corporation ,  mandrakesoft announced that the company was changing its name to mandriva ,  and that their linux distribution `` mandrake linux '' would henceforward be known as mandriva linux . 
from version 8.1 to 9.2 the distribution name was reversed and called mandrake linux . 
carcassi wrote a method for guitar  -lrb-  op . 
carcassi was in germany again during autumn 1824.
carcassi was born in florence ,  italy ,  and first studied the piano ,  but learned guitar when still a child . 
mazda also helped ford develop the 1991 explorer ,  which mazda sold as the 2-door only mazda navajo from 1991 through 1994.
north america is mazda's biggest market . 
after substantial successes by the mazda rx-2 and mazda rx-3, the mazda rx-7 has won more imsa races in its class than any other model of automobile ,  with its hundredth victory on september 2, 1990.
from 1974 to 2015, mazda had a partnership with the ford motor company ,  which acquired a 24.5% stake in 1979, upped to a 33.4% ownership of mazda in may 1995.
the xedos line was marketed under the mazda marque ,  and used the mazda badge from the corresponding years . 
during 1968, mazda started formal operations in canada  -lrb-  mazdacanada  -rrb-  although mazdas were seen in canada as early as 1959.
in 2015, mazda was the fifteenth biggest automaker by production worldwide . 
mazda's market share in u . s .  fell to a 10-year low in 2016 at 1.7 percent mazda's brand loyalty was 39 percent in 2016, below the industry average of 53 percent . 
mazda's rotary success continued until the onset of the 1973 oil crisis . 
after nine years of development ,  mazda finally launched its new model in the u . s .  in 1970.
mazda has conducted research in hydrogen-powered vehicles for several decades . 
formula mazda features open wheel race cars with mazda engines ,  adaptable to both oval tracks and road courses ,  on several levels of competition . 
the name mazda came into existence with the production of the company's first three-wheeled trucks . 
this diversification stressed the product development groups at mazda past its limits . 
the minute is a unit of time or angle . 
the prime is also sometimes used informally to denote minutes of time . 
each object is a `` mirror of all others . `` 
rather than being exclusive to individual human consciousness ,  consciousness is born of the pre-conscious style of the world ,  of nature . 
the world and the sense of self are emergent phenomena in an ongoing `` becoming . `` 
at the core of merleau-ponty's philosophy is a sustained argument for the foundational role perception plays in understanding the world as well as engaging with the world . 
through involvement in the world – being-in-the-world – the perceiver tacitly experiences all the perspectives upon that object coming from all the surrounding things of its environment ,  as well as the potential perspectives that that object has upon the beings around it . 
this is particularly the case when one attends to the phenomena of the body  -lrb-  which is at once body-subject and body-object  -rrb-  ,  subjective time  -lrb-  the consciousness of time is neither an act of consciousness nor an object of thought  -rrb-  and the other  -lrb-  the first considerations of the other in husserl led to solipsism  -rrb-  . 
the distinction between `` acts of thought ''  -lrb-  noesis  -rrb-  and `` intentional objects of thought ''  -lrb-  noema  -rrb-  does not seem ,  therefore ,  to constitute an irreducible ground . 
the articulation of the primacy of embodiment led him away from phenomenology towards what he was to call “indirect ontology” or the ontology of “the flesh of the world”  -lrb-  `` la chair du monde ''  -rrb-  ,  seen in his final and incomplete work ,  `` the visible and invisible '' ,  and his last published essay ,  “eye and mind” . 
the work ,  undertaken while serving as the chair of child psychology and pedagogy at the university of the sorbonne ,  is not a departure from his philosophical and phenomenological works ,  but rather an important continuation in the development of his thought . 
and in the last published working note ,  written in march 1961, he writes: `` nature as the other side of humanity  -lrb-  as flesh ,  nowise as 'matter'  -rrb-  . `` 
it was through this relationship with merleau-ponty's work that cognitive science's affair with phenomenology was born ,  which is represented by a growing number of works ,  including
for merleau-ponty ,  it is these uses of the notion of style that lead malraux to postulate a cleavage between the objectivity of italian renaissance painting and the subjectivity of painting in his own time ,  a conclusion that merleau-ponty disputes . 
merleau-ponty taught first at the lycée de beauvais  -lrb-  1931–33 -rrb- and then got a fellowship to do research from the  . 
this characterizes merleau-ponty's attempt to ground science in phenomenological objectivity and ,  in essence ,  institute a `` return to the phenomena . `` 
the following table gives a selection of merleau-ponty's works in french and english translation . 
experimental models are most common . 
there are many model organisms . 
research using animal models has been central to many of the achievements of modern medicine . 
historically ,  model organisms include a handful of species with extensive genomic research data ,  such as the nih model organisms . 
in researching human disease ,  model organisms allow for better understanding the disease process without the added risk of harming an actual human . 
animal models serving in research may have an existing ,  inbred or induced disease or injury that is similar to a human condition . 
orphan models refer to diseases for which there is no human analog and occur exclusively in the species studied . 
animal models observed in the sciences of psychology and sociology are often termed animal models of behavior . 
 ''arabidopsis thaliana '' is currently the most popular model plant . 
model organisms are drawn from all three domains of life ,  as well as viruses . 
spontaneous models refer to diseases that are analogous to human conditions that occur naturally in the animal being studied . 
scientists have been able to take advantage of these similarities in generating experimental and predictive models of human disease . 
animal models can be classified as homologous ,  isomorphic or predictive . 
the use of animal models allows researchers to investigate disease states in ways which would be inaccessible in a human patient ,  performing procedures on the non-human animal that imply a level of harm that would not be considered ethical to inflict on a human . 
often ,  model organisms are chosen on the basis that they are amenable to experimental manipulation . 
the increase in knowledge of the genomes of non-human primates and other mammals that are genetically close to humans is allowing the production of genetically engineered animal tissues ,  organs and even animal species which express human diseases ,  providing a more robust model of human diseases in an animal model . 
to materialists ,  matter is primary ,  and mind or spirit or ideas are secondary ,  the product of matter acting upon matter . 
the concept of matter has changed in response to new scientific discoveries . 
in idealism ,  mind and consciousness are first-order realities to which matter is subject and secondary . 
if matter and energy are seen as necessary to explain the physical world ,  but incapable of explaining mind ,  dualism results . 
one challenge to the traditional concept of matter as tangible `` stuff '' came with the rise of field physics in the 19th century . 
according to noam chomsky ,  any property can be considered material ,  if one defines matter such that it has that property . 
however philosophers such as mary midgley suggest that the concept of `` matter '' is elusive and poorly defined . 
joseph smith ,  the founder of the latter day saint movement ,  taught: `` there is no such thing as immaterial matter . 
in england john `` walking '' stewart  -lrb-  1747–1822 -rrb- insisted in seeing matter as endowed with a moral dimension had a major impact on the philosophical poetry of william wordsworth  -lrb-  1770–1850 -rrb- . 
chomsky also states that since the concept of matter may be affected by new scientific discoveries ,  as has happened in the past ,  scientific materialists are being dogmatic in assuming the opposite . 
davies' and gribbin's objections are shared by proponents of digital physics who view information rather than matter to be fundamental . 
most of hinduism and transcendentalism regards all matter as an illusion called maya ,  blinding humans from knowing the truth . 
therein ,  lenin attempted to answer questions concerning matter ,  experience ,  sensations ,  space and time ,  causality ,  and freedom . 
as such ,  the existence of matter can only be assumed from the apparent  -lrb-  perceived  -rrb-  stability of perceptions; it finds absolutely no evidence in direct experience . 
according to the dominant cosmological model ,  the lambda-cdm model ,  less than 5% of the universe's energy density is made up of the `` matter '' described by the standard model of particle physics ,  and the majority of the universe is composed of dark matter and dark energy—with little agreement amongst scientists about what these are made of . 
in 1991, gribbin and davies released their book `` the matter myth '' ,  the first chapter of which ,  `` the death of materialism '' ,  contained the following passage:
with the advent of quantum physics ,  some scientists believed the concept of matter had merely changed ,  while others believed the conventional position could no longer be maintained . 
today ,  microelectronics design is largely aided by electronic design automation software . 
these are called parasitic effects ,  and the goal of the microelectronics design engineer is to find ways to compensate for or to minimize these effects ,  while delivering smaller ,  faster ,  and cheaper devices . 
old english had other words to express `` mind '' ,  such as `` hyge '' `` mind ,  spirit '' . 
the attributes that make up the mind are debated . 
broadly speaking ,  mental faculties are the various functions of the mind ,  or things the mind can `` do '' . 
one open question regarding the nature of the mind is the mind–body problem ,  which investigates the relation of the mind to the physical brain and nervous system . 
the most straightforward scientific evidence of a strong relationship between the physical brain matter and the mind is the impact physical alterations to the brain have on the mind ,  such as with traumatic brain injury and psychoactive drug use . 
theoretical approaches to explain how mind emerges from the brain include connectionism ,  computationalism and bayesian brain . 
the word is originally from a pie verbal root ``  '' ,  meaning `` to think ,  remember '' ,  whence also latin '' mens '' `` mind '' ,  sanskrit ``  '' `` mind '' and greek μένος `` mind ,  courage ,  anger '' . 
mental contents are those items that are thought of as being `` in '' the mind ,  and capable of being formed and manipulated by mental processes and faculties . 
philosopher patricia churchland notes that this drug-mind interaction indicates an intimate connection between the brain and the mind . 
the mind is also portrayed as the stream of consciousness where sense impressions and mental phenomena are constantly changing
gandhi was a prolific writer . 
gandhi's birthday ,  2 october ,  is a national holiday in india ,  gandhi jayanti . 
for gandhi ,  democracy was a way of life . 
in 1938, gandhi stated that his `` sympathies are all with the jews . 
the british did not respond favourably to gandhi's proposal . 
churchill's bitterness against gandhi grew in the 1930s . 
there are three temples in india dedicated to gandhi . 
gandhi focused his attention on indians while in south africa . 
gandhi was cremated in accordance with hindu tradition . 
the birla house site where gandhi was assassinated is now a memorial called gandhi smriti . 
gandhi's life and teachings inspired many who specifically referred to gandhi as their mentor or who dedicated their lives to spreading gandhi's ideas . 
in 1934 gandhi resigned from congress party membership . 
in late 1885, gandhi's father karamchand died . 
the criticism of gandhi by ambedkar continued to influence the dalit movement past gandhi's death . 
gandhi spoke out against untouchability early in his life . 
indians widely describe gandhi as the father of the nation . 
gandhi criticised as well as praised christianity . 
putlibai gave gandhi her permission and blessing . 
sikh and buddhist leaders disagreed with gandhi ,  a disagreement gandhi respected as a difference of opinion . 
gandhi's children and grandchildren live in india and other countries . 
gandhi championed animal rights in general . 
gandhi declared that sitaramayya's defeat was his defeat . 
gandhi tried to test and prove to himself his `` brahmacharya '' . 
gandhi was brought up as a vegetarian by his devout hindu mother . 
gandhi participated in south african war against the boers ,  on the british side in 1899.
gandhi began to question his people's standing in the british empire . 
 ''time magazine '' named gandhi the man of the year in 1930.
gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements . 
the mahatma gandhi district in houston ,  texas ,  united states ,  an ethnic indian enclave ,  is officially named after gandhi . 
gandhi's complete works were published by the indian government under the name ``  '' in the 1960s . 
the 2014 film `` welcome back gandhi '' takes a fictionalised look at how gandhi might react to modern day india . 
gandhi's birthday ,  2 october ,  is commemorated in india as gandhi jayanti ,  a national holiday ,  and worldwide as the international day of nonviolence . 
he had advised gandhi to be patient and to study hinduism deeply . 
gandhi's london lifestyle incorporated the values he had grown up with . 
the 1989 marathi play `` me nathuram godse boltoy '' and the 1997 hindi play `` gandhi ambedkar '' criticised gandhi and his principles . 
gandhi was involved in the final negotiations ,  but stanley wolpert states the `` plan to carve up british india was never approved of or accepted by gandhi '' . 
however gandhi himself did not approve of the notion of `` gandhism '' ,  as he explained in 1936:
gandhi's assassination dramatically changed the political landscape . 
he linked gandhi's assassination to politics of hatred and ill-will . 
additional theories of possible influences on gandhi have been proposed . 
gandhi felt that hindu-muslim co-operation was necessary for political progress against the british . 
while in south africa ,  gandhi focused on racial persecution of indians ,  but ignored those of africans . 
gandhi's date of death ,  30 january ,  is commemorated as a martyrs' day in india . 
according to gandhi ,  a non-violent state is like an `` ordered anarchy '' . 
several biographers have undertaken the task of describing gandhi's life . 
gandhi opposed partition of the indian subcontinent along religious lines . 
obama in september 2009 said that his biggest inspiration came from gandhi . 
the gandhi memorial in kanyakumari resembles central indian hindu temples and the tamukkam or summer palace in madurai now houses the mahatma gandhi museum . 
in november 1887, the 18-year-old gandhi graduated from high school in ahmedabad . 
in the song porter rhymes `` mahatma gandhi' with `` napoleon brandy . `` 
ambedkar and gandhi debated their ideas and concerns ,  where both tried to persuade each other . 
gandhi and his colleagues continued to consult ambedkar ,  keeping him influential . 
gandhi rejected the colonial western format of education system . 
gandhi believed that `` swaraj '' not only can be attained with non-violence ,  it can be run with non-violence . 
after gandhi's arrest ,  the women marched and picketed shops on their own ,  accepting violence and verbal abuse from british authorities for the cause in a manner gandhi inspired . 
gandhi visited the most riot-prone areas to appeal a stop to the massacres . 
gandhi's war recruitment campaign brought into question his consistency on nonviolence . 
the government quelled any opposition to its economic and social policies ,  despite they being contrary to gandhi's ideas ,  by reconstructing gandhi's image and ideals . 
the government ,  represented by lord irwin ,  decided to negotiate with gandhi . 
for example ,  in his letters to mohammad iqbal ,  jinnah accused gandhi to be favouring a hindu rule and revivalism ,  that gandhi led indian national congress was a fascist party . 
gandhi opposed providing any help to the british war effort and he campaigned against any indian participation in the world war ii . 
along with many other texts ,  gandhi studied `` bhagavad gita '' while in south africa . 
in august 1947 the british partitioned the land with india and pakistan each achieving independence on terms that gandhi disapproved . 
during the discussions between gandhi and the british government over 1931–32 at the round table conferences ,  gandhi ,  now aged about 62, sought constitutional reforms as a preparation to the end of colonial british rule ,  and begin the self-rule by indians . 
when gandhi arrived in south africa ,  according to herman ,  he thought of himself as `` a briton first ,  and an indian second '' . 
on 10 august 1888, gandhi aged 18, left porbandar for mumbai ,  then known as bombay . 
to gandhi ,  the women of india were an important part of the `` swadeshi movement ''  -lrb-  buy indian  -rrb-  ,  and his goal of decolonising the indian economy . 
historian howard states the culture of gujarat influenced gandhi and his methods . 
mohandas karamchand gandhi  -lrb-  ; ; 2 october 1869 – 30 january 1948 -rrb- was an indian activist who was the leader of the indian independence movement against british rule . 
musashi's late arrival is controversial . 
musashi challenged yoshioka seijūrō ,  master of the yoshioka school ,  to a duel . 
after the battle ,  musashi disappears from the records for a while . 
 ''fujiwara '' was the lineage from which musashi claimed descent . 
however ,  there are no exact details of musashi's life ,  since musashi's only writings are those related to strategy and technique . 
there is considerable uncertainty surrounding munisai ,  such as when he died and whether he was truly musashi's father ,  and even less is known about musashi's mother . 
the details of miyamoto musashi's early life are difficult to verify . 
ultimately the name was taken from his own original kanji characters ,  武蔵 ,  which can be read as takezō or as musashi ,  as stated in eiji yoshikawa's book `` musashi '' . 
his father's fate is uncertain ,  but it is thought that he died at the hands of one of musashi's later adversaries ,  who was punished or even killed for treating musashi's father badly . 
the practical application of multivariate statistics to a particular problem may involve several types of univariate and multivariate analyses in order to understand the relationships between variables and their relevance to the problem being studied . 
certain types of problems involving multivariate data ,  for example simple linear regression and multiple regression ,  are `` not '' usually considered to be special cases of multivariate statistics because the analysis is dealt with by considering the  -lrb-  univariate  -rrb-  conditional distribution of a single outcome variable given the other variables . 
money laundering has been increasing . 
money can be laundered by many methods which vary in complexity and sophistication . 
casinos continue to attract organizations that deal with money laundering . 
money laundering is the process of concealing the origins of money obtained illegally by passing it through a complex sequence of banking transfers or commercial transactions . 
other countries define money laundering in such a way as to include money from activity that `` would have been '' a crime in that country ,  even if the activity was legal where the actual conduct occurred . 
in more recent times anti-money laundering legislation is seen as adjunct to the financial crime of terrorist financing in that both crimes usually involve the transmission of funds through the financial system  -lrb-  although money laundering relates to where the money has come `` from '' ,  and terrorist financing relating to where the money is going `` to ''  -rrb-  . 
money laundering is still a great concern for the financial services industry . 
fatf has developed 40 recommendations on money laundering and 9 special recommendations regarding terrorist financing . 
laws against money laundering were created to use against organized crime during the period of prohibition in the united states during the 1930s . 
another increasingly common way of laundering money is to use online gaming . 
because of the intrinsic uncertainties of the amount of money laundered ,  changes in the amount of money laundered ,  and the cost of anti-money laundering systems ,  it is almost impossible to tell which anti-money laundering systems work and which are more or less cost effective . 
in a growing number of online games ,  such as `` second life '' and `` world of warcraft , ``  it is possible to convert money into virtual goods ,  services ,  or virtual cash that can later be converted back into money . 
some countries treat obfuscation of sources of money as also constituting money laundering ,  whether it is intentional or by merely using financial systems or services that do not identify or track sources or destinations . 
formed in 1989 by the g7 countries ,  the financial action task force on money laundering  -lrb-  fatf  -rrb-  is an intergovernmental body whose purpose is to develop and promote an international response to combat money laundering . 
the money laundering practice uses various channels to legalize everything achieved through illegal practices . 
the midwife and the mother discuss birthing options and write a birth care plan . 
they are discharged to the care of the health visitor . 
for women who have a hospital birth ,  the minimum hospital stay is six hours . 
also ,  no trial included out of hospital birth . 
until the last century most women have used both the upright position and alternative positions to give birth . 
midwifery-led continuity of care is where one or more midwives have the primary responsibility for the continuity of care for childbearing women ,  with a multidisciplinary network of consultation and referral with other health care providers . 
a 2013 cochrane review concluded that `` most women should be offered midwifery-led continuity models of care and women should be encouraged to ask for this option although caution should be exercised in applying this advice to women with substantial medical or obstetric complications . `` 
the actual duties of the midwife in antiquity consisted mainly of assisting in the birthing process ,  although they may also have helped with other medical problems relating to women when needed . 
midwifery is the health science and health profession that deals with pregnancy ,  childbirth ,  and the postpartum period  -lrb-  including care of the newborn  -rrb-  ,  in addition to the sexual and reproductive health of women throughout their lives . 
following the birth ,  if the mother had an episiotomy or a tearing of the perineum ,  it is stitched . 
according to a cochrane review of public health systems in australia ,  canada ,  ireland ,  new zealand and the united kingdom ,  `` most women should be offered midwifery-led continuity models of care and women should be encouraged to ask for this option although caution should be exercised in applying this advice to women with substantial medical or obstetric complications . `` 
another group of `` exemplary '' novels is formed by `` la fuerza de la sangre '' ,  `` la ilustre fregona '' ,  `` la gitanilla '' ,  and `` el celoso extremeño '' . 
some of his poems are found in `` la galatea . `` 
in 1585 cervantes published his first major work ,  `` la galatea '' ,  a pastoral romance ,  at the same time that some of his plays ,  now lostexcept for `` el trato de argel ''  -lrb-  where he dealt with the life of christian slaves in algiers  -rrb-  and `` el cerco de numancia ''were playing on the stages of madrid . 
in esquivias ,  toledo ,  on 12 december 1584, he married the much younger catalina de salazar y palacios  -lrb-  born esquivias – d .  31 october 1626 -rrb- ,  daughter of fernando de salazar y vozmediano and catalina de palacios . 
in 1585, cervantes published `` la galatea '' ,  a pastoral novel . 
he has also been dubbed `` el príncipe de los ingenios ''  -lrb-  `` the prince of wits ''  -rrb-  . 
a project promoted and led by fernando de prado began in 2014 to rediscover his remains . 
miguel de cervantes saavedra  -lrb-  ; ; ; 29 september 1547  -lrb-  assumed  -rrb- 22 april 1616 ns  -rrb-  was a spanish writer who is widely regarded as the greatest writer in the spanish language and one of the world's pre-eminent novelists . 
his last work ,  `` los trabajos de persiles y sigismunda ''  -lrb-  `` the travails of persiles and sigismunda ''  -rrb-  ,  was published posthumously in 1617.
cervantes led a middle-class life after his return to spain . 
by 1570, cervantes had enlisted as a soldier in a regiment of the spanish navy marines ,  `` infantería de marina '' ,  stationed in naples ,  then a possession of the spanish crown . 
in 1606, cervantes settled in madrid ,  where he remained for the rest of his life . 
at the same time ,  cervantes continued working on `` los trabajos de persiles y sigismunda '' ,  a novel of adventurous travel ,  completed just before his death ,  and appearing posthumously in january 1617.
comparisons to more famous playwrights ,  those that use more popular structures and have more authority over the world of theatre ,  have diminished the reputation of his plays; but two of them  -lrb-  `` trato de argel '' and `` la numancia ''1582 – neither published until centuries aftdr his death  -rrb-  made an impact . 
four novelas ,  though favourites in cervantes' day ,  are perhaps of less interest today than the rest: `` el amante liberal '' ,  `` la señora cornelia '' ,  `` las dos doncellas '' ,  and `` la española inglesa '' . 
his jewish texts were:
in brief ,  the attempt is to gain and express knowledge of god by describing what god is not ,  rather than by describing what god `` is . `` 
later codes of jewish law ,  e . g . 
this is the basis of the torah . 
in the view of maimonides  -lrb-  taken from avicenna  -rrb-  ,  god does not become angry with people ,  as god has no human passions; but it is important for them to believe god does ,  so that they desist from doing wrong . 
but maimonides was also one of the most influential figures in medieval jewish philosophy . 
maimonides argued adamantly that god is not corporeal . 
maimonides wrote on theodicy  -lrb-  the philosophical attempt to reconcile the existence of a god with the existence of evil  -rrb-  . 
maimonides' `` mishneh torah '' is considered by jews even today as one of the chief authoritative codifications of jewish law and ethics . 
with `` mishneh torah '' ,  maimonides composed a code of jewish law with the widest-possible scope and depth . 
one of the most widely referred to sections of the `` mishneh torah '' is the section dealing with tzedakah . 
he also points out:
maimonides equated the god of abraham to what philosophers refer to as the necessary being . 
maimonides believes that there are three types of evil in the world: evil caused by nature ,  evil that people bring upon others ,  and evil man brings upon himself  -lrb-  guide 3:12 -rrb- . 
maimonides composed works of jewish scholarship ,  rabbinic law ,  philosophy ,  and medical texts . 
he became a prominent philosopher and polymath in both the jewish and islamic worlds . 
if the circumstances of one's environment are such that it is impossible to behave ethically ,  one must move to a new location . 
around 1171, maimonides was appointed the `` nagid '' of the egyptian jewish community . 
to justify the existence of evil ,  assuming god is both omnipotent and omnibenevolent ,  maimonides postulates that one who created something by causing its opposite not to exist is not the same as creating something that exists; so evil is merely the absence of good . 
maimonides wrote ten known medical works in arabic that have been translated by the jewish medical ethicist fred rosner into contemporary english . 
maimonides contests the common view that evil outweighs good in the world . 
in a letter  -lrb-  discovered later in the cairo geniza  -rrb-  ,  he wrote:
it is acquired as the result of the efforts of the soul to attain a correct knowledge of the absolute ,  pure intelligence of god . 
a specialized growing subset of interventional mri is intraoperative mri ,  in which an mri is used in surgery . 
the t1 and t2 weighting can also be described as mri sequences . 
mri requires a magnetic field that is both strong and uniform . 
to achieve molecular imaging of disease biomarkers using mri ,  targeted mri contrast agents with high specificity and high relaxivity  -lrb-  sensitivity  -rrb-  are required . 
mri is used industrially mainly for routine analysis of chemicals . 
an mri artifact is a visual artifact ,  that is ,  an anomaly during visual representation . 
in certain cases ,  mri is not preferred as it may be more expensive ,  time-consuming ,  and claustrophobia-exacerbating . 
cardiac mri is complementary to other imaging techniques ,  such as echocardiography ,  cardiac ct ,  and nuclear medicine . 
since its development in the 1970s and 1980s ,  mri has proven to be a highly versatile imaging technique . 
medical societies issue guidelines for when physicians should use mri on patients and recommend against overuse . 
however ,  as millions of mris are performed globally each year .  ,  fatalities are extremely rare . 
in the uk the retail price for an mri scan privately ranges between £350 and £700  -lrb-  €405–810 -rrb- . 
mri has a wide range of applications in medical diagnosis and more than 25,000 scanners are estimated to be in use worldwide . 
the lack of harmful effects on the patient and the operator make mri well-suited for interventional radiology ,  where the images produced by an mri scanner guide minimally invasive procedures . 
mri has the advantages of having very high spatial resolution and is very adept at morphological imaging and functional imaging . 
mri for imaging anatomical structures or blood flow do not require contrast agents as the varying properties of the tissues or blood provide natural contrasts . 
to perform a study ,  the person is positioned within an mri scanner that forms a strong magnetic field around the area to be imaged . 
the groups f above have order  . 
group representations are an organizing principle in the theory of finite groups ,  lie groups ,  algebraic groups and topological groups ,  especially  -lrb-  locally  -rrb-  compact groups . 
the dihedral group  -lrb-  discussed above  -rrb-  is a finite group of order 8.
 ''group homomorphisms '' are functions that preserve group structure . 
in the groups z/ ''n ''z introduced above ,  the element 1 is primitive ,  so these groups are cyclic . 
a `` cyclic group '' is a group all of whose elements are powers of a particular element `` a '' . 
for example ,  every group  -lrb-  as defined above  -rrb-  is also a set ,  so a group is a group object in the category of sets . 
quotient groups and subgroups together form a way of describing every group by its `` presentation '': any group is the quotient of the free group over the `` generators '' of the group ,  quotiented by the subgroup of `` relations '' . 
many groups are simultaneously groups and examples of other mathematical structures . 
in some situations the set of cosets of a subgroup can be endowed with a group law ,  giving a `` quotient group '' or `` factor group '' . 
some cyclic groups have an infinite number of elements . 
the symmetry group described in the following section is an example of a group that is not abelian . 
a consequence of this is that multiplication by a group element `` g '' is a bijection . 
thus a group homomorphism respects all the structure of `` g '' provided by the group axioms . 
basic facts about all groups that can be obtained directly from the group axioms are commonly subsumed under `` elementary group theory '' . 
as these two prototypes are both abelian ,  so is any cyclic group . 
examples and applications of groups abound . 
if `` g '' is abelian ,  the left and the right translation by a group element are the same . 
the set `` g '' is called the `` underlying set '' of the group  . 
in general and may be different ,  but ,  if the group operation is commutative  -lrb-  that is ,  if the group is abelian  -rrb-  ,  they are equal . 
 ''representation theory '' is both an application of the group concept and important for a deeper understanding of groups . 
a group is called `` finite '' if it has a finite number of elements . 
this way ,  the fundamental group detects the hole . 
parallel to the group of symmetries of the square above ,  s can also be interpreted as the group of symmetries of an equilateral triangle . 
to qualify as a group ,  the set and operation ,   ,  must satisfy four requirements known as the `` group axioms '':
in additive notation ,  the requirement for an element to be primitive is that each element of the group can be written as
this set inherits a group operation  -lrb-  sometimes called coset multiplication ,  or coset addition  -rrb-  from the original group `` g '': for all `` g '' and `` h '' in `` g '' . 
given any normal subgroup `` n '' ,  the quotient group is defined by
since the mid-1980s ,  geometric group theory ,  which studies finitely generated groups as geometric objects ,  has become an active area in group theory . 
knowing the subgroups is important in understanding the group as a whole . 
some topological spaces may be endowed with a group law . 
manson would use this title in the liner notes of the band's following album ,  citing himself as `` reverend marilyn manson '' . 
all of the band's lyrics are written by manson ,  whose songwriting style varies between albums . 
marilyn manson is an american rock band formed by namesake lead singer marilyn manson and guitarist daisy berkowitz in fort lauderdale ,  florida ,  in 1989.
marilyn manson have sold over 50 million records worldwide . 
although the band's music has often been labeled as shock rock by mainstream media ,  manson disputes the use of the label ,  preferring instead to identify his band's music as rock and roll . 
the band's second studio album ,  `` antichrist superstar '' ,  was released on october 8, 1996.
manson said that he will be replaced for the rest of the heaven upside down tour . 
although marilyn manson's music has often been labelled gothic rock ,  allmusic contends that the band merely borrows from gothic rock's imagery . 
marilyn manson have sold in excess of 50 million records worldwide . 
coon was wearing a black marilyn manson t-shirt during the incident . 
the band have received several kerrang ! 
from 1996 to his departure in 2002, twiggy was their chief musical contributor ,  co-writing many of the band's biggest hits with manson during this period . 
on july 19, manson announced that the band's tenth studio album had the working title `` say10 '' ,  and predicted a release date of valentine's day 2017.
manson would later say that the figure in the video `` wasn't anyone except if you wanted it to be them . `` 
it was also confirmed that `` antichrist superstar '' would be the first installment in a concept album trilogy which the band called their triptych . 
the album was not released in february 2017, and instead a long series of cryptic videos were posted to marilyn manson's personal instagram account over the course of just under 2 months ,  before manson revealed on may 9 that the album had been named `` heaven upside down '' . 
 '' '' was released on september 28, 2004 and was referred to by manson as a `` farewell '' compilation . 
the pair were widely reported as being fans of german bands kmfdm and rammstein ,  but the majority of blame was directed at marilyn manson . 
manson and the band members began appearing both on-and off-stage in designer suits created by jean-paul gaultier . 
upon parting with interscope ,  manson said `` a lot of the creative control on which my hands were tied has been regained '' ,  while stating that the band had been writing new material while touring their previous album . 
images of both monroe and manson ,  as well as of other famous and infamous figures ,  were common in the band's early promotional materials . 
marilyn manson have been credited with creating some of the most recognizable and visually defining music videos of the mtv generation ,  with some commentators suggesting that their music videos played a significant role in the band's commercial success . 
manson's earliest musical memory was listening to kiss during a family road trip; he has since cited the band as a major influence . 
with the `` triptych '' of previous albums complete ,  the band was free to begin a fresh project . 
adler was born into a nonobservant jewish family . 
while at columbia university ,  adler wrote his first book: `` dialectic '' ,  published in 1927.
adler and hutchins went on to found the great books of the western world program and the great books foundation . 
mortimer adler was married twice and had four children . 
adler took a long time to make up his mind about theological issues . 
adler also taught philosophy to business executives at the aspen institute . 
adler was born in new york city on december 28, 1902, to jewish immigrants from germany . 
adler defended this position against many challenges to dualistic theories . 
for weber ,  this means
in 1882 weber enrolled in the university of heidelberg as a law student . 
weber's role in german politics remains controversial to this day . 
weber joined the worker and soldier council of heidelberg in 1918.
later that same month ,  in january 1919, after weber and weber's party were defeated for election ,  weber delivered one of his greatest academic lectures ,  `` politics as a vocation '' ,  which reflected on the inherent violence and dishonesty he saw among politicians—a profession in which only recently weber was so personally active . 
max weber's bureaucratic theory or model is sometimes also known as the `` rational-legal '' model . 
this chronicle was supposedly destroyed because marianne weber feared that max weber's work would be discredited by the nazis if his experience with mental illness were widely known . 
weber also ran ,  unsuccessfully ,  for a parliamentary seat ,  as a member of the liberal german democratic party ,  which he had co-founded . 
in the years between the completion of his dissertation and habilitation ,  weber took an interest in contemporary social policy . 
 ''between philosophy and social science '' appeared between 1930 and 1938, during the time the frankfurt school moved from frankfurt to geneva to columbia university . 
 ''the present situation of social philosophy and the tasks for an institute of social research '' was not only included in this volume ,  but it was also used as horkheimer's inaugural speech as director of the frankfurt school . 
despite the explicit common referrals to `` subjective '' reason in the book ,  his frequent connecting of it with relativism could be an indication that by `` subjective reason '' horkheimer also means `` relativist reason '' . 
max horkheimer  -lrb-  ; ; february 14, 1895 – july 7, 1973 -rrb- was a german philosopher and sociologist who was famous for his work in critical theory as a member of the 'frankfurt school' of social research . 
in 1926 horkheimer was an `` unsalaried lecturer in frankfurt . `` 
through the frankfurt school ,  horkheimer planned ,  supported and made other significant works possible . 
above all ,  critical theory sought to develop a critical perspective in the discussion of all social practices . 
horkheimer believed that the illnesses of modern society are caused by misunderstanding reason: if people use true reason to critique their societies ,  they will be able to solve problems they may have . 
charles lemert discusses in his book `` social theory '' that in writing `` dialectic of enlightenment '' ,  horkheimer and adorno lack sufficient sympathy for the cultural plight of the average working person ,  unfair to criticize the tastes of ordinary people ,  and that popular culture does not really buttress social conformity and stabilize capitalism as much as the frankfurt school thinks . 
myanmar is ethnically diverse . 
myanmar has a total area of  . 
many religions are practised in myanmar . 
myanmar lacks adequate infrastructure . 
myanmar previously hosted the games in 1961 and 1969.
myanmar  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of the union of myanmar and also known as burma ,  is a country in southeast asia . 
many rohingya muslims have fled myanmar . 
in 2016, myanmar leader aung san suu kyi was accused of failing to protect myanmar's muslim minority . 
the general state of health care in myanmar is poor . 
in english ,  the country is popularly known as either `` burma '' or `` myanmar '' . 
in 1527, the confederation of shan states conquered ava itself ,  and ruled upper myanmar until 1555.
myanmar's armed forces are known as the tatmadaw ,  which numbers 488,000.
under british administration ,  myanmar was the second-wealthiest country in south-east asia . 
the 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for myanmar is 240.
myanmar's army-drafted constitution was approved in a referendum in may 2008.
myanmar imports most of its weapons from russia ,  ukraine ,  china and india . 
myanmar had a murder rate of 15.2 per 100,000 population with a total of 8,044 murders in 2012.
the country's official full name is the `` republic of the union of myanmar ''  -lrb-   ,  ``  '' ,    -rrb-  . 
myanmar has received extensive military aid from china in the past . 
there has been speculation that myanmar is interested in developing nuclear weapons ,  and that north korea was planning to export nuclear technology to myanmar . 
 ''myanmar '' is pronounced in at least nine different ways in english:  ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   ,   . 
however ,  the national aids programme myanmar found that 32% of sex workers and 43% of intravenous drug users in myanmar have hiv . 
british colonial rule introduced western elements of culture to myanmar . 
the provisional results of the 2014 myanmar census show that the total population is 51,419,420.
myanmar has been a member of the association of southeast asian nations  -lrb-  asean  -rrb-  since 1997.
myanmar is known with a name deriving from `` burma '' as opposed to `` myanmar '' in spanish ,  italian ,  romanian ,  and greek – `` birmania '' being the local version of `` burma '' in the spanish language ,  for example . 
in december 2014, myanmar signed an agreement to set up its first stock exchange . 
mohinga is the traditional breakfast dish and is myanmar's national dish . 
controversy surrounding the rohingya population also remains an issue between bangladesh and myanmar . 
this indicates some form of communication between groups in myanmar and other places ,  possibly through trade . 
for a list of protected areas ,  see list of protected areas of myanmar . 
 ,  myanmar ranks 145 out of 188 countries in human development ,  according to the human development index . 
homosexual acts are illegal in myanmar and can be punishable by life imprisonment . 
in 2010–2011, bangladesh exported products worth $9.65 million to myanmar against its import of $179 million . 
early civilisations in myanmar included the tibeto-burman-speaking pyu city-states in upper burma and the mon kingdoms in lower burma . 
in june 2013, myanmar held its first ever summit ,  the world economic forum on east asia 2013.
those in thailand on a visa run can cross to kawthaung but cannot venture farther into myanmar . `` 
in much of central myanmar  -lrb-  the dry zone  -rrb-  ,  vegetation is sparse and stunted . 
the annual import of medicine and medical equipment to myanmar during the 2000s was 160 million usd . 
in early august 2009, a conflict known as the kokang incident broke out in shan state in northern myanmar . 
myanmar is divided into seven states  -lrb-    -rrb-  and seven regions  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  formerly called divisions . 
the educational system of myanmar is operated by the government agency ,  the ministry of education . 
myanmar is the largest producer of methamphetamines in the world ,  with the majority of `` ya ba '' found in thailand produced in myanmar ,  particularly in the golden triangle and northeastern shan state ,  which borders thailand ,  laos and china . 
according to the unesco institute of statistics ,  myanmar's official literacy rate as of 2000 was 90% . 
there is consensus that the former military regime in myanmar  -lrb-  1962–2010 -rrb- was one of the world's most repressive and abusive regimes . 
myanmar produces precious stones such as rubies ,  sapphires ,  pearls ,  and jade . 
typical jungle animals ,  particularly tigers ,  occur sparsely in myanmar . 
around the second century bc the first-known city-states emerged in central myanmar . 
in myanmar ,  political and economic ideological struggles have affected living standards . 
both the names myanmar and burma derive from the earlier burmese `` mranma '' ,  an ethnonym for the majority bamar ethnic group ,  of uncertain etymology . 
the 2012 by-elections were also the first time that international representatives were allowed to monitor the voting process in myanmar . 
following world war ii ,  aung san negotiated the panglong agreement with ethnic leaders that guaranteed the independence of myanmar as a unified state . 
myanmar is one of the poorest nations in southeast asia ,  suffering from decades of stagnation ,  mismanagement and isolation . 
myanmar's slow economic growth has contributed to the preservation of much of its environment and ecosystems . 
civil wars have been a constant feature of myanmar's socio-political landscape since the attainment of independence in 1948.
as of july 2012, the myanmar government does not include the rohingya minority group—classified as stateless bengali muslims from bangladesh since 1982—on the government's list of more than 130 ethnic races and ,  therefore ,  the government states that they have no claim to myanmar citizenship . 
myanmar's government spends the least percentage of its gdp on health care of any country in the world ,  and international donor organisations give less to myanmar ,  per capita ,  than any other country except india . 
the majority of myanmar's population lives in the irrawaddy valley ,  which is situated between the rakhine yoma and the shan plateau . 
myanmar is home to four major language families: sino-tibetan ,  tai–kadai ,  austro-asiatic ,  and indo-european . 
 '' ,  in addition to expressing a desire to strengthen links between the uk and myanmar's military forces . 
a diverse range of indigenous cultures exist in myanmar ,  the majority culture is primarily buddhist and bamar . 
in 2007 the international movement to defend women's human rights issues in myanmar was said to be gaining speed . 
myanmar is bordered in the northwest by the chittagong division of bangladesh and the mizoram ,  manipur ,  nagaland and arunachal pradesh states of india . 
myanmar's admittance to least developed country status by the un in 1987 highlighted its economic bankruptcy . 
myanmar is the world's second largest producer of opium after afghanistan ,  producing some 25% of the world's opium ,  and forms part of the golden triangle . 
burmese ,  the mother tongue of the bamar and official language of myanmar ,  is related to tibetan and chinese . 
myanmar is a signatory to a special asean treaty that bans all types of nuclear weapons in signatory states in southeast asia . 
there are 101 universities ,  12 institutes ,  9-degree colleges and 24 colleges in myanmar ,  a total of 146 higher education institutions . 
english translations of its polish incipit  -lrb-  ``  ''   -rrb-  include: `` poland has not yet perished '' ,  `` poland has not perished yet '' ,  `` poland is not lost '' ,  `` poland is not lost yet '' ,  and `` poland is not yet lost '' . 
the melody of the polish anthem is a lively and rhythmical mazurka . 
 ''mazurek dąbrowskiego ''  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  also known by its incipit ,  `` poland is not yet lost ''   -lrb-  `` jeszcze polska nie zginęła ''  -rrb-  ,  is the national anthem of poland . 
bonaparte is the only non-polish person mentioned by name in the polish anthem . 
during the european revolutions of 1848, `` poland is not yet lost '' won favor throughout europe as a revolutionary anthem . 
the line `` poland is not lost yet '' has become proverbial in some languages . 
apart from `` poland is not yet lost '' ,  there were other popular patriotic songs which could compete for the status of an official national anthem . 
 ''poland is not yet lost '' was one of the most popular patriotic songs in the duchy ,  stopping short of becoming that entity's national anthem . 
it is also known by its original title ,  ``  ''  -lrb-   ,  `` song of the polish legions in italy ''  -rrb-  . 
at the inauguration of the un in 1945, no delegation from poland had been invited . 
in early july 1797, wybicki arrived in reggio emilia where the polish legions were then quartered and where he wrote the `` song of the polish legions '' soon afterwards . 
the ultimate fate of the polish legions in italy was different from that promised by wybicki's song . 
the polish anthem is also notable for influencing the lyrics of the ukrainian anthem ,  `` shche ne vmerla ukraina ''  -lrb-  `` ukraine's glory has not yet perished ''  -rrb-  . 
in russian poland ,  public performance of the song often ended with a police intervention . 
there are 3 suits of simples and in each suit the tiles are numbered from 1 to 9.
mahjong tiles are split into 3 categories: suits ,  honors ,  and bonuses . 
in each round at least four hands are played ,  with each player taking the position of dealer . 
old hong kong mahjong is played with a standard set of mahjong tiles  -lrb-  though cards may be used  -rrb-  . 
in addition ,  unlike the simple and honors tiles ,  there is only a single tile of each bonus tile ,  so there are a total of four flower and four season tiles in the set . 
when drawn ,  the bonus tile is not added into a player's hand but are instead set aside and kept near the player's other tiles for scoring purposes should they win the hand ,  and an extra tile is drawn in replacement of the bonus tile . 
