bush met her future husband ,  george w .  bush ,  in 1977, and they were married later that year . 
bush previously served as first lady of texas from 1995 to 2000.
bush is of english ,  french ,  and swiss ancestry . 
throughout 2015, bush was active in the presidential campaign of brother-in-law jeb bush ,  hosting fundraisers and endorsing him . 
ultimately ,  bush and her husband refused to vote for president in 2016.
she was to arrive there with her daughter barbara pierce bush ,  her husband george w .  bush ,  and soledad o'brien ,  a journalist . 
bush wrote her first book with her daughter jenna called `` read all about it ! ``  . 
on september 11, 2001, bush had been hosting her in-laws george h .  w .  bush and barbara bush at the white house and was scheduled to give a testimony to congress on education . 
bush first became involved with the heart truth awareness campaign in 2003.
obama sent bush a note thanking her and after the election met with bush at the white house in november 2008, bush giving obama a tour of her and her family's soon-to-be home . 
in races where the moderates are in the most trouble ,  laura bush is the one who can do the most good . `` 
laura bush's approval ratings have consistently ranked very high . 
bush is a republican and has identified herself with the gop since her marriage . 
during and after her tenure as the first lady ,  laura bush received a number of awards and honors . 
during her husband's second term ,  bush was more involved in foreign matters . 
obama thanked bush for her handling of the aftermath of september 11 attacks ,  while bush called her a `` first lady who serves this country with such grace '' . 
laura lane welch bush  -lrb-  born november 4, 1946 -rrb- is an american educator who was first lady of the united states during the presidency of her husband ,  george w .  bush ,  from 2001 to 2009.
in january 2017, bush attended the inauguration of donald trump . 
bush was a participant in the 2006 midterm elections ,  beginning her campaigning in april . 
in their remarks ,  both bush and obama stressed the importance of being role models . 
in july 2013, bush and obama appeared together in africa at the first ladies summit . 
bush traveled to kuwait in april 1993, accompanying her father-in-law and mother-in-law as well as brothers-in-law jeb and marvin bush after former president bush was invited to return to the middle east for the first time since his presidency . 
as first lady ,  bush was involved in issues of concern to children and women ,  both nationally and internationally . 
bush's mother ,  jenna welch ,  was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 78.
bush's chief of staff anita mcbride called this characterization of bush `` unfair '' and though conceding that she was traditional ,  mcbride noted bush broke from tradition in addressing issues that were not customary . 
several times a year ,  bush and her husband travel to their sprawling family estate ,  the bush compound ,  better known as walker's point . 
four learning facilities have been named for her: the laura welch bush elementary school in houston ,  texas ,  the laura w .  bush elementary school in the leander isd just outside austin ,  texas ,  and the laura bush education center at camp bondsteel ,  a u . s .  military base in kosovo and the laura bush middle school in lubbock ,  texas . 
bush is on the board of selectors of jefferson awards for public service . 
she met george w .  bush in july 1977 when mutual friends joe and jan o'neill invited her and bush to a backyard barbecue at their home . 
in 2015, bush had several speaking arrangements on issues relating to her husband's presidency . 
operating in partnership with the laura bush institute ,  the jenna welch center ,  named for bush's mother ,  strives for excellence in research ,  education and community outreach . 
in september 2009, bush openly praised president barack obama and first lady michelle obama . 
george w .  bush credited his wife with his decision to stop drinking in 1986.
in may 2017 bush received an honor at the `` women making history awards '' in washington ,  dc . 
the potto  -lrb-  `` perodicticus potto ''  -rrb-  is thought to lack brachial glands ,  though it produces similar toxic excretions with its anal glands . 
lorisids live in tropical ,  central africa as well as in south and southeast asia . 
slow lorises from southeast asia produce a secretion from their brachial gland  -lrb-  a scent gland on the upper arm ,  between the axilla and elbow  -rrb-  ,  that is licked and mixed with their saliva to form a toxin which may be used for defense . 
lysergic acid diethylamide  -lrb-  lsd  -rrb-  ,  also known as acid ,  is a hallucinogenic drug . 
lawyers in some civil law countries traditionally deprecated `` transactional law '' or `` business law '' as beneath them . 
in some civil law countries this responsibility is handled by civil law notaries . 
in other countries ,  particularly the uk and u . s . a .  ,  law is primarily taught at law schools . 
an equivalent dichotomy developed between advocates and procurators in some civil law countries; these two types did not always monopolize the practice of law ,  in that they coexisted with civil law notaries . 
a lawyer or attorney is a person who practices law ,  as an advocate ,  attorney ,  attorney at law ,  barrister ,  barrister-at-law ,  bar-at-law ,  civil law notary ,  counsel ,  counselor ,  counsellor ,  counselor at law ,  solicitor ,  chartered legal executive ,  or public servant preparing ,  interpreting and applying law but not as a paralegal or charter executive secretary . 
in most countries ,  particularly civil law countries ,  there has been a tradition of giving many legal tasks to a variety of civil law notaries ,  clerks ,  and scriveners . 
arguing a client's case before a judge or jury in a court of law is the traditional province of the barrister in england ,  and of advocates in some civil law jurisdictions . 
failure to obey such a rule is the crime of unauthorized practice of law . 
in many civil law countries ,  prosecutors are trained and employed as part of the judiciary; they are law-trained jurists ,  but may not necessarily be lawyers in the sense that the word is used in the common law world . 
legal advice is the application of abstract principles of law to the concrete facts of the client's case in order to advise the client about what they should do next . 
they may have to perform extensive research into relevant facts and law while drafting legal papers and preparing for oral argument . 
american lawyers have a profitable monopoly on dispensing advice about probate law  -lrb-  which has been heavily criticized  -rrb-  . 
logrolling is the trading of favors ,  or `` quid pro quo '' ,  such as vote trading by legislative members to obtain passage of actions of interest to each legislative member . 
the concept of playing by ear has led to the development of the idiom ,  to play by ear . 
in most instances ,  those traditions where learning music from playing by ear is paramount do not use musical notation in any form . 
playing or learning by ear is the ability of a performing musician to reproduce a piece of music they have heard ,  without having seen it notated in any form of sheet music . 
it is now on display at the british museum . 
during the french revolution the louvre was transformed into a public museum . 
hence the museum remained incomplete until the french revolution . 
some of the best known paintings of the museum have been digitized by the french center for research and restoration of the museums of france . 
the library of the museum and some of the adjoining halls were destroyed ,  but the museum was saved by the efforts of paris firemen and museum employees . 
the louvre  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or the louvre museum  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is the world's largest art museum and a historic monument in paris ,  france . 
in 2018, the louvre was the world's most visited art museum ,  receiving 10.2 million visitors . 
the museum opened on 10 august 1793, the first anniversary of the monarchy's demise . 
the 18th and 19th centuries are represented by the french sculptor alfred barye . 
iran’s national museum building was designed and constructed by french architect andré godard . 
during the french revolution ,  the national assembly decreed that the louvre should be used as a museum to display the nation's masterpieces . 
the islamic art collection ,  the museum's newest ,  spans `` thirteen centuries and three continents '' . 
during the second french empire ,  between 1852 and 1870, the french economy grew; by 1870 the museum had added 20,000 new pieces to its collections ,  and the pavillon de flore and the grande galérie were remodelled under architects louis visconti and hector lefuel . 
the museum lies in the center of paris on the right bank ,  in the 1st arrondissement . 
museum officials predicted that the new building ,  capable of receiving about 600 works of art ,  would attract up to 500,000 visitors a year when it opened in 2012.
from 2006 to 2009, the louvre lent artwork to the high museum of art in atlanta ,  georgia ,  and received a $6.9 million payment to be used for renovations . 
the italian peninsula was not the only region from which napoleon took art . 
the museum opened on 10 august 1793 with an exhibition of 537 paintings ,  the majority of the works being royal and confiscated church property . 
in 2012, the louvre and the fine arts museums of san francisco announced a five-year collaboration on exhibitions ,  publications ,  art conservation and educational programming . 
these finds formed the basis of the assyrian museum ,  the precursor to today's department . 
under the main entrance to the museum is the carrousel du louvre ,  a shopping mall operated by unibail-rodamco . 
the museum is housed in the louvre palace ,  originally built as the louvre castle in the late 12th to 13th century under philip ii . 
however ,  the `` tiber '' remained in the louvre museum and can be seen in the collections today . 
pope francis taught that `` true love is both loving and letting oneself be loved .  .  . what is important in love is not our loving ,  but allowing ourselves to be loved by god . `` 
interpersonal love refers to love between human beings . 
ancient greek philosophers identified five forms of love: essentially ,  familial love  -lrb-  in greek ,  '  -rrb-  ,  friendly love or platonic love  -lrb-  '  -rrb-  ,  romantic love  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  guest love  -lrb-    -rrb-  and divine love  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
it can also mean `` love of the mind . `` 
it has also been translated as `` love of the soul . `` 
some translations list it as `` love of the body '' . 
the christian understanding is that love comes from god . 
the philosophical investigation of love includes the tasks of distinguishing between the various kinds of personal love ,  asking if and how love is or can be justified ,  asking what the value of love is ,  and what impact love has on the autonomy of both the lover and the beloved . 
christian theologians see god as the source of love ,  which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships . 
to love one's friends is common practice ,  to love one's enemies only among christians . `` 
in hebrew ,   -lrb-  `` ahava ''  -rrb-  is the most commonly used term for both interpersonal love and love between god and god's creations . 
in buddhism ,  `` kāma '' is sensuous ,  sexual love . 
in the persian culture ,  everything is encompassed by love and all is for love ,  starting from loving friends and family ,  husbands and wives ,  and eventually reaching the divine love that is the ultimate goal in life . 
in his paris talks ,  `abdu'l-bahá described four types of love: the love that flows from god to human beings; the love that flows from human beings to god; the love of god towards the self or identity of god; and the love of human beings for human beings . 
being absorbed in love for god is considered to be the perfection of life . 
the complex and abstract nature of love often reduces discourse of love to a thought-terminating cliché . 
the commandment to love other people is given in the torah ,  which states ,  `` love your neighbor like yourself ''  -lrb-  leviticus 19:18 -rrb- . 
the philosophy of love is a field of social philosophy and ethics that attempts to explain the nature of love . 
the qur'an refers to god as being `` full of loving kindness . `` 
the love of man and woman— ''eros '' in greek—and the unselfish love of others  -lrb-  `` agape ''  -rrb-  ,  are often contrasted as `` descending '' and `` ascending '' love ,  respectively ,  but are ultimately the same thing . 
although the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate ,  different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what `` isn't '' love  -lrb-  antonyms of `` love ''  -rrb-  . 
a common principle that people say they love is life itself . 
 ''agape ''  -lrb-   `` agápē ''  -rrb-  means `` love '' in modern-day greek . 
tertullian wrote regarding love for enemies: `` our individual ,  extraordinary ,  and perfect goodness consists in loving our enemies . 
forever changes is the third studio album by the american psychedelic rock band love . 
the title of the album came from a story that lee had heard about a friend-of-a-friend who had broken up with his girlfriend . 
it was released by elektra records in november 1967 and would be the final album by the original band ,  as subsequent albums featured leader arthur lee backed by a variety of new players . 
the dvd features the album concert ,  five bonus performances ,  documentary footage and an interview with lee . 
a double-cd `` collector's edition '' of the album was issued by rhino records on april 22, 2008.
a september 25 recording session finished the album ,  adding the horns and strings ,  as well as some additional piano from randi ,  who played all the keyboard parts on the album as the band now had no keyboard player . 
the second disc contains a previously unissued alternate mix of the album . 
in astronomy ,  kepler's laws of planetary motion are three scientific laws describing the motion of planets around the sun . 
kepler's laws improved the model of copernicus . 
semiconductor lasers  -lrb-  laser diodes  -rrb-  are typically `` not '' referred to as solid-state lasers . 
these lasers ,  such as the excimer laser and the copper vapor laser ,  can never be operated in cw mode . 
lasers are distinguished from other light sources by their coherence . 
such lasers cannot be run in cw mode . 
pump light can be used more efficiently by creating a fiber disk laser ,  or a stack of such lasers . 
a laser differs from other sources of light in that it emits light `` coherently '' . 
living cells have been used to produce laser light . 
dye lasers use an organic dye as the gain medium . 
semiconductor lasers are diodes which are electrically pumped . 
a laser beam profiler is used to measure the intensity profile ,  width ,  and divergence of laser beams . 
in their most prevalent form these solid state dye lasers use dye-doped polymers as laser media . 
lasers are characterized according to their wavelength in a vacuum . 
the back-formed verb `` to lase '' is frequently used in the field ,  meaning `` to produce laser light , ``  especially in reference to the gain medium of a laser; when a laser is operating it is said to be `` lasing . `` 
commercial laser diodes emit at wavelengths from 375 nm to 3500 nm . 
solid-state lasers or laser amplifiers where the light is guided due to the total internal reflection in a single mode optical fiber are instead called fiber lasers . 
further use of the words `` laser '' and `` maser '' in an extended sense ,  not referring to laser technology or devices ,  can be seen in usages such as `` astrophysical maser '' and `` atom laser '' . 
pump light may be provided by a flash lamp or by another laser . 
at a conference in 1959, gordon gould published the term laser in the paper `` the laser ,  light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation '' . 
the lasing medium in some `` dye lasers '' and `` vibronic solid-state lasers '' produces optical gain over a wide bandwidth ,  making a laser possible which can thus generate pulses of light as short as a few femtoseconds  -lrb-  10 s  -rrb-  . 
frequency-doubled diode-pumped solid-state  -lrb-  dpss  -rrb-  lasers are used to make bright green laser pointers . 
some lasers are pulsed simply because they cannot be run in continuous mode . 
some applications of lasers depend on a beam whose output power is constant over time . 
another type is a raman laser ,  which takes advantage of raman scattering to produce a laser from materials such as silicon . 
quite often ,  the fiber laser is designed as a double-clad fiber . 
when lasers were invented in 1960, they were called `` a solution looking for a problem '' . 
this unique property of laser light ,  spatial coherence ,  cannot be replicated using standard light sources  -lrb-  except by discarding most of the light  -rrb-  as can be appreciated by comparing the beam from a flashlight  -lrb-  torch  -rrb-  or spotlight to that of almost any laser . 
thin disk lasers have been shown to produce beams of up to one kilowatt . 
vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers  -lrb-  vcsels  -rrb-  are semiconductor lasers whose emission direction is perpendicular to the surface of the wafer . 
the word `` laser '' started as an acronym for `` light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation '' . 
the development of a silicon laser is important in the field of optical computing . 
playing a larp is often called `` larping '' ,  and one who does it is a `` larper '' . 
most larps are intended as games for entertainment . 
horror larps are inspired by horror fiction . 
larp has been a subject of academic research and theory . 
today ,  larp is a widespread activity internationally . 
such larps are common in the nordic countries but also present elsewhere . 
denmark has an especially high number of youth larps . 
larp events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap . 
communities have formed around the creation ,  play and discussion of larp . 
proprietary campaign settings ,  together with rulesets ,  are often the principal creative asset of larp groups and larp publishers . 
the first larps were run in the late 1970s ,  inspired by tabletop role-playing games and genre fiction . 
 ''treasure trap '' ,  formed in 1982 at peckforton castle ,  was the first recorded larp game in the uk and influenced the fantasy larps that followed there . 
many larps have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting . 
'we are not aware of any discoveries of lithium , ' he said . `` 
lithium metal is isolated electrolytically from a mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride . 
at 20 mg lithium per kg of earth's crust ,  lithium is the 25th most abundant element . 
he named the metal inside the material `` lithium '' . 
the development of lithium ion batteries increased the demand for lithium and became the dominant use in 2007.
the stockpiled lithium was depleted in lithium-6 by 75% ,  which was enough to affect the measured atomic weight of lithium in many standardized chemicals ,  and even the atomic weight of lithium in some `` natural sources '' of lithium ion which had been `` contaminated '' by lithium salts discharged from isotope separation facilities ,  which had found its way into ground water . 
lithium metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife . 
lithium  -lrb-  from   -rrb-  is a chemical element with symbol li and atomic number 3.
these uses consume more than three quarters of lithium production . 
whether lithium has a physiological role in any of these organisms is unknown . 
lithium is one of the few metals that react with nitrogen under normal conditions . 
multiple allotropic forms have been identified for lithium at high pressures . 
lithium has a very low density  -lrb-  0.534 g/cm  -rrb-  ,  comparable with pine wood . 
lithium and its compounds have several industrial applications ,  including heat-resistant glass and ceramics ,  lithium grease lubricants ,  flux additives for iron ,  steel and aluminium production ,  lithium batteries ,  and lithium-ion batteries . 
in 1987 an autobiography about riefenstahl was released ,  leni riefenstahl memoiren regarding her life as a film maker and her post-war life . 
in the 2016 short film `` leni . 
riefenstahl distorts the diegetic sound in `` triumph of the will . `` 
in 1993, riefenstahl was the subject of the award-winning german documentary film `` the wonderful ,  horrible life of leni riefenstahl '' ,  directed by ray müller . 
hitler invited riefenstahl to film the 1936 summer olympics scheduled to be held in berlin ,  a film which riefenstahl claimed had been commissioned by the international olympic committee . 
riefenstahl's filming merits are discussed between characters in the 2009 quentin tarantino film `` inglourious basterds '' . 
riefenstahl fell in love with the arts in her childhood . 
he saw talent in riefenstahl and arranged a meeting . 
the film took riefenstahl's career to a new level and gave her further international recognition . 
most of riefenstahl's unfinished projects were lost towards the end of the war . 
riefenstahl eventually came to the notice of hitler who was immediately captivated by her work . 
the last time riefenstahl saw hitler was when she married peter jacob on 21 march 1944.
when filming `` impressionen unter wasser '' ,  riefenstahl lied about her age in order to be certified for scuba diving . 
helene bertha amalie riefenstahl was born in germany on 22 august 1902.
riefenstahl said that her biggest regret in life was meeting hitler ,  declaring ,  `` it was the biggest catastrophe of my life . 
film scholar mark cousins notes in his book `` the story of film '' that ,  `` next to orson welles and alfred hitchcock ,  leni riefenstahl was the most technically talented western film maker of her era '' . 
riefenstahl died of cancer on 8 september 2003 at the age of 101 and was buried at munich waldfriedhof . 
the propaganda film was funded entirely by the nsdap . 
riefenstahl became one of the few women in germany to direct a film during the weimar period .  ,  when in 1932, she decided to try directing with her own film called `` das blaue licht ''  -lrb-  `` the blue light ''  -rrb-  . 
in 2011, director steven soderbergh revealed that he had also been working on a biopic of riefenstahl for about six months . 
labatt is the largest brewer in canada . 
john and hugh labatt ,  grandsons of founder john k .  labatt ,  launched labatt 50 in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership . 
labatt was also the majority owner of the toronto blue jays from their inception in 1976 until 1995, when interbrew purchased labatt . 
in 2009, the company sold labatt usa ,  including the american rights to its core labatt products  -lrb-  such as blue ,  blue light ,  and labatt 50 -rrb- to north american breweries ,  and agreed to brew those brands on labatt usa's behalf until 2012.
for the case of several simultaneous linear equations ,  see system of linear equations . 
frequently the term `` linear equation '' refers implicitly to the case of just one variable . 
in the words of algebra ,  a linear equation is obtained by equating to zero a linear polynomial over some field ,  where the coefficients are taken from ,  and that does not contain the symbols for the indeterminates . 
in the may 16, 2007 edition of time magazine ,  the term was used in the allegation that `` his  -lrb-  gore's  -rrb-  tennessee mansion consumes 20 times the electricity used by the average american home ''
 ''lexus liberal '' is a variant on the term ,  used to describe an upper-middle class individual who supports the same ideas of the limousine liberals ,  but is still out-of-touch with the actual poor they purport to feel for . 
in the 1970s ,  the term was applied to wealthy liberal supporters of open-housing and forced school busing who didn't make use of public schooling . 
the term `` lexus '' is used as these liberals might not have a limousine ,  but are wealthy enough to afford a luxury car or high-end vehicle ,  such as a lexus . 
on the south side of the columbia river ,  upstream on the west side of the netul river  -lrb-  now lewis and clark river  -rrb-  ,  they constructed fort clatsop . 
the route of lewis and clark's expedition took them up the missouri river to its headwaters ,  then on to the pacific ocean via the columbia river ,  and it may have been influenced by the purported transcontinental journey of moncacht-apé by the same route about a century before . 
soon ,  they passed la charrette ,  the last euro-american settlement on the missouri river . 
meanwhile ,  clark had entered the crow tribe's territory . 
the corps began their journey homeward using canoes to ascend the columbia river ,  and later by trekking over land . 
president jefferson would later present this report to congress . 
lewis and clark returned from their expedition ,  bringing with them the mandan indian chief shehaka from the upper missouri to visit the `` great father '' at washington city . 
the americans and the lakota nation  -lrb-  whom the americans called sioux or `` teton-wan sioux ''  -rrb-  had problems when they met ,  and there was a concern the two sides might fight . 
sacagawea ,  and clark's slave york ,  were both allowed to participate in the vote ,  so this may have been the first time in american history where a woman and a slave were allowed to vote . 
in 1787, he gave a map of the upper missouri river and locations of `` territories transited by pedro vial '' to spanish authorities . 
jefferson explained his choice of lewis:
lewis and clark used the maps produced by these expeditions when they descended the lower columbia to the pacific coast . 
clark wrote they were `` warlike '' and were the `` vilest miscreants of the savage race '' . 
the lewis and clark expedition from may 1804 to september 1806, also known as the corps of discovery expedition ,  was the first american expedition to cross the western portion of the united states . 
the expedition followed the missouri through what is now kansas city ,  missouri ,  and omaha ,  nebraska . 
in 1803, jefferson commissioned the corps of discovery and named army captain meriwether lewis its leader ,  who then selected william clark as second in command . 
the lewis and clark expedition gained an understanding of the geography of the northwest and produced the first accurate maps of the area . 
captain lewis made his first mistake by offering the sioux chief gifts first ,  which insulted and angered the partisan chief . 
he spent time consulting maps and books and conferring with jefferson . 
when the expedition reached marias river ,  on june 16, 1805, sacagawea became dangerously ill .  she was able to find some relief by drinking mineral water from the sulphur spring that fed into the river . 
 -lrb-  ellipsoids which do not have an axis of symmetry are termed triaxial .   -rrb- 
the graticule on the ellipsoid is constructed in exactly the same way as on the sphere . 
the latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the normal to the surface at that point: the normal to the surface of the sphere is along the radius vector . 
besides the equator ,  four other parallels are of significance: the plane of the earth's orbit about the sun is called the ecliptic ,  and the plane perpendicular to the rotation axis of the earth is the equatorial plane . 
the figure shows the geometry of a cross-section of the plane perpendicular to the ecliptic and through the centres of the earth and the sun at the december solstice when the sun is overhead at some point of the tropic of capricorn . 
many different reference ellipsoids have been used in the history of geodesy . 
in 1884 the international meridian conference adopted the greenwich meridian as the `` universal prime meridian '' or `` zero point of longitude '' . 
longitude is given as an angular measurement ranging from 0° at the prime meridian to +180° eastward and −180° westward . 
if the earth were perfectly spherical and radially homogeneous ,  then the longitude at a point would be equal to the angle between a vertical north–south plane through that point and the plane of the greenwich meridian . 
the greek letter λ  -lrb-  lambda  -rrb-  ,  is used to denote the location of a place on earth east or west of the prime meridian . 
a location's north–south position along a meridian is given by its latitude ,  which is approximately the angle between the local vertical and the equatorial plane . 
 -lrb-  this forms a right-handed coordinate system with the -axis  -lrb-  right hand thumb  -rrb-  pointing from the earth's center toward the north pole and the -axis  -lrb-  right hand index finger  -rrb-  extending from the earth's center through the equator at the prime meridian .   -rrb- 
the details are more complex than described here: see the articles on universal time and on the equation of time for more details . 
as of 2006, approximately two percent of the linux kernel was written by torvalds himself . 
currently ,  the linux foundation sponsors torvalds so he can work full-time on improving linux . 
his personal mascot is a penguin nicknamed tux ,  which has been widely adopted by the linux community as the mascot of the linux kernel . 
the first prototypes of linux were publicly released later that year  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
torvalds holds the `` linux '' trademark and monitors the use of it ,  chiefly through the linux mark institute . 
thesis was titled `` linux: a portable operating system '' . 
following the release of linux 4.19 on october 22, linus went back to maintaining the kernel . 
torvalds used stallman's gnu general public license version 2  -lrb-  gplv2 -rrb- for his linux kernel . 
other global trade union organizations include the world federation of trade unions . 
in the baltic states trade unions were the part of the soviet union trade union system and closely connected with the party in the state . 
pressures on unions continued into the 1980s and '90s . 
trade union density ,  or the percentage of workers belonging to a trade union ,  is highest in the nordic countries . 
trade union density was 14.1% in the private sector and 56.5% in the public sector . 
union law varies from country to country ,  as does the function of unions . 
the canadian labour congress was founded in 1956 as the national trade union center for canada . 
trade unions were finally legalized in 1872, after a `` royal commission on trade unions '' in 1867 agreed that the establishment of the organizations was to the advantage of both employers and employees . 
in the 1870s and 1880s ,  the growing trade union movement began a series of protests against foreign labour . 
in 2011 there were 6,135,126 members in tuc-affiliated unions ,  down from a peak of 12,172,508 in 1980.
labour unions have existed in canada since the early 1800s . 
with 65% of the workers belonging to a union belgium is a country with one of the highest percentages of labour union membership . 
until around 1990 colombian trade unions were among the strongest in latin america . 
in india ,  the trade union movement is generally divided on political lines . 
therefore ,  he reasoned they must pay union dues ,  although they do not have to join the union . 
several sources of current news exist about the trade union movement in the world . 
unions may organize a particular section of skilled workers  -lrb-  craft unionism  -rrb-  ,  a cross-section of workers from various trades  -lrb-  general unionism  -rrb-  ,  or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry  -lrb-  industrial unionism  -rrb-  . 
in britain ,  the perceived left-leaning nature of trade unions has resulted in the formation of a reactionary right-wing trade union called solidarity which is supported by the far-right bnp . 
moderate new model unions dominated the union movement from the mid-19th century and where trade unionism was stronger than the political labour movement until the formation and growth of the labour party in the early years of the 20th century . 
the prevalence of unions in various countries can be measured by the concept of `` union density '' ,  which is expressed as a percentage of the total number of workers in a given location who are trade union members . 
more permanent trade unions were established from the 1850s ,  better resourced but often less radical . 
in western europe ,  professional associations often carry out the functions of a trade union . 
the largest trade union federation in the world is the brussels-based international trade union confederation  -lrb-  ituc  -rrb-  ,  which has approximately 309 affiliated organizations in 156 countries and territories ,  with a combined membership of 166 million . 
these enterprise unions ,  however ,  join industry-wide federations which in turn are members of rengo ,  the japanese national trade union confederation . 
trade unions  -lrb-  danish: `` fagforeninger '' ,  swedish: `` fackföreningar ''  -rrb-  have a long tradition in scandinavian society . 
prominent domestic unions in canada include actra ,  the canadian union of postal workers ,  the canadian union of public employees ,  the public service alliance of canada ,  the national union of public and general employees ,  and unifor . 
the last belgian union worth mentioning is the very small ,  but highly active anarchist union called the  . 
unions are also delineated by the service model and the organizing model . 
in 1834, the welsh socialist robert owen established the grand national consolidated trades union . 
typically such trade unions refrain from politics or pursue a more liberal politics than their blue-collar counterparts . 
2 -rrb- ,  which is just what jefferson did . 
the louisiana purchase  -lrb-   `` sale of louisiana ''  -rrb-  was the acquisition of the louisiana territory  -lrb-    -rrb-  by the united states from france in 1803.
the following year ,  the district of louisiana was renamed the territory of louisiana ,  aka louisiana territory  -lrb-  1805–1812 -rrb- . 
louisiana had never been considered one of new spain's internal provinces . 
jefferson disliked the idea of purchasing louisiana from france ,  as that could imply that france had a right to be in louisiana . 
the kingdom of france controlled the louisiana territory from 1699 until it was ceded to spain in 1762.
governing the louisiana territory was more difficult than acquiring it . 
jefferson sent livingston to paris in 1801 after discovering the transfer of louisiana from spain to france under the third treaty of san ildefonso . 
a dispute soon arose between spain and the united states regarding the extent of louisiana . 
the eastern boundary of the louisiana purchase was the mississippi river ,  from its source to the 31st parallel ,  though the source of the mississippi was ,  at the time ,  unknown . 
the louisiana purchase was by far the largest territorial gain in u . s .  history . 
new orleans was the administrative capital of the orleans territory ,  and st .  louis was the capital of the louisiana territory . 
the american purchase of the louisiana territory was not accomplished without domestic opposition . 
the opposition of new england federalists to the louisiana purchase was primarily economic self-interest ,  not any legitimate concern over constitutionality or whether france indeed owned louisiana or was required to sell it back to spain should it desire to dispose of the territory . 
livingston was authorized to purchase new orleans . 
in 1798, spain revoked the treaty allowing american use of new orleans ,  greatly upsetting americans . 
when spain later objected to the united states purchasing louisiana from france ,  madison responded that america had first approached spain about purchasing the property ,  but had been told by spain itself that america would have to treat with france for the territory . 
following the establishment of the united states ,  the americans controlled the area east of the mississippi and north of new orleans . 
napoleon needed peace with the united kingdom to implement the treaty of san ildefonso and take possession of louisiana . 
that is ,  the concept abstracts from the `` particular '' characteristics of all of the labor and is akin to average labor . 
the value of labor ,  in this view ,  covered not just the value of wages  -lrb-  what marx called the value of labor power  -rrb-  ,  but the value of the entire product created by labor . 
in ecological economics ,  the labor theory of value has been criticized ,  where it is argued that labor is in fact energy over time . 
however ,  production not only involves labor ,  but also certain means of labor: tools ,  materials ,  power plants and so on . 
the final sentence explains how smith sees value of a product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer ,  as opposite to marx who sees the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer . 
the labor theory of value has developed over many centuries . 
and we value things ,  price them ,  based on how much labor we can avoid or command ,  and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things for a profit . 
ricardo's labor theory of value is not a normative theory ,  as are some later forms of the labor theory ,  such as claims that it is `` immoral '' for an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes from the sales of all the goods he produces . 
the marxist labor theory of value has been criticised on several counts . 
hence ,  they propose that trade should be facilitated by using notes backed by labor . 
some post-keynesian economists have been highly critical of the labor theory of value . 
when speaking in terms of a labor theory of value ,  `` value , ``  without any qualifying adjective should theoretically refer to the amount of labor necessary to produce a marketable commodity ,  including the labor necessary to develop any real capital used in the production . 
as a result ,  `` smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value . `` 
value  -lrb-  without qualification  -rrb-  is the labor embodied in a commodity under a given structure of production . 
since the term `` value '' is understood in the ltv as denoting something created by labor ,  and its `` magnitude '' as something proportional to the quantity of labor performed ,  it is important to explain how the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it creates . 
adam smith held that ,  in a primitive society ,  the amount of labor put into producing a good determined its exchange value ,  with exchange value meaning in this case the amount of labor a good can purchase . 
the labor theory of value  -lrb-  ltv  -rrb-  is a normative classical theory of value that argues that the price of a good or service should be  -lrb-  morally  -rrb-  equal to the total amount of labor value  -lrb-  wages  -rrb-  required to produce it . 
contrary to popular belief marx never used the term `` labor theory of value '' in any of his works but used the term law of value ,  marx opposed `` ascribing a supernatural creative power to labor '' ,  arguing as such:
smith's theory of price  -lrb-  which for many is the same as value  -rrb-  has nothing to do with the past labor spent in producing a commodity . 
in more recent times a new lunar society was formed in birmingham by a group led by dame rachel waterhouse . 
the lunar circle also attracted more distant involvement . 
in 1767 james keir visited darwin in lichfield ,  where he was introduced to boulton ,  small ,  wedgwood and whitehurst and subsequently decided to move to birmingham . 
the first was probably that held on 31 december 1775, and the `` lunar '' name is first recorded in 1776.
in late 1780 the nature of the society was to change again with the move to birmingham of joseph priestley . 
although neither priestley nor watt were to move to birmingham for several years ,  both were to be in constant communication with the birmingham members and central to the circle's activities from 1767.
among memorials to the society and its members are the moonstones; two statues of watt and a statue of `` boulton ,  watt and murdoch '' by william bloye; and the museum at soho house – all in birmingham . 
although older than both boulton and darwin ,  by 1758 whitehurst was writing to boulton telling excitedly of a pyrometer he had built ,  and looking forward to visiting birmingham `` to spend one day with you in trying all necessary experiments '' . 
if william small's arrival in 1765 had been the catalyst to the development of the lunar circle as a cohesive group ,  his death – probably from malaria – in 1775 was to mark another change in its structure . 
by 1768 the core group of nine individuals who would form the nucleus of the lunar society had come together with small at their heart . 
from 1943 to 1951, libya was under allied occupation . 
libya became independent as a kingdom in 1951.
libya gained independence in 1951 as the united libyan kingdom  -lrb-   '  -rrb-  ,  changing its name to the kingdom of libya  -lrb-   '  -rrb-  in 1963.
on 24 december 1951, libya declared its independence as the united kingdom of libya ,  a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under king idris ,  libya's only monarch . 
libya's foreign policies have fluctuated since 1951.
libya's previous national army was defeated in the libyan civil war and disbanded . 
the second-largest city is benghazi ,  which is located in eastern libya . 
the incident generated outrage in the united states and libya . 
the legislature of libya is the unicameral council of deputies which meets in tobruk . 
libya has been riven by conflict between the rival parliaments since mid-2014.
some 150,000 italians settled in libya ,  constituting roughly 20% of the total population . 
the national transitional council ,  established in 2011, referred to the state as simply `` libya '' . 
libya extends over  ,  making it the 16th largest nation in the world by size . 
at  ,  libya's coastline is the longest of any african country bordering the mediterranean . 
libya has been inhabited by berbers since the late bronze age . 
the libyan desert ,  which covers much of libya ,  is one of the most arid and sun-baked places on earth . 
for the next several decades ,  libya was under the purview of the umayyad caliph of damascus until the abbasids overthrew the umayyads in 750, and libya came under the rule of baghdad . 
the name `` libya '' was brought back into use in 1903 by italian geographer federico minutilli . 
gaddafi was overthrown and killed in the 2011 libyan civil war . 
libyan authorities rejected european union's plans aimed at stopping migration from libya . 
in 630 bc ,  the ancient greeks colonized eastern libya and founded the city of cyrene . 
at least 30,000 libyans died in the civil war . 
the coastal plain of libya was inhabited by neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 bc . 
in the weeks that followed ,  american forces were in the forefront of nato operations against libya . 
libya lies between latitudes 19° and 34°n ,  and longitudes 9° and 26°e . 
in december 2017 the permanent mission of libya to the united nations informed the united nations that the country's official name was henceforth the `` state of libya ''; `` libya '' remained the official short form ,  and the country continued to be listed under `` l '' in alphabetical lists . 
historically ,  the area of libya was considered three provinces  -lrb-  or states  -rrb-  ,  tripolitania in the northwest ,  barka  -lrb-  cyrenaica  -rrb-  in the east ,  and fezzan in the southwest . 
libya  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the state of libya ,  is a country in the maghreb region in north africa ,  bordered by the mediterranean sea to the north ,  egypt to the east ,  sudan to the southeast ,  chad to the south ,  niger to the southwest ,  algeria to the west ,  and tunisia to the northwest . 
under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the allies ,  italy relinquished all claims to libya . 
a letter game involves the exchange of written letters ,  or e-mails ,  between two or more participants . 
it is one of the so called three laws of thought ,  along with its complement ,  the law of excluded middle ,  and the law of identity . 
however ,  no system of logic is built on just these laws ,  and none of these laws provide inference rules ,  such as modus ponens or demorgan's laws . 
aristotle attempts several proofs of this law . 
one difficulty in applying the law of non-contradiction is ambiguity in the propositions . 
the law is employed in a reductio ad absurdum proof . 
to express the fact that the law is tenseless and to avoid equivocation ,  sometimes the law is amended to say `` contradictory propositions cannot both be true 'at the same time and in the same sense' '' . 
as is true of all axioms of logic ,  the law of non-contradiction is alleged to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable ,  on the grounds that any proof or disproof must use the law itself prior to reaching the conclusion . 
the `` fargo '' episode `` the law of non-contradiction '' ,  which takes its name from the law ,  was noted for its several elements relating to the law of non-contradiction ,  as the episode's main character faces several paradoxes . 
one reason to have this law is the principle of explosion ,  which states that anything follows from a contradiction . 
the law of non contradiction and the law of excluded middle create a dichotomy in `` logical space '' ,  wherein the two parts are `` mutually exclusive '' and `` jointly exhaustive '' . 
some systems of logic have different but analogous laws . 
the law is also known as the law  -lrb-  or principle  -rrb-  of the excluded third ,  in latin principium tertii exclusi . 
the line of scrimmage first came into use in 1880.
in canadian football ,  the set distance of the line of scrimmage is  ,  almost three times as long as the american line . 
a line of scrimmage is parallel to the goal lines and touches one edge of the ball where it sits on the ground prior to the snap . 
a ball that is passed exactly sideways is considered a backwards pass . 
unlike a forward pass ,  if a backward pass hits the ground or an official ,  play continues and ,  as with a fumble ,  a backward pass that has hit the ground may be recovered and advanced by either team . 
while the forward pass is an invention of the north american games ,  the lateral and backward pass is also a part of rugby union and rugby league ,  where such passes are the norm . 
in a lateral pass the ball is not advanced ,  but unlike a forward pass a lateral may be attempted from anywhere on the field by any player to any player at any time . 
one famous college play involving the backward passes is simply known as the play . 
the play was a true lateral  -lrb-  the ball did not move forward or backward in the pass  -rrb-  ,  but the receiver was a step ahead of the passer and reached back to catch the ball ,  so it gave the appearance of an illegal forward pass . 
by 1790, `` l .  pinnata '' and `` l .  carnosa '' were recognised . 
 ''spanish lavender '' may be used to refer to `` l .  stoechas '' ,  `` l .  lanata '' or `` l .  dentata '' . 
 ''lavandula stoechas , ``  `` l .  pedunculata '' and `` l .  dentata '' were known in roman times . 
the lavandins `` lavandula `` × '' intermedia '' are a class of hybrids of `` l .  angustifolia '' and `` l .  latifolia '' . 
other commonly grown ornamental species are `` l .  stoechas '' ,  `` l .  dentata '' ,  and `` l .  multifida ''  -lrb-  egyptian lavender  -rrb-  . 
the most common form in cultivation is the common or english lavender `` lavandula angustifolia ''  -lrb-  formerly named `` l .  officinalis ''  -rrb-  . 
culinary lavender is usually english lavender ,  the most commonly used species in cooking  -lrb-  `` l .  angustifolia '' 'munstead'  -rrb-  . 
it is also used to make `` lavender sugar '' . 
they can also be used to make a tea that is milder than teas made with the flowers . 
these extracts are also used as fragrances for bath products . 
lemon balm is used in some toothpastes . 
lemon balm is also paired with fruit dishes or candies . 
lemon balm  -lrb-  `` melissa officinalis ''  -rrb-  ,  balm ,  common balm ,  or balm mint ,  is a perennial herbaceous plant in the mint family lamiaceae and native to south-central europe ,  the mediterranean basin ,  iran ,  and central asia ,  but now naturalized in the americas and elsewhere . 
the order has worldwide distribution . 
the total number of species in the order is now about 1768.
in circumscription the order was fairly similar to that of cronquist . 
the apg ii system  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- places this order in the clade monocots and uses this circumscription:
the laurales are an order of flowering plants . 
the order includes about 2500-2800 species from 85-90 genera ,  which comprise seven families of trees and shrubs . 
the lamiales are an order in the asterid group of dicotyledonous flowering plants . 
although exceptions often occur ,  species in this order typically have the following characteristics:
 ''; oswald answered ,  `` a policeman hit me . `` 
oswald returned to new orleans on april 24, 1963.
in the second trial the jury acquitted oswald . 
at about 12:40 p . m .  ,  oswald boarded a city bus . 
several films have fictionalized a trial of oswald ,  depicting what may have happened had ruby not killed oswald . 
in march 1961, oswald met marina prusakova  -lrb-  b . 
like all marines ,  oswald was trained and tested in shooting . 
oswald was never prosecuted because he was murdered two days after the assassination . 
 '' voebel said that `` oswald commonly read 'paperback trash . ' ''
oswald completed the eighth and ninth grades in new orleans . 
oswald was fired almost 6 months later ,  on the first week of april 1963.
while oswald was in the marines ,  he made an effort to teach himself rudimentary russian . 
oswald and his mother were later asked to leave after an argument in which oswald allegedly struck his mother and threatened john's wife with a pocket knife . 
oswald was born in new orleans ,  louisiana ,  on october 18, 1939, to robert edward lee oswald ,  sr .   -lrb-  1896–1939 -rrb- and marguerite frances claverie  -lrb-  1907–1981 -rrb- . 
agent hosty said that he destroyed oswald's note on orders from his superior ,  gordon shanklin ,  after oswald was named the suspect in the kennedy assassination . 
as he was led from the theater ,  oswald shouted he was a victim of police brutality . 
john pic  -lrb-  oswald's half-brother  -rrb-  testified to the warren commission that oswald's enlistment was motivated by wanting `` to get from out and under  .  .  .  the yoke of oppression from my mother . `` 
oswald ,  marina ,  and their infant daughter left for the united states ,  where they received less attention from the press than oswald expected ,  much to his disappointment . 
an officer there said that oswald was a `` very competent '' crew chief and was `` brighter than most people . `` 
truly later pointed out to officers that oswald was the only employee that he was certain was missing . 
oswald was interrogated several times during his two days at dallas police headquarters . 
oswald was court-martialed after he accidentally shot himself in the elbow with an unauthorized  . 22 caliber handgun . 
on october 20  -lrb-  a month before the assassination  -rrb-  ,  the oswalds' second daughter ,  audrey ,  was born . 
oswald's mother testified that on the day after the assassination she and marina destroyed another photograph with oswald holding the rifle with both hands over his head ,  with `` to my daughter june '' written on it . 
in fact ,  oswald was the branch's only member and it had never been chartered by the national organization . 
as a teenager in 1955, oswald attended civil air patrol meetings in new orleans . 
the commission concluded that oswald acted alone in assassinating kennedy ,  and the warren report could not ascribe any one motive or group of motives to oswald's actions:
as a child ,  oswald was described as withdrawn and temperamental by several people who knew him . 
oswald wrote in his diary in january 1961: `` i am starting to reconsider my desire about staying . 
george de mohrenschildt testified that he `` knew that oswald disliked general walker . `` 
oswald also declined his brother robert's offer on saturday to obtain a local attorney . 
jeanne de mohrenschildt testified that this was the last time she or her husband ever saw the oswalds . 
lincoln has a mayor-council government . 
lincoln is the second-most-populous city in nebraska . 
lincoln has an extensive park system ,  with over 131 individual parks . 
lincoln is home to the university of nebraska's football team ,  the nebraska cornhuskers . 
since lincoln is the state capital ,  many nebraska state and united states government offices are located in lincoln . 
lincoln's neighborhoods include both old and new development . 
private high schools located in lincoln are college view academy ,  lincoln christian ,  lincoln lutheran ,  parkview christian school and pius x high school . 
lincoln is the capital of the u . s .  state of nebraska and the county seat of lancaster county . 
lincoln is home to maroon 5 guitarist james valentine . 
during the early years of the cold war ,  the lincoln airport was the lincoln air force base; currently ,  the nebraska air national guard ,  along with the nebraska army national guard ,  have joint-use facilities with the lincoln airport . 
lincoln is the hometown of zager and evans ,  known for their international no . 
there are 17 radio stations licensed in lincoln ,  not including radio stations licensed outside of the city that serve the lincoln area . 
lincoln public schools  -lrb-  lps  -rrb-  is the sole public school district in the city . 
an occasional buffalo could still be seen in the plat of lincoln in the 1860s . 
nine colleges and universities are located within the lincoln boundaries . 
the downtown section of o street is lincoln's primary bar and nightclub district . 
the worldwide economic depression of 1890 saw the reduction of lincoln's population from 55,000 to 37,000 by 1900.
annual events in lincoln have come and gone throughout time ,  such as band day at the university of nebraska's lincoln campus and the star city holiday parade . 
most areas of lincoln also receive radio signals from omaha and other surrounding communities . 
west lincoln voters rejected annexation by lincoln until the state legislature passed a bill in 1965 allowing cities to annex surrounding areas without a vote . 
the lincoln area makes up a part of what is known as the greater midwest silicon prairie . 
as of december 2013, lincoln had 45 registered neighborhood associations within the city limits . 
lincoln is in two metropolitan statistical areas as defined by the united states census bureau . 
lincoln has a total area of  ,  of which of it is land and is water ,  according to the united states census bureau in 2017.
membership of the `` 100 club '' is open to anyone who has found at least 100 letterboxes on dartmoor . 
the origin of letterboxing can be traced to dartmoor ,  devon ,  england in 1854.
some clues may also be found in other letterboxes or on the internet ,  but this is more commonly for letterboxes in places other than dartmoor ,  where no `` 100 club '' or catalogue exist . 
the first dartmoor letterboxes were so remote and well-hidden that only the most determined walkers would find them ,  allowing weeks to pass before the letter made its way home . 
in the early 2000s ,  lionhead was `` growing very fast '' . 
the general consensus amongst lionhead was that the buyout `` benefited lionhead greatly '' . 
the articles were also published on lionhead's website . 
in 2005, lionhead released two titles: `` black & white 2 '' and `` the movies '' . 
the name lionhead came from webley's pet hamster . 
by early 2012, lionhead were suffering what had been described as `` black monday '' . 
word about lionhead began spreading quickly . 
six companies were competing for a space ,  and lionhead won due to molyneux and bullfrog's reputation . 
although rule 611-lrb- c  -rrb-  of the federal rules of evidence  -lrb-  and comparable rules of many states  -rrb-  do not prohibit leading questions on re-direct ,  some states have expressly limited the use of leading questions on re-direct . 
leading questions may often be answerable with a yes or no  -lrb-  though not all yes-no questions are leading  -rrb-  . 
rule 611-lrb- c  -rrb-  of the federal rules of evidence provides that:
in 2017, there were 63,846 crimes registered in lithuania . 
lithuania  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of lithuania  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a country in the baltic region of europe . 
in 1921 lithuania was admitted to the league of nations . 
the region became an autonomous region of lithuania . 
on 17 september 1991, lithuania was admitted to the united nations . 
as of 2014, the number of seats in the european parliament allocated to lithuania was 11.
winter extremes are in coastal areas and in the east of lithuania . 
lithuania lies at the edge of the north european plain . 
lithuania is located in the baltic region of europe and covers an area of  . 
people from all over lithuania flooded to vilnius to defend their legitimately elected supreme council of the republic of lithuania and independence . 
on 11 march 1990, a year before the formal dissolution of the soviet union ,  lithuania became the first baltic state to declare itself independent ,  resulting in the restoration of an independent state of lithuania . 
capital punishment in lithuania was suspended in 1996 and fully eliminated in 1998.
as world war i neared its end ,  lithuania's act of independence was signed on 16 february 1918, declaring the founding of the modern republic of lithuania . 
on 11 march 1990, the supreme council announced the restoration of lithuania's independence . 
a lithuanian national revival ,  inspired by the ancient lithuanian history ,  language and culture ,  laid the foundations of the modern lithuanian nation and independent lithuania . 
forest has long been one of the most important natural resources in lithuania . 
many rivers are also flowing in lithuania ,  most notably the longest nemunas . 
before it could fully recover ,  lithuania was ravaged during the great northern war  -lrb-  1700–1721 -rrb- . 
lithuania's climate ,  which ranges between maritime and continental ,  is relatively mild . 
each municipality in lithuania is governed by a municipal council and a mayor ,  who is a member of the municipal council . 
this initiated the formation of early statehood ,  from which the grand duchy of lithuania developed . 
after the retreat of the german armed forces ,  the soviets reestablished their control of lithuania in july–october 1944.
drūkšiai is the largest ,  tauragnas is the deepest and asveja is the longest lake in lithuania . 
on 25 october 1992, the citizens of lithuania voted in the referendum to adopt the current constitution . 
although the blockade lasted for 74 days ,  lithuania did not renounce the declaration of independence . 
lithuania ,  after breaking away from the soviet union had a difficult crime situation ,  however the lithuanian law enforcement agencies eliminated many criminals over the years ,  making lithuania a reasonably safe country . 
severe storms are rare in the eastern part of lithuania but common in the coastal areas . 
initially inhabited by fragmented baltic tribes ,  in the 1230s the lithuanian lands were united by mindaugas ,  who was crowned as king of lithuania on 6 july 1253.
lithuania is a member of the european union ,  the council of europe ,  eurozone ,  schengen agreement ,  nato and oecd . 
lithuania experienced a drought in 2002, causing forest and peat bog fires . 
the relativist fallacy ,  also known as the subjectivist fallacy ,  is claiming that something is true for one person but not true for someone else . 
determining whether someone has committed a relativist fallacy—by any interpretation—requires distinguishing between things that are true `` for '' a particular person ,  and things that are true `` about '' that person . 
if joe answers jim ,  saying `` that may be true for you ,  but it is not true for me , ``  he has given an answer that is fallacious as well as somewhat meaningless in the context of jim's original statement . 
a false dilemma is a type of informal fallacy in which something is falsely claimed to be an `` either/or '' situation ,  when in fact there is at least one additional option . 
for example ,  what is described as the `` tina factor '' in elections is often in reality a false dilemma ,  as there are about 3 to 25 electoral candidates for most electoral seats . 
a loaded question or complex question fallacy is a question that contains a controversial or unjustified assumption  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  a presumption of guilt  -rrb-  . 
a common way out of this argument is not to answer the question  -lrb-  e . g . 
in a broader sense he asserted that all fallacies are a form of `` ignoratio elenchi '' . 
 ''ignoratio elenchi '' is one of the fallacies identified by aristotle in his `` organon '' . 
if this is not accounted for ,  results can be erroneously attributed to the phenomenon under study rather than to the method of sampling . 
in this sense ,  errors occurring in the process of gathering the sample or cohort cause sampling bias ,  while errors in any process thereafter cause selection bias . 
 ''</poem>
the essayist spengler compared distinguishing between `` mature '' democracies ,  which never start wars ,  and `` emerging democracies '' ,  which may start them ,  with the `` no true scotsman '' fallacy . 
