much of the lr parser's efficiency is from being deterministic . 
as with other shift-reduce parsers ,  an lr parser works by doing some combination of shift steps and reduce steps . 
an lr parser scans and parses the input text in one forward pass over the text . 
lr parsers use a context-free grammar that deals just with local patterns of symbols . 
lr parsers are constructed from a grammar that formally defines the syntax of the input language as a set of patterns . 
when state 0 sees the lookahead `` id '' ,  it knows to shift that `` id '' onto the stack ,  and scan the next input symbol * ,  and advance to state 9.
at step 4, the total input stream `` a*2 + 1 '' is currently divided into  the states corresponding to the stacked phrases are 0, 4, and 5.
lr parsers differ from other shift-reduce parsers in how they decide when to reduce ,  and how to pick between rules with similar endings . 
alberti died in rome on april 25, 1472 at the age of 68.
alberti was gifted in many ways . 
leon battista alberti was born in 1404 in genoa . 
alberti did not concern himself with the practicalities of building ,  and very few of his major works were brought to completion . 
the basilica of sant'andrea ,  mantua was begun in 1471, the year before alberti's death . 
alberti was employed to design two churches in mantua ,  san sebastiano ,  which was never completed ,  and for which alberti's intention can only be speculated ,  and the basilica of sant'andrea . 
the design for the latter church was completed in 1471, a year before alberti's death ,  but was brought to completion and is his most significant work . 
alberti is considered to have been the consultant for the design of the piazza pio ii ,  pienza . 
alberti planned to dedicate his treatise on architecture to his friend . 
alberti regarded mathematics as the common ground of art and the sciences . 
as an artist ,  alberti distinguished himself from the ordinary craftsman ,  educated in workshops . 
the doodle also ends in the same way as the comic strips ,  with nemo falling from his bed . 
collector peter maresca self-published a volume of `` nemo '' sundays as `` little nemo in slumberland: so many splendid sundays ! ``  . 
little nemo is a fictional character created by american cartoonist winsor mccay . 
due to the lack of the 1920s nemo's success ,  the `` herald tribune '' signed over all copyrights to the strip to mccay for one dollar . 
mccay annotated the `` nemo '' pages for the printers with the precise color schemes he wanted . 
instead of flip or the princess ,  nemo meets zorro ,  alice and jules verne's nautilus  -lrb-  which was led by captain nemo  -rrb-  . 
an arcade game called simply `` nemo '' was also released in 1990.
 ''little nemo in slumberland '' debuted on the last page of the sunday comics section of `` the new york herald '' on october 15, 1905.
in 1937, mccay's son robert attempted to carry on his father's legacy by reviving `` little nemo '' . 
a weekly fantasy adventure ,  `` little nemo in slumberland '' featured the young nemo  -lrb-  `` no one '' in latin  -rrb-  who dreamed himself into wondrous predicaments from which he awoke in bed in the last panel . 
on july 12, 1908, mccay made a major change of direction: flip visits nemo and tells him that he has had his uncle destroy slumberland . 
 ''little nemo in slumberland '' is also the inspiration for the video of the 1989 song `` runnin' down a dream '' by tom petty . 
in several cities ,  mccay brought his son ,  who sat on a small throne dressed as nemo as publicity . 
in 2001, dark horse comics released a little nemo statue and tin lunchbox . 
although the strip began october 15, 1905 with morpheus ,  ruler of slumberland ,  making his first attempt to bring little nemo to his realm ,  nemo did not get into slumberland until march 4, 1906 and ,  due to flip's interfering ,  did not get to see the princess until july 8.
little nemo itself is influenced by children stories in general ,  and some french comic pages in particular . 
the comic strip `` cul de sac '' includes a strip-within-the-strip ,  `` little neuro '' ,  a parody of little nemo . 
the kingdom of lydia existed from about 1200 bc to 546 bc . 
land's end to the northernmost point of england is a distance of by road . 
the liber memorialis is an ancient book in latin featuring an extremely concise summary—a kind of index—of universal history from earliest times to the reign of trajan . 
the book's object and scope are indicated in its dedication: the `` liber memorialis '' seems to have been intended as a textbook to be learned by heart . 
p .  296 -rrb- . 
p .  300 -rrb- . 
lancelot andrewes  -lrb-  155525 september 1626 -rrb- was an english bishop and scholar ,  who held high positions in the church of england during the reigns of elizabeth i and james i . 
these sermons were used to promulgate the doctrine of the divine right of kings . 
he has an academic cap named after him ,  known as the bishop andrewes cap ,  which is like a mortarboard but made of velvet ,  floppy and has a tump or tuff instead of a tassel . 
two generations later ,  richard crashaw caught up the universal sentiment ,  when in his lines `` upon bishop andrewes' picture before his sermons '' he exclaims:
in a great sermon  -lrb-  during easter week  -rrb-  on 10 april 1588, he stoutly vindicated the reformed character of the church of england against the claims of roman catholicism and adduced john calvin as a new writer ,  with lavish praise and affection . 
in the church of england he is commemorated on 25 september with a lesser festival . 
tarquin's first war was waged against the latins . 
at the successful conclusion of each of his wars ,  rome was enriched by tarquin's plunder . 
tarquin returned to rome and celebrated a triumph on september 13, 585 bc . 
lucius tarquinius priscus ,  or tarquin the elder ,  was the legendary fifth king of rome from 616 to 579 bc . 
according to livy ,  tarquin came from etruria . 
tarquin is said to have reigned for thirty-eight years . 
after this failure ,  tarquin turned to lars porsena ,  the king of clusium . 
tarquin was said to be the son or grandson of lucius tarquinius priscus ,  the fifth king of rome ,  and tanaquil . 
in time ,  tarquin felt ready to seize the throne . 
early in his reign ,  tarquin called a meeting of the latin leaders to discuss the bonds between rome and the latin towns . 
tarquin agreed upon a peace with the aequi ,  and renewed the treaty of peace between rome and the etruscans . 
the elder sister ,  tullia major ,  was of mild disposition ,  yet married the ambitious tarquin . 
when word of the uprising reached the king ,  tarquin abandoned ardea ,  and sought support from his allies in etruria . 
this may recollect an otherwise forgotten attempt by the sons of tarquin the elder to reclaim the throne . 
at last tarquin accepted ,  in this way obtaining the sibylline books . 
after the latin defeat and the death of his son-in-law ,  tarquin went to the court of aristodemus at cumae ,  where he died in 495.
he is commonly known as tarquin the proud ,  from his cognomen `` superbus ''  -lrb-  latin for `` proud ,  arrogant ,  lofty ''  -rrb-  . 
libertarian socialism  -lrb-  or socialist libertarianism  -rrb-  is a group of anti-authoritarian political philosophies inside the socialist movement that rejects the conception of socialism as centralized state ownership and control of the economy . 
as such ,  libertarian socialism seeks to distinguish itself from both leninism/bolshevism and social democracy . 
the association of socialism with libertarianism predates that of capitalism and many anti-authoritarians still decry what they see as a mistaken association of capitalism with libertarianism in the united states . 
in the context of the european socialist movement ,  `` libertarian '' has conventionally been used to describe those who opposed state socialism ,  such as mikhail bakunin . 
livy’s most famous work was his history of rome . 
in another manuscript the birth is in 180.4, or 57 bc . 
livy was likely born between 64 and 59 b . c . 
livy’s teenage years were during the 40s bc ,  when a period of numerous civil wars throughout the roman world occurred . 
livy's only surviving work is the `` history of rome ''  -lrb-  `` ab urbe condita ''  -rrb-  ,  which was his career from his mid-life ,  probably 32, until he left rome for padua in old age ,  probably in the reign of tiberius after the death of augustus . 
titus livius probably went to rome in the 30s bc ,  and it is likely that he spent a large amount of time in the city after this ,  although it may not have been his primary home . 
livy's `` history of rome '' was in high demand from the time it was published and remained so during the early years of the empire . 
modern historians have developed their own views of livy and his place in the ancient world ,  which were not current in ancient times . 
the celebrations go on for three days with a parade on labour day monday . 
labour day is a public holiday in many countries . 
labour day  -lrb-  labor day in the united states  -rrb-  is an annual holiday to celebrate the achievements of workers . 
for most countries ,  labour day is synonymous with ,  or linked with ,  international workers' day ,  which occurs on 1 may . 
for most countries ,  `` labour day '' is synonymous with ,  or linked with ,  international workers' day ,  which occurs on 1 may . 
since then ,  labour day has been not only a public holiday but also a day of mass community involvement around the country . 
in trinidad and tobago ,  labour day is celebrated every 19 june . 
while labour day parades and picnics are organised by unions ,  many canadians regard labour day as the monday of the last long weekend of summer . 
the australian cricket team toured england in 1930.
bodyline ,  also known as fast leg theory bowling ,  was a cricketing tactic devised by the english cricket team for their 1932–33 ashes tour of australia ,  specifically to combat the extraordinary batting skill of australia's don bradman . 
the australian press were shocked and criticised the hostility of larwood in particular . 
in the 19th century ,  most cricketers considered it unsportsmanlike to bowl the ball at the leg stump or for batsmen to hit on the leg side . 
as a direct consequence of the 1932–33 tour ,  the mcc introduced a new rule to the laws of cricket for the 1935 english cricket season . 
the england team which toured australia in 1932–33 contained four fast bowlers and a few medium pacers; such a heavy concentration on pace was unusual at the time ,  and drew comment from the australian press and players ,  including bradman . 
in a match between the australians and nottinghamshire ,  voce ,  one of the bodyline practitioners of 1932–33, employed the strategy with the wicket-keeper standing to the leg side and took 8/66.
at the end of the fourth day's play of the third test match ,  the australian board of control sent a cable to the marylebone cricket club  -lrb-  mcc  -rrb-  ,  cricket's ruling body and the club that selected the england team ,  in london:
jardine's first experience against australia came when he scored an unbeaten 96 to secure a draw against the 1921 australian touring side for oxford university . 
bodyline is a tactic devised for and primarily used in the ashes series between england and australia in 1932–33.
yet the english tactics still did not earn universal disapproval; former australian captain monty noble praised the english bowling . 
freddie calthorpe ,  the england captain ,  criticised learie constantine's use of short-pitched bowling to a leg side field in a test match in 1930; one such ball struck andy sandham ,  but constantine only reverted to more conventional tactics after a complaint from the england team . 
bradman missed the first test at sydney ,  worn out by constant cricket and the ongoing argument with the board of control . 
other teams soon followed . 
the english players and management were consistent in referring to their tactic as `` fast leg theory '' considering it to be a variant of the established and unobjectionable leg theory tactic . 
in 1984, australia's network ten produced a television mini-series titled `` bodyline '' ,  dramatising the events of the 1932–33 english tour of australia . 
in the years immediately before the first world war ,  several bowlers used leg theory in county cricket . 
even so ,  correspondence between the australian board and the mcc continued for almost a year . 
erdrich lives in minneapolis . 
erdrich attended dartmouth college from 1972 to 1976.
erdrich remained in contact with dorris . 
erdrich was born on june 7, 1954, in little falls ,  minnesota . 
in addition to fiction and poetry ,  erdrich has published non-fiction . 
louise erdrich  -lrb-  born karen louise erdrich ,  june 7, 1954 -rrb- is an american author ,  writer of novels ,  poetry ,  and children's books featuring native american characters and settings . 
 ''the antelope wife ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- ,  erdrich's first novel after her divorce from dorris ,  was the first of her novels to be set outside the continuity of the previous books . 
formal latin literature began in 240 bc ,  when a roman audience saw a latin version of a greek play . 
several of the leading english poets wrote in latin as well as english . 
the birth of lyric poetry in latin occurred during the same period . 
cicero has traditionally been considered the master of latin prose . 
latin literature includes the essays ,  histories ,  poems ,  plays ,  and other writings written in the latin language . 
considerably more is known about early latin comedy ,  as 26 early latin comedies are extant – 20 of which plautus wrote ,  and the remaining six of which terence wrote . 
latin authors became masters of this art of variety . 
latin moves with impressive dignity in the writings of ovid ,  cicero ,  or virgil . 
latin lacks the rich poetic vocabulary that marks the greek poetry . 
much latin writing reflects the romans' interest in rhetoric ,  the art of speaking and persuading . 
but only his writings on agriculture and the latin language are extant in their complete form . 
bloomfield was born in chicago ,  illinois ,  on april 1, 1887, to jewish parents  -lrb-  sigmund bloomfield and carola buber bloomfield  -rrb-  . 
bloomfield's work on algonquian languages had both descriptive and comparative components . 
while at the university of illinois bloomfield undertook research on tagalog ,  an austronesian language spoken in the philippines . 
bloomfield was one of the founding members of the linguistic society of america . 
bloomfield attended harvard college from 1903 to 1906, graduating with the a . b . 
in a letter to algonquianist truman michelson ,  bloomfield noted `` my models are pāṇini and the kind of work done in indo-european by my teacher ,  professor wackernagel of basle . `` 
bloomfield's earliest work was in historical germanic studies ,  beginning with his dissertation ,  and continuing with a number of papers on indo-european and germanic phonology and morphology . 
crusting is a process that thins and lubricates leather . 
a further subprocess ,  finishing ,  can be added into the leather process sequence ,  but not all leathers receive finishing . 
leather can be oiled to improve its water resistance . 
the earliest record of leather artifacts dates back to 2200 bc . 
the long parliament was an english parliament which lasted from 1640 until 1660.
it was followed by barebone's parliament and then the first ,  second and third protectorate parliament . 
having called for elections for a new parliament to meet on 25 april ,  the long parliament was dissolved on 16 march 1660.
the parliament sat from 1640 until 1648, when it was purged by the new model army . 
nevertheless ,  parliament was closed once again by military force until such time that the army and leaders of parliament could effect a resolution . 
therefore ,  the restoration of king charles ii could not be an act of the long parliament acting freely under its own authority ,  but only under the influence of the sword by colonel monck ,  who traded his loyalties for the present long parliament ,  in preference to a reformed long parliament and to the restoration of king charles ii . 
in 1645 parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish . 
general edmond ludlow ,  still loyal to the rump parliament was also excepted . 
the parliament was initially influenced by john pym  -lrb-  1584–1643 -rrb- and his supporters . 
colonel monck ,  though a hero to the restoration of king charles ii ,  was also treacherously disloyal to the long parliament ,  to his oath to the present parliament ,  and to the good old cause . 
some of the rump parliament were opposed and refused to sit with the secluded members . 
parliament was by this time deeply suspicious of the army ,  and vice versa . 
though named by parliament for treason ,  miles corbet and edmond ludlow were for a while were permitted to continue to sit with parliament ,  and for a time the charges against these men were dropped . 
as they advanced ,  cromwell exclaimed ,  looking over the house ,  `` you are no parliament; i say you are no parliament; begone ,  and give place to honester men '' . 
the trial given to vane as to his own person ,  and defence of his own part played for the long parliament was a foregone conclusion . 
the long parliament began with the execution of lord stafford ,  and effectively ended with the execution of henry vane the younger . 
he set up his court at oxford ,  where the royalist mps formed the oxford parliament . 
charles declared parliament in rebellion and began raising an army . 
with the king having been implicated ,  the long parliament passed the triennial act ,  also known as the dissolution act ,  in may 1641, to which the royal assent was readily granted . 
however ,  the navy declared for parliament ,  and on 26 december 1659 the rump was restored to power . 
while charles negotiated with parliament ,  the house of commons investigated his policies . 
lubicants have been in some use for thousands of years . 
the property of reducing friction is known as lubricity . 
it was not required ,  and meitner's nephew's wife later wore it . 
in 1930, meitner taught a seminar on nuclear physics and chemistry with leó szilárd . 
on the occasion of a lecture by hahn in niels bohr's institute he ,  bohr ,  meitner and frisch met in copenhagen on 10 november 1938.
that year ,  meitner was given her own physics section at the kaiser wilhelm institute for chemistry . 
meitner received many awards and honors late in her life ,  but she and otto frisch ,  did not share in the 1944 nobel prize in chemistry for nuclear fission that was awarded exclusively to her long-time collaborator otto hahn . 
in 1926, meitner became the first woman in germany to assume a post of full professor in physics ,  at the university of berlin . 
after one year of attending planck's lectures ,  meitner became planck's assistant . 
llamas appear to have originated from the central plains of north america about 40 million years ago . 
as of 2007, there were over seven million llamas and alpacas in south america ,  and due to importation from south america in the late 20th century ,  there are now over 158,000 llamas and 100,000 alpacas in the united states and canada . 
lamoids ,  or llamas  -lrb-  as they are more generally known as a group  -rrb-  ,  consist of the vicuña  -lrb-  `` vicugna vicugna '' ,  prev . 
they are very social animals and live with other llamas as a herd . 
the word `` lexicon '' derives from the greek  -lrb-  `` lexicon ''  -rrb-  ,  neuter of  -lrb-  `` lexikos ''  -rrb-  meaning `` of or for words . `` 
items in the lexicon are called lexemes ,  or lexical items ,  or word forms . 
leonardo worked in milan from 1482 until 1499.
in 1506, leonardo returned to milan . 
leonardo is renowned primarily as a painter . 
why they were not published during leonardo's lifetime is unknown . 
leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity . 
during his lifetime ,  leonardo was valued as an engineer . 
little is known about leonardo's early life . 
leonardo was also later to visit venice . 
by the 1490s leonardo had already been described as a `` divine '' painter . 
leonardo's early life has been the subject of historical conjecture . 
leonardo died at clos lucé ,  on 2 may 1519 at the age of 67.
while it was through the action of lorenzo that leonardo received his employment at the court of milan ,  it is not known exactly what leonardo meant by this cryptic comment . 
by the 19th century ,  the scope of leonardo's notebooks was known ,  as well as his paintings . 
beyond friendship ,  leonardo kept his private life secret . 
the inclusion of the title `` ser '' indicated that leonardo's father was a gentleman . 
neither commission was completed ,  the second being interrupted when leonardo went to milan . 
leonardo was sent as an ambassador by the medici court to ludovico il moro ,  who ruled milan between 1479 and 1499.
the first document about the room and leonardo's work dates back to 1498: on 21 april ,  the secretary confirms to the duke that `` magistro leonardo '' will complete the decoration by september . 
leonardo received an informal education in latin ,  geometry and mathematics . 
leonardo first gained notoriety for his work on the `` baptism of christ '' ,  painted in conjunction with verrocchio . 
although previously attributed to ghirlandaio ,  the larger work is now generally attributed to leonardo . 
leonardo da vinci was buried in the chapel of saint-hubert in château d'amboise in france . 
leonardo was a contemporary of botticelli ,  domenico ghirlandaio and perugino ,  who were all slightly older than he was . 
this compositional theme was to emerge in leonardo's later paintings such as `` the virgin and child with st .  anne '' . 
florence at the time of leonardo's youth was the centre of christian humanist thought and culture . 
in all ,  leonardo had twelve half-siblings ,  who were much younger than he was  -lrb-  the last was born when leonardo was forty years old  -rrb-  and with whom he had very few contacts ,  but they caused him difficulty after his father's death in the dispute over the inheritance . 
five centuries have passed ,  yet we still view leonardo with awe . `` 
a wax model survives and ,  if genuine ,  is the only extant example of leonardo's sculpture . 
leonardo had many friends who are now renowned either in their fields or for their historical significance . 
it is thought that leonardo never made a painting from it ,  the closest similarity being to `` the virgin and child with st .  anne '' in the louvre . 
lacrosse was played in the world games for the first time at the 2017 world games held in poland . 
team usa has won 9 of the 12 titles ,  with canada winning the other three . 
lacrosse is played on all six continents ,  but the most recent world championships have involved 38 men's teams and 25 women's teams . 
the team that has taken the penalty is said to be playing man down ,  while the other team is man up . 
long island won the first two championships . 
the field of play is 110 by 60 yards  -lrb-  100 by 55 meters  -rrb-  . 
lacrosse is a team sport played with a lacrosse stick and a lacrosse ball ,  commonly played indoors or outdoors . 
there are currently 112 division i women's lacrosse teams ,  109 division ii teams ,  and 282 division iii teams . 
in canada ,  14 teams from ontario and quebec play field lacrosse in the fall in the canadian university field lacrosse association . 
the fil sponsors five world championship tournaments: the world lacrosse championship for men's field ,  the women's lacrosse world cup for women's ,  the world indoor lacrosse championship for box lacrosse ,  and the under-19 world lacrosse championships for men and women . 
the current nll name began in the 1998 season ,  which included the first canadian team . 
field lacrosse was a medal sport in the 1904 and the 1908 summer olympics . 
the sport has four versions that have different sticks ,  fields ,  rules and equipment: field lacrosse ,  women's lacrosse ,  box lacrosse and intercrosse . 
in the traditional aboriginal canadian version ,  each team consisted of about 100 to 1,000 men on a field that stretched from about to long . 
teams are organized into two divisions and various leagues . 
field lacrosse is the men's outdoor version of the sport . 
if the ball goes out of bounds ,  possession is awarded against the team that touched it last . 
players use the head of the lacrosse stick to carry ,  pass ,  catch ,  and shoot the ball into the goal . 
canada has dominated the competition ,  winning all four gold medals and never losing a game . 
for penalties ,  the offending player is sent to the penalty box and his team has to play without him ,  or man-down ,  for the length of the penalty . 
the first world indoor lacrosse championship  -lrb-  wilc  -rrb-  was held in 2003 and contested by six nations at four sites in ontario . 
the city of liverpool is governed by the directly elected mayor of liverpool and liverpool city council ,  and is one of six metropolitan boroughs that combine to make up the liverpool city region . 
the city of liverpool effectively has two mayors . 
liverpool has four parliamentary constituencies entirely within the city ,  through which members of parliament  -lrb-  mps  -rrb-  are elected to represent the city in westminster: liverpool riverside ,  liverpool walton ,  liverpool wavertree and liverpool west derby . 
the city of liverpool is one of the six constituent local government districts of the liverpool city region . 
liverpool was the site of britain's first provincial airport ,  operating from 1930.
liverpool has been a centre of industrial and later innovation . 
renamed 'liverpool one , ' the centre opened in may 2008.
between 1862 and 1867, liverpool held an annual `` grand olympic festival '' . 
liverpool was the only british city ever to have its own whitehall office . 
the mersey estuary separates liverpool from the wirral peninsula . 
liverpool has been described as having `` the most splendid setting of any english city . `` 
in finance ,  liverpool founded the uk's first underwriters' association and the first institute of accountants . 
in the later 20th century ,  liverpool's economy began to recover . 
liverpool airport was renamed for him in 2002, the first british airport to be named in honour of an individual . 
the pivotal battle of the atlantic was planned ,  fought and won from liverpool . 
from 1950 to 1951, the world's first scheduled passenger helicopter service ran between liverpool and cardiff . 
the local authority is liverpool city council ,  the most populous local government district in the metropolitan county of merseyside and the largest in the liverpool city region . 
in 1897, the lumière brothers filmed liverpool ,  including what is believed to be the world's first tracking shot ,  taken from the liverpool overhead railway ,  the world's first elevated electrified railway . 
liverpool  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city in north west england ,  with an estimated population of 491,500 in 2017.
liverpool has several tiers of government; the mayor and local council ,  who are also stakeholders in the liverpool city region combined authority ,  the national government and the european parliament . 
the word `` scouse '' has also become synonymous with the liverpool accent and dialect . 
king john's letters patent of 1207 announced the foundation of the borough of liverpool . 
some jumps over have been officially recorded . 
there has been some argument by modern scholars over the long jump . 
this phase is one of the most technical parts of the long jump . 
the long jump is the only known jumping event of ancient greece's original olympics' pentathlon events . 
long jumpers tend to practice jumping 1–2 times a week . 
this causes the jumper to jump to large distances . 
the long jump generally requires training in a variety of areas . 
bounding is any sort of continuous jumping or leaping . 
the emphasis on these lifts should be on speed and explosive as those are crucial in the long jump take off phase . 
however ,  it was not until 1948 that the women's long jump was added to the olympic athletics programme . 
a classic example of this long jump / sprint doubling are performances by carl lewis . 
the long jump has been part of modern olympic competition since the inception of the games in 1896.
the women's world record has seen more consistent improvement ,  though the current record has stood longer than any long jump record by men or women . 
there are five main components of the long jump: the approach run ,  the last two strides ,  takeoff ,  action in the air ,  and landing . 
this is yet exceeded by iia diamond's <111> tip hardness of 162 gpa . 
lonsdaleite is simulated to be 58% harder than diamond on the <100> face and to resist indentation pressures of 152 gpa ,  whereas diamond would break at 97 gpa . 
lonsdaleite was first identified in 1967 from the canyon diablo meteorite ,  where it occurs as microscopic crystals associated with diamond . 
the labrador duck is considered a sea duck . 
the labrador duck belongs to a monotypic genus . 
the labrador duck has been considered the most enigmatic of all north american birds . 
the labrador duck may have survived by eating snails . 
the breeding biology of the labrador duck is largely unknown . 
lettres de cachet  -lrb-   ,  lit . 
the comte de mirabeau wrote a scathing indictment of `` lettres de cachet '' while imprisoned in the dungeon of vincennes  -lrb-  by `` lettre de cachet '' obtained by his father  -rrb-  . 
the `` lettres de cachet '' ,  on the contrary ,  were signed simply by a secretary of state for the king; they bore merely the imprint of the king's privy seal ,  from which circumstance they were often called ,  in the 14th and 15th centuries ,  `` lettres de petit signet '' or `` lettres de petit cachet '' ,  and were entirely exempt from the control of the chancellor . 
in the 14th century the principle was introduced that the order should be written ,  and hence arose the `` lettre de cachet '' . 
the provincial estates were convoked  -lrb-  called to assembly  -rrb-  in this manner ,  and it was by a `` lettre de cachet ''  -lrb-  in this case ,  a `` lettre de jussipri ''  -rrb-  ,  or by showing in person in a `` lit de justice '' ,  that the king ordered a `` parlement '' to register a law despite that parlement's refusal to pass it . 
the treatise was published after his liberation in 1782 under the title `` les lettres de cachet et des prisons d'etat '' and was widely read throughout europe . 
protests against the `` lettres de cachet '' were made continually by the `` parlement '' of paris and by the provincial `` parlements '' ,  and also by the estates-general . 
at the 1994 world championships in brisbane ,  australia ,  she placed sixth in the all-around with a score of 38.942.
in november 1994, at the world team championships in dortmund ,  germany ,  she contributed an all-around score of 38.099 toward the ukrainian team's fifth-place finish . 
in event finals ,  she placed third on balance beam  -lrb-  9.756 -rrb- ,  first on uneven bars  -lrb-  9.825 -rrb- ,  and first on floor  -lrb-  9.862 -rrb- . 
on 6 august 711, lisbon was taken by muslim forces . 
lisbon was the site of three revolutions in the 20th century . 
lisbon is also home to the lisbon architecture triennial ,  the moda lisboa  -lrb-  fashion lisbon  -rrb-  ,  experimentadesign – biennial of design and luzboa – biennial of light . 
the maximum temperature recorded in lisbon was on 1 august 2003.
the lisbon metropolitan area had a gdp amounting to $96.3 billion ,  and $32,434 per capita . 
the lisbon agenda was a european union agreement on measures to revitalise the eu economy ,  signed in lisbon in march 2000.
a traditional form of public transport in lisbon is the tram . 
lisbon has been the site for many international events and programmes . 
for a brief time ,  lisbon was an independent muslim kingdom known as the taifa of lisbon ,  before being conquered by the larger taifa of badajoz in 1094.
internationally ,  lisbon's name is abbreviated to 'lx' or to 'lis' ,  which is also the iata airport code of the lisbon humberto delgado airport . 
the city of lisbon is rich in architecture; romanesque ,  gothic ,  manueline ,  baroque ,  modern and postmodern constructions can be found all over lisbon . 
the lisbon metro connects the city centre with the upper and eastern districts and also reaches some suburbs that are part of the lisbon metropolitan area ,  such as amadora and loures . 
a description of lisbon in the 16th century was written by damião de góis and published in 1554.
lisbon was the 18th most `` livable city '' in the world in 2015 according to lifestyle magazine `` monocle . `` 
parque das nações  -lrb-  park of nations  -rrb-  is the newest district in lisbon ,  having emerged from an urban renewal programme leading to the world exhibition of lisbon 1998, also known as expo'98.
the construction volumes in lisbon are growing at the highest rate in the country . 
more than 100,000 refugees were able to flee nazi germany via lisbon . 
lisbon is home every year to the lisbon gay & lesbian film festival ,  the lisboarte ,  the doclisboa – lisbon international documentary film festival ,  the festival internacional de máscaras e comediantes ,  the lisboa mágica – street magic world festival ,  the monstra – animated film festival ,  the lisbon book fair ,  the peixe em lisboa – lisbon fish and flavours ,  and many others . 
the muslim influence is still visible present in the alfama district ,  an old quarter of lisbon that survived the 1755 lisbon earthquake: many place-names are derived from arabic and the alfama  -lrb-  the oldest existing district of lisbon  -rrb-  was derived from the arabic ``  ''al-hamma '' . 
lisbon has 552,700 inhabitants within the administrative center on the area of only 100.05 km administratively defined cities that exist in the vicinity of the capital are in fact part of the metropolitan perimeter of lisbon . 
13 june is lisbon´s holiday in honour of the city's saint ,  anthony of lisbon  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
with its central location ,  lisbon became the capital city of the new portuguese territory in 1255.
the area is pedestrian-friendly with new buildings ,  restaurants ,  gardens ,  the casino lisbon ,  the fil building  -lrb-  international exhibition and fair  -rrb-  ,  the camões theatre ,  as well as the `` oceanário de lisboa ''  -lrb-  lisbon oceanarium  -rrb-  ,  the second largest in the world . 
the resulting treaty of lisbon was signed on 13 december 2007 and came into force on 1 december 2009.
lisbon has two sites listed by unesco as a world heritage site: belém tower and jerónimos monastery . 
the oldest district of lisbon ,  it spreads down the southern slope from the castle of são jorge to the river tagus . 
the lisbon metropolitan area is heavily industrialized ,  especially the south bank of the tagus river  -lrb-  rio tejo  -rrb-  . 
the lisbon metropolitan area incorporates two nuts iii  -lrb-  european statistical subdivisions  -rrb- : `` grande lisboa ''  -lrb-  greater lisbon  -rrb-  ,  along the northern bank of the tagus river ,  and `` península de setúbal ''  -lrb-  setúbal peninsula  -rrb-  ,  along the southern bank . 
in coastal areas ,  such as peniche ,  situated about north of lisbon ,  many people were killed by the following tsunami . 
lisbon  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  is the capital and the largest city of portugal ,  with an estimated population of 505,526 within its administrative limits in an area of 100.05 km . 
lisbon is located at  ,  situated at the mouth of the tagus river and is the westernmost capital of a mainland european country . 
the local group is the galaxy group that includes the milky way . 
he also identified ic 10 as a possible part of local group . 
a cubic metre ,  which is the si unit for volume  -rrb-  is exactly 1000 l . 
one litre of liquid water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram ,  because the kilogram was originally defined in 1795 as the mass of one cubic decimetre of water at the temperature of melting ice . 
a litre of liquid water has a mass almost exactly equal to one kilogram . 
at standard pressure ,  one litre of water has a mass of 0.999975 kg at  ,  and 0.997 kg at  . 
one litre of water has a mass of almost exactly one kilogram when measured at its maximal density ,  which occurs at about 4 °c . 
the litre was introduced in france in 1795 as one of the new `` republican units of measurement '' and defined as one cubic decimetre . 
the litre  -lrb-  international spelling  -rrb-  or liter  -lrb-  american spelling  -rrb-   -lrb-  symbols l or l  -rrb-  is an si accepted metric system unit of volume equal to 1 cubic decimetre  -lrb-  dm  -rrb-  ,  1,000 cubic centimetres  -lrb-  cm  -rrb-  or 1/1,000 cubic metre . 
one litre is slightly more than one us liquid quart and slightly less than one imperial quart or one us dry quart . 
the litre ,  though not an official si unit ,  may be used with si prefixes . 
from 1901 to 1964, the litre was defined as the volume of one kilogram of pure water at maximum density and standard pressure . 
in 1879, the cipm adopted the definition of the litre ,  with the symbol l  -lrb-  lowercase letter l  -rrb-  . 
following several ambiguous correspondences between kornilov and alexander kerensky ,  kornilov commanded an assault on the petrograd soviet . 
following the end of the war ,  kornilov served as military attache in china from 1907 to 1911.
kornilov's siberian cossack father was a friend of potanin  -lrb-  1835-1920 -rrb- ,  a prominent figure in the siberian autonomy movement . 
one story relates how kornilov was originally born as a don cossack kalmyk named lorya dildinov and adopted in ust-kamenogorsk ,  russian turkestan  -lrb-  now kazakhstan  -rrb-  by the family of his mother's brother ,  the russian cossack khorunzhiy george kornilov ,  whose wife was of kazakh origin . 
lavr georgiyevich kornilov  -lrb-   ,  ; 18 august 1870 – 13 april 1918 -rrb- was a russian military intelligence officer ,  explorer ,  and general of siberian cossack origin in the imperial russian army during world war i and the ensuing russian civil war . 
kornilov returned to st .  petersburg to attend the mykolayiv general staff academy and graduated as a captain in 1897.
the kornilov affair resulted in significantly increased distrust among russians towards the provisional government . 
there are zamenhof hills in hungary and brazil ,  and a zamenhof island in the danube . 
the minor planet 1462 zamenhof is named in his honor . 
in 1905 zamenhof received the légion d'honneur for creating esperanto . 
in 1959, unesco honoured zamenhof in the occasion of his centenary . 
zamenhof first developed the language in 1873 while still in school . 
zamenhof came from and lived a very-much multilingual life . 
at his birth zamenhof was given the hebrew name `` eliezer '' by his parents ,  the equivalent of the latinized `` lazarus '' . 
in 2015 unesco decided to support the celebration of the 100th anniversary of the death of ludwik zamenhof . 
a linear map formula_27 with formula_22 viewed as a vector space over itself is called a linear functional . 
let formula_1 and formula_2 be vector spaces over the same field formula_3 a function formula_4 is said to be a `` linear map '' if for any two vectors formula_5 and any scalar formula_6 the following two conditions are satisfied:
denoting the zero elements of the vector spaces formula_1 and formula_2 by formula_12 and formula_13 respectively ,  it follows that formula_14 let formula_15 and formula_16 in the equation for homogeneity of degree 1:
that for any vectors formula_7 and scalars formula_8 the following equality holds:
occasionally ,  formula_1 and formula_2 can be considered to be vector spaces over different fields . 
within months after musschenbroek's report about how to reliably create a leyden jar ,  other electrical researchers were making and experimenting with their own leyden jars . 
a leyden jar  -lrb-  or leiden jar  -rrb-  stores a high-voltage electric charge  -lrb-  from an external source  -rrb-  between electrical conductors on the inside and outside of a glass jar . 
in 1747–1748, benjamin franklin experimented with charging leyden jars in series . 
a typical leyden jar of one pint size has a capacitance of about 1 nf . 
leyden jars are still used in education to demonstrate the principles of electrostatics . 
this functioning apparatus ,  without glass ,  created a problem for benjamin franklin's explanation of the leyden jar ,  which maintained that the charge was located in the glass . 
despite its mundane and safe appearance ,  the leyden jar is a high voltage device ,  and it is estimated that at a maximum the early leyden jars could collect electrical energy from friction in a range from 20,000 to 60,000 volts . 
if a charged leyden jar is discharged by shorting the inner and outer coatings and left to sit for a few minutes ,  the jar will recover some of its previous charge ,  and a second spark can be obtained from it . 
ewald georg von kleist discovered the immense storage capability of the leyden jar while working under a theory that saw electricity as a fluid ,  and hoped a glass jar filled with alcohol would `` capture '' this fluid . 
the lennon wall or john lennon wall is a wall in prague ,  czech republic . 
and the `` wall is over '' bit has been changed to `` war is over” ,  a song . 
dedicated in 1956, it was the first lds temple built in california and it was the largest in the world when completed . 
the los angeles–long beach metropolitan area has a gross metropolitan product of $866 billion  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  making it the third-largest economic metropolitan area in the world ,  after tokyo and new york . 
it is part of the los angeles-long beach combined statistical area ,  also the nation's second most populous area with a 2015 estimated population of 18.7 million . 
los angeles is also home to the nation's largest urban oil field . 
for many years ,  the church convened at angelus temple ,  which ,  when built ,  was one of the largest churches in the country . 
with 621,000 jews in the metropolitan area  -lrb-  490,000 in city proper  -rrb-  ,  the region has the second largest population of jews in the united states . 
the university of southern california  -lrb-  usc  -rrb-  is the city's fourth largest employer and the largest private sector employer . 
washington area north of downtown ,  eastern parts such as boyle heights ,  the crenshaw district around the baldwin hills ,  and the san pedro district . 
the city's hollywood neighborhood has become recognized as the center of the motion picture industry and the los angeles area is also associated as being the center of the television industry . 
los angeles is the largest manufacturing center in the western united states . 
in 1771, franciscan friar junípero serra directed the building of the mission san gabriel arcángel ,  the first mission in the area . 
the hollywood region of los angeles also has several significant headquarters ,  churches ,  and the celebrity center of scientology . 
petroleum was discovered in the city and surrounding area in 1892, and by 1923, the discoveries had helped california become the country's largest oil producer ,  accounting for about one-quarter of the world's petroleum output . 
important churches in the city include first presbyterian church of hollywood ,  bel air presbyterian church ,  first african methodist episcopal church of los angeles ,  west angeles church of god in christ ,  second baptist church ,  crenshaw christian center ,  mccarty memorial christian church ,  and first congregational church . 
in the california state assembly ,  los angeles is split between fourteen districts . 
further afield ,  the highest point in the greater los angeles area is san gorgonio mountain ,  with a height of  . 
during world war ii ,  los angeles was a major center of wartime manufacturing ,  such as shipbuilding and aircraft . 
los angeles also hosted the deaflympics in 1985 and special olympics world summer games in 2015.
the city also hosted the miss universe pageant twice ,  in 1990 and 2006, and was one of 9 american cities to host the 1994 fifa men's soccer world cup and one of 8 to host the 1999 fifa women's soccer world cup ,  hosting the final match for both tournaments . 
in 2002, voters defeated efforts by the san fernando valley and hollywood to secede from the city . 
there are three public universities within the city limits: california state university ,  los angeles  -lrb-  csula  -rrb-  ,  california state university ,  northridge  -lrb-  csun  -rrb-  and university of california ,  los angeles  -lrb-  ucla  -rrb-  . 
atheism and other secular beliefs are also common ,  as the city is the largest in the western u . s .  unchurched belt . 
the city of los angeles and its metropolitan area are the home of eleven top level professional sports teams . 
there are about 90 neighborhood councils . 
african americans have been the predominant ethnic group in south los angeles ,  which has emerged as the largest african american community in the western united states since the 1960s . 
the largest asian ethnic groups are filipinos  -lrb-  3.2%  -rrb-  and koreans  -lrb-  2.9%  -rrb-  ,  which have their own established ethnic enclaves−koreatown in the wilshire center and historic filipinotown . 
by 1930, the population surpassed one million . 
the los angeles california temple ,  the second largest temple operated by the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ,  is on santa monica boulevard in the westwood neighborhood of los angeles . 
the majority of the non-hispanic white population is living in areas along the pacific coast as well as in neighborhoods near and on the santa monica mountains from the pacific palisades to los feliz . 
following the end of world war ii ,  los angeles grew more rapidly than ever ,  sprawling into the san fernando valley . 
it is located below—immediately south—of orion  -lrb-  the hunter  -rrb-  ,  and is sometimes represented as a hare being chased by orion or ,  alternatively ,  by orion's hunting dogs . 
towards the north of the constellation are globular clusters ngc 5824 and ngc 5986, and close by the dark nebula b 228.
alpha lupi is an ageing blue giant star of spectral type b1.5 iii that is 460 ± 10 light-years distant from earth . 
overall ,  there are 127 stars within the constellation's borders brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude 6.5.
however ,  the first name is in error; both stars were part of a large chinese constellation known in modern transliteration as qíguān ,  the imperial guards . 
ngc 6791 is a cluster of stars in lyra . 
vega is one of the most-magnificent of all stars ,  and has been called `` arguably the next most important star in the sky after the sun '' . 
vega was the pole star in the year 12,000 bce ,  and will again become the pole star around 14,000 ce . 
vega ,  lyra's brightest star ,  is one of the brightest stars in the night sky ,  and forms a corner of the famed summer triangle asterism . 
the brightest and by far the most well-known star in the constellation is vega ,  a main-sequence star of spectral type a0va . 
one of the most peculiar systems in lyra is mv lyrae ,  a nova-like star consisting of a red dwarf and a white dwarf . 
in orbit around the orange subgiant star hd 177830 is one of the earliest exoplanets to be detected . 
one of the most-studied exoplanets in the night sky is tres-1b ,  in orbit around the star gsc 02652-01324.
the final star forming the lyre's figure is beta lyrae ,  also a binary composed of a blue bright giant and an early b-type star . 
both components are themselves close binaries which can be seen with telescopes to consist of a- and f-type stars ,  and a faint star was recently found to orbit component c as well ,  for a total of five stars . 
vega and its surrounding stars are also treated as a constellation in other cultures . 
as of 2012, legnica had a population of 102,708 inhabitants . 
legnica has 102,708 inhabitants and is the third largest city in the voivodeship  -lrb-  after wrocław and wałbrzych  -rrb-  and 38th in poland . 
legnica is the largest city of the conurbation and is a member of the association of polish cities . 
liverpool f . c . 
liverpool's income in the 2009–10 season was €225.3m . 
since the establishment of the club in 1892, 45 players have been club captain of liverpool f . c . 
liverpool is one of the best supported clubs in the world . 
liverpool was involved in the closest finish to a league season during the 1988–89 season . 
liverpool reached its first fa cup final in 1914, losing 1–0 to burnley . 
liverpool football club is a professional football club in liverpool ,  england ,  that competes in the premier league ,  the top tier of english football . 
liverpool's longest-established rivalry is with fellow liverpool team everton ,  against whom they contest the merseyside derby . 
the club has won 5 european cups ,  more than any other english club ,  3 uefa cups ,  3 uefa super cups ,  18 league titles ,  7 fa cups ,  a record 8 league cups ,  and 15 fa community shields . 
as the owner of anfield and founder of liverpool ,  john houlding was the club's first chairman ,  a position he held from its founding in 1892 until 1904.
the capacity of the stadium at the time was 20,000, although only 100 spectators attended liverpool's first match at anfield . 
liverpool was the first english professional club to have a sponsor's logo on its shirts ,  after agreeing a deal with hitachi in 1979.
after finishing in first place the club was promoted to the first division ,  which it won in 1901 and again in 1906.
a lysosome  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a membrane-bound organelle found in many animal cells and most plant cells . 
the lysosomes also act as the waste disposal system of the cell by digesting unwanted materials in the cytoplasm ,  both from outside the cell and obsolete components inside the cell . 
leg spin is a type of spin bowling in the sport of cricket . 
one famous example of the leg-spin is the gatting ball or the ball of the century . 
to grip the ball for a leg-spinning delivery ,  the ball is placed into the palm with the seam parallel to the palm . 
the mit-derived lisp machines ran a lisp dialect named lisp machine lisp ,  descended from mit's maclisp . 
the operating systems were written in lisp machine lisp ,  interlisp  -lrb-  xerox  -rrb-  ,  and later partly in common lisp . 
later ,  these lisp machines also supported various versions of common lisp  -lrb-  with flavors ,  new flavors ,  and common lisp object system  -lrb-  clos  -rrb-   -rrb-  . 
xerox also worked on a lisp machine based on reduced instruction set computing  -lrb-  risc  -rrb-  ,  using the 'xerox common lisp processor' and planned to bring it to market by 1987, which did not occur . 
this lisp chip also was used for the microexplorer – a nubus board for the apple macintosh ii  -lrb-  nubus was initially developed at mit for use in lisp machines  -rrb-  . 
lisp machines are general-purpose computers designed to efficiently run lisp as their main software and programming language ,  usually via hardware support . 
in 1979, russell noftsker ,  being convinced that lisp machines had a bright commercial future due to the strength of the lisp language and the enabling factor of hardware acceleration ,  proposed to greenblatt that they commercialize the technology . 
it also runs on haiku . 
it also increases the perceived colour depth over 24 bits per pixel . 
links is an open source text and graphic web browser with a pull-down menu system . 
the graphical mode works even on unix systems without the x window system or any other window environment ,  using either svgalib or the framebuffer of the system's graphics card . 
this allows it to run in graphics mode even on platforms which don't have x server . 
the graphics stack has several peculiarities unusual for a web browser . 
the concept encompassed by 'learning objects' is known by numerous other terms ,  including: content objects ,  chunks ,  educational objects ,  information objects ,  intelligent objects ,  knowledge bits ,  knowledge objects ,  learning components ,  media objects ,  reusable curriculum components ,  nuggets ,  reusable information objects ,  reusable learning objects ,  testable reusable units of cognition ,  training components ,  and units of learning . 
a learning object is `` a collection of content items ,  practice items ,  and assessment items that are combined based on a single learning objective '' . 
one of the key issues in using learning objects is their identification by search engines or content management systems . 
the following is a list of some of the types of information that may be included in a learning object and its metadata:
the most important pieces of metadata typically associated with a learning object include:
louisiana  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a state in the deep south region of the southeastern united states . 
tornadoes are more common from january to march in the southern part of the state ,  and from february through march in the northern part of the state . 
the southern coast of louisiana in the united states is among the fastest-disappearing areas in the world . 
louisiana gets some cold fronts ,  which frequently drop the temperatures below 20 °f  -lrb-  −8 °c  -rrb-  in the northern part of the state ,  but almost never do so in the southern part of the state . 
in northern louisiana ,  the temperatures reach above 105 °f  -lrb-  41 °c  -rrb-  in the summer . 
louisiana is bordered to the west by texas; to the north by arkansas; to the east by mississippi; and to the south by the gulf of mexico . 
the sediments were carried from north to south by the mississippi river . 
salt domes are also found in louisiana . 
the entire state averages over 60 days of thunderstorms a year ,  more than any other state except florida . 
