aqueous hydrogen iodide is known as hydroiodic acid ,  which is a strong acid . 
elemental iodine may also be used to treat iodine deficiency . 
periodic acid may be protonated by sulfuric acid to give the cation ,  isoelectronic to te -lrb-  oh  -rrb-  and  ,  and giving salts with bisulfate and sulfate . 
hypoiodous acid is unstable to disproportionation . 
hydrolysis of the resulting acetyl iodide regenerates hydroiodic acid and gives acetic acid . 
when iodine dissolves in strong acids ,  such as fuming sulfuric acid ,  a bright blue paramagnetic solution including cations is formed . 
iodine is also used as a catalyst in the industrial production of acetic acid and some polymers . 
potassium tetraiodomercurate -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  ,  khgi ,  is also known as nessler's reagent . 
iodine probably attacks surface proteins of enveloped viruses ,  and it may also destabilise membrane fatty acids by reacting with unsaturated carbon bonds . 
the simplest compound of iodine is hydrogen iodide ,  hi . 
elemental iodine is slightly soluble in water ,  with one gram dissolving in 3450 ml at 20 °c and 1280 ml at 50 °c; potassium iodide may be added to increase solubility via formation of triiodide ions ,  among other polyiodides . 
hence hydroiodic acid cannot be concentrated past this point by evaporation of water . 
though it is the least reactive of the halogens ,  iodine is still one of the more reactive elements . 
iodine-131 is also used as a radioactive tracer . 
the iodine may then be liberated by displacement with chlorine . 
nearly all elements in the periodic table form binary iodides . 
iodised salt is fortified with iodine in the form of sodium iodide . 
lower iodides may be produced either through thermal decomposition or disproportionation ,  or by reducing the higher iodide with hydrogen or a metal ,  for example:
iodine trifluoride  -lrb-  if  -rrb-  is an unstable yellow solid that decomposes above −28 °c . 
unlike hydrogen fluoride ,  anhydrous liquid hydrogen iodide is difficult to work with as a solvent ,  because its boiling point is low ,  it has a small liquid range ,  its dielectric constant is low and it does not dissociate appreciably into hi and ions – the latter ,  in any case ,  are much less stable than the bifluoride ions  -lrb-    -rrb-  due to the very weak hydrogen bonding between hydrogen and iodine ,  though its salts with very large and weakly polarising cations such as cs and  -lrb-  r = me ,  et ,  bu  -rrb-  may still be isolated . 
perfluoroalkyl iodides are precursors to important surfactants ,  such as perfluorooctanesulfonic acid . 
iodine is a chemical element with symbol i and atomic number 53.
the carbon–iodine bond is a common functional group that forms part of core organic chemistry; formally ,  these compounds may be thought of as organic derivatives of the iodide anion . 
the reaction is driven toward products by mass action due to the precipitation of the insoluble salt . 
the melting and boiling points of iodine are the highest among the halogens ,  conforming to the increasing trend down the group ,  since iodine has the largest electron cloud among them that is the most easily polarised ,  resulting in its molecules having the strongest van der waals interactions among the halogens . 
on 10 august 2017, ikea opened its first store in serbia and 400th store overall . 
 ,  ikea owns and operates 415 stores in 49 countries . 
ikea began constructing its first store in india on 11 august 2016.
on september 5 2018 ikea opened its first store in the kingdom of bahrain . 
the store is located in salmabad . 
built in 1986, the store's initial area was  ,  while the renovated store now measures  . 
iridium dioxide ,   ,  a blue black solid ,  is the only well-characterized oxide of iridium . 
the discovery of iridium is intertwined with that of platinum and the other metals of the platinum group . 
iridium also reacts directly with sulfur at atmospheric pressure to yield iridium disulfide . 
although no binary hydrides of iridium ,  are known ,  complexes are known that contain and  ,  where iridium has the +1 and +3 oxidation states ,  respectively . 
iridium prices have fluctuated over a considerable range . 
all known isotopes of iridium were discovered between 1934 and 2008, with the most recent discoveries being ir . 
iridium is a chemical element with symbol ir and atomic number 77.
iridium complexes are being investigated as catalysts for asymmetric hydrogenation . 
iridium radioisotopes are used in some radioisotope thermoelectric generators . 
iridium was discovered in 1803 among insoluble impurities in natural platinum . 
a radioisotope of iridium ,   ,  is dangerous ,  like other radioactive isotopes . 
the iridium layer ,  which had to be smooth to within a few atoms ,  was applied by depositing iridium vapor under high vacuum on a base layer of chromium . 
iridium also forms iridates with oxidation states +4 and +5, such as and  ,  which can be prepared from the reaction of potassium oxide or potassium superoxide with iridium at high temperatures . 
iridium is found in meteorites in much higher abundance than in the earth's crust . 
iridium's modulus of elasticity is the second-highest among the metals ,  only being surpassed by osmium . 
the measured density of iridium is only slightly lower  -lrb-  by about 0.12%  -rrb-  than that of osmium ,  the densest metal known . 
they required burning more than 300 liters of pure and gas for each kilogram of iridium . 
although only certain molten salts and halogens are corrosive to solid iridium ,  finely divided iridium dust is much more reactive and can be flammable . 
the vickers hardness of pure platinum is 56 hv ,  whereas platinum with 50% of iridium can reach over 500 hv . 
the letters chosen for the ipa are meant to harmonize with the latin alphabet . 
these are shown in the current ipa chart ,  posted below in this article and at the website of the ipa . 
the international phonetic alphabet  -lrb-  ipa  -rrb-  is an alphabetic system of phonetic notation based primarily on the latin alphabet . 
since its creation ,  the ipa has undergone a number of revisions . 
although the ipa diacritics are fully featural ,  there is little systemicity in the letter forms . 
ipa symbols are composed of one or more elements of two basic types ,  letters and diacritics . 
these are organized into a chart; the chart displayed here is the official chart as posted at the website of the ipa . 
the sound values of modified latin letters can often be derived from those of the original letters . 
endeavour '' . 
dexter was a fan of cryptic crosswords and named morse after champion setter jeremy morse ,  one of dexter's arch-rivals in writing crossword clues . 
detective chief inspector endeavour morse gm is the eponymous fictional character in the series of detective novels by british author colin dexter . 
he was awarded the george medal in the last episode of endeavour series 4.
although details of morse's career are deliberately kept vague ,  it is hinted that he won a scholarship to study at st john's college ,  oxford . 
this illustrates that mann may have been under the thumb of dublin at this time . 
early in the 13th century ,  when ragnald  -lrb-  reigned 1187–1229 -rrb- paid homage to king john of england  -lrb-  reigned 1199–1216 -rrb- ,  we hear for the first time of english intervention in the affairs of mann . 
the isle of man was a base for alien civilian internment camps in both the first world war  -lrb-  1914–18 -rrb- and the second world war  -lrb-  1939–45 -rrb- . 
between about ad 800 and 815 the vikings came to mann chiefly for plunder; between about 850 and 990, when they settled there ,  the island fell under the rule of the scandinavian kings of dublin; and between 990 and 1079, it became subject to the powerful earls of orkney . 
the island lends its name to `` manannán '' ,  the brythonic and gaelic sea god who is said in myth to have once ruled the island . 
the  -lrb-  now disbanded  -rrb-  manx regiment was raised in 1938 and saw action during the second world war . 
the period of scandinavian domination is divided into two main epochs – before and after the conquest of mann by godred crovan in 1079.
with the accession of the stanleys to the throne there begins a more settled epoch in manx history . 
charles stanley ,  who died in 1672, was succeeded first by his son william richard george stanley ,  9th earl of derby until his death in 1702.
but scotland's rule over mann did not become firmly established till 1275, when the manx suffered defeat in the decisive battle of ronaldsway ,  near castletown . 
soon after stanley's death ,  the manx militia ,  under the command of william christian  -lrb-  known by his manx name of illiam dhone  -rrb-  ,  rose against the countess and captured all the insular forts except rushen and peel . 
after becoming subject to norwegian suzerainty as part of the kingdom of mann and the isles ,  the isle of man later became a possession of the scottish and then the english crowns . 
it is likely that the first celts to inhabit the island were brythonic tribes from mainland britain . 
in 1154, what was later to be known as the diocese of sodor and man was formed by the catholic church . 
in the 1130s the catholic church sent a small mission to establish the first bishopric on the isle of man ,  and appointed wimund as the first bishop . 
the isle of man had become separated from britain and ireland by 6500 bc . 
there was a mint producing coins on mann between c .  1025 and c .  1065.
the isle of man is an island in the irish sea ,  between great britain and ireland in western europe ,  with a population of almost 85,000.
the manx legislature is tynwald ,  which consists of two chambers . 
although the isle of man is not part of the united kingdom ,  its people are british citizens under uk law — there is no separate manx citizenship . 
the island also formerly had a manx national party . 
the island has no representation at either the uk or eu parliaments . 
there are also joint sittings of the tynwald court  -lrb-  the two houses together  -rrb-  . 
the other high and appeal court judges are the second deemster ,  deputy deemster and judge of appeal ,  all of whom are appointed by the lieutenant governor . 
the lowest courts in the isle of man are presided over by the high bailiff and the deputy high bailiff ,  along with lay justices of the peace . 
the court of general gaol delivery is the criminal court for serious offences  -lrb-  effectively the equivalent of a crown court in england  -rrb-  . 
as of 2016, the world bank assessed the island's gross national income  -lrb-  gni  -rrb-  per capita at us$89,970.
located in the irish sea ,  it is within the british isles but does not form part of the united kingdom or the european communities . 
in england ,  the telegraph was connected to whitehaven and the circuits of the electric telegraph company . 
following the 1869 finalisation of uk telegraph nationalisation into a general post office monopoly ,  the isle of man telegraph company was nationalised in 1870 under the telegraph act 1870  -lrb-  an act of parliament  -rrb-  at a cost to the british government of £16,106  -lrb-  paid in 1872 following arbitration proceedings over the value  -rrb-  . 
the undersea telegraph cables have been disused since the 1950s ,  but remain in place . 
by 1883 smith's directory listed several telegraph offices operated by the post office ,  in addition to those at douglas ,  ramsey ,  castletown and peel the telegraph was also available at laxey ,  ballaugh ,  and port st .  mary . 
the island has a total of of railway . 
the island has a total of of public roads ,  all of which are paved . 
shannon's main result ,  the noisy-channel coding theorem showed that ,  in the limit of many channel uses ,  the rate of information that is asymptotically achievable is equal to the channel capacity ,  a quantity dependent merely on the statistics of the channel over which the messages are sent . 
coding theory is concerned with finding explicit methods ,  called `` codes '' ,  for increasing the efficiency and reducing the error rate of data communication over noisy channels to near the channel capacity . 
some other important measures in information theory are mutual information ,  channel capacity ,  error exponents ,  and relative entropy . 
prior to this paper ,  limited information-theoretic ideas had been developed at bell labs ,  all implicitly assuming events of equal probability . 
gather information by starting a new person-specific data collection ,  known as the “collect it if you can” trend . 
the awareness about non-manageable amounts of data grew along with the advent of ever more powerful data processing since the mid-1960s . 
according to latanya sweeney ,  there are three trends in data gathering today:
since `` information '' in electronic media is often used synonymously with `` data '' ,  the term `` information explosion '' is closely related to the concept of `` data flood ''  -lrb-  also dubbed `` data deluge ''  -rrb-  . 
techniques to gather knowledge from an overabundance of electronic information  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  data fusion may help in data mining  -rrb-  have existed since the 1970s . 
examples include ;  -lrb-  `` inch ''  -rrb-  and '  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb- ;  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb- ; danish and  -lrb-  `` inch ''  -rrb-  '  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb- ; ; ; ; ;  -lrb-  `` inch ''  -rrb-  and '  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb- ;  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb- ;  -lrb-  `` inch ''  -rrb-  and '  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb- ; and  -lrb-  `` inch ''  -rrb-  and `` tumme ''  -lrb-  `` thumb ''  -rrb-  and russian: дюйм  -lrb-  `` duim ''  -rrb-  . 
in many other european languages ,  the word for `` inch '' is the same as or derived from the word for `` thumb '' ,  as a man's thumb is about an inch wide  -lrb-  and this was even sometimes used to define the inch  -rrb-  . 
the english word `` inch ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an early borrowing from latin ``  ''  -lrb-  `` one-twelfth; roman inch; roman ounce ''  -rrb-  not present in other germanic languages . 
examples are premier inn ,  holiday inn ,  comfort inn ,  days inn and knights inn . 
other forms of inn exist throughout the world . 
these inns were built between towns if the distance between them was too far for one day's travel . 
the inns of court in london were once accommodations for members of the legal profession . 
historically ,  inns in europe provided not only food and lodging ,  but also stabling and fodder for the travelers' horses . 
the lodging aspect of the word `` inn '' lives on in hotel brand names like holiday inn ,  and in some laws that refer to lodging operators as `` innkeepers '' . 
the first ioi was held in 1989 in pravetz ,  bulgaria . 
the following is a list of the top performers in the history of the ioi . 
ioi 2010 for the first time had a live web scoreboard with real-time provisional results . 
starting from 2012, ioi has been using the contest management system  -lrb-  cms  -rrb-  for developing and monitoring the contest . 
the top 50% of the contestants are awarded medals ,  such that the relative number of gold : silver : bronze : no medal is approximately 1:2:3:6  -lrb-  thus 1/12 of the contestants get a gold medal  -rrb-  . 
iota represents the sound  . 
iota  -lrb-  ; uppercase ι ,  lowercase ι;   -rrb-  is the ninth letter of the greek alphabet . 
it is the most common sexual problem in men . 
ed can also be associated with bicycling due to both neurological and vascular problems due to compression . 
erectile dysfunction  -lrb-  ed  -rrb-  ,  also known as impotence ,  is a type of sexual dysfunction characterized by the inability to develop or maintain an erection of the penis during sexual activity . 
one of the first steps is to distinguish between physiological and psychological ed . 
after ronald reagan took office as president on 20 january 1981, he vowed to continue carter's policy of blocking arms sales to iran on the grounds that iran supported terrorism . 
by contrast ,  when testifying before the tower commission ,  reagan declared that hostage issue was the main reason for selling arms to iran . 
although reagan claims that the arms sales were to a `` moderate '' faction of iranians ,  the walsh iran/contra report states that the arms sales were `` to iran '' itself ,  which was under the control of the ayatollah . 
the plan was discussed with president reagan on 18 july 1985 and again on 6 august 1985.
a common narrative of the iran-contra affair has the us-sponsored arms sales to iran beginning in the year 1985.
dynamic political evolution is taking place inside iran . 
a group of senior reagan administration officials in the senior interdepartmental group conducted a secret study on 21 july 1981, and concluded that the arms embargo was ineffective because iran could always buy arms and spare parts for its american weapons elsewhere ,  while at the same time the arms embargo opened the door for iran to fall into the soviet sphere of influence as the kremlin could sell iran weapons if the united states would not . 
the united states was the largest seller of arms to iran under mohammad reza pahlavi ,  and the vast majority of the weapons that the islamic republic of iran inherited in january 1979 were american-made . 
activision abandoned the infocom trademark in 2002.
by 1988, rumors spread of disputes between activision and infocom . 
for a few years ,  activision continued to market infocom's classic games in collections  -lrb-  usually by genre ,  such as the science fiction collection  -rrb- ; in 1991, they published `` the lost treasures of infocom '' ,  followed in 1992 by `` the lost treasures of infocom ii '' . 
infocom's games' sales benefited significantly from the portability offered by running on top of a virtual machine . 
dornbrook also started infocom's customer newsletter ,  called `` the new zork times '' ,  to discuss game hints and preview and showcase new products . 
infocom games were popular ,  `` infoworld '' said in 1984, in part because `` in offices all over america  -lrb-  more than anyone realizes  -rrb-  executives and managers are playing games on their computers '' . 
the marketing campaign was very successful ,  and infocom's success led to other companies like broderbund and electronic arts also releasing their own text games . 
in 2012, activision released `` lost treasures of infocom '' for ios devices . 
sometimes ,  though ,  infocom threw in puzzles just for the humor of it—if the user never ran into these ,  they could still finish the game . 
infocom games are text adventures where users direct the action by entering short strings of words to give commands when prompted . 
inspired by `` colossal cave '' ,  marc blank and dave lebling created what was to become the first infocom game ,  `` zork '' ,  in 1977 at mit's laboratory for computer science . 
in early 1979, the game was completed . 
interactive fiction features two distinct modes of writing: the player input and the game output . 
by 2006 ifcomp ,  most games were written for inform ,  with a strong minority of games for tads and adrift ,  followed by a small number of games for other systems . 
this level of complexity is the standard for works of interactive fiction today . 
in italy ,  interactive fiction games were mainly published and distributed through various magazines in included tapes . 
text adventures are one of the oldest types of computer games and form a subset of the adventure genre . 
in spain ,  interactive fiction was considered a minority genre ,  and was not very successful . 
interactive fiction usually relies on reading from a screen and on typing input ,  although text-to-speech synthesizers allow blind and visually impaired users to play interactive fiction titles as audio games . 
infocom was also known for shipping creative props ,  or `` feelies ''  -lrb-  and even `` smellies ''  -rrb-  ,  with its games . 
during the 1990s interactive fiction was mainly written with c-like languages ,  such as tads 2 and inform 6.
in 1991 and 1992, activision released `` the lost treasures of infocom '' in two volumes ,  a collection containing most of infocom's games ,  followed in 1996 by `` classic text adventure masterpieces of infocom '' . 
interactive fiction shares much in common with multi-user dungeons  -lrb-  'muds'  -rrb-  . 
some users of the term distinguish between interactive fiction ,  known as `` puzzle-free '' ,  that focuses on narrative ,  and `` text adventures '' that focus on puzzles . 
to learn more about the history of interactive fiction ,  see the `` get lamp '' documentary . 
interactive fiction ,  often abbreviated if ,  is software simulating environments in which players use text commands to control characters and influence the environment . 
each of these systems allowed anyone with sufficient time and dedication to create a game ,  and caused a growth boom in the online interactive fiction community . 
interactive fiction became a standard product for many software companies . 
after the decline of the commercial interactive fiction market in the 1990s ,  an online community eventually formed around the medium . 
for years ,  amateurs with the if community produced interactive fiction works of relatively limited scope using the adventure game toolkit and similar tools . 
ice hockey is played on a `` hockey rink '' . 
ice hockey is the official winter sport of canada . 
worldwide ,  there are ice hockey federations in 76 countries . 
in 1876, games played in montreal were `` conducted under the 'hockey association' rules ''; the hockey association was england's field hockey organization . 
pond hockey is a form of ice hockey played generally as pick-up hockey on lakes ,  ponds and artificial outdoor rinks during the winter . 
ice hockey has been played at the winter olympics since 1924  -lrb-  and was played at the summer games in 1920 -rrb- . 
the kontinental hockey league  -lrb-  khl  -rrb-  is the largest and most popular ice hockey league in eurasia . 
usa hockey has officiating levels 1 through 4.
the second division of hockey in eurasia is the supreme hockey league  -lrb-  vhl  -rrb-  . 
the australian ice hockey league and new zealand ice hockey league are represented by nine and five teams respectively . 
the three major rules of play in ice hockey that limit the movement of the puck: `` offside '' ,  `` icing '' ,  and the puck going out of play . 
there are many other little tactics used in the game of hockey . 
while the game's origins lie elsewhere ,  montreal is at the centre of the development of the sport of contemporary ice hockey ,  and is recognized as the birthplace of organized ice hockey . 
in canada ,  the canadian hockey league is an umbrella organization comprising three major junior leagues: the ontario hockey league ,  the western hockey league ,  and the quebec major junior hockey league . 
the nhl is by far the best attended and most popular ice hockey league in the world . 
the oldest indoor ice hockey arena still in use today for hockey is boston's matthews arena ,  which was built in 1910.
i must now describe to you the game of hockey; we have each a stick turning up at the end . 
women's ice hockey players are allowed to contact other players but are not allowed to body check . 
there are two major professional women's hockey leagues ,  the national women's hockey league with teams in the united states and the canadian women's hockey league with teams in canada ,  the united states ,  and china . 
in canada ,  to some extent ringette has served as the female counterpart to ice hockey ,  in the sense that traditionally ,  boys have played hockey while girls have played ringette . 
a typical game of hockey is governed by two to four `` officials '' on the ice ,  charged with enforcing the rules of the game . 
direct trauma to the head is estimated to account for 80% of all hockey injuries as a result of player contact with other players or hockey equipment . 
to this day ,  shinney  -lrb-  derived from `` shinty ''  -rrb-  is a popular canadian term for an informal type of hockey ,  either ice or street hockey . 
in the united states especially ,  college hockey is popular and the best university teams compete in the annual ncaa men's ice hockey championship . 
ice hockey in africa is a small but growing sport; while no african ice hockey playing nation has a domestic league ,  there are several regional leagues in south africa . 
stanley's son arthur helped organize the ontario hockey association ,  and stanley's daughter isobel was one of the first women to play ice hockey . 
in ice hockey ,  infractions of the rules lead to play stoppages whereby the play is restarted at a face off . 
there are currently two north american based professional women's hockey leagues ,  the canadian women's hockey league  -lrb-  cwhl  -rrb-  and the national women's hockey league  -lrb-  nwhl  -rrb-  . 
ice hockey is a contact team sport played on ice ,  usually in a rink ,  in which two teams of skaters use their sticks to shoot a vulcanized rubber puck into their opponent's net to score points . 
in 1910, the national hockey association  -lrb-  nha  -rrb-  was formed in montreal . 
since 2006, the us pond hockey championships have been played in minneapolis ,  minnesota ,  and the canadian national pond hockey championships have been played in huntsville ,  ontario . 
the number of teams grew ,  enough to hold the first `` world championship '' of ice hockey at montreal's annual winter carnival in 1883.
crowds seem to like fighting in ice hockey and cheer when fighting erupts . 
as of 2018, there are three minor professional leagues with no nhl affiliations: the federal hockey league  -lrb-  fhl  -rrb-  ,  ligue nord-américaine de hockey  -lrb-  lnah  -rrb-  ,  and the southern professional hockey league  -lrb-  sphl  -rrb-  . 
ice hockey is one of the fastest growing women's sports in the world ,  with the number of participants increasing by 400 percent from 1995 to 2005.
both of the codes ,  and others ,  originated from canadian rules of ice hockey of the early 20th century . 
with interest in women's ice hockey growing ,  between 2007 and 2010 the number of registered female players worldwide grew from 153,665 to 170,872.
the american collegiate hockey association is composed of college teams at the club level . 
programmers may also incorrectly assume that a pointer can be converted to an integer without loss of information ,  which may work on  -lrb-  some  -rrb-  32-bit computers ,  but fail on 64-bit computers with 64-bit pointers and 32-bit integers . 
practically all new desktop processors are capable of using 64-bit words ,  though embedded processors with 8- and 16-bit word size are still common . 
the 36-bit word length was common in the early days of computers . 
the term 'word' is used for a small group of bits that are handled simultaneously by processors of a particular architecture . 
the term `` octet '' always refers to an 8-bit quantity . 
this type can be stored in memory using a single bit ,  but is often given a full byte for convenience of addressing and speed of access . 
the term `` byte '' was usually not used at all in connection with bit- and word-addressed machines . 
the most common representation of a positive integer is a string of bits ,  using the binary numeral system . 
different cpus support different integral data types . 
so it is with an icon . 
at least some of the hierarchy of the christian churches still strictly opposed icons in the early 4th century . 
as people are also made in god's images ,  people are also considered to be living icons ,  and are therefore `` censed '' along with painted icons during orthodox prayer services . 
the coptic orthodox church of alexandria and oriental orthodoxy also have distinctive ,  living icon painting traditions . 
thus to kiss an icon of christ ,  in the eastern orthodox view ,  is to show love towards christ jesus himself ,  not mere wood and paint making up the physical substance of the icon . 
beginning in the 4th century ,  churches painted their walls and made icons to reflect an authentic expression of their faith . 
christian tradition dating from the 8th century identifies luke the evangelist as the first icon painter . 
an icon  -lrb-  from the greek `` eikōn '' `` image '' ,  `` resemblance ''  -rrb-  is a religious work of art ,  most commonly a painting ,  in the cultures of the eastern orthodox church ,  oriental orthodoxy ,  the roman catholic ,  and certain eastern catholic churches . 
eastern orthodox find the first instance of an image or icon in the bible when god made man in his own image  -lrb-  septuagint greek `` eikona ''  -rrb-  ,  in genesis 1:26-27.
comparable images from western christianity are generally not classified as `` icons '' ,  although `` iconic '' may be used to describe a static style of devotional image . 
in russian churches ,  the nave is typically separated from the sanctuary by an `` iconostasis '' ,  a wall of icons . 
the use and making of icons entered kievan rus' following its conversion to orthodox christianity from the eastern roman  -lrb-  byzantine  -rrb-  empire in 988 ad . 
on the other hand ,  irenaeus does not speak critically of icons or portraits in a general sense – only of certain gnostic sectarians' use of icons . 
russian icons are typically paintings on wood ,  often small ,  though some in churches and monasteries may be as large as a table top . 
the tendency toward emotionalism in icons continued in the paleologan period ,  which began in 1261.
icons are often illuminated with a candle or jar of oil with a wick . 
the use of icons was seriously challenged by byzantine imperial authority in the 8th century . 
nonetheless ,  popular favor for icons guaranteed their continued existence ,  while no systematic apologia for or against icons ,  or doctrinal authorization or condemnation of icons yet existed . 
in the icons of eastern orthodoxy ,  and of the early medieval west ,  very little room is made for artistic license . 
in romania ,  icons painted as reversed images behind glass and set in frames were common in the 19th century and are still made . 
in the orthodox church `` icons have always been understood as a visible gospel ,  as a testimony to the great things given man by god the incarnate logos '' in the council of 860 it was stated that `` all that is uttered in words written in syllables is also proclaimed in the language of colors '' . 
the same code under icon can be written:
this is a key concept in icon ,  known as `` generators '' . 
icon includes several generator-builders . 
within the parlance of icon ,  the evaluation of an expression or function results in a result sequence . 
under icon the find function is a generator ,  and will return the next instance of the string each time it is resumed before finally failing after it passes the end of the string . 
icon adds several control structures for looping through generators . 
although they use pascal naming ,  they work more like c functions and can return values; there is no codice_3 keyword in icon . 
since icon uses success or failure for all flow control ,  this simple code:
procedures are the basic building blocks of icon programs . 
when the read -lrb-    -rrb-  command fails ,  at the end of file for instance ,  the failure will be passed up the chain ,  and write -lrb-    -rrb-  will fail as well . 
the icon language is derived from the algol-class of structured programming languages ,  and thus has syntax similar to c or pascal . 
iconology is a method of interpretation in cultural history and the history of art used by aby warburg ,  erwin panofsky and their followers that uncovers the cultural ,  social ,  and historical background of themes and subjects in the visual arts . 
it should also be noted that panofsky's `` use of iconology as the principle tool of art analysis brought him critics . `` 
however ,  michael camille is of the opinion that `` though panofsky's concept of iconology has been very influential in the humanities and is quite effective when applied to renaissance art ,  it is still problematic when applied to art from periods before and after . `` 
the artwork is primarily seen as a document of its time . `` 
this is a listing of some of the events reported then or referred to now as `` indian massacre '' . 
the phrase eventually became commonly used also to describe mass killings of american indians . 
in `` an american genocide ,  the united states and the california catastrophe ,  1846-1873 '' ,  historian benjamin madley recorded the numbers of killings of california indians between 1846 and 1873.
because of the hijra ,  the calendar was named the hijri calendar . 
the islamic ,  muslim ,  or hijri calendar  -lrb-   `` at-taqwīm al-hijrī ''  -rrb-  is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 lunar months in a year of 354 or 355 days . 
are generally paid by the civil calendar . 
each month of the islamic calendar commences on the birth of the new lunar cycle . 
these months were considered forbidden both within the new islamic calendar and within the old pagan meccan calendar . 
the term `` fixed calendar '' is generally understood to refer to the non-intercalated calendar . 
in the astronomical-lunar-calendar system ,  a year of 12 lunar months is 354.37 days long . 
there are a number of indications that the intercalated calendar was similar to the jewish calendar ,  whose year began in the spring . 
saudi arabia uses the sighting method to determine the beginning of each month of the hijri calendar . 
rabi'i is the third month and if it coincided with the third month of the jewish calendar the festival would have been the feast of weeks ,  which is observed on the 6th and 7th days of that month . 
the solar hijri calendar is a solar calendar used in iran and afghanistan which counts its years from the hijra or migration of muhammad from mecca to medina in 622 ad/ce . 
the information provided by the calendar in any country does not extend beyond the current month . 
in the gregorian calendar ,  1440 ah runs from approximately 11 september 2018 to 30 august 2019.
the tabular islamic calendar is a rule-based variation of the islamic calendar ,  in which months are worked out by arithmetic rules rather than by observation or astronomical calculation . 
both the islamic calendar and the astronomical-lunar-calendar take no account of the solar year in their calculations ,  and thus both of these strictly lunar based calendar systems have no ability to reckon the timing of the four seasons of the year . 
if the islamic calendar were prepared using astronomical calculations ,  muslims throughout the muslim world could use it to meet all their needs ,  the way they use the gregorian calendar today . 
in the intercalated calendar's last year  -lrb-  ad/ce 632 -rrb- ,  dhu al-hijjah corresponded to march . 
the values that separate parts are called the first ,  second ,  and third quartiles; and they are denoted by q1, q2, and q3, respectively . 
the iqr is a measure of variability ,  based on dividing a data set into quartiles . 
following this ,  the games branched off into original storylines with indiana jones in the lost kingdom ,  `` indiana jones and the fate of atlantis '' ,  `` indiana jones and the infernal machine '' ,  `` indiana jones and the emperor's tomb '' and `` indiana jones and the staff of kings '' . 
the `` indiana jones epic stunt spectacular ! `` 
indiana also saves many enslaved children . 
two lego indiana jones games have also been released .  ``  ''
the 2008 film ,  `` indiana jones and the kingdom of the crystal skull '' ,  is the latest film in the series . 
the series title was also changed to `` the adventures of young indiana jones '' . 
dr .  henry walton `` indiana '' jones ,  jr .  is the title character and protagonist of the `` indiana jones '' franchise . 
indiana uses his knowledge of shiva to defeat mola ram . 
the four indiana jones film scripts were novelized and published in the time-frame of the films' initial releases . 
there is also a small game from lucas arts `` indiana jones and his desktop adventures '' . 
a video game was made for young indy called `` young indiana jones and the instruments of chaos '' ,  as well as a video game version of `` the young indiana jones chronicles '' . 
doug lee has supplied the voice of jones for two lucasarts video games ,  `` indiana jones and the fate of atlantis '' and `` indiana jones and the infernal machine '' ,  david esch supplied his voice for `` indiana jones and the emperor's tomb '' ,  and john armstrong for `` indiana jones and the staff of kings '' . 
the character was originally named indiana smith ,  after an alaskan malamute called indiana that lucas owned in the 1970s and on which he based the star wars character chewbacca . 
in march 2016, disney announced a fifth `` indiana jones '' film in development ,  with ford and spielberg set to return to the franchise . 
indiana jones is featured at several walt disney theme park attractions . 
while himself an homage to various prior adventurers ,  aspects of indiana jones also directly influenced some subsequent characterizations:
although lucas intended to make five indiana jones films ,  `` indiana jones and the last crusade '' was the last for over eighteen years ,  as he could not think of a good plot element to drive the next installment . 
disneyland paris also features an indiana jones-titled ride where people speed off through ancient ruins in a runaway mine wagon similar to that found in `` indiana jones and the temple of doom '' . 
for example ,  ⁄ ,  ⁄ ,  and ⁄ are all irreducible fractions . 
 -lrb-  two fractions ⁄ and ⁄ are `` equal '' or `` equivalent '' if and only if `` ad '' = `` bc '' .   -rrb- 
an irreducible fraction  -lrb-  or fraction in lowest terms or reduced fraction  -rrb-  is a fraction in which the numerator and denominator are integers that have no other common divisors than 1  -lrb-  and -1, when negative numbers are considered  -rrb-  . 
the final result ,  / ,  is an irreducible fraction because 4 and 3 have no common factors other than 1.
the identities formula_9 and formula_10 show that formula_11 and formula_12 are inverses of each other . 
the exponential function formula_6 satisfies formula_7 for all formula_8, so it too is a homomorphism . 
the logarithm function formula_3 satisfies formula_4 for all formula_5, so it is a group homomorphism . 
since formula_11 is a homomorphism that has an inverse that is also a homomorphism ,  formula_11 is an isomorphism of groups . 
intergovernmental organizations differ in function ,  membership ,  and membership criteria . 
such groups or associations have not been founded by a constituent document and exist only as task groups . 
the basic texts of the itu are adopted by the itu plenipotentiary conference . 
the itu comprises three sectors ,  each managing a different aspect of the matters handled by the union ,  as well as itu telecom . 
the most recent member state to join the itu is south sudan ,  which became a member on 14 july 2011.
the sectors were created during the restructuring of itu at its 1992 plenipotentiary conference . 
itu became a united nations specialized agency in 1947.
imap is defined by rfc 3501.
imap3 is an extremely rare variant of imap . 
imap over ssl  -lrb-  imaps  -rrb-  is assigned the port number 993.
an imap server typically listens on well-known port 143, while imap over ssl  -lrb-  imaps  -rrb-  uses 993.
the imap working group used rfc1176  -lrb-  imap2 -rrb- rather than rfc1203  -lrb-  imap3 -rrb- as its starting point . 
the imap wg decided to rename imap2bis to imap4 to avoid confusion . 
mail also provide support for either imap or pop3.
imap4 clients need to maintain a tcp/ip connection to the imap server in order to be notified of the arrival of new mail . 
the interim protocol was quickly replaced by the `` interactive mail access protocol ''  -lrb-  imap2 -rrb- ,  defined in rfc 1064  -lrb-  in 1988 -rrb- and later updated by rfc 1176  -lrb-  in 1990 -rrb- . 
in computing ,  the internet message access protocol  -lrb-  imap  -rrb-  is an internet standard protocol used by email clients to retrieve email messages from a mail server over a tcp/ip connection . 
an inertial frame of reference may also be called an inertial reference frame ,  inertial frame ,  galilean reference frame ,  or inertial space . 
the extra terms in the force f′ are the `` fictitious '' forces for this frame ,  whose causes are external to the system in the frame . 
indeed ,  an intuitive summary of inertial frames can be given: in an inertial reference frame ,  the laws of mechanics take their simplest form . 
in a non-inertial reference frame in classical physics and special relativity ,  the physics of a system vary depending on the acceleration of that frame with respect to an inertial frame ,  and the usual physical forces must be supplemented by fictitious forces . 
the laws of physics in the inertial frame are simpler because unnecessary forces are not present . 
according to the first postulate of special relativity ,  all physical laws take their simplest form in an inertial frame ,  and there exist multiple inertial frames interrelated by uniform translation:  this simplicity manifests in that inertial frames have self-contained physics without the need for external causes ,  while physics in non-inertial frames have external causes . 
in an inertial frame ,  newton's first law ,  the `` law of inertia '' ,  is satisfied: any free motion has a constant magnitude and direction . 
their power flows outwards into the groups they control via control arrows . 
cards come in three main types: illuminati cards ,  plot cards ,  and group cards . 
they go alongside the power structure of the player's illuminati ,  and bestow a useful special ability or similar . 
illuminati and plot cards both feature an illustration of a puppeteer's hand in a blue color scheme on the rear side ,  whereas group cards feature a puppet on a string in a red color scheme . 
interstellar travel is the term used for crewed or uncrewed travel between stars or planetary systems . 
although a high density interstellar medium may cause difficulties for many interstellar travel concepts ,  interstellar ramjets ,  and some proposed concepts for decelerating interstellar spacecraft ,  would actually benefit from a denser interstellar medium . 
upon return ,  there would be a difference between the time elapsed on the astronaut's ship and the time elapsed on earth . 
because of the vastness of those distances ,  interstellar travel would require a high percentage of the speed of light; huge travel time ,  lasting from decades to millennia or longer; or a combination of both . 
at this rate ,  a journey to proxima centauri would take 80,000 years . 
the ship will be close to the speed of light after about a year of accelerating and remain at that speed until it brakes for the end of the journey . 
the universe would appear contracted along the direction of travel to half the size it had when the ship was at rest; the distance between that star and the sun would seem to be 16 light years as measured by the astronaut . 
the speeds required for interstellar travel in a human lifetime far exceed what current methods of spacecraft propulsion can provide . 
a generation ship  -lrb-  or world ship  -rrb-  is a type of interstellar ark in which the crew that arrives at the destination is descended from those who started the journey . 
on this scale ,  the distance to alpha centauri a would be  . 
at higher speeds ,  the time on board will run even slower ,  so the astronaut could travel to the center of the milky way  -lrb-  30,000 light years from earth  -rrb-  and back in 40 years ship-time . 
it has been argued that an interstellar mission that cannot be completed within 50 years should not be started at all . 
the following could be considered prime targets for interstellar missions:
a knowledge of the properties of the interstellar gas and dust through which the vehicle must pass is essential for the design of any interstellar space mission . 
igrp is a proprietary protocol . 
igrp uses protocol number 9 for communication . 
most approaches to indo-european subgrouping to date have assumed that the tree model is by-and-large valid for indo-european; however ,  there is also a long tradition of wave-model approaches . 
the proposed proto-indo-european language  -lrb-  pie  -rrb-  is the reconstructed common ancestor of the indo-european languages ,  spoken by the proto-indo-europeans . 
other ,  greater proposed families including indo-european languages ,  include:
the reconstructed indo-european verb system is complex and ,  like the noun ,  exhibits a system of ablaut . 
some linguists propose that indo-european languages form part of one of several hypothetical macrofamilies . 
the indo-hittite hypothesis proposes that the indo-european language family consists of two main branches: one represented by the anatolian languages and another branch encompassing all other indo-european languages . 
there are about 445 living indo-european languages ,  according to the estimate by `` ethnologue '' ,  with over two thirds  -lrb-  313 -rrb- of them belonging to the indo-iranian branch . 
kortlandt proposes that the ancestors of balts and slavs took part in satemization before being drawn later into the western indo-european sphere . 
the various subgroups of the indo-european language family include ten major branches ,  listed below in alphabetical order
indo-european languages are also most commonly present as minority languages or second languages in countries where other families are dominant . 
membership of languages in the indo-european language family is determined by genealogical relationships ,  meaning that all members are presumed descendants of a common ancestor ,  proto-indo-european . 
illinois  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a state in the midwestern region of the united states . 
chicago ,  the third-most populous city in the united states ,  is the center of the chicago metropolitan area or chicagoland ,  as this area is nicknamed ,  comprises only 9% of the land area of the state ,  but contains 65% of the state's residents . 
in 1818, illinois became the 21st u . s .  state . 
chicago ,  the center of the chicago metropolitan area ,  became a global alpha-level city . 
the capital of illinois is springfield in the central part of the state . 
the state became a transportation hub for the nation . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of illinois was 12,741,080 in 2018, moving from the fifth-largest state to the sixth-largest state  -lrb-  losing out to pennsylvania  -rrb-  . 
the floodplain on the mississippi river from alton to the kaskaskia river is known as the american bottom . 
illinois is located in the midwest region of the united states and is one of the eight states and canadian province in the bi-national great lakes region of north america . 
the state is the site of the abraham lincoln presidential library and museum ,  located in the state capital of springfield ,  and the future home of the barack obama presidential center in chicago . 
the state's fourth constitution was adopted in 1970, replacing the 1870 document . 
though it was ostensibly a `` free state '' ,  there was slavery in illinois . 
the third division is southern illinois ,  comprising the area south of u . s .  route 50, including little egypt ,  near the juncture of the mississippi river and ohio river . 
with the tremendous growth of mines and factories in the state in the 19th century ,  illinois was the ground for the formation of labor unions in the united states . 
while a college student ,  murdock founded the debian project in august 1993, and wrote the debian manifesto in january 1994.
ian ashley murdock  -lrb-  28april 1973 28december 2015 -rrb- was an american software engineer ,  known for being the founder of the debian project and progeny linux systems ,  a commercial linux company . 
formally ,  an inner product space is a vector space over the field together with an `` inner product '' ,  i . e .  ,  with a map
in linear algebra ,  an inner product space is a vector space with an additional structure called an inner product . 
bbc one scotland and bbc2 broadcast an adaptation of his novel stonemouth in june 2015.
banks continued to write both science fiction and mainstream novels ,  with his final novel `` the quarry '' published in june 2013, the month of his death . 
he wrote mainstream fiction under the name iain banks and science fiction as iain m .  banks ,  including the initial of his adopted middle name menzies  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
his final interview was with kirsty wark and was broadcast as `` iain banks: raw spirit '' on bbc2 scotland on wednesday 12 june 2013.
iain banks  -lrb-  16 february 1954 – 9 june 2013 -rrb- was a scottish author . 
in 2011 banks was featured on the bbc radio 4 programme `` saturday live '' . 
a radio adaptation of banks's `` the state of the art '' was broadcast on bbc radio 4 in 2009; the adaptation was written by paul cornell and the production was directed/produced by nadia molinari . 
many authors reserve the term `` incunabula '' for the latter kind only . 
the term `` incunabula '' came to denote the printed books themselves in the late 17th century . 
the british library's incunabula short title catalogue now records over 29,000 titles ,  of which around 27,400 are incunabula editions  -lrb-  not all unique works  -rrb-  . 
the data in this section were derived from the incunabula short-title catalogue  -lrb-  istc  -rrb-  . 
notable collections ,  with the approximate numbers of incunabula held ,  include:
however many incunabula are sold at auction or through the rare book trade every year . 
for books printed in the uk ,  the term generally covers 1501–1520, and for books printed in mainland europe ,  1501–1540.
many incunabula are undated ,  needing complex bibliographical analysis to place them correctly . 
isotropic radiation has the same intensity regardless of the direction of measurement ,  and an isotropic field exerts the same action regardless of how the test particle is oriented . 
in 2009 imu published the document `` best current practices for journals '' . 
the scientific prizes awarded by the imu are deemed to be the highest distinctions in the mathematical world . 
this commission is organized similarly to imu with its own executive committee and general assembly . 
the international mathematical union  -lrb-  imu  -rrb-  is an international non-governmental organization devoted to international cooperation in the field of mathematics across the world . 
imu has a close relationship to mathematics education through its international commission on mathematical instruction  -lrb-  icmi  -rrb-  . 
icsu also had 22 scientific associates . 
in july 2018 icsu merged with the international social science council  -lrb-  issc  -rrb-  to form the international science council . 
however ,  nazi germany was removed from iupac during world war ii . 
in 2016, iupac denounced the use of chlorine as a chemical weapon . 
during world war ii ,  iupac was affiliated with the allied powers ,  but had little involvement during the war effort itself . 
this is still the major purpose of the iho . 
the iho was established in 1921 as the international hydrographic bureau  -lrb-  ihb  -rrb-  . 
the iho develops hydrographic and nautical charting standards . 
much has been done in the field of standardisation since the bureau  -lrb-  now the iho  -rrb-  was founded . 
the system/360 later evolved into the system/370, the system/390, and the 64-bit zseries ,  system z ,  and zenterprise machines . 
ibm mainframes are large computer systems produced by ibm since 1952.
the smaller models in the system/360 line  -lrb-  e . g . 
all that changed with the announcement of the system/360  -lrb-  s/360 -rrb- in april ,  1964.
 -lrb-  some ibm 7094s remained in service into the 1980s .   -rrb- 
iowa state's campus contains over 160 buildings . 
iowa state operates 20 on-campus residence halls . 
iowa state celebrated its first veishea on may 11–13, 1922.
the `` iowa state daily '' is the university's student newspaper . 
iowa state has maintained a horticulture garden since 1914.
iowa state university of science and technology ,  generally referred to as iowa state ,  is a public land-grant and space-grant research university located in ames ,  iowa ,  united states . 
iowa state is home to one of the largest campus public art programs in the united states . 
the first fraternity ,  delta tau delta ,  was established at iowa state in 1875, six years after the first graduating class entered iowa state . 
the sculpture garden is adjacent to iowa state's central campus . 
in 2013, iowa state hosted its eighth ncaa wrestling championships . 
in 1898, reflecting the school's growth during his tenure ,  it was renamed iowa state college of agricultural and mechanic arts ,  or iowa state for short . 
johnson-lynch is the fastest iowa state coach to clinch 100 victories . 
iowa state is known for having one of the most successful women's basketball programs in the nation . 
football first made its way onto the iowa state campus in 1878 as a recreational sport ,  but it was not until 1892 that iowa state organized its first team to represent the school in football . 
founded in 1858 and coeducational from its start ,  iowa state became the nation's first designated land-grant institution when the iowa legislature accepted the provisions of the 1862 morrill act on september 11, 1862, making iowa the first state in the nation to do so . 
iowa state's intrastate archrival is the university of iowa with whom it competes annually for the iowa corn cy-hawk series trophy ,  an annual athletic competition between the two schools . 
the national extension program was created in 1914 based heavily on the iowa state model . 
the campanile is widely seen as one of the major symbols of iowa state university . 
the 2007 veishea festivities marked the start of iowa state's year-long sesquicentennial celebration . 
in 1856, the iowa general assembly enacted legislation to establish the iowa agricultural college and model farm . 
located near the center of the iowa state campus ,  the farm house museum sits as a monument to early iowa state history and culture as well as a national historic landmark . 
iowa state's composting facility `` can handle more than 10,000 tons of organic wastes annually . `` 
the farm house ,  the first building on the iowa state campus ,  was completed in 1861 before the campus was occupied by students or classrooms . 
on july 4, 1959, the college was officially renamed iowa state university of science and technology . 
the new elizabeth and byron anderson sculpture garden further enhances the beauty of iowa state . 
the brunnier art museum ,  iowa's only accredited museum emphasizing a decorative arts collection ,  is one of the nation's few museums located within a performing arts and conference complex ,  the iowa state center . 
iowa state is the birthplace of the first electronic digital computer ,  starting the world's computer technology revolution . 
this early practice lead to iowa state agricultural college and model farm opening its doors to iowa students for free in 1869 under the morrill act  -lrb-  or land-grant act  -rrb-  of 1862.
since its inception in 1858, iowa state has fostered excellence in its alumni ,  under the instruction of world-class faculty . 
find a way . ” in october 2012 iowa state marked its 100th homecoming with a `` cytennial '' celebration . 
iowa state is the only university nationwide that has a u . s .  department of energy research laboratory physically located on its campus . 
in 2011, iowa state finished the season 25-6  -lrb-  13-3 big 12 -rrb- ,  placing second in the league ,  as well as a final national ranking of eighth . 
thomas gaines ,  in `` the campus as a work of art '' ,  proclaimed the iowa state campus to be one of the twenty-five most beautiful campuses in the country . 
however ,  the short-form name `` iowa state university '' is used even in official documents such as diplomas . 
under coaches floyd  -lrb-  1995–98 -rrb- and larry eustachy  -lrb-  1998–2003 -rrb- ,  iowa state achieved even greater success . 
the campanile was constructed during 1897-1898 as a memorial to margaret macdonald stanton ,  iowa state's first dean of women ,  who died on july 25, 1895.
iowa state is widely known for veishea ,  an annual education and entertainment festival that was held on campus each spring . 
iowa state university's athletic teams ,  the cyclones ,  compete in division i of the ncaa and are a founding member of the big 12 conference . 
iowa state became the first land grant university in the nation to offer training in domestic economy for college credit . 
iowa state is also a member of the association of american universities  -lrb-  aau  -rrb-  ,  which consists of 60 leading research universities in north america . 
as with many sites on the iowa state university campus ,  the farm house museum has a few old myths and legends associated with it . 
lake laverne is the home of two mute swans named sir lancelot and elaine ,  donated to iowa state by veishea 1935.
the extension service traces its roots to farmers' institutes developed at iowa state in the late 19th century . 
the isu research park is a 230-acre development with over 270,000 square feet of building space located just south of the iowa state campus in ames . 
the iau is a member of the international council for science  -lrb-  icsu  -rrb-  . 
the sovereign body of the iau is its `` general assembly '' ,  which comprises all members . 
the iau was founded on 28 july 1919, at the constitutive assembly of the international research council  -lrb-  now international council for science  -rrb-  held in brussels ,  belgium . 
in 2004 the iau contracted with the cambridge university press to publish the `` proceedings of the international astronomical union '' . 
the iau includes a total of 12,664 `` individual members '' who are professional astronomers from 96 countries worldwide . 
they were sworn in at the inaugural session of the court on 11 march 2003.
the court issued its first arrest warrants on 8 july 2005, and the first pre-trial hearings were held in 2006.
the states parties cannot interfere with the judicial functions of the court . 
currently ,  there are 123 icc member states . 
the presidency is responsible for the proper administration of the court  -lrb-  apart from the office of the prosecutor  -rrb-  . 
in 2010 the states parties of the rome statute held the first review conference of the rome statute of the international criminal court in kampala ,  uganda . 
the court has four organs: the presidency ,  the judicial division ,  the office of the prosecutor ,  and the registry . 
the assembly elects the judges and prosecutors ,  decides the court's budget ,  adopts important texts  -lrb-  such as the rules of procedure and evidence  -rrb-  ,  and provides management oversight to the other organs of the court . 
the creation of these tribunals further highlighted the need for a permanent international criminal court . 
the court itself ,  however ,  is composed of four organs: the presidency ,  the judicial divisions ,  the office of the prosecutor ,  and the registry . 
the terrain of the iberian peninsula is largely mountainous . 
the coastline of the iberian peninsula is  ,  on the mediterranean side and on the atlantic side . 
the iberian peninsula has two dominant climate types . 
the iberian peninsula  ,  also known as iberia ,  is located in the southwest corner of europe . 
all rivers in the iberian peninsula are subject to seasonal variations in flow . 
the iberian peninsula is the westernmost of the three major southern european peninsulas—the iberian ,  italian ,  and balkan . 
during their 600-year rule in the iberian peninsula ,  the romans introduced the latin language that influenced many of the languages that exist today in the iberian peninsula . 
around 200,000 bp ,  during the lower paleolithic period ,  neanderthals first entered the iberian peninsula . 
from the 8th–15th centuries ,  only the southern part of the iberian peninsula was part of the islamic world . 
the ancient greeks reached the iberian peninsula ,  of which they had heard from the phoenicians ,  by voyaging westward on the mediterranean . 
about 40,000 years ago ,  anatomically modern humans entered the iberian peninsula from southern france . 
during the neolithic expansion ,  various megalithic cultures developed in the iberian peninsula . 
the iberian peninsula has always been associated with the ebro ,  ibēros in ancient greek and ibērus or hibērus in latin . 
 -lrb-  the name `` iberia '' was ambiguous ,  being also the name of the kingdom of iberia in the caucasus .   -rrb- 
in 218 bc ,  during the second punic war against the carthaginians ,  the first roman troops invaded the iberian peninsula; however ,  it was not until the reign of augustus that it was annexed after 200 years of war with the celts and iberians . 
the word `` iberia '' is a noun adapted from the latin word `` hiberia '' originated by the ancient greek word ἰβηρία  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  by greek geographers under the rule of the roman empire to refer to what is known today in english as the iberian peninsula . 
the iberian peninsula has been inhabited for at least 1.2 million years as remains found in the sites in the atapuerca mountains demonstrate . 
in mathematical analysis ,  the intermediate value theorem states that if a continuous function ,  `` f '' ,  with an interval ,  `` a '' ,  `` b '' ,  as its domain ,  takes values `` f '' -lrb-  `` a ''  -rrb-  and `` f '' -lrb-  `` b ''  -rrb-  at each end of the interval ,  then it also takes any value between `` f '' -lrb-  `` a ''  -rrb-  and `` f '' -lrb-  `` b ''  -rrb-  at some point within the interval . 
