i never was a punk . `` 
other bands pointed punk rock toward future rock styles or its own foundations . 
the only band from the new punk movement to appear was the damned . 
meanwhile ,  punk rock scenes were emerging around the globe . 
as hardcore became the dominant punk rock style ,  many bands of the older california punk rock movement split up . 
punk rock  -lrb-  or `` punk ''  -rrb-  is a rock music genre that developed in the mid-1970s in the united states ,  united kingdom ,  and australia . 
by the 1990s punk rock re-emerged in the mainstream ,  as punk rock and pop punk bands such as green day ,  rancid ,  the offspring ,  and blink-182 brought the genre widespread popularity . 
the first wave of punk rock was `` aggressively modern '' and differed from what came before . 
punk rock bands often emulate the bare musical structures and arrangements of 1960s garage rock . 
technical accessibility and a do it yourself  -lrb-  diy  -rrb-  spirit are prized in punk rock . 
from 1977 on ,  punk rock crossed lines with many other popular music genres . 
the underground punk rock movement inspired countless bands that either evolved from a punk rock sound or brought its outsider spirit to very different kinds of music . 
the california punk scene was in full swing by early 1977.
marketers capitalized on the style and hipness of punk rock to such an extent that a 1993 ad campaign for an automobile ,  the subaru impreza ,  claimed that the car was `` like punk rock '' . 
by 1979, the hardcore punk movement was emerging in southern california . 
 '' ,  inscribed a catchphrase for punk's basic musical approach . 
its subtitle affirmed the connection with what was happening in new york: `` + other rock 'n' roll habits for punks ! `` 
bands anticipating the forthcoming movement were appearing as far afield as düsseldorf ,  west germany ,  where `` punk before punk '' band neu ! 
greg shaw was the first music critic to employ the term `` punk rock '': in the april 1971 issue of `` rolling stone '' ,  he refers to a track by the guess who as `` good ,  not too imaginative ,  punk rock and roll '' . 
in october ,  the damned became the first uk punk rock band to release a single ,  the romance-themed `` new rose '' . 
in the early to mid-1960s ,  garage rock bands ,  often recognized as punk rock's progenitors ,  began springing up around north america . 
over the next several months ,  many new punk rock bands formed ,  often directly inspired by the sex pistols . 
these opposing factions were mutually attracted by a view of punk rock as `` politically as well as musically  .  .  .  'against the system' . `` 
their shared attributes of minimalism and speed ,  however ,  had not yet come to define punk rock . 
by 1977, a second wave of the punk rock movement was breaking in the three countries where it had emerged ,  as well as in many other places . 
in japan ,  a punk movement developed around bands playing in an art/noise style such as friction ,  and `` psych punk '' acts like gaseneta and kadotani michio . 
the first issue of `` punk magazine ''  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- had a picture of a 60s garage rock band  -lrb-  which appears to be the seeds  -rrb-  on the front cover  -lrb-    -rrb-  . </ref>
the term `` punk rock '' was first used by certain american rock critics in the early 1970s to describe 1960s garage bands and subsequent acts then perceived as stylistic inheritors . 
breaking down the distance between performer and audience is central to the punk ethic . 
 -lrb-  zavella ,  2012 -rrb- being a punk was a form of expressing freedom and not caring of judgement . 
in los angeles ,  the opposing factions were often described as `` hollywood punks '' and `` beach punks '' ,  referring to hollywood's central position in the original l . a .  punk rock scene and to hardcore's popularity in the shoreline communities of south bay and orange county . 
alternative rock encompasses a diverse set of styles—including gothic rock ,  dream pop ,  shoegaze ,  and grunge ,  among others—unified by their debt to punk rock and their origins outside of the musical mainstream . 
the mainstream pop punk of latter-day bands such as blink-182 is criticized by many punk rock devotees; in critic christine di bella's words ,  `` it's punk taken to its most accessible point ,  a point where it barely reflects its lineage at all ,  except in the three-chord song structures . `` 
in 1977 the influence of punk rock music and subculture became more pervasive ,  spreading throughout various countries worldwide . 
an example of a code of law in ancient india is the manusmṛti or laws of manu . 
indian political philosophy in ancient times demarcated a clear distinction between  -lrb-  1 -rrb- nation and state  -lrb-  2 -rrb- religion and state . 
according to aquinas ,  there are four kinds of law:
aquinas never discusses the nature or categorization of canon law . 
the initiative has not made puerto rico into a state . 
puerto rico has its own puerto rico national guard ,  and its own state defense force ,  the puerto rico state guard ,  which by local law is under the authority of the puerto rico national guard . 
in 1936, u . s . 
puerto rico means `` rich port '' in spanish . 
the commonwealth of puerto rico has an area of  ,  of which is land and is water . 
since 2007, the puerto rico state department has developed a protocol to issue certificates of puerto rican citizenship to puerto ricans . 
according to the 2010 census ,  the number of puerto ricans living in the united states outside of puerto rico far exceeds those living in puerto rico . 
in order to be eligible ,  applicants must have been born in puerto rico ,  born outside of puerto rico to a puerto rican–born parent ,  or be an american citizen with at least one year of residence in puerto rico . 
puerto rico's head of state is the president of the united states . 
in 1967 puerto rico's legislative assembly polled the political preferences of the puerto rican electorate by passing a plebiscite act that provided for a vote on the status of puerto rico . 
the application of the u . s .  constitution to puerto rico is limited by the insular cases . 
the official name of the entity in spanish is ``   -lrb-  `` free associated state of puerto rico ''  -rrb-  ,  while its official english name is commonwealth of puerto rico . 
the ancient history of the archipelago which is now puerto rico is not well known . 
the nature of puerto rico's political relationship with the u . s .  is the subject of ongoing debate in puerto rico ,  the united states congress ,  and the united nations . 
puerto rican elections are governed by the federal election commission and the state elections commission of puerto rico . 
puerto rico has 8 senatorial districts ,  40 representative districts and 78 municipalities . 
puerto rico adopted the name of `` estado libre asociado de puerto rico ''  -lrb-  literally `` associated free state of puerto rico ''  -rrb-  ,  officially translated into english as commonwealth ,  for its body politic . 
puerto rico's agricultural sector represents less than 1% of gnp . 
slavery was abolished in puerto rico in 1873, `` with provisions for periods of apprenticeship '' . 
since puerto rico is an unincorporated territory  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  and not a u . s .  state ,  the united states constitution does not fully enfranchise u . s .  citizens residing in puerto rico . 
the local government of puerto rico has requested several times to the u . s .  congress to exclude puerto rico from the jones act restrictions without success . 
other study estimates 63.7% european ,  21.2%  -lrb-  sub-saharan  -rrb-  african ,  and 15.2% native american; european ancestry is more prevalent in the west and in central puerto rico ,  african in eastern puerto rico ,  and native american in northern puerto rico . 
puerto rico is currently under the responsibility of united states northern command . 
in 1978, the special committee determined that a `` colonial relationship '' existed between the u . s .  and puerto rico . 
the united states and puerto rico began a long-standing metropolis-colony relationship . 
the puerto rico trench ,  the largest and deepest trench in the atlantic ,  is located about north of puerto rico at the boundary between the caribbean and north american plates . 
puerto rico officially designates itself with the term `` commonwealth of puerto rico '' in its constitution ,  as a translation into english of the term to `` estado libre asociado ''  -lrb-  ela  -rrb-  . 
this was the anniversary of july 25, 1898, landing of u . s .  troops in the puerto rican campaign of the spanish–american war ,  until then celebrated as an annual puerto rico holiday . 
puerto rico has recently become the permanent home of over 100,000 legal residents . 
the cost of living in puerto rico is high and has increased over the past decade . 
puerto rico consists of the main island of puerto rico and various smaller islands ,  including vieques ,  culebra ,  mona ,  desecheo ,  and caja de muertos . 
thousands had left puerto rico ,  with close to 200,000 having arrived in florida alone . 
he organized a protest at the university of puerto rico in 1935, in which four were killed by police . 
in puerto rico ,  public school instruction is conducted almost entirely in spanish . 
the climate of puerto rico in the köppen climate classification is tropical rainforest . 
puerto rico  -lrb-  spanish for `` rich port ''  -rrb-  ,  officially the commonwealth of puerto rico  -lrb-   ,  `` free associated state of puerto rico ''  -rrb-  and briefly called porto rico ,  is an unincorporated territory of the united states located in the northeast caribbean sea ,  approximately southeast of miami ,  florida . 
the commander-in-chief of both local forces is the governor of puerto rico who delegates his authority to the puerto rico adjutant general ,  currently brigadier general isabelo rivera . 
during an address to the puerto rican legislature in 1906, president theodore roosevelt recommended that puerto ricans become u . s .  citizens . 
the first school in puerto rico was the `` escuela de gramática ''  -lrb-  grammar school  -rrb-  . 
puerto rico has four schools of medicine and three aba-approved law schools . 
in 1947, the u . s .  granted puerto ricans the right to democratically elect their own governor . 
the official number of hurricane maria-related deaths as reported by the government of puerto rico is 64.
while some online stores do offer free shipping on orders to puerto rico ,  many merchants exclude hawaii ,  alaska ,  puerto rico and other united states territories . 
the population of puerto rico has been shaped by amerindian settlement ,  european colonization ,  slavery ,  economic migration ,  and puerto rico's status as unincorporated territory of the united states . 
the highest elevation in puerto rico ,  cerro de punta  ,  is located in this range . 
when columbus arrived in puerto rico during his second voyage on november 19, 1493, the island was inhabited by the taíno . 
on june 9, 2016, in commonwealth of puerto rico vs sanchez valle ,  a 6–2 majority of the supreme court of the united states determined that puerto rico is a territory and lacks sovereignty . 
the u . s .  senate did not approve his annexation proposal ,  and spain rejected the u . s .  offer of dollars for puerto rico and cuba . 
at the local level ,  puerto rico established by law that the international relations which states and territories are allowed to engage must be handled by the department of state of puerto rico ,  an executive department ,  headed by the secretary of state of puerto rico ,  who also serves as the territory's lieutenant governor . 
the agreement might cover topics such as the role of the u . s .  military in puerto rico ,  the use of the u . s .  currency ,  free trade between the two entities ,  and whether puerto ricans would be u . s .  citizens . 
puerto rico's future political status has consistently been a matter of significant debate . 
puerto ricans who become residents of a u . s .  state can vote in presidential elections . 
in 1950, the u . s .  congress granted puerto ricans the right to organize a constitutional convention via a referendum that gave them the option of voting their preference ,  `` yes '' or `` no '' ,  on a proposed u . s .  law that would organize puerto rico as a `` commonwealth '' that would continue united states sovereignty over puerto rico and its people . 
puerto ricans `` were collectively made u . s .  citizens '' in 1917 as a result of the jones-shafroth act . 
the largest and oldest university system is the public university of puerto rico  -lrb-  upr  -rrb-  with 11 campuses . 
the estimated population of puerto rico as of july 1, 2018, was 3,195,153 a 14.24% decrease since the 2010 united states census . 
on december 11, 2012, the legislative assembly of puerto rico enacted a concurrent resolution requesting the president and the congress of the united states to respond to the referendum of the people of puerto rico ,  held on november 6, 2012, to end its current form of territorial status and to begin the process to admit puerto rico as a state . 
the un's special committee on decolonization has often referred to puerto rico as a `` nation '' in its reports ,  because ,  internationally ,  the people of puerto rico are often considered to be a caribbean nation with their own national identity . 
it stated that the u . s .  justice department in 1959 reiterated that congress held power over puerto rico pursuant to the territorial clause of the u . s .  constitution . 
the constitution of puerto rico was approved by a constitutional convention on february 6, 1952, and 82% of the voters in a march referendum . 
emigration is a major part of contemporary puerto rican history . 
puerto rico has an operating budget of about u . s . $9.8 billion with expenses at about $10.4 billion ,  creating a structural deficit of $775 million  -lrb-  about 7.9% of the budget  -rrb-  . 
as those who leave tend to be better educated than those that remain ,  this accentuates the drain on puerto rico's economy . 
specifically ,  the basic question is whether puerto rico should remain a u . s .  territory ,  become a u . s .  state ,  or become an independent country . 
the official languages of the executive branch of government of puerto rico are spanish and english ,  with spanish being the primary language . 
ultimately ,  the report concluded that `` the effects of modifying the application of the jones act for puerto rico are highly uncertain '' for both puerto rico and the united states ,  particularly for the u . s .  shipping industry and the military preparedness of the united states . 
puerto rico hosts consulates from 41 countries ,  mainly from the americas and europe ,  with most located in san juan . 
in 1898, following the spanish–american war ,  the united states acquired puerto rico under the terms of the treaty of paris . 
in addition ,  this act extended all u . s .  laws `` not locally inapplicable '' to puerto rico ,  specifying ,  in particular ,  exemption from u . s .  internal revenue laws . 
the spanish of puerto rico has evolved into having many idiosyncrasies in vocabulary and syntax that differentiate it from the spanish spoken elsewhere . 
puerto rico is the only current u . s .  possession whose legal system operates primarily in a language other than american english: namely ,  spanish . 
puerto rico has become a major tourist destination ,  as well as a global center for pharmaceutical manufacturing . 
in late september 2017, hurricane maria made landfall in puerto rico ,  causing devastating damage . 
popper proposed falsifiability as an important criterion in distinguishing science from pseudoscience . 
the use of this criterion has the consequence that a theory can be scientific at one time and pseudoscientific at a later time . 
during the mid-20th century ,  the philosopher karl popper emphasized the criterion of falsifiability to distinguish science from nonscience . 
some statements and common beliefs of popular science may not meet the criteria of science . 
moreover ,  some specific religious claims ,  such as the power of intercessory prayer to heal the sick ,  although they may be based on untestable beliefs ,  can be tested by the scientific method . 
among the issues which can make the distinction difficult is variable rates of evolution among the theories and methods of science in response to new data . 
to demonstrate this point ,  popper gave two cases of human behavior and typical explanations from sigmund freud and alfred adler's theories: `` that of a man who pushes a child into the water with the intention of drowning it; and that of a man who sacrifices his life in an attempt to save the child . `` 
paul r .  thagard used astrology as a case study to distinguish science from pseudoscience and proposed principles and criteria to delineate them . 
popper summed up his criterion for the scientific status of a theory as depending on its falsifiability ,  refutability ,  or testability . 
pseudoscience is differentiated from science because – although it claims to be science – pseudoscience does not adhere to accepted scientific standards ,  such as the scientific method ,  falsifiability of claims ,  and mertonian norms . 
karl popper stated it is insufficient to distinguish science from pseudoscience ,  or from metaphysics  -lrb-  such as the philosophical question of what existence means  -rrb-  ,  by the criterion of rigorous adherence to the empirical method ,  which is essentially inductive ,  based on observation or experimentation . 
prp is a normal protein found on the membranes of cells . 
many different mammalian species can be affected by prion diseases ,  as the prion protein  -lrb-  prp  -rrb-  is very similar in all mammals . 
for example ,  unlike prp ,  prp may not necessarily be infectious . 
in yeast ,  protein refolding to the prion configuration is assisted by chaperone proteins such as hsp104.
until 2015 all known mammalian prion diseases were considered to be caused by the prion protein ,  prp; in 2015 multiple system atrophy was found to be transmissible and was hypothesized to be caused by a new prion ,  the misfolded form of a protein called alpha-synuclein . 
an alternative model assumes that prp exists only as fibrils ,  and that fibril ends bind prp and convert it into prp . 
the protein that prions are made of  -lrb-  prp  -rrb-  is found throughout the body ,  even in healthy people and animals . 
the physiological function of the prion protein remains poorly understood . 
the infectious isoform of prp ,  known as prp ,  is able to convert normal prp proteins into the infectious isoform by changing their conformation ,  or shape; this ,  in turn ,  alters the way the proteins interconnect . 
one idea ,  the `` protein x '' hypothesis ,  is that an as-yet unidentified cellular protein  -lrb-  protein x  -rrb-  enables the conversion of prp to prp by bringing a molecule of each of the two together into a complex . 
protease-resistant prp-like protein  -lrb-  prp  -rrb-  is an isoform of prp from which is structurally altered and converted into a misfolded proteinase k-resistant form `` in vitro '' . 
all known prion diseases are untreatable and fatal . 
the characteristic prion domains may vary between species – e . g .  ,  characteristic fungal prion domains are not found in mammalian prions . 
in research done in mice ,  it was found that the cleavage of prp proteins in peripheral nerves causes the activation of myelin repair in schwann cells and that the lack of prp proteins caused demyelination in those cells . 
the relatively inert noble gases ,  in group 18, bridge the most reactive groups of elements in the periodic table—the halogens in group 17 and the alkali metals in group 1.
groups 3–10 have no trivial names and are referred to simply by their group numbers or by the name of the first member of their group  -lrb-  such as `` the scandium group '' for group 3 -rrb- ,  since they display fewer similarities and/or vertical trends . 
a uniform decrease in electron affinity only applies to group 1 atoms . 
there are exceptions to these trends: for example ,  in group 11, electronegativity increases farther down the group . 
a `` group '' or `` family '' is a vertical column in the periodic table . 
a trend of decreasing electron affinity going down groups would be expected . 
the number of possible elements is not known . 
still other chemists further exclude the group 3 elements from the definition of a transition metal . 
although scandium and yttrium are always the first two elements in group 3, the identity of the next two elements is not completely settled . 
in other tables ,  lutetium and lawrencium are the remaining group 3 members . 
simply following electron configurations ,  hydrogen  -lrb-  electronic configuration 1s  -rrb-  and helium  -lrb-  1s  -rrb-  should be placed in groups 1 and 2, above lithium  -lrb-  1s2s  -rrb-  and beryllium  -lrb-  1s2s  -rrb-  . 
since 2016, the periodic table has 118 confirmed elements ,  from element 1  -lrb-  hydrogen  -rrb-  to 118  -lrb-  oganesson  -rrb-  . 
in 1871, mendeleev published his periodic table in a new form ,  with groups of similar elements arranged in columns rather than in rows ,  and those columns numbered i to viii corresponding with the element's oxidation state . 
elements in the same group tend to show patterns in atomic radius ,  ionization energy ,  and electronegativity . 
the electron configuration or organisation of electrons orbiting neutral atoms shows a recurring pattern or periodicity . 
this is caused by the filling of the valence shell of the atom; a group 17 atom releases more energy than a group 1 atom on gaining an electron because it obtains a filled valence shell and is therefore more stable . 
electron affinity generally increases across a period . 
lanthanum and actinium are commonly depicted as the remaining group 3 members . 
hydrogen's chemical properties are not very close to those of the alkali metals ,  which occupy group 1.
elements in the same period show trends in atomic radius ,  ionization energy ,  electron affinity ,  and electronegativity . 
although all elements up to oganesson have been discovered ,  of the elements above hassium  -lrb-  element 108 -rrb- ,  only copernicium  -lrb-  element 112 -rrb- ,  nihonium  -lrb-  element 113 -rrb- ,  and flerovium  -lrb-  element 114 -rrb- have known chemical properties ,  and only for copernicium is there enough evidence for a conclusive categorisation at present . 
although groups generally have more significant periodic trends ,  there are regions where horizontal trends are more significant than vertical group trends ,  such as the f-block ,  where the lanthanides and actinides form two substantial horizontal series of elements . 
the f-block ,  often offset below the rest of the periodic table ,  has no group numbers and comprises lanthanides and actinides . 
though the group 3 elements show few of the characteristic chemical properties of the transition metals ,  they do show some of their characteristic physical properties  -lrb-  on account of the presence in each atom of a single d electron  -rrb-  . 
in 1789, antoine lavoisier published a list of 33 chemical elements ,  grouping them into gases ,  metals ,  nonmetals ,  and earths . 
from left to right across the four blocks of the long- or 32-column form of the periodic table are a series of linking or bridging groups of elements ,  located approximately between each block . 
the electron affinity of an atom is the amount of energy released when an electron is added to a neutral atom to form a negative ion . 
most industrial applications of potassium exploit the high solubility in water of potassium compounds ,  such as potassium soaps . 
the only common oxidation state for potassium is +1.
the body responds to the influx of dietary potassium ,  which raises serum potassium levels ,  with a shift of potassium from outside to inside cells and an increase in potassium excretion by the kidneys . 
the potassium ion is colorless in water and is very difficult to precipitate; possible precipitation methods include reactions with sodium tetraphenylborate ,  hexachloroplatinic acid ,  and sodium cobaltinitrite into potassium tetraphenylborate ,  potassium hexachloroplatinate ,  and potassium cobaltinitrite . 
elemental potassium does not occur in nature because of its high reactivity . 
potassium is the second least dense metal after lithium . 
there are 24 known isotopes of potassium ,  three of which occur naturally:  -lrb-  93.3%  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  0.0117%  -rrb-  ,  and  -lrb-  6.7%  -rrb-  . 
heavy crop production rapidly depletes the soil of potassium ,  and this can be remedied with agricultural fertilizers containing potassium ,  accounting for 95% of global potassium chemical production . 
potassium is formed in supernovae by nucleosynthesis from lighter atoms . 
the catholic church teaches that the pastoral office ,  the office of shepherding the church ,  that was held by the apostles ,  as a group or `` college '' with saint peter as their head ,  is now held by their successors ,  the bishops ,  with the bishop of rome  -lrb-  the pope  -rrb-  as their head . 
in the early christian era ,  rome and a few other cities had claims on the leadership of worldwide church . 
with the east–west schism ,  the eastern orthodox church and the catholic church split definitively in 1054.
when pope leo iii crowned charlemagne  -lrb-  800 -rrb- as roman emperor ,  he established the precedent that ,  in western europe ,  no man would be emperor without being crowned by a pope . 
in 1049, leo ix became pope ,  at last a pope with the character to face the papacy's problems . 
in the late 2nd century ad ,  there were more manifestations of roman authority over other churches . 
documents of the 1st century and early 2nd century indicate that the bishop of rome had some kind of pre-eminence and prominence in the church as a whole ,  as even a letter from the bishop ,  or patriarch ,  of antioch acknowledged the bishop of rome as `` a first among equals '' ,  though the detail of what this meant is unclear . 
the pope  -lrb-   from `` pappas '' ,  `` father ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the supreme pontiff  -lrb-  from latin `` pontifex maximus '' `` greatest priest ''  -rrb-  ,  is the bishop of rome and `` ex officio '' leader of the worldwide catholic church . 
the catholic church teaches that jesus personally appointed peter as leader of the church ,  and the catholic church's dogmatic constitution `` lumen gentium '' makes a clear distinction between apostles and bishops ,  presenting the latter as the successors of the former ,  with the pope as successor of peter ,  in that he is head of the bishops as peter was head of the apostles . 
in the first month ,  on the fourteenth day of the month at dusk is the lord's passover . 
the passover begins on the 15th day of the month of nisan ,  which typically falls in march or april of the gregorian calendar . 
to ensure that passover did not start before spring ,  the tradition in ancient israel held that the first day of nisan would not start until the barley was ripe ,  being the test for the onset of spring . 
the biblical regulations for the observance of the festival require that all leavening be disposed of before the beginning of the 15th of nisan an unblemished lamb or goat ,  known as the korban pesach or `` paschal lamb '' ,  is to be set apart on nisan 10, and slaughtered at dusk as nisan 14 ends in preparation for the 15th of nisan when it will be eaten after being roasted . 
the term `` pesach ''  -lrb-  hebrew:   -rrb-  may also refer to the lamb or goat which was designated as the passover sacrifice  -lrb-  called the `` korban pesach '' in hebrew  -rrb-  . 
passover commences on the 15th of the hebrew month of nisan and lasts for either seven days  -lrb-  in israel and for reform jews and other progressive jews around the world who adhere to the biblical commandment  -rrb-  or eight days for orthodox ,  hasidic ,  and most conservative jews  -lrb-  in the diaspora  -rrb-  . 
the karaite and samaritan passovers are each one day long ,  followed by the six-day festival of unleavened bread – for a total of seven days . 
karaites and samaritans use different versions of the jewish calendar ,  which are often out of sync with the modern jewish calendar by one or two days . 
in israel ,  passover is the seven-day holiday of the feast of unleavened bread ,  with the first and last days celebrated as legal holidays and as holy days involving holiday meals ,  special prayer services ,  and abstention from work; the intervening days are known as chol hamoed  -lrb-  `` weekdays of the festival ''  -rrb-  . 
in computing ,  the post office protocol  -lrb-  pop  -rrb-  is an application-layer internet standard protocol used by e-mail clients to retrieve e-mail from a mail server . 
 ''punch '' humorously appropriated the term to refer to its political cartoons ,  and the popularity of the `` punch '' cartoons led to the term's widespread use . 
 ''punch '' material was collected in book formats from the late nineteenth century ,  which included `` pick of the punch '' annuals with cartoons and text features ,  `` punch and the war ''  -lrb-  a 1941 collection of wwii-related cartoons  -rrb-  ,  and `` a big bowl of punch '' – which was republished a number of times . 
many punch cartoonists of the late 20th century published collections of their own ,  partly based on `` punch '' contributions . 
 ''punch '' was widely emulated worldwide and was popular in the colonies . 
this ocean has most of the islands in the world . 
along the pacific ocean's irregular western margins lie many seas ,  the largest of which are the celebes sea ,  coral sea ,  east china sea  -lrb-  east sea  -rrb-  ,  philippine sea ,  sea of japan ,  south china sea  -lrb-  south sea  -rrb-  ,  sulu sea ,  tasman sea ,  and yellow sea  -lrb-  west sea of korea  -rrb-  . 
the pacific ocean is the largest and deepest of earth's oceanic divisions . 
it extends from the arctic ocean in the north to the southern ocean  -lrb-  or ,  depending on definition ,  to antarctica  -rrb-  in the south and is bounded by asia and australia in the west and the americas in the east . 
he named it `` mar del sur ''  -lrb-  literally ,  `` sea of the south '' or `` south sea ''  -rrb-  because the ocean was to the south of the coast of the isthmus where he first observed the pacific . 
the volume of the pacific ocean ,  representing about 50.1 percent of the world's oceanic water ,  has been estimated at some  . 
the pacific ocean is the only ocean which is almost totally bounded by subduction zones . 
from 1404 to 1433 zheng he led expeditions into the indian ocean . 
to the north ,  the bering strait connects the pacific with the arctic ocean . 
by contrast ,  the atlantic ocean is increasing in size . 
on the western side of the pacific ocean the dutch threatened the spanish philippines . 
the east side of the ocean was discovered by spanish explorer vasco núñez de balboa in 1513 after his expedition crossed the isthmus of panama and reached a new ocean . 
the southern pacific ocean harbors the southeast indian ridge crossing from south of australia turning into the pacific-antarctic ridge  -lrb-  north of the south pole  -rrb-  and merges with another ridge  -lrb-  south of south america  -rrb-  to form the east pacific rise which also connects with another ridge  -lrb-  south of north america  -rrb-  which overlooks the juan de fuca ridge . 
the western pacific has many peripheral seas . 
in the 16th and 17th centuries spain considered the pacific ocean a `` mare clausum ''—a sea closed to other naval powers . 
for most of magellan's voyage from the strait of magellan to the philippines ,  the explorer indeed found the ocean peaceful . 
the coral reefs of the south pacific are low-lying structures that have built up on basaltic lava flows under the ocean's surface . 
the martin waldseemüller map of 1507 was the first to show the americas separating two distinct oceans . 
it is the 104th-largest island in the world and canada's 23rd-largest island . 
prince edward island  -lrb-  pei or p . e . i . 
the island's landscape is pastoral . 
the island has the highest concentration of roadways in canada . 
prince edward island is home to one university ,  the university of prince edward island  -lrb-  upei  -rrb-  ,  located in the city of charlottetown . 
prince edward island entered confederation on july 1, 1873.
prince edward island is also home to maritime christian college . 
according to the 2016 census ,  the province of prince edward island has 142,907 residents . 
great britain claimed the island as part of nova scotia in 1763, when france gave up its claim to the island . 
as such ,  the queen's representative ,  the lieutenant governor of prince edward island  -lrb-  presently antoinette perry  -rrb-  ,  carries out most of the royal duties in prince edward island . 
in 1534, jacques cartier was the first european to see the island . 
in french ,  the island is today called `` île-du-prince-édouard '' ,  but its former french name ,  as part of acadia ,  was `` île saint-jean ''  -lrb-  st .  john's island  -rrb-  . 
the centre is one of the 22 national historic sites of canada located in prince edward island . 
the following island landmarks are also named after the duke of kent:
prince edward island has one of canada's highest provincial retail sales tax rates ,  at 9% . 
prince edward island is located in the gulf of st .  lawrence ,  west of cape breton island ,  north of the nova scotia peninsula ,  and east of new brunswick . 
as with all natural harbours on the island ,  charlottetown and summerside harbours are created by rias . 
in the mid-1760s ,  a survey team divided the island into 67 lots . 
there is an extensive bicycling and hiking trail that spans the island . 
many of these lands also were fertile ,  and were some of the key factors to sustaining prince edward island's economy . 
the first british governor of st .  john's island ,  walter patterson ,  was appointed in 1769.
as the land rebounded from the weight of the ice ,  the island rose up to elevate it further from the surrounding water . 
prince edward island is governed by a parliamentary government within the construct of constitutional monarchy; the monarchy in prince edward island is the foundation of the executive ,  legislative ,  and judicial branches . 
after capturing louisbourg during the war of the austrian succession ,  the new englanders also attacked île saint-jean  -lrb-  prince edward island  -rrb-  . 
the island's lush landscape has a strong bearing on its economy and culture . 
in september 1864, prince edward island hosted the charlottetown conference ,  which was the first meeting in the process leading to the quebec resolutions and the creation of canada in 1867.
prince edward island used to have native moose ,  bear ,  caribou ,  wolf ,  and other larger species . 
the land was once owned and used by canadian national railway  -lrb-  cn  -rrb-  as a rail line on the island . 
the average family income on prince edward island is $62,110/year ,  and the minimum wage of $10.50/hour as of july 1, 2015.
most of the bedrock in prince edward island is composed of red sandstone ,  part of the permian aged pictou group . 
to remove confusion about how it could be that pgp 3 was the successor to pgp 4, pgp 3 was renamed and released as pgp 5 in may 1997.
the pgp desktop 9.x family includes pgp desktop email ,  pgp whole disk encryption ,  and pgp netshare . 
phil zimmermann developed pgp in 1991.
during this turmoil ,  zimmermann's team worked on a new version of pgp encryption called pgp 3.
pgp can be used to send messages confidentially . 
the symantec pgp platform has now undergone a rename . 
with pgp desktop 9.x managed by pgp universal server 2.x ,  first released in 2005, all pgp encryption applications are based on a new proxy-based architecture . 
phil zimmermann created the first version of pgp encryption in 1991.
the pgp universal server automates the creation ,  management ,  and expiration of keys ,  sharing these keys among all pgp encryption applications . 
pgp supports message authentication and integrity checking . 
recent pgp versions have also supported certificate expiration dates . 
therefore ,  it is essential that partners in pgp communication understand each other's capabilities or at least agree on pgp settings . 
the source code of pgp desktop 10 is available for peer review . 
since the 2002 purchase of nai's pgp assets ,  pgp corporation has offered worldwide pgp technical support from its offices in draper ,  utah; offenbach ,  germany; and tokyo ,  japan . 
with the advancement of cryptography ,  parts of pgp have been criticized for being dated:
in a posting of june 5, 2001, entitled `` pgp marks 10th anniversary '' ,  zimmermann describes the circumstances surrounding his release of pgp:
current versions of pgp encryption include both options through an automated key management server . 
the problem of correctly identifying a public key as belonging to a particular user is not unique to pgp . 
decks with fewer than 52 cards are known as stripped decks . 
michael dummett speculated that mamluk cards may have descended from an earlier deck which consisted of 48 cards divided into four suits each with ten pip cards and two court cards . 
a pinochle deck consists of two copies of a 24 card schnapsen deck ,  thus 48 cards . 
packs of 56 cards containing in each suit a king ,  queen ,  knight ,  and knave  -lrb-  as in tarot  -rrb-  were once common in the 15th century . 
this was followed by the innovation of reversible court cards . 
latin decks usually drop the higher-valued pip cards ,  while germanic decks drop the lower-valued ones . 
contemporary playing cards are grouped into three broad categories based on the suits they use: french ,  latin ,  and germanic . 
french decks come in a variety of patterns and deck sizes . 
panels on the pip cards in two suits show they had a reverse ranking ,  a feature found in madiao ,  `` ganjifa '' ,  and old european card games like ombre ,  tarot ,  and maw . 
the 78 card tarot nouveau adds the knight card between queens and jacks along with 21 numbered trumps and the unnumbered fool . 
such design may be uncomfortable for left-handed people who may prefer all four corners of the card to be used . 
the simplest definition is `` the study of ancient life '' . 
family-tree relationships may also help to narrow down the date when lineages first appeared . 
paleontology even contributes to astrobiology ,  the investigation of possible life on other planets ,  by developing models of how life may have arisen and by providing techniques for detecting evidence of life . 
body fossils and trace fossils are the principal types of evidence about ancient life ,  and geochemical evidence has helped to decipher the evolution of life before there were organisms large enough to leave body fossils . 
some scientists have proposed that life on earth was `` seeded '' from elsewhere ,  but most research concentrates on various explanations of how life could have arisen independently on earth . 
the sparseness of the fossil record means that organisms are expected to exist long before and after they are found in the fossil record – this is known as the signor–lipps effect . 
the evolutionary history of life stretches back to over  ,  possibly as far as  . 
geochemical observations may help to deduce the global level of biological activity at a certain period ,  or the affinity of certain fossils . 
paleontology lies on the boundary between biology and geology since paleontology focuses on the record of past life but its main source of evidence is fossils ,  which are found in rocks . 
for about 2,000 million years microbial mats ,  multi-layered colonies of different types of bacteria ,  were the dominant life on earth . 
multicellular life is composed only of eukaryotic cells ,  and the earliest evidence for it is the francevillian group fossils from  ,  although specialisation of cells for different functions first appears between  -lrb-  a possible fungus  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  a probable red alga  -rrb-  . 
analyses of carbon isotope ratios may help to explain major transitions such as the permian–triassic extinction event . 
also ,  conventional ball-point pens can be modified to work in most pen plotters . 
pen plotters print by moving a pen or other instrument across the surface of a piece of paper . 
there are many types of plotter pen ,  some of which are no longer mass-produced . 
a number of printer control languages were created to operate pen plotters ,  and transmit commands like `` lift pen from paper '' ,  `` place pen on paper '' ,  or `` draw a line from here to here '' . 
indeed ,  most modern pen plotters have commands to control slewing speed ,  depending on the type of pen currently in use . 
changing the color or width of a line required the plotter to change pens . 
unlike other printer types ,  pen plotter speed is measured by pen speed and acceleration rate ,  instead of by page printing speed . 
early pen plotters ,  e . g .  ,  the calcomp 565 of 1959, worked by placing the paper over a roller that moved the paper back and forth for x motion ,  while the pen moved back and forth on a track for y motion . 
ball-point plotter pens with refillable clear plastic ink reservoirs are available . 
this program instructs the plotter ,  in order ,  to take the first pen  -lrb-  sp1 = select pen 1 -rrb- ,  to go to coordinates x=500, y=500 on the paper sheet  -lrb-  pa = plot absolute  -rrb-  ,  to lower the pen against the paper  -lrb-  pd = pen down  -rrb-  ,  to move 1000 units in the y direction  -lrb-  thus drawing a vertical line - pr = plot relative  -rrb-  ,  to lift the pen  -lrb-  pu = pen up  -rrb-  and finally to put it back in its stall . 
this was either done manually on small plotters ,  but more typically the plotter would have a magazine of four or more pens which could be automatically mounted . 
cutting plotters use knives to cut into a piece of material  -lrb-  such as paper ,  mylar or vinyl  -rrb-  that is lying on the flat surface area of the plotter . 
there are two common rules regarding wild cards: `` fully wild '' cards and the `` bug '' . 
a card which is not wild may be referred to as a natural card . 
a card that is fully wild can be designated by its holder as any card they choose with no restrictions . 
a wild card in card games is one that may be used to represent any other playing card ,  sometimes with certain restrictions . 
for example ,  if one player has the high hand on showdown ,  and two other players tie for the best low hand ,  the high hand wins half of the pot and each low hand wins only a quarter of the pot . 
high-low split games are those in which the pot is divided between the player with the best traditional hand  -lrb-  called the high hand  -rrb-  and the player with the low hand . 
in a cards speak game ,  all players simply reveal their cards at showdown and the hands are evaluated by all players; high hand wins half of the pot and low hand wins the other half . 
a kicker ,  also called a side card ,  is a card in a poker hand that does not itself take part in determining the rank of the hand ,  but that may be used to break ties between hands of the same rank . 
kickers take on special importance in texas hold 'em ,  because a common winning hand is one card in a player's hand matched with a card on the board ,  while the player's second card acts as a kicker . 
 -lrb-  both the player and the bet may be referred to as big or small blind .   -rrb- 
the small blind is placed by the player to the left of the dealer button and the big blind is then posted by the next player to the left . 
generally ,  the `` big blind '' is equal to the minimum bet . 
in such a situation ,  if a player misses his or her big blind ,  he or she will not be dealt in again until the button has passed . 
it is possible to play without blinds . 
a player who loses his or her chips in this manner is said to have been `` blinded off . `` 
under such rules ,  players do not have an inherent right to view mucked hands . 
if there is a side pot ,  players involved in the side pot should show their hands before anyone who is all-in for only the main pot . 
the player who checked then raises in the same round . 
this might be done ,  for example ,  when the first player believes that an opponent has an inferior hand and will not call a direct bet ,  but that they may attempt to bluff ,  allowing the first player to win more money than they would by betting straightforwardly . 
in older poker material and among stud and draw poker players ,  it is sometimes referred to as `` sandbagging '' . 
one can replace any round of  -lrb-  or add a round to  -rrb-  a stud poker game with a twist round ,  in which each player is offered the option to replace exactly one card in his hand with a new one from the remaining deck stub . 
it removed all the cards from 6 to 3 to create a 36-card deck . 
the opposite of a stripped deck is an expanded deck . 
the most popular card game in 16th-century europe was piquet ,  played with a 36-card deck that dropped ranks from 5 to 2.
many card games use stripped decks ,  and stripped decks for popular games are commercially available . 
the game of euchre is also played with a 24-card stripped deck ,  consisting of only 9-10-j-q-k-a of each suit ,  the 2-8 being stripped from the deck . 
when playing cards first arrived in europe during the 1370s ,  they had the same format as the modern standard 52-card deck ,  consisting of four suits each with ten pip cards and three face cards . 
rolling tobacco ,  or cigarette tobacco ,  is the primary tobacco used for r-y-o cigarettes . 
this increase has caused many people to switch to using pipe tobacco to make cigarettes ,  since the pipe tobacco tax rate was also increased ,  but only to $2.83 per pound . 
by contrast ,  in the netherlands about half of all tobacco smoked in the country is ryo because of price differences . 
the least amount of supplies needed to roll one's own cigarettes includes tobacco and rolling papers . 
rollout or roll 'em out is poker jargon used for a game phase in certain poker variants . 
they resemble stud poker only in that cards are revealed to other players one at a time for each betting round . 
that is ,  in a cards speak game ,  players all reveal their hands at the showdown ,  and whoever has the highest hand wins the high half of the pot and whoever has the lowest hand wins the low half . 
the `` cards speak '' rule does not address the awarding of a pot ,  player responsibilities ,  or the similar one player to a hand rule . 
one may declare a number of cards to draw in a draw poker game  -lrb-  which is typically not binding  -rrb-  ,  or one may declare some other choice specific to the variant being played . 
in the game of poker ,  a betting round is said to be closed if no player will have the right to raise in the round . 
the term is also used to describe a category of poker game in which no cards held by individual players are visible to any other player before the showdown . 
for a bet for value to be correct ,  a player must have a positive expectation ,  that is ,  he will win more than one bet for every bet he puts in the pot . 
a bet for value is in contrast to a `` bluff '' or a `` protection bet ''  -lrb-  though some bets may have a combination of these motives  -rrb-  . 
in poker ,  the nut hand is the strongest possible hand in a given situation . 
in texas hold 'em ,  if the board is 5♠ 6♠ a♣ 9♠ 5♥ ,  a player holding 7♠ 8♠ has the nut hand because those hole cards complete a 9-high straight flush of spades ,  which cannot be beaten by any other possible combination of hole cards and community cards . 
it is important to note that the `` actual '' nut hand may not be the same as the `` absolute '' nut hand; for example ,  if the board is 7♥ 2♣ k♠ k♥ 3♦ a player with k♣ k♦ has the absolute nut hand . 
to deliberately make such a bet solely to protect another player's hand constitutes collusion . 
a protection play differs from a bluff in that the bluff can win `` only '' when the opponent folds ,  while protection bet is made with a hand that is likely to win a showdown ,  but isn't strong enough for slow playing . 
an unseen card that would improve a drawing hand to a likely winner is an out . 
the number of outs can be converted to the probability of making the hand on the next card by dividing the number of outs by the number of unseen cards . 
in a poker game with more than one betting round ,  an out is any unseen card that ,  if drawn ,  will improve a player's hand to one that is likely to win . 
this adjusted pot value is known as the implied pot . 
assuming a $20 pot and one opponent ,  if bob bets $10  -lrb-  half the pot  -rrb-  ,  when his opponent acts ,  the pot will be $30 and it will cost $10 to call . 
in poker ,  pot odds are the ratio of the current size of the pot to the cost of a contemplated call . 
often a player will bet to manipulate the pot odds offered to other players . 
the expected value of a call is determined by comparing the pot odds to the odds of drawing a card that wins the pot . 
an opponent with a superior hand ,  will ,  on the other hand ,  continue ,   -lrb-  extracting additional bets or calls from the player  -rrb-  . 
now instead ,  suppose david in the cut-off position  -lrb-  to the right of the button  -rrb-  has the same k♥ j♠ and all players fold to him . 
there are 10 players playing $4/$8 fixed limit . 
steals being made in late position when everyone folds to the stealer ,  or when the game is short-handed ,  are the most common steals ,  but a raise under other conditions can also act as a steal . 
a steal is normally either an `` ante steal '' or `` blind steal ''  -lrb-  depending on whether the game being played uses antes or blinds  -rrb-  . 
in poker ,  dead money is the amount of money in the pot other than the equal amounts bet by active remaining players in that pot . 
isolation plays are most common against overly-aggressive players  -lrb-  `` maniacs ''  -rrb-  who frequently play inferior hands ,  or with players who may have a drawing hand . 
for instance ,  when a player has a small pocket pair he may raise a large amount simply to knock out other players because typically a small pocket pair is about 50–60% likely to win an all-in pot in a heads up situation ,  but less likely when facing multiple opponents . 
freeroll tournaments are not exclusive to poker . 
one applies to the play of a single hand ,  and the other describes an entire poker tournament . 
freerolls at internet poker sites should not be confused with their close counterpart -- play money tournaments . 
most if not all internet poker sites have freeroll tournaments although in many cases require a payment of points to play . 
a freeroll tournament is a tournament with no entry fee ,  although some freerolls require a payment at some point to gain entry to the tournament . 
both limit omaha/8 and pot limit omaha high are featured in the 8-game . 
while it is true that aggressive play is generally superior to passive play ,  using any play exclusively can lead to predictability . 
a player who is constantly aggressive and plays many inferior hands is called a `` maniac '' ,  and skilled players will take advantage of him by calling him more often ,  using isolation plays ,  and by other means . 
twelve perfect mongean shuffles restore a 52-card deck . 
the result ,  if one started with cards numbered consecutively formula_1, would be a deck with the cards in the following order: formula_2.
for a deck of given size ,  the number of mongean shuffles that it takes to return a deck to starting position ,  is known  . 
however ,  while the exact sequence of all cards in a randomized deck is unpredictable ,  it may be possible to make some probabilistic predictions about a deck that is not sufficiently randomized . 
the faro is a controlled shuffle which does not randomize a deck when performed properly . 
the mexican spiral shuffle is performed by cyclic actions of moving the top card onto the table ,  then the new top card under the deck ,  the next onto the table ,  next under the deck ,  and so on until the last card is dealt onto the table . 
the faro shuffle is performed by cutting the deck into two ,  preferably equal ,  packs in both hands as follows  -lrb-  right-handed  -rrb- : the cards are held from above in the right and from below in the left hand . 
shuffling is a procedure used to randomize a deck of playing cards to provide an element of chance in card games . 
if the top and bottom cards are weaved in during each shuffle ,  it takes 52 shuffles to return the deck back into original order  -lrb-  or 26 shuffles to reverse the order  -rrb-  . 
the most common way that players cheat with the overhand shuffle is by having a card at the top or bottom of the pack that they require ,  and then slipping it to the bottom at the start of a shuffle  -lrb-  if it was on top to start  -rrb-  ,  or leaving it as the last card in a shuffle and just dropping it on top  -lrb-  if it was originally on the bottom of the deck  -rrb-  . 
the mongean shuffle ,  or monge's shuffle ,  is performed as follows  -lrb-  by a right-handed person  -rrb- : start with the unshuffled deck in the left hand and transfer the top card to the right . 
in this instance ,  the deck is cut onto the aforementioned cut card ,  and the cut completed; this prevents players from seeing the bottom card of the deck . 
in many card games ,  to cut the cards  -lrb-  or to cut the deck  -rrb-  is a procedure used just prior to the cards being dealt to the players . 
the deck will be in the order  -lrb-  2,3. .  .  , 10,1 -rrb- . 
if a cut is requested by a player ,  it must be granted by the dealer . 
it can be demonstrated that multiple top-to-bottom  -lrb-  non-scarne's  -rrb-  cuts are equivalent to some single cut . 
work on the ancient languages of the near east progressed rapidly . 
another branch of philology ,  cognitive philology ,  studies written and oral texts . 
a related study method known as higher criticism studies the authorship ,  date ,  and provenance of text to place such text in historical context . 
a person who pursues this kind of study is known as a philologist . 
lewis ,  the main character ,  elwin ransom ,  is a philologist - as was lewis' close friend j .  r .  r .  tolkien . 
in the case of old persian and mycenaean greek ,  decipherment yielded older records of languages already known from slightly more recent traditions  -lrb-  middle persian and alphabetic greek  -rrb-  . 
linear b ,  a script used in the ancient aegean ,  was deciphered in 1952 by michael ventris and john chadwick ,  who demonstrated that it recorded an early form of greek ,  now known as mycenaean greek . 
phonetics  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a branch of linguistics that studies the sounds of human speech ,  or—in the case of sign languages—the equivalent aspects of sign . 
the relative percentage of each varies from oil to oil ,  determining the properties of each oil . 
some of the component of oil will mix with water: the water associated fraction of the oil . 
an oil well produces predominantly crude oil ,  with some natural gas dissolved in it . 
petroleum has mostly been recovered by oil drilling  -lrb-  natural petroleum springs are rare  -rrb-  . 
the first commercial oil well in canada became operational in 1858 at oil springs ,  ontario  -lrb-  then canada west  -rrb-  . 
by 347 ad ,  oil was produced from bamboo-drilled wells in china . 
the word `` petroleum '' comes from medieval latin `` petroleum ''  -lrb-  literally `` rock oil ''  -rrb-  ,  which comes from latin `` petra' ,  `` rock '' ,   -lrb-  from  ,  `` rock ''  -rrb-  and latin `` oleum '' ,  `` oil '' . 
in 1848 young set up a small business refining the crude oil . 
the proportion of light hydrocarbons in the petroleum mixture varies greatly among different oil fields ,  ranging from as much as 97 percent by weight in the lighter oils to as little as 50 percent in the heavier oils and bitumens . 
today ,  about 90 percent of vehicular fuel needs are met by oil . 
oil sands have been mined since the 18th century . 
between them ,  canada and venezuela contain an estimated of bitumen and extra-heavy oil ,  about twice the volume of the world's reserves of conventional oil . 
crude oil varies greatly in appearance depending on its composition . 
in the 19th century ,  the term `` petroleum '' was often used to refer to mineral oils produced by distillation from mined organic solids such as cannel coal  -lrb-  and later oil shale  -rrb-  ,  and refined oils produced from them; in the united kingdom ,  storage  -lrb-  and later transport  -rrb-  of these oils were regulated by a series of petroleum acts ,  from the `` petroleum act 1863 '' onwards . 
four different types of hydrocarbon molecules appear in crude oil . 
in formulating a solution to the problem of universals ,  the term 'particular' can be used to describe the `` particular '' instance of redness of a certain apple as opposed to the 'universal' 'redness'  -lrb-  being abstract  -rrb-  . 
the term particular is also used as a modern equivalent of the aristotelian notion of individual substance . 
chickens raised intensively for their meat are known as `` broilers '' . 
poultry  -lrb-    -rrb-  are domesticated birds kept by humans for their eggs ,  their meat or their feathers . 
world production of duck meat was about 4.2 million tonnes in 2011 with china producing two thirds of the total ,  some 1.7 billion birds . 
poultry also includes other birds that are killed for their meat ,  such as the young of pigeons  -lrb-  known as squabs  -rrb-  but does not include similar wild birds hunted for sport or food and known as game . 
since then ,  the keeping of chickens has spread around the world for the production of food with the domestic fowl being a valuable source of both eggs and meat . 
worldwide ,  more chickens are kept than any other type of poultry ,  with over 50 billion birds being raised each year as a source of meat and eggs . 
 ''poultry '' can be defined as domestic fowls ,  including chickens ,  turkeys ,  geese and ducks ,  raised for the production of meat or eggs and the word is also used for the flesh of these birds used as food . 
the quail is a small to medium-sized ,  cryptically coloured bird . 
the resulting bird ,  called a capon ,  has more tender and flavorful meat ,  as well . 
poultry is the second most widely eaten type of meat in the world ,  accounting for about 30% of total meat production worldwide compared to pork at 38% . 
china was also by far the largest producer of goose and guinea fowl meat ,  with a 94% share of the 2.6 million tonne global market . 
together with pig meat ,  poultry is one of the two most widely eaten types of meat globally ,  with over 70% of the meat supply in 2012 between them; poultry provides nutritionally beneficial food containing high-quality protein accompanied by a low proportion of fat . 
these quail are closely related to the common quail ,  and many young hybrid birds are released into the wild each year to replenish dwindling wild populations . 
poultry meat and eggs provide nutritionally beneficial food containing protein of high quality . 
poultry can be distinguished from `` game '' ,  defined as wild birds or mammals hunted for food or sport ,  a word also used to describe the flesh of these when eaten . 
the encyclopædia britannica lists the same bird groups but also includes guinea fowl and squabs  -lrb-  young pigeons  -rrb-  . 
identifying propaganda has always been a problem . 
propaganda may be administered in insidious ways . 
in the twentieth century ,  the term propaganda has often been associated with a manipulative approach ,  but propaganda historically was a neutral descriptive term . 
from the 1790s ,  the term began being used also to refer to `` propaganda '' in secular activities . 
the west and the soviet union both used propaganda extensively during the cold war . 
propaganda is often associated with material prepared by governments ,  but activist groups ,  companies ,  religious organizations and the media can also produce propaganda . 
 ''propaganda '' is a modern latin word ,  the gerundive form of `` propagare '' ,  meaning `` to spread '' or `` to propagate '' ,  thus `` propaganda '' means `` that which is to be propagated '' . 
some time has been spent analyzing the means by which the propaganda messages are transmitted . 
propaganda shares techniques with advertising and public relations ,  each of which can be thought of as propaganda that promotes a commercial product or shapes the perception of an organization ,  person ,  or brand . 
the use of propaganda in schools was highly prevalent during the 1930s and 1940s in germany in the form of the hitler youth . 
of all the potential targets for propaganda ,  children are the most vulnerable because they are the least prepared with the critical reasoning and contextual comprehension they need to determine whether a message is propaganda or not . 
a number of techniques based in social psychological research are used to generate propaganda . 
opposition to black propaganda is often unavailable and may be dangerous to reveal ,  because public cognizance of black propaganda tactics and sources would undermine or backfire the very campaign the black propagandist supported . 
propaganda was used extensively by communist forces in the vietnam war as means of controlling people's opinions . 
formula_5.
if ,  e . g .  ,  `` u '' is the speed of a particle ,  then the straightforward notation for its velocity is u ,  u ,  or formula_6.
the type of subscripts is expressed by their style ,  e . g . 
the fine-structure constant `` α '' is the best known dimensionless fundamental physical constant . 
a physical constant ,  sometimes fundamental physical constant or universal constant ,  is a physical quantity that is generally believed to be both universal in nature and have constant value in time . 
increasingly ,  however ,  physicists reserve the use of the term `` fundamental physical constant '' for dimensionless physical constants ,  such as the fine-structure constant `` α '' . 
physical constant in the sense under discussion in this article should not be confused with other quantities called `` constants '' that are assumed to be constant in a given context without the implication that they are fundamental ,  such as the `` time constant '' characteristic of a given system ,  or material constants ,  such as the madelung constant ,  electrical resistivity ,  and heat capacity . 
there are many physical constants in science ,  some of the most widely recognized being the speed of light in vacuum `` c '' ,  the gravitational constant `` g '' ,  the planck constant `` h '' ,  the electric constant `` ε '' ,  and the elementary charge `` e '' . 
notable examples are the speed of light `` c '' ,  and the gravitational constant `` g '' . 
any ratio between physical constants of the same dimensions results in a dimensionless physical constant ,  for example ,  the proton-to-electron mass ratio . 
paul dirac in 1937 speculated that physical constants such as the gravitational constant or the fine-structure constant might be subject to change over time in proportion of the age of the universe . 
the term `` fundamental physical constant '' is sometimes used to refer to universal but dimensioned physical constants such as those mentioned above . 
another type of parsley is grown as a root vegetable ,  the hamburg root parsley  -lrb-  `` p .  crispum radicosum '' group ,  syn . 
parsley attracts several species of wildlife . 
excessive consumption of parsley should be avoided by pregnant women . 
parsley is widely used in european ,  middle eastern ,  and american cooking . 
the two main groups of parsley used as herbs are french ,  or curly leaf  -lrb-  `` p .  crispum crispum '' group; syn . 
parsley is widely used in middle eastern ,  european ,  brazilian ,  and american cooking . 
parsley is the main ingredient in italian salsa verde ,  which is a mixed condiment of parsley ,  capers ,  anchovies ,  garlic ,  and sometimes bread ,  soaked in vinegar . 
parsley grows best in moist ,  well-drained soil ,  with full sun . 
peppermint  -lrb-  mentha '' × `` piperita ,  also known as `` mentha balsamea '' wild .   -rrb- 
peppermint is a fast-growing plant; once it sprouts ,  it spreads very quickly . 
although the genus `` mentha '' comprises more than 25 species ,  the most common one used is peppermint . 
this can be useful for randomized algorithms . 
a pseudorandom process is a process that appears to be random but is not . 
or use existing random number tables . 
even with all of this work ,  it is not truly random . 
the generation of random numbers has many uses  -lrb-  mostly in statistics ,  for random sampling ,  and simulation  -rrb-  . 
all these simulations require the use of random numbers and therefore pseudorandom number generators ,  which makes creating random-like numbers very important . 
the four most species-rich families in the order are:  the poales are the most economically important order of monocots and possibly the most important order of plants in general . 
the apg iii system  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- accepts the order within a monocot clade called commelinids ,  and accepts the following 16 families: the earlier apg system  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- adopted the same placement of the order ,  although it used the spelling `` commelinoids '' . 
in early systems ,  an order including the grass family did not go by the name poales but by a descriptive botanical name such as graminales in the engler system  -lrb-  update of 1964 -rrb- and in the hutchinson system  -lrb-  first edition ,  first volume ,  1926 -rrb- ,  glumiflorae in the wettstein system  -lrb-  last revised 1935 -rrb- or glumaceae in the bentham & hooker system  -lrb-  third volume ,  1883 -rrb- . 
in the 1970s ,  the american new left began using the term `` politically correct '' . 
the term `` politically correct '' was used infrequently until the latter part of the 20th century . 
the term probably entered use in the united kingdom around 1975.
an october 1990 `` new york times '' article by richard bernstein is credited with popularizing the term . 
in the us ,  the term has been widely used in books and journals ,  but in britain ,  usage has been confined mainly to the popular press . 
in may 1991, `` the new york times '' had a follow-up article ,  according to which the term was increasingly being used in a wider public arena:
stuart hall suggests one way in which the original use of the term may have developed into the modern one:
while earlier usage of the term referred to the strict adherence to political orthodoxy ,  the contemporary pejorative usage of the term emerged from conservative criticism of the new left in the late 20th century . 
 ''political correctness '' is a label typically used to describe liberal terms and actions ,  but not for equivalent attempts to mold language and behavior on the right . 
herbert kohl ,  in 1992, commented that a number of neoconservatives who promoted the use of the term `` politically correct '' in the early 1990s were former communist party members ,  and ,  as a result ,  familiar with the marxist use of the phrase . 
graham good ,  an academic at the university of british columbia ,  wrote that the term was widely used in debates on university education in canada . 
following the 2016 election ,  `` los angeles times '' columnist jessica roy wrote that `` political correctness '' is one of the key terms used by the american alt-right ,  who refer to it as being `` responsible for most of society's ills '' . 
in her essay `` toward a feminist revolution ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ellen willis said: `` in the early eighties ,  when feminists used the term 'political correctness' ,  it was used to refer sarcastically to the anti-pornography movement's efforts to define a 'feminist sexuality' . `` 
in the united states the term has played a major role in the 'culture war' between liberals and conservatives . 
this total number of chromosomes is called the chromosome number . 
the haploid number for humans  -lrb-  half of 46 -rrb- is 23; and the monoploid number equals 46 divided by the ploidy level of 2, which is also 23.
the monoploid number equals the chromosome number divided by the ploidy level: 48 chromosomes in total divided by a ploidy level of 4 equals a monoploid number of 12.
the number of chromosomes found in a single complete set of chromosomes is called the monoploid number  -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  . 
from 1966 to 1976, robie macauley was the fiction editor at `` playboy '' . 
christie hefner ,  daughter of the founder hugh hefner ,  joined playboy in 1975 and became head of the company in 1988.
playboy is an american men's lifestyle and entertainment magazine . 
the top ranked party school by `` playboy '' for 2009 was the university of miami . 
the novel `` fahrenheit 451 '' ,  by ray bradbury ,  was published in 1953 and serialized in the march ,  april and may 1954 issues of `` playboy '' . 
the first issue ,  in december 1953, was undated ,  as hefner was unsure there would be a second . 
in october 2015, playboy announced that starting with their march 2016 issue ,  the magazine would no longer feature full frontal nudity . 
the division between pennsylvanian and mississippian comes from north american stratigraphy . 
paul  -lrb-  louis-toussaint  -rrb-  héroult  -lrb-  10 april 1863 – 9 may 1914 -rrb- was a french scientist . 
because of this ,  the process was called the hall-heroult process . 
the permian is a geologic period and system which spans 47 million years from the end of the carboniferous period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  ,  to the beginning of the triassic period 251.902 mya . 
the concept of the permian was introduced in 1841 by geologist sir roderick murchison ,  who named it after the city of perm . 
a type ii-p supernova was discovered in the outer regions of m74 by robert evans in june 2003; the star that underwent the supernova was later identified as a red supergiant with a mass of 8 solar masses . 
