tolkien learned esperanto some time before 1909.
she explained that ,  because of tolkien's letter ,  everything had changed . 
tolkien had one sibling ,  his younger brother ,  hilary arthur reuel tolkien ,  who was born on 17 february 1894.
mabel tolkien taught her two children at home . 
tolkien arrived at the somme in early july 1916.
while waiting to be summoned to his unit ,  tolkien sank into boredom . 
on 8 january 1913, tolkien travelled by train to cheltenham and was met on the platform by edith . 
tolkien later lamented ,  `` the most improper job of any man  .  .  .  is bossing other men . 
in a 1941 letter to his son michael ,  tolkien recalled: on the evening of his 21st birthday ,  tolkien wrote to edith ,  who was living with family friend c .  h .  jessop at cheltenham . 
between 1951 and 1955, tolkien applied the term `` legendarium '' to the larger part of these writings . 
for tolkien ,  the result of this meeting was a strong dedication to writing poetry . 
on 5 june 1916, tolkien boarded a troop transport for an overnight voyage to calais . 
on 2 june 1916, tolkien received a telegram summoning him to folkestone for posting to france . 
following their engagement ,  edith reluctantly announced that she was converting to catholicism at tolkien's insistence . 
several other books take place in the fictional town of lichfield ,  virginia . 
between 1911 and 1913, he was employed by his uncle in the office of the branch coal mines in west virginia . 
in 1970, virginia commonwealth university ,  also located in richmond ,  named its main campus library `` james branch cabell library '' in his honor . 
his aunt was the suffragist and educationist mary-cooke branch munford . 
james branch cabell  -lrb-  ; april 14, 1879  – may 5, 1958 -rrb- was an american author of fantasy fiction and belles lettres . 
cabell delivered a more concise ,  historical treatment of the novel's events in `` the first virginian '' ,  part one of his 1947 work of non-fiction ,  `` let me lie '' ,  a book on the history of virginia . 
his later novel ,  `` the first gentleman of america: a comedy of conquest ''  -lrb-  1942 -rrb- ,  retells the strange career of an american indian from the shores of the potomac who sailed away with spanish explorers ,  later to return ,  be made chief of his tribe ,  and kill all the spaniards in the new virginia settlement . 
a great deal of cabell's work has focused on `` the biography of the life of manuel '' ,  the story of a character named dom manuel and his descendants through many generations . 
many of these books take place in the fictional country eventually ruled by manuel ,  known as `` poictesme '' ,   -lrb-  pronounced `` pwa-tem ''  -rrb-  . 
in 2006, for marketing purposes ,  sun renamed new `` j2 '' versions as `` java ee '' ,  `` java me '' ,  and `` java se '' ,  respectively . 
java uses comments similar to those of c++ . 
there were five primary goals in the creation of the java language:  ,  both java 8 and 11 are officially supported . 
the syntax of java is largely influenced by c++ . 
java itself is platform-independent and is adapted to the particular platform it is to run on by a java virtual machine for it ,  which translates the java bytecode into the platform's machine language . 
explicit memory management is not possible in java . 
sun generated revenue from java through the selling of licenses for specialized products such as the java enterprise system . 
java reuses some popular aspects of c++  -lrb-  such as the method  -rrb-  . 
end users commonly use a java runtime environment  -lrb-  jre  -rrb-  installed on their own machine for standalone java applications ,  or in a web browser for java applets . 
java contains multiple types of garbage collectors . 
sun microsystems released the first public implementation as java 1.0 in 1996.
jason  -lrb-  ; ancient greek: ἰάσων `` iásōn ''   -rrb-  was an ancient greek mythological hero who was the leader of the argonauts whose quest for the golden fleece featured in greek literature . 
jason's father is invariably aeson ,  but there is great variation as to his mother's name . 
judah ha-nasi  -lrb-   ,  yehudah hanasi or judah the prince  -rrb-  or judah i ,  also known as rabbi  -lrb-    -rrb-  or rabbenu haqadosh  -lrb-   ,  `` our master ,  the holy one ''  -rrb-  ,  was a second-century rabbi and chief redactor and editor of the `` mishnah '' . 
judah also said ,  `` one who is ignorant of the torah should not eat meat . `` 
before he died ,  judah said: `` i need my sons ! 
judah hanasi died on 15 kislev ,  am 3978  -lrb-  around december 1, 217 ce  -rrb-  . 
judah spent his youth in the city of usha . 
according to the talmud  -lrb-  avodah zarah 10a-b  -rrb-  ,  rabbi judah hanasi was very wealthy and greatly revered in rome . 
it is said that in judah's house ,  only the hebrew language was spoken ,  and even the maids spoke it . 
kerouac's mother inherited most of his estate . 
there is some confusion surrounding his name ,  partly because of variations on the spelling of kerouac ,  and because of kerouac's own statement of his name as jean-louis lebris de kerouac . 
 ''naw , ``  says kerouac ,  sweating and fidgeting . 
the success of `` on the road '' brought kerouac instant fame . 
kerouac also later wrote about the killing in his novel `` vanity of duluoz '' . 
while he is best known for his novels ,  kerouac is also noted for his poetry . 
kerouac greatly admired and was influenced by gary snyder . 
jack kerouac later referred to 34 beaulieu street as `` sad beaulieu '' . 
on may 17, 1928, while six years old ,  kerouac had his first confession . 
kerouac talked about the counterculture of the 1960s in what would be his last appearance on television . 
when his football career at columbia ended ,  kerouac dropped out of the university . 
kerouac described the experience in `` desolation angels '' and later in `` the dharma bums '' . 
in the spring of 1951, while pregnant ,  joan haverty left and divorced kerouac . 
jack kerouac and his literary works had a major impact on the popular rock music of the 1960s . 
kerouac's fame came as an unmanageable surge that would ultimately be his undoing . 
kerouac would go on for hours ,  often drunk ,  to friends and strangers about his method . 
in 2010, during the first weekend of october ,  the 25th anniversary of the literary festival `` lowell celebrates kerouac '' was held in kerouac's birthplace of lowell ,  massachusetts . 
these revisions have often led to criticisms of the alleged spontaneity of kerouac's style . 
both `` sur le chemin '' and `` la nuit est ma femme '' have also been translated to english by jean-christophe cloutier ,  in collaboration with kerouac ,  and were published in 2016 by the library of america in `` the unknown kerouac '' . 
though the work was completed quickly ,  kerouac had a long and difficult time finding a publisher . 
john antonelli's 1985 documentary `` kerouac ,  the movie '' begins and ends with footage of kerouac reading from `` on the road '' and `` visions of cody '' on `` the steve allen plymouth show '' in november 1959.
some believed that at times kerouac's writing technique did not produce lively or energetic prose . 
in 1944, kerouac was arrested as a material witness in the murder of david kammerer ,  who had been stalking kerouac's friend lucien carr since carr was a teenager in st .  louis . 
kerouac's novel is often described as the defining work of the post-world war ii beat generation and kerouac came to be called `` the king of the beat generation , ``  a term with which he never felt comfortable . 
the collective continues to be a mainstay of detroit's music scene . 
thanks to his technical abilities as a dj ,  mills became known as `` the wizard '' in the early to mid 1980s . in the late 1980s mills founded the techno collective underground resistance with fellow detroit techno producers 'mad' mike banks and robert hood but left the group to pursue a career as a solo artist in the early 90s . 
jeff mills  -lrb-  born june 18, 1963, in detroit ,  michigan  -rrb-  is an american dj ,  record producer and composer . 
he continued in the film industry with the release of the independent film `` life to death and back '' which he shot in the egyptian wing of the louvre museum in france ,  the same museum where he had a four-month residency . 
there in 1992, with fellow detroit native robert hood ,  he set up the record label axis ,  and later ,  sub-labels purpose maker ,  tomorrow ,  and 6277, all aiming for a more minimal sound than most of the techno being produced in those years . 
he would highlight local techno artists ,  giving light to artists such as derrick may ,  kevin saunderson and juan atkins . 
major was interested in politics from an early age . 
major's premiership saw the ongoing war in bosnia . 
the party would not return to government until 2010, and did not win a parliamentary majority until 2015.
major became prime minister after thatcher's reluctant resignation in november 1990.
born in st helier ,  surrey ,  major grew up in brixton . 
although this translated into a much-reduced majority of 21 seats in the house of commons  -lrb-  down from a majority of 102 seats at the previous election  -rrb-  ,  this was enough for major to return as prime minister elected in his own right and give the conservatives their fourth consecutive victory ,  although the relatively small majority would go on to cause problems for major throughout his second term . 
later that day ,  major gave an interview to itn's michael brunson . 
major was succeeded by william hague as leader of the conservative party in june 1997.
since the death of margaret thatcher in 2013, major has been the oldest living former prime minister . 
following the 1987 election ,  major was promoted to the cabinet as chief secretary to the treasury . 
major's comfortable re-election as conservative leader failed to restore his authority . 
as chancellor ,  major presented only one budget ,  the first to be televised live ,  in early 1990.
major's second honeymoon as prime minister following his election victory did not last long . 
in spite of labour leader neil kinnock's repeated calls for an immediate general election after major became prime minister ,  it wasn't until february 1992 that major called an election for 9 april . 
major served as leader of the opposition for seven weeks while the leadership election to replace him was underway . 
from 1994 to 1997, major privatised british rail ,  splitting it up into franchises to be run by the private sector . 
the following day major travelled to buckingham palace to inform the queen of his resignation as prime minister . 
major was born on 29 march 1943 at st helier hospital and queen mary's hospital for children in st helier ,  surrey ,  the son of gwen major  -lrb-   coates ,  1905–1970 -rrb- and former music hall performer tom major-ball  -lrb-  1879–1962 -rrb- ,  who was sixty-three years old when major was born . 
major remained active in parliament after his resignation ,  regularly attending and contributing in debates . 
sir john major  -lrb-  born 29 march 1943 -rrb- is a british politician who served as prime minister of the united kingdom and leader of the conservative party from 1990 to 1997.
by april 1993, a mere 12 months after his general election triumph ,  john major's popularity as prime minister had slumped . 
for the rest of major's premiership the main argument was over whether britain would join the planned european single currency . 
the term `` jazz dance '' has been used in ways that have little or nothing to do with jazz music . 
in 1917, jazz pianist spencer williams wrote a song called `` shim-me-sha-wabble '' which inspired a jazz dance called the shimmy . 
contemporary jazz became well known because of shows like `` so you think you can dance '' . 
jacqui malone distinguishes between dances such as the lindy hop in the 1930s and bob fosse's choreography in a broadway musical such as `` chicago '' in the 1970s ,  though the term `` jazz dance '' has been applied to both . 
</poem>
 ''jabberwocky '' is considered one of the greatest nonsense poems written in english . 
when alice has finished reading the poem she gives her impressions:
this may reflect carroll's intention for his readership; the poem is ,  after all ,  part of a dream . 
the rest of the poem was written during carroll's stay with relatives at whitburn ,  near sunderland . 
parsons suggests that this is mirrored in the prosody of the poem: in the tussle between the tetrameter in the first three lines of each stanza and trimeter in the last lines ,  such that one undercuts the other and we are left off balance ,  like the poem's hero . 
many of the words in the poem are playful nonce words of carroll's own invention ,  without intended explicit meaning . 
 ''jabberwocky '' is a nonsense poem written by lewis carroll about the killing of a creature named `` the jabberwock '' . 
hofstadter also notes that it makes a great difference whether the poem is translated in isolation or as part of a translation of the novel . 
thompson was born in halifax ,  nova scotia . 
thompson was always a reluctant politician . 
thompson recommended john abbott ,  who ultimately accepted . 
she had great admiration for thompson and wrote frequently about him in her `` canadian journal '' . 
thompson retained the post of attorney general while he was prime minister . 
born in halifax ,  nova scotia ,  to john sparrow thompson and charlotte pottinger ,  he was of irish descent . 
after his resignation from government ,  thompson was immediately appointed to the nova scotia supreme court by the prime minister of canada ,  sir john a .  macdonald . 
thompson assumed the office of prime minister in 1892, a year later ,  when sir john abbott retired . 
after several failed overtures ,  john a .  macdonald finally recruited thompson to ottawa in 1885.
sir john thompson had been prime minister of canada for only two years when he died suddenly from a heart attack at the age of 49 on december 12, 1894.
s .  225 = bwv 225 -rrb- . 
bg cantata number = bwv number of the cantata  -rrb- :
there are over 1000 known compositions by bach . 
this edition ,  known as bwv ,  contained a few further updates and collation rearrangements . 
another consequence of the ordering principles of the bwv was that it tore known collections apart ,  for instance clavier-übung iii was partly in the organ compositions range  -lrb-  bwv 552 and 669–689 -rrb- ,  with the four duets listed among the keyboard compositions  -lrb-  bwv 802–805 -rrb- . 
macdonald called an election for 5 march 1891.
macdonald was returned for the ontario riding of carleton . 
macdonald's parents and sisters also returned to kingston ,  and hugh macdonald became a bank clerk . 
a number of sites associated with macdonald are preserved . 
in 1885 macdonald government enacted the chinese immigration act of 1885.
by 1876, macdonald and the conservatives had adopted protection as party policy . 
hugh john macdonald would be principally raised by his paternal aunt and her husband . 
soon after macdonald was called to the bar in february 1836, he arranged to take in two students; both became ,  like macdonald ,  fathers of confederation . 
macdonald's parents decided he should become a lawyer after leaving school . 
in july 1857, macdonald departed for britain to promote canadian government projects . 
sir john alexander macdonald  -lrb-  11 january 1815 – 6 june 1891 -rrb- was the first prime minister of canada  -lrb-  1867–1873, 1878–1891 -rrb- . 
the visit stretched for nearly a year before john and isabella macdonald married on 1 september 1843.
macdonald was born in scotland; when he was a boy his family immigrated to kingston in the province of upper canada  -lrb-  today in eastern ontario  -rrb-  . 
macdonald served as a private in the militia ,  patrolling the area around kingston ,  but the town saw no real action and macdonald was not called upon to fire on the enemy . 
in february 1843, macdonald announced his candidacy for the post of alderman in kingston's fourth ward . 
macdonald returned home to defend the treaty of washington against a political firestorm . 
in polls ,  macdonald has consistently been ranked as one of the greatest prime ministers in canadian history . 
on 6 november 1873, macdonald offered his resignation as party leader to his caucus; it was refused . 
macdonald began to drink heavily around this time ,  both in public and in private ,  which patricia phenix ,  who studied macdonald's private life ,  attributes to his family troubles . 
in early 1872, macdonald submitted the treaty for ratification ,  and it passed the commons with a majority of 66.
macdonald and his government faced immediate problems upon formation of the new country . 
even before cartier's death ,  macdonald attempted to use delay to extricate the government . 
the british parliament had merged upper and lower canada into the province of canada effective in 1841.
macdonald had once been tepid on the question of westward expansion of the canadian provinces; as prime minister he became a strong supporter of a bicoastal canada . 
diefenbaker pursued a `` one canada '' policy ,  seeking equality of all canadians . 
st .  laurent instead resigned ,  making diefenbaker prime minister . 
an economic downturn was beginning in canada by 1958.
when john diefenbaker took office as prime minister of canada on june 21, 1957, only one progressive conservative mp ,  earl rowe ,  had served in federal governmental office ,  for a brief period under bennett in 1935.
john george diefenbaker  -lrb-  ; september 18, 1895 – august 16, 1979 -rrb- was the 13th prime minister of canada ,  serving from june 21, 1957 to april 22, 1963.
diefenbaker characterized the tory program in a nationwide telecast on april 30: it is a program  .  .  .  for a united canada ,  for one canada ,  for canada first ,  in every aspect of our political and public life ,  for the welfare of the average man and woman . 
the liberals would be limited to less than half of that . 
diefenbaker appointed ellen fairclough as secretary of state for canada ,  the first woman to be appointed to a cabinet post ,  and michael starr as minister of labour ,  the first canadian of ukrainian descent to serve in cabinet . 
although the two leaders had a strong relationship ,  by 1960 us officials were becoming concerned by what they viewed as canadian procrastination on vital issues ,  such as whether canada should join the organization of american states  -lrb-  oas  -rrb-  . 
pearson and his liberals faltered badly in the campaign . 
the prime minister was returned in an ontario by-election within months . 
john diefenbaker had been interested in politics from an early age ,  and told his mother at the age of eight or nine that he would some day be prime minister . 
nonetheless ,  pearson formed a government with the support of the ndp . 
he remained an mp until his death in 1979, two months after joe clark became the first tory prime minister since diefenbaker . 
diefenbaker would often spend weekends with his parents in saskatoon . 
despite liberal misgivings that diefenbaker had committed canada to the system before consulting either the cabinet or parliament ,  pearson and his followers voted with the government to approve norad in june 1958.
the conservatives elected a floor leader ,  and in 1941 approached former prime minister meighen ,  who had been appointed as a senator by bennett ,  about becoming party leader again . 
he was the only progressive conservative  -lrb-  pc or tory  -rrb-  party leader after 1930 and before 1979 to lead the party to an election victory ,  doing so three times ,  although only once with a majority of seats in the house of commons of canada . 
bracken was elected to the commons in the 1945 general election ,  and for the first time in five years the tories had their party leader in the house of commons . 
two members of the government resigned the day after the government lost the vote . 
the liberals were ineffective in opposition ,  with the party in the midst of a leadership race after st .  laurent's resignation as party leader . 
in january 1957, diefenbaker took his place as leader of the official opposition . 
mackenzie king triumphed easily ,  and regained his position as prime minister . 
such an excuse presented itself when former minister of external affairs lester pearson attended his first parliamentary session as leader of the opposition on january 20, 1958, four days after becoming the liberal leader . 
by 1962, the american government was becoming increasingly concerned at the lack of a commitment from canada to take nuclear weapons . 
newman argued that but for diefenbaker's many defeats ,  he would never have become prime minister: if ,  as a neophyte lawyer ,  he had succeeded in winning the prince albert seat in the federal elections of 1925 or 1926,  .  .  .  diefenbaker would probably have been remembered only as an obscure minister in bennett's depression cabinet  .  .  . 
in early 1948, mackenzie king ,  by now aged 73, announced his retirement; later that year louis st .  laurent succeeded him . 
the kennedy administration began its dealings with canada badly ,  with kennedy mispronouncing diefenbaker's name in a press conference announcing the prime minister's visit to washington in february 1961.
the early 1980s were basquiat's breakthrough as a solo artist . 
tamra davis discussed her friendship with basquiat in a sotheby's video ,  `` basquiat: through the eyes of a friend '' . 
in 1982, basquiat worked briefly with musician and artist david bowie . 
a record price for a basquiat painting was made in 2007, when an untitled basquiat work from 1981 sold at sotheby's in new york for us$14.6 million . 
basquiat had romantic and sexual relations with both men and women . 
korean rapper t . o . p references basquiat in his 2013 single `` doom dada '' ,  when he says `` mic-reul jwin shindeullin ,  rap basquiat '' ,  which translates as: `` a god-given rap basquiat with a mic . `` 
his father ,  gérard basquiat ,  was born in port-au-prince ,  haiti ,  and his mother ,  matilde basquiat ,  who was of puerto rican descent ,  was born in brooklyn ,  new york . 
heads are seen as a major focal point of some of basquiat's most seminal works . 
basquiat sold his first painting in 1981, and by 1982, spurred by the neo-expressionist art boom ,  his work was in great demand . 
vernon states that basquiat's death inspired him to write the song after receiving a phone call from greg tate informing vernon of basquiat's death . 
in september 1968, at the age of seven ,  basquiat was hit by a car while playing in the street . 
in 2006 the equality forum featured jean-michel basquiat during lgbt history month . 
basquiat responded to the abstract ,  stylized logos with his oppositional graffiti style . 
in the song `` ten thousand hours '' ,  macklemore raps: `` i observed escher ,  i love basquiat '' ,  and on his song `` victory lap '' raps: `` unorthodox ,  like basquiat with a pencil '' . 
jean-michel basquiat  -lrb-  ; december 22, 1960 – august 12, 1988 -rrb- was an american artist of haitian and puerto rican descent . 
in memory of the late artist ,  keith haring created `` pile of crowns for jean-michel basquiat ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- . 
art critic bonnie rosenberg compares basquiat's work to the emergence of american hip hop during the same era . 
in 2018, jon batiste released an album named after basquiat's painting ,  `` hollywood africans '' . 
jean-michel basquiat was born in brooklyn ,  new york ,  on december 22, 1960, shortly after the death of his elder brother ,  max . 
after basquiat died of an overdose at the age of 27, his estate was controlled by his father gérard basquiat ,  who also oversaw the committee which authenticated artworks ,  and operated from 1993 to 2012 to review over 1000 works ,  the majority of which were drawings . 
until 2002, the highest amount paid for an original work of basquiat's was us$3,302,500, set on november 12, 1998, at christie's . 
in 1983, basquiat produced a 12-inch rap single featuring hip-hop artists rammellzee and k-rob . 
in 2005, poet m .  k .  asante published the poem `` samo '' ,  dedicated to basquiat ,  in his book `` beautiful . 
in 2017, the book `` radiant child '' ,  which told basquiat's life in a child-oriented way ,  won the caldecott medal . 
basquiat is referenced in jay-z and frank ocean's song `` oceans '': `` i hope my black skin don't dirt this white tuxedo before the basquiat show '' in the 2013 album `` magna carta holy grail '' . 
the constitutional act 1791 divided canada into the provinces of upper canada  -lrb-  ontario  -rrb-  and lower canada  -lrb-  quebec  -rrb-  . 
he was unable to return to upper canada and resigned his office in 1798.
simcoe finally reached kingston ,  upper canada on 24 june 1792.
the simcoes had five daughters before their posting in canada . 
slavery was thus ended in upper canada long before it was abolished in the british empire as a whole . 
by 1810, there were no slaves in upper canada ,  but the crown did not abolish slavery throughout the empire until 1834.
simcoe began construction of two roads through upper canada ,  for defence and to encourage settlement and trade . 
john graves simcoe  -lrb-  25 february 1752 – 26 october 1806 -rrb- was a british army general and the first lieutenant governor of upper canada from 1791 until 1796 in southern ontario and the watersheds of georgian bay and lake superior . 
following simcoe's work precipitated by the chloe cooley incident ,  the assembly passed the first act against slavery in the british empire in 1793, and the english colonists of upper canada took pride in this distinction with respect to the french-canadian populace of lower canada . 
the northwest indian war ended after the united states defeated the indians at the battle of fallen timbers . 
he was killed in an infantry charge during the peninsular war in 1812.
booth wrote in his diary:
in the letter ,  booth had written:
booth was the only one of the assassins to succeed . 
booth left school at 14 after his father's death . 
booth ignored an invitation to visit lincoln between acts . 
she was unaware of booth's deep antipathy towards lincoln . 
nobody knows exactly what booth said to the garretts ,  or they to him . `` 
booth was completely successful in carrying out his part of the plot . 
john wilkes booth slipped into lincoln's box that evening at around 10p . m . 
in 1907, finis l .  bates wrote `` escape and suicide of john wilkes booth '' ,  contending that a booth look-alike was mistakenly killed at the garrett farm while booth eluded his pursuers . 
booth later learned that lincoln had changed his plans at the last moment to attend a reception at the national hotel in washington—where booth was staying . 
booth was pro-confederate ,  but his family was divided ,  like many marylanders . 
robert e .  lee also expressed regret at lincoln's death by booth's hand . 
booth was strongly opposed to the abolitionists who sought to end slavery in the u . s . 
booth was already growing more obsessed with the south's worsening situation in the civil war and angered at lincoln's re-election . 
forty years later ,  when the centenary of lincoln's birth was celebrated in 1909, a border state official reflected on booth's assassination of lincoln . 
booth attended lincoln's second inauguration on march 4 as the guest of his secret fiancée lucy hale . 
booth lay in hiding in the maryland woods ,  waiting for an opportunity to cross the potomac river into virginia . 
john wilkes booth  -lrb-  may 10, 1838 – april 26, 1865 -rrb- was an american actor who assassinated president abraham lincoln at ford's theatre in washington ,  d . c .  on april 14, 1865.
conger tracked down jett and interrogated him ,  learning of booth's location at the garrett farm . 
lincoln stated that he was in favor of granting suffrage to the former slaves ,  and booth declared that it would be the last speech that lincoln would ever make . 
on the morning of good friday ,  april 14, 1865, booth went to ford's theatre to get his mail . 
after the assassination ,  booth fled on horseback to southern maryland and ,  12 days later ,  arrived at a farm in rural northern virginia where he was tracked down . 
quayle was also a u . s .  representative from 1977 to 1981 and was a u . s .  senator from 1981 to 1989 for the state of indiana . 
he secured re-nomination for vice president in 1992, but democrat bill clinton and his vice presidential running mate ,  al gore ,  defeated the bush/quayle ticket . 
in 1988, vice president and republican presidential nominee george h .  w .  bush chose quayle as his running mate . 
during his vice presidency ,  quayle made official trips to 47 countries . 
after spending much of his youth in arizona ,  quayle returned to his native indiana and graduated from huntington north high school in huntington ,  in 1965.
he won re-election in 1978 by the greatest percentage margin achieved to date in that northeast indiana district . 
quayle faced off against gore and stockdale in the vice presidential debate on october 13, 1992.
in the october 1988 vice presidential debate ,  quayle debated democratic candidate lloyd bentsen . 
in the 1992 election ,  bush and quayle were challenged in their bid for re-election by the democratic ticket of arkansas governor bill clinton and tennessee senator al gore ,  as well as the independent ticket of texas businessman ross perot and retired vice admiral james stockdale . 
on august 16, 1988, at the republican convention in new orleans ,  louisiana ,  george h .  w .  bush chose quayle to be his running mate in the 1988 united states presidential election . 
caesar and cleopatra were not married . 
caesar was acclaimed `` imperator '' in 60 and 45 bc . 
in 85 bc ,  caesar's father died suddenly ,  so caesar was the head of the family at 16.
little is recorded of caesar's childhood . 
in 60 bc ,  caesar sought election as consul for 59 bc ,  along with two other candidates . 
late in 48 bc ,  caesar was again appointed dictator ,  with a term of one year . 
caesar won ,  along with conservative marcus bibulus . 
pompey managed to escape before caesar could capture him . 
julius caesar was the first historical roman to be officially deified . 
the first goal was accomplished when caesar defeated pompey and his supporters . 
after the death of caesar ,  octavian ,  as the adoptive son of caesar ,  assumed the title of `` divi filius ''  -lrb-  son of a god  -rrb-  . 
it formally deified caesar as divus iulius in 42 bc ,  and caesar octavian henceforth became `` divi filius ''  -lrb-  `` son of the divine ''  -rrb-  . 
roman satirists ever after referred to the year as `` the consulship of julius and caesar . `` 
caesar now had a secure base from which to launch an invasion of britain . 
hearing of sulla's death in 78 bc ,  caesar felt safe enough to return to rome . 
however ,  suetonius' own opinion was that caesar said nothing . 
the history of caesar's political appointments is complex and uncertain . 
caesar's cognomen itself became a title; it was promulgated by the bible ,  which contains the famous verse `` render unto caesar the things which are caesar's ,  and unto god the things that are god's '' . 
caesar raised two new legions and defeated these tribes . 
caesar possibly had a genetic predisposition for cardiovascular disease . 
during this time ,  caesar was elected to his third and fourth terms as consul in 46 bc and 45 bc  -lrb-  this last time without a colleague  -rrb-  . 
faced with the choice between a triumph and the consulship ,  caesar chose the consulship . 
on the ides of march  -lrb-  15 march; see roman calendar  -rrb-  of 44 bc ,  caesar was due to appear at a session of the senate . 
after the triumph ,  caesar set out to pass an ambitious legislative agenda . 
caesar pursued pompey ,  hoping to capture pompey before his legions could escape . 
the result unforeseen by the assassins was that caesar's death precipitated the end of the roman republic . 
caesar was already in crassus' political debt ,  but he also made overtures to pompey . 
caesar then increased the number of magistrates who were elected each year ,  which created a large pool of experienced magistrates ,  and allowed caesar to reward his supporters . 
ballard later became an atheist . 
ballard also had an interest in the relationship between various media . 
in addition to his novels ,  ballard made extensive use of the short story form . 
ballard left the raf in 1955 after thirteen months and returned to england . 
in his introduction to `` vermilion sands '' ,  ballard cites this as his favourite collection . 
at university ,  ballard was writing avant-garde fiction heavily influenced by psychoanalysis and surrealist painters . 
with the exception of his autobiographical novels ,  ballard most commonly wrote in the post-apocalyptic dystopia genre . 
ballard's disturbing novel was turned into a controversial—and likewise disturbing—cerebral film by david cronenberg . 
later that year his second novel ,  `` the drowned world '' ,  was published ,  establishing ballard as a notable figure in the fledgling new wave movement of science fiction . 
in late 1945, after the end of the war ,  his mother returned to britain with ballard and his sister on the ss `` arawa '' . 
in 1964 ballard's wife mary died suddenly of pneumonia ,  leaving him to raise their three children – james ,  fay and bea ballard – by himself . 
from 1958 ballard worked as assistant editor on the scientific journal `` chemistry and industry '' . 
ballard continued to write until the end of his life ,  and also contributed occasional journalism and criticism to the british press . 
it has been supposed that ballard's exposure to the atrocities of war at an impressionable age explains the apocalyptic and violent nature of much of his fiction . 
 ''fake news '' is also deliberately untruthful information which can often spread quickly on social media or by means of fake news websites . 
a news organization's budget inevitably reflects decision-making about what news to cover ,  for what audience ,  and in what depth . 
for this reason ,  journalists traditionally relied on top management to create and maintain a `` firewall '' between the news and other departments in a news organization to prevent undue influence on the news department . 
that goes for fake news ,  foreign interference in elections ,  and hate speech ,  as well as developers and data privacy . readers can often evaluate credibility of news by examining the credibility of the underlying news organization . 
starting in 1980 with the establishment of cnn ,  news channels began providing 24-hour news coverage ,  a format which persists through today . 
while publications reporting news to the general public in a standardized fashion only began to appear in the 17th century and later ,  governments as early as han dynasty china made use of regularly published news bulletins . 
because of these changes ,  the credibility ratings of news outlets has reached an all-time low . 
the role and status of journalism ,  as well as mass media ,  has undergone changes over the last two decades ,  together with the advancement of digital technology and publication of news on the internet . 
news from a variety of online sources ,  like blogs and other social media ,  results in a wider choice of official and unofficial sources ,  rather than only traditional media organizations . 
these bulletins ,  however ,  were intended only for government officials ,  and thus were not journalistic news publications in the modern sense of the term . 
as mass-printing technologies like the printing press spread ,  newspapers were established to provide increasingly literate audiences with news . 
however ,  though 69.2% of the surveyed journalists agreed that social media allowed them to connect to their audience ,  only 30% thought it had a positive influence on news credibility . 
the definition of 'fake news' above ,  could also be applied to the general category of 'propaganda' when it is applied to the field of political reporting . 
when crafting news stories ,  regardless of the medium ,  fairness and bias are issues of concern to journalists . 
opinion pieces are generally written by regular columnists or appear in a section titled `` op-ed '' ,  while feature stories ,  breaking news ,  and hard news stories typically make efforts to remove opinion from the copy . 
starting in the 1940s ,  united states broadcast television channels would air 10-to-15-minute segments of news programming one or two times per evening . 
journalistic media include print ,  television ,  radio ,  internet ,  and ,  in the past ,  newsreels . 
a 2014 study revealed that only 22% of americans reported a `` great deal '' or `` quite a lot of confidence '' in either television news or newspapers . 
anand won the tournament in a tie-break game over polgár . 
polgár returned to chess at the prestigious corus chess tournament on 15 january 2005.
polgár is considered the strongest female chess player of all time . 
polgár authored a series of children's books on chess ,  `` chess playground '' . 
1 in the world in 2009, 3½–½ to win the tournament . 
judit polgár  -lrb-  born 23 july 1976 -rrb- is a hungarian chess grandmaster . 
polgár has spoken of appreciating the psychological aspect of chess . 
in may–june 2007 she played in the candidates tournament for the fide world chess championship 2007.
in september 2005, polgár once again made history as she became the first woman to play for the world championship ,  at the fide world chess championship 2005.
in 2004, polgár took some time off from chess to give birth to her son ,  olivér . 
in october 1999, polgár participated in the four-player gm section of the vam chess tournament in hoogeveen ,  netherlands . 
in 1993, polgár became the first woman to ever qualify for a men's interzonal tournament . 
in april and may 2000, polgár won one of the strongest tournaments ever held in asia . 
 ''you have to be very selfish sometimes '' ,  said polgár in speaking of the life of a professional chess player . 
in 2010, polgár began her return to competitive chess and would play more than she had in recent years . 
in september 2011, polgár competed in the chess world cup ,  a 128-player tournament with a large prize fund and qualification to the top three for the world championship cycle . 
polgár is especially adept at faster time controls . 
in january 2000, polgár had ,  for her ,  a disappointing result in a tournament in pamplona ,  spain ,  which was won by nigel short . 
to begin 2012, in january polgár competed in the tradewise gibraltar tournament finishing with 7 points in 10 games . 
polgár won two ,  drew one and lost one and won $12,000 in prize money . 
by early 2003, polgár had worked her way back into the top 10 rated players in the world . 
she did not play at the 2006 linares tournament because she was pregnant again . 
in october and november 2002, polgár played on second board  -lrb-  with péter lékó on first  -rrb-  for hungary in the 35th chess olympiad . 
on 2 april 2011, polgár finished in a four-way tie for first in the european individual chess championship in aix-les-bains ,  france . 
however ,  in her game against veselin topalov ,  polgár pushed the eventual tournament winner and world champion to a seven-hour marathon before succumbing . 
rousseau's mother ,  suzanne bernard rousseau ,  was from an upper-class family . 
rousseau continued his interest in music . 
rousseau never learnt the truth . 
the trade of watchmaking had become a family tradition by the time of rousseau's father ,  isaac rousseau . 
rousseau published `` emile ,  or on education '' in may . 
rousseau helped roustan find a publisher for the rebuttal . 
rousseau later expressed regret that he had not replied to voltaire's invitation . 
rousseau was born in geneva ,  which was at the time a city-state and a protestant associate of the swiss confederacy . 
at this point ,  rousseau's friends in môtiers advised him to leave the town . 
when rousseau reached 20, de warens took him as her lover ,  while intimate also with the steward of her house . 
on returning to geneva in 1754, rousseau reconverted to calvinism and regained his official genevan citizenship . 
throughout his life ,  he generally signed his books `` jean-jacques rousseau ,  citizen of geneva '' . 
frederick made no known reply ,  but commented to keith that rousseau had given him a `` scolding '' . 
ten years later ,  rousseau made inquiries about the fate of his son ,  but no record could be found . 
jean-jacques rousseau's father ,  isaac ,  was not in the city at this time ,  but jean-jacques's grandfather supported fatio and was penalized for it . 
jean-jacques rousseau  -lrb-   ,  ; ; 28 june 1712 – 2 july 1778 -rrb- was a genevan philosopher ,  writer and composer . 
von neumann was a child prodigy . 
von neumann introduced the study of rings of operators ,  through the von neumann algebras . 
in 1955, von neumann became a commissioner of the aec . 
von neumann was a founding figure in computing . 
some of von neumann's early computer programs have been preserved . 
von neumann founded the field of continuous geometry . 
von neumann's results have been viewed as a special case of linear programming ,  where von neumann's model uses only nonnegative matrices . 
the direct integral was later introduced in 1949 by john von neumann . 
neumann jános became margittai neumann jános  -lrb-  john neumann de margitta  -rrb-  ,  which he later changed to the german johann von neumann . 
von neumann made fundamental contributions to mathematical statistics . 
prior to his marriage to marietta ,  von neumann was baptized a catholic in 1930.
in 1955, von neumann was diagnosed with what was either bone or pancreatic cancer . 
von neumann entered the lutheran fasori evangélikus gimnázium in 1911.
during the 1930s ,  von neumann became an authority on the mathematics of shaped charges . 
in any case ,  gleason's theorem of 1957 fills the gaps in von neumann's approach . 
by then von neumann had already written his famous articles on operator theory ,  and the application of this work was instrumental in the von neumann mean ergodic theorem . 
von neumann's algorithm was the first interior point method of linear programming . 
von neumann made fundamental contributions in the field of fluid dynamics . 
von neumann founded the field of game theory as a mathematical discipline . 
von neumann was reportedly able to memorize the pages of telephone directories . 
it was evident from von neumann's face ,  that he had been unaware of lagrange's mécanique analytique . 
von neumann's hydrogen bomb work was played out in the realm of computing ,  where he and stanisław ulam developed simulations on von neumann's digital computers for the hydrodynamic computations . 
von neumann's closest friend in the united states was mathematician stanisław ulam . 
ulam noted that von neumann's way of thinking might not be visual ,  but more aural . 
when george dantzig brought von neumann an unsolved problem in linear programming `` as i would to an ordinary mortal '' ,  on which there had been no published literature ,  he was astonished when von neumann said `` oh ,  that ! 
at von neumann's 1926 doctoral exam ,  as he had never seen such beautiful evening clothes . 
von neumann addressed the evolutionary growth of complexity amongst his self-replicating machines . 
the von neumann–wigner interpretation has been summarized as follows:
when the 6-year-old von neumann caught his mother staring aimlessly ,  he asked her ,  `` what are you calculating ? `` 
on february 15, 1956, von neumann was presented with the medal of freedom by president dwight d .  eisenhower . 
quantum information theory is largely concerned with the interpretation and uses of von neumann entropy . 
subsequently ,  the concept of the von neumann universal constructor based on the von neumann cellular automaton was fleshed out in his posthumously published lectures `` theory of self reproducing automata '' . 
decades later ,  shannon developed an information-theoretic formula for use in classical information theory ,  and asked von neumann what to call it ,  with von neumman telling him to call it shannon entropy ,  as it was a special case of von neumann entropy . 
additionally ,  `` in the general case ,  von neumann proved the following basic representation theorem . 
von neumann's team performed the world's first numerical weather forecasts on the eniac computer; von neumann published the paper `` numerical integration of the barotropic vorticity equation '' in 1950.
halmos recounts a story told by nicholas metropolis ,  concerning the speed of von neumann's calculations ,  when somebody asked von neumann to solve the famous fly puzzle:
klara and john von neumann were socially active within the local academic community . 
peter lax wrote `` von neumann was addicted to thinking ,  and in particular to thinking about mathematics '' . 
newton's niece alys newton later married mehul ,  a prince from india . 
newton did not however immediately renounce working in the slave trade . 
newton did not get along with the crew of `` pegasus '' . 
newton started his career at sea at a young age ,  and worked on slave ships in the slave trade for several years . 
newton later recounted this period as the time he was `` once an infidel and libertine ,  a servant of slaves in west africa . `` 
newton returned in 1748 to liverpool ,  england ,  a major port for the triangle trade . 
during his 1748 voyage to england after his rescue ,  newton had a spiritual conversion . 
newton also contributed to the cheap repository tracts . 
john newton was born in wapping ,  london ,  in 1725, the son of john newton sr .  ,  a shipmaster in the mediterranean service ,  and elizabeth  -lrb-  née scatliff  -rrb-  . 
instead ,  newton signed on with a merchant ship sailing to the mediterranean sea . 
while in west africa  -lrb-  1748–49 -rrb- ,  newton acknowledged the inadequacy of his spiritual life . 
newton became an ally of william wilberforce ,  leader of the parliamentary campaign to abolish the african slave trade . 
ramjets are ram powered jet engines . 
a jet engine is a type of reaction engine discharging a fast-moving jet that generates thrust by jet propulsion . 
jet engines power jet aircraft ,  cruise missiles and unmanned aerial vehicles . 
commonly aircraft are propelled by airbreathing jet engines . 
most airbreathing jet engines that are in use are turbofan jet engines ,  which give good efficiency at speeds just below the speed of sound . 
there are a large number of different types of jet engines ,  all of which achieve forward thrust from the principle of `` jet propulsion '' . 
following the end of the war the german jet aircraft and jet engines were extensively studied by the victorious allies and contributed to work on early soviet and us jet fighters . 
in general ,  jet engines are combustion engines . 
the earliest attempts at airbreathing jet engines were hybrid designs in which an external power source first compressed air ,  which was then mixed with fuel and burned for jet thrust . 
however some definitions treat it as a form of jet propulsion . 
jet propulsion technology then stalled for hundreds of years . 
chalker was posthumously awarded the phoenix award by the southern fandom confederation on april 9, 2005.
chalker was a three-term treasurer of the science fiction and fantasy writers of america . 
jack laurence chalker  -lrb-  december 17, 1944 – february 11, 2005 -rrb- was an american science fiction author . 
at the time of his death ,  chalker left one unfinished novel ,  `` chameleon '' . 
blish was a member of the futurians . 
from 1962 to 1968, blish worked for the tobacco institute ,  as a writer and critic . 
james benjamin blish  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an american science fiction and fantasy writer . 
blish was born on at east orange ,  new jersey . 
blish was what andrew litpack called a `` practical writer '' . 
blish died on from complications related to lung cancer . 
blish was commissioned by bantam books to adapt episodes of ``  '' . 
the library also has a complete catalog of blish's published works . 
blish attended meetings of the futurian science fiction society in new york city during this period . 
blish studied microbiology at rutgers university ,  graduating in 1942.
blish's `` chaos ,  co-ordinated '' ,  co-written with robert a .  w .  lowndes ,  was sold to `` astounding science fiction '' ,  appearing in the october 1946 issue ,  earning blish national circulation for the first time . 
madison's father died in 1801.
other things named for madison include madison square ,  james madison university ,  and the uss `` james madison '' . 
madison served in the virginia house of delegates from 1784 to 1786.
madison died at montpelier on the morning of june 28, 1836.
madison's promise paid off ,  as he won election to congress with 57% of the vote . 
madison served on the council of state from 1777 to 1779, when he was elected to the congress of the confederation . 
after serving congress from 1780 to 1783, madison won election to the virginia house of delegates in 1784.
after jackson accused madison of duplicity with erskine ,  madison had jackson barred from the state department and sent packing to boston . 
madison had begun to act as a steward of his father's properties by 1780.
madison succeeded jefferson with a victory in the 1808 presidential election ,  and he won re-election in 1812.
throughout the 1780s ,  madison advocated for reform of the articles of confederation . 
historians have generally ranked madison as an above-average president . 
early in his tenure ,  madison was a principal adviser of president washington ,  who looked to madison as the person who best understood the constitution . 
madison helped jefferson establish the university of virginia ,  though the university was primarily jefferson's initiative . 
as the attacks on american shipping continued ,  both madison and the broader american public were ready for war with britain . 
declining to seek re-election ,  madison left congress in 1797 and returned to montpelier . 
after the ratification of the constitution in 1788, madison won election to the united states house of representatives . 
after virginia ratified the constitution ,  madison returned to new york to resume his duties in the congress of the confederation . 
james madison jr .  was born on march 16, 1751,  -lrb-  march 5, 1751, old style ,  julian calendar  -rrb-  at belle grove plantation near port conway ,  virginia ,  to james madison sr .  and nelly conway madison . 
madison had presided over the expiration of the first bank of the united states's charter in 1811.
speculation regarding madison's potential succession of jefferson commenced early in jefferson's first term . 
madison was disappointed at the failure of virginians to resolve the issue more equitably . 
madison was disappointed that the bill of rights did not include protections against actions by state governments ,  but passage of the document mollified some critics of the original constitution and shored up madison's support in virginia . 
congress had repealed the embargo right before madison became president ,  but troubles with the british and french continued . 
madison was married for the first time at the age of 43; on september 15, 1794, james madison married dolley payne todd ,  a 26-year-old widow ,  at harewood ,  in what is now jefferson county ,  west virginia . 
madison resisted calls for war ,  as he was ideologically opposed to the debt and taxes necessary for a war effort . 
the `` journal of the travellers aid society '' won the h . g . 
imperium games published `` journal of the travellers' aid society '' #25 in 1996, and published their second and final issue of the `` journal of the travellers' aid society '' in 1997.
william a .  barton reviewed the `` merchant prince '' supplement from `` journal of the travellers aid society '' #12 in `` the space gamer '' no . 
the united kingdom does not have a single highest national court; the judicial committee is the highest court of appeal in some cases ,  while in most others the highest court of appeal is the supreme court of the united kingdom . 
the judicial committee of the privy council is the court of final appeal for the church of england . 
the judicial committee of the privy council  -lrb-  jcpc  -rrb-  is the highest court of appeal for certain british territories and commonwealth countries . 
 -lrb-  in scotland the highest court in criminal cases is the high court of justiciary; the supreme court is the highest court in civil cases and matters arising from scottish devolution ,  the latter previously having been dealt with by the judicial committee .   -rrb- 
at its height ,  the judicial committee was said to be the court of final appeal for over a quarter of the world . 
utgard was a stronghold surrounding the land of the giants . 
from jötunheimr ,  the giants menace the humans in midgard and the gods in asgard . 
he sometimes wrote under the pseudonym flavio anicio olibrio . 
