the guard of the mind is the practical goal of the hesychast . 
hesychasm is a mystical tradition of contemplative prayer in the eastern orthodox church . 
it is also assumed in the hesychast texts that the hesychast is a member of the orthodox church in good standing . 
the hesychast usually experiences the contemplation of god as light ,  the `` uncreated light '' of the theology of st gregory palamas . 
in general ,  the hesychast restricts his external activities for the sake of his hesychastic practice . 
the terms `` hesychia '' and `` hesychast '' are used quite systematically in the `` ladder of divine ascent '' of st john of sinai  -lrb-  523–603 -rrb- and in `` pros theodoulon '' by st hesychios  -lrb-  c . 
it is not known where either st john of sinai or st hesychios were born ,  nor where they received their monastic formation . 
it is from the guard of the mind that he is raised to contemplation by the grace of god . 
mount athos is a center of the practice of hesychasm . 
the uncreated light that the hesychast experiences is identified with the holy spirit . 
the primary task of the hesychast is to engage in mental ascesis . 
27 – 31 -rrb- . 
but in 1351 at a synod under the presidency of the emperor john vi cantacuzenus ,  hesychast doctrine was established as the doctrine of the orthodox church . 
hence ,  the tradition of st john cassian in the west concerning the spiritual practice of the hermit can be considered to be a tradition that is parallel to that of hesychasm in the eastern orthodox church . 
the term `` hesychast '' was used in the 6th century in palestine in the `` lives '' of cyril of scythopolis ,  many of which lives treat of hesychasts who were contemporaries of cyril . 
western theologians have tended to reject hesychasm ,  in some instances equating it with quietism ,  perhaps because `` quietism '' is the literal translation of `` hesychasm '' . 
the origin of the term `` hesychasmos , ``  and of the related terms `` hesychastes '' ,  `` hesychia '' and `` hesychazo , ``  is not entirely certain . 
in 1824, they decided it was time to leave indiana ,  sold their land and town in indiana ,  and moved to their final settlement in western pennsylvania . 
as the new settlement in indiana grew ,  it also began to attract new arrivals ,  including emigrants from germany ,  who expected the harmonists to pay for their passage to america . 
when the harmonists advertised their indiana property for sale in 1824, they had acquired of land ,  of which was under cultivation . 
in 1822 william herbert ,  a visitor to harmony ,  indiana ,  described the new brick church and the harmonists' craftsmanship:
by 1824 the decision had been made to sell their property in indiana and search for land to the east . 
johann georg rapp  -lrb-  1757 – 1847 -rrb- ,  also known as george rapp ,  was the founder of the religious sect called harmonists ,  harmonites ,  rappites ,  or the harmony society . 
rapp and his group of believers began meeting in iptengen and eventually emigrated to the united states ,  where they established three communities: harmony ,  butler county ,  pennsylvania; harmony  -lrb-  later named new harmony  -rrb-  ,  posey county ,  indiana; and economy ,  beaver county ,  pennsylvania . 
the society is best known for its worldly successes ,  most notably the establishment of three model communities ,  the first at harmony ,  pennsylvania; the second ,  also called harmony ,  in the indiana territory ,  now new harmony ,  indiana; and the third and final town at economy ,  now ambridge ,  pennsylvania . 
at harmony ,  george rapp ,  also known as father rapp ,  was recognized as the spiritual head of the society ,  the one that they went to for discussions ,  confessions ,  and other matters . 
visitors to the new town commented on its growing commercial and industrial work . 
in 1824 frederick rapp initially purchased along the ohio river ,  northwest of pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania ,  for $10,000, and later bought an additional for $33,445, giving the society more than to develop into a new community . 
by 1798 rapp and his group of followers had already begun to distance themselves from mainstream society and intended to establish a new religious congregation of fellow believers . 
owen named the town new harmony ,  and by may ,  the last of the harmony society's remaining members returned to pennsylvania . 
in 1814 the harmonites sold their first settlement to abraham ziegler ,  a mennonite ,  for $100,000 and moved west to make a new life for themselves in the indiana territory . 
george rapp had an eloquent style ,  which matched his commanding presence ,  and he was the personality that led the group through all the different settlements . 
in december 1804 rapp and a party of two others initially contracted to purchase of land for $11,250 in butler county ,  pennsylvania ,  and later acquired additional land to increase their holdings to approximately by the time they advertised their property for sale in 1814.
in indiana ,  harmonists continued to live in homes ,  but they also built dormitories to house single men and women . 
after frederick rapp's death in 1834, george rapp appointed romelius baker and jacob henrici as trustees to manage the society's business affairs . 
once established at harmony ,  pennsylvania ,  the society planned to replace the log dwellings with brick structures ,  but the group moved to the indiana territory before the plan was completed . 
in 1804, while rapp and his associates remained in the united states looking for a place to settle ,  his followers sailed to america aboard several vessels and made their way to western pennsylvania ,  where they waited until land had been selected for their new settlement . 
huneric was the first vandal king who used the title `` king of the vandals and alans '' . 
eudocia ,  daughter of valentinian iii ,  was huneric's wife . 
huneric was a son of king genseric  -lrb-  or gaiseric  -rrb-  ,  and was sent to italy as a hostage in 435, when his father made a treaty with the western emperor valentinian iii . 
the hasdingi crossed the rhine into gaul in 406 ad ,  although their king godigisel lost his life in battle against the franks during the crossing . 
gunderic ,  godegisel's successor as king of the hasdingi ,  lost his kingdom to king hermeric of the suebi in 419 after the battle of the nervasos mountains where the vandals were overwhelmed by an allied force of suebi and romans . 
other origins have also been proposed . 
hermes was the emissary and messenger of the gods . 
she bore him a son ,  hermaphroditus . 
in later myths ,  after the cult of pan was reintroduced to attica ,  pan was said to be hermes's son . 
according to one theory that has received considerable scholarly acceptance ,  hermes himself originated as a form of the god pan ,  who has been identified as a reflex of the proto-indo-european pastoral god `` *péhusōn '' ,  in his aspect as the god of boundary markers . 
he was also viewed as the protector and patron of roads and travelers . 
he also said that hermes had assigned each person his share of intelligence . 
hedge funds are generally distinct from mutual funds ,  as their use of leverage is not capped by regulators ,  and distinct from private equity funds ,  as the majority of hedge funds invest in relatively liquid assets . 
the term `` hedge fund '' originated from the paired long and short positions that the first of these funds used to hedge market risk . 
some hedge funds have several billion dollars of assets under management  -lrb-  aum  -rrb-  . 
us institutional investors such as pension and endowment funds began allocating greater portions of their portfolios to hedge funds . 
in june 2011, the hedge fund management firms with the greatest aum were bridgewater associates  -lrb-  us$58.9 billion  -rrb-  ,  man group  -lrb-  us$39.2 billion  -rrb-  ,  paulson & co .   -lrb-  us$35.1 billion  -rrb-  ,  brevan howard  -lrb-  us$31 billion  -rrb-  ,  and och-ziff  -lrb-  us$29.4 billion  -rrb-  . 
in the 1970s ,  hedge funds specialized in a single strategy with most fund managers following the long/short equity model . 
hydrocodone is used to treat moderate to severe pain ,  although it is often prescribed to treat mild pain as well . 
hydrocodone ,  sold under brand names such as vicodin and norco among many others ,  is a semisynthetic opioid derived from codeine ,  one of the opioid alkaloids found in the opium poppy . 
recommended dosing interval is 4–6 hours . 
hashish ,  or hash ,  is a drug made from the resin of the cannabis plant . 
hashish was also mentioned and used as an anesthetic in germany in 1869.
hashish was the primary form of cannabis used in europe in 2008.
before the coming of the first hippies from the `` hippie hashish trail '' ,  only small pieces of lebanese hashish were found in morocco . 
in the 19th century ,  hashish was embraced in some european literary circles . 
between 2000 and 2005 the percentage of hashish in cannabis end product seizures was at 18% . 
hashish arrived in europe from the east during the 18th century ,  and is first mentioned scientifically by gmelin in 1777.
in his later works ,  braid reserved the term `` hypnotism '' for cases in which subjects entered a state of amnesia resembling sleep . 
in fact ,  hypnosis used to be known as ‘mesmerism’ as it was named after mesmer . 
therefore ,  braid defined hypnotism as a state of mental concentration that often leads to a form of progressive relaxation ,  termed `` nervous sleep '' . 
when james braid first described hypnotism ,  he did not use the term `` suggestion '' but referred instead to the act of focusing the conscious mind of the subject upon a single dominant idea . 
braid elaborated upon this brief definition in a later work ,  `` hypnotic therapeutics '':
hypnosis may be useful as an adjunct therapy for weight loss . 
one way of inducing the relaxed state was through hypnosis . 
erickson had no hesitation in presenting any suggested effect as being `` hypnosis '' ,  whether or not the subject was in a hypnotic state . 
modern hypnotherapy has been used ,  with varying success ,  in a variety of forms ,  such as:
the term may also refer to an art ,  skill ,  or act of inducing hypnosis . 
later ,  in his `` the physiology of fascination ''  -lrb-  1855 -rrb- ,  braid conceded that his original terminology was misleading ,  and argued that the term `` hypnotism '' or `` nervous sleep '' should be reserved for the minority  -lrb-  10%  -rrb-  of subjects who exhibit amnesia ,  substituting the term `` monoideism '' ,  meaning concentration upon a single idea ,  as a description for the more alert state experienced by the others . 
milton erickson  -lrb-  1901–1980 -rrb- ,  the founding president of the american society for clinical hypnosis and a fellow of the american psychiatric association ,  the american psychological association ,  and the american psychopathological association ,  was one of the most influential post-war hypnotherapists . 
hypnosis has been used as a pain relieving technique during dental surgery and related pain management regimens as well . 
charcot operated a clinic at the pitié-salpêtrière hospital  -lrb-  thus ,  known as the `` paris school '' or the `` salpêtrière school ''  -rrb-  ,  while bernheim had a clinic in nancy  -lrb-  known as the `` nancy school ''  -rrb-  . 
hypnotherapy is a use of hypnosis in psychotherapy . 
at that time ,  hypnosis as a medical treatment was seldom used; the german doctor franz mesmer reintroduced it in the 18th century . 
preliminary research has expressed brief hypnosis interventions as possibly being a useful tool for managing painful hiv-dsp because of its history of usefulness in pain management ,  its long-term effectiveness of brief interventions ,  the ability to teach self-hypnosis to patients ,  the cost-effectiveness of the intervention ,  and the advantage of using such an intervention as opposed to the use of pharmaceutical drugs . 
the word `` mesmerize '' ,  formed from the last name of franz mesmer ,  was intentionally used to separate practitioners of mesmerism from the various `` fluid '' and `` magnetic '' theories included within the label `` magnetism '' . 
braid made a rough distinction between different stages of hypnosis ,  which he termed the first and second conscious stage of hypnotism; he later replaced this with a distinction between `` sub-hypnotic '' ,  `` full hypnotic '' ,  and `` hypnotic coma '' stages . 
braid based his practice on that developed by franz mesmer and his followers  -lrb-  which was called `` mesmerism '' or `` animal magnetism ''  -rrb-  ,  but differed in his theory as to how the procedure worked . 
some hypnotists view suggestion as a form of communication that is directed primarily to the subject's conscious mind ,  whereas others view it as a means of communicating with the `` unconscious '' or `` subconscious '' mind . 
the next major development came from behavioural psychology in american university research . 
a person in a state of hypnosis has focused attention ,  and has increased suggestibility . 
avicenna  -lrb-  980–1037 -rrb- ,  a persian physician ,  documented the characteristics of the `` trance ''  -lrb-  hypnotic trance  -rrb-  state in 1027.
the earliest definition of hypnosis was given by braid ,  who coined the term `` hypnotism '' as an abbreviation for `` neuro-hypnotism '' ,  or nervous sleep ,  which he contrasted with `` normal '' sleep ,  and defined as: `` a peculiar condition of the nervous system ,  induced by a fixed and abstracted attention of the mental and visual eye ,  on one object ,  not of an exciting nature . `` 
braid soon assimilated carpenter's observations into his own theory ,  realising that the effect of focusing attention was to enhance the ideo-motor reflex response . 
chadwick and his wife had three children ,  richard westlake chadwick ,  in 1849, susan mary chadwick ,  in 1851, and rose virginia chadwick ,  1853.
chadwick was born in exeter ,  england . 
chadwick became a frequent player of cricket and similar ball games such as rounders . 
edwin chadwick's mother had made james chadwick a widower shortly after edwin's birth . 
the following description of a game was written by henry chadwick and appeared in his `` base ball memoranda '' . 
in 1848, chadwick married jane botts from richmond ,  virginia . 
henry chadwick is interred at green-wood cemetery in brooklyn ,  new york . 
chadwick is credited with devising the baseball box score  -lrb-  which he adapted from the cricket scorecard  -rrb-  for reporting game events . 
chadwick later willed his baseball library to spalding . 
the u . s .  system of higher education was heavily influenced by the humboldtian model of higher education . 
higher educational institutions in these arts include film schools and art schools . 
higher vocational education and training takes place at the non-university tertiary level . 
the professional field involving the collection ,  analysis ,  and reporting of higher education data is called institutional research . 
this describes a distinct form of higher education that offers a particularly intense integration with the world of work in all its aspects  -lrb-  including teaching ,  learning ,  research and governance  -rrb-  and at all levels of the overarching qualifications framework of the european higher education area . 
from the early 1950s to the present ,  more and more people in the united states have gone on to pursue degrees or certificates of higher education . 
higher vocational education might be contrasted with education in a usually broader scientific field ,  which might concentrate on theory and abstract conceptual knowledge . 
in the days when few pupils progressed beyond primary education or basic education ,  the term `` higher education '' was often used to refer to secondary education ,  which can create some confusion . 
typically to work in higher education as a member of the academic faculty ,  a candidate must first obtain a doctorate in an academic field ,  although some lower teaching positions require only a master's degree . 
in contrast ,  the vocational higher education and training that takes place at vocational universities and schools usually concentrates on practical applications ,  with very little theory . 
since world war ii ,  developed and many developing countries have increased the participation of the age group who mostly studies higher education from the elite rate ,  of up to 15 per cent ,  to the mass rate of 16 to 50 per cent . 
in winning ,  fargo became the first latina mayor of an american city . 
on september 4, 2008 only councilman kevin mccarty endorsed heather fargo . 
heather fargo  -lrb-  born december 12, 1952 -rrb- is an american politician who served as mayor and was a former city council member of sacramento ,  california . 
fargo did not face as stiff competition in her 2004 re-election . 
however ,  fargo came back to beat karpilow in november . 
other scholars state that this is unclear ,  because historic texts present a conflicting picture ,  ranging from zoroastrianism's belief in `` one god ,  two gods ,  or a best god henotheism '' . 
various scholars prefer the term monolatrism to henotheism ,  to discuss religions where a single god is central ,  but the existence or the position of other gods is not denied . 
for example ,  the moabites worshipped the god chemosh ,  the edomites ,  qaus ,  both of whom were part of the greater canaanite pantheon ,  headed by the chief god ,  el . 
maximus tyrius  -lrb-  2nd century a . d .   -rrb-  stated: `` in such a mighty contest ,  sedition and discord ,  you will see one according law and assertion in all the earth ,  that there is one god ,  the king and father of all things ,  and many gods ,  sons of god ,  ruling together with him . `` 
ahura mazda is the supreme god ,  but zoroastrianism does not deny other deities . 
van hale has written ,  `` mormonism teaches the existence of gods who are not the father ,  son ,  or holy ghost '' and `` the existence of more than one god is clearly a mormon doctrine '' ,  but he also said that defining this belief system in theological terms was troublesome . 
the neoplatonic philosopher plotinus taught that above the gods of traditional belief was `` the one '' ,  and polytheist grammarian maximus of madauros even stated that only a madman would deny the existence of the supreme god . 
hedwig and henry had several daughters ,  though only one surviving son ,  henry ii the pious ,  who succeeded his father as duke of silesia and polish high duke . 
her actions promoted the reign of her husband: upon the death of the polish high duke władysław iii spindleshanks in 1231, henry also became duke of greater poland and the next year prevailed as high duke at kraków . 
saint hedwig of silesia  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also saint hedwig of andechs  -lrb-   ,  ; 1174 – 15 october 1243 -rrb- ,  a member of the bavarian comital house of andechs ,  was duchess of silesia from 1201 and of greater poland from 1231 as well as high duchess consort of poland from 1232 until 1238.
at the age of twelve ,  hedwig married henry i the bearded ,  son and heir of the piast duke boleslaus the tall of silesia . 
hence ,  yiddish is the vernacular and common tongue for many hasidim around the world . 
some hasidim from eastern galicia wear black socks with their breeches on the sabbath ,  as opposed to white ones on weekdays ,  particularly belzer hasidim . 
the movement founded by israel ben eliezer in the 18th century adopted the term `` hasidim '' in the original connotation . 
this kabbalistic notion ,  too ,  was not unique to the movement and appeared frequently among other jewish groups . 
married hasidim don a variety of fur headdresses on the sabbath ,  once common among all wedded eastern european jewish males and still worn by non-hasidic perushim in jerusalem . 
in some hasidic groups ,  such as satmar ,  women may wear two headcoverings – a wig and a scarf ,  or a wig and a hat . 
while hasidic leadership has often been accused of silencing the matter ,  awareness of it is rising within the sects . 
having ousted the old communal model and replaced it with a less-hierarchical structure and more individually-oriented religiosity ,  hasidism was in fact the first great modern – albeit not modernist; its self-understanding was grounded in a traditional mindset – jewish movement . 
its members adhere closely both to orthodox jewish practice – with the movement's own unique emphases – and the traditions of eastern european jews ,  so much so that many of the latter ,  including various special styles of dress and the use of the yiddish language ,  are nowadays associated almost exclusively with hasidism . 
it is the dialectic opposite of god's contraction into the world . 
yet ,  the movement proved more resilient than expected . 
the opening of the 19th century saw the hasidic sect transformed . 
another famous philosophy is that formulated by nachman of breslov and adhered to by breslov hasidim . 
thus ,  for example ,  the `` court '' established by joel teitelbaum in 1905 at transylvania remained known after its namesake town ,  sathmar ,  even though its headquarters lay in new york ,  and almost all other hasidic sects likewise – albeit some groups founded overseas were named accordingly ,  like the boston  -lrb-  hasidic dynasty  -rrb-  . 
among the traits particularly associated with hasidism in common understanding which are in fact widespread ,  is the importance of joy and happiness at worship and religious life – though the sect undoubtedly stressed this aspect and still possesses a clear populist bent . 
in canada ,  kiryas tosh is a settlement populated entirely by tosh hasidim ,  and there are more adherents of other sects in and around montreal . 
one major derivative of this philosophy is the notion of `` devekut '' ,  `` communion '' . 
the hasidic community is organized in a sect known as `` court ''  -lrb-  hebrew: חצר ,  `` hatzer ''; yiddish: האף ,  `` hoif ''  -rrb-  . 
the common adherents were taught they may engage it only mildly ,  through small deeds like earning money to support their leaders . 
hasidim use the ashkenazi pronunciation of hebrew and aramaic for liturgical purposes ,  reflecting their eastern european background . 
apart from those ,  each `` court '' often possesses its unique customs ,  including style of prayer ,  melodies ,  particular items of clothing and the like . 
israel ben eliezer  -lrb-  ca . 
ben eliezer and his acolytes used the very old and common epithet `` hasidim '' ,  `` pious ''; in the latter third of the 18th century ,  a clear differentiation arose between that sense of the word and what was at first described as `` new hasidism '' ,  propagated to a degree by the maggid and especially his successors . 
allegiance to the dynasty and `` rebbe '' is also often a cause for tension and violence . 
most hasidim speak the language of their countries of residence ,  but use yiddish among themselves as a way of remaining distinct and preserving tradition . 
they were often transmitted orally ,  though the earliest compendium is from 1815.
the `` haskalah '' was always a minor force ,  but the jewish national movements which emerged in the 1880s ,  as well as socialism ,  proved much more appealing to the young . 
the spread of hasidism also incurred organized opposition . 
most hasidim use some variation of `` nusach sefard '' ,  a blend of ashkenazi and sephardi liturgies ,  based on the innovations of rabbi isaac luria . 
as to their hasidim ,  affiliation was less a matter of admiring a charismatic leader as in the early days ,  but rather birth into a family belonging to a specific `` court '' . 
hasidism ,  sometimes hasidic judaism  -lrb-   ,  ; originally ,  `` piety ''  -rrb-  ,  is a jewish religious group . 
hasidic women wear clothing adhering to the principles of modest dress in jewish law . 
an overtone is any partial above the lowest partial . 
the harmonic series is an arithmetic series  -lrb-  1×f ,  2×f ,  3×f ,  4×f ,  5×f ,   .  .  .   -rrb-  . 
an inharmonic partial is any partial that does not match an ideal harmonic . 
a harmonic partial is any real partial component of a complex tone that matches  -lrb-  or nearly matches  -rrb-  an ideal harmonic . 
the musical pitch of a note is usually perceived as the lowest partial present  -lrb-  the fundamental frequency  -rrb-  ,  which may be the one created by vibration over the full length of the string or air column ,  or a higher harmonic chosen by the player . 
a partial is any of the sine waves  -lrb-  or `` simple tones '' ,  as ellis calls them when translating helmholtz  -rrb-  of which a complex tone is composed ,  not necessarily with an integer multiple of the lowest harmonic . 
 -lrb-  see also ,  fourier analysis .   -rrb- 
see also: lipps–meyer law . 
pitched musical instruments are often based on an acoustic resonator such as a string or a column of air ,  which oscillates at numerous modes simultaneously . 
in the aggregate ,  it may refer to members of any of the following jewish movements:
hoosier hysteria is the state of excitement surrounding basketball in indiana ,  or more specifically the indiana high school basketball tournament . 
indiana high schools boast a tradition of producing top caliber basketball players . 
aside from the `` milan miracle , ``  the story of crispus attucks high school ranks as one of the greatest in indiana high school basketball tradition . 
historically ,  each of the several hundred small towns of indiana had its own small school system . 
hoosier hysteria may have its roots firmly planted in the high school game ,  but the college tradition brings its own depth to indiana's passion . 
alexander returned to britain in may 1920 as a major ,  second in command of the 1st battalion ,  irish guards; in may 1922, he was promoted substantive lieutenant-colonel and appointed commanding officer . 
he then commanded the 15th army group for the capture of sicily and again in italy before receiving his field marshal's baton and being made supreme allied commander mediterranean . 
field marshal harold rupert leofric george alexander ,  1st earl alexander of tunis ,   -lrb-  10 december 1891 – 16 june 1969 -rrb- was a senior british army officer who served with distinction in both the first world war and the second world war and ,  afterwards ,  as governor general of canada ,  the 17th since canadian confederation . 
alexander spent most of the first world war on the western front . 
in june 1938 he was appointed a companion of the order of the bath . 
on 1 january 1942 he was knighted and appointed a knight commander of the order of the bath ,  and in february ,  after the japanese invasion of burma ,  was sent to india to become goc-in-c of british forces in burma as a full general . 
still an acting lieutenant colonel ,  he then commanded a corps infantry school in october 1918, a month before the war ended on 11 november 1918.
lord alexander departed the office of governor general of canada in early 1952 after churchill asked him to return to london to take the post of minister of defence in the british government . 
following the outbreak of the second world war ,  in september 1939, alexander brought the 1st division to france ,  where it became part of the british expeditionary force  -lrb-  bef  -rrb-  and served there for the next eight months . 
alexander remained in command of the 15th army group ,  as well as its successor ,  the allied armies in italy  -lrb-  aai  -rrb-  ,  for most of the italian campaign ,  until december 1944, when he relinquished his command to clark and took over as the supreme commander of the allied forces headquarters ,  responsible for all military operations in the mediterranean theatre . 
when eisenhower was appointed supreme allied commander for the planned normandy landings he suggested that alexander become ground forces commander ,  as he was popular with both british and american officers . 
in september 1911, alexander entered the royal military college ,  sandhurst and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the british army's irish guards . 
this has become known as moseley's law . 
this stemmed from his development of moseley's law in x-ray spectra . 
x-ray spectrometers are the foundation-stones of x-ray crystallography . 
in addition ,  moseley showed that there were gaps in the atomic number sequence at numbers 43, 61, 72, and 75.
moseley's mother was amabel gwyn jeffreys moseley ,  the daughter of the welsh biologist and conchologist john gwyn jeffreys . 
moseley's method in early x-ray spectroscopy was able to sort out the above chemical problems promptly ,  some of which had occupied chemists for a number of years . 
in 1913, moseley observed and measured the x-ray spectra of various chemical elements  -lrb-  mostly metals  -rrb-  that were found by the method of diffraction through crystals . 
before moseley and his law ,  atomic numbers had been thought of as a semi-arbitrary ordering number ,  vaguely increasing with atomic weight but not strictly defined by it . 
in may 2018, he was promoted to the substantive ranks of lieutenant commander of the royal navy ,  major of the british army and squadron leader of the royal air force . 
the palace confirmed weeks later that the scheme was established in partnership with help for heroes and the royal british legion . 
in may 2014, he visited estonia and italy . 
on 6 january 2009, the queen granted harry and william their own royal household . 
it was said that this was in preparation for a tour of duty in afghanistan ,  where canadian and british forces were participating in the nato-led afghan war . 
this would allow him to see active military service again on the frontline in afghanistan . 
clarence house made public harry's disappointment with the decision ,  though he said he would abide by it . 
the head of the british army at the time ,  general sir richard dannatt ,  said on 30 april 2007 that he had personally decided that harry would serve with his unit in iraq ,  and harry was scheduled for deployment in may or june 2007, to patrol the maysan governorate . 
he also paid a visit to the australian sas hq in perth . 
prince harry ,  duke of sussex ,   -lrb-  henry charles albert david; born 15 september 1984 -rrb- is a member of the british royal family . 
on 17 march 2015, kensington palace announced that harry would leave the armed forces in june . 
in late january 2015, harry visited the battle back centre set up by the royal british legion ,  and fisher house uk at the queen elizabeth hospital birmingham . 
also in april 2018, harry was selected as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by `` time '' magazine . 
he also visited merville barracks in colchester ,  where chavasse vc house personnel recovery centre is located ,  run by help for heroes in partnership with the ministry of defence and royal british legion . 
his parents announced their second son's name would officially be prince henry charles albert david ,  but that he would be known as `` harry '' to his family and friends . 
in september 2017, they made their first public appearance at an official royal engagement ,  the opening ceremonies of the invictus games in toronto . 
on 30 april 2014, it was reported that the couple had parted amicably . 
the couple married at st george's chapel ,  windsor castle ,  on 19 may 2018.
harry was educated at schools in the united kingdom and spent parts of his gap year in australia and lesotho . 
he would be working with both those who administer and receive physical and mental care within the london district area . 
like his father and brother ,  harry was educated at independent schools . 
polls conducted in the united kingdom in november 2012 showed harry to be the third-most popular member of the royal family ,  after william and the queen . 
hail is a form of solid precipitation . 
terminal velocity of hail ,  or the speed at which hail is falling when it strikes the ground ,  varies . 
hail is one of canada's most expensive hazards . 
hail is one of the most significant thunderstorm hazards to aircraft . 
narrow zones where hail accumulates on the ground in association with thunderstorm activity are known as hail streaks or hail swaths ,  which can be detectable by satellite after the storms pass by . 
hail suppression programs have been undertaken by 15 countries between 1965 and 2005.
in north america ,  hail is most common in the area where colorado ,  nebraska ,  and wyoming meet ,  known as `` hail alley '' . 
below  ,  hail is equally distributed in and around a thunderstorm to a distance of  . 
any thunderstorm which produces hail that reaches the ground is known as a hailstorm . 
hail in the tropics occurs mainly at higher elevations . 
hail is most common within continental interiors of the mid-latitudes ,  as hail formation is considerably more likely when the freezing level is below the altitude of  . 
hail is possible within most thunderstorms as it is produced by cumulonimbus ,  and within of the parent storm . 
although the diameter of hail is varied ,  in the united states ,  the average observation of damaging hail is between 2.5 cm  -lrb-  1 in  -rrb-  and golf ball-sized  -lrb-  1.75 in  -rrb-  . 
like other precipitation in cumulonimbus clouds ,  hail begins as water droplets . 
the department of health in the state of washington regulates hypnotherapists . 
similar studies have shown that groups suffering from bulimia nervosa ,  undergoing hypnotherapy ,  were more exceptional to no treatment ,  placebos ,  or other alternative treatments . 
modern hypnotherapy is widely accepted for the treatment of certain habit disorders ,  to control irrational fears ,  as well as in the treatment of conditions such as insomnia and addiction . 
professional hypnotherapy and use of the occupational titles `` hypnotherapist '' or `` clinical hypnotherapist '' are not government-regulated in australia . 
australian hypnotism/hypnotherapy organizations  -lrb-  including the australian hypnotherapists association  -rrb-  are seeking government regulation similar to other mental health professions . 
a meta-analysis of eight different researches revealed `` a 70% greater improvement '' for patients undergoing an integrated treatment to those using cbt only . 
the united states' `` federal dictionary of occupational titles '' describes the job of the hypnotherapist: ``  ''induces hypnotic state in client to increase motivation or alter behavior patterns: consults with client to determine nature of problem . 
in 2005, a meta-analysis by the cochrane collaboration found no evidence that hypnotherapy was more successful than other treatments or no treatment in achieving cessation of smoking for at least six months . 
david lesser  -lrb-  1928 - 2001 -rrb- was the originator of what is today known by the term `` curative hypnotherapy '' . 
the player guessing the word may ,  at any time ,  attempt to guess the whole word . 
hangman is a paper and pencil guessing game for two or more players . 
the word to guess is represented by a row of dashes ,  representing each letter of the word . 
however ,  the guesser can also win by guessing all the letters or numbers that appears in the word ,  thereby completing the word ,  before the diagram is completed . 
once a full body is drawn ,  the game is over ,  and the player lost . 
in mathematics ,  the harmonic mean  -lrb-  sometimes called the subcontrary mean  -rrb-  is one of several kinds of average ,  and in particular one of the pythagorean means . 
as a simple example ,  the harmonic mean of 1, 4, and 4 is
the genus `` cryptobranchus '' has historically only been considered to contain one species ,  `` c .  alleganiensis '' ,  with two subspecies ,  `` c .  a .  alleganiensis '' and `` c .  a .  bishopi '' . 
both subspecies ,  `` c .  a .  alleganiensis '' and `` c .  a .  bishopi '' undergo a metamorphosis after around a year and a half of life . 
the subspecies  -lrb-  or species ,  depending on the source  -rrb-  `` c .  a .  bishopi '' is confined to the ozarks of northern arkansas and southern missouri ,  while `` c .  a .  alleganiensis '' is found in the rest of these states . 
 ''c .  alleganiensis '' feeds primarily on crayfish and small fish . 
due to sharp decreases seen in the ozark subspecies ,  researchers have been trying to differentiate `` c .  a .  alleganiensis '' and `` c .  a .  bishopi '' into two management units . 
the subspecific name ,  `` bishopi '' ,  is in honor of american herpetologist sherman c .  bishop . 
the disease has been detected in all missouri populations of the ozark hellbender . 
 ''c .  alleganiensis '' has a flat body and head ,  with beady dorsal eyes and slimy skin . 
furthermore ,  the average size of `` c .  a .  alleganiensis '' has been reported to be 45–60 cm  -lrb-  with some reported as reaching up to 74 cm or 30 in  -rrb-  ,  while `` n .  m .  maculosus '' has a reported average size of 28–40 cm in length ,  which means that hellbender adults will still generally be notably larger than even the biggest mudpuppies . 
vernacular names include `` snot otter '' ,  `` lasagna lizard '' ,  `` devil dog '' ,  `` mud-devil '' ,  `` grampus '' ,  `` allegheny alligator '' ,  `` mud dog '' ,  `` water dog '' ,  and `` leverian water newt '' . 
in 1936 edgerton visited hummingbird expert may rogers webster . 
after graduating from the university of nebraska-lincoln ,  edgerton married esther may garrett in 1928.
edgerton was appointed a professor of electrical engineering at the massachusetts institute of technology  -lrb-  mit  -rrb-  in 1934.
edgerton's work was featured in an october 1987 `` national geographic magazine '' article entitled `` doc edgerton: the man who made time stand still '' . 
edgerton was born in fremont ,  nebraska ,  on april 6, 1903, the son of mary nettie coe and frank eugene edgerton ,  a descendant of richard edgerton ,  one of the founders of norwich ,  connecticut and a descendant of governor william bradford  -lrb-  1590–1657 -rrb- of the plymouth colony and a passenger on the mayflower . 
edgerton partnered with kenneth j .  germeshausen to do consulting for industrial clients . 
sir harold walter kroto  -lrb-  born harold walter krotoschiner; 7 october 1939 – 30 april 2016 -rrb- ,  known as harry kroto ,  was an english chemist . 
the composition of the sagas is snorri's . 
heimskringla  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the best known of the old norse kings' sagas . 
 ''heimskringla '' contains the following sagas  -lrb-  see also list of norwegian monarchs  -rrb- :
 ''flateyjarbók '' ,  from the end of the fourteenth century ,  is the most extreme example of expansion ,  interweaving snorri's text with many `` þættir '' and other whole sagas ,  prominently `` orkneyinga saga '' ,  `` færeyinga saga '' ,  and `` fóstbrœðra saga '' . 
after presenting a series of other kinds ,  the saga ends with magnus v of norway . 
snorri explicitly mentions a few prose sources ,  now mostly lost in the form that he knew them: `` hryggjarstykki ''  -lrb-  'spine pieces'  -rrb-  by eiríkr oddsson  -lrb-  covering events 1130-61 -rrb- ,  `` skjǫldunga saga '' ,  an unidentified saga about knútr inn gamli ,  and a text called `` jarlasǫgurnar ''  -lrb-  'sagas of the jarls' ,  which seems to correspond to the saga now known as `` orkneyinga saga ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''heimskringla '' is a collection of sagas about swedish and norwegian kings  ,  beginning with the saga of the legendary swedish dynasty of the ynglings ,  followed by accounts of historical norwegian rulers from harald fairhair of the 9th century up to the death of the pretender eystein meyla in 1177.
hamar is a town in hamar municipality in hedmark county ,  norway . 
in 1850, a new election was held for the town board . 
much of the information about medieval hamar is derived from the hamar chronicles ,  dated to about 1550.
the municipality  -lrb-  originally the town  -rrb-  is named after the old `` hamar '' farm  -lrb-  old norse: `` hamarr ''  -rrb- ; the medieval town was built on its ground . 
the town was known for its fragrant apple orchards ,  but there were also merchants ,  craftsmen ,  and fishermen in the town . 
the first mayor of hamar was christian borchgrevink . 
the norwegian railway museum  -lrb-  `` norsk jernbanemuseum ''  -rrb-  is also in hamar . 
there were also lingering concerns about the town's vulnerability to flooding . 
vang was merged back into hamar on 1 january 1992.
the diocese of hamar was established in 1864, and the hamar cathedral was consecrated in 1866 and remains a central point in the city . 
it was first described in the anonymous hamar chronicle ,  written in 1553.
the law stated that the town will be founded on the date its borders are settled ,  which turned out to be 21 march 1849, known as the merchant town of hamar ,  with a trading zone within five kilometers  -lrb-    -rrb-  of its borders . 
the area of the new town covered 400 mål which is the equivalent to today's  -lrb-  40 hectare  -rrb-  . 
on 8 june 1815, the commission recommended establishing such a town at lillehammer ,  then also a farm ,  part of fåberg . 
also situated in hamar is the hamar olympic amphitheatre which hosted the figure skating and short track speed skating events of the 1994 winter olympics . 
as steamboats were introduced on the lake ,  the urban elite developed an interest in the medieval hamar ,  and in 1841, editorials appeared advocating the reestablishment of a town at storhamar . 
the book of helaman is one of the books that make up the book of mormon . 
pacumeni was personally slain by coriantumr against the walls of zarahemla . 
pacumeni was elevated to judge in place of pahoran . 
the people selected pahoran by acclaim ,  and pacumeni assented . 
krush has played on the u . s .  national team in the women's chess olympiad since 1998.
the u . s .  team won the silver medal in 2004, at the 36th chess olympiad ,  and bronze in 2008, at the 38th chess olympiad . 
at age 14 krush won the 1998 u . s .  women's chess championship to become the youngest u . s .  women's champion ever . 
krush took part in the `` kasparov versus the world '' chess competition in 1999.
ihés celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2008 and the 40th anniversary in 1998.
several cnrs researchers are also based at the ihes: ahmed abbes ,  cédric deffayet ,  ofer gabber ,  fanny kassel ,  and christophe soulé . 
iceland has no passenger railways . 
iceland has a left–right multi-party system . 
the climate of iceland's coast is subarctic . 
iceland's stock market ,  the iceland stock exchange  -lrb-  ise  -rrb-  ,  was established in 1985.
iceland prospered during the second world war . 
the animals of iceland include the icelandic sheep ,  cattle ,  chickens ,  goats ,  the sturdy icelandic horse ,  and the icelandic sheepdog ,  all descendants of animals imported by europeans . 
around 1,300 species of insects are known in iceland . 
surtsey ,  one of the youngest islands in the world ,  is part of iceland . 
 ,  canada had over 88,000 people of icelandic descent ,  while there are more than 40,000 americans of icelandic descent ,  according to the 2000 us census . 
iceland is divided into regions ,  constituencies and municipalities . 
iceland is a representative democracy and a parliamentary republic . 
iceland has no standing army ,  but the icelandic coast guard which also maintains the iceland air defence system ,  and an iceland crisis response unit to support peacekeeping missions and perform paramilitary functions . 
iceland is at the juncture of the north atlantic and arctic oceans . 
the original population of iceland was of nordic and gaelic origin . 
emigration of icelanders to the united states and canada began in the 1870s . 
iceland has hundreds of volcanoes with about 30 active volcanic systems . 
in 1946, the us defence force allied left iceland . 
until the 20th century ,  iceland was among the poorest countries in europe . 
the southwest corner of iceland is the most densely populated region . 
during world war ii ,  iceland joined denmark in asserting neutrality . 
in the 17th and 18th centuries ,  denmark imposed harsh trade restrictions on iceland . 
on 20 november 2008, the nordic countries agreed to lend iceland $2.5 billion . 
in december 2007, 33,678 people  -lrb-  13.5% of the total population  -rrb-  living in iceland had been born abroad ,  including children of icelandic parents living abroad . 
icelandic culture is founded upon the nation's scandinavian heritage . 
a geologically young land ,  iceland is the surface expression of the iceland plateau ,  a large igneous province forming as a result of volcanism from the iceland hotspot and along the mid-atlantic ridge ,  the latter of which runs right through it . 
in the ensuing centuries ,  iceland became one of the poorest countries in europe . 
iceland was the first country in the world to have a political party formed and led entirely by women . 
route 1, or the ring road  -lrb-  icelandic: `` þjóðvegur 1 '' or `` hringvegur ''  -rrb-  ,  was completed in 1974, and is a main road that runs around iceland and connects all the inhabited parts of the island ,  with the interior of the island being uninhabited . 
the icelandic commonwealth lasted until the 13th century ,  when the political system devised by the original settlers proved unable to cope with the increasing power of icelandic chieftains . 
some 500 icelanders under the leadership of erik the red settled greenland in the late 10th century . 
the sagas of icelanders say that a norwegian named naddodd  -lrb-  or naddador  -rrb-  was the first norseman to reach iceland ,  and in the 9th century he named it snæland or `` snow land '' because it was snowing . 
swedish viking explorer garðar svavarsson was the first to circumnavigate iceland in 870 and establish that it was an island . 
this was expanded in 1904, and hannes hafstein served as the first minister for iceland in the danish cabinet . 
whale watching has become an important part of iceland's economy since 1997.
iceland formally became a republic on 17 june 1944, with sveinn björnsson as its first president . 
the highest elevation for iceland is listed as 2,110 m  -lrb-  6,923 ft  -rrb-  at hvannadalshnúkur  -lrb-  64°00′n 16°39′w  -rrb-  . 
the italian renaissance peaked in the mid-16th century as foreign invasions plunged the region into the turmoil of the italian wars . 
in 1950, italian somaliland was made a united nations trust territory under italian administration until 1 july 1960.
a 2009 report identified 610 comuni which have a strong mafia presence ,  where 13 million italians live and 14.6% of the italian gdp is produced . 
centuries of infighting between the italian city-states ,  such as the italian wars of the 15th and 16th centuries ,  left the region fragmented ,  and it was subsequently conquered and further divided by european powers such as france ,  spain and austria . 
the automotive industry is a significant part of the italian manufacturing sector ,  with over 144,000 firms and almost 485,000 employed people in 2015, and a contribution of 8.5% to italian gdp . 
italy  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  officially the italian republic  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a country in europe . 
the italian victory marked the end of the war on the italian front ,  secured the dissolution of the austro-hungarian empire and was chiefly instrumental in ending the first world war less than two weeks later . 
the italian army is the national ground defence force ,  numbering 109,703 in 2008.
the birth of the kingdom of italy was the result of efforts by italian nationalists and monarchists loyal to the house of savoy to establish a united kingdom encompassing the entire italian peninsula . 
the italian navy in 2008 had 35,200 active personnel with 85 commissioned ships and 123 aircraft . 
during the war ,  more than 650,000 italian soldiers and as many civilians died and the kingdom went to the brink of bankruptcy . 
in modern times the italian navy ,  being a member of the eu and nato ,  has taken part in many coalition peacekeeping operations around the world . 
nearly half a million italians  -lrb-  including civilians  -rrb-  died in the conflict ,  and the italian economy had been all but destroyed; per capita income in 1944 was at its lowest point since the beginning of the 20th century . 
the italian judicial system is based on roman law modified by the napoleonic code and later statutes . 
a peculiarity of the italian parliament is the representation given to italian citizens permanently living abroad: 12 deputies and 6 senators elected in four distinct overseas constituencies . 
meanwhile ,  about 250,000 italians and anti-communist slavs fled to italy in the istrian exodus . 
between the 17th and the 11th centuries bc mycenaean greeks established contacts with italy and in the 8th and 7th centuries bc a number of greek colonies were established all along the coast of sicily and the southern part of the italian peninsula ,  that became known as magna graecia . 
the armistice of villa giusti ,  which ended fighting between italy and austria-hungary at the end of world war i ,  resulted in italian annexation of neighbouring parts of yugoslavia . 
the italian army ,  navy ,  air force and carabinieri collectively form the italian armed forces ,  under the command of the supreme defence council ,  presided over by the president of italy . 
italy's varied geological structure ,  including the alps and the apennines ,  central italian woodlands ,  and southern italian garigue and maquis shrubland ,  also contribute to high climate and habitat diversity . 
the kingdom of sardinia again attacked the austrian empire in the second italian war of independence of 1859, with the aid of france ,  resulting in liberating lombardy . 
italian fauna includes 4777 endemic animal species ,  such as the sardinian long-eared bat ,  sardinian red deer ,  spectacled salamander ,  brown cave salamander ,  italian cave salamander ,  monte albo cave salamander ,  sardinian brook newt ,  italian newt ,  italian frog ,  apennine yellow-bellied toad ,  aeolian wall lizard ,  sicilian wall lizard ,  italian aesculapian snake ,  and sicilian pond turtle . 
four different seas surround the italian peninsula in the mediterranean sea from three sides: the adriatic sea in the east ,  the ionian sea in the south ,  and the ligurian sea and the tyrrhenian sea in the west . 
in 1866, victor emmanuel ii allied with prussia during the austro-prussian war ,  waging the third italian war of independence which allowed italy to annexe venetia . 
other notable lakes in the italian peninsula are trasimeno ,  bolsena ,  bracciano ,  vico ,  varano and lesina in gargano and omodeo in sardinia . 
the italian air force in 2008 had a strength of 43,882 and operated 585 aircraft ,  including 219 combat jets and 114 helicopters . 
by the mid-19th century ,  rising italian nationalism and calls for independence from foreign control led to a period of revolutionary political upheaval . 
following the italian wars  -lrb-  1494 to 1559 -rrb- ,  ignited by the rivalry between france and spain ,  the city-states gradually lost their independence and came under foreign domination ,  first under spain  -lrb-  1559 to 1713 -rrb- and then austria  -lrb-  1713 to 1796 -rrb- . 
in 1860–1861, garibaldi led the drive for unification in naples and sicily  -lrb-  the expedition of the thousand  -rrb-  ,  while the house of savoy troops occupied the central territories of the italian peninsula ,  except rome and part of papal states . 
law enforcement in italy is provided by multiple police forces ,  five of which are national ,  italian agencies . 
as a result ,  today more than 4.1 million italian citizens are living abroad ,  while at least 60 million people of full or part italian ancestry live outside of italy ,  most notably in argentina ,  brazil ,  uruguay ,  venezuela ,  the united states ,  canada ,  australia and france . 
the carabinieri is the common name for the arma dei carabinieri ,  a gendarmerie that also serves as the military police for the italian armed forces . 
the office is similar to those in most other parliamentary systems ,  but the leader of the italian government is not authorised to request the dissolution of the parliament of italy . 
in the north ,  the germans set up the italian social republic  -lrb-  rsi  -rrb-  ,  a nazi puppet state with mussolini installed as leader after he was rescued by german paratroopers . 
after initially advancing in british somaliland ,  egypt ,  the balkans and eastern fronts ,  the italians were defeated in east africa ,  soviet union and north africa . 
the italian socialist party constantly increased in strength ,  challenging the traditional liberal and conservative establishment . 
however ,  as a result of his spending policies ,  the italian national debt skyrocketed during the craxi era ,  soon passing 100% of the country's gdp . 
the sovereign states of san marino and the vatican city are enclaves within italy ,  while campione d'italia is an italian exclave in switzerland . 
the roman empire was among the most powerful economic ,  cultural ,  political and military forces in the world of its time ,  and it was one of the largest empires in world history . 
italian explorers and navigators from the dominant maritime republics played a key role in ushering the age of discovery and the european colonization of the americas . 
in the 14th and 15th centuries ,  northern-central italy was divided into a number of warring city-states ,  the rest of the peninsula being occupied by the larger papal states and the kingdom of sicily ,  referred to here as naples . 
the most famous member of young italy was the revolutionary and general giuseppe garibaldi ,  renowned for his extremely loyal followers ,  who led the italian republican drive for unification in southern italy . 
field hockey in india is administered by hockey india . 
india is the world's most populous democracy . 
cotton was domesticated in india by 4000 bce . 
the original indian plate survives as peninsular india ,  the oldest and geologically most stable part of india . 
india  -lrb-  iast:   -rrb-  ,  also known as the republic of india  -lrb-  iast:   -rrb-  ,  is a country in south asia . 
all were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of india into two states: india and pakistan . 
 ''hindustan ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a middle persian name for india . 
the government of india comprises three branches:
india has been a member of wto since 1 january 1995.
india comprises the bulk of the indian subcontinent ,  lying atop the indian tectonic plate ,  a part of the indo-australian plate . 
india has also played a major role in popularising cricket . 
india is a federal union comprising 29 states and 7 union territories . 
india was the host country for the 2017 fifa u-17 world cup . 
india is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the constitution of india ,  which serves as the country's supreme legal document . 
india has traditionally been the dominant country at the south asian games . 
india's coastline measures in length; of this distance ,  belong to peninsular india and to the andaman ,  nicobar ,  and lakshadweep island chains . 
according to corruption perceptions index ,  india ranked 76th out of 176 countries in 2016, from 85th in 2014.
historians consider india's modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885.
india was the second largest textile exporter after china in the world in the calendar year 2013.
india continues to face several public health-related challenges . 
india has a theatre training institute nsd that is situated at new delhi it is an autonomous organisation under the ministry of culture ,  government of india . 
at the end of 2011, the indian it industry employed 2.8 million professionals ,  generated revenues close to us$100 billion equalling 7.5% of indian gdp and contributed 26% of india's merchandise exports . 
the earliest literature in india ,  composed between 1500 bce and 1200 ce ,  was in the sanskrit language . 
since its independence in 1947, india has maintained cordial relations with most nations . 
in the decades following ,  public life gradually emerged all over india ,  leading eventually to the founding of the indian national congress in 1885.
india has two archipelagos: the lakshadweep ,  coral atolls off india's south-western coast; and the andaman and nicobar islands ,  a volcanic chain in the andaman sea . 
the 513.7-million-worker indian labour force is the world's second-largest ,   . 
india's telecommunication industry ,  the world's fastest-growing ,  added 227 million subscribers during the period 2010–11, and after the third quarter of 2017, india surpassed the us to become the second largest smartphone market in the world after china . 
the music of india includes multiple varieties of classical music ,  folk music ,  filmi ,  indian rock and indian pop . 
sometimes ,  the music of india will fuse with the traditional music of other countries . 
carnatic music has served as the foundation for most music in south india ,  including folk music ,  festival music and has also extended its influence to film music in the past 100–150 years or so . 
the biggest form of indian popular music is filmi ,  or songs from indian films ,  it makes up 72% of the music sales in india . 
indian pop music is based on an amalgamation of indian folk and classical music ,  and modern beats from different parts of the world . 
the difficulty in importing western musical instruments and their rarity have also contributed to the obscurity of classical western music . 
the two main traditions of indian classical music are carnatic music ,  which is found predominantly in the peninsular regions ,  and hindustani music ,  which is found in the northern ,  eastern and central regions . 
music in india began as an integral part of socio-religious life . 
tagore wrote some 2,230 songs in bengali ,  now known as `` rabindra sangeet '' ,  using classical music and traditional folk music as sources . 
it enjoys a respectable presence in bollywood music as well . 
the spread and following of western classical music in india is almost entirely non-existent . 
the rock music `` scene '' in india is small compared to the filmi or fusion musicality `` scenes '' but as of recent years has come into its own ,  achieving a cult status of sorts . 
for example ,  delhi 2 dublin ,  a band based in canada ,  is known for fusing indian and irish music ,  and bhangraton is a fusion of bhangra music with reggaeton ,  which itself is a fusion of hip hop ,  reggae ,  and traditional latin american music . 
sufi folk rock contains elements of modern hard rock and traditional folk music with sufi poetry . 
despite more than a century of exposure to western classical music and two centuries of british colonialism ,  classical music in india has never gained more than 'fringe' popularity . 
the last major version of irix is irix 6.5, which was released in may 1998.
irix is the first operating system to include the xfs file system . 
irix 5.3 introduced the xfs journaling file system . 
the last version of irix is 6.5.30, released in august 2006.
in 1994, irix 6.0 added support for the 64-bit mips r8000 processor ,  but is otherwise similar to irix 5.2.
the internet is a global network that comprises many voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks . 
the internet  -lrb-  contraction of interconnected network  -rrb-  is the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the internet protocol suite  -lrb-  tcp/ip  -rrb-  to link devices worldwide . 
the terms `` internet '' and `` world wide web '' are often used interchangeably in everyday speech; it is common to speak of ``  ''going on the internet '' '' when using a web browser to view web pages . 
public commercial use of the internet began in mid-1989 with the connection of mci mail and compuserve's email capabilities to the 500,000 users of the internet . 
additionally ,  sometimes a fourth independent branch ,  dardic ,  is posited ,  but recent scholarship in general places dardic languages as archaic members of the indo-aryan branch . 
the reduced number of employees in the manufacturing sector has been assumed to result from a decline in the competitiveness of the sector ,  or the introduction of the lean manufacturing process . 
this process has accelerated with the development of the computer and the robot . 
while it is possible to produce a low-technology product with low-skill labour ,  the ability to manufacture high-technology products well is dependent on a highly skilled staff . 
an industrial society is a society driven by the use of technology to enable mass production ,  supporting a large population with a high capacity for division of labour . 
this came through many successive rapid advances in technology ,  such as the production of steel and coal . 
in a post-industrial society ,  manufacturers relocate to more profitable locations through a process of off-shoring . 
indriids ,  like all lemurs ,  live exclusively on the island of madagascar . 
they have fewer premolar teeth than other lemurs ,  with the dental formula of:
the name is taken from the name of a robot manufacturer  -lrb-  `` united states robots and mechanical men ''  -rrb-  that appears throughout asimov's robot short stories . 
when a scientist takes in the robot for evaluation ,  the panel enquires whether the robot was built using the three laws of robotics . 
 ''doctor who '''s 1977 story ,  `` the robots of death '' ,  references i ,  robot with the `` first principle '' - it is forbidden for robots to harm humans . 
at least three of the short stories from `` i ,  robot '' have been adapted for television . 
unlike the books by asimov ,  the movie featured hordes of killer robots . 
i ,  robot is a fixup novel of science fiction short stories or essays by american writer isaac asimov . 
in 2004 `` the saturday evening post '' said that `` i ,  robot '''s three laws `` revolutionized the science fiction genre and made robots far more interesting than they ever had been before . `` 
although the stories can be read separately ,  they share a theme of the interaction of humans ,  robots ,  and morality ,  and when combined they tell a larger story of asimov's fictional history of robotics . 
 ''invictus '' is a short victorian poem by the english poet william ernest henley  -lrb-  1849–1903 -rrb- . 
the 1900 edition of henley's `` poems '' ,  published after bruce's death ,  altered the dedication to `` i .  m .  r .  t .  hamilton bruce  -lrb-  1846–1899 -rrb- ''  -lrb-  i .  m .  standing for `` in memoriam ''  -rrb-  . 
the tertiary sector or service sector is the third of the three economic sectors of the three-sector theory . 
the others are the secondary sector  -lrb-  approximately the same as manufacturing  -rrb-  ,  and the primary sector  -lrb-  raw materials  -rrb-  . 
the production of information has long been regarded as a service ,  but some economists now attribute it to a fourth sector ,  the quaternary sector . 
for the last 100 years ,  there has been a substantial shift from the primary and secondary sectors to the tertiary sector in industrialized countries . 
and it is not only companies that have been classified as part of that sector in some schemes; government and its services such as police or military ,  and non-profit organizations such as charities or research associations can also be seen as part of that sector . 
developed countries are allowed to maintain and develop their primary industries even further due to the excess wealth . 
such differences also come about due to more efficient production in developed economies ,  given farm machinery ,  better information available to farmers ,  and often larger scale . 
the secondary sector supports both the primary and tertiary sector . 
an imaginary number can be added to a real number to form a complex number of the form  ,  where the real numbers and are called ,  respectively ,  the `` real part '' and the `` imaginary part '' of the complex number . 
an imaginary number is a complex number that can be written as a real number multiplied by the imaginary unit  ,  which is defined by its property  . 
this can be demonstrated by ,   where both `` x '' and `` y '' are non-negative real numbers . 
some authors use the term pure imaginary number to denote what is called here an imaginary number ,  and `` imaginary number '' to denote any complex number with non-zero imaginary part . 
all proceedings on indictment must be brought before the crown court . 
this is why a public prosecution of a person whose surname is smith would be referred to in writing as `` r v smith ''  -lrb-  or alternatively as `` regina v smith '' or `` rex v smith '' depending on the gender of the sovereign ,  `` regina '' and `` rex '' being latin for `` queen '' and `` king '' and in either case may informally be pronounced as such  -rrb-  and when cited orally in court would be pronounced `` the crown against smith '' . 
the trial court does not proceed with the trial if the evidence is insufficient to make out a charge . 
as well as `` ireland '' ,  `` éire '' or `` the republic of ireland '' ,  the state is also referred to as `` the republic '' ,  `` southern ireland '' or `` the south '' . 
the 1922 state ,  comprising 26 of the 32 counties of ireland ,  was `` styled and known as the irish free state '' . 
ireland  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  also known as the republic of ireland  -lrb-  '  -rrb-  ,  is a country in north-western europe occupying 26 of 32 counties of the island of ireland . 
the state extends over an area of about five-sixths  -lrb-    -rrb-  of the island of ireland  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  with northern ireland constituting the remainder . 
there are approximately 3,300 primary schools in ireland . 
later ,  the crown of ireland act was repealed in ireland by the statute law revision  -lrb-  pre-union irish statutes  -rrb-  act 1962.
ireland has made a significant contribution to world literature in both the english and irish languages . 
therefore ,  anyone born in northern ireland who meets the requirements for being an irish citizen ,  such as birth on the island of ireland to an irish or british citizen parent or a parent who is entitled to live in northern ireland or the republic without restriction on their residency ,  may exercise an entitlement to irish citizenship ,  such as an irish passport . 
the irish civil war  -lrb-  june 1922 – may 1923 -rrb- was the consequence of the creation of the irish free state . 
as such ,  ireland's gdp and gnp should no longer be used . 
ireland's citizenship laws relate to `` the island of ireland '' ,  including islands and seas ,  thereby extending them to northern ireland ,  which is part of the united kingdom . 
religious freedom is constitutionally provided for in ireland . 
ireland is the least forested country in europe . 
from the act of union on 1 january 1801, until 6 december 1922, the island of ireland was part of the united kingdom of great britain and ireland . 
the state was created as the irish free state in 1922 as a result of the anglo-irish treaty . 
the irish constitution describes irish as the `` national language '' ,  but english is the dominant language . 
175,000 men joined irish regiments of the 10th  -lrb-  irish  -rrb-  and 16th  -lrb-  irish  -rrb-  divisions of the new british army ,  while unionists joined the 36th  -lrb-  ulster  -rrb-  divisions . 
as a result of immigration ,  polish is the most widely spoken language in ireland after english ,  with irish as the third most spoken . 
ireland is a constitutional republic with a parliamentary system of government . 
despite irish neutrality during world war ii ,  ireland had more than 50,000 participants in the war through enlistment in the british armed forces . 
in the irish defence forces ,  all foot and arms drill commands are given in the irish language . 
the population of ireland stood at 4,588,252 in 2011, an increase of 8.2% since 2006.  ,  ireland had the highest birth rate in the european union  -lrb-  16 births per 1,000 of population  -rrb-  . 
their withdrawal from the over-borrowed irish credit system would precipitate a deep irish property correction which would then lead to the collapse of the irish banking system . 
ireland has participated in the eurovision song contest since 1965.
the republic of ireland national football team plays at international level and is administered by the football association of ireland . 
the church of ireland ,  at 2.7% of the population ,  is the second largest christian denomination . 
ireland exited its eu-imf bailout programme on 15 december 2013.
the `` multinational tax schemes '' foreign firms use in ireland materially distort irish economic statistics . 
saint patrick's day is celebrated on 17 march in ireland and abroad as the irish national day ,  with parades and other celebrations . 
in the northern ireland question ,  the british and irish governments started to seek a peaceful resolution to the violent conflict involving many paramilitaries and the british army in northern ireland known as `` the troubles '' . 
in an irish republican context it is often referred to as `` the free state '' or `` the 26 counties '' . 
with regard to northern ireland's status ,  it said that the uk government's `` clearly-stated preference is to retain northern ireland’s current constitutional position: as part of the uk ,  but with strong links to ireland '' . 
ireland adopted the euro currency in 2002 along with eleven other eu member states . 
the royal institute of the architects of ireland regulates the practice of architecture in the state . 
in accordance with the treaty ,  on 6 december 1922 the entire island of ireland became a self-governing dominion called the irish free state  -lrb-  `` saorstát éireann ''  -rrb-  . 
healthcare in ireland is provided by both public and private healthcare providers . 
the following is a list of functional urban areas in ireland and their population  . 
the government of the united kingdom used the name `` eire ''  -lrb-  without the diacritic  -rrb-  and ,  from 1949, `` republic of ireland '' ,  for the state; it was not until the 1998 good friday agreement that it used the name `` ireland '' . 
