ideally ,  the hash function will assign each key to a unique bucket ,  but most hash table designs employ an imperfect hash function ,  which might cause hash `` collisions '' where the hash function generates the same index for more than one key . 
a hash table uses a hash function to compute an `` index '' into an array of `` buckets '' or `` slots '' ,  from which the desired value can be found . 
a `` hello ,  world ! `` 
a `` hello ,  world ! `` 
 ''hello ,  world ! `` 
time to `` hello world ''  -lrb-  tthw  -rrb-  is a metric for how long it takes to get a `` hello world '' program running from scratch . 
modern hebrew is phonetically simpler than biblical hebrew and has fewer phonemes ,  but it is phonologically more complex . 
standard israeli hebrew  -lrb-  sih  -rrb-  phonology ,  based on the sephardic hebrew pronunciation tradition ,  has a number of differences from biblical hebrew  -lrb-  bh  -rrb-  and mishnaic hebrew  -lrb-  mh  -rrb-  in the form of splits and mergers . 
the two main accents of modern hebrew are oriental and non-oriental . 
though an ashkenazi jew in the russian empire ,  the zionist eliezer ben-yehuda based his standard hebrew on sephardi hebrew ,  originally spoken in spain ,  and therefore recommended an alveolar  . 
according to the academy of the hebrew language ,  in the 1880s  -lrb-  the time of the beginning of the zionist movement and the hebrew revival  -rrb-  there were three groups of hebrew regional accents: ashkenazi  -lrb-  eastern european  -rrb-  ,  sephardi  -lrb-  southern european  -rrb-  ,  and mizrahi  -lrb-  middle eastern ,  iranian ,  and north african  -rrb-  . 
the hohenzollerns named their estates after hohenzollern castle in the swabian alps . 
the house of hohenzollern is a german dynasty of former princes ,  electors ,  kings and emperors of hohenzollern ,  brandenburg ,  prussia ,  the german empire ,  and romania . 
the first ancestors of the hohenzollerns were mentioned in 1061.
since then ,  the rogallo wing has been the most used airfoil of hang gliders . 
the accident rate from hang glider flying has been dramatically decreased by pilot training . 
hang gliding is an air sport or recreational activity in which a pilot flies a light ,  non-motorised foot-launched heavier-than-air aircraft called a hang glider . 
early hang gliders had a low lift-to-drag ratio ,  so pilots were restricted to gliding down small hills . 
all modern gliders have built-in dive recovery mechanisms such as luff lines in kingposted gliders ,  or `` sprogs '' in topless gliders . 
in most hang gliders ,  the pilot is ensconced in a harness suspended from the airframe ,  and exercises control by shifting body weight in opposition to a stationary control frame ,  also known as triangle control frame ,  control bar or base bar . 
images showing a triangle control frame on otto lilienthal's 1892 hang glider shows that the technology of such frames has existed since the early design of gliders ,  but he did not mention it in his patents . 
the reign of philip ii augustus  -lrb-  junior king 1179–80, senior king 1180–1223 -rrb- marked an important step in the history of french monarchy . 
the carolingian kings had nothing more than a royal title when the capetian kings added their principality to that title . 
richard replaced his father as king of england afterward . 
the late direct capetian kings were considerably more powerful and influential than the earliest ones . 
although the normans were now both vassals of the french kings and their equals as kings of england ,  their zone of political activity remained centered in france . 
thanks to abbot suger's political advice ,  king louis vii  -lrb-  junior king 1131–37, senior king 1137–80 -rrb- enjoyed greater moral authority over france than his predecessors . 
also during this time ,  the mayors of the palace ,  originally the chief advisor to the kings ,  would become the real power in the frankish lands; the merovingian kings themselves would be reduced to little more than figureheads . 
some of the king's vassals would grow sufficiently powerful that they would become some of the strongest rulers of western europe . 
french political power reached a zenith under the rule of louis xiv ,  `` the sun king '' ,  builder of versailles palace . 
the fact that the capetians held lands as both prince and king gave them a complicated status . 
he was recorded to be recognised king by the gauls ,  bretons ,  danes ,  aquitanians ,  goths ,  spanish and gascons . 
the capetians ,  in a way ,  held a dual status of king and prince; as king they held the crown of charlemagne and as count of paris they held their personal fiefdom ,  best known as île-de-france . 
as time went on the power of the king was expanded by conquests ,  seizures and successful feudal political battles . 
this period also saw the rise of a complex system of international alliances and conflicts opposing ,  through dynasties ,  kings of france and england and holy roman emperor . 
the capetians ,  as they were descended from the robertians ,  were formerly powerful princes themselves who had successfully unseated the weak and unfortunate carolingian kings . 
the roman empire was on the verge of collapsing . 
afterwards a gallo-roman culture emerged and gaul was increasingly integrated into the roman empire . 
the word `` halloween '' or `` hallowe'en '' dates to about 1745 and is of christian origin . 
list of foods associated with halloween:
trick-or-treating is a customary celebration for children on halloween . 
the christian church traditionally observed hallowe'en through a vigil . 
today ,  christian attitudes towards halloween are diverse . 
there are several games traditionally associated with halloween . 
some believe ,  however ,  that halloween began solely as a christian holiday . 
the names have been used by historians to refer to celtic halloween customs up until the 19th century ,  and are still the gaelic and welsh names for halloween . 
in the roman catholic church ,  halloween's christian connection is acknowledged ,  and halloween celebrations are common in many catholic parochial schools . 
development of artifacts and symbols associated with halloween formed over time . 
today's halloween customs are thought to have been influenced by christian dogma and practices derived from it . 
dressing up in costumes and going `` guising '' was prevalent in scotland and ireland at halloween by the late 19th century . 
halloween or hallowe'en  -lrb-  a contraction of hallows' even or hallows' evening  -rrb-  ,  also known as allhalloween ,  all hallows' eve ,  or all saints' eve ,  is a celebration observed in several countries on 31 october ,  the eve of the western christian feast of all hallows' day . 
black ,  orange ,  and sometimes purple are halloween's traditional colors . 
american historian and author ruth edna kelley of massachusetts wrote the first book-length history of halloween in the us; ``  ''  -lrb-  1919 -rrb- ,  and references souling in the chapter `` hallowe'en in america '' . 
all halloween customs in the united states are borrowed directly or adapted from those of other countries '' . 
up until the 19th century ,  the halloween bonfires were also used for divination in parts of scotland ,  wales and brittany . 
it is widely believed that many halloween traditions originated from ancient celtic harvest festivals ,  particularly the gaelic festival samhain; that such festivals may have had pagan roots; and that samhain itself was christianized as halloween by the early church . 
there is no consistent rule or view on halloween amongst those who describe themselves as neopagans or wiccans . 
the traditions and importance of halloween vary greatly among countries that observe it . 
episodes of television series and halloween-themed specials  -lrb-  with the specials usually aimed at children  -rrb-  are commonly aired on or before halloween ,  while new horror films are often released before halloween to take advantage of the holiday . 
hayling island is a true island ,  completely surrounded by sea . 
the nearest railway station to hayling island is havant ,  just onto the mainland off hayling island . 
a railway to the island was active in the 19th and 20th centuries . 
hayling island is an island off the south coast of england ,  in the borough of havant in the county of hampshire ,  near portsmouth . 
the island hosts one of the few active real tennis courts in the uk . 
until march 2015, hayling ferry linked portsmouth and hayling island . 
salt production was an industry on the island from the 11th century  -lrb-  the domesday book records a saltpan on the island for this purpose  -rrb-  until the late 19th century . 
as a consequence of the island's popularity for water activities ,  there are two lifeboat services: hayling island lifeboat station ,  run by the rnli and hayling island rescue service ,  an independent service run by retired rnli helmsman ,  frank dunster . 
on 20 october 2013, at least one hundred properties on the island were damaged when it was hit by a tornado . 
an iron age shrine in the north of hayling island was later developed into a roman temple in the 1st century bc and was first recorded in richard scott's `` topographical and historical account of hayling island '' ,  published in 1826.
theorem . 
theorem . 
theorem . 
hahn–banach theorem  . 
one form of hahn–banach theorem is known as the geometric hahn–banach theorem ,  or mazur's theorem . 
hahn–banach theorem  -lrb-  alternative version  -rrb-  . 
another version of hahn–banach theorem is known as the hahn–banach separation theorem . 
the towns of portsmouth ,  new hampshire and portsmouth ,  virginia take their names from portsmouth in hampshire . 
hampshire takes its name from the settlement that is now the city of southampton . 
southampton and portsmouth are the main settlements within the south hampshire conurbation ,  which is home to about half of the ceremonial county's population . 
from 1889 until 1959, the administrative county was named the county of southampton and has also been known as southamptonshire . 
 ''mayflower '' and `` speedwell '' set sail for america from southampton in 1620.
the itchen and test are trout rivers that flow from the chalk through wooded valleys into southampton water . 
the larger south hampshire metropolitan area has a population of 1,547,000.
the three cities are all university cities ,  southampton being home to the university of southampton and southampton solent university  -lrb-  formerly southampton institute  -rrb-  ,  portsmouth to the university of portsmouth ,  and winchester to the university of winchester  -lrb-  formerly known as university college winchester; king alfred's college  -rrb-  . the northeast of the county houses the blackwater valley conurbation ,  which includes the towns of farnborough ,  aldershot ,  blackwater and yateley and borders both berkshire and surrey . 
king alfred proclaimed himself `` king of england '' in 886; but athelstan of wessex did not officially control the whole of england until 927.
the county has a milder climate than most of britain . 
natural england identifies a number of national character areas that lie wholly or partially in hampshire: the hampshire downs ,  new forest ,  south hampshire lowlands ,  south coast plain ,  south downs ,  low weald and thames basin heaths
its two largest settlements ,  southampton and portsmouth ,  are administered separately as unitary authorities and the rest of the area forms the administrative county ,  which is governed by hampshire county council . 
hard science fiction is a category of science fiction characterized by an emphasis on scientific accuracy . 
readers of `` hard sf '' often try to find inaccuracies in stories . 
there is a degree of flexibility in how far from `` real science '' a story can stray before it leaves the realm of hard sf . 
cases ,  especially bottleneck cases ,  will stretch upon firing . 
progressive presses sometimes use an additional `` die '' to meter powder into the case  -lrb-  though it is arguably not a real die as it does not shape the case  -rrb-  . 
progressive presses also often feature case feeds that will hold hundreds of cases to be loaded ,  and all the user has to do is hold the bullet in place over the appropriate case mouth ,  and pull the lever . 
single stage presses often do not provide an easy way to prime cases . 
a scale also allows bullets and cases to be sorted by weight ,  which can increase consistency further . 
pushing the bullet into the case slightly with a seating die will break the seal ,  and allow the bullet to be pulled . 
reamers for removing primer pocket crimps are not associated with presses ,  being an alternative to using a press to remove military case primer pocket crimps . 
dies are generally sold in sets of two or three dies ,  depending on the shape of the case . 
the purpose of these tools is to achieve a more equal distribution of flame from the primer to ignite the powder charge ,  resulting in consistent ignition from case to case . 
military cases ,  for example ,  tend to be thicker ,  while cases that have been reloaded numerous times will have thinner walls due to brass flowing forward under firing ,  and excess case length being later trimmed from the case mouth . 
primer pocket uniformer tools are used to achieve a uniform primer pocket depth . 
several kinds of case trimmers are available . 
modern reloading dies are generally standardized with 7/8-14  -lrb-  or ,  for the case of 50 bmg dies ,  with 1-1/4×12 -rrb- threads and are interchangeable with all common brands of presses ,  although older dies may use other threads and be press-specific . 
shotshell presses typically use a charge bar to drop precise amounts of shot and powder . 
primer pocket reamers or swagers are used to remove military crimps in primer pockets . 
brass cases can be matched by volume ,  weight ,  and concentricity ,  bullets by weight and design ,  powder charges by weight ,  type ,  case filling  -lrb-  amount of total usable case capacity filled by charge  -rrb-  ,  and packing scheme  -lrb-  characteristics of granule packing  -rrb-  . 
there are also some specialty dies worth mentioning . 
progressive presses handle several shells at once ,  with each pull of the lever performing a single step on all the cases at once . 
as members of the afc south ,  the texans play 6 of their 16 regular season games against other afc south teams . 
the texans are 28–40 against nfc teams ,  tallying a 6-14 record against nfc east teams ,  8–8 against nfc north teams ,  9-7 against nfc south teams ,  and 5–11 against nfc west teams . 
as of the end of the 2018 season ,  the texans' overall regular season win-loss record is 121–151.
the texans lost 34–16.
the texans surged as the team to beat in the afc south in  ,  starting 5-0 and holding an 11–1 record by week 14.
as of the end of the 2018 season ,  there is one team against which the texans have never lost: the chicago bears  -lrb-  4–0 -rrb- . 
in 2002, the team wore a patch commemorating their inaugural season . 
on october 6, 1999 the nfl awarded the 32nd team to houston ,  at the cost of $700 million . 
the houston texans are a professional american football team based in houston ,  texas . 
the texans went on to finish 9–7 in the 2014 season and barely missed the playoffs . 
the texans then beat wild card cincinnati bengals 31–10 in the first round of the 2011–12 nfl playoffs ,  before a 20–13 defeat by the ravens in the semifinals . 
the team also has a cheerleading squad simply named the houston texans cheerleaders . 
the houston texans joined the league at the 2002 nfl season ,  playing at the newly founded reliant stadium . 
the texans would go on to finish the season 11-5, and win another afc south division championship under bill o'brien . 
the team plays its home games at nrg stadium . 
 ''heart of oak '' is the official march of the royal navy of the united kingdom . 
 ''chorus '':<br> heart of oak are our ships ,  heart of oak are our men;<br> we always are ready ,  steady ,  boys ,  steady ! <br> we'll fight and we'll conquer again and again . 
the phrase `` hearts of oak '' appears in english translations of the `` aeneid . `` 
come cheer up ,  my lads ! 
it was also the official march of the royal australian navy ,  but has now been replaced by the new march ,  `` royal australian navy . `` 
whitlam himself later said of holt:
holt has been described as an `` apathetic agnostic '' . 
holt and johnson developed a personal friendship . 
holt was the first prime minister born in the twentieth century . 
tom holt married lola in 1936, and their daughter frances  -lrb-  harold's half-sister  -rrb-  was born in 1940; tom holt died in 1945.
holt's initial cabinet was virtually unchanged from that of his predecessor . 
harold holt is commemorated by the harold holt memorial swimming centre in the melbourne suburb of glen iris . 
holt was born in sydney ,  but lived in melbourne from a young age . 
a few days later ,  holt announced a new royal commission into the disaster . 
holt's personal profile and political standing grew throughout the 1950s . 
in 1933, holt joined the young nationalists ,  the youth wing of the united australia party . 
it was holt who convinced cabinet to call the new currency the `` dollar '' rather than the `` royal '' . 
when menzies regained the prime ministership in 1949, holt became a senior figure in the new government . 
in december 1958, following the retirement of arthur fadden ,  holt succeeded him as treasurer . 
nonetheless ,  `` all the way with lbj '' is still remembered as holt's `` best-known utterance '' . 
the vietnam war was the dominant foreign policy issue during holt's term in office . 
holt came to regard the referendum as indicative of a shift in the national mood . 
holt was born on 5 august 1908 at his parents' home in stanmore ,  sydney ,  new south wales . 
holt was twenty-seven years old when he entered parliament ,  making him its youngest member . 
holt as prime minister was sometimes criticised for a failure to be assertive on economic matters . 
in his biography of holt ,  tom frame wrote: `` i have not included the names of women with whom holt allegedly had a sexual relationship because i was unable to confirm or deny that most of these relationships took place … by their very nature they were always illicit and holt was very discreet . `` 
holt served his articles of clerkship with the firm of fink ,  best ,  & miller . 
his attack on holt's family – which he refused to withdraw – was viewed as desperate and undignified ,  and it was pointed out that ,  unlike holt ,  calwell had performed no military service in world war ii . 
as prime minister ,  holt continued the liberalisation of immigration law that he had begun as minister for immigration . 
sharpe-young's multivolume metal encyclopedia separates the underground into five major categories: thrash metal ,  death metal ,  black metal ,  power metal ,  and the related subgenres of doom and gothic metal . 
however ,  the metal audience had begun to factionalize ,  with those in many underground metal scenes favoring more extreme sounds and disparaging the popular style as `` light metal '' or `` hair metal '' . 
also in the 2010s ,  a metal style called `` djent '' developed as a spinoff of standard progressive metal . 
the first generation of metal bands was ceding the limelight . 
during the late 1980s ,  the power metal scene came together largely in reaction to the harshness of death and black metal . 
heavy metal  -lrb-  or simply metal  -rrb-  is a genre of rock music that developed in the late 1960s and early 1970s ,  largely in the united kingdom . 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s ,  swedish death metal became notable and melodic forms of death metal were created . 
later the term would be replaced by `` heavy metal '' . 
thrash metal emerged in the early 1980s under the influence of hardcore punk and the new wave of british heavy metal ,  particularly songs in the revved-up style known as speed metal . 
critics disagree over who can be thought of as the first heavy metal band . 
the rhythm in metal songs is emphatic ,  with deliberate stresses . 
alternative metal's mix of styles and sounds represented `` the colorful results of metal opening up to face the outside world . `` 
the origin of the term `` heavy metal '' in a musical context is uncertain . 
in the mid- and late 1990s came a new wave of u . s .  metal groups inspired by the alternative metal bands and their mix of genres . 
attendees of metal concerts do not dance in the usual sense . 
in 1968, the sound that would become known as heavy metal began to coalesce . 
although a number of metal musicians cite classical composers as inspiration ,  classical and metal are rooted in different cultural traditions and practices—classical in the art music tradition ,  metal in the popular music tradition . 
in the study of heavy metal chord structures ,  it has been concluded that `` heavy metal music has proved to be far more complicated '' than other music researchers had realized . 
closely related to power metal is progressive metal ,  which adopts the complex compositional approach of bands like rush and king crimson . 
earlier on ,  as `` heavy metal '' emerged partially from the heavy psychedelic rock scene ,  also known as acid rock ,  `` acid rock '' was often used interchangeably with `` heavy metal '' and `` hard rock '' . 
heavy metal remained popular in the 2000s ,  particularly in continental europe . 
the metal scene has been characterized as a `` subculture of alienation '' ,  with its own code of authenticity . 
the thematic content of heavy metal has long been a target of criticism . 
in the 2000s ,  an extreme metal fusion genre known as deathcore emerged . 
fashion and personal style was especially important for glam metal bands of the era . 
like jane's addiction ,  many of the most popular early 1990s groups with roots in heavy metal fall under the umbrella term `` alternative metal '' . 
grunge acts were influenced by the heavy metal sound ,  but rejected the excesses of the more popular metal bands ,  such as their `` flashy and virtuosic solos '' and `` appearance-driven '' mtv orientation . 
metal historian ian christe describes what the components of the term mean in `` hippiespeak '': `` heavy '' is roughly synonymous with `` potent '' or `` profound , ``  and `` metal '' designates a certain type of mood ,  grinding and weighted as with metal . 
the combination of blues rock with psychedelic rock and acid rock formed much of the original basis for heavy metal . 
for the first time ,  heavy metal became a true genre unto itself . 
thrash soon began to evolve and split into more extreme metal genres . 
down-the-back long hair is the `` most crucial distinguishing feature of metal fashion '' . 
mastodon ,  which plays in a progressive/sludge style ,  has inspired claims of a metal revival in the united states ,  dubbed by some critics the `` new wave of american heavy metal '' . 
iron butterfly's 1968 song `` in-a-gadda-da-vida '' is sometimes described as an example of the transition between acid rock and heavy metal or the turning point in which acid rock became `` heavy metal '' ,  and both iron butterfly's 1968 album `` in-a-gadda-da-vida '' and blue cheer's 1968 album `` vincebus eruptum '' have been described as laying the foundation of heavy metal and greatly influential in the transformation of acid rock into heavy metal . 
he described the band's latest ,  self-titled release as `` more of the same 27th-rate heavy metal crap '' . 
musicologist steve waksman stated that `` the distinction between acid rock ,  hard rock ,  and heavy metal can at some point never be more than tenuous '' ,  while percussionist john beck defined `` acid rock '' as synonymous with hard rock and heavy metal . 
the metal audience has become older  -lrb-  college-aged  -rrb-  ,  younger  -lrb-  pre-teen  -rrb-  ,  and more female '' . 
rather than the helvetii . 
the helvetii were the first gallic tribe of the campaign to be confronted by caesar . 
the helvetii  -lrb-    ,  anglicized helvetians  -rrb-  were a celtic tribe or tribal confederation occupying most of the swiss plateau at the time of their contact with the roman republic in the 1st century bc . 
in the course of romanization ,  the celtic polytheism of the helvetians was syncretized with roman religion . 
as caesar’s account is heavily influenced by his political agenda ,  it is difficult to determine the actual motive of the helvetii movement of 58 bc . 
a few days later ,  however ,  near the aeduan `` oppidum '' bibracte ,  caesar caught up with the helvetii and faced them in a major battle ,  which ended in the helvetii’s retreat and the capture of most of their baggage by the romans . 
of the four helvetian `` pagi '' or sub-tribes ,  caesar names only the verbigeni  -lrb-  `` bell . 
nevertheless ,  the helvetii did not give up their planned emigration ,  but burned their homes in 58 bc . 
according to caesar ,  the territory abandoned by the helvetii had comprised 400 villages and 12 `` oppida ''  -lrb-  fortified settlements  -rrb-  . 
the swiss plateau was gradually romanized during the 1st to 3rd centuries . 
in 2015, the star 51 pegasi ,  the first main-sequence star found to have an exoplanet ,  was named helvetios after the helvetii . 
in the cavalry battle that followed ,  the helvetii prevailed over caesar’s aedui allies under dumnorix’ command ,  and continued their journey ,  while caesar’s army was being detained by delays in his grain supplies ,  caused by the aedui on the instigations of dumnorix ,  who had married orgetorix’ daughter . 
the helvetii were re-discovered as the forebears of the swiss in the early historiography of switzerland ,  in the late 15th to early 16th century . 
according to caesar ,  those killed had been the tigurini ,  on whom he had now taken revenge in the name of the republic and his family . 
the helvetians were subjugated after 52 bc ,  and under augustus ,  celtic oppida ,  such as vindonissa or basilea ,  were re-purposed as garrisons . 
the helvetii and rauraci most likely lost their status as `` foederati '' only six years after the battle of bibracte ,  when they supported vercingetorix in 52 bc with 8,000 and 2,000 men ,  respectively . 
by destroying the planet ,  the bene gesserit would be dependent on the tleilaxu for the spice ,  ensuring an alliance . 
however ,  lucilla must deal with reverend mother schwangyu ,  head of the ghola project but also the leader of a faction within the bene gesserit who feel the gholas are a danger . 
lucilla arrives at a bene gesserit safe house to discover it has been taken over by a young honored matre named murbella ,  who has partially subdued idaho . 
they intend to drown the worm in a mixture of water and spice ,  turning it into sandtrout which will turn the secret bene gesserit planet chapterhouse into another dune ,  but with the collective consciousness of the god emperor diluted into just one sandworm ,  freeing humanity from the shadow of his prescience forever . 
 ''halakha '' also does not include the parts of the torah not related to commandments . 
the word `` halakha '' is derived from the hebrew root `` halakh '' – `` to walk '' or `` to go '' . 
 ''halakha '' is often translated as `` jewish law '' ,  although a more literal translation might be `` the way to behave '' or `` the way of walking '' . 
halakha  -lrb-  ;  ,  ; also transliterated as halacha ,  halakhah ,  halachah ,  or halocho  -rrb-   -lrb-     -rrb-  is the collective body of jewish religious laws derived from the written and oral torah . 
the kingdom of israel and the kingdom of judah were related kingdoms from the iron age period of the ancient levant . 
the name `` israel '' first appears in the merneptah stele c .  1209 bce: `` israel is laid waste and his seed is no more . `` 
in 63 bce the roman general pompey conquered jerusalem and made the jewish kingdom a client state of rome . 
judah emerged somewhat later than israel ,  probably during the 9th century bce ,  but the subject is one of considerable controversy . 
king ahaz's seal is a piece of reddish-brown clay that belonged to king ahaz of judah ,  who ruled from 732 to 716 bce . 
when babylon fell to the persian cyrus the great in 539 bce ,  judah  -lrb-  or yehud medinata ,  the `` province of yehud ''  -rrb-  became an administrative division within the persian empire . 
yahweh ,  the national god of both israel and judah ,  seems to have originated in edom and midian in southern canaan and may have been brought to israel by the kenites and midianites at an early stage . 
the second temple period  -lrb-  520 bce 70 ce  -rrb-  differed in significant ways from what had gone before . 
the israel of the persian period consisted of descendants of the inhabitants of the old kingdom of judah ,  returnees from the babylonian exile community ,  mesopotamians who had joined them or had been exiled themselves to samaria at a far earlier period ,  samaritans ,  and others . 
the persian era ,  and especially the period between 538 and 400 bce ,  laid the foundations for the unified judaic religion and the beginning of a scriptural canon . 
this article lists the monarchs of persia ,  who ruled over the area of modern-day iran from the establishment of the median dynasty by medes around 705 bc until the deposition of the pahlavi dynasty in 1979.
heinz was a man of faith . 
heinz married sarah sloan young heinz on september 3, 1869.
senator h .  john heinz iii of pennsylvania . 
heinz was raised and confirmed as a lutheran . 
a bronze statue of heinz by emil fuchs was dedicated on october 11, 1924 at the heinz company building in pittsburgh . 
heinz operated it until 2014, when it was sold . 
in 1888, heinz bought out his other two partners and reorganized the company as the h .  j .  heinz company . 
heinz was founded by and is named for henry j .  heinz ,  who was born in the united states to german immigrants . 
in 1905, h .  j .  heinz was incorporated ,  and heinz served as its first president ,  holding that position for the rest of his life . 
but in `` canonical huffman code '' ,  the result is formula_32.
condition: formula_10 for any code formula_11.
huffman coding is such a widespread method for creating prefix codes that the term `` huffman code '' is widely used as a synonym for `` prefix code '' even when such a code is not produced by huffman's algorithm . 
in general ,  a huffman code need not be unique . 
a huffman tree that omits unused symbols produces the most optimal code lengths . 
in the standard huffman coding problem ,  it is assumed that any codeword can correspond to any input symbol . 
we give an example of the result of huffman coding for a code with five characters and given weights . 
 -lrb-  however ,  for each minimizing codeword length assignment ,  there exists at least one huffman code with those lengths .   -rrb- 
input . <br> alphabet formula_1, which is the symbol alphabet of size formula_2.
if weights corresponding to the alphabetically ordered inputs are in numerical order ,  the huffman code has the same lengths as the optimal alphabetic code ,  which can be found from calculating these lengths ,  rendering hu–tucker coding unnecessary . 
huffman coding uses a specific method for choosing the representation for each symbol ,  resulting in a prefix code  -lrb-  sometimes called `` prefix-free codes '' ,  that is ,  the bit string representing some particular symbol is never a prefix of the bit string representing any other symbol  -rrb-  . 
deflate  -lrb-  pkzip's algorithm  -rrb-  and multimedia codecs such as jpeg and mp3 have a front-end model and quantization followed by the use of prefix codes; these are often called `` huffman codes '' even though most applications use pre-defined variable-length codes rather than codes designed using huffman's algorithm . 
the output from huffman's algorithm can be viewed as a variable-length code table for encoding a source symbol  -lrb-  such as a character in a file  -rrb-  . 
arithmetic coding and huffman coding produce equivalent results — achieving entropy — when every symbol has a probability of the form 1/2.
the remainder of the serum cholesterol after subtracting the hdl is the non-hdl cholesterol . 
larger hdl particles are carrying more cholesterol . 
hdl is the smallest of the lipoprotein particles . 
five subfractions of hdl have been identified . 
most saturated fats increase hdl cholesterol to varying degrees but also raise total and ldl cholesterol . 
in contrast ,  while the use of statins is effective against high levels of ldl cholesterol ,  most have little or no effect in raising hdl cholesterol . 
while higher hdl levels are correlated with cardiovascular health ,  no medication used to increase hdl has been proven to improve health . 
pharmacological therapy to increase the level of hdl cholesterol includes use of fibrates and niacin . 
high ldl with low hdl level is an additional risk factor for cardiovascular disease . 
the triglycerides are not stable in hdl ,  but are degraded by hepatic lipase so that ,  finally ,  small hdl particles are left ,  which restart the uptake of cholesterol from cells . 
higher native hdl levels are correlated with better cardiovascular health ,  but it does not appear that further increasing one's hdl improves cardiovascular outcomes . 
men tend to have noticeably lower hdl levels ,  with smaller size and lower cholesterol content ,  than women . 
the measurement of apo-a reactive capacity can be used to measure hdl cholesterol but is thought to be less accurate . 
this pathway has been termed `` reverse cholesterol transport '' and is considered as the classical protective function of hdl toward atherosclerosis . 
hdl transports cholesterol mostly to the liver or steroidogenic organs such as adrenals ,  ovary ,  and testes by both direct and indirect pathways . 
honolulu is the most remote major city in the world . 
 ''honolulu '' means `` sheltered harbor '' or `` calm port '' . 
honolulu  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the capital and largest city of the u . s .  state of hawaii . 
at the same time ,  honolulu became the center of commerce in the islands ,  with descendants of american missionaries establishing major businesses in downtown honolulu . 
honolulu is the most remote city of its size in the world and is the westernmost major u . s .  city . 
the population of the honolulu census designated place  -lrb-  cdp  -rrb-  was 359,870 as of the 2017 population estimate ,  while the honolulu ccd was 390,738 and the population of the consolidated city and county was 953,207.
the entire group is usually called the heterolobosea ,  but this may be restricted to members with amoeboid stages . 
usually ,  the amoeboid form is taken when food is plentiful ,  and the flagellate form is used for rapid locomotion . 
these are superficially similar to the sporangia of the dictyostelids ,  but the amoebae only aggregate as individuals or in small groups and do not die to form the stalk . 
the bronze age in the indian subcontinent began around 3300 bce . 
around 800 bce to 400 bce witnessed the composition of the earliest upanishads . 
the vedic period is named after the indo-aryan culture of north-west india ,  although other parts of india had a distinct cultural identity during this period . 
neolithic agricultural cultures sprang up in the indus valley region around 5000 bce ,  in the lower gangetic valley around 3000 bce ,  represented by the bhirrana findings  -lrb-  7570–6200 bce  -rrb-  in haryana ,  india ,  lahuradewa findings  -lrb-  7000 bce  -rrb-  in uttar pradesh ,  india ,  and mehrgarh findings  -lrb-  7000–5000 bce  -rrb-  in balochistan ,  pakistan; and later in southern india ,  spreading southwards and also northwards into malwa around 1800 bce . 
the shungas originated from magadha ,  and controlled areas of the central and eastern indian subcontinent from around 187 to 78 bce . 
most of the indian subcontinent was conquered by the maurya empire during the 4th and 3rd centuries bce . 
the period from c .  600 bce to c .  300 bce witnessed the rise of the mahajanapadas ,  sixteen powerful and vast kingdoms and oligarchic republics . 
during the sangam period tamil literature flourished from the 3rd century bce to the 4th century ce . 
chandragupta rapidly expanded his power westwards across central and western india ,  and by 317 bce the empire had fully occupied northwestern india . 
the time between the maurya empire in the 3rd century bce and the end of the gupta empire in the 6th century ce is referred to as the `` classical '' period of india . 
during the time between 800 and 200 bce the `` śramaṇa '' movement formed ,  from which originated jainism and buddhism . 
the kuru kingdom was the first state-level society of the vedic period ,  corresponding to the beginning of the iron age in northwestern india ,  around 1200–800 bce ,  as well as with the composition of the atharvaveda  -lrb-  the first indian text to mention iron ,  as  ,  literally `` black metal ''  -rrb-  . 
the iron age in the indian subcontinent from about 1200 bce to the 6th century bce is defined by the rise of janapadas ,  which are realms ,  republics and kingdoms—notably the iron age kingdoms of kuru ,  panchala ,  kosala ,  videha . 
increasing urbanisation of india in 7th and 6th centuries bce led to the rise of new ascetic or śramaṇa movements which challenged the orthodoxy of rituals . 
magadha formed one of the sixteen mahā-janapadas  -lrb-  sanskrit: `` great realms ''  -rrb-  or kingdoms in ancient india . 
during this period ,  india's economy is estimated to have been the largest in the world ,  having between one-third and one-quarter of the world's wealth ,  from 1 ce to 1000 ce . 
many of the sixteen kingdoms had coalesced into four major ones by 500/400 bce ,  by the time of gautama buddha . 
by 326 bce ,  alexander the great had conquered asia minor and the achaemenid empire and had reached the northwest frontiers of the indian subcontinent . 
the later part of this period corresponds with a consolidation of increasingly large states and kingdoms ,  called `` mahajanapadas '' ,  all across northern india . 
they played an important role in the establishment of buddhism in india and its spread to central asia and china . 
from the late 18th century to the mid-19th century ,  large areas of india were annexed by the british east india company of the british empire . 
directed by yoshiaki kawajiri ,  the film was written by david abramowitz ,  who also wrote for ``  '' ,  ``  '' and the sci-fi channel film ``  '' . 
however ,  the film had more success internationally ,  taking in $12,885,193.
some episodes of the series were edited into the feature-length film . 
in november 2016, chad stahelski was confirmed to direct the film . 
in 2007, an anime film ,  ``  '' was released ,  featuring the immortal colin macleod in the year 2187.
the film was also a box office bomb ,  managing to garner $15m of its $25m budget . 
critics claim that it was little more than a carbon copy of the first film . 
in august ,  lin dropped out of the film due to commitments to other projects . 
the film follows duncan macleod and a group of fellow immortals seeking the source of immortality . 
the first of the series of films ,  `` highlander '' ,  directed by russell mulcahy ,  was released on march 7, 1986, with the tagline `` there can be only one '' . 
 '' '' ,  released on september 1, 2000, was an attempt to merge characters from both the original film and from the  . 
on june 28, 2013, it was announced that ``  '' writer and executive producer david abramowitz would polish the film's script . 
the series was an offshoot of the 1986 feature film but with one major difference: immortals still exist post-1985.
the astros finished the strike-shortened season at 84–69, their first winning season . 
the 2000 season saw a move to a new stadium . 
after the 1986 season ,  the team had difficulty finding success again . 
scott would finish the season with an 18–10 record and a cy young award . 
the astros finished the 1969 season with a record of 81 wins ,  81 losses ,  marking their first season of  . 500 ball . 
the astros finished with a record of 76–86.
the 1963 season saw more young talent mixed with seasoned veterans . 
winning only 20 road games during the entire season ,  the astros finished with a 55–107 record ,  the worst record in all of major league baseball for the 2012 season ,  and surpassing the 2011 season for the worst record in astros history . 
the astros regressed in 2008 and 2009, finishing with records of 86–75 and 74–88, respectively . 
the new houston team was named the colt  . 45s after a `` name the team '' contest was won by william irving neder . 
the 1975 season saw the introduction of the astros' new uniforms . 
the astros entered the 2016 season as the favorites to win the al west after a promising 2015 season . 
the houston astros are an american professional baseball team based in houston ,  texas . 
the astros finished with a record of 56–106, the worst single-season record in franchise history  -lrb-  a record which would be broken the following season  -rrb-  . 
the mets won the series ,  4–2.
he was selected to both all-star games in 1962.
however ,  the signature game of the series was game 6.
the astros finished in third place again in 1977 with a record of 81–81.
the astros finished the 2016 season eleven games behind the rangers . 
the 1979 season would prove to be a big turnaround in astros history . 
the astros would however win the one-game playoff 7–1, and advance to their first post-season . 
houston finished in fourth place in 1970.
a dramatic season end included wins in 10 of their last 12 games ,  but the astros missed a playoff appearance when they lost the final game of the season to the atlanta braves . 
on september 29, the astros completed their first year in the american league ,  losing 5–1 in a 14-inning game to the new york yankees . 
coinciding with the change in ownership ,  the team switched uniforms and team colors after the season in order to go for a new ,  more serious image . 
similarly ,  the radio broadcasting team remained with the new houston major league franchise . 
the astros greatly improved against the rangers in 2017, going 12–7 against them and winning the season series . 
the houston astros played their first game as an american league team on march 31, 2013, where they were victorious over their in-state division competitor ,  the texas rangers ,  with a score of 8–2.
the 2010 season was the first season as astros manager for brad mills ,  who was previously the bench coach of the boston red sox . 
just as the excitement was settling down over the astrodome ,  the 1966 season found something new to put the domed stadium in the spotlight once again – the field . 
with new manager grady hatton ,  the astros started the 1966 season strong . 
from 1888 until 1961, houston's professional baseball club was the minor league houston buffaloes . 
the astros finished with their best record to that point at 89–73 and 1½ games behind the nl winner reds . 
manager cecil cooper was fired after the 2009 season . 
harry clement stubbs  -lrb-  may 30, 1922 – october 29, 2003 -rrb- ,  better known by the pen name hal clement ,  was an american science fiction writer and a leader of the hard science fiction subgenre . 
 ''halldór kiljan laxness’s three-volume `` íslandsklukkan '' … is probably the most significant  -lrb-  icelandic  -rrb-  novel of the 1940s . `` 
halldór kiljan laxness  -lrb-  ; born halldór guðjónsson; 23 april 1902 – 8 february 1998 -rrb- was an icelandic writer . 
this was followed by the four-part novel `` heimsljós  -lrb-  world light ,  1937, 1938, 1939, 1940 -rrb- '' ,  which was `` … consistently regarded by many critics as his most important work . `` 
laxness was born in 1902 in reykjavík . 
laxness's next novel was `` sjálfstætt fólk  -lrb-  independent people ,  1934, 1935 -rrb- '' which has been described as `` … one of the best books of the twentieth century . `` 
in 1955 laxness was awarded the nobel prize in literature ,  `` … for his vivid epic power ,  which has renewed the great narrative art of iceland '' . 
an adaptation of his novel `` salka valka '' was directed by arne mattsson  -lrb-  and filmed by sven nykvist  -rrb-  in 1954.
due to its examination of modern reykjavík ,  `` atómstöðin '' caused many critics and readers to consider it as `` the '' exemplary `` reykjavík novel . `` 
depending on the friction coefficient ,  the system can:
if `` f '' is the only force acting on the system ,  the system is called a simple harmonic oscillator ,  and it undergoes simple harmonic motion: sinusoidal oscillations about the equilibrium point ,  with a constant amplitude and a constant frequency  -lrb-  which does not depend on the amplitude  -rrb-  . 
balance of forces  -lrb-  newton's second law  -rrb-  for the system is
heathers is a 1989 american black comedy film written by daniel waters and directed by michael lehmann . 
between 1953, when the federal expellee law was passed ,  and 1991, the west german government passed several laws dealing with german expellees . 
the german law of return declared refugee status to be inheritable . 
the federation helps its members to integrate into german society . 
in 1989-1990 the west german government realized they had an opportunity to reunify the federal republic of germany and the soviet created german democratic republic . 
previous west german governments ,  especially those led by the christian democratic union ,  had shown more rhetorical support for the territorial claims made on behalf of german refugees and expellees . 
the federation of expellees  -lrb-  ; bdv  -rrb-  is a non-profit organization formed in west germany on 27 october 1957 to represent the interests of german nationals of all ethnicities and foreign ethnic germans and their families  -lrb-  usually naturalised as german nationals after 1949 -rrb- who either fled their homes in parts of central and eastern europe ,  or were forcibly expelled following world war ii . 
the charter has been criticised for avoiding mentioning nazi atrocities of second world war and germans who were forced to emigrate due to nazi repressions . 
