the norwegian sea  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a marginal sea in the arctic ocean ,  northwest of norway between the north sea and the greenland sea ,  adjoining the barents sea to the northeast . 
whaling was also important for the norwegian sea . 
in contrast to the greenland sea and arctic seas ,  the norwegian sea is ice-free year round ,  owing to its warm currents . 
the norwegian sea is part of the northern sea route for ships from european ports to asia . 
the norwegian sea is connected with the greenland sea and the arctic ocean by the 2,600-metre deep fram strait . 
the coasts of the norwegian sea were shaped during the last ice age . 
most of the aquatic life in the norwegian sea is concentrated in the upper layers . 
the importance of shipping in the norwegian sea also increased with the expansion of the russian and soviet navies in the barents sea and development of international routes to the atlantic through the baltic sea ,  kattegat ,  skagerrak ,  and north sea . 
to the north ,  the jan mayen ridge separates it from the greenland sea . 
for many centuries ,  the norwegian sea was regarded as the edge of the known world . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the norwegian sea as follows:
important waterfowl species of the norwegian sea are puffin ,  kittiwake and guillemot . 
the environmental protection of the norwegian sea is mainly regulated by the ospar convention . 
the largest damage to the norwegian sea was caused by extensive fishing ,  whaling ,  and pollution . 
unlike many other seas ,  most of the bottom of the norwegian sea is not part of a continental shelf and therefore lies at a great depth of about two kilometres on average . 
nuclear fission is the reverse process to fusion . 
the process of alpha decay is in essence a special type of spontaneous nuclear fission . 
in nuclear fusion ,  two low mass nuclei come into very close contact with each other ,  so that the strong force fuses them . 
such applications are studied in the field of nuclear engineering . 
nuclear physics is the field of physics that studies atomic nuclei and their constituents and interactions . 
the element is not changed to another element in the process  -lrb-  no nuclear transmutation is involved  -rrb-  . 
heavy nuclei such as uranium and thorium may also undergo spontaneous fission ,  but they are much more likely to undergo decay by alpha decay . 
this was a problem for nuclear physics at the time ,  because it seemed to indicate that energy was not conserved in these decays . 
nuclear astrophysics ,  the application of nuclear physics to astrophysics ,  is crucial in explaining the inner workings of stars and the origin of the chemical elements . 
in alpha decay  -lrb-  which typically occurs in the heaviest nuclei  -rrb-  the radioactive element decays by emitting a helium nucleus  -lrb-  2 protons and 2 neutrons  -rrb-  ,  giving another element ,  plus helium-4.
nuclear physics should not be confused with atomic physics ,  which studies the atom as a whole ,  including its electrons . 
discoveries in nuclear physics have led to applications in many fields . 
much of current research in nuclear physics relates to the study of nuclei under extreme conditions such as high spin and excitation energy . 
the rutherford model worked quite well until studies of nuclear spin were carried out by franco rasetti at the california institute of technology in 1929.
in 1349 nuremberg's jews suffered a pogrom . 
nuremberg has been a popular destination for immigrants . 
printers and publishers have a long history in nuremberg . 
the same courtroom in nuremberg was the venue of the nuremberg military tribunals ,  organized by the united states as occupying power in the area . 
the nuremberg international toy fair is the largest of its kind in the world . 
nuremberg held great significance during the nazi germany era . 
nuremberg's trams ,  buses and metro system are operated by the vag nürnberg  -lrb-  `` verkehrsaktiengesellschaft nürnberg '' or nuremberg transport corporation  -rrb-  ,  itself a member of the vgn  -lrb-  `` verkehrsverbund grossraum nürnberg '' or greater nuremberg transport network  -rrb-  . 
nuremberg was the site of major nazi rallies ,  and it provided the site for the nuremberg trials ,  which held to account many major nazi officials . 
the cultural flowering of nuremberg ,  in the 15th and 16th centuries ,  made it the centre of the german renaissance . 
nuremberg airport  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the second-busiest airport of bavaria after munich airport ,  and the tenth-busiest airport of germany . 
in total ,  about 6,000 nuremberg residents are estimated to have been killed in air raids . 
however ,  nuremberg was chosen as the site for the trials for specific reasons:
nuremberg  -lrb-  ; ; ; nuremberg dialect: ; east franconian: or   -rrb-  is the second-largest city of the german federal state of bavaria after its capital of munich ,  and its 511,628  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- inhabitants make it the 14th largest city of germany . 
at the 1935 rally ,  hitler specifically ordered the reichstag to convene at nuremberg to pass the nuremberg laws which revoked german citizenship for all jews and other non-aryans . 
nuremberg is located at the junction of several important autobahn routes . 
nuremberg is known for nürnberger bratwurst ,  which is shorter and thinner than other bratwurst sausages . 
nuremberg airport has flights to major german cities and many european destinations . 
he has been a staff writer at `` the new yorker '' since 1999.
lemann has been married twice . 
nicholas lemann was born ,  raised ,  and educated in a jewish family in new orleans . 
on september 1, 2003, lemann became dean of the graduate school of journalism at columbia university . 
the derived unit of speed is the knot ,  one nautical mile per hour . 
n  -lrb-  named `` en ''   -rrb-  is the fourteenth letter in the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
one of the most common hieroglyphs ,  snake ,  was used in egyptian writing to stand for a sound like the english  ,  because the egyptian word for `` snake '' was `` djet '' . 
nails are typically driven into the workpiece by a hammer ,  a pneumatic nail gun ,  or a small explosive charge or primer . 
from 1948, with the national party elected to power ,  south africa applied apartheid also to what was then known as south west africa . 
namibia  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of namibia ,  is a country in southern africa . 
south africa began imposing `` apartheid , ``  its codified system of racial segregation and discrimination ,  on south west africa during the late 1940s . 
upon the end of apartheid in south africa in 1994, the nation ceded walvis bay to namibia . 
however ,  south africa interpreted the mandate as a veiled annexation and made no attempt to prepare south west africa for future autonomy . 
the kalahari desert ,  an arid region that extends into south africa and botswana ,  is one of namibia's well-known geographical features . 
before its independence in 1990, the area was known first as german south-west africa  -lrb-  `` deutsch-südwestafrika ''  -rrb-  ,  then as south-west africa ,  reflecting the colonial occupation by the germans and the south africans  -lrb-  technically on behalf of the british crown reflecting south africa's dominion status within the british empire  -rrb-  . 
namibia's coastal desert is one of the oldest deserts in the world . 
namibia became a german colony in 1884 under otto von bismarck to forestall perceived british encroachment and was known as german south west africa  -lrb-  `` deutsch-südwestafrika ''  -rrb-  . 
being situated between the namib and the kalahari deserts ,  namibia has the least rainfall of any country in sub-saharan africa . 
for its part ,  the soviet union supported swapo partly because it viewed south africa as a regional western ally . 
namibia is the driest country in sub-saharan africa and depends largely on groundwater . 
the central plateau runs from north to south ,  bordered by the skeleton coast to the northwest ,  the namib desert and its coastal plains to the southwest ,  the orange river to the south ,  and the kalahari desert to the east . 
as swapo's insurgency intensified ,  south africa's case for annexation in the international community continued to decline . 
however ,  walvis bay and the penguin islands remained under south african control until 1994.
most africans were confined to so-called native territories ,  which later under south african rule after 1949 were turned into `` homelands ''  -lrb-  bantustans  -rrb-  . 
in 1966, following the icj's controversial ruling that it had no legal standing to consider the question of south african rule ,  swapo launched an armed insurgency which escalated into part of a wider regional conflict known as the south african border war . 
namibia's coastal desert is one of the oldest deserts in the world . 
the central plateau runs from north to south ,  bordered by the skeleton coast to the northwest ,  the namib desert and its coastal plains to the southwest ,  the orange river to the south ,  and the kalahari desert to the east . 
the namib desert and the namib-naukluft national park is located here . 
the kalahari desert is perhaps namibia’s best known geographical feature . 
as the area behind the coast is a desert ,  these winds can develop into sand storms with sand deposits in the atlantic ocean visible on satellite images . 
at  ,  namibia is the world's thirty-fourth largest country  -lrb-  after venezuela  -rrb-  . 
namibia has more than 300 days of sunshine per year . 
in 2011 the total fertility rate was 3.6 children per woman ,  down from 4.1 in 2001.
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 36.4% ,  59.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 3.7% was 65 years or older
since 2015 hage geingob has been president of namibia . 
the constitution also states that namibia should have a mixed economy ,  and foreign investment should be encouraged . 
the parallel existence of traditional authorities and the namibian government in namibia is controversial . 
he was succeeded by hage geingob ,  who in turn was succeeded as prime minister by saara kuugongelwa when he became president of namibia on 21 march 2015.
parliament has two chambers . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated namibia as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
politics of namibia takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of namibia is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a pluriform multi-party system . 
namibia has a high unemployment rate . 
in 2000, namibia's manufacturing sector contributed about 20% of gdp . 
namibia imports almost all of its goods from south africa . 
there are 3,300 us$-millionaires in namibia ,  1,400 of which live in the capital windhoek . 
experts estimate that namibia has 7720 km of underground water . 
furthermore ,  the namibian economy remains integrated with the economy of south africa ,  as the bulk of namibia's imports originate there . 
the governments of germany and britain will finance namibia's land reform process ,  as namibia plans to start expropriating land from white farmers to resettle landless black namibians . 
about 4,000, mostly white ,  commercial farmers own almost half of namibia's arable land . 
the namibian economy is closely linked to south africa with the namibian dollar pegged to the south african rand . 
every namibian resident had on average 10,800 us$ of wealth accumulated in 2016, putting namibia on third place in africa . 
the mining industry in namibia is supposedly going to reach us1.79bn by the year 2018.
although arable land accounts for only 1% of namibia ,  nearly half of the population is employed in agriculture . 
in recent years ,  namibia has accounted for about 5% of total sacu exports ,  and a slightly higher percentage of imports . 
since independence in 1990, namibia has seen a dramatic growth in radio stations ,  with both commercial  -lrb-  for instance radio 99, radio wave ,  radio energy ,  omulunga radio ,  west coast fm ,  etc .   -rrb- 
the television network with the widest transmission range is the namibian broadcasting corporation  -lrb-  nbc ,  not to be confused with the american nbc network  -rrb-  . 
the distribution of road surfaces is:
although no other such early examples have been found ,  it is certain that this road was not the only one of its kind . 
as of february 2012, it was reported that a chinese company paid us $499,950 into shalli's account in zambia while he was the ndf chief . 
poly technologies was supplying equipment to the ndf at the time . 
ndaitwah served until 31 december 2013 when the ndf chief's position was given to maj gen john mutwa . 
ndf sergeant major is the highest appointment a non commission officer may receive . 
the chief of defence force is always a commissioned three star general/air/flag officer from the officer corps . the first chief of the ndf was lieutenant-general dimo hamaambo . 
the namibian defence force was created when south west africa gained full independence from south africa in 1990.
there are no personal taxes in nauru . 
nauru gained its independence in 1968.
nauru had 17 changes of administration between 1989 and 2003.
from 1992 to 1999, nauru had a local government system known as the nauru island council  -lrb-  nic  -rrb-  . 
nauru is the least populous country in oceania . 
japanese troops occupied nauru on 25 august 1942.
nauru is a republic with a parliamentary system of government . 
nauru uses the australian dollar as its official currency . 
a significant portion of nauru's income has been in the form of aid from australia . 
 ''certain phosphate lands: nauru v .  australia '' led to an out-of-court settlement to rehabilitate the mined-out areas of nauru . 
coral cliffs surround nauru's central plateau . 
nauru  -lrb-   or ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of nauru  -lrb-    -rrb-  and formerly known as pleasant island ,  is an island country in micronesia ,  a subregion of oceania ,  in the central pacific . 
they were returned to nauru by the bpc ship `` trienza '' in january 1946.
there are limited natural sources of fresh water on nauru . 
nauru is a  ,  oval-shaped island in the southwestern pacific ocean ,  south of the equator . 
however ,  the prc continues to maintain a representative office on nauru . 
the president of nauru is baron waqa ,  who heads a 19-member unicameral parliament . 
phosphate was discovered on nauru in 1900 by the prospector albert fuller ellis . 
nauru was first inhabited by micronesians and polynesians at least 3,000 years ago . 
in the 1990s ,  nauru became a tax haven and offered passports to foreign nationals for a fee . 
nauru finally joined the un in 1999.
nauru became self-governing in january 1966.
by the new millennium ,  nauru was virtually bankrupt . 
in 1989, nauru took legal actions against australia in the international court of justice over australia's actions during its administration of nauru . 
japanese troops occupied nauru on 26 august 1942.
 ''certain phosphate lands: nauru v .  australia '' led to an out-of-court settlement to rehabilitate the mined-out areas of nauru . 
in 2004, nauru broke off relations with the prc and re-established them with the roc . 
phosphate was discovered on nauru in 1900 by the prospector albert ellis . 
nauru was first settled by micronesian and polynesian people at least 3,000 years ago . 
the matter is being pursued in an australian court ,  and initial judgments have been in favor of nauru . 
nauru is a tiny phosphate rock island nation located in the south pacific ocean south of the marshall islands in oceania . 
the highest point is 213 ft  -lrb-  65 m  -rrb-  above sea level ,  along the plateau rim . 
nauru has its own unique navigational system ,  which is only capable of being used on the island . 
nauru is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the pacific ocean — the others are banaba  -lrb-  ocean island  -rrb-  in kiribati and makatea in french polynesia . 
average urbanisation rate in nauru is 100% . 
the main religions in nauru are nauru congregational  -lrb-  35.71%  -rrb-  ,  roman catholic  -lrb-  32.96%  -rrb-  ,  assemblies of god  -lrb-  12.98%  -rrb-  ,  and nauru independent  -lrb-  9.50%  -rrb-  . 
the nauruan language is the official language of nauru . 
in nauru's history ,  there have been six major demographics changes . 
for births ,  deaths ,  and fertility rates ,  the nauru bureau of statistics was used . 
there are 1,647 households in nauru ,  making an average household size of 6.0 persons per household . 
nauru ,  as a result ,  has been a casualty of this movement . 
in may and june 2014, waqa suspended 5 of the 7 members of nauru's opposition from parliament indefinitely . 
nauru demanded compensation from the three nations ,  but was refused . 
in late june 2004, nauru's former parliament speaker ludwig scotty became the country's new president . 
at the time ,  dowiyogo referred to nauru's political scenario as being `` critical . `` 
elections for parliament were held in 2013, after which baron waqa was elected by parliament as president . 
since 1992, local government has been the responsibility of the nauru island council  -lrb-  nic  -rrb-  . 
today ,  nauru is almost totally dependent on trade with new zealand ,  australia and fiji . 
australia is responsible for nauru's defence under an informal agreement between the two countries . 
the author of the report has offered nauru economic advice in the past . 
in may 2003, elections were held within the parliament to select a new president . 
in april 2000, rené harris ,  former chairman of the nauru phosphate corporation ,  became president as he briefly assembled support in parliament . 
the case was soon afterwards settled out of court by australia ,  with britain and new zealand also contributing to the reparations sought by nauru . 
nauru instead received a us$150 million aid package from beijing . 
rene harris was finally able to claim power as the president of nauru in march 2001 when he was elected to the presidency by the parliament; his term was to last three years ,  presumably ending in 2004.
in 2004 nauru's imports totaled about us$19.8 million . 
nauru receives about us$20 million foreign aid a year from australia . 
the australian government shut down nauru's banking system in 2006.
nauru is dependent on foreign aid ,  chiefly from australia ,  taiwan and new zealand . 
few comprehensive statistics on the nauru economy exist ,  with estimates of nauru's gdp varying widely . 
nauru has been a cash economy since at least 2004, after the bank of nauru and the republic of nauru finance corporation went bankrupt and ceased operations in the early 2000s and the licenses of all offshore banks were revoked by the nauru government in 2004.
nauru has one government-owned radio station and two television stations . 
navassa island is about in area . 
navassa reaches an elevation of at dunning hill south of the lighthouse ,  navassa island light . 
in 1997 an american salvager made a claim to navassa to the department of state based on the guano islands act . 
for statistical purposes ,  navassa was grouped with the now-obsolete term united states miscellaneous caribbean islands and is now grouped with other islands claimed by the u . s .  under the guano islands act as the united states minor outlying islands . 
navassa island  -lrb-  ; ; also `` la navasse '' ,  `` la navase ''  -rrb-  is a small uninhabited island in the caribbean sea . 
in 1996 the coast guard dismantled the light on navassa ,  which ended its interest in the island . 
as listed in its 1987 constitution ,  haiti maintains its claim to the island . 
the department's opinion said that navassa is and remains a u . s .  possession `` appertaining to '' the united states and is `` unavailable to be claimed '' under the guano islands act . 
despite this implicit claim ,  navassa island was claimed for the united states on september 19, 1857, by peter duncan ,  an american sea captain ,  under the guano islands act of 1856, for the rich guano deposits found on the island ,  and for not being within the lawful jurisdiction of any other government ,  nor occupied by another government's citizens . 
fishermen ,  mainly from haiti ,  fish the waters around navassa . 
they were bala deva ,  padma deva ,  nagarjuna deva and shankara deva . 
after sivadeva iii ,  mahendra deva ,  mana deva ,  narendra deva ii ,  ananda deva ,  rudra deva ,  amrita deva ,  ratna deva ii ,  somesvara deva ,  gunakama deva ii ,  lakmikama deva iii and vijayakama deva ii ruled nepal in quick succession . 
bhola deva succeeded gunakama deva . 
after the death of king raghava dev ,  many thakuri kings ruled southern nepal up to the middle of the 12th century ce . 
king mahendra was succeeded by his 27-year-old son ,  king birendra ,  in 1972.
in reply army of nepal defended ,  won the battle and successfully protected nepal from a foreign invasion . 
when patan was too captured a few weeks later ,  both jaya prakash malla and the king of patan;tej narsingh malla took refuge in bhaktapur ,  which was also captured after some time . thus ,  the kathmandu valley was conquered by king prithvi narayan shah and kathmandu became the capital of the modern nepal by 1769.
after his death ,  the thakuri clan of nuwakot occupied the throne of nepal . 
bama deva ,  a descendant of amshuvarma ,  defeated shankar deva in 1080 ce . 
the derivation of the word nepal is also the subject of a number of other theories:
after harsha deva ,  shivadeva the third ruled from 1099 to 1126 ce . 
the most spoken language of nepal is nepali followed by several other ethnic languages . 
the kings of lichhavi dynasty  -lrb-  originated from vaishali of modern bihar of india  -rrb-  have been found to rule nepal after the kirat monarchical dynasty . 
nepal became a federal republic and was formally renamed the 'federal democratic republic of nepal' ending the 200 year old shah dynasty . 
slavery was abolished in nepal in 1924 under premiership of chandra shamsher jang bahadur rana . 
bhaskara deva ,  a thakuri from nuwakot ,  succeeded vijayakama deva and established nuwakot-thakuri rule . 
from the ancient records nepal was originally inhabited by the mongoloid people . 
shankara deva  -lrb-  1067–1080 ce  -rrb-  was the most illustrious ruler of this dynasty . 
the subalpine zone from occupies 9% of nepal's land area ,  mainly in the mountain and himalayan regions . 
nepal has an area of and water resource 2 position  . 
the temperate climate zone from occupies 12% of nepal's land area and has up to 153 annual days of frost . 
the alpine zone from occupies 8% of the country's land area . 
along a south-to-north transect ,  nepal can be divided into three belts: terai ,  pahad and himal . 
himal is a mountain region containing snow . 
nepal measures about along its himalayan axis by across . 
unlike the `` mahabharats '' ,  the himalaya are not continuous across nepal . 
nepal is landlocked by india on three sides and china's tibet autonomous region to the north . 
the subtropical climate zone from occupies 22% of nepal's land area and is the most prevalent climate of the middle hills above river valleys . 
in rainshadows beyond the high mountains ,  annual precipitation drops as low as  . 
tropical climate zones extend far up river valleys across the middle hills and even into the mountain regions . 
permanent villages in the mountain region stand as high as with summer encampments even higher . 
in the 2011 census ,  nepal's population was approximately 26 million people with a population growth rate of 1.35% and a median age of 21.6 years . 
the current population is roughly 30 million which contributes to an increase of about 3 million people every 5 years . 
until may 28, 2009, nepal was a constitutional monarchy . 
nepal's current score of 19.5 is better than in 2010  -lrb-  20.0 -rrb- and much improved than its score of 27.5 in 1990.
progress has been made in exploiting nepal's natural resources ,  tourism and hydroelectricity . 
nepal's merchandise trade balance has improved somewhat since 2000 with the growth of the carpet and garment industries . 
currently demand for electricity is increasing at 8-10% a year whereas nepal's option to have agreement with india will make this fulfilment against demand . 
in 2014, nepal restricted the foreign aid by setting a minimum limit for foreign grants ,  soft and commercial loans from its development partners . 
nepal has used a series of five-year plans in an attempt to make progress in economic development . 
in june 1998, nepal submitted its memorandum on a foreign trade regime to the world trade organization and in may 2000 began direct negotiations on its accession . 
however ,  the company is known to the general public by the brand name nepal telecom  -lrb-  nt  -rrb-  as a registered trademark . 
now ,  other competing telecom service providers are united telecom  -lrb-  utl  -rrb-  ,  and ncell . 
nepal is a landlocked mountainous country where transportation is difficult due to the terrain . 
article 144 of interim constitution of nepal states that the president of nepal is the supreme commander chief of nepal army . 
nepal was soon preparing to launch multi-directional attacks . 
currently as the president of nepal bidhya devi bhandari who was elected president of nepal on 28 oct 2015, is the supreme commander of nepal army . 
these battles of nepal unification helped the royal nepalese army to gain more experience while helping to unify nepal . 
before 2006 democracy movement in nepal forced king to restore democracy in 2006, article 119 of the 1990 constitution stated that the king is the supreme commander of the royal nepal army . 
the nepalese armed forces are the military forces of nepal . 
nepal's relation with china has seen a major upswing in the recent years with china now becoming nepal's 3rd largest aid donor  -lrb-  after the uk and japan  -rrb-  ,  and the largest source of fdi to nepal . 
nepal participates in a number of un specialized agencies and is a member of the world bank ,  international monetary fund ,  colombo plan ,  and the asian development bank . 
though the ministry of foreign affairs  -lrb-  mofa  -rrb-  is the government agency responsible for the conduct of foreign relations of nepal ,  historically ,  it is the office of prime minister  -lrb-  pmo  -rrb-  that has exercised the authority to formulate and conduct policies related to nepal's foreign affairs . 
there are three caribbean islands that are countries  -lrb-    -rrb-  within the kingdom of the netherlands: aruba ,  curaçao ,  and sint maarten . 
there were three islands collectively known as the `` abc islands '':
the island regulation had divided the netherlands antilles into four island territories: aruba ,  bonaire ,  curaçao  -lrb-  abc  -rrb-  ,  and the islands in the leeward islands . 
on 3 november 2006, curaçao and sint maarten were granted autonomy in an agreement ,  but this agreement was rejected by the then island council of curaçao on 28 november . 
the island of curaçao was hit hard by the abolition of slavery in 1863.
there were three islands ,  collectively known as the `` sss islands '': they lie approximately north-east of the abc islands . 
its 22 members were fixed in number for the islands making up the netherlands antilles: fourteen for curaçao ,  three each for sint maarten and bonaire ,  and one each for saba and sint eustatius . 
the language papiamentu was predominant on curaçao and bonaire  -lrb-  as well as the neighboring island of aruba  -rrb-  . 
there are three caribbean islands that are special municipalities of the netherlands alone: bonaire ,  sint eustatius ,  and saba . 
the islands of the netherlands antilles are all part of the lesser antilles island chain . 
no part of the country was in the southern windward islands . 
there are also several smaller islands ,  like klein curaçao and klein bonaire ,  that belong to one of the island countries or special municipalities . 
the majority of the population were followers of the christian faith ,  with a protestant majority in sint eustatius and sint maarten ,  and a roman catholic majority in bonaire ,  curaçao and saba . 
of the five islands ,  sint maarten and curaçao voted for `` status aparte '' ,  saba and bonaire voted for closer ties with the netherlands ,  and sint eustatius voted to stay within the netherlands antilles . 
after the dissolution of the netherlands antilles in 2010, curaçao and sint maarten became autonomous countries within the kingdom and bonaire ,  sint eustatius and saba  -lrb-  bes  -rrb-  became special municipalities of the netherlands . 
it consisted of two island groups ,  the abc islands curaçao ,  bonaire and  -lrb-  until 1986 -rrb- aruba just north of venezuela ,  and the sss islands east of the virgin islands . 
territory included the islands of aruba until 1986 and curaçao ,  bonaire ,  saba ,  sint eustatius ,  sint maarten  -lrb-  which is the dutch part of the island of saint martin  -rrb-  until 2010 when the netherlands antilles was dissolved . 
the population of the individual islands was as follows:  bonaire - 17,408 curaçao - 154,843 saba - 1,991 sint eustatius - 4,020 sint maarten - 33,609
gross domestic product- $3.81 billion gdp: purchasing power parity - $3 600 million  -lrb-  3,6 g$  -rrb-   -lrb-  2007 est .   -rrb- 
new caledonia has a land area of  . 
cannibalism was widespread throughout new caledonia . 
in 1946, new caledonia became an overseas territory . 
at the 2012 french presidential election ,  the voter turnout in new caledonia was 61.19% . 
for 25 years ,  the party system in new caledonia was dominated by the anti-independence the rally–ump . 
by 1953, french citizenship had been granted to all new caledonians ,  regardless of ethnicity . 
new caledonia is a territory `` sui generis '' to which france has gradually transferred certain powers . 
as trade in sandalwood declined ,  it was replaced by a new business enterprise ,  `` blackbirding '' ,  a euphemism for taking melanesian or western pacific islanders from new caledonia ,  the loyalty islands ,  new hebrides ,  new guinea ,  and the solomon islands into indentured or forced labour in the sugar cane plantations in fiji and queensland by various methods of trickery and deception . 
the earliest traces of human presence in new caledonia date back to the lapita period c .  1600 bc to c .  500 ad . 
the total area of new caledonia is  ,  of those being land . 
new zealand is the greatest part of zealandia above sea level ,  followed by new caledonia . 
new species came to new caledonia while species of gondwanan origin were able to penetrate further eastward into the pacific island region . 
new caledonia is home to 13 of the 19 extant species of evergreens in the genus `` araucaria '' . 
the climate of new caledonia is tropical ,  modified by southeasterly trade winds . 
anthropologically ,  new caledonia is considered the southernmost archipelago of melanesia ,  grouping it with the more close-by islands to its north ,  rather than its geologically associated neighbour ,  new zealand ,  to the south . 
the diahot river is the longest river of new caledonia ,  flowing for some 60 miles  -lrb-  100 kilometres  -rrb-  . 
new caledonia claims an exclusive fishing zone to a distance of and a territorial sea of from shore . 
a territorial dispute exists with regard to the uninhabited matthew and hunter islands ,  which are claimed by both france  -lrb-  as part of new caledonia  -rrb-  and vanuatu . 
on the other hand ,  new caledonia remains an integral part of the french republic . 
the high commissioner is appointed by the french president on the advice of the french ministry of interior . 
new caledonia is a french sui generis collectivity with a system of government based on parliamentarism and representative democracy . 
under article 4 of the organic law 99-209 a new caledonian `` citizenship '' has also been introduced: only new caledonian `` citizens ''  -lrb-  defined by article 188 -rrb- have the right to vote in the local elections . 
new caledonia is a major source for nickel and contains roughly 10% of the worlds known nickel supply . 
the gdp of new caledonia in 2007 was 8.8 billion us dollars at market exchange rates ,  the fourth-largest economy in oceania after australia ,  new zealand ,  and hawaii . 
the north island is the second-largest island ,  and the 14th-largest in the world . 
the south island is the largest land mass of new zealand ,  and is the 12th-largest island in the world . 
new zealand has no land borders . 
besides the north and south islands ,  the five largest inhabited islands are stewart island ,  chatham island ,  great barrier island  -lrb-  in the hauraki gulf  -rrb-  ,  d'urville island  -lrb-  in the marlborough sounds  -rrb-  and waiheke island  -lrb-  about from central auckland  -rrb-  . 
new zealand proper is subdivided into sixteen regions: seven in the south island and nine in the north . 
the north island has many isolated volcanic peaks and new zealand's largest lake . 
significantly smaller islands include waiheke island ,  chatham island ,  great barrier island and more ,  although many are uninhabited . 
the points that are farther north ,  south ,  east or west than any other location in new zealand are as follows:
to the east of the north island the pacific plate is forced under the indo-australian plate . 
the relative proximity of new zealand north of antarctica has made the south island a gateway for scientific expeditions to the continent . 
the north island volcanic plateau covers much of central north island with volcanoes ,  lava plateaus ,  and crater lakes . 
the south island contains a little under one-quarter of the population . 
however ,  the extreme points of new zealand are actually located in several outlying islands . 
this is the cause of new zealand's numerous earthquakes and volcanoes . 
new zealand  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  is an island country located in the south-western pacific ocean ,  near the centre of the water hemisphere . 
new zealand is located in the south pacific ocean at  ,  near the centre of the water hemisphere . 
the south island is much more mountainous than the north ,  but shows fewer manifestations of recent volcanic activity . 
new zealand is largely antipodal to the iberian peninsula of europe . 
new zealand is party to several multilateral environmental agreements . 
new zealand has no state religion and just over 40 percent of the population does not have a religion . 
in 2006, more people who identified themselves with these islands lived in new zealand than on the islands themselves . 
while the demonym for a new zealand citizen is new zealander ,  the informal `` kiwi '' is commonly used both internationally and by locals . 
in  ,  new zealand has an estimated population of  ,  up from the 4,027,947 recorded in the 2006 census . 
queen elizabeth ii is new zealand's sovereign and head of state . 
the new zealand parliament holds legislative power and consists of the queen and the house of representatives . 
new zealand is a unitary parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy . 
the new zealand parliament has 120 seats ,  however some elections have resulted in overhangs and there is the potential for underhangs . 
the economist intelligence unit rated new zealand as a `` full democracy '' in 2016.
executive power in new zealand is based on the principle that `` the queen reigns ,  but the government rules '' . 
new zealand has a universal superannuation scheme . 
between 1982 and 2011, new zealand's gross domestic product grew by 35% . 
the new zealand dollar is the 10th-most traded currency in the world . 
there is no social security  -lrb-  payroll  -rrb-  tax or land tax in new zealand . 
in 2012 new zealand has 2.7 doctors per 1,000 population ,  and increase from 2.2 in the year 2000.
in 2013, around 265,000 children ,  a quarter of all children in new zealand ,  were now `` mired in poverty '' . 
as at october 2014, the fund managed nz$27.11 billion ,  15.9% of which was invested in new zealand . 
taxation in new zealand is collected at a national level by the inland revenue department  -lrb-  ird  -rrb-  on behalf of the government of new zealand . 
in the ten years from 2014, the number of new zealanders over the age of 65 is projected to grow by about 200,000.
the major capital market is the new zealand exchange ,  known as the nzx . 
in 2015 statistics new zealand published details of the break-down of gross domestic product in the regions of new zealand for the year ended march 2015:
after 1973, unemployment became a persistent economic and social issue in new zealand . 
in the 2010 new zealand budget ,  personal tax rates were cut with the top personal tax rate reduced from 38% to 33% the cuts gave new zealand the second-lowest personal tax burden in the oecd . 
however ,  bulk freight still continues to be transported by coastal shipping and by rail transport ,  and there are attempts to  -lrb-  re  -rrb- introduce public transport as a major transport mode in the larger population centres . 
historically very car-dependent ,  as of 2010, transport funding in new zealand is still heavily dominated by money for road projects–the national-led government proposes to spend $21 billion on roading infrastructure after 2012, yet only $0.7 billion on other transport projects  -lrb-  public transport ,  walking and cycling  -rrb-  . 
the new zealand defence force  -lrb-  maori: `` te ope kātua o aotearoa '' ,  `` line of defence of new zealand ''  -rrb-  consists of three services: the new zealand army ,  the royal new zealand air force and the royal new zealand navy; and is commanded and headed by the chief of defence force  -lrb-  cdf  -rrb-  . 
the country’s major political parties have generally agreed on the broad outlines of foreign policy ,  and the current coalition government has been active in promoting free trade ,  nuclear disarmament ,  and arms control . 
nicaragua has no official religion . 
nicaragua occupies a landmass of  . 
nicaragua is a unitary republic . 
nicaragua has a population growth rate of 1.5%  . 
nicaragua is among the poorest countries in the americas . 
on the pacific side of nicaragua are the two largest fresh water lakes in central america—lake managua and lake nicaragua . 
nicaragua pursues an independent foreign policy . 
there are two prevailing theories on how the name `` nicaragua '' came to be . 
 ,  the military budget was roughly 0.7% of nicaragua's expenditures . 
nicaragua finally became an independent republic in 1838.
by 2006, tourism had become the second largest industry in nicaragua . 
the national police of nicaragua force  -lrb-  in spanish: la policía nacional nicaragüense  -rrb-  is the national police of nicaragua . 
there are currently 78 protected areas in nicaragua ,  covering more than  ,  or about 17% of its landmass . 
nicaragua was one of the few countries that did not enter an indc at cop21.
nicaragua's minimum wage is among the lowest in the americas and in the world . 
nicaragua's tropical east coast is very different from the rest of the country . 
nicaragua is home to a rich variety of plants and animals . 
nicaragua has recently banned freshwater fishing of the nicaragua shark and the sawfish in response to the declining populations of these animals . 
nicaragua is currently a member of the bolivarian alliance for the americas ,  which is also known as alba . 
paleo-americans first inhabited what is now known as nicaragua as far back as 12,000 bce . 
it came to nicaragua in the 16th century with the spanish conquest and remained ,  until 1939, the established faith . 
since central america is a major subduction zone ,  nicaragua hosts most of the central american volcanic arc . 
about 9% of nicaragua's population is black and mainly resides on the country's caribbean  -lrb-  or atlantic  -rrb-  coast . 
the armed forces of nicaragua consists of various military contingents . 
nicaragua is considering construction of a canal linking the atlantic to the pacific ocean ,  which president daniel ortega has said will give nicaragua its `` economic independence . `` 
relative to its population ,  nicaragua has not experienced large waves of immigration . 
nicaragua  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of nicaragua  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is the largest country in the central american isthmus ,  bordered by honduras to the northwest ,  the caribbean to the east ,  costa rica to the south ,  and the pacific ocean to the southwest . 
the central highlands are a significantly less populated and economically developed area in the north ,  between lake nicaragua and the caribbean . 
in the 19th century ,  nicaragua experienced modest waves of immigration from europe . 
additionally ,  there were trade-related colonies in nicaragua that had been set up by the aztecs starting in the 14th century . 
other kinds of protestant and other christian denominations were introduced to the rest of nicaragua during the 19th century . 
as a result of increased tourism ,  nicaragua has seen its foreign direct investment increase by 79.1% from 2007 to 2009.
united states marines occupied nicaragua from 1912 to 1933, except for a nine-month period beginning in 1925.
the population more closely resembles that found in many typical caribbean ports than the rest of nicaragua . 
in march 2007, poland and nicaragua signed an agreement to write off 30.6 million dollars which was borrowed by the nicaraguan government in the 1980s . 
politics of nicaragua takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of nicaragua is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
great britain ,  which had claimed the mosquito coast as a protectorate since 1655, delegated the area to honduras in 1859 before transferring it to nicaragua in 1860.
also present is a small middle eastern-nicaraguan community of syrians ,  armenians ,  jewish nicaraguans ,  and lebanese people in nicaragua . 
in addition ,  ecotourism ,  sport fishing and surfing attract many tourists to nicaragua . 
the other elements and manpower that were not devoted to the national police were sent over to cultivate the new army of nicaragua . 
the project was scheduled to begin construction in december 2014, however the nicaragua canal has yet to be started . 
nicaragua has long been considered as a possible site for a new sea-level canal that could supplement the panama canal . 
according to the world bank ,  nicaragua ranked as the 123rd out of 190 best economy for starting a business . 
nicaragua's name is derived from nicarao ,  the name of the nahuatl-speaking tribe which inhabited the shores of lake nicaragua before the spanish conquest of the americas ,  and the spanish word 'agua' ,  meaning water ,  due to the presence of the large lake cocibolca  -lrb-  or lake nicaragua  -rrb-  and lake managua  -lrb-  or lake xolotlán  -rrb-  ,  as well as lagoons and rivers in the region . 
nicaragua is the largest country in central america . 
inec ran its first census in 1906, the last census was taken in 2005, it was the eighth to date . 
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 34.5% ,  60.9% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 4.6% was 65 years or older
the remainder of the nicaraguan population is 9% black ,  and 5% native american . 
nicaragua is a presidential republic ,  in which the president of nicaragua is both head of state and head of government ,  and there is a multi-party system . 
freedom of speech is a right guaranteed by the nicaraguan constitution ,  but media has come under censorship from time to time . 
this allowed current president daniel ortega to run for a third successive term . 
the president and the vice president are elected for a single five-year term . 
nicaragua is divided in 15 departments : boaco ,  carazo ,  chinandega ,  chontales ,  estelí ,  granada ,  jinotega ,  león ,  madriz ,  managua ,  masaya ,  matagalpa ,  nueva segovia ,  rivas ,  río san juan ,  as well as in two autonomous regions: north caribbean coast autonomous region and south caribbean coast autonomous region . 
there also are copper mines in northeastern nicaragua . 
the u . s .  is the country's largest trading partner ,  providing 25% of nicaragua's imports and receiving about 60% of its exports . 
tourism in nicaragua is one of the most important industries in the country . 
one of the key engines of economic growth has been production for export . 
nicaragua's economy is focused primarily on the agricultural sector . 
nicaragua faces a number of challenges in stimulating rapid economic growth . 
in 2007, exports topped $1 billion us dollars for the first time in nicaraguan history . 
nicaragua has transformed itself into one of the safest and fastest-growing countries in latin america . 
but even with the recessions ,  growth has averaged 3.4% between 2001 and 2011  -lrb-  again ,  based on world bank figures  -rrb-  . 
independent media are active and express a variety of views . 
in general media outlets owned by the presidential family limited programming to progovernment or fsln propaganda and campaign advertisements . 
the communications research centre of nicaragua  -lrb-  cinco  -rrb-  reported that control over television media by the sandinista national liberation front  -lrb-  fsln  -rrb-  and president ortega strengthened throughout 2012.
transport in nicaragua revolves around road ,  air and water transport modalities . 
the costs differ from 2.50 c$ in managua to 10 c$ in bluefields . 
urban buses  -lrb-  `` urbanos ''  -rrb-  can be found in managua ,  estelí ,  león ,  chinandega ,  matagalpa and bluefields . 
an urban bus in nicaragua takes the same road multiple times per day ,  following a more or less strict schedule . 
as of 2009, from a total of 19,137 km 2,033 km are paved and 17,104 km are unpaved . 
nicaragua pursues an independent foreign policy . 
nicaragua is negotiating a trade agreement with the european union as part of a central american bloc . 
the imf is currently in negotiations with the government of nicaragua to reinstate disbursements . 
under current president daniel ortega ,  nicaragua has stayed current with the central american-dominican republic free trade agreement ,  which entered into force for nicaragua on april 1, 2006.
on september 10, 2008, with misgivings about fiscal transparency ,  the imf released an additional $30 million to nicaragua ,  the second tranche of its $110 million prgf . 
niger or the niger  -lrb-   or ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of the niger ,  is a landlocked country in west africa named after the niger river . 
niger's new constitution was approved on 31 october 2010.
the lowest point is the niger river ,  with an elevation of  . 
the north of niger is covered by large deserts and semi deserts . 
niger is divided into 7 regions and one capital district . 
the 1989 referendum led to the adoption a new constitution and the creation of the second republic of niger . 
niger borders seven countries and has a total perimeter of  . 
the southern parts of niger are naturally dominated savannahs . 
by 1922, all resistance to colonial rule was eliminated and niger became a french colony . 
between the niger river and lake chad lay hausa kingdoms and fertile areas . 
the capital city is niamey ,  located in niger's southwest corner . 
the current judiciary of niger was established with the creation of the fourth republic in 1999.
the end of the colonial era was characterized by a transformation of the political environment in french west africa and niger . 
the niger armed forces  -lrb-  forces armées nigériennes  -rrb-  are the military and paramilitary forces of niger ,  under the president as supreme commander . 
niger also has small borders in its far southwest with burkina faso at and benin at and to the north-northeast libya at  . 
the songhai empire was an empire bearing the name of its main ethnic group ,  the songhai or sonrai ,  located in western africa on the bend of the niger river in present-day niger ,  mali and burkina faso . 
niger's subtropical climate is mainly very hot and very dry ,  with much desert area . 
niger is a landlocked nation in west africa located along the border between the sahara and sub-saharan regions . 
niger lies between latitudes 11° and 24°n ,  and longitudes 0° and 16°e . 
early human settlement in niger is evidenced by numerous archaeological remains . 
the border dispute with benin ,  inherited from colonial times and concerning inter alia lété island in the niger river ,  was solved by the international court of justice in 2005 to niger's advantage . 
in the 19th century ,  contact with europe began with the first european explorers—notably monteil  -lrb-  french  -rrb-  and barth  -lrb-  german  -rrb- —to travel to niger . 
the west african giraffe is currently not found in the w national park ,  but further north in niger ,  where it has its last relict population . 
for its first fourteen years as an independent state ,  niger was run by a single-party civilian regime under the presidency of diori . 
the kanem-bornu empire was an empire that existed in modern-day chad ,  nigeria ,  cameroon ,  niger and libya . 
this is the history of niger . 
niger's colonial history and development parallel that of other french west african territories . 
although french efforts at pacification began before 1900, dissident ethnic groups ,  especially the desert tuareg ,  were not subdued until 1922, when niger became a french colony . 
humans have lived in what is now niger from the earliest times . 
after the establishment of the fifth french republic on 4 october 1958, the territories of french west africa and french equatorial africa were given the right to hold a referendum on their membership in the french community ,  a modified form of the french union which allowed some limited self-government and was viewed as a path to eventual independence . 
in november and december 2004, niger held presidential and legislative elections . 
in 1958 diori became president of the provisional government ,  and then became prime minister of niger in 1959.
a route from the niger bend to egypt was abandoned in the 10th century due to its dangers . 
see also the history of africa and the history of west africa . 
in july 2004, niger held municipal elections nationwide as part of its decentralization process . 
one discovery suggests what is now the sahara of northeast niger was home to a succession of holocene era societies . 
his movement socialist africain  -lrb-  known by the name sawaba – `` independence '' in the hausa language  -rrb-  called for a `` no '' vote: one of only two major formations in french west africa to do so . 
on 11 july 1960 france agreed to niger becoming fully independent . 
while there have always been questions about french influence in the voting the results of both elections were confirmed on the 16th . 
this was the first presidential election with a democratically elected incumbent and a test to niger's young democracy . 
niger ,  with a land area of 1.267 million km ,  is a land locked country which is bounded with a land boundary of 5,834 km by seven countries: algeria  -lrb-  951 km  -rrb-  ,  benin  -lrb-  277 km  -rrb-  ,  burkina faso  -lrb-  622 km  -rrb-  ,  chad  -lrb-  1,196 km  -rrb-  ,  libya  -lrb-  342 km  -rrb-  ,  mali  -lrb-  838 km ,  and nigeria  -lrb-  1,608 -rrb- km . 
its area is 1.267 million square kilometers ,  of which 1 266 700 km² is land and 300 km² water ,  making niger slightly less than twice the size of france . 
the largest ethnic groups in niger are the hausa ,  who also constitute the major ethnic group in northern nigeria ,  and the zarma songhay  -lrb-  also spelled djerma-songhai  -rrb-  ,  who also are found in parts of mali . 
in march ,  during his meetings with french president sarkozy ,  tandja explicitly stated that he would not seek a third term . 
on 15 may 2009, in response to their parties opposition to a proposed referendum to allow the president to seek a third term ,  the three members of rdp-jama'a and andp-zaman lahiya were replaced with ministers drawn from the mnsd-nassara . 
politics of niger takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of niger is head of state and the prime minister of niger head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
the constitution of december 1992 was revised by national referendum on 12 may 1996 and ,  again ,  by referendum ,  revised to the current version on 18 july 1999.
in the run up to the 2009 elections  -lrb-  presidential ,  assembly ,  and municipal  -rrb-  ,  a movement to draft president tandja for a third term appeared . 
according to the 1999 constitution of niger ,  the president may call a referendum on any matter  -lrb-  except for a revision of those elements of the constitution outlined in article 136—including the presidential term limits  -rrb-  . 
niger is the poorest country in the world . 
current gdp per capita of niger grew 10% in the 1960s . 
the persistent uranium price slump has brought lower revenues for niger's uranium sector ,  although uranium still provides 72% of national export proceeds . 
of niger's exports ,  foreign exchange earnings from livestock ,  although impossible to quantify ,  are second only to those from uranium . 
niger's agricultural and livestock sectors are the mainstay of all but 18% of the population . 
niger's economy is based largely on subsistence crops ,  livestock ,  and some of the world's largest uranium deposits . 
the 2006 human development index ranked niger sixth from worst in the world ,  with a hdi of 0.370: 174 of 179 nations . 
telecommunications in niger include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
transport ,  including motor vehicles ,  highways ,  airports ,  and port authorities ,  are overseen by the nigerien ministry of transport's directorate for land water and air transport  -lrb-  ``  ''ministère des transport et de l'aviation civile/direction des transports terrestres ,  maritimes et fluviaux '' ''  -rrb-  . 
a non-governmental body ,  the nigerien council of users of public transport  -lrb-  ``  ''conseil nigérien des utilisateurs des transports publics cnut '' ''  -rrb-  advocates on behalf of users of public transport ,  including roads and airports . 
the niger river is navigable 300 km from niamey to gaya on the benin frontier from mid-december to march . 
the national road system  -lrb-  `` routes nationale ''  -rrb-  are numbered and prefixed with `` rn '' ,  as rn1.
icao codes for niger are prefixed `` dr '' . 
road accidents have been identified as a major public health concern by the nigerien government . 
the predecessor of the niger air force ,  the niger national escadrille  -lrb-  escadrille nationale du niger  -rrb-  was first formed in 1961.
the niger army is the land military armed forces of niger with 5,200 personnel . 
the niger armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  fan  -rrb-  includes military armed force service branches  -lrb-  niger army and niger air force  -rrb-  ,  paramilitary services branches  -lrb-  national gendarmerie of niger and national guard of niger  -rrb-  and the national police . 
at the moment ,  there is no air force special training facilities in niger . 
the niger army was created on 28 july 1960 by decree . 
from 1985 to 1995, the armed forces of niger were engaged in armed fights with the popular front for the liberation of niger  -lrb-  fpln  -rrb-  . 
the president of niger is the supreme commander of all armed forces . 
it was reorganized in 2003 to create the niger air force as a distinct service branch . 
there are two paramilitary services branches:  -lrb-  national gendarmerie of niger under the ministry of defense and the national guard of niger  -rrb-  under the ministry of interior . 
the niger army has participated in the u . s .  led flinlock exercise which it hosted in 2014.
the two military service branches  -lrb-  niger army and niger air force  -rrb-  are each headed by their respective chiefs of staff who serve as adjunct to the joint chiefs of staff of military armed forces  -lrb-  french: `` chef d'etat major des armées ''  -rrb-  . 
in 2005, the icj ruled in niger's favour . 
niger has an ongoing conflict with benin over lété island ,  an island in the river niger approx . 
an agreement has been completed and awaits ratification by cameroon ,  chad ,  niger ,  and nigeria . 
libya has in the past claimed a strip along their border of about 19,400 km² in northern niger . 
