no other version of the story has macbeth kill the king in macbeth's own castle . 
at a banquet ,  macbeth invites his lords and lady macbeth to a night of drinking and merriment . 
the following quote from `` macbeth '' is one such reference:
macbeth ,  the king's kinsman ,  is praised for his bravery and fighting prowess . 
 ''macbeth '' has been compared to shakespeare's `` antony and cleopatra . `` 
in the following scene ,  macbeth and banquo discuss the weather and their victory . 
macbeth  -lrb-  ; full title the tragedy of macbeth  -rrb-  is a tragedy by william shakespeare; it is thought to have been first performed in 1606.
king duncan welcomes and praises macbeth and banquo ,  and declares that he will spend the night at macbeth's castle at inverness; he also names his son malcolm as his heir . 
banquo reveals this to the audience ,  and while sceptical of the new king macbeth ,  he remembers the witches' prophecy about how his own descendants would inherit the throne; this makes him suspicious of macbeth . 
 ''macbeth '' was first printed in the first folio of 1623 and the folio is the only source for the text . 
this time ,  lady macbeth tells the lords to leave ,  and they do so . 
the bloodbath and consequent civil war swiftly take macbeth and lady macbeth into the realms of madness and death . 
no medieval account of the reign of macbeth mentions the weird sisters ,  banquo ,  or lady macbeth ,  and with the exception of the latter none actually existed . 
macduff carries macbeth's head onstage and malcolm discusses how order has been restored . 
minor threat broke up in 1983.
the band's first 7 '' eps ,  `` minor threat '' and `` in my eyes '' ,  were released in 1981.
in march 1984, six months after the band broke up ,  the eps `` minor threat '' and `` in my eyes '' were compiled together and re-released as the `` minor threat '' album . 
minor threat was an american hardcore punk band ,  formed in 1980 in washington ,  d . c .  by vocalist ian mackaye and drummer jeff nelson . 
in 2013, minor threat shirts began appearing in urban outfitters stores . 
some of the other members of minor threat ,  jeff nelson in particular ,  took exception to what they saw as mackaye's imperious attitude on the song . 
on october 29, 2005, fox played the first few seconds of minor threat's `` salad days '' during an nfl broadcast . 
dischord had previously taken action against forever 21 in 2009 for marketing unlicensed minor threat shirts . 
in a meaningful way ,  minor threat ended their final set with `` last song '' ,  which was the original title of their song `` salad days '' . 
a mental event is anything which happens within the mind or mind substitute of a conscious individual . 
some state that the mental and the physical are the very same property which cause any event -lrb-  s  -rrb-  . 
the only market structure that has no market power is perfect competition . 
it includes relevant product market and relevant geographic market . 
a company must have some degree of market power to practice price discrimination . 
there are three forms of price discrimination . 
market power is the ability to affect the terms and conditions of exchange so that the price of a product is set by a single company  -lrb-  price is not imposed by the market as in perfect competition  -rrb-  . 
a small business may still have the power to raise prices in a small industry  -lrb-  or market  -rrb-  . 
market share may be a valuable source of information regarding the market structure and the market position when it comes to accessing it . 
price discrimination is not limited to monopolies . 
to reduce prices and increase output ,  regulators often use average cost pricing . 
as such ,  monopolists have substantial economic interest in improving their market information and `` market segmenting '' . 
market power is the ability to increase the product's price above marginal cost without losing all customers . 
market power is a company’s ability to increase prices without losing all its customers . 
assume that by a uniform pricing system the monopolist would sell five units at a price of $10 per unit . 
the three basic forms of price discrimination are first ,  second and third degree price discrimination . 
it is very important to realize that partial price discrimination can cause some customers who are inappropriately pooled with high price customers to be excluded from the market . 
perfect competition is the only market form in which price discrimination would be impossible  -lrb-  a perfectly competitive company has a perfectly elastic demand curve and has zero market power  -rrb-  . 
the implication of the rule is that the more elastic the demand for the product the less pricing power the monopoly has . 
as the definition of the market is of a matter of interchangeability ,  if the goods or services are regarded as interchangeable then they are within the same product market . 
with a price increase ,  price elasticity tends to increase ,  and in the optimum case above it will be greater than one for most customers . 
in `` third degree price discrimination '' or multi-market price discrimination the seller divides the consumers into different groups according to their willingness to pay as measured by their price elasticity of demand . 
price discrimination allows a monopolist to increase its profit by charging higher prices for identical goods to those who are willing or able to pay more . 
it arises when a monopolist has such significant market power that it can restrict its output while increasing the price above the competitive level without losing customers . 
as with collusive conduct ,  market shares are determined with reference to the particular market in which the company and product in question is sold . 
a monopolist can extract only one premium ,  and getting into complementary markets does not pay . 
third degree price discrimination is the most prevalent type . 
consequently ,  any price increase will result in the loss of some customers . 
a monopoly chooses that price that maximizes the difference between total revenue and total cost . 
by setting price equal to the intersection of the demand curve and the average total cost curve ,  the firm's output is allocatively inefficient as the price is less than the marginal cost  -lrb-  which is the output quantity for a perfectly competitive and allocatively efficient market  -rrb-  . 
a company with a monopoly does not experience price pressure from competitors ,  although it may experience pricing pressure from potential competition . 
according to the standard model ,  in which a monopolist sets a single price for all consumers ,  the monopolist will sell a lesser quantity of goods at a higher price than would companies by perfect competition . 
in `` second degree price discrimination '' or quantity discrimination customers are charged different prices based on how much they buy . 
as long as the price elasticity of demand for most customers is less than one in absolute value ,  it is advantageous for a company to increase its prices: it receives more money for fewer goods . 
de beers' market share by value fell from as high as 90% in the 1980s to less than 40% in 2012, having resulted in a more fragmented diamond market with more transparency and greater liquidity . 
mit has its own police force . 
these activities affected mit profoundly . 
mit was informally called `` boston tech '' . 
the mit museum was founded in 1971 and collects ,  preserves ,  and exhibits artifacts significant to the culture and history of mit . 
mit is a member of the association of american universities  -lrb-  aau  -rrb-  . 
mit is often ranked among the world's top universities . 
mit is chartered as a non-profit organization and is owned and governed by a privately appointed board of trustees known as the mit corporation . 
the massachusetts institute of technology  -lrb-  mit  -rrb-  is a private research university in cambridge ,  massachusetts . 
mit was elected to the association of american universities in 1934 and remains a research university with a very high level of research activity; research expenditures totaled $718.2 million in 2009.
mit has kept pace with and helped to advance the digital age . 
mit ultimately prevailed when the justice department dropped the case in 1994.
between 1912 and 1920, eastman donated $20 million  -lrb-  $ million in 2015 dollars  -rrb-  in cash and kodak stock to mit . 
in late 1960s and early 1970s ,  student and faculty activists protested against the vietnam war and mit's defense research . 
more recently ,  mit's research for the military has included work on robots ,  drones and 'battle suits' . 
mit students refer to both their majors and classes using numbers or acronyms alone . 
mit's involvement in military science surged during world war ii . 
undergraduates are guaranteed four-year housing in one of mit's 10 undergraduate dormitories . 
two days after mit was chartered ,  the first battle of the civil war broke out . 
mit is a large ,  highly residential ,  research university with a majority of enrollments in graduate and professional programs . 
through programs like the deshpande center ,  mit faculty leverage their research and discoveries into multi-million-dollar commercial ventures . 
mit awarded 1,547 master's degrees and 609 doctoral degrees in the academic year 2010–11.
in the 1980s ,  there was more controversy at mit over its involvement in sdi  -lrb-  space weaponry  -rrb-  and cbw  -lrb-  chemical and biological warfare  -rrb-  research . 
post-war government-sponsored research at mit included sage and guidance systems for ballistic missiles and project apollo . 
valued at $13.182 billion in 2016, mit's endowment is the sixth-largest among american colleges and universities . 
joan robinson published a book `` the economics of imperfect competition '' with a comparable theme of distinguishing perfect from imperfect competition . 
the proof that `` p '' -lrb-  `` n ''  -rrb-  is true for each natural number `` n '' proceeds as follows . 
 ''p '' -lrb-  `` n ''  -rrb-  gives a formula for the sum of the natural numbers less than or equal to number `` n '' . 
whether `` n '' = 0 or `` n '' = 1 is taken as the standard base case depends on the preferred definition of the natural numbers . 
to prove the inductive step ,  one assumes the induction hypothesis and then uses this assumption ,  involving `` n '' ,  to prove the statement for `` n '' + 1.
mathematical induction can be used to prove that the following statement ,  `` p '' -lrb-  `` n ''  -rrb-  ,  holds for all natural numbers `` n '' . 
in 1989, downey released an album of songs based on his show entitled `` morton downey jr . 
downey headed to secaucus ,  new jersey ,  where his highly controversial television program `` the morton downey jr .  show '' was taped . 
sean morton downey  -lrb-  december 9, 1932 – march 12, 2001 -rrb- ,  better known as morton downey jr .  ,  was an american television talk show host of the late-1980s who pioneered the `` trash tv '' format on his program `` the morton downey jr .  show '' . 
downey's largest effect on american culture came from his popular ,  yet short-lived ,  syndicated late 1980s television talk show ,  `` the morton downey jr .  show '' . 
downey attended new york university . 
downey's parents were also in show business; his father ,  morton downey ,  was a popular singer ,  and his mother ,  barbara bennett ,  was a singer and dancer . 
released in 2012, the documentary film ``  '' touches upon downey's upbringing and formative years in radio and politics before launching into the history of `` the morton downey jr .  show '' and downey's influence on trash tv . 
in the 1980s ,  downey was a talk show host at kfbk-am in sacramento ,  california ,  where he employed his abrasive style . 
in 1984, at kfbk radio ,  downey used the word `` chinaman '' while telling a joke . 
on august 30, 1997, downey quit his wtam show to focus on pursuing legal action against howard stern . 
downey was married four times and had four children from three of those marriages . 
so let us  .  .  .  not speak of it all but just do it . `` 
the term is derived from greek word `` meta '' μετά  -lrb-  `` after '' ,  `` beyond '' ,  `` with ''  -rrb-  and `` philosophía '' φιλοσοφία  -lrb-  `` love of wisdom ''  -rrb-  . 
morris lazerowitz claims to have coined the term 'metaphilosophy' around 1940 and used it in print in 1942.
as bertrand russell wrote:
ducasse's view has been among the first to be described as 'metaphilosophy' . 
ludwig wittgenstein wrote about the nature of philosophical puzzles and philosophical understanding . 
there are many styles of mandolin ,  but three are common ,  the `` neapolitan '' or `` round-backed '' mandolin ,  the `` carved-top '' mandolin and the `` flat-backed '' mandolin . 
the necked box instruments include the carved top mandolins and the flatback mandolins . 
the mandolin is the soprano member of the mandolin family ,  as the violin is the soprano member of the violin family . 
not limited to mandolins ,  the vinaccias made stringed instruments ,  including violins ,  cellos ,  guitars ,  mandolas and mandolins . 
the mandolins they made changed over generations ,  from mandolinos with flat soundboards and gut-strings ,  through mandolins with a bent soundboard and bronze or bronze-and-gut strings ,  into mandolins with bent soundboards that used steel or steel-and-bronze strings . 
mandolin orchestras were formed worldwide ,  incorporating not only the mandolin family of instruments ,  but also guitars ,  double basses and zithers . 
mandolins evolved from the lute family in italy during the 17th and 18th centuries ,  and the deep bowled mandolin ,  produced particularly in naples ,  became common in the 19th century . 
much of mandolin development revolved around the soundboard  -lrb-  the top  -rrb-  . 
the term is used online by mandolin enthusiasts to name the time period when the mandolin had become popular ,  when mandolin orchestras were being organized worldwide ,  and new and high-quality instruments were increasingly common . 
mandolins have a body that acts as a resonator ,  attached to a neck . 
like any plucked instrument ,  mandolin notes decay to silence rather than sound out continuously as with a bowed note on a violin ,  and mandolin notes decay faster than larger stringed instruments like the guitar . 
a mandolin  -lrb-   ; literally `` small mandola ''  -rrb-  is a stringed musical instrument in the lute family and is usually plucked with a plectrum or `` pick '' . 
that era  -lrb-  from the late 19th century into the early 20th century  -rrb-  has come to be known as the `` golden age '' of the mandolin . 
the neapolitan style of mandolin construction was adopted and developed by others ,  notably in rome ,  giving two distinct but similar types of mandolin – neapolitan and roman . 
these tools are used to `` mold the flow of light '' ,  a famous phrase for describing the goal of microphotonics . 
it is used in optical networking . 
microsoft windows is a group of several graphical operating system families ,  all of which are developed ,  marketed ,  and sold by microsoft . 
still ,  numbers for server use of windows  -lrb-  that are comparable to competitors  -rrb-  show one third market share ,  similar to that for end user use . 
alternative american names for the mojo bag include hand ,  mojo hand ,  conjure hand ,  lucky hand ,  conjure bag ,  trick bag ,  root bag ,  toby ,  jomo ,  and gris-gris bag . 
there is a process to fixing a proper mojo . 
west indians also use mojo bags but often use leather instead of flannel . 
the most common synonym for the word mojo is `` gris-gris '' ,  which literally means `` fetish '' or `` charm ''; thus a gris-gris bag is a charm bag . 
 ''life in hell '' became popular almost immediately . 
groening made his first professional cartoon sale of `` life in hell '' to the avant-garde `` wet '' magazine in 1978.
the poster contained tribute cartoons by 22 of groening's cartoonist friends who were influenced by `` life in hell '' . 
the simpsons shorts first appeared in `` the tracey ullman show '' on april 19, 1987.
groening described life in los angeles to his friends in the form of the self-published comic book `` life in hell '' ,  which was loosely inspired by the chapter `` how to go to hell '' in walter kaufmann's book `` critique of religion and philosophy '' . 
although `` the tracey ullman show '' was not a big hit ,  the popularity of the shorts led to a half-hour spin-off in 1989.
 ''life in hell '' caught the eye of hollywood writer-producer and gracie films founder james l .  brooks ,  who had been shown the strip by fellow producer polly platt . 
among the fans of the column was harry shearer ,  who would later become a voice on `` the simpsons '' . 
in 1994, groening formed bongo comics  -lrb-  named after the character bongo from `` life in hell ''  -rrb-  with steve vance ,  cindy vance and bill morrison ,  which publishes comic books based on `` the simpsons '' and `` futurama ''  -lrb-  including `` futurama simpsons infinitely secret crossover crisis '' ,  a crossover between the two  -rrb-  ,  as well as a few original titles . 
simon eventually left the show in 1993 over creative differences . 
when comedy central committed to sixteen new episodes ,  it was decided that four straight-to-dvd films – ``  ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- and ``  ''  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- – would be produced . 
metaphysics studies questions related to what it is for something to exist and what types of existence there are . 
there are two broad stances about what is `` the world '' studied by metaphysics . 
it states that if some object x is identical to some object y ,  then any property that x has ,  y will have as well . 
topics of metaphysical investigation include existence ,  objects and their properties ,  space and time ,  cause and effect ,  and possibility . 
yuri gagarin became the first human in space and the earth's orbit on vostok 1 on april 12, 1961.
human spaceflight  -lrb-  also referred to as crewed spaceflight or manned spaceflight  -rrb-  is space travel with a crew or passengers aboard the spacecraft . 
alan shepard became the first american to reach space on freedom 7 on may 5, 1961.
after the apollo program ,  the us launched the skylab sortie space station in 1973, manning it for 171 days with three crews aboard apollo spacecraft . 
spacex and boeing are both developing passenger-capable orbital space capsules as of 2015, planning to fly nasa astronauts to the international space station by 2018.
the period between the retirement of the shuttle in 2011 and the first launch to space of spaceshiptwo on december 13, 2018 is similar to the gap between the end of apollo in 1975 and the first space shuttle flight in 1981, is referred to by a presidential blue ribbon committee as the u . s .  human spaceflight gap . 
russia and china have human spaceflight capability with the soyuz program and shenzhou program . 
the first human spaceflight was launched by the soviet union on 12 april 1961 as a part of the vostok program ,  with cosmonaut yuri gagarin aboard . 
in 1993, president bill clinton secured russia's cooperation in converting the planned space station `` freedom '' into the international space station  -lrb-  iss  -rrb-  . 
mendelevium was the ninth transuranic element to be synthesized . 
mendelevium-256, the chemically most important isotope of mendelevium ,  decays through electron capture 90.7% of the time and alpha decay 9.9% of the time . 
mendelevium is a synthetic element with chemical symbol md  -lrb-  formerly mv  -rrb-  and atomic number 101.
the half-lives of mendelevium isotopes mostly increase smoothly from md onwards ,  reaching a maximum at md . 
mendelevium can form coordination complexes with 1,2-cyclohexanedinitrilotetraacetic acid  -lrb-  dcta  -rrb-  . 
sixteen isotopes of mendelevium are known ,  with mass numbers from 245 to 260; all are radioactive . 
another method to isolate mendelevium exploits the distinct elution properties of md from those of es and fm . 
the chemistry of mendelevium is mostly known only in solution ,  in which it can take on the +3 or +2 oxidation states . 
the lightest mendelevium isotopes  -lrb-  md to md  -rrb-  are mostly produced through bombardment of bismuth targets with heavy argon ions ,  while slightly heavier ones  -lrb-  md to md  -rrb-  are produced by bombarding plutonium and americium targets with lighter ions of carbon and nitrogen . 
it can be summarized as ``  ''p implies q '' and `` p '' is asserted to be true ,  therefore `` q '' must be true . `` 
the first to explicitly describe the argument form `` modus ponens '' was theophrastus . 
the inference rule `` modus tollens '' validates the inference from formula_1 implies formula_2 and the contradictory of formula_2 to the contradictory of formula_1.
on the other hand ,  many pure mathematicians draw on natural and social phenomena as inspiration for their abstract research . 
in fact ,  rüegg asserts that the german system is responsible for the development of the modern research university because it focused on the idea of “freedom of scientific research ,  teaching and study . ”
the number of known mathematicians grew when pythagoras of samos  -lrb-  c .  582–c . 
one of the earliest known mathematicians was thales of miletus  -lrb-  c .  624–c . 546 bc  -rrb- ; he has been hailed as the first true mathematician and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed . 
the first woman mathematician recorded by history was hypatia of alexandria  -lrb-  ad 350 - 415 -rrb- . 
to develop accurate models for describing the real world ,  many applied mathematicians draw on tools and techniques that are often considered to be `` pure '' mathematics . 
even though the pure and applied viewpoints are distinct philosophical positions ,  in practice there is much overlap in the activity of pure and applied mathematicians . 
microfluidics deals with the behaviour ,  precise control and manipulation of fluids that are geometrically constrained to a small ,  typically sub-millimeter ,  scale at which capillary penetration governs mass transport . 
specifically ,  it can be shown that for prime  ,  is prime if and only if divides  ,  where and for  . 
this definition is therefore equivalent to a definition as a prime number of the form for some prime  . 
the first four mersenne primes are  ,   ,  and and because the first mersenne prime starts at  ,  all mersenne primes are congruent to 3  -lrb-  mod 4 -rrb- . 
fast algorithms for finding mersenne primes are available ,  and the seven largest known prime numbers are mersenne primes . 
the exponents which give mersenne primes are 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 17, 19, 31,  .  .  .  and the resulting mersenne primes are 3, 7, 31, 127, 8191, 131071, 524287, 2147483647,  .  .  .   . 
in mathematics ,  a mersenne prime is a prime number that is one less than a power of two . 
 ,  51 are now known . 
for example ,  eight of the first 11 primes give rise to a mersenne prime  -lrb-  the correct terms on mersenne's original list  -rrb-  ,  while is prime for only 43 of the first two million prime numbers  -lrb-  up to 32,452,843 -rrb- . 
a basic theorem about mersenne numbers states that if is prime ,  then the exponent must also be prime . 
hence ,  divides formula_3 and = cannot be prime . 
the first four mersenne primes  ,   ,  and were known in antiquity . 
from magnesium chloride ,  electrolysis produces magnesium . 
magnesium forms a variety of compounds important to industry and biology ,  including magnesium carbonate ,  magnesium chloride ,  magnesium citrate ,  magnesium hydroxide  -lrb-  milk of magnesia  -rrb-  ,  magnesium oxide ,  magnesium sulfate ,  and magnesium sulfate heptahydrate  -lrb-  epsom salts  -rrb-  . 
magnesium reacts with carbon dioxide exothermically to form magnesium oxide and carbon:
magnesium has three stable isotopes:  ,  and  . 
therefore ,  water cannot extinguish magnesium fires . 
magnesium is the ninth most abundant element in the universe . 
magnesium is the third-most-commonly-used structural metal ,  following iron and aluminium . 
relevant organic magnesium reagents outside the scope of grignards are magnesium anthracene with magnesium forming a 1,4-bridge over the central hexagon used as a source of highly active magnesium and butadiene magnesium an adduct with butadiene and a source for the butadiene dianion . 
magnesium is used in super-strong ,  lightweight materials and alloys . 
at the cathode ,  the ion is reduced by two electrons to magnesium metal:
elemental magnesium is a gray-white lightweight metal ,  two-thirds the density of aluminium . 
magnesium hydroxide  -lrb-  brucite  -rrb-  is insoluble in water and can be filtered out and reacted with hydrochloric acid to produced concentrated magnesium chloride . 
it was eventually recognized as hydrated magnesium sulfate ,  ·7.
magnesium is a chemical element with symbol mg and atomic number 12.
in the united states ,  magnesium is obtained principally with the dow process ,  by electrolysis of fused magnesium chloride from brine and sea water . 
magnesium ,  being readily available and relatively nontoxic ,  has a variety of uses:
in computer text processing ,  a markup language is a system for annotating a document in a way that is syntactically distinguishable from the text . 
every tag used in a markup language has a property to format the text we write . 
or `` why should i be moral ? `` 
if one presupposes a cognitivist interpretation of moral sentences ,  morality is justified by the moralist's knowledge of moral facts ,  and the theories to justify moral judgements are epistemological theories . 
these theories attempt to answer the second of the above questions: `` what is the nature of moral judgments ? `` 
these are theories that attempt to answer questions like ,  `` how may moral judgments be supported or defended ? `` 
however ,  international mormons often bring pieces of their own heritage into the church ,  adapting church practices to local cultures . 
today ,  polygamy is practiced within mormonism only by people that have broken with the lds church . 
the word `` mormons '' most often refers to members of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  because of their belief in the book of mormon ,  though members often refer to themselves as `` latter-day saints '' or sometimes just `` saints '' . 
in 2010, around 13–14 percent of mormons lived in utah ,  the center of cultural influence for mormonism . 
utah mormons often place a greater emphasis on pioneer heritage than international mormons who generally are not descendants of the mormon pioneers . 
lds church leaders have encouraged members to use the church's full name to emphasize its focus on jesus christ ,  and have discouraged the use of the shortened form `` church of the latter day saints '' ,  as well as the acronym `` lds '' ,  and the nickname `` mormons '' . 
isolation in utah had allowed mormons to create a culture of their own . 
the center of mormon cultural influence is in utah ,  and north america has more mormons than any other continent ,  though the majority of mormons live outside the united states . 
lgbt mormons ,  or mormons who self-identify as gay ,  lesbian ,  or bisexual ,  remain in good standing in the church if they abstain from homosexual relations and obey the law of chastity . 
many black mormons are members of the genesis group ,  an organization of black members that predates the priesthood ban ,  and is endorsed by the church . 
nevertheless ,  the lds church still wielded significant political power in the utah territory . 
around 12 percent of canada's farmland is in manitoba . 
manitoba has a strong literary tradition . 
manitoba  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a province at the longitudinal centre of canada . 
manitoba has an extreme continental climate . 
the first lending library in manitoba was founded in 1848.
as of october 2009, manitoba's unemployment rate was 5.8 percent . 
manitoba's capital and largest city ,  winnipeg ,  is the eighth-largest census metropolitan area in canada . 
cfb winnipeg is a canadian forces base at the winnipeg international airport . 
the manitoba co-operative commonwealth federation ,  forerunner to the new democratic party of manitoba  -lrb-  ndp  -rrb-  ,  was founded in 1932.
english and french are the official languages of the legislature and courts of manitoba ,  according to §23 of the manitoba act ,  1870  -lrb-  part of the constitution of canada  -rrb-  . 
aboriginal peoples have inhabited what is now manitoba for thousands of years . 
manitoba is the only province with an arctic deep-water seaport ,  at churchill . 
in 1997, the `` flood of the century '' caused over in damages in manitoba ,  but the floodway prevented winnipeg from flooding . 
like all canadian provinces ,  manitoba is governed by a unicameral legislative assembly . 
transportation and warehousing contribute approximately to manitoba's gdp . 
at the 2011 census ,  manitoba had a population of 1,208,268, more than half of which is in the winnipeg capital region; winnipeg is canada's eighth-largest census metropolitan area ,  with a population of 730,018  -lrb-  2011 census  -rrb-  . 
of manitoba's gdp comes directly or indirectly from trucking . 
manitoba has two class i railways: canadian national railway  -lrb-  cn  -rrb-  and canadian pacific railway  -lrb-  cpr  -rrb-  . 
the 1960s pop group the guess who was formed in manitoba ,  and later became the first canadian band to have a no . 
manitoba's early economy depended on mobility and living off the land . 
the first school in manitoba was founded in 1818 by roman catholic missionaries in present-day winnipeg; the first protestant school was established in 1820.
gimli ,  manitoba is home to the largest icelandic community outside of iceland . 
manitoba is at the centre of the hudson bay drainage basin ,  with a high volume of the water draining into lake winnipeg and then north down the nelson river into hudson bay . 
 ''falcon beach '' ,  an internationally broadcast television drama ,  was filmed at winnipeg beach ,  manitoba . 
winnipeg has two daily newspapers: the `` winnipeg free press '' ,  a broadsheet with the highest circulation numbers in manitoba ,  as well as the `` winnipeg sun '' ,  a smaller tabloid-style paper . 
manitoba has a moderately strong economy based largely on natural resources . 
the name `` manitoba '' is believed to be derived from the cree ,  ojibwe or assiniboine languages . 
there are five universities in manitoba ,  regulated by the ministry of advanced education and literacy . 
according to the 2006 census ,  82.8 percent of manitoba's population spoke only english ,  3.2 percent spoke only french ,  15.1 percent spoke both ,  and 0.9 percent spoke neither . 
mount logan  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the highest mountain in canada and the second-highest peak in north america ,  after denali . 
temperatures are extremely low on and near mount logan . 
due to active tectonic uplifting ,  mount logan is still rising in height . 
a `` subject '' is an observer and an `` object '' is a thing observed . 
ideology inaugurates one into being a subject ,  and every ideology is intended to maintain and glorify its idealized subject ,  as well as the metaphysical category of the subject itself  -lrb-  see antihumanism  -rrb-  . 
with heidegger ,  phenomenology tries to go beyond the classical dichotomy between subject and object ,  because they are linked by an inseparable and original relationship ,  in the sense that there can be no world without a subject ,  nor the subject without world . 
the nature of the subject is also central in debates over the nature of subjective experience within the anglo-american tradition of analytical philosophy . 
thinkers such as structural marxist louis althusser and poststructuralist michel foucault theorize the subject as a social construction ,  the so-called poststructuralist subject . 
these thinkers opened up the way for the deconstruction of the subject as a core-concept of metaphysics . 
this biases media content against the interest of minorities . 
jonathan m .  ladd ,  who has conducted intensive studies of media trust and media bias ,  concluded that the primary cause of belief in media bias is media telling their audience that particular media are biased . 
a majority of people see such media as biased ,  while at the same time preferring media with extensive coverage of celebrities . 
studies reporting perceptions of bias in the media are not limited to studies of print media . 
in this setting ,  media bias arises because biased media are more informative; people with a certain political bias prefer media with a similar bias because they can more trust their advice on what actions to take . 
media bias is the bias or perceived bias of journalists and news producers within the mass media in the selection of events and stories that are reported and how they are covered . 
many media theorists concerned with language and media bias point towards the media of the united states ,  a large country where english is spoken by the majority of the population . 
there are a number of national and international watchdog groups that report on bias in the media . 
alan gerber and dean karlan of yale university use an experimental approach to examine not whether the media are biased ,  but whether the media influence political decisions and attitudes . 
finally ,  some countries have laws enforcing balance in state-owned media . 
herman and chomsky  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- proposed a propaganda model hypothesizing systematic biases of u . s .  media from structural economic causes . 
the apparent bias of media is not always specifically political in nature . 
particularly in international news topics ,  matrix-based news aggregation helps to reveal differences in media coverage between the involved countries . 
their work claims to detect a bias towards liberalism in the american media . 
the media are often accused of bias favoring a particular religion or of bias against a particular religion . 
at the same time ,  the concentration of media ownership in private hands ,  and frequently amongst a comparatively small number of individuals ,  has also led to accusations of media bias . 
research about media bias is now a subject of systematic scholarship in a variety of disciplines . 
d'alessio and allen list three forms of media bias as the most widely studied: other common forms of political and non-political media bias include:
in such cases in the united states ,  the media outlet is required to disclose the conflict of interest . 
political bias has been a feature of the mass media since its birth with the invention of the printing press . 
market forces that result in a biased presentation include the ownership of the news source ,  concentration of media ownership ,  the selection of staff ,  the preferences of an intended audience ,  and pressure from advertisers . 
in rare cases ,  a news organization may dismiss or reassign staff members who appear biased . 
media bias in the united states occurs when the media in the united states systematically emphasizes one particular point of view in a manner that contravenes the standards of professional journalism . 
the direction and degree of media bias in various countries is widely disputed . 
they hypothesize media ownership by corporations ,  funding from advertising ,  the use of official sources ,  efforts to discredit independent media  -lrb-  `` flak ''  -rrb-  ,  and `` anti-communist '' ideology as the filters that bias news in favor of u . s .  corporate interests . 
muhammad began to prepare for a campaign . 
khadijah is said to have had four daughters with muhammad  -lrb-  ruqayyah bint muhammad ,  umm kulthum bint muhammad ,  zainab bint muhammad ,  fatimah zahra  -rrb-  and two sons  -lrb-  abd-allah ibn muhammad and qasim ibn muhammad ,  who both died in childhood  -rrb-  . 
nine of muhammad's wives survived him . 
these include traditional muslim biographies of muhammad ,  which provide additional information about muhammad's life . 
muslims have traditionally expressed love and veneration for muhammad . 
in islamic belief ,  muhammad is regarded as the last prophet sent by god . 
muhammad consented to the marriage ,  which by all accounts was a happy one . 
after migration to medina ,  muhammad ,  who was then in his fifties ,  married several more women . 
after the reformation ,  muhammad was often portrayed in a similar way . 
bahá'ís venerate muhammad as one of a number of prophets or `` manifestations of god '' . 
muhammad expelled from medina the banu qaynuqa ,  one of three main jewish tribes ,  but some historians contend that the expulsion happened after muhammad's death . 
those who migrated from mecca along with muhammad became known as `` muhajirun ''  -lrb-  emigrants  -rrb-  . 
muhammad  -lrb-   ,  ; c .  570 ce – 8 june 632 ce  -rrb-  was the founder of islam . 
muhammad instructed his followers to emigrate to medina ,  until nearly all his followers left mecca . 
muhammad's descendants through fatimah are known as `` sharifs '' ,  `` syeds '' or `` sayyids '' . 
the quran also refers to muhammad as `` aḥmad '' `` more praiseworthy ''  -lrb-   ,  sura as-saff   -rrb-  . 
muhammad defeated the hawazin and thaqif tribes in the battle of hunayn . 
following the conquest of mecca ,  muhammad was alarmed by a military threat from the confederate tribes of hawazin who were raising an army double the size of muhammad's . 
the name `` muhammad ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  means `` praiseworthy '' and appears four times in the quran . 
according to muslim tradition ,  muhammad's wife khadija was the first to believe he was a prophet . 
muslim tradition credits muhammad with several miracles or supernatural events . 
western historian of islam denis gril believes the quran does not overtly describe muhammad performing miracles ,  and the supreme miracle of muhammad is identified with the quran itself . 
zayd ibn haritha was a slave that muhammad bought ,  freed ,  and then adopted as his son . 
muhammad's life is traditionally defined into two periods: pre-hijra  -lrb-  emigration  -rrb-  in mecca  -lrb-  from 570 to 622 -rrb- ,  and post-hijra in medina  -lrb-  from 622 until 632 -rrb- . 
following the attestation to the oneness of god ,  the belief in muhammad's prophethood is the main aspect of the islamic faith . 
muhammad gained few early followers ,  and experienced hostility from meccan polytheists . 
according to islamic tradition ,  muhammad was attacked by the people of ta'if and was badly injured . 
it is said that muhammad rejected the offer and prayed for the guidance of the people of ta'if . 
at the age of 25, muhammad married the wealthy khadijah bint khuwaylid who was 40 years old . 
the delegation from medina pledged themselves and their fellow-citizens to accept muhammad into their community and physically protect him as one of themselves . 
then muhammad instituted brotherhood between the emigrants and the supporters and he chose ali as his own brother . 
a scout alerted muhammad of the meccan army's presence and numbers a day later . 
muhammad's father ,  abdullah ,  died almost six months before he was born . 
according to muslim tradition ,  muhammad himself was a hanif and one of the descendants of ishmael ,  son of abraham . 
the victory strengthened muhammad's position in medina and dispelled earlier doubts among his followers . 
a year after the battle of tabuk ,  the banu thaqif sent emissaries to surrender to muhammad and adopt islam . 
in june 622, warned of a plot to assassinate him ,  muhammad secretly slipped out of mecca and moved his followers to medina ,  north of mecca . 
morse code has been in use for more than 160 years—longer than any other electrical coding system . 
this code was used since 1844 and became known as `` morse landline code '' or `` american morse code '' . 
this finally led to the international morse code in 1865.
operators skilled in morse code can often understand  -lrb-  `` copy ''  -rrb-  code in their heads at rates in excess of 40 wpm . 
american morse code is now seldom used except in historical re-enactments . 
software is also frequently employed to produce and decode morse code radio signals . 
morse code can also be translated by computer and used in a speaking communication aid . 
in the 1890s ,  morse code began to be used extensively for early radio communication ,  before it was possible to transmit voice . 
international contests in code copying are still occasionally held . 
in some countries ,  certain portions of the amateur radio bands are reserved for transmission of morse code signals only . 
the original amateur radio operators used morse code exclusively since voice-capable radio transmitters did not become commonly available until around 1920.
morse code is named for samuel f .  b .  morse ,  an inventor of the telegraph . 
some modern navigation receivers automatically translate the code into displayed letters . 
finally ,  effective on february 23, 2007, the fcc eliminated the morse code proficiency requirements from all amateur radio licenses . 
morse code speed is measured in words per minute  -lrb-  wpm  -rrb-  or characters per minute  -lrb-  cpm  -rrb-  . 
emergency contraception  -lrb-  ec  -rrb-  are birth control measures that may be used after sexual intercourse to prevent pregnancy . 
research into the consumer psychology of meat is relevant both to meat industry marketing and to advocates of reduced meat consumption . 
meat additives include the following:
meat is animal flesh that is eaten as food . 
many religions have rules about which meat may or may not be eaten ,  and vegetarian people abstain from eating meat because of concerns about the ethics of eating meat or about the effects of meat production or consumption . 
meat is mainly composed of water ,  protein ,  and fat . 
meat is a typical base for making sandwiches . 
also ,  microwaving meat before cooking may reduce hcas by 90% . 
while taste quality may vary between meats ,  the proteins ,  vitamins ,  and minerals available from meats are generally consistent . 
there are concerns about the consumption of meat increasing the risk of cancer . 
the religion of jainism has always opposed eating meat ,  and there are also schools of buddhism and hinduism that condemn the eating of meat . 
meat is prepared in many ways ,  as steaks ,  in stews ,  fondue ,  or as dried meat like beef jerky . 
meat is produced by killing an animal and cutting flesh out of it . 
various environmental effects are associated with meat production . 
another important trend in contemporary meat production is organic farming which ,  while providing no organoleptic benefit to meat so produced ,  meets an increasing demand for organic meat . 
in the context of food ,  `` meat '' can also refer to `` the edible part of something as distinguished from its covering  -lrb-  such as a husk or shell  -rrb- ``  ,  for example ,  `` coconut meat '' . 
the spoilage of meat occurs ,  if untreated ,  in a matter of hours or days and results in the meat becoming unappetizing ,  poisonous or infectious . 
the founders of western philosophy disagreed about the ethics of eating meat . 
vegetarians choose not to eat meat because of ethical ,  economic ,  environmental ,  religious or health concerns that are associated with meat production and consumption . 
various forms of imitation meat have been created for people who wish not to eat meat but still want to taste its flavor and texture . 
there is ongoing research into producing meat `` in vitro '' ,  that is ,  outside of animals . 
for most of human history ,  meat was a largely unquestioned part of the human diet . 
however ,  on the contrary ,  bovine meat has decreased from /capita in 1990 to /capita in 2009.
while each kind of meat has about the same content of protein and carbohydrates ,  there is a very wide range of fat content . 
meat and meat products may contain substances such as dioxins ,  polychlorinated biphenyl  -lrb-  pcbs  -rrb-  ,  and cooked meat may contain carcinogens ,  that are toxic to the consumer ,  although any chemical's toxicity is dependent on the dose and timing of exposure . 
generally ,  the meat of adult mammals such as cows ,  sheep ,  and horses is considered red ,  while chicken and turkey breast meat is considered white . 
the investigation also highlighted unsanitary conditions in us-based meat plants ,  which included meat products covered in excrement and abscesses `` filled with pus '' . 
ethical issues regarding the consumption of meat include objecting to the act of killing animals or to the agricultural practices used in meat production . 
the table in this section compares the nutritional content of several types of meat . 
other kinds of meat are marinated and barbecued ,  or simply boiled ,  roasted ,  or fried . 
regular meat eaters and vegans shared the highest mortality ratio of 1.00.
unlike most other food ,  meat is not perceived as gender-neutral ,  and is particularly associated with men and masculinity . 
monty python won the case . 
john cleese is the oldest python . 
this was the last time chapman appeared on screen with the pythons . 
 '' ,  which later became the title of the first monty python film . 
monty python  -lrb-  also collectively known as the pythons  -rrb-  were a british surreal comedy group who created their sketch comedy show `` monty python's flying circus '' ,  which first aired on the bbc in 1969.
 -lrb-  cleese and palin made a brief cameo appearance in the 1989 amnesty show; apart from that ,  the pythons have not appeared in shows after the first four .   -rrb- 
the pythons had a definite idea about what they wanted to do with the series . 
he also contributed to a sketch on the soundtrack album for `` monty python and the holy grail '' . 
cleveland went on to appear in about two-thirds of the episodes ,  as well as in all of the python films ,  and in most of their stage shows ,  as well . 
among the original python group ,  only eric idle was not involved . 
the group did not consider the film a success . 
izzard has said that monty python was a significant influence on his style of comedy and cleese has referred to him as `` the lost python '' . 
in 2013, the pythons lost a legal case to mark forstater ,  the film producer of `` monty python and the holy grail '' ,  over royalties for the derivative work `` spamalot '' . 
booth appeared in a total of six sketches and also played one-off characters in python feature films `` and now for something completely different '' and `` monty python and the holy grail '' . 
when monty python was first formed ,  two writing partnerships were already in place: cleese and chapman ,  jones and palin . 
carol cleveland was the most important female performer in the monty python ensemble ,  commonly referred to as `` the female python '' . 
he co-directed `` monty python and the holy grail '' and directed short segments of other python films  -lrb-  for instance `` the crimson permanent assurance '' ,  the short film that appears before `` the meaning of life ''  -rrb-  . 
the pythons' first feature film was directed by ian macnaughton ,  reprising his role from the television series . 
sketches from `` monty python's flying circus '' were introduced to american audiences in august 1972, with the release of the python film `` and now for something completely different '' ,  featuring sketches from series 1 and 2 of the television show . 
sir michael palin attended oxford ,  where he met his python writing partner jones . 
since `` the meaning of life '' ,  their last project as a team ,  the pythons have often been the subject of reunion rumours . 
the pythons' final film returned to something structurally closer to the style of `` flying circus '' . 
the surviving pythons had agreed in principle to perform a live tour of america in 1999.
several names for the show were considered before `` monty python's flying circus '' was settled upon . 
both were present and presented as associate pythons at the official monty python 25th-anniversary celebrations held in los angeles in july 1994.
at the time of its release ,  the pythons confessed their aim was to offend `` absolutely everyone '' . 
michael palin stated that the final reunion show on 20 july would be the last time that the troupe would perform together . 
cleese and jones had an involvement  -lrb-  as performer ,  writer or director  -rrb-  in all four amnesty benefit shows ,  palin in three ,  chapman in two ,  and gilliam in one . 
while the show was a collaborative process ,  different factions within python were responsible for elements of the team's humour . 
the six python members appeared in or wrote these shows before `` flying circus '': the bbc’s satirical television show ,  `` the frost report '' ,  broadcast from march 1966 to december 1967, is credited as first uniting the british pythons and providing an environment in which they could develop their particular styles . 
on 9 october 1999, to commemorate 30 years since the first `` flying circus '' television broadcast ,  bbc2 devoted an evening to python programmes ,  including a documentary charting the history of the team ,  interspersed with new sketches by the monty python team filmed especially for the event . 
with the popularity of python throughout the rest of the 1970s and through most of the 1980s ,  pbs stations looked at other british comedies ,  leading to uk shows such as `` are you being served ? `` 
the first two seasons of the series were videotaped at abc television center in hollywood . 
the series was produced by embassy communications during its first season and half of its second season and the remaining seasons by elp communications under the studio columbia pictures television . 
the series comprises 259 episodes and 11 seasons . 
the suffix `` -meter '' has the same greek origin as the unit of length . 
the conversion of a length in wavelengths to a length in metres is based upon the relation
the si unit symbol is m . 
 ''metre '' is the standard spelling of the metric unit for length in nearly all english-speaking nations except the united states and the philippines ,  which use `` meter . `` 
regardless ,  this length became the french standard and was progressively adopted by other countries in europe . 
the metre is `` defined '' as the path length travelled by light in a given time and practical laboratory length measurements in metres are determined by counting the number of wavelengths of laser light of one of the standard types that fit into the length ,  and converting the selected unit of wavelength to metres . 
in 1893, the standard metre was first measured with an interferometer by albert a .  michelson ,  the inventor of the device and an advocate of using some particular wavelength of light as a standard of length . 
the metre  -lrb-  british spelling and bipm spelling  -rrb-  or meter  -lrb-  american spelling   -rrb-   -lrb-  from the french unit `` mètre '' ,  from the greek noun μέτρον ,  `` measure ''  -rrb-  is the base unit of length in some metric systems ,  including the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  . 
which converts the unit of wavelength `` λ '' to metres using `` c '' ,  the speed of light in vacuum in m/s . 
mint grows all year round . 
in common usage ,  other plants with fragrant leaves may be called `` mint '' ,  although they are not in the mint family . 
harvesting of mint leaves can be done at any time . 
mentha  -lrb-  also known as mint ,  from greek  ,  linear b `` mi-ta ''  -rrb-  is a genus of plants in the family lamiaceae  -lrb-  mint family  -rrb-  . 
the taxonomic family lamiaceae is known as the mint family . 
in middle eastern cuisine ,  mint is used on lamb dishes ,  while in british cuisine and american cuisine ,  mint sauce and mint jelly are used ,  respectively . 
the leaf ,  fresh or dried ,  is the culinary source of mint . 
mint leaves ,  without a qualifier like 'peppermint' or 'apple mint' ,  generally refers to spearmint leaves . 
in spain and central and south america ,  mint is known as `` menta '' . 
mints are aromatic ,  almost exclusively perennial herbs . 
it has a stronger flavor than marjoram . 
it is also called pot marjoram ,  although this name is also used for other cultivated species of `` origanum '' . 
the diagnosis and treatment may take only a few minutes or a few weeks depending upon the complexity of the issue . 
in modern clinical practice ,  physicians personally assess patients in order to diagnose ,  prognose ,  treat ,  and prevent disease using clinical judgment . 
medicine  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is the science and practice of the diagnosis ,  prognosis ,  treatment ,  and prevention of disease . 
in august 2000, nasa solicited candidate names for the mission . 
the mission was named as a tribute to arthur c .  clarke ,  evoking the name of ``  '' . 
2001 mars odyssey is a robotic spacecraft orbiting the planet mars . 
the macedonian phalanx is an infantry formation developed by philip ii and used by his son alexander the great to conquer the achaemenid empire and other armies . 
the phalanx consisted of a line-up of several battalion blocks called `` syntagmata '' ,  each of its 16 files  -lrb-  `` lochoi ''  -rrb-  numbering 16 men ,  for a total of 256 in each unit . 
