the central unit of maasai society is the age-set . 
the maasai herd goats and sheep ,  including the red maasai sheep ,  as well as the more prized cattle . 
by one estimate two-thirds of the maasai died during this period . 
all of the maasai’s needs for food are met by their cattle . 
soups are probably the most important use of plants for food by maasai . 
the piercing and stretching of earlobes is common among the maasai as with other tribes . 
maasai society never condoned traffic of human beings ,  and outsiders looking for people to enslave avoided the maasai . 
when many maasai women gather together ,  they sing and dance among themselves . 
one myth about the maasai is that each young man is supposed to kill a lion before he is circumcised . 
the maasai population has been reported as numbering 841,622 in kenya in the 2009 census ,  compared to 377,089 in the 1989 census . 
maasai society is strongly patriarchal in nature ,  with elder men ,  sometimes joined by retired elders ,  deciding most major matters for each maasai group . 
though the maasai’s entire way of life has historically depended on their cattle ,  more recently with their cattle dwindling ,  the maasai have grown dependent on food such as sorghum ,  rice ,  potatoes and cabbage  -lrb-  known to the maasai as goat leaves  -rrb-  . 
unlike most other african tribes ,  maasai widely use drone polyphony . 
many maasai in tanzania wear simple sandals ,  which were until recently made from cowhides . 
haplogroup b-m60 was also observed in 8% of the studied maasai ,  which is also found in 30%  -lrb-  16/53 -rrb- of southern sudanese nilotes . 
traditionally ,  the maasai diet consisted of raw meat ,  raw milk ,  and raw blood from cattle . 
maasai are a nilotic ethnic group inhabiting northern ,  central and southern kenya and northern tanzania . 
the maasai inhabit the african great lakes region and arrived via the south sudan . 
the maasai's autosomal dna has been examined in a comprehensive study by tishkoff et al . 
the maasai are known for their intricate jewelry and for decades ,  have sold these items to tourists as a business . 
stone was strong but very expensive and time-consuming to construct . 
soon stone became more popular . 
towers of medieval castles were usually made of stone or sometimes  -lrb-  but rarely  -rrb-  wood . 
costs for the walls depended on the material used . 
in many cases ,  the wall would have had an internal and an external `` pomoerium '' . 
harbours or some sort of water access was often essential to the construction of medieval fortification . 
lieber suggests that adm would have not turned whitacre over to the authorities if he had not been a mole for the fbi . 
whitacre wore a wire for the fbi assisting in one of the largest price fixing cases in u . s .  history against adm . 
eichenwald ,  two prosecutors ,  an fbi agent ,  and mark whitacre  -lrb-  during his incarceration  -rrb-  were featured on a september 15, 2000, episode of the radio program `` this american life '' about the adm case . 
over the next three years ,  whitacre worked with fbi agents to collect information and record conversations with both adm executives and its competitors . 
adm investigated whitacre's activities and ,  upon discovering suspicious activity ,  requested the fbi investigate whitacre for embezzlement . 
in 2008, more than ten years after the original conviction ,  paisley and two other fbi agents went public with praise for whitacre . 
in his 2000 book ,  `` rats in the grain '' ,  attorney james b .  lieber focuses on adm's price-fixing trial and presents whitacre as an american hero overpowered by adm's vast political clout . 
a few years into the price-fixing investigation ,  whitacre confessed to his fbi handlers that he had been involved with corporate kickbacks and money laundering at adm .  whitacre was later convicted of embezzling $9 million; some of this criminal activity occurred during the time he was cooperating with the fbi . 
appeals for whitacre's full pardon or clemency to the white house were supported by several current and former justice department officials: dean paisley ,  a retired 25-year veteran and former fbi supervisor on the price-fixing case; two other fbi agents involved with the case; a former attorney general of the united states; one of the former asst . 
mainz is located on the 50th latitude ,  on the left bank of the river rhine ,  opposite the confluence of the main with the rhine . 
today ,  mainz is a transport hub and a center of wine production . 
maria feodorovna was pretty and popular . 
in november 1925, maria's favourite sister ,  queen alexandra ,  died . 
in may 1914 maria feodorovna travelled to england to visit her sister . 
she converted to orthodoxy and became grand duchess maria feodorovna of russia . 
in 1873, maria ,  alexander ,  and their two eldest sons made a journey to england . 
empress maria feodorovna ,  the mistress of langinkoski retreat ,  was also otherwise a known friend of finland . 
during the first years of her son's reign ,  maria often acted as the political adviser to the tsar . 
in 1912, maria faced trouble with her youngest son ,  when he secretly married his mistress ,  much to the outrage and scandal of both maria feodorovna and nicholas . 
in 1899, maria's second son ,  george ,  died of tuberculosis in the caucasus . 
maria feodorovna  -lrb-  26 november 1847 – 13 october 1928 -rrb- ,  known before her marriage as princess dagmar of denmark ,  was a danish princess and empress of russia as spouse of emperor alexander iii  -lrb-  reigned 1881–1894 -rrb- . 
despite the overthrow of the monarchy in 1917, the former empress dowager maria at first refused to leave russia . 
maria feodorovna disliked rasputin ,  whom she regarded to be a dangerous charlatan ,  and when his activities damaged the reputation of the tsar ,  she asked the tsar and empress to remove him from their vicinity . 
when maria's eldest sister alexandra visited gatchina in july 1894, she was surprised to see how weak her brother-in-law alexander iii had become . 
once the death of alexander iii had receded ,  maria again took a brighter view of the future . 
the following year ,  maria and alexander welcomed the prince and princess of wales to st .  petersburg; they had come for the wedding of the prince's younger brother ,  alfred ,  to grand duchess maria alexandrovna ,  daughter of tsar alexander ii and the sister of the tsarevich . 
during her nearly three-month visit to england in 1910, maria feodorovna attempted ,  unsuccessfully ,  to get her sister ,  now queen dowager alexandra ,  to claim a position of precedence over her daughter-in-law ,  queen mary . 
montauban:
montauban is the second oldest  -lrb-  after mont-de-marsan  -rrb-  of the `` bastides '' of southern france . 
montauban  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a commune in the tarn-et-garonne department in the occitanie region in southern france . 
in the 17th century ,  the king of france revoked `` l’édit de nantes '' . 
at first ,  model railways were not to scale . 
most large scale battery powered models use radio control . 
the earliest model railways were the 'carpet railways' in the 1840s . 
static diorama models or 'push along' scale models are a branch of model railways for unpowered locomotives ,  examples are lone star and airfix models . 
railway modelling  -lrb-  uk ,  australia and ireland  -rrb-  or model railroading  -lrb-  us and canada  -rrb-  is a hobby in which rail transport systems are modelled at a reduced scale . 
weathering purchased models is common . 
other modellers have built live steam models in ho/oo ,  oo9 and n ,  and there is one in z in australia . 
modellers may collect model trains ,  building a landscape for the trains to pass through . 
o ,  s ,  ho ,  and n scale are more often used indoors . 
layouts vary from a circle or oval of track to realistic reproductions of real places modelled to scale . 
 ''scale '' is the model's measurement as a proportion to the original ,  while `` gauge '' is the measurement between the rails . 
in h0 scale ,  the rail heights are codes 100, 87, 53
the british outline model railway of banbury connections is one of the world's most complicated model railways . 
hobbyists ,  called `` railway modellers '' or `` model railroaders '' ,  may maintain models large enough to ride  -lrb-  see `` live steam ,  ridable miniature railway '' and `` backyard railroad ''  -rrb-  . 
a model that is weathered would not fit as many layouts as a pristine model which can be weathered by its purchaser . 
today modellers create model railway layouts ,  often recreating real locations and periods throughout history . 
if ,  in a given derivation ,  the application of rule a creates the environment for rule b to apply ,  which was not present before the application of rule a ,  rule a and b are in a `` feeding relationship '' so rule a feeds rule b . 
assuming again rule a and b ,  with a ordered before b in the derivation in which rule a destroys the environment to which rule b shall apply ,  one says a and b are in a `` bleeding order '' . 
if it is assumed again that a pair of rules a and b ,  with a ordered before b and b creating an environment to which a could have applied ,  b is said to counterfeed a ,  and the relationship is `` counterfeeding '' . 
assume that the grammar of a language has two rules , rule a and rule b ,  with a ordered before b . 
here the underlying form can be assumed to be  ,  corresponding to the isolation form ,  since rules can be set up to derive the reduced form from this  -lrb-  while it would be difficult or impossible to set up rules that would derive the isolation form from an underlying   -rrb-  . 
if the isolation form were adopted as the underlying form ,  the information that there is a final `` t '' would be lost ,  and it would be hard then to explain the appearance of the `` t '' in the inflected forms . 
if one assumes a pair of rules a and b and a ordered before b is in a `` counterbleeding '' relationship if b destroys the environment that a applies to and has already applied ,  therefore ,  b ordered after a has missed its chance to bleed a . 
the isolation form of a morpheme is the form in which that morpheme appears in isolation  -lrb-  when not subject to the effects of any other morpheme  -rrb-  . 
decorative glass mirrors are usually handcrafted . 
an aluminium glass mirror is made of a float glass manufactured using vacuum coating ,  i . e . 
the problems of making metal-coated ,  glass mirrors was due to the difficulties in making glass that was very clear ,  as most ancient glass was tinted green with iron . 
a safety glass mirror is made by adhering a special protective film to the back surface of a silver glass mirror ,  which prevents injuries in case the mirror is broken . 
a silver glass mirror is an ordinary mirror ,  coated on its back surface with silver ,  which produces images by reflection . 
the most familiar type of mirror is the plane mirror ,  which has a flat surface . 
by the 11th century ,  glass mirrors were being produced in moorish spain . 
glass mirrors are most often coated with silver or aluminium ,  implemented by a series of coatings:
a low aluminium glass mirror is manufactured by coating silver and two layers of protective paint on the back surface of glass . 
 -lrb-  if you stand side-on to a mirror ,  the mirror really does reverse your left and right ,  because that's the direction perpendicular to the mirror .   -rrb- 
there are many types of glass mirrors ,  each representing a different manufacturing process and reflection type . 
the tin -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  chloride is applied because silver will not bond with the glass . 
a beam of light reflects off a mirror at an angle of reflection equal to its angle of incidence  -lrb-  if the size of a mirror is much larger than the wavelength of light  -rrb-  . 
a silkscreen printed glass mirror is produced using inorganic color ink that prints patterns through a special screen onto glass . 
most mirrors are designed for visible light; however ,  mirrors designed for other wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation are also used . 
mindanao is divided into six regions: the zamboanga peninsula ,  northern mindanao ,  the caraga region ,  the davao region ,  soccsksargen ,  and the bangsamoro autonomous region in muslim mindanao  -lrb-  barmm  -rrb-  . 
located in the southern region of the archipelago ,  as of the 2010 census ,  the main island was inhabited by 20,281,545 people ,  while the entire mindanao island group had an estimated total of 25,537,691  -lrb-  2018 -rrb- residents . 
most other feast days ,  such as those of particular saints ,  are `` fixed feasts '' ,  held on the same date every year . 
each season from 1996 to 1999, he again led the major leagues in home runs . 
mcgwire was born in pomona ,  california . 
mcgwire was honored with the inaugural babe ruth home run award for leading mlb in home runs . 
from 1988 to 1990, mcgwire followed with 32, 33, and 39 home runs ,  respectively ,  becoming the first major leaguer to hit 30+ home runs in each of his first four full seasons . 
mcgwire's total of 363 home runs with the athletics surpassed the previous franchise record . 
foot injuries limited mcgwire to a total of 74 games in 1993 and 1994, and just 9 home runs in each of the two seasons . 
however ,  later that day mcgwire hit his 48th and 49th home runs to regain the lead . 
he was the fastest player to hit 500 home runs ,  in 5,487 at-bats . 
mcgwire appeared as himself in season 7, episode 13 of the sitcom `` mad about you '' . 
mcgwire's 49 home runs as a rookie stood as a major league record until aaron judge hit 52 for the new york yankees in 2017.
in a short cameo ,  mcgwire debuted in the major leagues in august 1986, hitting three home runs and nine runs batted in in 18 games . 
retaining his rookie status in 1987, mcgwire took center stage in baseball with his home runs . 
the `` new look '' mcgwire hit 42 homers and batted  . 268 in 1992, with an outstanding ops+ of 175  -lrb-  the highest of his career to that point  -rrb-  ,  and put on a home run hitting show at the home run derby during the 1992 all-star break . 
for his career ,  mcgwire averaged a home run once every 10.61 at bats ,  the best at bats per home run ratio in baseball history  -lrb-  babe ruth is second at 11.76 -rrb- . 
a part of the 1998 major league baseball home run record chase of roger maris' 61 with the cardinals ,  mcgwire set the major league single-season home run record with 70, which barry bonds broke three years later with 73.
in 16 seasons playing major league baseball  -lrb-  1986–2001 -rrb- ,  mcgwire accumulated the following career totals:
however ,  mcgwire's batting averages after his rookie season plummeted to  . 260,  . 231, and  . 235 from 1988 to 1990.
according to chomsky ,  `` most of the book '' was herman's work . 
chomsky credits the origin of the book to the impetus of alex carey ,  the australian social psychologist ,  to whom he and co-author e .  s .  herman dedicated the book . 
maeshowe is one of the largest tombs in orkney; the mound encasing the tomb is in diameter and rises to a height of  . 
the tomb gives its name to the maeshowe type of scottish chambered cairn ,  which is limited to orkney . 
according to the description herein ,  a chambered tomb is normally characterized by grave goods ,  which were found at cuween hill and the tomb on holm of papa westray  -lrb-  see the paragraph above  -rrb-  but were not found at maeshowe . 
anna ritchie reports that there are three more maeshowe type tombs in orkney but she doesn't name or locate them . 
the `` modern '' opening of the tomb was by james farrer ,  an antiquarian and the member of parliament for south durham ,  in july 1861.
some archaeologists see this as evidence that the tomb may have been reused by the norse people and that they were the source of the `` treasure '' found by the later looters . 
those states were brazil ,  peru and the united states . 
the only state to attend the seventh international conference of american states ,  where the convention was agreed upon ,  which did not sign it was bolivia . 
furthermore ,  the first sentence of article 3 explicitly states that `` the political existence of the state is independent of recognition by the other states . `` 
the montevideo convention on the rights and duties of states is a treaty signed at montevideo ,  uruguay ,  on december 26, 1933, during the seventh international conference of american states . 
the committee also found that the existence of states was a question of fact ,  while the recognition by other states was purely declaratory and not a determinative factor of statehood . 
the macrolides are a class of natural products that consist of a large macrocyclic lactone ring to which one or more deoxy sugars ,  usually cladinose and desosamine ,  may be attached . 
meta elements are tags used in html and xhtml documents to provide structured metadata about a web page . 
such elements must be placed as tags in the codice_1 section of an html or xhtml document . 
mechas are typically depicted as humanoid mobile robots . 
the first giant robot seen was mitsuteru yokoyama's 1956 manga `` tetsujin 28-go '' . 
not all mecha need be completely mechanical . 
the first anime featuring a giant mecha being piloted by the protagonist from within a cockpit was the super robot show `` mazinger z '' ,  written by go nagai and introduced in 1972.
mecha are often featured in computer and console video games . 
in japan ,  `` robot anime ''  -lrb-  known as `` mecha anime '' outside japan  -rrb-  is one of the oldest genres in anime . 
the size of mecha can vary according to the story and concepts involved . 
some robot mecha are capable of transformation  -lrb-  `` macross '' and `` zeta gundam ''  -rrb-  or combining to form even bigger ones  -lrb-  `` beast king golion '' and `` tengen toppa gurren lagann ''  -rrb-  . 
by the late 1950s the macro language was followed by the macro assemblers . 
separate programs for creating these macros are called macro recorders . 
this gives the macro some of the power of a function . 
a parameterized macro is a macro that is able to insert given objects into its expansion . 
keyboard and mouse macros that are created using an application's built-in macro features are sometimes called application macros . 
others have proposed alternative uses of macros ,  such as anaphoric macros in macro systems that are unhygienic or allow selective unhygienic transformation . 
macros are normally used to map a short string  -lrb-  macro invocation  -rrb-  to a longer sequence of instructions . 
in 1963, timothy hart proposed adding macros to lisp 1.5 in ai memo 57: macro definitions for lisp . 
an anaphoric macro is a type of programming macro that deliberately captures some form supplied to the macro which may be referred to by an anaphor  -lrb-  an expression referring to another  -rrb-  . 
for example ,  the racket language extends the notion of a macro system to a syntactic tower ,  where macros can be written in languages including macros ,  using hygiene to ensure that syntactic layers are distinct and allowing modules to export macros to other modules . 
while `` macro instructions '' can be defined by a programmer for any set of native assembler program instructions ,  typically macros are associated with macro libraries delivered with the operating system allowing access to operating system functions such as
in the mid-eighties ,  a number of papers introduced the notion of hygienic macro expansion  -lrb-  codice_3 -rrb- ,  a pattern-based system where the syntactic environments of the macro definition and the macro use are distinct ,  allowing macro definers and users not to worry about inadvertent variable capture  -lrb-  cf . 
as a simple example ,  in the c programming language ,  this is a typical macro that is `` not '' a parameterized macro: this causes the string `` pi '' to be replaced with `` 3.14159 '' wherever it occurs . 
magical acts and witchcraft had long been forbidden by the church ,  whose attitude towards witchcraft was explained in the `` canon episcopi '' written in about ad 900.
ankarloo and clark claim that kramer's purpose in writing the book was to explain his own views on witchcraft ,  systematically refute arguments claiming that witchcraft did not exist ,  discredit those who expressed skepticism about its reality ,  claim that those who practised witchcraft were more often women than men ,  and to convince magistrates to use kramer's recommended procedures for finding and convicting witches . 
it was later used by royal courts during the renaissance ,  and contributed to the increasingly brutal prosecution of witchcraft during the 16th and 17th centuries . 
some scholars have suggested that following the failed efforts in tyrol ,  kramer requested explicit authority from the pope to prosecute witchcraft . 
before 1400 it was rare for anyone to be persecuted for witchcraft ,  but the increasingly common persecution of heresy and failure to fully defeat those heretics paved the way for later criminal prosecution of witchcraft . 
patinkin later dropped out of the role . 
patinkin has been involved in a variety of jewish causes and cultural activities . 
in 1994, patinkin took the role of dr .  jeffrey geiger on cbs's `` chicago hope '' for which he won an emmy award . 
on june 15, 1980, patinkin married actress and writer kathryn grody . 
mandel bruce `` mandy '' patinkin  -lrb-  ; born november 30, 1952 -rrb- is an american actor and singer . 
gideon was later officially killed off ,  ending all chances of a guest appearance by patinkin on the show . 
patinkin is well known for his portrayal of inigo montoya in the 1987 movie `` the princess bride . `` 
patinkin suffered from keratoconus ,  a degenerative eye condition ,  in the mid-1990s . 
he also released two solo albums ,  titled `` mandy patinkin ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- and `` dress casual ''  -lrb-  1990 -rrb- . 
patinkin's cousins include mark patinkin ,  an author and nationally syndicated columnist for `` the providence journal ''; sheldon patinkin of columbia college chicago's theater department ,  a founder of the second city; and bonnie miller rubin ,  a `` chicago tribune '' reporter . 
smith was born and brought up in chiswick . 
smith and jones were reunited in 2005 for a review/revival of their earlier television series in `` the smith and jones sketchbook '' . 
on the morning of 19 july 2013, the london ambulance service was called to smith's home in north-west london . 
in autumn 2006, smith starred opposite belinda lang in a tour of a new comedy `` an hour and a half late '' by french playwright gérald sibleyras ,  which was adapted by smith . 
melvin kenneth smith  -lrb-  3 december 1952 – 19 july 2013 -rrb- was an english comedian ,  writer ,  film director ,  producer ,  and actor . 
smith was married to pamela  -lrb-  née gay-rees  -rrb-  ,  a former model who grew up in easington and durham . 
the term is less used of areas further east ,  and not at all beyond eurasia and north africa . 
in the new world ,  neither term is used  -lrb-  except provisionally in the arctic  -rrb-  . 
in north-eastern europe ,  the hunting and fishing lifestyle continued into the medieval period in regions less suited to agriculture ,  and in scandinavia no mesolithic period may be accepted ,  with the locally preferred `` older stone age '' moving into the `` younger stone age '' . 
while paleolithic and neolithic have been found useful terms and concepts in the archaeology of china ,  and can be mostly regarded as happily naturalized ,  mesolithic was introduced later ,  mostly after 1945, and does not appear to be a necessary or useful term in the context of china . 
in old world archaeology ,  mesolithic  -lrb-  greek: μέσος ,  `` mesos '' `` middle ''; λίθος ,  `` lithos '' `` stone ''  -rrb-  is the period between  the upper paleolithic and the neolithic . 
both are dated to before c .  9,000 bp  -lrb-  the 8th millennium bc  -rrb-  . 
robinson was inaugurated as the seventh president of ireland on 3 december 1990.
robinson was a member of the european members of the trilateral commission . 
robinson was the first high commissioner for human rights to visit tibet ,  making her trip in 1998.
on 24 july 1997, robinson announced her intention to resign as president of ireland . 
robinson is chairman of the institute for human rights and business and chancellor of the university of dublin . 
under continuing pressure from the u . s .  ,  robinson resigned her post in september 2002.
robinson is the twenty fourth ,  and first female ,  chancellor of university of dublin  -lrb-  i . e . 
the possibility of transfers increased robinson's chances if only lenihan could be further weakened . 
nelson mandela and graca machel also congratulated robinson on her acceptance of the award . 
the head start that robinson attained in the nomination process ,  and the fact that the fine gael candidate was from northern ireland ,  resulted in robinson attaining second place in the polls . 
over the course of her career ,  robinson has been awarded with numerous honors ,  including the following:
robinson also received the backing of the irish times newspaper ,  and this proved hugely advantageous . 
robinson's role was to set the human rights agenda within the organisation and internationally ,  refocusing its appeal . 
browne's comments matched the attitudes of irish people on robinson's achievements as president ,  between 1990 and 1997.
coincidentally ,  just as mary mcaleese replaced mary robinson as reid professor of law in trinity ,  and would succeed her to the irish presidency ,  so robinson replaced mcaleese in the campaign for homosexual law reform . 
robinson now became president ,  the first woman to hold the office ,  and the first candidate to be second on first preference votes to win the presidency . 
robinson's campaign was boosted by a lack of organisation in fine gael ,  the official opposition party . 
in september 2012, robinson's memoir `` everybody matters '' was published with hodder & stoughton . 
women who did not wear the headscarf were criticized ,  and robinson said that it `` played into the hands of religious conservatives . `` 
robinson's early political career included election to dublin city council in 1979, where she served until 1983.
robinson became the first labour party candidate ,  the first woman and the first non-fianna fáil candidate in the history of contested presidential elections to win the presidency . 
robinson initially served in the irish upper house as an independent senator ,  but in the mid-1970s ,  she joined the labour party . 
robinson remained in the seanad for four more years ,  although at this point many of the issues she had campaigned for had been tackled . 
the council of women world leaders ,  the champalimaud foundation ,  and the imaginenations group welcomed the presentation of the medal of freedom to robinson . 
third ,  musicals often use various genres of popular music or at least popular singing and musical styles . 
 ''the belle of new york ''  -lrb-  1898 -rrb- became the first american musical to run for over a year in london . 
some television shows have set episodes as a musical . 
there is no fixed length for a musical . 
musicals are performed around the world . 
in france ,  `` comédie musicale '' was written between in the early decades of the century for such stars as yvonne printemps . 
the made-for-tv musical `` high school musical ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- ,  and its several sequels ,  enjoyed particular success and were adapted for stage musicals and other media . 
several shorter musicals on broadway and in the west end have been presented in one act in recent decades . 
in 2013, nbc began a series of live television broadcasts of musicals with `` the sound of music live ! `` 
at the same time ,  stephen sondheim found success with some of his musicals ,  as mentioned above . 
in practice ,  it is often difficult to distinguish among the various kinds of musical theatre ,  including `` musical play '' ,  `` musical comedy '' ,  `` operetta '' and `` light opera '' . 
made for tv musical films were popular in the 1990s ,  such as `` gypsy ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  `` cinderella ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- and `` annie ''  -lrb-  1999 -rrb- . 
broadway audiences welcomed musicals that varied from the golden age style and substance . 
other musical theatre forms developed in england by the 19th century ,  such as music hall ,  melodrama and burletta ,  which were popularized partly because most london theatres were licensed only as music halls and not allowed to present plays without music . 
the most successful new york shows were often followed by extensive national tours . 
together with its extremely successful 1965 film version ,  it has become one of the most popular musicals in history . 
since the early 20th century ,  musical theatre stage works have generally been called ,  simply ,  musicals . 
adaptations of the french operettas  -lrb-  played in mostly bad ,  risqué translations  -rrb-  ,  musical burlesques ,  music hall ,  pantomime and burletta dominated the london musical stage into the 1870s . 
rock music would be used in several broadway musicals ,  beginning with `` hair '' ,  which featured not only rock music but also nudity and controversial opinions about the vietnam war ,  race relations and other social issues . 
the longest-running piece of musical theatre of the 1930s was `` hellzapoppin ''  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- ,  a revue with audience participation ,  which played for 1,404 performances ,  setting a new broadway record . 
the 1980s saw the influence of european `` mega-musicals '' ,  or `` pop operas '' ,  on broadway ,  in the west end and elsewhere . 
while some critics have argued that some of sondheim's musicals lack commercial appeal ,  others have praised their lyrical sophistication and musical complexity ,  as well as the interplay of lyrics and music in his shows . 
india has ,  since the 20th century ,  produced numerous musical films ,  referred to as `` bollywood '' musicals ,  and in japan a series of musicals based on popular anime and manga comics has developed in recent decades . 
in asia ,  india continues to produce numerous `` bollywood '' film musicals ,  and japan produces `` anime '' and `` manga '' film musicals . 
new york runs continued to lag far behind those in london ,  but laura keene's `` musical burletta '' `` seven sisters ''  -lrb-  1860 -rrb- shattered previous new york records with a run of 253 performances . 
moments of greatest dramatic intensity in a book musical are often performed in song . 
this explanation unified the motion of celestial bodies and motion of objects on earth . 
in physics ,  motion is a change in position of an object over time . 
uniform motion: when an object moves with a constant speed at a particular direction at regular intervals of time it's known as the `` uniform motion . `` 
as there is no absolute frame of reference ,  `` absolute motion '' cannot be determined . 
in the law of torts ,  malpractice ,  also known as professional negligence ,  is an `` instance of negligence or incompetence on the part of a professional '' . 
the term `` mediation '' broadly refers to any instance in which a third party helps others reach agreement . 
mediation is a dynamic ,  structured ,  interactive process where a neutral third party assists disputing parties in resolving conflict through the use of specialized communication and negotiation techniques . 
mediation ,  as used in law ,  is a form of alternative dispute resolution  -lrb-  adr  -rrb-  ,  a way of resolving disputes between two or more parties with concrete effects . 
new york has three classes of misdemeanor: a ,  b ,  and unclassified . 
in the united states ,  when a statute does not specify the class of a misdemeanor ,  it may be referred to as an `` unclassified misdemeanor '' . 
in new york law ,  a class a misdemeanor carries a maximum sentence of one year of imprisonment ,  while a class b misdemeanor `` shall not exceed three months '' . 
many misdemeanors are punished with monetary fines . 
depending on the jurisdiction ,  several classes of misdemeanors may exist; the forms of punishment can vary widely between those classes . 
a misdemeanor is considered a crime of low seriousness ,  and a felony one of high seriousness . 
from his early life ,  freeman has two extramarital children; one of them is alfonso freeman . 
in 2017, he hosted `` the story of us with morgan freeman '' . 
freeman made his directorial debut in 1993 with `` bopha ! `` 
morgan freeman was born on june 1, 1937 in memphis ,  tennessee . 
in september 2018, sag confirmed that freeman could retain his award . 
freeman later said that his experience working on `` the story of god with morgan freeman '' did not change his views on religion . 
freeman lives in charleston ,  mississippi ,  and new york city . 
freeman and colley-lee adopted freeman's stepgranddaughter from his first marriage ,  e'dena hines ,  and raised her together . 
in 2010, freeman co-starred alongside bruce willis in `` red '' . 
when freeman was 16 years old ,  he almost died of pneumonia . 
morgan freeman  -lrb-  born june 1, 1937 -rrb- is an american actor ,  producer ,  and narrator . 
at age 65, freeman earned a private pilot's license . 
morgan freeman has been nominated for an academy award `` and '' the golden globe award five different times ,  each time for the same film for each award . 
in a 2012 interview with thewrap ,  freeman was asked if he considered himself atheist or agnostic . 
the park is part of mississippi state university and freeman has several horses that he takes there . 
any model which is not pure white-box contains some parameters that can be used to fit the model to the system it is intended to describe . 
in general ,  model complexity involves a trade-off between simplicity and accuracy of the model . 
mathematical models can take many forms ,  including dynamical systems ,  statistical models ,  differential equations ,  or game theoretic models . 
assessing the scope of a model ,  that is ,  determining what situations the model is applicable to ,  can be less straightforward . 
for example ,  when modeling the flight of an aircraft ,  we could embed each mechanical part of the aircraft into our model and would thus acquire an almost white-box model of the system . 
a crucial part of the modeling process is the evaluation of whether or not a given mathematical model describes a system accurately . 
these parameters have to be estimated through some means before one can use the model . 
often when engineers analyze a system to be controlled or optimized ,  they use a mathematical model . 
a mathematical model is a description of a system using mathematical concepts and language . 
usually the easiest part of model evaluation is checking whether a model fits experimental measurements or other empirical data . 
if the model was constructed based on a set of data ,  one must determine for which systems or situations the known data is a `` typical '' set of data . 
mathematical modeling problems are often classified into black box or white box models ,  according to how much a priori information on the system is available . 
it is common to use idealized models in physics to simplify things . 
this member of the fujiwara clan was the son of fujiwara no nagara ,  who was one of the brothers of fujiwara no yoshifusa . 
he was born the third son of fujiwara no nagara ,  but was adopted by his powerful uncle fujiwara no yoshifusa ,  who had no sons . 
shōshi was the mother of two princes who became emperors: emperor go-ichijō and emperor go-suzaku . 
michinaga's other daughters ,  kenshi and ishi ,  followed similar fates to shōshi and further ensured michinaga's power over the court . 
a power struggle between korechika and michinaga continued until teishi's unexpected death in 1001, which sealed michinaga's power since shōshi became the only empress after teishi's death . 
michinaga and sanjō's opinions often varied . 
though ichijō already had an empress ,  a daughter of michitaka ,  he claimed there were two types of empresshood and therefore it was legal for an emperor to have two empresses at the same time . 
michinaga exercised such powers even after he formally retired from public life in 1019.
lesser poland voivodeship or lesser poland province  -lrb-  in   -rrb-  ,  also known as `` małopolska voivodeship '' or `` małopolska province '' ,  is a voivodeship  -lrb-  province  -rrb-  ,  in southern poland . 
błędów desert ,  the only desert in poland ,  is located in lesser poland ,  where temperatures can often reach up to 38 °c  -lrb-  100.4 °f  -rrb-  in the summer . 
located in southern poland ,  lesser poland is the warmest place in poland with average summer temperatures between 23 °c  -lrb-  73.4 °f  -rrb-  and 30 °c  -lrb-  86 °f  -rrb-  during the day ,  often reaching 32 °c  -lrb-  89.6 °f  -rrb-  to 38 °c  -lrb-  100.4 °f  -rrb-  in july and august ,  the two warmest months of the year . 
almost all of lesser poland lies in the vistula river catchment area . 
protected areas in lesser poland voivodeship include six national parks and 11 landscape parks . 
the fourth period spans 730–760 and includes the work of the last great poet of this collection ,  the compiler ōtomo no yakamochi himself ,  who not only wrote many original poems but also edited ,  updated and refashioned an unknown number of ancient poems . 
the `` man'yōshū '' is widely regarded as being a particularly unique japanese work . 
in addition to its artistic merits the `` man'yōshū '' is important for using one of the earliest japanese writing systems ,  the cumbersome `` man'yōgana '' . 
more than 150 species of grasses and trees are mentioned in approximately 1,500 entries of `` man'yōshū '' . 
mieszko ii was very well educated for the period . 
in 1013 mieszko ii went to magdeburg ,  where he paid homage to the emperor henry ii . 
in the year 1014 mieszko ii was sent by his father to bohemia as an emissary . 
after mieszko ii's death ,  poland's peasants revolted in a `` pagan reaction . `` 
mieszko ii died suddenly between 10 and 11 may 1034, probably in poznań . 
in 1030 mieszko ii secured an alliance with hungary and once again invaded saxony . 
mieszko ii lambert  -lrb-  ; c .  990 – 10/11 may 1034 -rrb- was king of poland from 1025–1031, and duke from 1032 until his death . 
a year later ,  mieszko ii stood at the head of polish troops in the next war against the emperor . 
according to some chroniclers ,  mieszko ii expelled his two brothers from the country . 
mieszko ii regained the full power ,  but he still had to fight against the nobility and his own subjects . 
in response ,  the emperor organized another expedition against the polish king ,  this time by organizing a coalition against mieszko ii . 
since mieszko ii was politically active before his father's death ,  bolesław i appointed him as his successor . 
the new duke bezprym probably made bloody persecutions against the followers of mieszko ii . 
this war was probably prompted by family connections of mieszko's in germany who opposed emperor conrad ii . 
mieszko i  -lrb-  ; – 25 may 992 -rrb- was the ruler of the polans from about 960 until his death . 
the first christian ruler of territories later called poland ,  mieszko i is considered the creator of the polish state . 
maggieknockater  -lrb-  `` magh an fhucadair '' in scottish gaelic  -rrb-  is a hamlet on the a95 road between craigellachie and mulben in scotland in the moray council area ,  in the former county of banffshire . 
less than two miles heading east along the a95 from maggieknockater is the site for moray's most demanding mountain biking trails ,  `` the moray monster trails '' . 
mary's claim to the english throne was a perennial sticking point between her and elizabeth i . 
english statesmen william cecil and the earl of leicester had worked to obtain darnley's licence to travel to scotland from his home in england . 
mary apparently expected elizabeth to help her regain her throne . 
in scotland ,  her supporters fought a civil war against regent moray and his successors . 
king henry viii of england took the opportunity of the regency to propose marriage between mary and his own son and heir ,  edward ,  hoping for a union of scotland and england . 
the french king ,  henry ii ,  proposed to unite france and scotland by marrying the young queen to his three-year-old son ,  the dauphin francis . 
the union infuriated elizabeth ,  who felt the marriage should not have gone ahead without her permission ,  as darnley was both her cousin and an english subject . 
mary sent william maitland of lethington as an ambassador to the english court to put the case for mary as the heir presumptive to the english throne . 
mary's request to be buried in france was refused by elizabeth . 
in november 1558, henry viii's elder daughter ,  mary i of england ,  was succeeded by her only surviving sibling ,  elizabeth i . 
as mary was an infant when she inherited the throne ,  scotland was ruled by regents until she became an adult . 
she joined with lord moray in the destruction of scotland's leading catholic magnate ,  lord huntly ,  in 1562 after he led a rebellion in the highlands against her . 
mary ,  queen of scots  -lrb-  8 december 1542 – 8 february 1587 -rrb- ,  also known as mary stuart or mary i of scotland ,  reigned over scotland from 14 december 1542 to 24 july 1567.
four years later ,  she married her first cousin ,  henry stuart ,  lord darnley and in june 1566 they had a son ,  james . 
on 3 february ,  ten members of the privy council of england ,  having been summoned by cecil without elizabeth's knowledge ,  decided to carry out the sentence at once . 
mary was born on 8 december 1542 at linlithgow palace ,  scotland ,  to king james v and his french second wife ,  mary of guise . 
in late 1561 and early 1562, arrangements were made for the two queens to meet in england at york or nottingham in august or september 1562, but elizabeth sent sir henry sidney to cancel in july because of the civil war in france . 
in may 1544, the english earl of hertford  -lrb-  later duke of somerset  -rrb-  raided edinburgh ,  and the scots took mary to dunkeld for safety . 
twenty days later ,  she married the dauphin at notre dame de paris ,  and he became king consort of scotland . 
in scotland ,  the power of the protestant lords of the congregation was rising at the expense of mary's mother ,  who maintained effective control only through the use of french troops . 
on duncan's death ,  macbeth became king . 
macbeth's stepson lulach was installed as king soon after . 
macbeth's full name in medieval gaelic was ' . 
some sources make macbeth a grandson of king malcolm ii and thus a cousin to duncan i ,  whom he succeeded . 
after the defeat of crínán ,  macbeth was evidently unchallenged . 
in 1040, duncan i launched an attack into moray and was killed in action by macbeth's troops . 
when cnut the great came north in 1031 to accept the submission of king malcolm ii ,  macbeth too submitted to him: malcolm ii's grandson duncan  -lrb-  donnchad mac crínáin  -rrb-  ,  later king duncan i ,  was acclaimed as king of alba on 30 november 1034, apparently without opposition . 
in modern times ,  dorothy dunnett's novel `` king hereafter '' aims to portray a historical macbeth ,  but proposes that macbeth and his rival and sometime ally thorfinn of orkney are one and the same  -lrb-  thorfinn is his birth name and macbeth his baptismal name  -rrb-  . 
macbeth  -lrb-  medieval gaelic: `` mac bethad mac findlaích ''; modern gaelic: `` macbheatha mac fhionnlaigh ''; nicknamed ``  '' ,  `` the red king ''; – 15 august 1057 -rrb- was king of scots from 1040 until his death . 
millbridge is a small neighbourhood of plymouth ,  on the boundary of what used to be the towns of plymouth and devonport ,  in the english county of devon . 
ml uses static scoping rules . 
the following examples use the syntax of standard ml . 
today there are several languages in the ml family; the three most prominent are standard ml  -lrb-  sml  -rrb-  ,  ocaml and f# . 
these objects are still known by their `` messier number '' from this list . 
the messier objects are a set of 110 astronomical objects ,  of which 103 were included in lists published by french astronomer charles messier in 1771 and 1781.
in addition to the 103 items published by messier ,  seven more are thought to have been observed by messier and have been added to the list by other astronomers over the years . 
mambo arrived in 1947 and mambo music and dance became popular soon . 
prado's recordings were meant for the latin american and u . s .  `` latino '' markets ,  but some of his most celebrated mambos ,  such as `` mambo no . 
perez prado's style differed from the previous mambo concept . 
antonio arcaño described the mambo as follows: `` mambo is a type of syncopated `` montuno '' that possesses the rhythmic charm ,  informality and eloquence of the cuban people . 
on 11 march 1973, argentina held general elections for the first time in ten years . 
the montoneros hoped that perón would return from exile in francoist spain and transform argentina into a `` socialist fatherland '' . 
in argentina ,  left-wing guerrillas arose in response to state terror . 
one of the gunmen who got out of the car shot him dead while he lay on the floor and also shot a woman ,  who screamed out ,  `` murderer . `` 
in the week preceding the military coup ,  the montoneros killed 13 policemen as part of their `` third national military campaign '' and vowed to kill at least 3,000 policemen by decade's end . 
on 26 october 1975, a catholic youth leader ,  juan ignacio isla casares ,  with the help of the montoneros commander eduardo pereira rossi  -lrb-  nom de guerre `` el carlón ''  -rrb-  was the mastermind behind the ambush and killing of five policemen  -lrb-  pedro dettle ,  juan ramón costa ,  carlos livio cejas ,  cleofás galeano and juan fernández  -rrb-  near near san isidro cathedral . 
montoneros  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an argentine leftist urban guerrilla group ,  active during the 1960s and 1970s . 
the montoneros admit 5,000 of their guerrillas were killed . 
while the erp fought the army in tucumán ,  the montoneros were active in buenos aires . 
the montoneros' leadership was keen to learn from the erp's `` compañía de monte ramón rosa jiménez '' operating in the andean province of tucumán . 
the more radically right-wing factions quickly took control of the government; isabel perón ,  president since juan perón's death ,  was essentially a figurehead under the influence of rega . 
on 23 may 1977, the leftist guerrillas in buenos aires killed two police officers and a retired inspector as he entered his home . 
the montoneros formed around 1970 out of a confluence of roman catholic groups ,  university students in social sciences ,  and leftist supporters of juan domingo perón . 
two of the captured policemen were reported to have been executed in this operation under the orders of the montoneros commander eduardo pereyra rossi  -lrb-  nom de guerre carlon  -rrb-  . 
by the time videla's military junta took power in march 1976, approximately five thousand prisoners were being held in various prisons around argentina ,  some with connections and some just guilty by association . 
on 4 january 1977, montoneros guerrillas shot and killed private guillermo félix dimitri of the 10th mechanised infantry brigade in a drive-by shooting while he was on roadblock duty outside the chrysler factory in the san justo suburb of buenos aires . 
in may 1974, perón expelled the montoneros from the justicialist movement . 
in cladistics ,  a monophyletic group ,  or clade ,  is a group of organisms that consists of all the descendants of a common ancestor . 
the features by which a polyphyletic group is differentiated from others are not inherited from a common ancestor . 
that is ,  a paraphyletic group is `` nearly '' monophyletic ,  hence the prefix ``  '' . 
morphine is a pain medication of the opiate family which is found naturally in a number of plants and animals . 
morphine is beneficial in reducing the symptom of shortness of breath due to both cancer and noncancer causes . 
and ,  if the output gear has fewer teeth than the input gear ,  then the gear train `` reduces '' the input torque . 
this shows that if the output gear `` g '' has more teeth than the input gear `` g '' ,  then the gear train `` amplifies '' the input torque . 
the mechanical advantage of a pair of meshing gears for which the input gear has `` n '' teeth and the output gear has `` n '' teeth is given by
in this case ,  because the output gear must have more teeth than the input gear ,  the speed reducer will amplify the input torque . 
therefore where `` n '' is the number of teeth on the input sprocket and `` n '' is the number of teeth on the output sprocket . 
the velocity `` v '' of the point of contact on the pitch circles is the same on both gears ,  and is given by  where input gear `` a '' has radius `` r '' and meshes with output gear `` b '' of radius `` r ,  therefore ,  where `` n '' is the number of teeth on the input gear and `` n '' is the number of teeth on the output gear . 
thanjavur marathi ,  namadeva shimpi marathi ,  arey marathi and bhavsar marathi are some of the dialects of marathi spoken by many descendants of maharashtrians who migrated to the southern india . 
marathi was widely used during the sultanate period . 
marathi  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is an indo-aryan language spoken predominantly by around 83 million marathi people of maharashtra ,  india . 
both events are very popular among marathi speakers . 
an chart of all contrastive sounds in marathi is provided below . 
indic scholars distinguish 42 dialects of spoken marathi . 
the oldest book in prose form in marathi ,  `` vivēkasindhu ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was written by mukundaraja ,  a nath yogi and arch-poet of marathi . 
marathi is also spoken by maharashtrian migrants to other parts of india and overseas . 
koli ,  malvani konkani has been heavily influenced by marathi varieties . 
the phoneme inventory of marathi is similar to that of many other indo-aryan languages . 
standard marathi is based on dialects used by academics and the print media . 
adilshahi of bijapur also used marathi for administration and record keeping . 
his contemporary ,  namdev composed verses or abhang in marathi as well as hindi . 
however ,  there is no record of any actual literature produced in marathi until the late 13th century . 
there are two more vowels in marathi to denote the pronunciations of english words such as of `` a '' in `` act '' and `` a '' in `` all '' . 
the devanagari alphabet used to write marathi is slightly different from the devanagari alphabets of hindi and other languages: there are a couple of additional letters in the marathi alphabet ,  and western punctuation is used . 
the west german government declared that its hunt for bormann was over in 1971.
bormann's power and effective reach broadened considerably during the war . 
while hitler was in residence at the berghof ,  bormann was constantly in attendance and acted as hitler's personal secretary . 
george mosse wrote of bormann's beliefs: however ,  richard overy describes bormann as an atheist . 
hitler seldom used the building ,  but bormann liked to impress guests by taking them there . 
theodor died when bormann was three ,  and his mother soon remarried . 
bormann returned with hitler to the `` führerbunker '' in berlin on 16 january 1945 as the red army approached the city . 
during the chaotic days after the war ,  contradictory reports arose as to bormann's whereabouts . 
bormann was one of the leading proponents of the ongoing persecution of the christian churches . 
in 1927, bormann joined the national socialist german workers party  -lrb-  nazi party; nsdap  -rrb-  . 
bormann returned to his job at mecklenburg and remained there until may 1926, when he moved in with his mother in oberweimar . 
bormann's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered in the baltic sea on 16 august 1999.
bormann also had a series of mistresses ,  including manja behrens ,  an actress . 
hitler decided to deal with the issue when the war was over . 
sweeney was aged 35 when she was killed . 
at the national 9/11 memorial ,  sweeney is memorialized at the north pool ,  on panel n-74.
madeline amy sweeney  -lrb-  december 14, 1965 – september 11, 2001 -rrb- ,  known as amy sweeney ,  was an american flight attendant killed on board american airlines flight 11 during the september 11 attacks . 
they are formed by the polymerization of a dimer of two globular proteins ,  alpha and beta tubulin . 
some cell types ,  such as plant cells ,  do not contain well defined mtocs . 
nucleation is the event that initiates the formation of microtubules from the tubulin dimer . 
however ,  in most microtubules there is a seam in which tubulin subunits interact α-β . 
tubulin and microtubule-mediated processes ,  like cell locomotion ,  were seen by early microscopists ,  like leeuwenhoek  -lrb-  1677 -rrb- . 
the centrosome is the primary mtoc of most cell types . 
while microtubule elongation can occur at both the  -lrb-  +  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  -  -rrb-  ends ,  it is significantly more rapid at the  -lrb-  +  -rrb-  end . 
microtubules are part of a structural network  -lrb-  the cytoskeleton  -rrb-  within the cell's cytoplasm . 
some of the contexts in which the term `` militia '' is used include:
militia are often limited by local civilian laws to serve only in their home region ,  and to serve only for a limited time; this further reduces their use in long military campaigns . 
when a labeled packet is received by an mpls router ,  the topmost label is examined . 
routers in between ,  which need only swap labels ,  are called transit routers or label switch routers  -lrb-  lsrs  -rrb-  . 
it is responsible for switching the labels used to route packets . 
labels are distributed between lers and lsrs using the label distribution protocol  -lrb-  ldp  -rrb-  . 
the old label is then removed from the header and replaced with the new label before the packet is routed forward . 
an mpls router that performs routing based only on the label is called a label switch router  -lrb-  lsr  -rrb-  or transit router . 
at the egress router ,  when the last label has been popped ,  only the payload remains . 
in the label distribution protocols ,  this php label pop action is advertised as label value 3 « implicit-null»  -lrb-  which is never found in a label ,  since it means that the label is to be popped  -rrb-  . 
the path begins at a label edge router  -lrb-  ler  -rrb-  ,  which makes a decision on which label to prefix to a packet ,  based on the appropriate fec . 
when an lsr receives a packet ,  it uses the label included in the packet header as an index to determine the next hop on the label-switched path  -lrb-  lsp  -rrb-  and a corresponding label for the packet from a lookup table . 
when forwarding an ip datagram into the mpls domain ,  an ler uses routing information to determine the appropriate label to be affixed ,  labels the packet accordingly ,  and then forwards the labeled packet into the mpls domain . 
these mpls-labeled packets are switched after a label lookup/switch instead of a lookup into the ip table . 
the packet is then passed on to the next hop router for this tunnel . 
during these operations ,  the contents of the packet below the mpls label stack are not examined . 
mpls ,  on the other hand ,  simply adds a label to the head of each packet and transmits it on the network . 
mpls works by prefixing packets with an mpls header ,  containing one or more labels . 
multiprotocol label switching belongs to the family of packet-switched networks . 
likewise ,  upon receiving a labeled packet which is destined to exit the mpls domain ,  the ler strips off the label and forwards the resulting ip packet using normal ip forwarding rules . 
the router which first prefixes the mpls header to a packet is called an ingress router . 
mpls can make use of existing atm network or frame relay infrastructure ,  as its labeled flows can be mapped to atm or frame relay virtual-circuit identifiers ,  and vice versa . 
a message transfer agent receives mail from either another mta ,  a mail submission agent  -lrb-  msa  -rrb-  ,  or a mail user agent  -lrb-  mua  -rrb-  . 
within the internet email system ,  a message transfer agent or mail transfer agent  -lrb-  mta  -rrb-  or mail relay is software that transfers electronic mail messages from one computer to another using smtp . 
an mta works in the background ,  while the user usually interacts directly with a mail user agent . 
the southern part of balochistan is called `` kech makran '' on pakistani side and makran on the iranian side which is also the name of a former iranian province . 
makran  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a semi-desert coastal strip in balochistan ,  in pakistan and iran ,  along the coast of the gulf of oman . 
makran remained part of the umayyad and abbasid caliphate ,  and was also ruled by muslim turks ,  persian . 
in response to caliph umar’s questions about the makran region ,  the messenger from makkuran who brought the news of the victory told him:
there is only one island off the coast of makran ,  astola island ,  near pasni although there are several small islets . 
the first islamic conquest of makran took place during the rashidun caliphate in the year 643 a . d .  caliph umar’s governor of bahrain ,  usman ibn abu al-aas ,  who was on a campaign to conquer the southern coastal areas beyond sassanid ,  sent his brother hakam ibn abu al-aas to raid and reconnoitre the makran region . 
the longest human chromosome is approximately 10 μm in length . 
