however ,  if plato was not named after an ancestor named plato  -lrb-  there is no record of one  -rrb-  ,  then the origin of his renaming as `` plato '' becomes a conundrum . 
a variety of sources have given accounts of plato's death . 
thus ,  nails dates plato's birth to 424/423.
plato never speaks in his own voice in his dialogues . 
because these doctrines are not spoken directly by plato and vary between dialogues ,  they cannot be straightforwardly assumed as representing plato's own views . 
for a long time ,  plato's unwritten doctrine had been controversial . 
plato ,  in general ,  distinguished between three types of myth . 
according to tertullian ,  plato simply died in his sleep . 
plato's writings have been published in several fashions; this has led to several conventions regarding the naming and referencing of plato's texts . 
george karamanolis notes thatnumenius accepted both pythagoras and plato as the two authorities one should follow in philosophy ,  but he regarded plato's authority as subordinate to that of pythagoras ,  whom he considered to be the source of all true philosophy—including plato's own . 
plato may have traveled in italy ,  sicily ,  egypt and cyrene . 
their account is in full agreement with aristotle's description of plato's metaphysical doctrine . 
it is possible that plato and socrates took part in the eleusinian mysteries . 
plato was the innovator of the written dialogue and dialectic forms in philosophy . 
ambrose believed that plato met jeremiah in egypt and was influenced by his ideas . 
the usual system for making unique references to sections of the text by plato derives from a 16th-century edition of plato's works by henricus stephanus . 
some of plato's most famous doctrines are contained in the `` republic '' as well as in the `` laws '' and the `` statesman '' . 
it is generally agreed that the main purpose for plato in using myths was didactic . 
due to a lack of surviving accounts ,  little is known about plato's early life and education . 
in the dialogues of plato ,  though socrates sometimes seems to support a mystical side ,  discussing reincarnation and the mystery religions ,  this is generally attributed to plato . 
although socrates influenced plato directly as related in the dialogues ,  the influence of pythagoras upon plato also appears to have significant discussion in the philosophical literature . 
the precise relationship between plato and socrates remains an area of contention among scholars . 
these ideas about change and permanence ,  or becoming and being ,  influenced plato in formulating his `` theory of forms '' . 
throughout his later life ,  plato became entangled with the politics of the city of syracuse . 
ariston appears to have died in plato's childhood ,  although the precise dating of his death is difficult . 
a set formula_1 with outcomes formula_2  -lrb-  i . e . 
if the sample space is unordered ,  it becomes  . 
formula_3 -rrb- must meet some conditions in order to be a sample space:
for instance ,  in the trial of tossing a coin ,  we could have as a sample space formula_10, where formula_11 stands for `` heads '' and formula_12 for `` tails '' . 
in probability theory ,  an elementary event  -lrb-  also called an atomic event or simple event  -rrb-  is an event which contains only a single outcome in the sample space . 
typically ,  when the sample space is finite ,  any subset of the sample space is an event  -lrb-  `` i '' . `` e '' . 
so ,  when defining a probability space it is possible ,  and often necessary ,  to exclude certain subsets of the sample space from being events  -lrb-  see `` events in probabiliity spaces '' ,  below  -rrb-  . 
in the general measure-theoretic description of probability spaces ,  an event may be defined as an element of a selected σ-algebra of subsets of the sample space . 
pig latin is mainly used in fun . 
an 1866 article describes a `` hog latin '' that has some similarities to current pig latin . 
early mentions of pig latin or hog latin describe what we would today call dog latin ,  a type of parody latin . 
the finnish pig latin is called kontinkieli  -lrb-  `` container language ''  -rrb-  . 
two pig latin words that have entered into mainstream american english are ``  '' or `` icksnay '' ,  the pig latin version of ``  ''  -lrb-  itself a borrowing of german `` nichts ''  -rrb-  ,  which is used as a general negative; and ``  '' ,  pig latin for ``  '' ,  meaning `` go away '' or `` get out of here '' . 
it was something like the well-known 'pig latin' that all sorts of children like to play with . `` 
a 1947 newspaper question and answer column describes the pig latin as we understand it today . 
the precursor to modern polish is the old polish language . 
in the united states ,  polish americans number more than 11 million but most of them cannot speak polish fluently . 
there are significant numbers of polish speakers among polish emigrants and their descendants in many other countries . 
in canada ,  there is a significant polish canadian population: there are 242,885 speakers of polish according to the 2006 census ,  with a particular concentration in toronto  -lrb-  91,810 speakers  -rrb-  and montreal . 
the geographical distribution of the polish language was greatly affected by the territorial changes of poland immediately after world war ii and polish population transfers  -lrb-  1944–46 -rrb- . 
pulp magazines  -lrb-  often referred to as `` the pulps ''  -rrb-  were inexpensive fiction magazines that were published from 1896 to the 1950s . 
the pulps gave rise to the term pulp fiction in reference to run-of-the-mill ,  low-quality literature . 
popular pulp characters that headlined in their own magazines: popular pulp characters who appeared in anthology titles such as `` all-story '' or `` weird tales '': pulp covers were printed in color on higher-quality  -lrb-  slick  -rrb-  paper . 
in the 1950s ,  men's adventure magazines began to replace the pulp . 
the collapse of the pulp industry changed the landscape of publishing because pulps were the single largest sales outlet for short stories . 
during the second world war paper shortages had a serious impact on pulp production ,  starting a steady rise in costs and the decline of the pulps . 
the german fantasy magazine `` der orchideengarten '' had a similar format to american pulp magazines ,  in that it was printed on rough pulp paper and heavily illustrated . 
the first `` pulp '' was frank munsey's revamped `` argosy '' magazine of 1896, with about 135,000 words  -lrb-  192 pages  -rrb-  per issue ,  on pulp paper with untrimmed edges ,  and no illustrations ,  even on the cover . 
the two words 'pressure' and 'pleasure' can serve as a near minimal pair . 
a pair of words like `` kátur '' and `` gátur ''  -lrb-  above  -rrb-  that differ only in one phone is called a minimal pair for the two alternative phones in question  -lrb-  in this case ,  and   -rrb-  . 
a phoneme  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the units of sound  -lrb-  or gesture in the case of sign languages ,  see chereme  -rrb-  that distinguish one word from another in a particular language . 
and would be considered the same  -rrb-  . 
a minimal pair may exist in the signed language if the basic sign stays the same but one of these parameters changes . 
however ,  the absence of minimal pairs for a given pair of phones does not always mean that they belong to the same phoneme: they may be too dissimilar phonetically for it to be likely that speakers perceive them as the same sound . 
 ''phonemic stress '' is encountered in languages such as english . 
the term `` phonème ''  -lrb-  from ancient greek φώνημα `` phōnēma '' ,  `` sound made ,  utterance ,  thing spoken ,  speech ,  language ''  -rrb-  was reportedly first used by a .  dufriche-desgenettes in 1873, but it referred only to a speech sound . 
thus ,  pʰ and p are two distinct phones but not distinct phonemes in english . 
in phonetics and linguistics ,  a phone is any distinct speech sound or gesture ,  regardless of whether the exact sound is critical to the meanings of words . 
for example ,  the english words `` kid '' and `` kit '' end with two distinct phonemes ,  and swapping one for the other would change the word's meaning . 
for example ,  the english word `` spin '' consists of four phones ,  s ,  p ,  ɪ and n ,  and the word thus has the phonetic representation spɪn . 
as in the case of lemurs ,  the origin of new world monkeys is unclear . 
common names for the simians are the  -lrb-  old world  -rrb-  baboons ,  macaques ,  gibbons ,  and great apes; and the  -lrb-  new world  -rrb-  capuchins ,  howlers and squirrel monkeys . 
sexual dimorphism is often exhibited in simians ,  though to a greater degree in old world species  -lrb-  apes and some monkeys  -rrb-  than new world species . 
 ,  there is no consensus as to which methodology will rule ,  whether to accept traditional  -lrb-  that is ,  common  -rrb-  ,  but paraphyletic ,  names or to use monophyletic names only; or to use 'new' common names or adaptations of old ones . 
omomyids perished about 30 mya ,  while adapiforms survived until about 10 mya . 
the cladogram below shows one possible classification sequence of the living primates: groups that use common  -lrb-  traditional  -rrb-  names are shown on the right . 
the english name `` primates '' is derived from old french or french `` primat '' ,  from a noun use of latin `` primat- '' ,  from `` primus ''  -lrb-  `` prime ,  first rank ''  -rrb-  . 
molecular and fossil studies generally show that modern humans originated in africa 100,000–200,000 years ago . 
in contrast with clark's methodology ,  modern classifications typically identify  -lrb-  or name  -rrb-  only those groupings that are monophyletic; that is ,  such a named group includes `` all '' the descendants of the group's common ancestor . 
color vision in strepsirrhines is not as well understood; however ,  research indicates a range of color vision similar to that found in platyrrhines . 
order primates is part of the clade euarchontoglires ,  which is nested within the clade eutheria of class mammalia . 
according to our current understanding of the evolutionary history of the primates ,  several of these groups are paraphyletic: a paraphyletic group is one which does `` not '' include all the descendants of the group's common ancestor . 
it is very often said that politics is about power . 
in the american civil war ,  the argument by the confederate states that a state could secede from the union didn't stand because of the federal government's power . 
all states are varieties of a single organizational form ,  the sovereign state . 
states are perhaps the predominant institutional form of political governance ,  where a state is understood as an institution and a government is understood as the regime in power . 
this was echoed more famously by john dalberg-acton over a century later: `` power tends to corrupt ,  and absolute power corrupts absolutely . `` 
the king often ,  even in absolute monarchies ,  ruled his kingdom with the aid of an elite group of advisors ,  a council without which he could not maintain power . 
global politics include different practices of political globalization in relation to questions of social power: from global patterns of governance to issues of globalizing conflict . 
the origin of the state is to be found in the development of the `` art of warfare '' . 
informal politics is understood as forming alliances ,  exercising power and protecting and advancing particular ideas or goals . 
on a sunday in 1962, the world stood still at the brink of nuclear war during the october cuban missile crisis from the implementation of u . s .  vs soviet union nuclear blackmail policy . 
political corruption is the use of legislated powers by government officials for illegitimate private gain . 
other marks of his reign were the collège des quatre-nations ,  the place vendôme ,  the place des victoires ,  and les invalides . 
general charles de gaulle led a huge and emotional crowd down the champs élysées towards notre dame de paris ,  and made a rousing speech from the hôtel de ville . 
the region of île de france ,  including paris and its surrounding communities ,  is governed by the regional council ,  which has its headquarters in the 7th arrondissement of paris . 
bertrand delanoë also transformed a section of the highway along the left bank of the seine into an urban promenade and park ,  the promenade des berges de la seine ,  which he inaugurated in june 2013.
since the late 19th century ,  paris has also been known as `` panam -lrb-  e  -rrb- ``   -lrb-    -rrb-  in french slang . 
inhabitants are known in english as `` parisians '' and in french as `` parisiens ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the two houses of the french parliament are located on the left bank . 
gare du nord is the 24th busiest railway station in the world ,  with 262 million passengers in 2015.
there are a total of 20 arrondissement mayors and 120 deputy mayors . 
excluding the outlying parks of bois de boulogne and bois de vincennes ,  paris covers an oval measuring about in area ,  enclosed by the ring road ,  the boulevard périphérique . 
the regional council has 121 members from the union of the right ,  66 from the union of the left and 22 from the extreme right national front . 
the 1938 and 1998 fifa world cups ,  the 2007 rugby world cup ,  and the 1960, 1984, and 2016 uefa european championships were also held in the city and ,  every july ,  the tour de france bicycle race finishes there . 
on 5 april 2014, anne hidalgo ,  a socialist ,  was elected the first female mayor of paris . 
the mayor of paris is elected indirectly by paris voters; the voters of each arrondissement elect the `` conseil de paris ''  -lrb-  council of paris  -rrb-  ,  composed of 163 members . 
by the end of the western roman empire ,  the town was known as `` parisius '' ,  a latin name that would later become `` paris '' in french . 
the new structure is administered by a metropolitan council of 210 members ,  not directly elected ,  but chosen by the councils of the member communes . 
paris is located in northern central france ,  in a north-bending arc of the river seine whose crest includes two islands ,  the île saint-louis and the larger île de la cité ,  which form the oldest part of the city . 
the metropolitan area of the city is  . 
clovis the frank ,  the first king of the merovingian dynasty ,  made the city his capital from 508.
a postmaster is the head of an individual post office . 
thus formula_2 is greater than formula_5, where formula_6, etc . 
for his result on the continuum hypothesis ,  cohen won the fields medal in mathematics in 1966, and also the national medal of science in 1967.
the fields medal that cohen won continues to be the only fields medal to be awarded for a work in mathematical logic ,  as of 2018.
apart from his work in set theory ,  cohen also made many valuable contributions to analysis . 
cohen was a full professor of mathematics at stanford university . 
paul joseph cohen  -lrb-  april 2, 1934 – march 23, 2007 -rrb- was an american mathematician . 
patti smith was one of the winners of the 2011 polar music prize . 
smith was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame on march 12, 2007.
in 2018, smith's concert-documentary film `` horses: patti smith and her band '' premiered at the 2018 tribeca film festival to wide acclaim . 
jury's article quotes smith as saying:
in 2014, smith offered her opinion on the sexualization of women in music . 
patricia lee smith was born in chicago to beverly smith ,  a jazz singer turned waitress ,  and grant smith ,  who worked as a machinist at a honeywell plant . 
smith's 11th studio album ,  `` banga '' ,  was released in june 2012.
smith premiered two new protest songs in london in september 2006.
on november 17, 2010, smith won the national book award for her memoir `` just kids '' . 
smith has been a great source of inspiration for michael stipe of r . e . m . 
on april 27, 2004, patti smith released `` trampin' '' which included several songs about motherhood ,  partly in tribute to smith's mother ,  who had died two years before . 
called the `` punk poet laureate , ``  smith fused rock and poetry in her work . 
in 2004, shirley manson of garbage spoke of smith's influence on her in `` rolling stone ''s issue `` the immortals: 100 greatest artists of all time '' ,  in which patti smith was counted number 47.
in 2018, the english band florence and the machine dedicated smith the `` high as hope '' album song `` patricia '' . 
during these years ,  smith also wrote rock journalism pieces ,  some of which were published in `` rolling stone '' and `` creem '' . 
in 1998, stipe published a collection of photos called `` two times intro: on the road with patti smith . `` 
when her son jackson turned 14, smith decided to move back to new york . 
american pop singer madonna has also named smith as one of her biggest influences . 
 ''horses '' has since been viewed by critics as one of the greatest and most influential albums in the history of the american punk rock movement ,  as well as one of the greatest albums of all time . 
horses is the debut studio album by american musician patti smith ,  released on november 10, 1975, on arista records . 
in a 1976 interview with `` rolling stone '' ,  smith described the experience:
in 1979, robert christgau ranked it at number 38 on his list of the best albums of the 1970s . 
the album was recorded and mixed by emery dobyns . 
in smith's own words ,  `` horses '' was conceived as `` three-chord rock merged with the power of the word '' . 
 ''free money '' is a recollection of smith's childhood in new jersey . 
spanish authorities had little control over much of the territory of panama . 
the definite origin of the name `` panama '' is ultimately unknown . 
panama was under spanish rule for almost 300 years  -lrb-  1538–1821 -rrb- ,  and became part of the viceroyalty of peru ,  along with all other spanish possessions in south america . 
the us intent to influence the area ,  especially the panama canal's construction and control ,  led to the separation of panama from colombia in 1903 and its establishment as a nation . 
panama was inhabited by indigenous tribes before spanish colonists arrived in the 16th century . 
this uneasy relationship between panama and bogotá would persist for centuries . 
at the time of the arrival of the spanish in the 16th century ,  the known inhabitants of panama included the cuevas and the coclé tribes . 
panama was the site of the ill-fated darien scheme ,  which set up a scottish colony in the region in 1698.
panama  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of panama  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a country in central america ,  bordered by costa rica to the west ,  colombia to the southeast ,  the caribbean sea to the north ,  and the pacific ocean to the south . 
in the first 80 years following independence from spain ,  panama was a department of colombia ,  after voluntarily joining at the end of 1821.
because of incomplete spanish control ,  the panama route was vulnerable to attack from pirates  -lrb-  mostly dutch and english  -rrb-  ,  and from `` new world '' africans called cimarrons who had freed themselves from enslavement and lived in communes or `` palenques '' around the camino real in panama's interior ,  and on some of the islands off panama's pacific coast . 
a polynomial `` p '' in the indeterminate `` x '' is commonly denoted either as `` p '' or as `` p '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  . 
many authors use these two words interchangeably . 
the mapping that associates the result of this substitution to the substituted value is a function ,  called a `` polynomial function '' . 
in biological contexts ,  essentially all biological macromolecules—i . e .  ,  proteins  -lrb-  polyamides  -rrb-  ,  nucleic acids  -lrb-  polynucleotides  -rrb-  ,  and polysaccharides—are purely polymeric ,  or are composed in large part of polymeric components—e . g .  ,  isoprenylated/lipid-modified glycoproteins ,  where small lipidic molecules and oligosaccharide modifications occur on the polyamide backbone of the protein . 
the terms polymer and resin are often synonymous with plastic . 
the market price will be driven down until all firms are earning normal profit only . 
a firm will receive only normal profit in the long run at the equilibrium point . 
if r < vc the firm should shut down . 
equilibrium in perfect competition is the point where market demands will be equal to market supply . 
profit can ,  however ,  occur in competitive and contestable markets in the short run ,  as firms jostle for market position . 
although a regulated firm will not have an economic profit as large as it would in an unregulated situation ,  it can still make profits well above a competitive firm in a truly competitive market . 
 ''normal '' profit is a component of  -lrb-  implicit  -rrb-  costs and not a component of business profit at all . 
the issue is different with respect to factor markets . 
this allows the firm to set a price which is higher than that which would be found in a similar but more competitive industry ,  allowing them economic profit in both the long and short run . 
in a single-goods case ,  a positive economic profit happens when the firm's average cost is less than the price of the product or service at the profit-maximizing output . 
a decision to shut down means that the firm is temporarily suspending production . 
this ,  of course ,  violates the condition that `` no one seller can influence market price '' . 
in cases where barriers are present ,  but more than one firm ,  firms can collude to limit production ,  thereby restricting supply in order to ensure the price of the product remains high enough to ensure all of the firms in the industry achieve an economic profit . 
in contrast to a monopoly or oligopoly ,  in perfect competition it is impossible for a firm to earn economic profit in the long run ,  which is to say that a firm cannot make any more money than is necessary to cover its economic costs . 
while one can be skeptical towards the claims of religion ,  one need not be hostile towards religion . 
smart's view is that there are genuine differences between religions . 
one of the main differences among religions is whether the ultimate reality is a personal god or an impersonal reality . 
religious exclusivism is the claim that only one religion is true and that others are wrong . 
the issue of how one is to understand religious diversity and the plurality of religious views and beliefs has been a central concern of the philosophy of religion . 
a general question which philosophy of religion asks is what is the relationship ,  if any ,  between morality and religion . 
while religions resort to rational arguments to attempt to establish their views ,  they also claim that religious belief is at least partially to be accepted through faith ,  confidence or trust in one's religious belief . 
belief in miracles and supernatural events or occurrences is common among world religions . 
this close connection between the two views was made by kant ,  who argued that one can infer an afterlife from belief in a just god who rewards persons for their adherence to moral law . 
common types of arguments for the existence of god include:
analytic philosophy of religion has also been preoccupied with ludwig wittgenstein ,  as well as his interpretation of søren kierkegaard's philosophy of religion . 
phillips argues that god is not intelligible through reason or evidence because god is not an empirical object or a 'being among beings' . 
pluralism is the view that all religions are equally valid responses to the divine and that they are all valid paths to personal transformation . 
monotheism is the belief in a single deity or god ,  who is ontologically independent . 
perennialists tend to distinguish between the experience itself ,  and its post experience interpretation to make sense of the different views in world religions . 
just like there are different religions ,  there are different forms of religious experience . 
the topic of whether religious beliefs are compatible with science and in what way is also another important topic in the philosophy of religion as well as in theology . 
in the modern western study of religion ,  the work of ninian smart has also been instrumental in representing a more diverse understanding of religion and religious pluralism . 
plantinga's argument is that belief in god is of this type ,  because within every human mind there is a natural awareness of divinity . 
in western religions ,  various forms of theism are the most common conceptions of the ultimate good ,  while in eastern religions ,  there are theistic and also various non-theistic conceptions of the ultimate . 
don cupitt is one example of someone who ,  while disbelieving in the metaphysical and cosmological claims of his religion ,  holds that one can practice it with a `` non-realist '' perspective which sees religious claims as human inventions and myths to live by . 
the view of perennialism is that there is a single or core truth or experience which is shared by all religions even while they use different terms and language to express it . 
wittgenstein's theory of language games also shows how one can use analogical religious language to describe god or religious truths ,  even if the words one is using do not in this case refer to their everyday sense ,  i . e . 
all religions argue for certain values and ideas of the moral good . 
a different view is inclusivism ,  which is the idea that `` one's own tradition alone has the whole truth but that this truth is nevertheless partially reflected in other traditions . `` 
buddhism is one religion which ,  while affirming postmortem existence  -lrb-  through rebirth  -rrb-  ,  denies the existence of individual souls and instead affirms a deflationary view of personal identity ,  termed `` not-self ''  -lrb-  anatta  -rrb-  . 
price is one modern philosopher who has speculated at length about what it would be like to be a disembodied soul after death . 
the attempt to provide proofs or arguments for the existence of god is one aspect of what is known as natural theology or the natural theistic project . 
there are also different positions on how faith relates to reason . 
several contemporary new atheist writers which are hostile to religion hold a related view which says that religious claims and scientific claims are opposed to each other ,  and that therefore religions are false . 
indian monotheism meanwhile teaches that the world is beginningless ,  but that there is god's act of creation which sustains the world . 
generally ,  a common law court system has trial courts ,  intermediate appellate courts and a supreme court . 
a lower court may not rule against a binding precedent ,  even if the lower court feels that the precedent is unjust; the lower court may only express the hope that a higher court or the legislature will reform the rule in question . 
in federal or multijurisdictional law systems ,  conflicts may exist between the various lower appellate courts . 
the inferior courts are bound to obey precedent established by the appellate court for their jurisdiction ,  and all supreme court precedent . 
any court may seek to distinguish its present case from that of a binding precedent ,  to reach a different conclusion . 
essential to the development of case law is the publication and indexing of decisions for use by lawyers ,  courts ,  and the general public ,  in the form of law reports . 
dick sold his first story in 1951, and from then on wrote full-time . 
dick attended berkeley high school in berkeley ,  california . 
in 1963, dick won the hugo award for `` the man in the high castle '' . 
philip kindred dick  -lrb-  december 16, 1928 – march 2, 1982 -rrb- was an american writer known for his work in science fiction . 
only one of these works ,  `` confessions of a crap artist '' ,  was published during dick's lifetime . 
in 2007, dick became the first science fiction writer to be included in the library of america series . 
after the woman's departure ,  dick began experiencing strange hallucinations . 
at one point ,  dick felt that he had been taken over by the spirit of the prophet elijah . 
cruz ranked as no . 
cruz's only film of 2010 was `` sex and the city 2 '' ,  the sequel to the 2008 film ,  in which she appeared as a banker in a cameo role . 
when rose asked cruz if she was concerned about how she would be perceived after her role in the film ,  cruz replied ,  `` i just knew i had to do the complete opposite . `` 
in 2015, cruz co-produced and starred in the spanish drama film `` ma ma '' ,  directed by julio medem . 
as a teenager ,  cruz became interested in acting after seeing the film `` tie me up ! 
as of december 2017, cruz has various film projects in different states of production . 
cruz has donated money and time to charity . 
cruz is married to spanish actor javier bardem . 
also in 1998 cruz appeared in `` don juan '' and `` the girl of your dreams '' . 
cruz's first film of 2016 was the american comedy ,  `` zoolander 2 '' ,  co-starring and directed by ben stiller . 
cruz is a friend of spanish director pedro almodóvar ,  whom she has known for more than two decades and with whom she has worked on films . 
2001 marked a turning point year when cruz starred in the feature films `` vanilla sky '' and `` blow '' . 
penélope cruz sánchez  -lrb-  ; ; born 28 april 1974 -rrb- is a spanish actress and model . 
cruz appeared alongside her good friend salma hayek in the 2006 western comedy film ,  `` bandidas '' . 
it is a pre-trial diet to enable the court to be advised whether both parties ,  the prosecution and the defence ,  are ready to proceed to trial and may also deal with ancillary procedural matters . 
in scotland ,  a preliminary hearing is a non-evidential diet in cases to be tried before the high court of justiciary . 
he was the founder and first director of what is now known as the paul ehrlich institute . 
paul ehrlich  -lrb-  ; 14 march 1854 – 20 august 1915 -rrb- was a nobel prize-winning german-jewish physician and scientist who worked in the fields of hematology ,  immunology ,  and antimicrobial chemotherapy . 
there is not just one method that philosophers use to answer philosophical questions . 
one can call this a philosophical explanation . 
if one is willing to be satisfied without any good supporting reasons ,  then a western philosophical approach may not be what one actually requires . 
some common features of the methods that philosophers follow  -lrb-  and discuss when discussing philosophical method  -rrb-  include:
method in philosophy is in some sense rooted in motivation ,  only by understanding why people take up philosophy can one properly understand what philosophy is . 
one might also consider some of the many questions about justification . 
one can do this sort of harsh criticism on one's own ,  but others can help greatly ,  if important assumptions are shared with the person offering the criticisms . 
an argument is a set of statements ,  one of which  -lrb-  the conclusion  -rrb-  ,  it is said or implied ,  follows from the others  -lrb-  the premises  -rrb-  . 
the characters in a punch and judy show are not fixed . 
punch and judy is a traditional puppet show featuring mr .  punch and his wife judy . 
the cast of a typical punch and judy show today will include:
the term `` pleased as punch '' is derived from punch and judy; specifically ,  mr .  punch's characteristic sense of gleeful self-satisfaction . 
other games that use poker hand rankings may likewise be referred to as `` poker '' . 
poker variations are played where a `` high hand '' or a `` low hand '' may be the best desired hand . 
strip poker is a traditional poker variation where players remove clothing when they lose bets . 
there are several methods for defining the structure of betting during a hand of poker . 
bluffing is a primary feature of poker ,  one that distinguishes it from other vying games and from other games that make use of poker hand rankings . 
other poker-like games played at casinos against the house include three card poker and pai gow poker . 
in most modern poker games the first round of betting begins with one or more of the players making some form of a forced bet  -lrb-  the `` blind '' or `` ante ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''strong typing '' prevents the above . 
the formal design and study of type systems is known as `` type theory '' . 
thus c has been called both strongly typed and weakly ,  statically typed . 
a type system defines how a programming language classifies values and expressions into `` types '' ,  how it can manipulate those types and how they interact . 
a programming language may also be classified by factors unrelated to programming paradigm . 
statically typed languages can be either `` manifestly typed '' or `` type-inferred '' . 
additionally ,  some programming languages allow for some types to be automatically converted to other types; for example ,  an int can be used where the program expects a float . 
programming languages are used in computer programming to create programs that implement specific algorithms . 
in `` static typing '' ,  all expressions have their types determined prior to when the program is executed ,  typically at compile-time . 
a programming language's surface form is known as its syntax . 
the first `` high-level programming languages '' ,  or `` third-generation programming languages ''  -lrb-  3gl  -rrb-  ,  were written in the 1950s . 
it may seem odd to some professional programmers that c could be `` weakly ,  statically typed '' . 
 ''weak typing '' allows a value of one type to be treated as another ,  for example treating a string as a number . 
not all syntactically correct programs are semantically correct . 
a language is `` typed '' if the specification of every operation defines types of data to which the operation is applicable ,  with the implication that it is not applicable to other types . 
a programming language is a notation for writing programs ,  which are specifications of a computation or algorithm . 
this can occasionally be useful ,  but it can also allow some kinds of program faults to go undetected at compile time and even at run time . 
 ''programming '' is the process by which programmers combine these primitives to compose new programs ,  or adapt existing ones to new uses or a changing environment . 
the increased use of high-level languages introduced a requirement for `` low-level programming languages '' or `` system programming languages '' . 
 ''fifth generation programming languages ''  -lrb-  5gl  -rrb-  are programming languages based on solving problems using constraints given to the program ,  rather than using an algorithm written by a programmer . 
 ''dynamic typing '' ,  also called `` latent typing '' ,  determines the type-safety of operations at run time; in other words ,  types are associated with `` run-time values '' rather than `` textual expressions '' . 
in broad strokes ,  programming languages divide into `` programming paradigms '' and a classification by `` intended domain of use , ``  with general-purpose programming languages distinguished from domain-specific programming languages . 
even when a program is well-defined within a language ,  it may still have a meaning that is not intended by the person who wrote it . 
newer programming languages like java and c# have definite assignment analysis ,  a form of data flow analysis ,  as part of their static semantics . 
the output of a compiler may be executed by hardware or a program called an interpreter . 
strongly typed languages are often termed `` type-safe '' or `` safe '' . 
the basic programming language has many dialects . 
on the other hand ,  there are some programming languages which are more graphical in nature ,  using visual relationships between symbols to specify a program . 
poland is a founding member of the world trade organization . 
the public and private debt levels of poland are below the european average  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- . 
poland is served by an extensive network of railways . 
since 2008 the unemployment rate in poland has consistently been below european average . 
according to the national bank of poland  -lrb-  nbp  -rrb-  the level of fdi inflow into poland in 2006 amounted to €13.9 billion . 
poland has 412,264 km  -lrb-  256,170 mi  -rrb-  of public roads overall . 
poland is the sixth largest producer and exporter of apples in the entire world . 
with the collapse of the rouble-based comecon trade bloc in 1991, poland reoriented its trade . 
the economy of poland is the eighth largest economy in the european union and the largest among the former eastern bloc members of the european union . 
since the global recession of 2009, poland's gdp continued to grow . 
the most important airport in poland is warsaw 'frederic chopin' international airport . 
according to the central statistical office of poland ,  in 2010 the polish economic growth rate was 3.7% ,  which was one of the best results in europe . 
telecommunications in poland include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
transport in poland involves air ,  water ,  road and rail transportation . 
the only high-speed rail line  -lrb-  though by most definitions ,  real high-speed rail only includes speeds over 200 km/h  -rrb-  in central-eastern europe is the central rail line  -lrb-  poland  -rrb-  ,  `` centralna magistrala kolejowa ''  -lrb-  cmk  -rrb-  . 
the republic of poland is a central european country and member of the european union and nato ,  among others . 
in 1994, poland became an associate member of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  and its defensive arm ,  the western european union  -lrb-  weu  -rrb-  . 
the polish media environment is highly polarized . 
in the first months of 2016 the pis’s government worked on a “big media law” ,  a more comprehensive reform of the media system . 
on december 2015 the so-called “small media law” prepared by pis was sent to the polish parliament . 
on january 2016, the european commission discussed the “small media law” in the frame of its assessment of the situation in poland under the rule of law framework . 
radio is a popular medium in poland . 
poland lacks the tradition of an editorially independent public service media: public and radio television broadcasters tend to favor those in power . 
the media of poland consist of several different types of communications media including television ,  radio ,  cinema ,  newspapers ,  magazines ,  and internet . 
foreign companies hold a dominate position in the polish media market . 
the two most popular radio stations are radio rmf fm and radio zet . 
by the 11th and 12th centuries ,  `` portugale '' ,  `` portugallia '' or `` portvgalliae '' was already referred to as portugal . 
the region became known as `` portucale '' ,  `` portugale '' ,  and simultaneously `` portugália '' – the county of portugal . 
romans first invaded the iberian peninsula in 219 bc . 
as the king's confidence in de melo increased ,  the king entrusted him with more control of the state . 
after the death of teodomiro ,  miro  -lrb-  570–583 -rrb- was his successor . 
this is the 3rd largest exclusive economic zone of the european union and the 11th largest in the world . 
queen maria ii  -lrb-  mary ii  -rrb-  and king ferdinand ii's son ,  king pedro v  -lrb-  peter v  -rrb-  modernized the country during his short reign  -lrb-  1853–1861 -rrb- . 
portugal was one of only five european countries to remain neutral in world war ii . 
although for a long period it was believed the dutch were the first europeans to arrive in australia ,  there is also some evidence that the portuguese may have discovered australia in 1521.
portugal is also known for having decriminalized the usage of all common drugs in 2001, the first country in the world to do so . 
official estimates – and most estimates made so far – place the number of portuguese migrants to colonial brazil during the gold rush of the 18th century at 600,000.
during the reconquista period ,  christians reconquered the iberian peninsula from moorish domination . 
the council of ministers – under the presidency of the prime minister  -lrb-  or the president of portugal at the latter's request  -rrb-  and the ministers  -lrb-  may also include one or more deputy prime ministers  -rrb-  – acts as the cabinet . 
today's modern day continental portugal ,  along with most of modern spain ,  was part of al-andalus between 711–1249, following the umayyad caliphate conquest of the iberian peninsula in 711.
later the kingdom of asturias was divided into a number of christian kingdoms in northern iberia due to dynastic divisions of inheritance among the king's offspring . 
there followed the first discoveries in the atlantic: madeira and the azores ,  which led to the first colonization movements . 
in the 15th and 16th centuries ,  portugal established the first global empire ,  becoming one of the world's major economic ,  political and military powers . 
for the next 300 years and by the year 700, the entire iberian peninsula was ruled by the visigoths . 
in 1986, portugal joined the european economic community  -lrb-  eec  -rrb-  that later became the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  . 
a member state of the united nations since 1955, portugal is also a founding member of nato  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- ,  oecd  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- and efta  -lrb-  1960 -rrb-; it left the last in 1986 to join the european economic community ,  which became the european union in 1993.
this represented one of the largest movements of european populations to their colonies in the americas during colonial times . 
cisplatina  -lrb-  today's sovereign state of uruguay  -rrb-  ,  in the south ,  was one of the last additions to the territory of brazil under portuguese rule . 
portugal was the first country in the world to abolish life imprisonment  -lrb-  in 1884 -rrb- and was one of the first countries to abolish the death penalty . 
its territory also includes the atlantic archipelagos of the azores and madeira ,  both autonomous regions with their own regional governments . 
they settled in the region between the rivers `` cávado '' and `` homem '' ,  in the area known as terras de bouro  -lrb-  lands of the buri  -rrb-  . 
also in the early 1960s ,  independence movements in the portuguese overseas provinces of angola ,  mozambique and guinea in africa ,  resulted in the portuguese colonial war  -lrb-  1961–1974 -rrb- . 
all these factors made portugal one of the world's major economic ,  military ,  and political powers from the 15th century until the late 16th century . 
however ,  the king of portugal remained in brazil until the liberal revolution of 1820, which started in porto ,  demanded his return to lisbon in 1821.
portugal has around 2500 to 3200 hours of sunshine a year ,  an average of 4–6 h in winter and 10–12 h in the summer ,  with higher values in the south-east and lower in the north-west . 
thus he returned to portugal but left his son pedro in charge of brazil . 
the region of present-day portugal was inhabited by neanderthals and then by `` homo sapiens '' ,  who roamed the border-less region of the northern iberian peninsula . 
the government is headed by the presidentially appointed prime minister ,  also including one or more deputy prime ministers ,  ministers ,  secretaries of state and under-secretaries of state . 
this occurred because the last two kings of the house of aviz – king sebastian ,  who died in the battle of alcácer quibir in morocco ,  and his great-uncle and successor ,  king-cardinal henry of portugal – both died without heirs ,  resulting in the portuguese succession crisis of 1580.
after annexing the county of portugal into one of the several counties that made up the kingdom of asturias ,  king alfonso iii of asturias knighted vímara peres ,  in 868, as the first count of portus cale  -lrb-  portugal  -rrb-  . 
most of the avian species congregate along the iberian peninsula since it is the closest stopover between northern europe and africa . 
additionally ,  the country ranks highly in terms of democracy  -lrb-  10th  -rrb-  ,  social progress  -lrb-  20th  -rrb-  ,  prosperity  -lrb-  25th  -rrb-  ,  press freedom  -lrb-  14th  -rrb-  ,  moral freedom  -lrb-  3rd  -rrb-  ,  lgbti rights  -lrb-  7th in europe  -rrb-  ,  ease of doing business  -lrb-  29th  -rrb-  and road network  -lrb-  2nd  -rrb-  . 
the reigns of dinis i  -lrb-  denis i  -rrb-  ,  afonso iv  -lrb-  alphons iv  -rrb-  ,  and pedro i  -lrb-  peter i  -rrb-  for the most part saw peace with the christian kingdoms of iberia . 
one of the first cities vimara peres founded at this time is vimaranes ,  known today as guimarães – the `` birthplace of the portuguese nation '' or the `` cradle city ''  -lrb-  cidade berço in portuguese  -rrb-  . 
in 1415, portugal acquired the first of its overseas colonies by conquering ceuta ,  the first prosperous islamic trade centre in north africa . 
about 410 and during the 6th century it became a formally declared kingdom of the suebi ,  where king hermeric made a peace treaty with the gallaecians before passing his domains to rechila ,  his son . 
the portuguese legal system is part of the civil law legal system ,  also called the continental family legal system . 
it has essentially executive powers ,  but has also limited legislative powers . 
a few small ,  semi-permanent ,  commercial coastal settlements  -lrb-  such as tavira  -rrb-  were also founded in the algarve region by phoenicians–carthaginians . 
at the height of european colonialism in the 19th century ,  portugal had already lost its territory in south america and all but a few bases in asia . 
sebastião de melo also made an important contribution to the study of seismology by designing an inquiry that was sent to every parish in the country . 
he would later be proclaimed king of portugal at the battle of ourique in 1139 and was recognised as such ,  by neighbouring kingdoms ,  on the treaty of zamora ,  in 1143.
this episode is known as the transfer of the portuguese court to brazil . 
henry based his newly formed county in bracara augusta  -lrb-  modern braga  -rrb-  ,  capital city of the ancient roman province ,  and also previous capital of several kingdoms over the first millennia . 
in the early 5th century ,  germanic tribes ,  namely the suebi and the vandals  -lrb-  silingi and hasdingi  -rrb-  together with their allies ,  the sarmatians and alans invaded the iberian peninsula where they would form their kingdom . 
this occupation lasted from some decades in the north to five centuries in the south . 
on 5 july 2004, josé manuel barroso ,  then prime minister of portugal ,  was nominated president of the european commission ,  the most powerful office in the european union . 
after almost two centuries ,  the emirate became the caliphate of córdoba in 929, until its dissolution a century later in 1031 into no less than 23 small kingdoms ,  called taifa kingdoms . 
portugal is the oldest state on the iberian peninsula and one of the oldest in europe ,  its territory having been continuously settled ,  invaded and fought over since prehistoric times . 
vímara peres organized the region he had reconquered ,  and elevated it to the status of county ,  naming it the county of portugal after the region's major port city – `` portus cale ''' or modern porto . 
on grand pianos ,  the middle pedal is a sostenuto pedal . 
in the 2000s ,  some pianos include an acoustic grand piano or upright piano combined with midi electronic features . 
modern acoustic pianos have two basic configurations ,  the grand piano and the upright piano ,  with various styles of each . 
the crown and schubert piano company also produced a four-pedal piano . 
upright pianos ,  also called vertical pianos ,  are more compact because the frame and strings are vertical . 
there are also specialized and novelty pianos ,  electric pianos based on electromechanical designs ,  electronic pianos that synthesize piano-like tones using oscillators ,  and digital pianos using digital samples of acoustic piano sounds . 
digital pianos are also non-acoustic and do not have strings or hammers . 
the `` pedalier '' piano ,  or pedal piano ,  is a rare type of piano that includes a pedalboard so players can user their feet to play bass register notes ,  as on an organ . 
cheap pianos often have plywood soundboards . 
the piano was founded on earlier technological innovations in keyboard instruments . 
pianos have been built with alternative keyboard systems ,  e . g .  ,  the jankó keyboard . 
electronic pianos are non-acoustic; they do not have strings ,  tines or hammers ,  but are a type of synthesizer that simulates or imitates piano sounds using oscillators and filters that synthesize the sound of an acoustic piano . 
some early pianos had shapes and designs that are no longer in use . 
in grand pianos the frame and strings are horizontal ,  with the strings extending away from the keyboard . 
some piano companies have included extra pedals other than the standard two or three . 
a similar concept is used in the electric-acoustic rhodes piano . 
pianos have had pedals ,  or some close equivalent ,  since the earliest days . 
only a very small number of works composed for piano actually use these notes . 
aluminum piano plates were not widely accepted ,  and were discontinued . 
upright pianos took less space than a grand piano ,  and as such they were a better size for use in private homes for domestic music-making and practice . 
anderson also has russian ancestry on her mother's side . 
anderson's `` playboy '' career spans 22 years ,  and she has appeared on more `` playboy '' covers than any other model . 
anderson wrote the foreword in the `` playboy '' coffee table book `` playboy's greatest covers '' . 
anderson was born in ladysmith ,  british columbia ,  the daughter of barry ,  a furnace repairman ,  and carol  -lrb-  née grosco  -rrb-  anderson ,  a waitress . 
in 1988, anderson moved to vancouver and worked as a fitness instructor . 
pamela denise anderson  -lrb-  born july 1, 1967 -rrb- is a canadian-american actress and model . 
