it is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global international of anarchist federations . 
it is the main principle behind the anarchist federations grouped around the contemporary global international of anarchist federations . 
insurrectionary anarchism is a revolutionary theory ,  practice ,  and tendency within the anarchist movement which emphasises insurrection within anarchist practice . 
also m .  e .  lazarus was an important american individualist anarchist who promoted free love . 
josiah warren is widely regarded as the first american anarchist ,  and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, `` the peaceful revolutionist '' ,  was the first anarchist periodical published . 
in 1968, in carrara ,  italy the international of anarchist federations was founded during an international anarchist conference held there in 1968 by the three existing european federations of france  -lrb-  the fédération anarchiste  -rrb-  ,  the federazione anarchica italiana of italy and the iberian anarchist federation as well as the bulgarian federation in french exile . 
anarchists in france and italy were active in the resistance during world war ii . 
the `` platform '' attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement's failures during the russian revolution . 
platformism is a tendency within the wider anarchist movement based on the organisational theories in the tradition of dielo truda's `` organisational platform of the general union of anarchists  -lrb-  draft  -rrb- ``  . 
however ,  important figures in the anarchist movement distanced themselves from such individual acts as soon as 1887.
in 1793, william godwin ,  who has often been cited as the first anarchist ,  wrote `` political justice '' ,  which some consider the first expression of anarchism . 
anarchist ,  communist and collectivist ideas are not mutually exclusive—although the collectivist anarchists advocated compensation for labour ,  some held out the possibility of a post-revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need . 
the french pierre-joseph proudhon is regarded as the first self-proclaimed anarchist ,  a label he adopted in his groundbreaking work `` what is property ? 
on a tactical level ,  while propaganda of the deed was a tactic used by anarchists in the 19th century  -lrb-  e . g . 
anarcha-feminism  -lrb-  also called anarchist feminism and anarcho-feminism  -rrb-  combines anarchism with feminism . 
collectivist- ,  communist- ,  mutualist- and individualist-anarchism  -rrb-  ,  it sought to emphasise the anti-authoritarian beliefs common to all anarchist schools of thought . 
in paris ,  the dielo truda group of russian anarchist exiles ,  which included nestor makhno ,  concluded that anarchists needed to develop new forms of organisation in response to the structures of bolshevism . 
mutualism began in 18th-century english and french labour movements before taking an anarchist form associated with pierre-joseph proudhon in france and others in the united states . 
mckinley's assassin leon czolgosz claimed to have been influenced by anarchist and feminist emma goldman . 
the victory of the bolsheviks in the october revolution and the resulting russian civil war did serious damage to anarchist movements internationally . 
there would be many revolutionaries of the early nineteenth century who contributed to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation ,  such as william godwin and wilhelm weitling ,  but they did not use the word `` anarchist '' or `` anarchism '' in describing themselves or their beliefs . 
religious anarchism refers to a set of related anarchist ideologies that are inspired by the teachings of  -lrb-  organized  -rrb-  religions ,  but many anarchists have traditionally been skeptical of and opposed to organized religion . 
the anarchist tendency known as platformism has been criticized by situationist international|situationists ,  insurrectionary anarchism|insurrectionaries ,  synthesis anarchism|synthesis anarchists and others of preserving tacitly statist ,  authoritarian or bureaucratic tendencies . 
the revolutionary wave of 1917–1923 saw the active participation of anarchists in varying degrees of protagonism . 
it was re-discovered and promoted by german philosophical anarchist and homosexual activist john henry mackay . 
the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist was pierre-joseph proudhon ,  marking the formal birth of anarchism in the mid-nineteenth century . 
anarchism is often considered a far-left ideology ,  and much of anarchist economics and anarchist legal philosophy reflect anti-authoritarian interpretations of communism ,  collectivism ,  syndicalism ,  mutualism ,  or participatory economics . 
anarchist schools of thought had been generally grouped in two main historical traditions ,  individualist anarchism and social anarchism ,  which have some different origins ,  values and evolution . 
a more recent libertarian tradition on education is that of unschooling and the anarchist free school|free school in which child-led activity replaces pedagogic approaches . 
his opposition to the state ,  organised religion and certain capitalist practices inspired subsequent anarchists and made him one of the leading social thinkers of his time . 
there has been early research looking at hyperbaric treatments in children with autism . 
the emergence of the autism rights movement has served as an attempt to encourage people to be more tolerant of those with autism . 
social deficits distinguish autism and the related autism spectrum disorders  -lrb-  asd; see classification  -rrb-  from other developmental disorders . 
children with autism may have difficulty with imaginative play and with developing symbols into language . 
these theories map well from the underconnectivity theory of autism . 
it has been proposed to classify autism using genetics as well as behavior . 
studies of twins suggest that heritability is 0.7 for autism and as high as 0.9 for asd ,  and siblings of those with autism are about 25 times more likely to be autistic than the general population . 
children with high-functioning autism suffer from more intense and frequent loneliness compared to non-autistic peers ,  despite the common belief that children with autism prefer to be alone . 
no single repetitive or self-injurious behavior seems to be specific to autism ,  but autism appears to have an elevated pattern of occurrence and severity of these behaviors . 
the immune system is thought to play an important role in autism . 
the validity of this distinction remains controversial; it is possible that regressive autism is a specific subtype ,  or that there is a continuum of behaviors between autism with and without regression . 
the number of reported cases of autism increased dramatically in the 1990s and early 2000s . 
most people with autism face significant obstacles in transitioning to adulthood . 
autism's symptoms result from maturation-related changes in various systems of the brain . 
functional connectivity studies have found both hypo- and hyper-connectivity in brains of people with autism . 
the underconnectivity theory of autism hypothesizes that autism is marked by underfunctioning high-level neural connections and synchronization ,  along with an excess of low-level processes . 
although individuals with asperger syndrome tend to perform better cognitively than those with autism ,  the extent of the overlap between asperger syndrome ,  hfa ,  and non-syndromal autism is unclear . 
there is tentative evidence that autism occurs more frequently in people with gender dysphoria . 
several lines of evidence point to synaptic dysfunction as a cause of autism . 
autism may be underdiagnosed in women and girls due to an assumption that it is primarily a male condition . 
autism is a developmental disorder characterized by difficulties with social interaction and communication ,  and by restricted and repetitive behavior . 
although some children with autism also have gastrointestinal symptoms ,  there is a lack of published rigorous data to support the theory that children with autism have more or different gastrointestinal symptoms than usual; studies report conflicting results ,  and the relationship between gastrointestinal problems and asd is unclear . 
for example ,  magnetoencephalography studies have found evidence in children with autism of delayed responses in the brain's processing of auditory signals . 
this is supported by recent studies that have found that infection during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of autism . 
albedo works on a smaller scale ,  too . 
hence ,  the actual albedo formula_5  -lrb-  also called blue-sky albedo  -rrb-  can then be given as:
snow on top of this sea ice increases the albedo to 0.9.
just as fresh snow has a higher albedo than does dirty snow ,  the albedo of snow-covered sea ice is far higher than that of sea water . 
this feedback loop results in a reduced albedo effect . 
directional-hemispherical reflectance is sometimes referred to as black-sky albedo and bi-hemispherical reflectance as white-sky albedo . 
unless given for a specific wavelength  -lrb-  spectral albedo  -rrb-  ,  albedo refers to the entire spectrum of solar radiation . 
bdrf can facilitate translations of observations of reflectance into albedo . 
cloud albedo has substantial influence over atmospheric temperatures . 
the intensity of albedo temperature effects depend on the amount of albedo and the level of local insolation  -lrb-  solar irradiance  -rrb- ; high albedo areas in the arctic and antarctic regions are cold due to low insolation ,  where areas such as the sahara desert ,  which also have a relatively high albedo ,  will be hotter due to high insolation . 
albedo can affect the electrical energy output of solar photovoltaic devices . 
when an area's albedo changes due to snowfall ,  a snow–temperature feedback results . 
earth's average surface temperature due to its albedo and the greenhouse effect is currently about 15 °c . 
albedo affects climate by determining how much radiation a planet absorbs . 
where formula_8 is the astronomical albedo ,  formula_9 is the diameter in kilometers ,  and formula_10 is the absolute magnitude . 
by 1600 bc ,  the phoenician alphabet letter had a linear form that served as the base for some later forms . 
a  -lrb-  named  ,  plural `` as '' ,  `` a's '' ,  `` a ''s ,  `` a's '' or `` aes ''  -rrb-  is the first letter and the first vowel of the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
during roman times ,  there were many variant forms of the letter `` a '' . 
this form was derived through a combining of prior forms . 
the earliest certain ancestor of `` a '' is aleph  -lrb-  also written 'aleph  -rrb-  ,  the first letter of the phoenician alphabet ,  which consisted entirely of consonants  -lrb-  for that reason ,  it is also called an abjad to distinguish it from a true alphabet  -rrb-  . 
alabama has 67 counties . 
alabama is a state in the southeastern region of the united states . 
alabama is nicknamed the `` yellowhammer state '' ,  after the state bird . 
with a total of of inland waterways ,  alabama has among the most of any state . 
the foundational document for alabama's government is the alabama constitution ,  which was ratified in 1901.
the state had 108,000 foreign-born  -lrb-  2.4% of the state population  -rrb-  ,  of which an estimated 22.2% were undocumented  -lrb-  24,000 -rrb- . 
uab is the largest state government employer in alabama ,  with a workforce of about 18,000.
 ,  the state of alabama has one female sheriff ,  in morgan county ,  alabama ,  and ten african-american sheriffs . 
 ,  alabama has the sixth highest poverty rate among states in the u . s . 
according to the 2010 census ,  alabama had a population of 4,779,736.
alabama has no state minimum wage and uses the federal minimum wage of $7.25.
alabama is an alcoholic beverage control state ,  meaning that the state government holds a monopoly on the sale of alcohol . 
in a symbolic ceremony ,  the bill was signed in the alabama state capitol ,  which housed congress of the confederate states of america . 
alabama's threshold is the lowest among the 41 states and the district of columbia with income taxes . 
according to the 2012 `` u . s .  news & world report '' ,  alabama had four tier 1 universities  -lrb-  university of alabama ,  auburn university ,  university of alabama at birmingham and university of alabama in huntsville  -rrb-  . 
in 2010, per capita income for the state was $22,984.
south alabama reports many thunderstorms . 
alabama's slaves were freed by the 13th amendment in 1865.
alabama is the thirtieth-largest state in the united states with of total area: 3.2% of the area is water ,  making alabama 23rd in the amount of surface water ,  also giving it the second-largest inland waterway system in the united states . 
in 1984, under the davis–strong act ,  the state legislature established the alabama indian affairs commission . 
alabama's income tax on poor working families is among the highest in the united states . 
the state's general sales tax rate is 4% . 
in 2011, 46.6% of alabama's population younger than age 1 were minorities . 
alabama is bordered by the states of tennessee to the north ,  georgia to the east ,  florida to the south ,  and mississippi to the west . 
until 1964, the state elected state senators on a geographic basis by county ,  with one per county . 
uab hospital is the only level i trauma center in alabama . 
summers in alabama are among the hottest in the u . s .  ,  with high temperatures averaging over throughout the summer in some parts of the state . 
according to the 2011 `` u . s .  news & world report '' ,  alabama had three universities ranked in the top 100 public schools in america  -lrb-  university of alabama at 31, auburn university at 36, and university of alabama at birmingham at 73 -rrb- . 
alabama's government is divided into three coequal branches . 
the five employers that employed the most employees in alabama in april 2011 were:
bahá'í centers in alabama exist in birmingham ,  huntsville ,  and florence . 
public primary and secondary education in alabama is under the purview of the alabama state board of education as well as local oversight by 67 county school boards and 60 city boards of education . 
however ,  there are no correspondingly similar words in the alabama language . 
there has been a significant movement to rewrite and modernize alabama's constitution . 
in alabama ,  majority-white districts are now expected to regularly elect republican candidates to federal ,  state and local office . 
alabama was admitted as the 22nd state on december 14, 1819, with congress selecting huntsville as the site for the first constitutional convention . 
members of the nine seats on the supreme court of alabama and all ten seats on the state appellate courts are elected to office . 
while alabama's public education system has improved in recent decades ,  it lags behind in achievement compared to other states . 
alabama currently ranks 4th in the nation for vehicle exports . 
the state's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 5.8% in april 2015.
alabama receives an average of of rainfall annually and enjoys a lengthy growing season of up to 300 days in the southern part of the state . 
an estimated 20 million tourists visit the state each year . 
for example ,  in 2003, alabama had an annual budget deficit as high as $670 million . 
the judicial branch is responsible for interpreting the state's constitution and applying the law in state criminal and civil cases . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of alabama was 4,858,979 on july 1, 2015, which represents an increase of 79,243, or 1.66% ,  since the 2010 census . 
the rate of school corporal punishment in alabama is surpassed only by mississippi and arkansas . 
the european-american naming of the alabama river and state was derived from the alabama people ,  a muskogean-speaking tribe whose members lived just below the confluence of the coosa and tallapoosa rivers on the upper reaches of the river . 
a 1960 study noted that because of rural domination ,  `` a minority of about 25 per cent of the total state population is in majority control of the alabama legislature . `` 
with exploration in the 16th century ,  the spanish were the first europeans to reach alabama . 
achilles' most notable feat during the trojan war was the slaying of the trojan hero hector outside the gates of troy . 
in greek mythology ,  achilles or achilleus  -lrb-   ;  ,  `` achilleus ''   -rrb-  was a greek hero of the trojan war and the central character and the greatest warrior of homer's `` iliad '' . 
homer's `` iliad '' is the most famous narrative of achilles' deeds in the trojan war . 
when the greeks left for the trojan war ,  they accidentally stopped in mysia ,  ruled by king telephus . 
the fight between achilles and memnon over antilochus echoes that of achilles and hector over patroclus ,  except that memnon  -lrb-  unlike hector  -rrb-  was also the son of a goddess . 
also ,  in the fragmentary poems of the epic cycle in which one can find description of the hero's death  -lrb-  i . e . 
the trojans ,  led by hector ,  subsequently push the greek army back toward the beaches and assault the greek ships . 
she was interrupted by peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage . 
he was represented in the `` aethiopis '' as living after his death in the island of leuke at the mouth of the river danube . 
another version of achilles' death is that he fell deeply in love with one of the trojan princesses ,  polyxena . 
in the following chapter of his book ,  pliny refers to the same island as `` achillea '' and introduces two further names for it: `` leuce '' or `` macaron ''  -lrb-  from greek νῆσος μακαρῶν `` island of the blest ''  -rrb-  . 
the achilles tendon is also named after him due to these legends . 
after receiving the news of the death of patroclus from antilochus ,  the son of nestor ,  achilles grieves over his beloved companion's death . 
the poem ends with a description of hector's funeral ,  with the doom of troy and achilles himself still to come . 
the death of achilles ,  as predicted by hector with his dying breath ,  was brought about by paris with an arrow  -lrb-  to the heel according to statius  -rrb-  . 
the `` aethiopis ''  -lrb-  7th century bc  -rrb-  and a work named `` posthomerica '' ,  composed by quintus of smyrna in the fourth century ad ,  relate further events from the trojan war . 
patroclus succeeds in pushing the trojans back from the beaches ,  but is killed by hector before he can lead a proper assault on the city of troy . 
the trojans attacked and reached the heroes ,  who were saved only by an intervention of athena . 
lincoln said:
lincoln was largely self-educated . 
lincoln said as the war was ending:
lincoln `` was remarkably fond of children '' ,  and the lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own . 
then lincoln began his practice with william herndon ,  whom lincoln thought `` a studious young man '' . 
while the war was still being waged ,  lincoln faced reelection in 1864.
on march 4, 1865, lincoln delivered his second inaugural address . 
on being informed of lincoln's nomination ,  douglas stated ,  `` lincoln is the strong man of the party  .  .  .  and if i beat him ,  my victory will be hardly won . `` 
burton  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- argues that lincoln's republicanism was taken up by the freedmen as they were emancipated . 
although lincoln won only a plurality of the popular vote ,  his victory in the electoral college was decisive: lincoln had 180 and his opponents added together had only 123.
people of the northern states knew the southern states would vote against lincoln because of his ideas of anti-slavery and took action to rally supporters for lincoln . 
the most famous and most visited memorials are lincoln's sculpture on mount rushmore; lincoln memorial ,  ford's theatre ,  and petersen house  -lrb-  where he died  -rrb-  in washington ,  d . c . ; and the abraham lincoln presidential library and museum in springfield ,  illinois ,  not far from lincoln's home ,  as well as his tomb . 
several claims have been made that lincoln's health was declining before the assassination . 
late in 1836, lincoln agreed to a match with mary if she returned to new salem . 
lincoln's managers had been adroitly focused on this delegation as well as the others ,  while following lincoln's strong dictate to `` make no contracts that bind me '' . 
the idea was never commercialized ,  but lincoln is the only president to hold a patent . 
as douglas and the other candidates went through with their campaigns ,  lincoln was the only one of them who gave no speeches . 
president lincoln had planned to reform federal indian policy . 
lincoln concluded that the civil war had a profound objective: a new birth of freedom in the nation . 
the war effort was the source of continued disparagement of lincoln ,  and dominated his time and attention . 
in march 1861, in lincoln's first inaugural address ,  he explored the nature of democracy . 
lincoln ,  however ,  did tacitly support the proposed corwin amendment to the constitution ,  which passed congress before lincoln came into office and was then awaiting ratification by the states . 
before the election ,  lincoln served as a captain in the illinois militia during the black hawk war . 
after lincoln acted ,  union enlistments from maryland ,  kentucky ,  and missouri increased by over 40,000 troops . 
 ''stanton and lincoln virtually conducted the war together , ``  say thomas and hyman . 
lincoln removed mcclellan as general-in-chief in march 1862, after mcclellan's `` harrison's landing letter '' ,  in which he offered unsolicited political advice to lincoln urging caution in the war effort . 
lincoln is largely responsible for the institution of the thanksgiving holiday in the united states . 
lincoln and the republican party mobilized support for the draft throughout the north ,  and replaced the union losses . 
douglas was up for re-election in 1858, and lincoln hoped to defeat the powerful illinois democrat . 
as a youth ,  lincoln disliked the hard labor associated with frontier life . 
born in kentucky ,  lincoln grew up on the western frontier in a poor family . 
privately ,  lincoln concluded at this point that the slave base of the confederacy had to be eliminated . 
to broaden his coalition to include war democrats as well as republicans ,  lincoln ran under the label of the new union party . 
lincoln appointed no judges to the united states circuit courts during his time in office . 
as a young man ,  lincoln was a religious skeptic ,  or ,  in the words of a biographer ,  an iconoclast . 
lincoln has often been portrayed by hollywood ,  almost always in a flattering light . 
in the 1854 elections ,  lincoln was elected to the illinois legislature but declined to take his seat . 
lincoln's reputation with clients gave rise to his nickname `` honest abe '' . 
allen c .  guelzo states that lincoln was a lincoln became a favorite exemplar for liberal intellectuals across europe and latin america and even in asia . 
though lincoln did not himself win office ,  his vigorous campaigning had made him the leading republican in illinois . 
lincoln was open to the possibility of a constitutional convention to make further amendments to the constitution . 
during his term as president of the united states ,  mary was known to cook for lincoln often . 
in the 21st century ,  president barack obama named lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using lincoln's bible for his swearing in to office at both his inaugurations . 
lincoln's appointments were designed to keep both the moderate and radical factions in harness . 
nevertheless ,  lincoln was concerned that grant might be considering a candidacy for president in 1864, as mcclellan was . 
lincoln served as new salem's postmaster and later as county surveyor ,  all the while reading voraciously . 
franklin delano roosevelt ,  although lincoln and washington ,  and washington and roosevelt ,  are occasionally reversed . 
lincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as among the greatest u . s .  presidents . 
lincoln received 1,866,452 votes ,  douglas 1,376,957 votes ,  breckinridge 849,781 votes ,  and bell 588,789 votes . 
several significant family events took place during lincoln's youth in indiana . 
lincoln later regretted some of his statements ,  especially his attack on the presidential war-making powers . 
president lincoln's assassination increased his status to the point of making him a national martyr . 
lincoln was close to the todds ,  and he and his family occasionally visited the todd estate in lexington . 
lincoln and douglas would compete for votes in the north ,  while bell and breckinridge primarily found support in the south . 
so ,  according to aristotle ,  the form of apple exists within each apple ,  rather than in the world of the forms . 
however ,  according to aristotle ,  the potential being  -lrb-  matter  -rrb-  and the actual one  -lrb-  form  -rrb-  are one and the same . 
plato argued that all things have a universal form ,  which could be either a property or a relation to other things . 
the formula that gives the components is the account of the matter ,  and the formula that gives the differentia is the account of the form . 
the books are:
with the `` prior analytics '' ,  aristotle is credited with the earliest study of formal logic ,  and his conception of it was the dominant form of western logic until 19th-century advances in mathematical logic . 
in summary ,  the matter used to make a house has potentiality to be a house and both the activity of building and the form of the final house are actualities ,  which is also a final cause or end . 
what we today call `` aristotelian logic '' with its types of syllogism  -lrb-  methods of logical argument  -rrb-  ,  aristotle himself would have labelled `` analytics '' . 
like his teacher plato ,  aristotle's philosophy aims at the universal . 
an american in paris is a jazz-influenced orchestral piece by american composer george gershwin written in 1928.
gershwin composed `` an american in paris '' on commission from conductor walter damrosch . 
gershwin was attracted by maurice ravel's unusual chords ,  and gershwin went on his first trip to paris in 1926 ready to study with ravel . 
gershwin strongly encouraged ravel to come to the united states for a tour . 
gershwin did not particularly like walter damrosch's interpretation at the world premiere of `` an american in paris '' . 
after recapitulating the `` walking '' themes ,  gershwin overlays the slow blues theme from section b in the final `` grandioso '' . 
the best known award is the academy award of merit ,  more popularly known as the oscar statuette . 
the origin of the name `` oscar '' is disputed . 
a total of 3,072 oscar statuettes have been awarded from the inception of the award through the 90th ceremony . 
traditionally ,  the previous year's winner for best actor and best supporting actor present the awards for best actress and best supporting actress ,  while the previous year's winner for best actress and best supporting actress present the awards for best actor and best supporting actor . 
the 74th academy awards ,  held in 2002, presented the first academy award for best animated feature . 
in addition to the academy award of merit  -lrb-  oscar award  -rrb-  ,  there are nine honorary  -lrb-  non-competitive  -rrb-  awards presented by the academy from time to time  -lrb-  except for the academy honorary award ,  the technical achievement award ,  and the student academy awards ,  which are presented annually  -rrb- :
the academy awards ceremony was first broadcast on radio in 1930 and televised for the first time in 1953.
the film was produced in 1996.
it was also shown at the 1997 stockholm international film festival . 
julia macrae books published an `` animalia '' colouring book in 2008.
the children's book council of australia designated `` animalia '' a 1987 : honour book . 
 ''animalia '' won the young australian's best book award in 1987 for best picture story book . 
international atomic time  -lrb-  tai ,  from the french name   -rrb-  is a high-precision atomic coordinate time standard based on the notional passage of proper time on earth's geoid . 
the same circular also gives tables of tai − ta -lrb-  `` k ''  -rrb-  ,  for the various unsynchronised atomic time scales . 
tai was henceforth a realisation of tt ,  with the equation tt -lrb-  tai  -rrb-  = tai + 32.184 s . 
the instant that the gravitational correction started to be applied serves as the epoch for barycentric coordinate time  -lrb-  tcb  -rrb-  ,  geocentric coordinate time  -lrb-  tcg  -rrb-  ,  and terrestrial time  -lrb-  tt  -rrb-  ,  which represent three fundamental time scales in the solar system . 
the latter is not to be confused with `` ta -lrb-  npl  -rrb- ``  ,  which denotes an independent atomic time scale ,  not synchronised to tai or to anything else . 
the word `` altruism '' was coined by the french philosopher auguste comte in french ,  as `` altruisme '' ,  for an antonym of egoism . 
altruism can be distinguished from feelings of loyalty ,  in that whilst the latter is predicated upon social relationships ,  altruism does not consider relationships . 
in simple terms ,  altruism is caring about the welfare of other people and acting to help them . 
in an extreme case ,  altruism may become a synonym of selflessness which is the opposite of selfishness . 
the term `` altruism '' may also refer to an ethical doctrine that claims that individuals are morally obliged to benefit others . 
during the 1940s ,  rand became politically active . 
in 1985, rand's intellectual heir leonard peikoff established the ayn rand institute ,  a nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting rand's ideas and works . 
rand's first published novel ,  the semi-autobiographical `` we the living '' ,  was published in 1936.
since rand's death ,  interest in her work has gradually increased . 
the first reviews rand received were for `` night of january 16th '' . 
in her will ,  rand named leonard peikoff to inherit her estate . 
rand's nonfiction received far fewer reviews than her novels had . 
during rand's lifetime ,  her work evoked both extreme praise and condemnation . 
rand's work continues to be among the top sellers among books in india . 
during rand's lifetime ,  her work received little attention from academic scholars . 
rand acknowledged aristotle as her greatest influence and remarked that in the history of philosophy she could only recommend `` three a's ''—aristotle ,  aquinas ,  and ayn rand . 
in late 1925, rand was granted a visa to visit relatives in chicago . 
 ''atlas shrugged '' ,  published in 1957, was considered rand's `` magnum opus '' . 
rediscovered in the 1960s ,  these films were re-edited into a new version which was approved by rand and re-released as `` we the living '' in 1986.
 ''the fountainhead '' became a worldwide success ,  bringing rand fame and financial security . 
in subsequent years ,  rand and several more of her closest associates parted company . 
rand's first major success as a writer came in 1943 with `` the fountainhead '' ,  a romantic and philosophical novel that she wrote over a period of seven years . 
rand's 1957 novel `` atlas shrugged '' was widely reviewed and many of the reviews were strongly negative . 
rand underwent surgery for lung cancer in 1974 after decades of heavy smoking . 
rand advocated reason as the only means of acquiring knowledge and rejected faith and religion . 
dwan operated flying a studios in la mesa ,  california from august 1911 to july 1912.
born joseph aloysius dwan in toronto ,  ontario ,  canada ,  dwan ,  was the younger son of commercial traveller of woolen clothing joseph michael dwan  -lrb-  1857–1917 -rrb- and his wife mary jane dwan ,  `` née '' hunt . 
allan dwan  -lrb-  3 april 1885 – 28 december 1981 -rrb- was a pioneering canadian-born american motion picture director ,  producer and screenwriter . 
algeria is a regional and middle power . 
homosexuality is illegal in algeria . 
berbers are the indigenous inhabitants of algeria . 
algeria is the largest country in africa ,  and the mediterranean basin . 
algeria  -lrb-  ; ' ,  algerian arabic ';   -rrb-  ,  officially the people's democratic republic of algeria ,  is a country in the maghreb region of north africa . 
algeria has the second largest military in north africa with the largest defence budget in africa  -lrb-  $10 billion  -rrb-  . 
the number of european `` pied-noirs '' who fled algeria totaled more than 900,000 between 1962 and 1964.
the region of algeria was partially ruled by ottomans for three centuries from 1516 to 1830.
the head of state is the president of algeria ,  who is elected for a five-year term . 
in 1629 pirate ships from algeria raided the faroe islands . 
russia is also building two 636-type diesel submarines for algeria . 
algiers ,  oran ,  constantine ,  and annaba are algeria's main cities . 
the hoggar mountains  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the hoggar ,  are a highland region in central sahara ,  southern algeria . 
in 2009, the french government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear tests in algeria . 
the war uprooted more than 2 million algerians . 
despite being removed from algeria in the 19th century ,  spain retained a presence in morocco . 
for several centuries algeria was ruled by the romans ,  who founded many colonies in the region . 
in 2011 algeria announced a budgetary surplus of $26.9 billion ,  62% increase in comparison to 2010 surplus . 
from 1848 until independence ,  france administered the whole mediterranean region of algeria as an integral part and `` département '' of the nation . 
algeria consistently opposed spanish fortresses and control in nearby morocco through the 20th century . 
elected politicians are considered to have relatively little sway over algeria . 
precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern algeria ,  where it reaches as much as in some years . 
algeria is classified as an upper middle income country by the world bank . 
algeria's first president was the front de libération nationale  -lrb-  fln  -rrb-  leader ahmed ben bella . 
the fln used hit and run attacks in algeria and france as part of its war ,  and the french conducted severe reprisals . 
algeria has struggled to develop industries outside hydrocarbons in part because of high costs and an inert state bureaucracy . 
algeria is divided into 48 provinces  -lrb-  `` wilayas ''  -rrb-  ,  553 districts  -lrb-  `` daïras ''  -rrb-  and 1,541 municipalities  -lrb-  `` baladiyahs ''  -rrb-  . 
algeria is a member of the african union ,  the arab league ,  opec ,  the united nations and is a founding member of the arab maghreb union . 
plague had repeatedly struck the cities of north africa . 
algeria lies mostly between latitudes 19° and 37°n  -lrb-  a small area is north of 37°n and south of 19°n  -rrb-  ,  and longitudes 9°w and 12°e . 
the varied vegetation of algeria includes coastal ,  mountainous and grassy desert-like regions which all support a wide range of wildlife . 
in the elections ,  the fln won 221 seats ,  the military-backed national rally for democracy won 70, and the islamist green algeria alliance won 47.
 ''kinship '' can refer both to `` the study of '' the patterns of social relationships in one or more human cultures ,  or it can refer to `` the patterns of social relationships '' themselves . 
anthropology is the study of humans and human behavior and societies in the past and present . 
anthropology is a global discipline involving humanities ,  social sciences and natural sciences . 
the study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of sociocultural anthropology ,  as kinship is a human universal . 
archaeology is the study of the human past through its material remains . 
by directly looking at the different social issues ,  one would also be studying how they affect the dynamic of the city . 
it focuses on the following six basic fields:
it is a dynamic and interdisciplinary field ,  drawing on many lines of evidence to understand the human experience ,  past and present . 
media anthropology  -lrb-  also known as the anthropology of media or mass media  -rrb-  emphasizes ethnographic studies as a means of understanding producers ,  audiences ,  and other cultural and social aspects of mass media . 
legal anthropology or anthropology of law specializes in `` the cross-cultural study of social ordering '' . 
in 1989, a group of european and american scholars in the field of anthropology established the european association of social anthropologists  -lrb-  easa  -rrb-  which serves as a major professional organization for anthropologists working in europe . 
it examines the biological and social factors that have affected the evolution of humans and other primates ,  and that generate ,  maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation . 
medical anthropology is an interdisciplinary field which studies `` human health and disease ,  health care systems ,  and biocultural adaptation '' . 
evolutionary anthropology is the interdisciplinary study of the evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation between hominins and non-hominin primates . 
in great britain and the commonwealth countries ,  the british tradition of social anthropology tends to dominate . 
linguistic anthropology  -lrb-  not to be confused with anthropological linguistics  -rrb-  seeks to understand the processes of human communications ,  verbal and non-verbal ,  variation in language across time and space ,  the social uses of language ,  and the relationship between language and culture . 
biocultural anthropology is the scientific exploration of the relationships between human biology and culture . 
biological or physical anthropology studies the biological development of humans . 
broadly ,  kinship patterns may be considered to include people related both by descent  -lrb-  one's social relations during development  -rrb-  ,  and also relatives by marriage . 
since the work of franz boas and bronisław malinowski in the late 19th and early 20th centuries ,  `` social '' anthropology in great britain and `` cultural '' anthropology in the us have been distinguished from other social sciences by its emphasis on cross-cultural comparisons ,  long-term in-depth examination of context ,  and the importance it places on participant-observation or experiential immersion in the area of research . 
it also examines how the understanding of cognition ,  emotion ,  motivation ,  and similar psychological processes inform or constrain our models of cultural and social processes . 
sociocultural anthropology draws together the principle axes of cultural anthropology and social anthropology . 
these fields frequently overlap but tend to use different methodologies and techniques . 
ethnoarchaeology is a type of archaeology that studies the practices and material remain of living human groups in order to gain a better understanding of the evidence left behind by past human groups ,  who are presumed to have lived in similar ways . 
agricultural science is a broad multidisciplinary field of biology that encompasses the parts of exact ,  natural ,  economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture . 
through much of the 12th and 13th centuries ,  alchemical knowledge in europe remained centered on translations ,  and new latin contributions were not made . 
this move was mostly successful ,  and the consequences of this continued into the 19th and 20th centuries ,  and even to the present day . 
in the late 15th century ,  marsilo ficino translated the corpus hermeticum and the works of plato into latin . 
they wrote in greek and lived in egypt under roman rule . 
this approach eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the 18th and 19th centuries ,  based on revolutionary discoveries of lavoisier and john dalton . 
it was at that time that khalid ibn yazid sparked its migration from alexandria to the islamic world ,  facilitating the translation and preservation of greek alchemical texts in the 8th and 9th centuries . 
gunpowder was used by the mongols against the hungarians in 1241, and in europe by the 14th century . 
during the occult revival of the early 19th century ,  alchemy received new attention as an occult science . 
grosseteste also did much work to reconcile platonic and aristotelian thinking . 
platonic and aristotelian thought ,  which had already been somewhat appropriated into hermetical science ,  continued to be assimilated during the late 7th and early 8th centuries through syriac translations and scholarship . 
in the 14th century ,  chaucer began a trend of alchemical satire that can still be seen in recent fantasy works like those of terry pratchett . 
in the late 8th century ,  jābir ibn hayyān  -lrb-  latinized as `` geber '' or `` geberus ''  -rrb-  introduced a new approach to alchemy ,  based on scientific methodology and controlled experimentation in the laboratory ,  in contrast to the ancient greek and egyptian alchemists whose works were often allegorical and unintelligible ,  with very little concern for laboratory work . 
the elemental system used in medieval alchemy also originated with jabir . 
in the 14th century ,  alchemy became more accessible to europeans outside the confines of latin speaking churchmen and scholars . 
a decree of diocletian ,  written about 300 ad in greek ,  speaks against `` the ancient writings of the egyptians ,  which treat of the `` khēmia '' transmutation of gold and silver '' . 
from the 9th to 14th centuries ,  alchemical theories faced criticism from a variety of practical muslim chemists ,  including alkindus ,  abū al-rayhān al-bīrūnī ,  avicenna and ibn khaldun . 
islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical hermeticism . 
the 14th century saw the christian imagery of death and resurrection employed in the alchemical texts of petrus bonus ,  john of rupescissa ,  and in works written in the name of raymond lull and arnold of villanova . 
trustworthy scholarship on indian alchemy must now take the findings of this work into account . 
the first alchemist whose name we know is said to have been mary the jewess  -lrb-  c .  200 a . d .   -rrb-  . 
greek alchemy may have been introduced to ancient india through the invasions of alexander the great in 325  ,  and kingdoms that were culturally influenced by the greeks like gandhāra ,  although hard evidence for this is lacking . 
these processes are actively used to the present day . 
due to the proliferation of pseudepigrapha and anonymous works ,  it is difficult to know which of the alchemists were actually women . 
other early writings are found in the jaina medical treatise `` kalyāṇakārakam '' of ugrāditya ,  written in south india in the early 9th century . 
the great work of alchemy is often described as a series of four stages represented by colors . 
two famous early indian alchemical authors were nāgārjuna siddha and nityanātha siddha . 
the start of western alchemy may generally be traced to ancient and hellenistic egypt ,  where the city of alexandria was a center of alchemical knowledge ,  and retained its pre-eminence through most of the greek and roman periods . 
in particular ,  they wrote refutations against the idea of the transmutation of metals . 
the vedas describe a connection between eternal life and gold . 
they spend the majority of their time working on research ,  although they quite often have other duties such as teaching ,  building instruments ,  or aiding in the operation of an observatory . 
while there is a relatively low number of professional astronomers ,  the field is popular among amateurs . 
most universities also have outreach programs including public telescope time and sometimes planetariums as a public service to encourage interest in the field . 
ascii  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  abbreviated from american standard code for information interchange ,  is a character encoding standard for electronic communication . 
when film became a common medium some manufacturers of optical toys adapted small magic lanterns into toy film projectors for short loops of film . 
animated feature-length films returned the highest gross margins  -lrb-  around 52%  -rrb-  of all film genres in the 2004–2013 timeframe . 
 ''el apóstol ''  -lrb-  spanish: `` the apostle ''  -rrb-  was a 1917 argentine animated film utilizing cutout animation ,  and the world's first animated feature film . 
unfortunately ,  a fire that destroyed producer federico valle's film studio incinerated the only known copy of `` el apóstol '' ,  and it is now considered a lost film . 
by 1902, they were producing many chromolithography film loops ,  usually by tracing live-action film footage  -lrb-  much like the later rotoscoping technique  -rrb-  . 
in 1932, the first short animated film created entirely with technicolor  -lrb-  using red/green/blue photographic filters and three strips of film  -rrb-  was walt disney's `` flowers and trees '' ,  directed by burt gillett . 
traditional animation  -lrb-  also called cel animation or hand-drawn animation  -rrb-  was the process used for most animated films of the 20th century . 
fully animated films are animated at 24 frames per second ,  with a combination of animation on ones and twos ,  meaning that drawings can be held for one frame out of 24 or two frames out of 24.
the completed character cels are photographed one-by-one against a painted background by a rostrum camera onto motion picture film . 
but ,  the first feature film that was done with this technique ,  apart from the movie the vanities fair  -lrb-  1935 -rrb- ,  by rouben mamoulian ,  was `` snow white and the seven dwarfs '' ,  also by walt disney . 
computer animation has become popular since `` toy story ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  the first feature-length animated film completely made using this technique . 
in 2008, the animation market was worth us$68.4 billion . 
other examples include `` allegro non troppo ''  -lrb-  italy ,  1976 -rrb- ,  `` who framed roger rabbit ''  -lrb-  us ,  1988 -rrb- ,  `` space jam ''  -lrb-  us ,  1996 -rrb- and `` osmosis jones ''  -lrb-  us ,  2001 -rrb- . 
apollo is the god who affords help and wards off evil . 
hymns sung to apollo were called paeans . 
apollo is the god of archery and the invention of archery is credited to him and his sister artemis . 
apollo is the patron of herdsmen and protector of herds and flocks . 
as the patron of delphi  -lrb-  `` pythian apollo ''  -rrb-  ,  apollo was an oracular god—the prophetic deity of the delphic oracle . 
medicine and healing are associated with apollo ,  whether through the god himself or mediated through his son asclepius ,  yet apollo was also seen as a god who could bring ill-health and deadly plague . 
the role of apollo as god of plague is evident in the invocation of apollo smintheus  -lrb-  `` mouse apollo ''  -rrb-  by chryses ,  the trojan priest of apollo ,  with the purpose of sending a plague against the greeks  -lrb-  the reasoning behind a god of the plague becoming a god of healing is apotropaic ,  meaning that the god responsible for bringing the plague must be appeased in order to remove the plague  -rrb-  . 
agassi reached the world no . 
agassi had a poor start to 2006.
1997 was the low point of agassi's career . 
agassi had a short ,  but dramatic ,  run in his final us open . 
agassi's 2005 was defined by an improbable run to the us open final . 
boris becker and agassi played 14 times with agassi leading 10–4.
in 1998, agassi won five titles and leapt from no . 
agassi and graf formed a company called agassi graf holdings . 
on may 13, 2013, agassi rejoined nike . 
agassi and sampras met 34 times on the tour level with agassi trailing 14–20.
agassi and pat rafter played fifteen times with agassi leading 10–5.
agassi's 2005 began with a quarterfinal loss to federer at the australian open . 
the match marked as last appearance by agassi in any tournament final . 
agassi established a limited liability company named andre agassi ventures  -lrb-  formerly named agassi enterprises  -rrb-  . 
in 2009, in macau agassi and sampras met for the first time on court since the 2002 us open final . 
agassi won the final four of their matches ,  with the last being in 2003 at the miami open with chang being clearly after his prime . 
with both sampras and agassi participating ,  the u . s .  won the davis cup in 1995.
their final match was played at hong kong in 1999, which agassi won in three sets . 
this time it was agassi who came out on top in two straight sets . 
in 2012, agassi took part in five tournaments ,  winning three of those . 
agassi opened 2001 by successfully defending his australian open title with a straight-sets final win over arnaud clément . 
agassi's grand slam tournament breakthrough came at wimbledon ,  not at the french open or the us open ,  where he had previously enjoyed success . 
agassi dropped out of school in the ninth grade . 
the 1990 us open was their first meeting in a grand slam tournament final . 
a genetic and linguistic research in 2015 about ancient people in east asia suggest an origin and homeland of austroasiatic in today southern china or even further north . 
georg van driem  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- proposes that the homeland of austroasiatic is somewhere in southern china . 
the austroasiatic languages ,  formerly known as mon–khmer ,  are a large language family of mainland southeast asia ,  also scattered throughout india ,  bangladesh ,  nepal and the southern border of china ,  with around 117 million speakers . 
austroasiatic languages have a disjunct distribution across india ,  bangladesh ,  nepal and southeast asia ,  separated by regions where other languages are spoken . 
linguists traditionally recognize two primary divisions of austroasiatic: the mon–khmer languages of southeast asia ,  northeast india and the nicobar islands ,  and the munda languages of east and central india and parts of bangladesh ,  parts of nepal . 
languages in the pearic branch and some in the vietic branch can have a three- or even four-way voicing contrast . 
the linguists sagar  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- and bellwood  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- support the theory of an origin of austroasiatic along the yangtze river in southern china . 
the phylum has six branches: berber ,  chadic ,  cushitic ,  egyptian ,  omotic and semitic . 
it includes languages spoken predominantly in west asia ,  north africa ,  the horn of africa and parts of the sahel . 
proposed locations include north africa ,  the horn of africa ,  the eastern sahara and the levant  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
little agreement exists on the subgrouping of the five or six branches of afroasiatic: semitic ,  egyptian ,  berber ,  chadic ,  cushitic ,  and omotic . 
friedrich müller named the traditional hamito-semitic family in 1876 in his `` grundriss der sprachwissenschaft ''  -lrb-  `` outline of linguistics ''  -rrb-  ,  and defined it as consisting of a semitic group plus a `` hamitic '' group containing egyptian ,  berber ,  and cushitic; he excluded the chadic group . 
in doing so ,  greenberg sought to emphasize the fact that afroasiatic spanned the continents of both africa and asia . 
during the early 1800s ,  linguists grouped the berber ,  cushitic and egyptian languages within a `` hamitic '' phylum ,  in acknowledgement of these languages' genetic relation with each other and with those in the semitic phylum . 
a de facto group of distinct language varieties within the semitic branch ,  the languages that evolved from proto-arabic have around 313 million native speakers ,  concentrated primarily in west asia and north africa . 
the parliament of andorra is known as the general council . 
being a landlocked country ,  andorra has no navy . 
andorra participated in the cultural movement of the catalan renaixença . 
the same year andorra became a member of the united nations and the council of europe . 
andorra  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the principality of andorra  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called the principality of the valleys of andorra  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a sovereign landlocked microstate on the iberian peninsula ,  in the eastern pyrenees ,  bordered by france to the north and spain to the south . 
andorra does not have its own armed forces ,  although there is a small ceremonial army . 
in 1814 a royal decree reestablished the independence and economy of andorra . 
the current head of government is antoni martí of the democrats for andorra  -lrb-  da  -rrb-  . 
since then the bishop of urgell ,  based in seu d'urgell ,  has been co-prince of andorra . 
andorra declared war on imperial germany during world war i ,  but did not take part directly in the fighting . 
andorra is the sixth-smallest nation in europe ,  having an area of and a population of approximately  . 
tourism in andorra sees an estimated 10.2 million visitors annually . 
the origin of the word `` andorra '' is unknown ,  although several hypotheses have been formulated . 
the judiciary is composed of the magistrates court ,  the criminal law court ,  the high court of andorra ,  and the constitutional court . 
the first document that mentions `` andorra '' as a territory is the `` acta de consagració i dotació de la catedral de la seu d'urgell ''  -lrb-  deed of consecration and endowment of the cathedral of la seu d'urgell  -rrb-  . 
bills may be presented to the council as private members' bills by three of the local parish councils jointly or by at least one tenth of the citizens of andorra . 
andorra is a parliamentary co-principality with the president of france and the catholic bishop of urgell  -lrb-  catalonia ,  spain  -rrb-  as co-princes . 
historically ,  the families of the six ancient parishes of andorra maintained local arrangements to assist each other in fighting fires . 
three centuries after its foundation the consell de la terra located its headquarters and the tribunal de corts in casa de la vall in 1702.
in 2013, andorra had the highest life expectancy in the world at 81 years ,  according to the global burden of disease study . 
they became roger bernat ii and ermessenda i ,  counts of foix ,  viscounts of castellbò and cerdanya ,  and co-sovereigns of andorra  -lrb-  shared with the bishop of urgell  -rrb-  . 
andorra remained part of the marca hispanica of the frankish empire being part of the territory ruled by the count of urgell and eventually by the bishop of the diocese of urgell . 
during this period ,  andorra's late medieval institutions and rural culture remained largely unchanged . 
despite not being involved in any fighting during the first world war ,  andorra was technically the longest combatant ,  as the country was left out of the versailles peace conference ,  technically remaining at war with germany from its original declaration of war in 1914 until 24 september 1958 when andorra officially declared peace with germany . 
the arithmetic mean  -lrb-  or mean or average  -rrb-  ,  formula_1  -lrb-  read formula_2 `` bar ''  -rrb-  ,  is the mean of the formula_3 values formula_4.
the term `` arithmetic mean '' is preferred in some contexts in mathematics and statistics because it helps distinguish it from other means ,  such as the geometric mean and the harmonic mean . 
the afc champion then plays the nfc champion in the super bowl . 
both the afc and the nfc were created after the nfl merged with the american football league  -lrb-  afl  -rrb-  in 1970.
between 1995 and 2018, the afc has sent less than half of the 16 afc teams to the super bowl with only 7 of the 16 individual teams making it . 
the nfl would again expand in 2002, adding the houston texans to the afc . 
the afc has started 5 quarterbacks in the last 18 superbowls ,  while the nfc has started 15.
napoleon enacts changes to the governance structure of the farm ,  replacing meetings with a committee of pigs who will run the farm . 
some time later ,  several men attack animal farm . 
farmer jones ,  having moved away after giving up on reclaiming his farm ,  has also died . 
the pigs hold a festival one day after boxer's death to further praise the glories of animal farm and have the animals work harder by taking on boxer's ways . 
however ,  the truth is that napoleon had engineered the sale of boxer to the knacker ,  allowing napoleon and his inner circle to acquire money to buy whisky for themselves . 
once snowball becomes a scapegoat ,  napoleon begins to purge the farm with his dogs ,  killing animals he accuses of consorting with his old rival . 
when snowball announces his plans to modernize the farm by building a windmill ,  napoleon has his dogs chase snowball away and declares himself leader . 
