social determinants of health are the social conditions in which people live that determine their health . 
the world health organization's social determinants council also recognizes social determinants of health in poverty . 
in 2004, the world health organization calculated that 932 million years of potential life were lost to premature death . 
the most known and used classification of diseases is the world health organization's icd . 
treatments may be provided by an organized health care system ,  or informally ,  by the patient or family members . 
in humans ,  `` disease '' is often used more broadly to refer to any condition that causes pain ,  dysfunction ,  distress ,  social problems ,  or death to the person afflicted ,  or similar problems for those in contact with the person . 
medical therapies or treatments are efforts to cure or improve a disease or other health problem . 
the european hmdb datea was submitted by european countries to the world health organization regional office for europe . 
the quality-adjusted life year  -lrb-  qaly  -rrb-  and disability-adjusted life year  -lrb-  daly  -rrb-  metrics are similar ,  but take into account whether the person was healthy after diagnosis . 
diseases can affect people not only physically ,  but also mentally ,  as contracting and living with a disease can alter the affected person's perspective on life . 
the dardanelles  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  ,  also known from classical antiquity as the hellespont  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` hellespontos '' ,  literally `` sea of helle ''  -rrb-  ,  is a narrow ,  natural strait and internationally significant waterway in northwestern turkey that forms part of the continental boundary between europe and asia ,  and separates asian turkey from european turkey . 
the total length of the river is : in russia
in 2001, nissan marketed its d22 pick-up model in japan with the name `` datsun '' . 
datsun  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an automobile brand owned by nissan . 
the use of the `` datsun '' name in the american market derives from the name nissan used for its production cars . 
'but datsun was a pet name for the cars when we started exporting . ' ''
the name was changed to `` datsun '' two years later in 1933.
 ''the decision to change the name datsun to nissan in the u . s .  was announced in the autumn  -lrb-  september/october  -rrb-  of 1981.
before the datsun brand name came into being ,  an automobile named the dat car was built in 1914, by the  ,  in the azabu-hiroo district in tokyo . 
five years after the name change program was over ,  `` datsun '' still remained more familiar than `` nissan '' . 
ultimately ,  the decision was made to stop using the brand name `` datsun '' worldwide ,  in order to strengthen the company name `` nissan '' . 
in america ,  the nissan branch was named ``  ''nissan motor corporation in u . s . a . ``  '' ,  and chartered on september 28, 1960, in california ,  but the small cars the firm exported to america were still named datsun . 
by 1986 nissan had phased out the datsun name ,  but re-launched it in june 2013 as the brand for low-cost vehicles manufactured for emerging markets . 
ultimately ,  the name change campaign lasted for a three-year period from 1982 to 1984 – datsun badged vehicles had been progressively fitted with small `` nissan '' and `` datsun by nissan '' badges from the late 1970s onward until the nissan name was given prominence in 1983 – although in some export markets vehicles continued to wear both the datsun and nissan badges until 1986.
alfred nobel's father ,  immanuel nobel ,  was an industrialist ,  engineer ,  and inventor . 
dynamite is an explosive made of nitroglycerin ,  sorbents  -lrb-  such as powdered shells or clay  -rrb-  and stabilizers . 
currently only dyno nobel manufactures dynamite in the us . 
it was in france that nobel first encountered nitroglycerin ,  which pelouze cautioned against using as a commercial explosive because of its high volatility  -lrb-  tendency to ignite  -rrb-  . 
nobel originally sold dynamite as `` nobel's blasting powder '' but decided to change the name to dynamite ,  from the ancient greek word `` dýnamis ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  meaning `` power '' . 
dynamite was invented by swedish chemist alfred nobel in the 1860s and was the first safely manageable explosive stronger than black powder ,  which had been invented in china in the 9th century . 
dynamite is usually rated by `` weight strength ''  -lrb-  the amount of nitroglycerin it contains  -rrb-  ,  usually from 20% to 60% . 
dynamite was first manufactured in the u . s .  by the giant powder company of san francisco ,  california whose founder had obtained the exclusive rights from nobel in 1867.
fincher was employed at korty films as a production head . 
in 2002, fincher followed up with the thriller `` panic room '' . 
the film received five academy award nominations ,  including best actress for mara ,  and won the award for best film editing . 
his films `` zodiac '' and `` the social network '' are ranked in bbc's 100 greatest films of the 21st century . 
david andrew leo fincher  -lrb-  born august 28, 1962 -rrb- is an american film director ,  film producer ,  television director ,  television producer ,  and music video director . 
the film went on to win many awards ,  including three academy awards for best adapted screenplay ,  best original score ,  and best film editing . 
fincher directed the 2010 film `` the social network '' ,  about the legal battles of mark zuckerberg and the founding of facebook . 
the film earned pike an academy award nomination for best actress ,  fincher also received his third golden globe nomination . 
engelbart's book is now being republished by the doug engelbart institute . 
engelbart was founder emeritus of the doug engelbart institute ,  which he founded in 1988 with his daughter christina engelbart ,  who is executive director . 
engelbart was born in portland ,  oregon ,  on january 30, 1925, to carl louis engelbart and gladys charlotte amelia munson engelbart . 
at tymshare ,  engelbart soon found himself further marginalized . 
engelbart slipped into relative obscurity by the mid-1970s . 
in addition ,  christina engelbart spoke about her father's early influences and the ongoing work of the doug engelbart institute . 
the most complete coverage of engelbart's bootstrapping ideas can be found in `` boosting our collective iq '' ,  by douglas c .  engelbart ,  1995.
in december 2008, engelbart was honored by sri at the 40th anniversary of the `` mother of all demos '' . 
on december 9, 2008, engelbart was honored at the 40th anniversary celebration of the 1968 `` mother of all demos '' . 
all four of these books are based on interviews with engelbart as well as other contributors in his laboratory . 
engelbart showcased the chorded keyboard and many more of his and arc's inventions in 1968 at the mother of all demos . 
engelbart took a position at sri international  -lrb-  known then as stanford research institute  -rrb-  in menlo park ,  california in 1957.
diamond is a solid form of pure carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal . 
diamond is a solid form of the element carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal structure called diamond cubic . 
most natural diamonds have ages between 1 billion and 3.5 billion years . 
from dr .  dre's album `` 2001 '' . 
in july 2008, dr .  dre released his first brand of headphones ,  beats by dr .  dre . 
dr .  dre will additionally be an executive producer on the show . 
following the success of `` 2001 '' ,  dr .  dre focused on producing songs and albums for other artists . 
kanye west wrote the summary for dr .  dre ,  where he stated dr .  dre's song `` xxplosive '' as where he `` got  -lrb-  his  -rrb-  whole sound from '' . 
by 1996, dre was again looking to innovate his sound . 
during the course of `` 2001 '''s popularity ,  dr .  dre was involved in several lawsuits . 
in 2007, dr .  dre's third studio album ,  formerly known as `` detox '' ,  was slated to be his final studio album . 
the project is a partnership between dr .  dre and the compton unified school district . 
over the years ,  word of other collaborators who have contributed to dr .  dre's work has surfaced . 
in 1996, dr .  dre left death row records to establish his own label ,  aftermath entertainment . 
in a june 2014 interview with rapuptv ,  marsha ambrosius talked about working on dr .  dre's third album . 
in november 2006, dr .  dre began working with raekwon on his album `` only built 4 cuban linx ii '' . 
anderson paak also praised dr .  dre in a 2016 interview with `` music times , ``  telling the publication that it was a dream come true to work with dre . 
the deal made dr .  dre the `` richest man in hip hop '' ,  surpassing diddy . 
a consequence of his perfectionism is that some artists who initially sign deals with dr .  dre's aftermath label never release albums . 
the `` dr .  dre presents the aftermath '' album ,  released on november 26, 1996, featured songs by dr .  dre himself ,  as well as by newly signed aftermath entertainment artists ,  and a solo track `` been there ,  done that '' ,  intended as a symbolic farewell to gangsta rap . 
dr .  dre also produced `` how we do '' ,  a 2005 hit single from rapper the game from his album `` the documentary '' ,  as well as tracks on 50 cent's successful second album `` the massacre '' . 
dr .  dre's second solo album ,  `` 2001 '' ,  released on november 16, 1999, was considered an ostentatious return to his gangsta rap roots . 
in september 2005, johnson was sentenced to a year in prison and ordered to stay away from dr .  dre until 2008.
50 cent and eminem asserted in an interview on bet's `` 106 & park '' that dr .  dre had around a dozen songs finished for `` detox '' . 
dr .  dre has stated that he is a perfectionist and is known to pressure the artists with whom he records to give flawless performances . 
after ice cube left n . w . a in 1989 over financial disputes ,  dr .  dre produced and performed for much of the group's second album `` efil4zaggin '' . 
delicate arch is freestanding natural arch located in arches national park near moab ,  utah ,  usa . 
delicate arch is formed of entrada sandstone . 
other arches in the park were formed the same way but ,  due to placement and less dramatic shape ,  are not as famous . 
the most common use is a name change through a deed of change of name  -lrb-  often referred to simply as a `` deed poll ''  -rrb-  . 
this form of deed poll is commonly used in hong kong . 
a deed poll  -lrb-  plural: deeds poll  -rrb-  is a legal document binding only to a single person or several persons acting jointly to express an active intention . 
city symphony films were avant-garde films made during the 1920s to 1930s . 
the american film critic pare lorentz defines a documentary film as `` a factual film which is dramatic . `` 
it was one of the first anti-nazi films in history . 
films in the documentary form without words have been made . 
film `` calling mr .  smith ''  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- was anti-nazi color film created by stefan themerson and being both documentary and avant-garde film against war . 
but the most famous city symphony films are ``  ''  -lrb-  dir . 
films showing many people  -lrb-  for example ,  leaving a factory  -rrb-  were often made for commercial reasons: the people being filmed were eager to see ,  for payment ,  the film showing them . 
docufiction is a genre from two basic ones ,  fiction film and documentary ,  practiced since the first documentary films were made . 
city symphony films include `` manhatta ''  -lrb-  dir . 
travelogue films were very popular in the early part of the 20th century . 
among the best known films of the movement are `` night mail '' and `` coal face '' . 
with robert j .  flaherty's `` nanook of the north '' in 1922, documentary film embraced romanticism; flaherty filmed a number of heavily staged romantic films during this time period ,  often showing how his subjects would have lived 100 years earlier and not how they lived right then . 
 ''bodysong '' was made in 2003 and won a british independent film award for `` best british documentary . `` 
in canada ,  the film board ,  set up by john grierson ,  was created for the same propaganda reasons . 
early film  -lrb-  pre-1900 -rrb- was dominated by the novelty of showing an event . 
polish writer and filmmaker bolesław matuszewski was among those who identified the mode of documentary film . 
documentary filmmakers are increasingly utilizing social impact campaigns with their films . 
constance bennett and her husband henri de la falaise produced two feature-length documentaries ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1935 -rrb- filmed in bali ,  and `` kilou the killer tiger ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- filmed in indochina . 
the film documented the failed antarctic expedition led by ernest shackleton in 1914.
the concept was introduced by pierre bismuth to describe his 2016 film `` where is rocky ii ? `` 
compilation films were pioneered in 1927 by esfir schub with `` the fall of the romanov dynasty '' . 
the propagandist tradition consists of films made with the explicit purpose of persuading an audience of a point . 
matuszewski is also among the first filmmakers to propose the creation of a film archive to collect and keep safe visual materials . 
fans of `` day of the tentacle '' created a webcomic ,  `` the day after the day of the tentacle '' ,  using the game's graphics . 
 ''day of the tentacle '' has been featured regularly in lists of `` top '' games . 
the total budget for the game was about $600,000, according to schafer . 
the whole original `` maniac mansion '' game can be played on a computer resembling a commodore 64 inside the `` day of the tentacle '' game; this practice has since been repeated by other game developers ,  but at the time of `` day of the tentacle's '' release ,  it was unprecedented . 
dave grossman and tim schafer co-led the game's development ,  their first time in such a role . 
computerandvideogames . com ranked it at number 30 in 2008, and gamespot also listed `` day of the tentacle '' as one of the greatest games of all time . 
 ''day of the tentacle '' was one of the first games concurrently released on cd-rom and floppy disk . 
day of the tentacle ,  also known as maniac mansion ii: day of the tentacle ,  is a 1993 graphic adventure game developed and published by lucasarts . 
 ''day of the tentacle '' uses time travel extensively; early in the game ,  the three main protagonists are separated across time by the effects of a faulty time machine . 
 ''day of the tentacle '' uses the scumm engine developed for `` maniac mansion '' . 
 ''day of the tentacle '' follows the point-and-click two-dimensional adventure game formula ,  first established by the original `` maniac mansion '' . 
following a string of successful adventure games ,  lucasarts assigned dave grossman and tim schafer to lead development of a new game . 
bbc radio 4 broadcast the first radio series weekly in the uk in march and april 1978.
adams's contribution to uk radio is commemorated in the radio academy's hall of fame . 
a bbc radio 4 `` book at bedtime '' adaptation and an audio book soon followed . 
radio producer dirk maggs had consulted with adams ,  first in 1993, and later in 1997 and 2000 about creating a third radio series ,  based on the third novel in the `` hitchhiker's '' series . 
 ''the hitchhiker's guide to the galaxy '' was a concept for a science-fiction comedy radio series pitched by adams and radio producer simon brett to bbc radio 4 in 1977.
an omnibus edition of this version was broadcast on the digital radio station bbc7 on 10 december 2005.
he said it was `` awesome .  .  . ``  ,  which was also the last word he wrote on his site . 
bbc radio 4 also commissioned a third dirk gently radio series based on the incomplete chapters of `` the salmon of doubt '' ,  and written by kim fuller; but this was dropped in favour of a bbc tv series based on the two completed novels . 
gilmour also performed at adams's memorial service in 2001, and what would have been adams's 60th birthday party in 2012.
some of adams's early radio work included sketches for `` the burkiss way '' in 1977 and `` the news huddlines '' . 
a 12-part radio series based on the dirk gently novels was announced in 2007.
this became the first church service broadcast live on the web by the bbc . 
between adams's first trip to madagascar with mark carwardine in 1985, and their series of travels that formed the basis for the radio series and non-fiction book `` last chance to see '' ,  adams wrote two other novels with a new cast of characters . 
at this point adams's career stalled; his writing style was unsuited to the then-current style of radio and tv comedy . 
the tv series was based on the first six radio episodes ,  and sections contributed by lloyd were largely re-written . 
adams was a macintosh user from the time they first came out in 1984 until his death in 2001.
later he was also involved in creating `` bureaucracy '' as a parody of events in his own life . 
altogether ,  he wrote three `` doctor who '' serials starring tom baker as the doctor:
john lloyd was also co-author of two episodes from the original `` hitchhiker '' radio series  -lrb-  `` fit the fifth '' and `` fit the sixth '' ,  also known as `` episode five '' and `` episode six ''  -rrb-  ,  as well as `` the meaning of liff '' and `` the deeper meaning of liff '' . 
it was hosted by bbc online from 2001 to 2011.
it was derived from two doctor who serials adams had written . 
drum and bass is dominated by a small group of record labels . 
a track combining the same elements  -lrb-  broken beat ,  bass ,  production techniques  -rrb-  as a drum and bass track ,  but with a slower tempo  -lrb-  say 140 bpm  -rrb-  ,  might not be drum and bass but a drum and bass-influenced breakbeat track . 
drum and bass  -lrb-  also written as `` drum 'n' bass '' or `` drum & bass ''; commonly abbreviated as `` d&b '' ,  `` dnb '' or `` d'n'b ''  -rrb-  ,  is a genre and branch of electronic music which emerged from rave and jungle scenes in britain during the early 1990s . 
clearly drum and bass has been influenced by other music genres ,  though influences from sources external to the electronic dance music scene perhaps lessened following the shifts from jungle to drum and bass ,  and through to so-called `` intelligent drum and bass '' and techstep . 
the sounds of drum and bass are extremely varied due to the range of influences behind the music . 
prior to the rise of the internet ,  drum and bass was commonly broadcast over pirate radio . 
originally drum and bass was mostly sold in 12-inch vinyl single format . 
white labels along with dubplates play an important part in drum and bass musical culture . 
the amen break is generally acknowledged to have been the most-used  -lrb-  and often considered the most powerful  -rrb-  break in drum and bass . 
drum and bass subgenres include breakcore ,  ragga jungle ,  hardstep ,  darkstep ,  techstep ,  neurofunk ,  ambient drum and bass ,  liquid funk ,  jump up ,  deep ,  drumfunk ,  funkstep ,  sambass ,  dnbnoise ,  and drill 'n' bass . 
msx/ radio station in `` grand theft auto iii '' and ``  '' played drum and bass exclusively . 
fabio and grooverider previously held a long-standing drum and bass show on radio 1, and there was also radio 1's 'one in the jungle' show . 
one of the most influential tracks in drum and bass history was `` amen brother '' by the winstons which contains a drum solo that has since become known as the `` amen break '' ,  which after being extensively used in early hip hop music ,  went on to become the basis for the rhythms used in drum and bass . 
consequently ,  drum and bass parties are often advertised as featuring uncommonly loud and bass-heavy sound systems . 
of equal importance is the tr-808 kick drum ,  an artificially pitch-downed or elongated bass drum sound sampled from roland's classic tr-808 drum machine ,  and a sound which has been subject to an enormous amount of experimentation over the years . 
as digital music became more popular ,  websites focused on electronic music ,  such as beatport ,  began to sell drum and bass in digital format . 
many musicians have adapted drum and bass to live performances ,  which feature instruments such as drums  -lrb-  acoustic or electronic  -rrb-  ,  samplers ,  synthesizers ,  turntables ,  bass  -lrb-  either upright or electric  -rrb-  and guitars  -lrb-  acoustic or electric  -rrb-  . 
roni size ,  krust and dj die produced some of the first tracks to be considered mainstream drum and bass tracks . 
despite its roots in the uk ,  which can still be treated as the `` home '' of drum and bass ,  the style has firmly established itself around the world . 
as of 2014, despite higher profile stations such as 1xtra scaling back their drum and bass specialist coverage ,  the genre has made its way into uk top 10 charts with drum and bass inspired tracks from artists such as rudimental and sigma . 
the three highest profile radio stations playing drum and bass shows are bbc radio 1 with the drum and bass show - formerly with friction ,  who was replaced with rené lavice in 2017, simulcast in the us and canada on sirius xm ,  and dj hype on kiss 100 in london . 
they have two children: john martin knuth and jennifer sierra knuth . 
in 2006, knuth was diagnosed with prostate cancer . 
knuth has also delved into recreational mathematics . 
knuth is a writer ,  as well as a computer scientist . 
knuth's chinese name is gao dena  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
knuth has been called the `` father of the analysis of algorithms '' . 
knuth is also an occasional contributor of language puzzles to ``  '' . 
knuth embodied the idea of literate programming in the web system . 
knuth was born in milwaukee ,  wisconsin ,  to german-americans ervin henry knuth and louise marie bohning . 
knuth used web to program tex and metafont ,  and published both programs as books . 
knuth wanted the book to prepare students for doing original ,  creative research . 
after receiving his phd ,  knuth joined caltech's faculty as an assistant professor . 
low-consumption countries consume under 30 kg per capita per year: senegal ,  most of central africa ,  and most of east and southeast asia . 
dairy products are consumed worldwide ,  with the exception of much of east and southeast asia and also some parts of central africa . 
grohl is a democrat . 
grohl soon joined the band full-time . 
grohl is an advocate for lgbt rights . 
apart from his main bands ,  grohl has been involved in other music projects . 
grohl and foo fighters released their fifth album `` in your honor '' on june 14, 2005.
on october 23, 2010, grohl performed with tenacious d at blizzcon . 
at the same time ,  grohl wondered if his future might be in drumming for other bands . 
grohl was married to photographer jennifer youngblood from 1994 to 1997.
a music video was filmed for the song `` money '' while grohl was with nirvana on their 1994 european tour ,  footage of grohl was filmed later and included . 
in the later years of nirvana ,  grohl's songwriting contributions increased . 
grohl also featured on drums for new indie hip-hop band rdgldgrn . 
while playing in scream ,  grohl became a fan of melvins and eventually befriended the band . 
cobain noted that he was excited at the possibility of having novoselic and grohl contribute more to the band's songwriting . 
grohl's life of non-stop touring and travel continued with foo fighters' popularity . 
grohl dropped out of high school at the beginning of the 11th grade . 
in the midst of the initial sessions for foo fighters' second album ,  tension emerged between grohl and goldsmith . 
in february 2013, grohl filled in as host of `` chelsea lately '' for a week . 
also in 2003, grohl stepped behind the kit to perform on killing joke's second self-titled album . 
grohl ,  a fan of theatrical swedish metal band ghost ,  produced their ep `` if you have ghost '' . 
on august 10, 2018, grohl released `` play '' ,  a solo recording lasting over 22 minutes . 
in virginia ,  grohl attended thomas jefferson high school as a freshman . 
grohl's first solo `` rolling stone '' cover story appeared on december 4, 2014.
on november 6, 2012, following the departure of joey castillo from queens of the stone age ,  grohl has been confirmed as the drummer for the band on the upcoming album . 
following cobain's death in april 1994, grohl retreated ,  unsure of where to go and what to do with himself . 
grohl completed the recording in two weeks ,  and immediately joined foo fighters to work on their follow-up . 
dollar  -lrb-  often represented by the dollar sign $  -rrb-  is the name of more than 20 currencies ,  including those of australia ,  canada ,  hong kong ,  jamaica ,  liberia ,  namibia ,  new zealand ,  singapore ,  taiwan ,  and the united states ,  whose us dollar is also the official currency of caribbean netherlands ,  east timor ,  ecuador ,  el salvador ,  federated states of micronesia ,  marshall islands ,  palau ,  panama ,  and zimbabwe . 
dysprosium is a rare earth element that has a metallic ,  bright silver luster . 
dysprosium is a chemical element with symbol dy and atomic number 66.
between 2000 and 2012, of forests around the world were cut down . 
about 31% of earth's land surface is covered by forests . 
the degradation of forest ecosystems has also been traced to economic incentives that make forest conversion appear more profitable than forest conservation . 
more than half of all plant and land animal species in the world live in tropical forests . 
another major area that is being impacted by desertification is the gobi desert . 
as there are many different types of deserts ,  there are also different types of desert reclamation methodologies . 
some soils  -lrb-  for example ,  clay  -rrb-  ,  due to lack of water can become consolidated rather than porous  -lrb-  as in the case of sandy soils  -rrb-  . 
as of 1998, the then-current degree of southward expansion of the sahara was not well known ,  due to a lack of recent ,  measurable expansion of the desert into the sahel at the time . 
enriching of the soil and restoration of its fertility is often done by plants . 
drylands occupy approximately 40–41% of earth’s land area and are home to more than 2 billion people . 
desertification is a type of land degradation in which a relatively dry area of land becomes increasingly arid ,  typically losing its bodies of water as well as vegetation and wildlife  . 
sand fences can also be used to control drifting of soil and sand erosion . 
these salt-flats are one of the most promising desert areas for seawater agriculture and could be revitalized without the use of freshwater or much energy . 
the world's most noted deserts have been formed by natural processes interacting over long intervals of time . 
paleodeserts are large sand seas now inactive because they are stabilized by vegetation ,  some extending beyond the present margins of core deserts ,  such as the sahara ,  the largest hot desert . 
some statistics have shown that since 1900 the sahara has expanded by 250 km to the south over a stretch of land from west to east 6,000 km long . 
there is a suggestion that the last time that the sahara was converted from savanna to desert it was partially due to overgrazing by the cattle of the local population . 
tolls are only collected from westbound traffic at the toll plaza on the east side of the bay . 
the dumbarton bridge is the southernmost of the highway bridges across san francisco bay in california . 
between the dumbarton bridge and the dumbarton rail bridge is the bay crossing of the hetch hetchy aqueduct . 
prior to 1969, tolls on the dumbarton bridge were collected in both directions . 
due to further funding shortages for seismic retrofit projects ,  the bay area toll authority again raised tolls on all seven of the state-owned bridges in july 2010.
the aqueduct rises above ground in newark at the east side of the bay ,  falls below the water's surface at a pump station in fremont ,  re-emerges in the middle of the bay and then continues above water until it reaches the west side of the bay at menlo park . 
the toll rate for autos on the dumbarton bridge was thus increased to $5.
the toll per car remained at $0.75 when the replacement bridge opened in the 1980s . 
dallas ended the season 8–8.
the cowboys finished the season 6–10.
dallas once again finished the season 8–8.
hard times came for the organization as they went 7–9 in 1986, 7–8 in 1987, and 3–13 in 1988.
dallas ended the regular season with a 12–4 record and an 8–0 away record when they won on the road against washington 44–17.
they finished the season 4–12 and last in their division . 
they went 2–7 in their next 9 games but won 4 of their last 6 games to finish the season with a 4th place 7–9 record . 
dallas got off to a hot 7–3 start for the 2005 season but ended up in 3rd place with a 9–7 record . 
in 1992 dallas set a team record for regular season wins with a 13–3 mark . 
in the divisional round their season ended in a 38–6 playoff rout by the lions . 
despite starting the 1993 season 0–2, they again defeated the buffalo bills in super bowl xxviii ,  30–13  -lrb-  becoming the first team in nfl history to win a super bowl after starting 0–2 -rrb- . 
for the 1983 season the cowboys went 12–4 and made it once again to the playoffs but were defeated at home in the wild card by the rams 24–17.
the cowboys are the only nfl team to record 20 straight winning seasons  -lrb-  1966–85 -rrb- ,  in which they missed the playoffs only twice  -lrb-  1974 and 1984 -rrb- . 
to start off the 2014 season dallas began by losing to san francisco 28–17.
after going 10–6 in 1985 and winning a division title ,  the cowboys were blown out in the divisional round at home to the rams 20–0.
in the tumultuous 2008 season ,  the cowboys started off strong ,  going 3–0 for the second straight year ,  en route to a 4–1 start . 
at home against the new york giants ,  dallas won 27–26.
in the 2013 season dallas started off by defeating the giants for the second straight year; this time 36–31.
they defeated minnesota 40–15 in the wild card round but were eliminated in the divisional round of the playoffs 26–17 by the carolina panthers . 
in game 10, romo suited up for the first time in the season and was the backup quarterback . 
the eagles captured their first conference championship and super bowl berth by winning 20–7.
they missed the super bowl ,  however ,  after losing to the 49ers in the nfc championship game ,  38–28.
the 2008 season ended in a 52–21 loss at the san diego chargers ,  giving the broncos an 8–8 record and their third straight season out of the playoffs . 
cutler's first full season as a starter in 2007 became the broncos' first losing season since 1999, with a 7–9 record . 
as the designated home team in super bowl 50, the broncos — who have an 0–4 super bowl record when using their standard orange jerseys — chose to wear their white jerseys as the designated `` home '' team . 
like 2012, the broncos finished with a 13–3 record and the afc's no . 
shortly after finishing the regular season ,  head coach vance joseph was fired after having only an 11-21 record in two seasons . 
the teams met again in the divisional round of the 2015 playoffs at denver ,  where the broncos defeated the steelers 23–16 on their way to a victory in super bowl 50.
the broncos defeated the pittsburgh steelers 23–16 in the divisional round ,  the new england patriots 20–18 in the afc championship ,  and defeated the carolina panthers 24–10 in super bowl 50—the broncos' third super bowl title . 
the broncos did not win the super bowl after any of the championship games where they defeated the browns ,  losing by an aggregate of 136–40.
during the 1997 season ,  elway and davis helped guide the broncos to their first super bowl victory ,  a 31–24 win over the defending champion green bay packers in super bowl xxxii . 
the two teams met in the playoffs for the first time on january 12, 2014, at denver's sports authority field at mile high ,  with the broncos winning 24–17.
john elway retired following the 1998 season ,  and brian griese started at quarterback for the next four seasons . 
following a 1–4 start to the 2011 season ,  tim tebow replaced kyle orton as the broncos' starting quarterback ,  and led the broncos to an 8–8 record and the team's first playoff berth and division title since 2005.
the broncos' defense began the first five games of the 2006 season allowing only one touchdown—an nfl record ,  but struggled down the season stretch . 
however ,  the broncos were soundly defeated by the seattle seahawks in super bowl xlviii by a score of 43–8, the broncos' first super bowl berth since winning back-to-back super bowls in 1997 and 1998.
the steelers went on to win super bowl xl . 
the renovations were finished before kickoff of the 2013 season . 
since 2002, the broncos have won three of five interconference meetings ,  and the two teams met in super bowl xlviii on february 2, 2014, with the seahawks winning by a score of 43–8.
plummer led the broncos to a 13–3 record in 2005 and their first afc west division title since 1998.
prior to that ,  they played at mile high stadium from 1960 to 2000.
prior to elway ,  the broncos had over 24 different starting quarterbacks in its 23 seasons to that point . 
from 1969 to 1971, and again from 1978 to 1979, the team wore orange pants with their white jerseys . 
d  -lrb-  named `` dee ''   -rrb-  is the fourth letter of the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
the equivalent greek letter is delta ,  δ . 
the name `` digamma '' was used in ancient greek and is the most common name for the letter in its alphabetic function today . 
loanwords that entered greek before the loss of lost that sound when greek did . 
in modern greek ,  this is often replaced by the digraph  . 
the sound existed in mycenean greek ,  as attested in linear b and archaic greek inscriptions using digamma . 
digamma ,  waw ,  or wau  -lrb-  uppercase: ϝ ,  lowercase: ϝ ,  numeral: ϛ  -rrb-  is an archaic letter of the greek alphabet . 
it is also confirmed by the hittite name of troy ,  `` wilusa '' ,  corresponding to the greek name * ''wilion '' . 
 ''wau ''  -lrb-  variously rendered as `` vau '' ,  `` waw '' or similarly in english  -rrb-  is the original name of the alphabetic letter for in ancient greek . 
digamma or wau was part of the original archaic greek alphabet as initially adopted from phoenician . 
digamma or wau is in turn the ancestor of the latin letter f .  as an alphabetic letter ,  it is attested in archaic and dialectal ancient greek inscriptions until the classical period . 
digamma was derived from phoenician waw ,  which was shaped roughly like an y  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the comic strip originally revolved around dilbert and his `` pet '' dog dogbert in their home . 
catbert is the `` evil director of human resources '' in the `` dilbert '' comic strip . 
dilbert's anthropomorphic pet dog is the smartest dog on earth . 
the main character in the strip ,  dilbert is a stereotypical technically-minded single male . 
dilbert is an american comic strip written and illustrated by scott adams ,  first published on april 16, 1989.
in one strip ,  it was mentioned that being in heck is not as bad as being in a cubicle . 
dilbert is a skilled engineer but has a poor social and romantic life . 
solomon cites the xerox corporation's use of `` dilbert '' strips and characters in internally distributed 'inspirational' pamphlets:
a `` standard dialect ''  -lrb-  also known as a standardized dialect or `` standard language ''  -rrb-  is a dialect that is supported by institutions . 
for example ,  standard american english ,  standard british english ,  standard canadian english ,  standard indian english ,  standard australian english ,  and standard philippine english may all be said to be standard dialects of the english language . 
italians in different regions today may also speak regional varieties of standard italian ,  or regional italian dialects ,  which ,  unlike the majority of languages of italy ,  are actually dialects of standard italian rather than separate languages . 
these variations on standard italian ,  known as regional italian ,  would thus more appropriately be called `` dialects '' in accordance with the first linguistic definition of `` dialect '' ,  as they are in fact derived partially or mostly from standard italian . 
however ,  at the time of the italian unification ,  standard italian still existed mainly as a literary language ,  and only 2.5% of italy's population could speak standard italian . 
a regional italian dialect is generally standard italian that has been heavily influenced or mixed with local or regional native languages and accents . 
most swiss german speakers perceive standard german to be a foreign language . 
the low german varieties spoken in germany are often counted among the german dialects . 
that allows them to be distinguished from the regional varieties of modern standard german . 
modern standard italian itself is heavily based on the latin-derived florentine tuscan language . 
the dialect test was designed by joseph wright to compare different english dialects with each other . 
the german dialects show a wide spectrum of variation . 
the frisian languages spoken in germany are excluded from the german dialects . 
for example ,  most of the various regional romance languages of italy ,  often colloquially referred to as italian `` dialects '' ,  are ,  in fact ,  not `` actually '' derived from modern standard italian ,  but rather evolved from vulgar latin separately and individually from one another and independently of standard italian ,  long prior to the diffusion of a national standardized language throughout what is now italy . 
a nonstandard dialect ,  like a standard dialect ,  has a complete vocabulary ,  grammar ,  and syntax ,  but is usually not the beneficiary of institutional support . 
in this secondary sense of `` dialect '' ,  language varieties are often called `` dialects '' rather than `` languages '':
digitalis poisoning can cause heart block and either bradycardia  -lrb-  decreased heart rate  -rrb-  or tachycardia  -lrb-  increased heart rate  -rrb-  ,  depending on the dose and the condition of one's heart . 
the term `` digitalis '' is also used for drug preparations that contain cardiac glycosides ,  particularly one called digoxin ,  extracted from various plants of this genus . 
some of the more menacing names ,  such as `` witch's glove , ``  reference the toxicity of the plant . 
the name `` foxglove '' was first recorded in the year 1542 by leonhard fuchs ,  whose family name ,  fuchs ,  is the german word for `` fox ''  -lrb-  the plant genus `` fuchsia '' is also named for him  -rrb-  . 
during the second year of the plant's life ,  a long ,  leafy stem from 50 to 255 centimetres tall grows atop the roots of healthy plants . 
the entire plant is toxic  -lrb-  including the roots and seeds  -rrb-  . 
digoxigenin  -lrb-  dig  -rrb-  is a steroid found exclusively in the flowers and leaves of the plants `` d .  purpurea '' and `` d .  lanata '' . 
dendrites are one of two types of protoplasmic protrusions that extrude from the cell body of a neuron ,  the other type being an axon . 
an autapse is a synapse in which the axon of one neuron transmits signals to its own dendrites . 
dendrites  -lrb-  from greek δένδρον `` déndron '' ,  `` tree ''  -rrb-  ,  also dendrons ,  are branched protoplasmic extensions of a nerve cell that propagate the electrochemical stimulation received from other neural cells to the cell body ,  or soma ,  of the neuron from which the dendrites project . 
action potentials in animal cells are generated by either sodium-gated or calcium-gated ion channels in the plasma membrane . 
there are three main types of neurons; multipolar ,  bipolar ,  and unipolar . 
electrochemical signals are propagated by action potentials that utilize intermembrane voltage-gated ion channels to transport sodium ions ,  calcium ions ,  and potassium ions . 
the fifth dalai lama died in 1682.
the 14th and current dalai lama is tenzin gyatso . 
this lineage has been extrapolated by tibetans up to and including the dalai lamas . 
the 6th dalai lama died during the route to beijing . 
these dzungars ,  who were buddhist ,  had supported the fifth dalai lama and his regent . 
the dalai lama figure is important for many reasons . 
the dalai lama lineage started from humble beginnings . 
like the seventh dalai lama ,  the tenth ,  tsultrim gyatso ,  was born in lithang ,  kham ,  where the third dalai lama had built a monastery . 
the delighted tibetans enthroned him as the seventh dalai lama at the potala palace . 
finally ,  while acknowledging the possibility ,  the 14th dalai lama himself doubts they were poisoned . 
he also called sonam gyatso `` dalai '' ,  mongolian for 'gyatso'  -lrb-  ocean  -rrb-  . 
his second regent demo tulku was the biographer of the 8th and 9th dalai lamas and though the 9th died at the age of 9 his biography is as lengthy as those of many of the early dalai lamas . 
tibetan historian nyima gyaincain and wang jiawei point out that the 9th dalai lama was allowed to use the seal of authority given to the late 8th dalai lama by the emperor of china
following the failed 1959 tibetan uprising ,  the 14th dalai lama sought refuge in india . 
the kangxi emperor ordered lha-bzang khan to arrest the 6th dalai lama and send him to beijing . 
then ,  the panchen lama ,  in shigatse ,  negotiated the lifting of the ban ,  enabling the boy to be recognised as lobsang gyatso ,  the 5th dalai lama . 
having discredited and deposed the sixth dalai lama ,  whom he considered an impostor ,  and having removed the regent ,  lhazang khan pressed the lhasa gelugpa lamas to endorse a new dalai lama in tsangyang gyatso's place as the true incarnation of the fifth . 
the 1st dalai lama was based at tashi lhunpo monastery ,  which he founded ,  the second to the fifth dalai lamas were mainly based at drepung monastery outside lhasa . 
the third dalai lama ,  sonam gyatso  -lrb-  1543–1588 -rrb- was born in tolung ,  near lhasa ,  as predicted by his predecessor . 
the 13th dalai lama assumed ruling power from the monasteries ,  which previously had great influence on the regent ,  in 1895.
construction of the norbulingka ,  the 'summer palace' of the dalai lamas in lhasa was also started during kelzang gyatso's reign . 
in this way ,  güshi khan established the fifth dalai lama as the highest spiritual and political authority in tibet . 
the fifth dalai lama's death in 1682 was kept secret for fifteen years by his regent desi sangye gyatso . 
the fourth dalai lama ,  yonten gyatso  -lrb-  1589–1617 -rrb- was a mongolian ,  the great-grandson of altan khan who was a descendant of kublai khan and king of the tümed mongols who had already been converted to buddhism by the third dalai lama ,  sonam gyatso  -lrb-  1543–1588 -rrb- . 
the 14th dalai lama was born on a straw mat in a cowshed to a farmer's family in a remote part of tibet . 
fearing for his life in the wake of a revolt in tibet in 1959, the 14th dalai lama fled to india ,  from where he led a government in exile . 
the 14th dalai lama was not formally enthroned until 17 november 1950, during the battle of chamdo with the people's republic of china . 
in fact ,  this text is said to have laid the foundation for the tibetans' later identification of the dalai lamas as incarnations of avalokiteśvara . 
the death of the fourth dalai lama in 1617 led to open conflict breaking out between various parties . 
according to the 14th dalai lama ,  long ago avalokiteśvara had promised the buddha to guide and protect the tibetan people and in the late middle ages ,  his master plan to fulfill this promise was the stage-by-stage establishment of the dalai lama theocracy in tibet . 
although the 8th dalai lama lived almost as long as the seventh he was overshadowed by many contemporary lamas in terms of both religious and political accomplishment . 
tibetan historian nyima gyaincain points out that based on the texts written on golden sheets ,  dalai lama was only a subordinate of the emperor of china . 
in 1708, in accordance with an indication given by the 6th dalai lama when quitting lhasa a child called kelzang gyatso had been born at lithang in eastern tibet who was soon claimed by local tibetans to be his incarnation . 
the sixth dalai lama was taken to amdo at the age of 8 to be installed in kumbum monastery with great pomp and ceremony . 
they present a number of artifacts ,  only some of which belonged to the previous dalai lama ,  and if the boy chooses the items which belonged to the previous dalai lama ,  this is seen as a sign ,  in conjunction with all of the other claimed indications ,  that the boy is the reincarnation . 
the 17th-century struggles for domination between the manchu-led qing dynasty and the various mongol groups spilled over to involve tibet because of the fifth dalai lama's strong influence over the mongols as a result of their general adoption of tibetan buddhism and their consequent deep loyalty to the dalai lama as their guru . 
for tibetan buddhist historians however it was interpreted as the start of an era of independent rule of the dalai lamas ,  and of qing patronage alongside that of the mongols . 
when the 5th dalai lama returned ,  he was granted by the emperor of china a golden seal of authority and golden sheets with texts written in manchurian ,  tibetan and chinese languages . 
the dalai lama is also considered to be the successor in a line of tulkus who are believed to be incarnations of avalokiteśvara ,  a bodhisattva of compassion . 
as a young man ,  being 22 years his junior ,  the dalai lama addressed him reverentially as ``  ''zhalngo '' '' ,  meaning `` the presence '' . 
damages in tort are awarded generally to place the claimant in the position in which he would have been had the tort not taken place . 
the claimant may also be entitled to any consequential losses . 
 -lrb-  however ,  she would have to return the watch ,  or else her damages would be £50.  -rrb- 
this is because damages in tort put her in the position she would have been in had the tort not taken place ,  and are calculated as her money back  -lrb-  £750 -rrb- less the value of what she actually got  -lrb-  £50 -rrb- . 
if the transaction were a `` bad bargain '' ,  tort gives a better result for the claimant . 
parties may contract for liquidated damages to be paid upon a breach of the contract by one of the parties . 
if the transaction was a `` good bargain , ``  contract generally gives a better result for the claimant . 
expectation damages are used in contract law . 
the word `` disaster '' is derived from middle french `` désastre '' and that from old italian `` disastro '' ,  which in turn comes from the ancient greek pejorative prefix δυσ- ,   -lrb-  `` dus- ''  -rrb-  `` bad '' and ἀστήρ  -lrb-  `` aster ''  -rrb-  ,  `` star '' . 
the root of the word `` disaster ''  -lrb-  `` bad star '' in greek  -rrb-  comes from an astrological sense of a calamity blamed on the position of planets . 
a natural disaster is a natural process or phenomenon that may cause loss of life ,  injury or other health impacts ,  property damage ,  loss of livelihoods and services ,  social and economic disruption ,  or environmental damage . 
zoff is roman catholic . 
at 41 years and 86 days ,  zoff is also the oldest player to have appeared in a european cup or uefa champions league final . 
zoff was voted the world soccer manager of the year in 2000.
zoff also achieved great club success with juventus ,  winning 6 serie a titles ,  2 coppa italia titles ,  and an uefa cup ,  also reaching two european champions' cup finals in the 1972–73 and 1982–83 seasons ,  as well as finishing second in the 1973 intercontinental cup final . 
in 1998, zoff was appointed as the head coach of the italian national team . 
in 1999, zoff placed 47th in world soccer magazine's `` 100 greatest players of the twentieth century '' . 
after retiring as a footballer ,  zoff went on to pursue a managerial career ,  coaching the italian national team ,  with which he reached the euro 2000 final ,  and several other italian clubs ,  including his former club juventus ,  with which he won an uefa cup and a coppa italia double during the 1989–90 season ,  trophies he had also won as a player . 
zoff is married to annamaria passerini; they have a son ,  marco ,  born in 1967.
these dates do not correspond to the modern gregorian calendar . 
december is the twelfth and final month of the year in the julian and gregorian calendars and is the seventh and last of seven months to have a length of 31 days . 
in ancient rome ,  as one of the four agonalia ,  this day in honor of sol indiges was held on december 11, as was septimontium . 
he married and had four children: pedro cão ,  manuel cão ,  andré afonso cão ,  and isabel cão . 
 -lrb-  `` here reached the ships of the enlightned king john ii of portugal – diogo cão ,  pero anes ,  pero da costa ''  -rrb-  . 
cão was born in vila real  -lrb-  some say in évora  -rrb-  ,  in the middle of the 15th century ,  the illegitimate son of álvaro fernandes or gonçalves cão ,  fidalgo of the royal household ,  himself the illegitimate son of gonçalo cão . 
the simplest drinking games are endurance games in which players compete to out-drink one another . 
drinking games are games which involve the consumption of alcoholic beverages . 
tolerance games are simply about seeing which player can last the longest . 
many pub or bar games involve competitive drinking for speed . 
devon derives its name from dumnonia . 
the supporters are a devon bull and a sea lion . 
only one school in exeter ,  mid devon ,  torridge and north devon have a sixth form – the schools in other districts mostly have sixth forms ,  with all schools in west devon and east devon having a sixth form . 
there are five rugby league teams in devon . 
devon has a mostly comprehensive education system . 
devon was later constituted as a shire of the kingdom of england . 
west devon has the fewest residents ,  having 63,839 at the time of the census . 
there are small remains of pre-devonian rocks on the south devon coast . 
the principal geological components of devon are the devonian  -lrb-  in north devon ,  south west devon and extending into cornwall  -rrb- ; the culm measures  -lrb-  north western devon also extending into north cornwall  -rrb- ; and the granite intrusion of dartmoor in central devon ,  part of the cornubian batholith forming the 'spine' of the southwestern peninsula . 
devon has been home to a number of customs ,  such as its own form of devon wrestling ,  similar in some ways to cornish wrestling . 
devon also has its own flag which has been dedicated to saint petroc ,  a local saint with dedications throughout devon and neighbouring counties . 
all these features make devon a popular holiday destination . 
inland ,  the dartmoor national park lies wholly in devon ,  and the exmoor national park lies in both devon and somerset . 
the administrative centre and capital of devon is the city of exeter . 
an `` atlas of the devon flora '' by ivimey-cook appeared in 1984, and `` a new flora of devon '' ,  based on field work undertaken between 2005 and 2014, was published in 2016.
the largest city in devon ,  plymouth ,  and the conurbation of torbay  -lrb-  which includes the largest town in devon and capital of torbay ,  torquay ,  as well as paignton and brixham  -rrb-  have been unitary authorities since 1998, separate from the remainder of devon which is administered by devon county council for the purposes of local government . 
combined as a ceremonial county ,  devon's area is and its population is about 1.1 million . 
devon has produced tin ,  copper and other metals from ancient times . 
in australia ,  devon is a name for luncheon meat  -lrb-  processed ham  -rrb-  . 
celtic paganism and roman practices were the first known religions in devon ,  although in the mid-fourth century ad ,  christianity was introduced to devon . 
as well as agriculture ,  much of the economy of devon is based on tourism . 
all devon services are diesel-hauled ,  since there are no electrified lines in the county . 
devon's toponyms include many with the endings `` coombe/combe '' and `` tor '' . 
there are also many successful professional racehorse trainers based in devon . 
dartmoor is a moor in southern devon ,  england . 
some of the bogs on dartmoor have achieved notoriety . 
for a more complete list see list of dartmoor tors and hills . 
much more rain falls on dartmoor than in the surrounding lowlands . 
the high ground of dartmoor forms the catchment area for many of devon's rivers . 
protected by national park status as dartmoor national park ,  it covers  . 
parts of dartmoor have been used as military firing ranges for over 200 years . 
the highest points on dartmoor are on the northern moor: high willhays ,   ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  and yes tor ,   ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  the highest points on the southern moor are ryder's hill ,   ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  snowdon  ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and an unnamed point ,  at  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  between langcombe hill and shell top . 
for a full list ,  expand the `` rivers of dartmoor '' navigational box at the bottom of this page . 
dartmoor is managed by the dartmoor national park authority ,  whose 22 members are drawn from devon county council ,  local district councils and government . 
the first formal biography of dante was the `` vita di dante ''  -lrb-  also known as `` trattatello in laude di dante ''  -rrb-  ,  written after 1348 by giovanni boccaccio . 
dante was one of the delegates . 
durante degli alighieri  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  commonly known by his short name dante alighieri or simply as dante  -lrb-  ;  ,  ; – 1321 -rrb- ,  was an italian poet during the late middle ages . 
he would even write in the tuscan dialect for works such as `` the new life ''  -lrb-  1295 -rrb- and the `` divine comedy ''; this highly unorthodox choice set a precedent that important later italian writers such as petrarch and boccaccio would follow . 
antonia later became a nun ,  taking the name sister beatrice . 
italy's first dreadnought battleship was completed in 1913 and named `` dante alighieri '' in honor of him . 
the exact date of his marriage is not known: the only certain information is that ,  before his exile in 1301, he had three children  -lrb-  pietro ,  jacopo and antonia  -rrb-  . 
in italy ,  he is often referred to as '  -lrb-  `` the supreme poet ''  -rrb-  and '; he ,  petrarch ,  and boccaccio are also called `` the three fountains '' or `` the three crowns '' . 
it was during this time that he wrote `` de monarchia '' ,  proposing a universal monarchy under henry vii . 
he took part in several attempts by the white guelphs to regain power ,  but these failed due to treachery . 
his `` divine comedy '' ,  originally called '  -lrb-  modern italian: `` commedia ''  -rrb-  and later christened ' by giovanni boccaccio ,  is widely considered the most important poem of the middle ages and the greatest literary work in the italian language . 
brubeck organized the dave brubeck quartet in 1951, with paul desmond on alto saxophone . 
appearing on one of the top-selling jazz albums ,  `` time out '' ,  and written in time ,  `` take five '' has endured as a jazz classic associated with brubeck . 
brubeck founded the brubeck institute with his wife ,  iola ,  at their alma mater ,  the university of the pacific in 2000.
after graduating in 1942, brubeck was drafted into the u . s .  army . 
smith was an old friend of brubeck's; they would record together ,  intermittently ,  from the 1940s until the final years of brubeck's career . 
four of brubeck's six children have been professional musicians . 
in 1959, the dave brubeck quartet recorded `` time out '' ,  an album about which the record label was enthusiastic but which they were nonetheless hesitant to release . 
brubeck's children often joined him in concerts and in the recording studio . 
ellington himself knocked on the door of brubeck's hotel room to show him the cover and the only reaction brubeck could give was ,  “it should have been you . ”
often incorrectly attributed to brubeck ,  the song `` take five '' ,  which has become a jazz standard ,  was composed by brubeck's long-time musical partner ,  alto saxophonist paul desmond . 
both dyes and pigments are colored ,  because they absorb only some wavelengths of visible light . 
textile dyeing dates back to the neolithic period . 
a dye is a colored substance that has an affinity to the substrate to which it is being applied . 
where formula_8 is some known function . 
equations in the form formula_1 are called separable and solved by formula_2 and thus  formula_3.
by world war ii ,  only dwight was still called `` ike '' . 
in 1951–52, he served as the first supreme commander of nato . 
however ,  egypt received american aid until the six-day war in 1967.
eisenhower stated prophetically that `` this war would absorb our troops by divisions . `` 
nevertheless ,  the cold war escalated during his presidency . 
after the war ,  eisenhower reverted to his regular rank of captain and a few days later was promoted to major ,  a rank he held for 16 years . 
he also upgraded the role of the national security council in planning all phases of the cold war . 
eisenhower had the insight to realize that unlimited war in the nuclear age was unthinkable ,  and limited war unwinnable . 
two controversies during the campaign tested him and his staff ,  but did not affect the campaign . 
eisenhower was honored on a us one dollar coin ,  minted from 1971 to 1978.
they moved many times during their first 35 years of marriage . 
at bridge ,  you would say he plays in the 70s . `` 
eisenhower had a republican congress for only his first two years in office; in the senate ,  the republican majority was by a one-vote margin . 
early in 1953, the french asked eisenhower for help in french indochina against the communists ,  supplied from china ,  who were fighting the first indochina war . 
as president ,  eisenhower also initiated the `` up or out '' policy that still prevails in the u . s .  military . 
the administration never made use of many republicans of consequence whose services in one form or another would have been available for the asking . `` 
when the u . s .  entered world war i ,  he immediately requested an overseas assignment but was again denied and then assigned to ft .  leavenworth ,  kansas . 
as the cold war deepened ,  dulles sought to isolate the soviet union by building regional alliances of nations against it . 
nato did not have strong bipartisan support in congress at the time that eisenhower assumed its military command . 
eisenhower became the first u . s .  president constitutionally prevented from running for re-election to a third term . 
on may 1, 1960, a u . s .  one-man u-2 spy plane was reportedly shot down at high altitude over soviet union airspace . 
eisenhower was the first non-british person to command gibraltar in 200 years . 
although his administrative abilities had been noticed ,  on the eve of the american entry into world war ii he had never held an active command above a battalion and was far from being considered by many as a potential commander of major operations . 
this second general of the army rank is not the same as the post-civil war era version because of its purpose and five stars . 
nevertheless ,  eisenhower thought that nato would become a truly european alliance ,  with the american and canadian commitments ending after about ten years . 
ambrose argues that eisenhower ,  by not participating in the geneva agreement ,  had kept the u . s .  out of vietnam; nevertheless ,  with the formation of seato ,  he had in the end put the u . s .  back into the conflict . 
the u . n .  speech was well received but the soviets never acted upon it ,  due to an overarching concern for the greater stockpiles of nuclear weapons in the u . s .  arsenal . 
the 22nd amendment to the u . s .  constitution was ratified in 1951, and it set term limits to the presidency of two terms . 
in december 1943, president roosevelt decided that eisenhower – not marshall – would be supreme allied commander in europe . 
in the election he also brought with him a republican majority in the house  -lrb-  by eight votes  -rrb-  and in the senate  -lrb-  evenly divided ,  with vice president nixon providing republicans the majority  -rrb-  . 
in june 1943, a visiting politician had suggested to eisenhower that he might become president of the united states after the war . 
the last three years of eisenhower's second term in office were ones of relatively good health . 
his primary duty was planning for the next war ,  which proved most difficult in the midst of the great depression . 
he then accepted an appointment to west point in 1911.
this resulted in an increased strategic control over iranian oil by u . s .  and british companies . 
in the years that followed ,  eisenhower increased the number of u . s .  military advisors in south vietnam to 900 men . 
the contacts gained through university and american assembly fund-raising activities would later become important supporters in eisenhower's bid for the republican party nomination and the presidency . 
in athletics ,  eisenhower later said that `` not making the baseball team at west point was one of the greatest disappointments of my life ,  maybe my greatest '' . 
on the whole ,  eisenhower's support of the nation's fledgling space program was officially modest until the soviet launch of sputnik in 1957, gaining the cold war enemy enormous prestige around the world . 
his wife mamie was buried next to him after her death a decade later in 1979.
dwight david `` ike '' eisenhower  -lrb-   ; october 14, 1890 – march 28, 1969 -rrb- was an american army general and statesman who served as the 34th president of the united states from 1953 to 1961.
fear spread through the united states that the soviet union would invade and spread communism ,  so eisenhower wanted to not only create a surveillance satellite to detect any threats but ballistic missiles that would protect the united states . 
after the japanese attack on pearl harbor ,  eisenhower was assigned to the general staff in washington ,  where he served until june 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat japan and germany . 
throughout his terms eisenhower took a hard-line attitude toward red china ,  as demanded by conservative republicans ,  with the goal of driving a wedge between red china and the soviet union . 
while eisenhower's mother was against war ,  it was her collection of history books that first sparked eisenhower's early and lasting interest in military history . 
on february 10, 1962, powers was exchanged for rudolf abel in berlin and returned to the u . s . 
on december 20, 1944, eisenhower was appointed to the rank of general of the army ,  placing him in the company of george marshall ,  henry `` hap '' arnold ,  and douglas macarthur ,  the only four men to achieve the rank in world war ii . 
he was returned to active duty when he left office eight years later . 
eisenhower advised the participating european nations that it would be incumbent upon them to demonstrate their own commitment of troops and equipment to the nato force before such would come from the war-weary united states . 
for eight years now ,  dwight eisenhower has neither commanded an army nor led a nation; and yet he remained through his final days the world's most admired and respected man ,  truly the first citizen of the world . 
dwight d .  eisenhower school for national security and resource strategy is a senior war college of the department of defense's national defense university in washington ,  dc . 
it was believed that large cities would be targets in a possible war ,  hence the highways were designed to facilitate their evacuation and ease military maneuvers . 
the eisenhowers had two sons . 
in late 1954, gen .  j .  lawton collins was made ambassador to `` free vietnam ''  -lrb-  the term south vietnam came into use in 1955 -rrb- ,  effectively elevating the country to sovereign status . 
at home ,  eisenhower was more effective in making the case for nato in congress than the truman administration had been . 
edgar took the first turn at school ,  and dwight was employed as a night supervisor at the belle springs creamery . 
in 1955 american nuclear arms policy became one aimed primarily at arms control as opposed to disarmament . 
he defeated democratic candidate adlai stevenson ii in a landslide ,  with an electoral margin of 442 to 89, marking the first republican return to the white house in 20 years . 
oil painting was one of eisenhower's hobbies . 
eisenhower was also the first outgoing president to come under the protection of the former presidents act; two living former presidents ,  herbert hoover and harry s .  truman ,  left office before the act was passed . 
