amphibian skin is permeable to water . 
adult frogs do not have tails and caecilians have only very short ones . 
the eggs of amphibians are typically laid in water and hatch into free-living larvae that complete their development in water and later transform into either aquatic or terrestrial adults . 
most terrestrial caecilians that lay eggs do so in burrows or moist places on land near bodies of water . 
on land ,  amphibians are restricted to moist habitats because of the need to keep their skin damp . 
when they are newly hatched ,  frog larvae feed on the yolk of the egg . 
the skin changed to become more protective and prevent excessive water loss . 
on the surface of the ground or in water they move by undulating their body from side to side . 
the three modern orders of amphibians are anura  -lrb-  the frogs and toads  -rrb-  ,  urodela  -lrb-  the salamanders  -rrb-  ,  and apoda  -lrb-  the caecilians  -rrb-  . 
for the purpose of reproduction most amphibians require fresh water although some lay their eggs on land and have developed various means of keeping them moist . 
amphibians have a juvenile stage and an adult stage ,  and the circulatory systems of the two are distinct . 
the skin colour of amphibians is produced by three layers of pigment cells called chromatophores . 
amphibians usually swallow food whole but may chew it lightly first to subdue it . 
the eggs may be deposited singly or in small groups ,  or may take the form of spherical egg masses ,  rafts or long strings . 
the largest frog is the african goliath frog  -lrb-  `` conraua goliath ''  -rrb-  ,  which can reach and weigh  . 
with a few exceptions ,  frogs use external fertilisation . 
some tree frogs with limited access to water excrete most of their metabolic waste as uric acid . 
adult frogs are unable to regrow limbs but tadpoles can do so . 
the first major groups of amphibians developed in the devonian period ,  around 370 million years ago ,  from lobe-finned fish which were similar to the modern coelacanth and lungfish . 
tadpoles retain the lateral line system of their ancestral fishes ,  but this is lost in terrestrial adult amphibians . 
the numbers of species cited above follows frost and the total number of known amphibian species is over 7,000, of which nearly 90% are frogs . 
the study of amphibians is called batrachology ,  while the study of both reptiles and amphibians is called herpetology . 
with a few exceptions ,  adult amphibians are predators ,  feeding on virtually anything that moves that they can swallow . 
the assembled frogs may call in unison and frenzied activity ensues ,  the males scrambling to mate with the usually smaller number of females . 
they supplement this with gas exchange through the skin . 
most frogs can be classified as either prolonged or explosive breeders . 
certain primitive salamanders in the families sirenidae ,  hynobiidae and cryptobranchidae practice external fertilisation in a similar manner to frogs ,  with the female laying the eggs in water and the male releasing sperm onto the egg mass . 
as they evolved from lunged fish ,  amphibians had to make certain adaptations for living on land ,  including the need to develop new means of locomotion . 
alaska was officially proclaimed a state on january 3, 1959.
of the remaining land area ,  the state of alaska owns  ,  its entitlement under the alaska statehood act . 
the climate of the interior of alaska is subarctic . 
alaska has a longer coastline than all the other u . s .  states combined . 
according to the 2010 united states census ,  alaska ,  had a population of 710,231.
the name `` alaska ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  was introduced in the russian colonial period when it was used to refer to the alaska peninsula . 
the climate of western alaska is determined in large part by the bering sea and the gulf of alaska . 
the cost of goods in alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 48 states . 
 ''alaska grown '' is used as an agricultural slogan . 
alaska has few road connections compared to the rest of the u . s . 
that same year ,  not coincidentally ,  alaska repealed its state income tax . 
estimates for the number of muslims in alaska range from 2,000 to 5,000.
the alaska rail network is not connected to outside . 
in 1960, the census bureau reported alaska's population as 77.2% white ,  3% black ,  and 18.8% american indian and alaska native . 
alaska is the largest state in the united states by total area at  ,  over twice the size of texas ,  the next largest state . 
the highest and lowest recorded temperatures in alaska are both in the interior . 
the interior is the largest region of alaska; much of it is uninhabited wilderness . 
built around 1915, the alaska railroad  -lrb-  arr  -rrb-  played a key role in the development of alaska through the 20th century . 
with its myriad islands ,  alaska has nearly of tidal shoreline . 
on march 30, 1867, the united states purchased alaska from the russian empire for the sum of $7.2 million . 
the alaska constitution was written so as to discourage dedicating state funds for a particular purpose . 
alaska  -lrb-  ; ; ; alutiiq: `` alas'kaaq; ''   -rrb-  is a u . s .  state in the northwest extremity of north america ,  just across the bering strait from asia . 
alaska has an abundance of seafood ,  with the primary fisheries in the bering sea and the north pacific . 
also referred to as the panhandle or inside passage ,  this is the region of alaska closest to the rest of the united states . 
in 2010, alaska ranked as the 47th state by population ,  ahead of north dakota ,  vermont ,  and wyoming  -lrb-  and washington ,  d . c .   -rrb-  . 
alaska is the northernmost and westernmost state in the united states and has the most easterly longitude in the united states because the aleutian islands extend into the eastern hemisphere . 
evidence of russian settlement in names and churches survive throughout southeast alaska . 
some researchers believe that the first russian settlement in alaska was established in the 17th century . 
for most of alaska's first decade under the united states flag ,  sitka was the only community inhabited by american settlers . 
this event is celebrated as alaska day ,  a legal holiday on the 18th of october . 
this type of farming is practised in arid and semi-arid regions of sahara ,  central asia and some parts of india . 
this practice is used in northeast india ,  southeast asia ,  and the amazon basin . 
in eurasia ,  the sumerians started to live in villages from about 8,000 bc ,  relying on the tigris and euphrates rivers and a canal system for irrigation . 
the service sector overtook the agricultural sector as the largest global employer in 2007.
in the european union ,  the european agency for safety and health at work has issued guidelines on implementing health and safety directives in agriculture ,  livestock farming ,  horticulture ,  and forestry . 
then ,  wild stands that had previously been harvested started to be planted ,  and gradually came to be domesticated . 
in intensive farming ,  the crops are cultivated to maximise profit ,  with a low fallow ratio and a high use of inputs . 
in the americas ,  crops domesticated in mesoamerica  -lrb-  apart from teosinte  -rrb-  include squash ,  beans ,  and cocoa . 
huxley was a humanist and pacifist . 
in 1955, maria huxley died of cancer . 
huxley also incorporated bird into the novel . 
she told the story of their marriage through mary ann braubach's 2010 documentary ,  `` huxley on huxley '' . 
in 1937 huxley moved to hollywood with his wife maria ,  son matthew huxley ,  and friend gerald heard . 
huxley was born in godalming ,  surrey ,  england ,  in 1894.
aldous leonard huxley  -lrb-  26 july 1894 – 22 november 1963 -rrb- was an english writer and philosopher ,  a member of the huxley family . 
as a child ,  huxley's nickname was `` ogie '' ,  short for `` ogre '' . 
huxley had been a long-time friend of russian composer igor stravinsky ,  who later dedicated his last orchestral composition to huxley . 
in the spring of 1953, huxley had his first experience with the psychedelic drug mescaline . 
following lawrence's death in 1930, huxley edited lawrence's letters  -lrb-  1932 -rrb- . 
from 1941 until 1960, huxley contributed 48 articles to `` vedanta and the west '' ,  published by the society . 
huxley also occasionally lectured at the hollywood and santa barbara vedanta temples . 
in 1956, huxley married laura archera  -lrb-  1911–2007 -rrb- ,  also an author ,  as well as a violinist and psychotherapist . 
in 1953, huxley and maria applied for united states citizenship and presented themselves for examination . 
huxley provided an introduction to krishnamurti's quintessential statement ,  `` the first and last freedom ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- . 
the algae contain chloroplasts that are similar in structure to cyanobacteria . 
it could be any color: black ,  red ,  green ,  or blue . 
the singular `` alga '' is the latin word for `` seaweed '' and retains that meaning in english . 
although cyanobacteria are often referred to as `` blue-green algae '' ,  most authorities exclude all prokaryotes from the definition of algae . 
in the typical application of anova ,  the null hypothesis is that all groups are random samples from the same population . 
grouping dogs according to a coin flip might produce distributions that look similar . 
an attempt to explain the weight distribution by grouping dogs as `` pet vs working breed '' and `` less athletic vs more athletic '' would probably be somewhat more successful  -lrb-  fair fit  -rrb-  . 
an attempt to explain weight by breed is likely to produce a very good fit . 
responses show a variability that is partially  the result of the effect and is partially random error . 
cycloalkanes are ch  -rrb-  . 
the number of carbon atoms may be thought of as the size of the alkane . 
the members of the series  -lrb-  in terms of number of carbon atoms  -rrb-  are named as follows:
in an alkane ,  each carbon atom is sp-hybridized with 4 sigma bonds  -lrb-  either c–c or c–h  -rrb-  ,  and each hydrogen atom is joined to one of the carbon atoms  -lrb-  in a c–h bond  -rrb-  . 
one group of the higher alkanes are waxes ,  solids at standard ambient temperature and pressure  -lrb-  satp  -rrb-  ,  for which the number of carbons in the carbon backbone is greater than about 17.
saturated hydrocarbons are hydrocarbons having only single covalent bonds between their carbons . 
unbranched ,  saturated hydrocarbon chains are named systematically with a greek numerical prefix denoting the number of carbons and the suffix `` -ane '' . 
an appellate court is a court that hears cases on appeal from another court . 
in different jurisdictions ,  appellate courts are also called appeals courts ,  courts of appeals ,  superior courts ,  or supreme courts . 
some courts have samples of a notice of appeal on the court's own web site . 
in the federal courts ,  the parties' names always stay in the same order as the lower court when an appeal is taken to the circuit courts of appeals ,  and are re-ordered only if the appeal reaches the supreme court . 
for example ,  the appellant might have to file the notice of appeal with the appellate court ,  or with the court from which the appeal is taken ,  or both . 
after an appeal is heard ,  the `` mandate '' is a formal notice of a decision by a court of appeal; this notice is transmitted to the trial court and ,  when filed by the clerk of the trial court ,  constitutes the final judgment on the case ,  unless the appeal court has directed further proceedings in the trial court . 
an appellee is the party to an appeal in which the lower court judgment was in its favor . 
in some systems ,  an appellate court will only consider the written decision of the lower court ,  together with any written evidence that was before that court and is relevant to the appeal . 
in an adversarial system ,  appellate courts do not have the power to review lower court decisions unless a party appeals it . 
in unusual cases the appellant can be the victor in the court below ,  but still appeal . 
in those cases the record will first be certified by the lower court . 
the second is the collateral appeal or post-conviction petition ,  in which the petitioner-appellant files the appeal in a court of first instance—usually the court that tried the case . 
in some cases ,  an appellate court may review a lower court decision `` de novo ''  -lrb-  or completely  -rrb-  ,  challenging even the lower court's findings of fact . 
the appellant is the party who ,  having lost part or all their claim in a lower court decision ,  is appealing to a higher court to have their case reconsidered . 
the right to file an appeal can also vary from state to state; for example ,  the new jersey constitution vests judicial power in a supreme court ,  a superior court ,  and other courts of limited jurisdiction ,  with an appellate court being part of the superior court . 
however ,  most appeals begin when a party files a petition for review to a higher court for the purpose of overturning the lower court's decision . 
it may have been preceded by an `` optional '' `` pre-answer '' motion to dismiss or demurrer; if such a motion is unsuccessful ,  the defendant `` must '' file an answer to the complaint or risk an adverse default judgment . 
in the common law ,  an answer is the first pleading by a defendant ,  usually filed and served upon the plaintiff within a certain strict time limit after a civil complaint or criminal information or indictment has been served upon the defendant . 
an appellate court ,  commonly called an appeals court ,  court of appeals  -lrb-  american english  -rrb-  ,  appeal court  -lrb-  british english  -rrb-  ,  court of second instance or second instance court ,  is any court of law that is empowered to hear an appeal of a trial court or other lower tribunal . 
while many appellate courts have jurisdiction over all cases decided by lower courts ,  some systems have appellate courts divided by the type of jurisdiction they exercise . 
his plea having been entered he is said to stand arraigned . 
no plea allows the defendant to get legal advice on the plea ,  which must be made on the second appearance . 
in germany ,  if one has been arrested and taken into custody by the police one must be brought before a judge as soon as possible and at the latest on the day after the arrest . 
at the first appearance ,  the accused is read the charges and asked for a plea . 
if they are not released after being charged ,  they should be brought before a court as soon as practicable . 
during the second arraignment ,  a post-indictment arraignment or pia ,  the defendant is allowed to enter a plea . 
because of the michigan constitution's guarantee of a speedy arraignment ,  a least one judge in every michigan district court is on 24-hour call every day ,  including weekends and holidays ,  so that the arraignment can be held as soon after the arrest as possible . 
in california ,  arraignments must be conducted without unnecessary delay and ,  in any event ,  within 48 hours of arrest ,  excluding weekends and holidays . 
 ''america the beautiful '' is an american patriotic song . 
the song is one of the most popular of the many u . s .  patriotic songs . 
bing crosby included the song in a medley on his album `` 101 gang songs ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- . 
the first known melody written for the song was sent in by silas pratt when the poem was published in `` the congregationalist . `` 
ward's music combined with bates's poem was first published together in 1910 and titled `` america the beautiful . `` 
three different renditions of the song have entered the hot country songs charts . 
ward died in 1903, not knowing the national stature his music would attain since the music was only first applied to the song in 1904.
screen readers are used to help the visually impaired to easily access electronic information . 
a screen magnifier is software that interfaces with a computer's graphical output to present enlarged screen content . 
computer users who cannot use a computer monitor use it to read a braille output version of the displayed text . 
people with both sitting and walking disability often need to use a wheelchair or walker . 
desktop video magnifiers are electronic devices that use a camera and a display screen to perform digital magnification of printed materials . 
one example of screen readers is apple voiceover . 
examples of assistive technology for visually impairment include screen readers ,  screen magnifiers ,  braille embossers ,  desktop video magnifiers ,  and voice recorders . 
the term adaptive technology is often used as the synonym for assistive technology; however ,  they are different terms . 
abacuses come in different designs . 
although today many use calculators and computers instead of abacuses to calculate ,  abacuses still remain in common use in some countries . 
the wire frame may be used either with positional notation like other abacuses  -lrb-  thus the 10-wire version may represent numbers up to 9,999,999,999 -rrb- ,  or each bead may represent one unit  -lrb-  so that e . g . 
the preferred plural of `` abacus '' is a subject of disagreement ,  with both `` abacuses '' and `` abaci ''  -lrb-  hard `` c ''  -rrb-  in use . 
around the world ,  abacuses have been used in pre-schools and elementary schools as an aid in teaching the numeral system and arithmetic . 
altogether ,  there were 13 rows with 7 beads in each one ,  which made up 91 beads in each nepōhualtzintzin . 
 ''suanpan '' can be used for functions other than counting . 
in the bead frame shown ,  the gap between the 5th and 6th wire ,  corresponding to the color change between the 5th and the 6th bead on each wire ,  suggests the latter use . 
some of these methods may work with non-natural numbers  -lrb-  numbers such as and   -rrb-  . 
some people who are unable to use a calculator because of visual impairment may use an abacus . 
the abacus  -lrb-  `` plural '' abaci or abacuses  -rrb-  ,  also called a counting frame ,  is a calculating tool that was in use in europe ,  china and russia ,  centuries before the adoption of the written hindu–arabic numeral system . 
today ,  abacuses are often constructed as a bamboo frame with beads sliding on wires ,  but originally they were beans or stones moved in grooves in sand or on tablets of wood ,  stone ,  or metal . 
using the fibonacci sequence would keep the number of grains within any one field at a minimum . 
the binary abacus is used to explain how computers manipulate numbers . 
there are currently schools teaching students how to use it . 
many blind people find this number machine a very useful tool throughout life . 
the earliest archaeological evidence for the use of the greek abacus dates to the 5th century bc . 
using visual imagery of a soroban ,  one can arrive at the answer in the same time as ,  or even faster than ,  is possible with a physical instrument . 
the first category of acids is the proton donors or brønsted acids . 
chemicals or substances having the property of an acid are said to be acidic . 
strong acids and some concentrated weak acids are corrosive ,  but there are exceptions such as carboranes and boric acid . 
in modern terminology ,  an `` acid '' is implicitly a brønsted acid and not a lewis acid ,  since chemists almost always refer to a lewis acid explicitly as `` a lewis acid '' . 
in british english ,  `` bitumen '' is used instead of `` asphalt '' . 
in american english ,  `` asphalt '' is equivalent to the british `` bitumen '' . 
neither of the terms `` asphalt '' or `` bitumen '' should be confused with tar or coal tars . 
naturally occurring asphalt is sometimes specified by the term `` crude bitumen '' . 
however ,  `` asphalt '' is also commonly used as a shortened form of `` asphalt concrete ''  -lrb-  therefore equivalent to the british `` asphalt '' or `` tarmac ''  -rrb-  . 
there are approximately 9,500 american national standards that carry the ansi designation . 
ansi was originally formed in 1918, when five engineering societies and three government agencies founded the american engineering standards committee  -lrb-  aesc  -rrb-  . 
the organization also coordinates u . s .  standards with international standards so that american products can be used worldwide . 
although ansi itself does not develop standards ,  the institute oversees the development and use of standards by accrediting the procedures of standards developing organizations . 
the apollo 11 prime crew had none of the close cheerful camaraderie that characterized that of apollo 12.
based on the normal crew rotation scheme ,  armstrong was then expected to command apollo 11.
armstrong and aldrin spent 21.5 hours on the lunar surface before rejoining `` columbia '' in lunar orbit . 
apollo 11 was the spaceflight that landed the first two people on the moon . 
lovell ,  haise ,  and mattingly were later assigned as the prime crew of apollo 13.
he thought lovell deserved to command his own mission  -lrb-  eventually apollo 13 -rrb- . 
the initial crew assignment of commander neil armstrong ,  command module pilot  -lrb-  cmp  -rrb-  jim lovell ,  and lunar module pilot  -lrb-  lmp  -rrb-  buzz aldrin on the backup crew for apollo 9 was officially announced on november 20, 1967.
haise served on the backup crew of apollo 11 as lmp and flew on apollo 13 as lmp . 
apollo 8 was officially changed from a `` d '' mission to a `` c-prime '' lunar-orbit mission . 
the standard lunar orbit for apollo missions was planned as a nominal circular orbit above the moon's surface . 
this project already had a name: project apollo . 
during projects mercury and gemini ,  each mission had a prime and a backup crew . 
apollo 8, the second manned spaceflight mission flown in the united states apollo space program ,  was launched on december 21, 1968, and became the first manned spacecraft to leave low earth orbit ,  reach the moon ,  orbit it ,  and return . 
the backup crew assignment of neil armstrong as commander ,  lovell as cmp ,  and buzz aldrin as lmp for the third crewed apollo flight was officially announced at the same time as the prime crew . 
on september 20, 1967, nasa adopted a seven-step plan for apollo missions ,  with the final step being a moon landing . 
the apollo 11 cm was named `` columbia '' in part for that reason . 
with the change in mission for apollo 8, slayton asked mcdivitt if he still wanted to fly it . 
originally planned as the second crewed apollo lunar module and command module test ,  to be flown in an elliptical medium earth orbit in early 1969, the mission profile was changed in august 1968 to a more ambitious command-module-only lunar orbital flight to be flown in december ,  as the lunar module was not yet ready to make its first flight . 
the first civilian in space was valentina tereshkova aboard vostok 6  -lrb-  she also became the first woman in space on that mission  -rrb-  . 
seven others have paid the russian space agency to fly into space:
the first nasa astronauts were selected for training in 1959.
the european space agency similarly uses the term astronaut for members of its astronaut corps . 
in english-speaking nations ,  a professional space traveler is called an `` astronaut '' . 
when the soviet union launched the first man into space ,  yuri gagarin in 1961, they chose a term which anglicizes to `` cosmonaut '' . 
in 1988, abdul ahad mohmand became the first afghan to reach space ,  spending nine days aboard the mir space station . 
in 1992 mae jemison became the first african american woman to travel in space aboard sts-47.
with the rise of space tourism ,  nasa and the russian federal space agency agreed to use the term `` spaceflight participant '' to distinguish those space travelers from professional astronauts on missions coordinated by those two agencies . 
alan shepard became the first american and second person in space on may 5, 1961, on a 15-minute sub-orbital flight . 
on july 23, 1980, pham tuan of vietnam became the first asian in space when he flew aboard soyuz 37.
on march 14, 1995, norman thagard became the first american to ride to space on board a russian launch vehicle ,  and thus became the first `` american cosmonaut '' . 
swift's '' . 
scholars have speculated about which earlier works swift may have had in mind when he wrote `` a modest proposal '' . 
in response ,  swift's `` modest proposal '' was `` a burlesque of projects concerning the poor '' that were in vogue during the early 18th century . 
the 2012 film `` butcher boys , ``  written by kim henkel ,  is said to be loosely based on jonathan swift's `` a modest proposal . `` 
a modest proposal for preventing the children of poor people from being a burthen to their parents or country ,  and for making them beneficial to the publick ,  commonly referred to as a modest proposal ,  is a juvenalian satirical essay written and published anonymously by jonathan swift in 1729.
 ''if one regards the `` modest proposal '' simply as a criticism of condition ,  about all one can say is that conditions were bad and that swift's irony brilliantly underscored this fact '' . 
 ''a modest proposal '' also targets the calculating way people perceived the poor in designing their projects . 
while swift's proposal is obviously not a serious economic proposal ,  george wittkowsky ,  author of `` swift's modest proposal: the biography of an early georgian pamphlet '' ,  argues that to understand the piece fully it is important to understand the economics of swift's time . 
louis a .  landa presents swift's `` a modest proposal '' as a critique of the popular and unjustified maxim of mercantilism in the 18th century that `` people are the riches of a nation '' . 
swift has his proposer further degrade the irish by using language ordinarily reserved for animals . 
critics differ about swift's intentions in using this faux-mathematical philosophy . 
the alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in any other group are to each other . 
the alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in any other group are to each other . 
lithium ,  the lightest of the alkali metals ,  is the only alkali metal which reacts with nitrogen at standard conditions ,  and its nitride is the only stable alkali metal nitride . 
all the alkali metals react with water ,  with the heavier alkali metals reacting more vigorously than the lighter ones . 
the reactivities of the alkali metals increase going down the group . 
most alkali metals have many different applications . 
the atomic radii of the alkali metals increase going down the group . 
the alkali metal hydroxides are the most basic known hydroxides . 
lithium fluoride is the only alkali metal halide that is poorly soluble in water ,  and lithium hydroxide is the only alkali metal hydroxide that is not deliquescent . 
the coinage metals were traditionally regarded as a subdivision of the alkali metal group ,  due to them sharing the characteristic s electron configuration of the alkali metals  -lrb-  group 1: ps; group 11: ds  -rrb-  . 
the trivial name `` alkali metals '' comes from the fact that the hydroxides of the group 1 elements are all strong alkalis when dissolved in water . 
all the alkali metals react vigorously with oxygen at standard conditions . 
most routes to the pure alkali metals require the use of electrolysis due to their high reactivity; one of the few which does not is the pyrolysis of the corresponding alkali metal azide ,  which yields the metal for sodium ,  potassium ,  rubidium ,  and caesium and the nitride for lithium . 
the ammonium ion  -lrb-    -rrb-  has very similar properties to the heavier alkali metals ,  acting as an alkali metal intermediate between potassium and rubidium ,  and is often considered a close relative . 
lithium fluoride  -lrb-  lif  -rrb-  is the only alkali halide that is not soluble in water ,  and lithium hydroxide  -lrb-  lioh  -rrb-  is the only alkali metal hydroxide that is not deliquescent . 
the ionic radii of the alkali metals are much smaller than their atomic radii . 
the bioinorganic chemistry of the alkali metal ions has been extensively reviewed . 
nevertheless ,  hydrogen can take on the same structural role as the alkali metals in some molecular crystals ,  and has a close relationship with the lightest alkali metals  -lrb-  especially lithium  -rrb-  . 
the alkali metals can also react analogously with the heavier chalcogens  -lrb-  sulfur ,  selenium ,  tellurium ,  and polonium  -rrb-  ,  and all the alkali metal chalcogenides are known  -lrb-  with the exception of francium's  -rrb-  . 
the alkali metals ,  due to their high reactivity ,  do not occur naturally in pure form in nature . 
all the alkali metals are highly reactive and are never found in elemental forms in nature . 
many other substances are similar to the alkali metals in their tendency to form monopositive cations . 
the first ionisation energy of hydrogen  -lrb-  1312.0 kj/mol  -rrb-  is much higher than that of the alkali metals . 
although francium is the heaviest alkali metal that has been discovered ,  there has been some theoretical work predicting the physical and chemical characteristics of the hypothetical heavier alkali metals . 
their monopositive ions are paramagnetic and contribute no colour to their salts ,  like those of the alkali metals . 
all the alkali metals react vigorously or explosively with cold water ,  producing an aqueous solution of a strongly basic alkali metal hydroxide and releasing hydrogen gas . 
the alkali metals dissolve slowly in liquid ammonia ,  forming ammoniacal solutions of solvated m and e ,  which react to form hydrogen gas and the alkali metal amide  -lrb-  mnh ,  where m represents an alkali metal  -rrb- : this was first noted by humphry davy in 1809 and rediscovered by w .  weyl in 1864.
hydrogen ,  like the alkali metals ,  has one valence electron and reacts easily with the halogens ,  but the similarities end there because of the small size of a bare proton h compared to the alkali metal cations . 
the alkali metals are a group  -lrb-  column  -rrb-  in the periodic table consisting of the chemical elements lithium  -lrb-  li  -rrb-  ,  sodium  -lrb-  na  -rrb-  ,  potassium  -lrb-  k  -rrb-  ,  rubidium  -lrb-  rb  -rrb-  ,  caesium  -lrb-  cs  -rrb-  ,  and francium  -lrb-  fr  -rrb-  . 
the 1s electron configuration of hydrogen ,  while superficially similar to that of the alkali metals  -lrb-  ns  -rrb-  ,  is unique because there is no 1p subshell . 
being the smallest alkali metal ,  lithium forms the widest variety of and most stable organometallic compounds ,  which are bonded covalently . 
these alkali metal germanides ,  stannides ,  and plumbides may be produced by reducing germanium ,  tin ,  and lead with sodium metal in liquid ammonia . 
the alkali metals also react similarly with hydrogen to form ionic alkali metal hydrides ,  where the hydride anion acts as a pseudohalide: these are often used as reducing agents ,  producing hydrides ,  complex metal hydrides ,  or hydrogen gas . 
the stable alkali metals are all silver-coloured metals except for caesium ,  which has a pale golden tint: it is one of only three metals that are clearly coloured  -lrb-  the other two being copper and gold  -rrb-  . 
unlike the organolithium compounds ,  the organometallic compounds of the heavier alkali metals are predominantly ionic . 
the alkali metals form complete series of compounds with all usually encountered anions ,  which well illustrate group trends . 
potassium ,  rubidium and caesium are also incompatible elements due to their large ionic radii . 
the element hydrogen ,  with one electron per neutral atom ,  is usually placed at the top of group 1 of the periodic table for convenience ,  but hydrogen is not normally considered to be an alkali metal; when it is considered to be an alkali metal ,  it is because of its atomic properties and not its chemical properties . 
the georgian alphabet  -lrb-   ``  ''  -rrb-  is alphabetical writing system . 
the longest european alphabet is the latin-derived slovak alphabet which has 46 letters . 
in this narrow sense of the word the first `` true '' alphabet was the greek alphabet ,  which was developed on the basis of the earlier phoenician alphabet . 
the arabic alphabet ,  hebrew alphabet ,  syriac alphabet ,  and other abjads of the middle east are developments of the aramaic alphabet ,  but because these writing systems are largely consonant-based they are often not considered true alphabets . 
they feature many letters that appear to have been borrowed from or influenced by the greek alphabet and the hebrew alphabet . 
the number of letters in an alphabet can be quite small . 
the armenian script's directionality is horizontal left-to-right ,  like the latin and greek alphabets . 
the armenian alphabet  -lrb-   ' or '  -rrb-  is a graphically unique alphabetical writing system that has been used to write the armenian language . 
the khmer alphabet  -lrb-  for cambodian  -rrb-  is the longest ,  with 74 letters . 
the first fully phonemic script ,  the proto-canaanite script ,  later known as the phoenician alphabet ,  is considered to be the first alphabet ,  and is the ancestor of most modern alphabets ,  including arabic ,  greek ,  latin ,  cyrillic ,  hebrew ,  and possibly brahmic . 
alphabets are usually associated with a standard ordering of letters . 
sometimes ,  like in the alphabet song in english ,  the term `` abcs '' is used instead of the word `` alphabet ''  -lrb-  `` now i know my abcs '' .  .  .   -rrb-  . 
the earliest known alphabet in the wider sense is the wadi el-hol script ,  believed to be an abjad ,  which through its successor phoenician is the ancestor of modern alphabets ,  including arabic ,  greek ,  latin  -lrb-  via the old italic alphabet  -rrb-  ,  cyrillic  -lrb-  via the greek alphabet  -rrb-  and hebrew  -lrb-  via aramaic  -rrb-  . 
other alphabets only use a subset of the latin alphabet ,  such as hawaiian ,  and italian ,  which uses the letters `` j ,  k ,  x ,  y '' and `` w '' only in foreign words . 
the history of the alphabet started in ancient egypt . 
the armenian word for `` alphabet '' is ``  ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  named after the first two letters of the armenian alphabet ա այբ ayb and բ բեն ben . 
in its early years ,  there were many variants of the greek alphabet ,  a situation that caused many different alphabets to evolve from it . 
these alphabets have since been replaced with the latin alphabet ,  except for decorative usage for which the runes remained in use until the 20th century . 
in korea ,  the hangul alphabet was created by sejong the great . 
the sum of the atomic number `` z '' and the number of neutrons ,  `` n '' ,  gives the mass number `` a '' of an atom . 
the atomic number or proton number  -lrb-  symbol `` z ''  -rrb-  of a chemical element is the number of protons found in the nucleus of an atom . 
in an uncharged atom ,  the atomic number is also equal to the number of electrons . 
after 1932, therefore ,  an element's atomic number `` z '' was also realized to be identical to the proton number of its nuclei . 
atoms with the same atomic number `` z '' but different neutron numbers `` n '' ,  and hence different atomic masses ,  are known as isotopes . 
this placement is consistent with the modern practice of ordering the elements by proton number ,  `` z '' ,  but that number was not known or suspected at the time . 
each element has a specific set of chemical properties as a consequence of the number of electrons present in the neutral atom ,  which is `` z ''  -lrb-  the atomic number  -rrb-  . 
humans have a head ,  neck ,  trunk  -lrb-  which includes the thorax and abdomen  -rrb-  ,  two arms and hands ,  and two legs and feet . 
the body of a fish is divided into a head ,  trunk and tail ,  although the divisions between the three are not always externally visible . 
there may also be protrusions such as microvilli ,  cilia ,  bristles ,  spines and tubercles . 
they are often involved in teaching anatomy ,  and research into certain systems ,  organs ,  tissues or cells . 
cardiac muscle is found only in the heart ,  allowing it to contract and pump blood round the body . 
lizards have skulls with only one fenestra on each side ,  the lower bar of bone below the second fenestra having been lost . 
great feats were made during the third century in both the digestive and reproductive systems . 
human anatomy is one of the essential basic sciences that are applied in medicine . 
phenomenal anatomical observations of the human body were made ,  which have contributed towards the understanding of the brain ,  eye ,  liver ,  reproductive organs and the nervous system . 
humans have the overall body plan of a mammal . 
spiders a class of arachnids have four pairs of legs; a body of two segments—a cephalothorax and an abdomen . 
the bony fish lineage shows more derived anatomical traits ,  often with major evolutionary changes from the features of ancient fish . 
some protozoans can form multicellular colonies . 
all of a triploblastic animal's tissues and organs are derived from the three germ layers of the embryo ,  the ectoderm ,  mesoderm and endoderm . 
sharks and rays are basal fish with numerous primitive anatomical features similar to those of ancient fish ,  including skeletons composed of cartilage . 
unlike plant cells ,  animal cells have neither a cell wall nor chloroplasts . 
the feathers are outgrowths of the epidermis and are found in localized bands from where they fan out over the skin . 
the term `` anatomy '' is commonly taken to refer to human anatomy . 
low frequency vibrations are detected by the lateral line system of sense organs that run along the length of the sides of fish ,  and these respond to nearby movements and to changes in water pressure . 
in 1600 bce ,  the edwin smith papyrus ,  an ancient egyptian medical text ,  described the heart ,  its vessels ,  liver ,  spleen ,  kidneys ,  hypothalamus ,  uterus and bladder ,  and showed the blood vessels diverging from the heart . 
metazoans are multicellular organism ,  different groups of cells of which have separate functions . 
for example ,  the statement `` if the lamp were broken ,  then the room would be dark , ``   -lrb-  formula_1 -rrb- does imply its contrapositive ,  `` the room is `` not '' dark ,  so the lamp is `` not '' broken , ``   -lrb-  formula_11 -rrb- . 
this illogic can be summarized formally as formula_4 or ,  alternatively ,  formula_5.
it may be worth noting that formula_1 `` does '' imply its contrapositive ,  formula_11, where formula_12 symbolize the negations of `` q '' and `` p '' ,  respectively . 
a version of the film was presented at the cannes film festival in 1969 and won the fipresci prize . 
during 1985, he shot the film `` the sacrifice '' in sweden . 
the film was completed in 1979 and won the prize of the ecumenical jury at the cannes film festival . 
he spent most of 1984 preparing the film `` the sacrifice '' . 
tarkovsky is mainly known as a film director . 
the films `` andrei rublev '' ,  `` solaris '' ,  `` mirror '' ,  and `` stalker '' are regularly listed among the greatest films of all time . 
tarkovsky's first feature film was `` ivan's childhood '' in 1962.
tarkovsky's first feature film was `` ivan's childhood '' in 1962.
the film was widely released in the soviet union in a cut version in 1971.
he also wrote `` sculpting in time '' ,  a book on film theory . 
during this time in the taiga ,  tarkovsky decided to study film . 
 ''the sacrifice '' was tarkovsky's ultimate film ,  dedicated to andrei jr . 
in addition ,  formula_25 may mean formula_26, as formula_27 means formula_28  -lrb-  see tetration  -rrb-  . 
formula_29, which by convention means formula_30, though it might be thought to mean formula_31, since formula_32 means formula_33.
in the scientific journal style ,  the expression formula_9 means product of variables formula_10, formula_11, formula_12 and formula_13, although in a slideshow ,  it may mean formula_14.
formula_34, which arguably should mean formula_35 but would commonly be understood to mean formula_36  . 
subscripts are also used to denote the argument to a function ,  as in formula_21.
it is common to define the coherent states in quantum optics with formula_37 and states with fixed number of photons with formula_38.
the order of operations may depend on the context . 
the context in which an ambiguous word is used often makes it evident which of the meanings is intended . 
the lexical ambiguity of a word or phrase pertains to its having more than one meaning in the language to which the word belongs . 
the same may apply to any other use of ambiguous notations . 
 -lrb-  the `` ambi- '' part of the term reflects an idea of `` two '' ,  as in `` two meanings '' .   -rrb- 
context may play a role in resolving ambiguity . 
semantic ambiguity happens when a sentence contains an ambiguous word or phrase—a word or phrase that has more than one meaning . 
pictures or photographs may also be ambiguous at the semantic level: the visual image is unambiguous ,  but the meaning and narrative may be ambiguous: is a certain facial expression one of excitement or fear ,  for instance ? 
for example ,  the same piece of information may be ambiguous in one context and unambiguous in another . 
in computer science ,  the si prefixes kilo- ,  mega- and giga- were historically used in certain contexts to mean either the first three powers of 1024  -lrb-  1024, 1024 and 1024 -rrb- contrary to the metric system in which these units unambiguously mean one thousand ,  one million ,  and one billion . 
the name of the aardvarks's order ,  `` tubulidentata , ``  comes from the tubule-style teeth . 
the aardvark  -lrb-   ; `` orycteropus afer ''  -rrb-  is a medium-sized ,  burrowing ,  nocturnal mammal native to africa . 
the aardvark is sometimes colloquially called `` african ant bear '' ,  `` anteater ''  -lrb-  not to be confused with the south american anteater  -rrb-  ,  or the `` cape anteater '' after the cape of good hope . 
aardwolfs are common sights at zoos . 
dogs and insecticides are also common killers of the aardwolf . 
while foraging ,  the aardwolf can cover about per hour ,  which translates to per summer night and per winter night . 
the aardwolf  -lrb-  `` proteles cristata ''  -rrb-  is a small ,  insectivorous mammal ,  native to east and southern africa . 
the aardwolf has not seen decreasing numbers and they are relatively widespread throughout eastern africa . 
the aardwolf is the only surviving species in the subfamily protelinae . 
there are two distinct populations: one in southern africa ,  and another in east and northeast africa . 
bricks made from adobe are usually made by pressing the mud mixture into an open timber frame . 
bricks made with stabilized adobe generally do not need protection of plasters . 
an adobe brick is a composite material made of earth mixed with water and an organic material such as straw or dung . 
the same mixture ,  without straw ,  is used to make mortar and often plaster on interior and exterior walls . 
adobe walls are load bearing ,  i . e . 
to construct a flat adobe roof ,  beams of wood were laid to span the building ,  the ends of which were attached to the tops of the walls . 
roof design evolved around 1850 in the american southwest . 
no more than half the clay content should be expansive clays ,  with the remainder non-expansive illite or kaolinite . 
poured and puddled adobe  -lrb-  puddled clay ,  piled earth  -rrb-  ,  today called `` cob '' ,  is made by placing soft adobe in layers ,  rather than by making individual dried bricks or using a form . 
adventure books may have the theme of the hero or main character going to face the wilderness or mother nature . 
many adventures are based on the idea of a quest: the hero goes off in pursuit of a reward ,  whether it be a skill ,  prize ,  or perhaps the safety of a person . 
some of the oldest and most widespread stories in the world are stories of adventure such as homer's `` the odyssey '' . 
asia is the largest continent on earth . 
the history of asia can be seen as the distinct histories of several peripheral coastal regions: east asia ,  south asia ,  southeast asia and the middle east ,  linked by the interior mass of the central asian steppes . 
latin asia and greek ἀσία appear to be the same word . 
the islamic caliphate's defeats of the byzantine and persian empires led to west asia and southern parts of central asia and western parts of south asia under its control during its conquests of the 7th century . 
the bahá'í faith originated in asia ,  in iran  -lrb-  persia  -rrb-  ,  and spread from there to the ottoman empire ,  central asia ,  india ,  and burma during the lifetime of bahá'u'lláh . 
in east asia ,  particularly in china and japan ,  confucianism ,  taoism and zen buddhism took shape . 
asia has extremely diverse climates and geographic features . 
the border between asia and europe was historically defined by european academics . 
japan has won the most nobel prizes of any asian nation with 24 followed by india which has won 13.
in general terms ,  asia is bounded on the east by the pacific ocean ,  on the south by the indian ocean ,  and on the north by the arctic ocean . 
china and india alternated in being the largest economies in the world from 1 to 1800 ce . 
the russian empire began to expand into asia from the 17th century ,  and would eventually take control of all of siberia and most of central asia by the end of the 19th century . 
the boundary between asia and africa is the red sea ,  the gulf of suez ,  and the suez canal . 
asia has the largest continental economy by both gdp nominal and ppp in the world ,  and is the fastest growing economic region . 
the border between asia and the region of oceania is usually placed somewhere in the malay archipelago . 
asia does not exactly correspond to the cultural borders of its various types of constituents . 
some of the events pivotal in the asia territory related to the relationship with the outside world in the post-second world war were:
asia  -lrb-    -rrb-  is earth's largest and most populous continent ,  located primarily in the eastern and northern hemispheres . 
islam ,  which originated in the hejaz located in modern-day saudi arabia ,  is the second largest and most widely-spread religion in asia with at least 1 billion muslims constituting around 23.8% of the total population of asia . 
asia is home to several language families and many language isolates . 
in greek mythology ,  `` asia ''  -lrb-  `` ἀσία ''  -rrb-  or `` asie ''  -lrb-  `` ἀσίη ''  -rrb-  was the name of a `` nymph or titan goddess of lydia '' . 
asia is subdivided into 48 countries ,  three of them  -lrb-  russia ,  kazakhstan and turkey  -rrb-  having part of their land in europe . 
at the end of 2011, there were 18,000 asian people mainly in southeast asia ,  china and japan who have at least $100 million in disposable assets ,  while north america with 17,000 people and western europe with 14,000 people . 
herodotus comments that he is puzzled as to why three women's names were `` given to a tract which is in reality one ''  -lrb-  europa ,  asia ,  and libya ,  referring to africa  -rrb-  ,  stating that most greeks assumed that asia was named after the wife of prometheus  -lrb-  i . e . 
collectively ,  aruba and the other dutch islands in the caribbean are often called the dutch caribbean . 
unlike much of the caribbean region ,  aruba has a dry climate and an arid ,  cactus-strewn landscape . 
that body was renamed the congress of the confederation; but americans continued to call it the `` continental congress '' ,  since its organization remained the same . 
congress was informed of maryland's assent on march 1, and officially proclaimed the articles of confederation to be the law of the land . 
in 1775, with events outpacing communications ,  the second continental congress began acting as the provisional government that would run the american revolutionary war and gain the colonies their collective independence . 
on june 12, 1776, a day after appointing a committee to prepare a draft of the declaration of independence ,  the second continental congress resolved to appoint a committee of 13 to prepare a draft of a constitution for a union of the states . 
as the confederation congress attempted to govern the continually growing american states ,  delegates discovered that the limitations placed upon the central government rendered it ineffective at doing so . 
the atlantic ocean is bounded on the west by north and south america . 
north atlantic central water flows into south atlantic central water at 15°n . 
the equatorial counter current subdivides it into the north atlantic ocean and the south atlantic ocean at about 8°n . 
correspondingly ,  the extent and number of oceans and seas varies . 
the atlantic ocean is the second largest of the world's oceans ,  with an area of about  . 
municipal pollution comes from the eastern united states ,  southern brazil ,  and eastern argentina; oil pollution in the caribbean sea ,  gulf of mexico ,  lake maracaibo ,  mediterranean sea ,  and north sea; and industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in the baltic sea ,  north sea ,  and mediterranean sea . 
the mar rises above the surrounding ocean floor and its rift valley is the divergent boundary between the north american and eurasian plates in the north atlantic and the south american and african plates in the south atlantic . 
north atlantic deep water flows southerward below the thermocline of the subtropical gyre . 
the north atlantic deep water  -lrb-  nadw  -rrb-  is a complex of four water masses ,  two that form by deep convection in the open ocean — classical and upper labrador sea water — and two that form from the inflow of dense water across the greenland-iceland-scotland sill — denmark strait and iceland-scotland overflow water . 
from october to june the surface is usually covered with sea ice in the labrador sea ,  denmark strait ,  and baltic sea . 
the sargasso sea in the western north atlantic can be defined as the area where two species of `` sargassum ''  -lrb-  `` s .  fluitans '' and `` natans ''  -rrb-  float ,  an area wide and encircled by the gulf stream ,  north atlantic drift ,  and north equatorial current . 
in latitudes above 40° north some east-west oscillation ,  known as the north atlantic oscillation ,  occurs . 
the coriolis effect circulates north atlantic water in a clockwise direction ,  whereas south atlantic water circulates counter-clockwise . 
it runs from 87°n or south of the north pole to the subantarctic bouvet island at 42°s . 
including its marginal seas ,  the atlantic covers an area of or 23.5% of the global ocean and has a volume of or 23.3% of the total volume of the earth's oceans . 
a much vaguer ,  nameless boundary ,  between the north american and south american plates ,  intersects the mar near or just north of the fifteen-twenty fracture zone ,  approximately at 16°n . 
the wide range of salinities in the north atlantic is caused by the asymmetry of the northern subtropical gyre and the large number of contributions from a wide range of sources: labrador sea ,  norwegian-greenland sea ,  mediterranean ,  and south atlantic intermediate water . 
west gondwana  -lrb-  south america and africa  -rrb-  broke up in the early cretaceous to form the south atlantic . 
the european coasts of the north atlantic were permanently populated about 9–8.5 thousand years ago . 
geologically the northern atlantic is the area delimited to the south by two conjugate margins ,  newfoundland and iberia ,  and to the north by the arctic eurasian basin . 
in the southeast ,  the atlantic merges into the indian ocean . 
the mar is a barrier for bottom water ,  but at these two transform faults deep water currents can pass from one side to the other . 
large variations in the subpolar gyre on a decade-century scale ,  associated with the north atlantic oscillation ,  are especially pronounced in labrador sea water ,  the upper layers of the moc . 
in the 1953 definition it extends south to antarctica ,  while in later maps it is bounded at the 60° parallel by the southern ocean . 
hurricanes are hazard in the western parts of the north atlantic during the summer and autumn . 
in the south atlantic the walvis ridge and rio grande rise form barriers to ocean currents . 
climate is influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and water currents as well as winds . 
the south atlantic is dominated by the anti-cyclonic southern subtropical gyre . 
