the sovereign state is an archipelago consisting of three major islands and numerous smaller islands ,  all in the volcanic comoro islands . 
the union of the comoros has three official languages—comorian ,  arabic ,  and french . 
attributed to immanuel kant ,  the critical philosophy  -lrb-    -rrb-  movement sees the primary task of philosophy as criticism rather than justification of knowledge; criticism ,  for kant ,  meant judging as to the possibilities of knowledge before advancing to knowledge itself  -lrb-  from the greek `` kritike  -lrb-  techne  -rrb- ``  ,  or `` art of judgment ''  -rrb-  . 
geographically ,  all 31 provincial divisions can be grouped into six regions ,  including north china ,  northeast china ,  east china ,  south central china ,  southwest china and northwest china . 
during the 1950s and 1960s ,  after the defeat of the kuomintang in the chinese civil war ,  it was also referred to as `` communist china '' or `` red china '' ,  to be differentiated from `` nationalist china '' or `` free china '' . 
in 2014, the urban unemployment rate of china was about 4.1% . 
in 2014, china ranked 175th out of 180 countries . 
there are as many as 292 living languages in china . 
the remnants of the song retreated to southern china . 
china has one of the oldest sporting cultures in the world . 
china has urbanized significantly in recent decades . 
china's constitution declares that the country is ruled `` under the leadership '' of the communist party of china  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  . 
in 2014, the internal freshwater resources per capita of china reduced to 2,062m ,  and it was below 500m in the north china plain ,  while 5,920m in the world . 
china telecom and china unicom ,  the world's two largest broadband providers ,  accounted for 20% of global broadband subscribers . 
china emerged as one of the world's earliest civilizations ,  in the fertile basin of the yellow river in the north china plain . 
the 13th century brought the mongol conquest of china . 
china was once a world leader in science and technology up until the ming dynasty . 
after yuan shikai's death in 1916, china was politically fragmented . 
in 2010, air pollution caused 1.2 million premature deaths in china . 
china has had a long and complex trade relationship with the united states . 
china considers taiwan to be its 23rd province ,  although taiwan is governed by the republic of china ,  which rejects the prc's claim . 
in china ,  heavy metals also cause environmental pollution . 
china has become a prime sports destination worldwide . 
the official name of the modern state is the `` people's republic of china ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in recent times ,  china has been widely characterized as a global superpower . 
the qing dynasty ,  which lasted from 1644 until 1912, was the last imperial dynasty of china . 
in addition to taiwan ,  china is also involved in other international territorial disputes . 
china has over 10,000 recorded species of fungi ,  and of them ,  nearly 6,000 are higher fungi . 
china ,  officially the people's republic of china  -lrb-  prc  -rrb-  ,  is a country in east asia and the world's most populous country ,  with a population of around /1e9 round 3 billion . 
china's middle-class population  -lrb-  if defined as those with annual income of between us$10,000 and us$60,000 -rrb- had reached more than 300 million by 2012.
china's high-speed rail  -lrb-  hsr  -rrb-  system started construction in the early 2000s . 
by 2007, there were 396,567 primary schools ,  94,116 secondary schools ,  and 2,236 higher education institutions in china . 
china is a member of the wto and is the world's largest trading power ,  with a total international trade value of us$3.87 trillion in 2012.
china currently has the largest number of active cellphones of any country in the world ,  with over 1 billion users by february 2012.
china is one of 17 megadiverse countries ,  lying in two of the world's major ecozones: the palearctic and the indomalaya . 
china has over 32,000 species of vascular plants ,  and is home to a variety of forest types . 
china is developing its education system with an emphasis on science ,  mathematics and engineering; in 2009, china graduated over 10,000 ph . d .  engineers ,  and as many as 500,000 bsc graduates ,  more than any other country . 
by 2014, china hosts more than twice as much national bandwidth potential than the u . s .  ,  the historical leader in terms of installed telecommunication bandwidth  -lrb-  china: 29% versus us:13% of the global total  -rrb-  . 
examinations and a culture of merit remain greatly valued in china today . 
in recent decades ,  china has suffered from severe environmental deterioration and pollution . 
the national census of 2010 recorded the population of the people's republic of china as approximately 1,370,536,875.
china has participated in the olympic games since 1932, although it has only participated as the prc since 1952.
a study conducted by southwestern university of finance and economics showed that china's gini coefficient actually had reached 0.61 in 2012, and top 1% chinese held more than 25% of china's wealth . 
 ,  there are more than 262 million migrant workers in china ,  mostly rural migrants seeking work in cities . 
archaeological evidence suggests that early hominids inhabited china between 2.24 million and 250,000 years ago . 
in the early years of the ming dynasty ,  china's capital was moved from nanjing to beijing . 
california is a state in the pacific region of the united states . 
california is bordered by oregon to the north ,  nevada and arizona to the east ,  and the mexican state of baja california to the south  -lrb-  with the coast being on the west  -rrb-  . 
it's possible the name california was meant to imply the island was a caliphate . 
cutting through the uplifting mountains ,  the columbia river significantly deepened the columbia river gorge . 
the columbia river is the largest river in the pacific northwest region of north america . 
the deschutes river joins the columbia near the dalles . 
the columbia drains an area of about  . 
nutrients dynamics vary in the river basin from the headwaters to the main river and dams ,  to finally reaching the columbia river estuary and ocean . 
the pend oreille river joins the columbia about north of the us–canada border . 
today the main stem of the columbia river has 14 dams ,  of which three are in canada and 11 in the us . 
the fourth-largest river in the united states by volume ,  the columbia has the greatest flow of any north american river entering the pacific . 
in 1891 the columbia was dredged to enhance shipping . 
both natural and anthropogenic processes are involved in the cycling of nutrients in the columbia river basin . 
the columbia receives more than 60 significant tributaries . 
the river defines that border for the final of its journey . 
the columbia enters eastern washington flowing south and turning to the west at the spokane river confluence . 
its discharge is roughly a third of the columbia's at the rivers' confluence but compared to the columbia upstream of the confluence the snake is longer  -lrb-  113%  -rrb-  and has a larger drainage basin  -lrb-  104%  -rrb-  . 
compared to the columbia river above the two rivers' confluence ,  the pend oreille-clark-flathead is nearly as long  -lrb-  about 86%  -rrb-  ,  its basin about three-fourths as large  -lrb-  76%  -rrb-  ,  and its discharge over a third  -lrb-  37%  -rrb-  . 
the columbia begins its journey in the southern rocky mountain trench in british columbia  -lrb-  bc  -rrb-  . 
the shifting columbia bar makes passage between the river and the pacific ocean difficult and dangerous ,  and numerous rapids along the river hinder navigation . 
the pend oreille river system  -lrb-  including its main tributaries ,  the clark fork and flathead rivers  -rrb-  is also similar in size to the columbia at their confluence . 
oral histories describe the formation and destruction of the bridge of the gods ,  a land bridge that connected the oregon and washington sides of the river in the columbia river gorge . 
the columbia shares its name with nearby places ,  such as british columbia ,  as well as with landforms and bodies of water . 
other columbia basin dams that have been removed include condit dam on washington's white salmon river ,  and the milltown dam on the clark fork in montana . 
with an average flow at the mouth of about  ,  the columbia is the largest river by discharge flowing into the pacific from north america and is the fourth-largest by volume in the us . 
the columbia supports several species of anadromous fish that migrate between the pacific ocean and fresh water tributaries of the river . 
chief joseph dam has no fish ladders and completely blocks fish migration to the upper half of the columbia river system . 
all three terms essentially mean `` the big river '' . 
canada's obligation was met by building three dams  -lrb-  two on the columbia ,  and one on the duncan river  -rrb-  ,  the last of which was completed in 1973.
he named cape disappointment for the non-existent river ,  not realizing the cape marks the northern edge of the river's mouth . 
several major north american drainage basins and many minor ones share a common border with the columbia river's drainage basin . 
because the columbia was at the same latitude as the headwaters of the missouri river ,  there was some speculation that gray and vancouver had discovered the long-sought northwest passage . 
this divide meets the continental divide at snow dome  -lrb-  also known as dome  -rrb-  ,  near the northernmost bend of the columbia river . 
the world wide fund for nature  -lrb-  wwf  -rrb-  divides the waters of the columbia and its tributaries into three freshwater ecoregions ,  naming them columbia glaciated ,  columbia unglaciated ,  and upper snake . 
on july 1, 2003, christopher swain of portland ,  oregon ,  became the first person to swim the columbia river's entire length ,  in an effort to raise public awareness about the river's environmental health . 
the cascades rapids of the columbia river gorge ,  and kettle falls and priest rapids in eastern washington ,  were also major fishing and trading sites . 
the installation of dams dramatically altered the landscape and ecosystem of the river . 
this is unchanged from the apg iii of 2009 and the apg ii of 2003, but different from the older apg system of 1998, which did not include hanguanaceae . 
according to the most recent classification scheme ,  the apg iv of 2016, the order includes five families:
the order consists of roughly 2600 species in eight families . 
the cucurbitales are an order of flowering plants ,  included in the rosid group of dicotyledons . 
the cucurbitales are an order of plants with a cosmopolitan distribution ,  particularly diverse in the tropics . 
the present classification is due to apg iii  -lrb-  2009 -rrb- . 
almost all contra dances are danced to live music . 
most contra dances do not have a strict dress code . 
contra dances are arranged in long lines of couples . 
contra dancing is a social dance that one can attend without a partner . 
contra dance has never been one woman dancing solely with one man . 
as in any social dance ,  cooperation is vital to contra dancing . 
most contra dances consist of a sequence of about 6 to 12 individual figures ,  prompted by the caller in time to the music as the figures are danced . 
 -lrb-  for diagrams and full descriptions ,  see contra dance form main article .   -rrb- 
typical contra dance choreography comprises four parts ,  each 16 counts  -lrb-  8 measures  -rrb-  long . 
 -lrb-  see the article on contra dance form for full characterizations of the progression in the eight dance forms mentioned above .   -rrb- 
contra dance  -lrb-  also contradance ,  contra-dance and other variant spellings  -rrb-  is a folk dance made up of long lines of couples . 
after the walkthrough ,  the music begins and the dancers repeat that sequence some number of times before that dance ends ,  often 10 to 15 minutes ,  depending on the length of the contra lines . 
coin collecting is the collecting of coins or other forms of minted legal tender . 
people have hoarded coins for their bullion value for as long as coins have been minted . 
these coins may be pocket change left from an international trip or an old coin found in circulation . 
coin hoarders may be similar to investors in the sense that they accumulate coins for potential long-term profit . 
casual coin collectors often begin the hobby by saving notable coins found by chance . 
a coin's grade is a main determinant of its value . 
typically they purchase coins that are composed of rare or precious metals ,  or coins that have a high purity of a specific metal . 
if unsuccessful ,  the shot disc is `` fouled '' and removed from the board ,  along with any of the player's other discs that were moved during the shot . 
when there are no enemy discs on the board ,  many  -lrb-  but not all  -rrb-  rules also state that a player must shoot for the centre of the board ,  and a shot disc must finish either completely inside the 15-point guarded ring line ,  or  -lrb-  depending on the specifics of the rules  -rrb-  be inside or touching this line . 
crokinole is most commonly played by two players ,  or by four players in teams of two ,  with partners sitting across the board from each other . 
players take turns shooting discs across the circular playing surface ,  trying to have their discs land in the higher-scoring regions of the board ,  while also attempting to knock away opposing discs . 
alternatively ,  the game may be played with ring-shaped pieces with a central hole . 
the capitalist mode of production refers to the systems of organising production and distribution within capitalist societies . 
the obstacles for the development of capitalist markets are therefore less technical and more social ,  cultural and political . 
in capitalist economic structures ,  supply and demand is an economic model of price determination in a market . 
benjamin disraeli used the term `` capitalist '' in his 1845 work `` sybil '' . 
in free market and `` laissez-faire '' forms of capitalism ,  markets are used most extensively with minimal or no regulation over the pricing mechanism . 
states with capitalistic economic systems have thrived under political regimes deemed to be authoritarian or oppressive . 
in state capitalist systems ,  markets are relied upon the least ,  with the state relying heavily on state-owned enterprises or indirect economic planning to accumulate capital . 
a society ,  region or nation is capitalist if the predominant source of incomes and products being distributed is capitalist activity ,  but even so this does not yet mean necessarily that the capitalist mode of production is dominant in that society . 
in capitalist economics ,  market competition is the rivalry among sellers trying to achieve such goals as increasing profits ,  market share and sales volume by varying the elements of the marketing mix: price ,  product ,  distribution and promotion . 
most existing capitalist economies are mixed economies ,  which combine elements of free markets with state intervention and in some cases economic planning . 
many theorists have noted that this increase in global gdp over time coincides with the emergence of the modern world capitalist system . 
the `` hollandische mercurius '' uses `` capitalists '' in 1633 and 1654 to refer to owners of capital . 
if the market does not provide consistent job opportunities  -lrb-  as it has in previous decades  -rrb-  ,  the shortcomings of liberal social security systems may depress social and political participation even further than in other capitalist economies . 
in a capitalist market economy ,  decision-making and investment are determined by every owner of wealth ,  property or production ability in financial and capital markets ,  whereas prices and the distribution of goods and services are mainly determined by competition in goods and services markets . 
theoretically ,  in free and competitive markets maximising profits ensures that resources are not wasted . 
over time ,  capitalist countries have experienced consistent economic growth and an increase in the standard of living . 
in capitalist theoretics ,  the profit motive is said to ensure that resources are being allocated efficiently . 
heavy cross ownership is referred to as circular ownership . 
a congenital heart defect ,  also known as a `` congenital heart anomaly '' or `` congenital heart disease '' ,  is a problem in the structure of the heart that is present at birth . 
the mechanical part of the heart is centered on the fluidic movement of blood and the functionality of the heart as a pump . 
cardiology is concerned with the normal functionality of the heart and the deviation from a healthy heart . 
the heart is a muscle that squeezes blood and functions like a pump . 
coronary circulation is the circulation of blood in the blood vessels of the heart muscle  -lrb-  myocardium  -rrb-  . 
the primary responsibility of the heart is to pump blood throughout the body . 
each part of the heart is susceptible to failure or dysfunction and the heart can be divided into the mechanical and the electrical parts . 
heart failure is one condition in which the mechanical properties of the heart have failed or are failing ,  which means insufficient blood is being circulated . 
cardiac arrest is a sudden stop in effective blood flow due to the failure of the heart to contract effectively . 
while plenty is known about the healthy heart ,  the bulk of study in cardiology is in disorders of the heart and restoration ,  and where possible ,  of function . 
other complications include heart failure or an irregular heartbeat . 
all cardiologists study the disorders of the heart ,  but the study of adult and child heart disorders are through different training pathways . 
an echocardiogram can also give physicians other estimates of heart function ,  such as a calculation of the cardiac output ,  ejection fraction ,  and diastolic function  -lrb-  how well the heart relaxes  -rrb-  . 
cardiac electrophysiology is the science of elucidating ,  diagnosing ,  and treating the electrical activities of the heart . 
cardiology  -lrb-  from greek `` kardiā '' ,  `` heart '' and `` -logia '' ,  `` study ''  -rrb-  is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the heart as well as parts of the circulatory system . 
diagnostic tests in cardiology are the methods of identifying heart conditions associated with healthy vs .  unhealthy ,  pathologic heart function . 
these include the great cardiac vein ,  the middle cardiac vein ,  the small cardiac vein and the anterior cardiac veins . 
cardiac disorders such as coronary heart disease  -lrb-  including myocardial infarction ,  heart failure ,  cardiomyopathy ,  arrhythmias  -lrb-  as atrial fibrillation  -rrb-  and others are common and are a major cause of mortality in elderly people . 
capcom started its `` street fighter '' franchise in 1987.
capcom has three internal divisions to make games . 
in 1994, capcom adapted its `` street fighter '' series of fighting games into a film of the same name . 
capcom has created 15 multi-million-selling game series ,  the most successful of which is `` resident evil '' . 
capcom's predecessor ,  i . r . m corporation ,  was founded on may 30, 1979 by kenzo tsujimoto . 
in january 1989, the old affiliate company capcom co .  ,  ltd .  merged with sambi co .  ,  ltd .  ,  resulting in the current japanese branch . 
capcom claimed koei tecmo games infringed a patent it obtained in 2002 regarding a play feature in video games . 
affiliated companies include koko capcom co .  ,  ltd .  in south korea ,  street fighter film ,  llc in the united states ,  and dellgamadas co .  ,  ltd . 
cambodia's situation at the end of the war was chaotic . 
modern research has located 20,000 mass graves from the khmer rouge era all over cambodia . 
cambodia had neither a currency nor a banking system . 
the khmer empire was established by the early 9th century . 
the khmer rouge insurgency inside cambodia continued to grow ,  aided by supplies and military support from north vietnam . 
the term `` dark ages of cambodia '' ,  also the `` middle period '' refers to the historical era from the early 15th century to 1863, the beginning of the french protectorate of cambodia . 
the new regime immediately demanded that the vietnamese communists leave cambodia . 
1975, abandoned and in the hands of the khmer rouge ,  cambodia endures its darkest hour – democratic kampuchea and its long aftermath of vietnamese occupation ,  the people's republic of kampuchea and the un mandate towards modern cambodia since 1993.
the lon nol government in phnom penh surrendered on 17 april 1975, just five days after the us mission evacuated cambodia . 
when cambodian socialists began to rebel in the eastern zone of cambodia ,  pol pot ordered his armies to exterminate 1.5 million eastern cambodians which he branded as `` cambodians with vietnamese minds '' in the area . 
the khmer empire was preceded by chenla ,  a polity with shifting centres of power ,  which was split into land chenla and water chenla in the early 8th century . 
the history of cambodia ,  a country in mainland southeast asia ,  can be traced back to at least the 5th millennium bce . 
funan's language has been determined as to have been an early form of khmer and its written form was sanskrit . 
on 9 march 1945, during the japanese occupation of cambodia ,  young king norodom sihanouk proclaimed an independent kingdom of kampuchea ,  following a formal request by the japanese . 
in april 1970, us president richard nixon announced to the american public that us and south vietnamese ground forces had entered cambodia in a campaign aimed at destroying nva base areas in cambodia  -lrb-  see cambodian incursion  -rrb-  . 
the khmers ,  vassals of funan ,  reached the mekong river from the northern menam river via the mun river valley . 
religious institutions were not spared by the khmer rouge as well ,  in fact religion was so viciously persecuted to such a terrifying extent that the vast majority of cambodia's historic architecture ,  95% of cambodia's buddhist temples ,  was completely destroyed . 
siamese and vietnamese dominance intensified during the 17th and 18th century ,  resulting in frequent displacements of the seat of power as the khmer royal authority decreased to the state of a vassal . 
the relationship between the massive carpet bombing of cambodia by the united states and the growth of the khmer rouge ,  in terms of recruitment and popular support ,  has been a matter of interest to historians . 
the vietnamese intervention in cambodia ,  launched at the request of the khmer rouge ,  has also been cited as a major factor in their eventual victory ,  including by shawcross . 
chenla is the name of funan's successor in chinese annals ,  first appearing in 616/617 ce
on 16 march 1992, the un transitional authority in cambodia  -lrb-  untac  -rrb-  arrived in cambodia to begin implementation of the un settlement plan and to become operational on 15 march 1992 under yasushi akashi ,  the special representative of the u . n .  secretary general . 
historians relate the event to the shift of cambodia's political centre southward to the region of phnom penh ,  longvek and later oudong . 
in the period 245–250 ce dignitaries of the chinese kingdom of wu visited the funan city vyadharapura . 
land chenla acquired independence under jayavarman ii in 802 ce
the decline continued through a transitional period of approximately 100 years followed by the middle period of cambodian history ,  also called the dark ages of cambodia ,  beginning in the mid 15th century . 
prince sihanouk resigned as head of state on 4 april . 
more than two million refugees from the war lived in phnom penh and other cities . 
cambodia is still infested with countless land mines ,  indiscriminately planted by all warring parties during the decades of war and upheaval . 
a un investigation reported 2–3 million dead ,  while unicef estimated 3 million had been killed . 
william shawcross ,  however ,  wrote that the us bombing and ground incursion plunged cambodia into the chaos sihanouk had worked for years to avoid . 
the landmass is bisected by the mekong river ,  which at is the longest river in cambodia . 
major rivers are the sen river ,  sreng river ,  stung pouthisat river ,  sisophon river ,  mongkol borei river ,  and sangkae river . 
the mekong river and its tributaries comprise one of the largest river systems in the world . 
the flow of water into the tonle sap is seasonal . 
they divide into two parallel channels ,  the mekong river proper and the bassac river ,  and flow independently through the delta areas of cambodia and vietnam to the south china sea . 
as the mekong enters cambodia  -lrb-  over 95% of its waters have already joined the river  -rrb-  it widens and inundates large areas . 
the mekong's waters disperse into the surrounding wetlands of central cambodia and strongly affect the seasonal nature of the tonlé sap lake . 
cambodia's main geographical features are the low lying central plain that includes the tonlé sap basin ,  the lower mekong river flood-plains and the bassac river plain surrounded by mountain ranges to the north ,  east ,  in the south-west and south . 
cambodia is a country in mainland southeast asia ,  bordering thailand ,  laos ,  vietnam ,  the gulf of thailand and covers a total area of  . 
the bowl's bottom represents cambodia's interior ,  about 75 percent ,  consisting of alluvial flood-plains of the tonlé sap basin ,  the lower mekong river and the bassac river plain ,  whose waters feed the large and almost centrally located wetlands . 
the plains of the mekong and tonle sap basin are confined in the north by the dangrek and central annamite mountains ,  and to the south by the cardamom mountains and elephant mountains . 
the mekong river flows southward from the cambodia-laos border to a point south of kratié  -lrb-  town  -rrb-  ,  where it turns west for about and then turns southwest towards phnom penh . 
the tonle sap ,  also known as the great lake in central cambodia is the largest freshwater lake in southeast asia and one of the richest inland fishing grounds in the world . 
approximately 40% of cambodia’s forests have some level of protection ,  while one of the cambodia millennium development goals targets is to achieve a 60% forest cover by 2015.
the mekong traverses the north to south-east portions of the country ,  where the low-lying plains extend into vietnam and reach the south china sea at the mekong delta region . 
after the mekong's waters crest — when its downstream channels can handle the volume of water — the flow reverses ,  and water flows out of the engorged lake . 
its waters' flow reverses direction every year ,  caused by greatly varying amounts of water carried by the mekong over the course of a year and the impact of monsoonal rains ,  that coincides with the river's maximum . 
between 1874 and 1921, the total population of cambodia increased from about 946,000 to 2.4 million . 
births and deaths the total fertility rate in cambodia was 3.0 children per woman in 2010.
after the abdication of king norodom sihanouk in 2004, he was succeeded by his son norodom sihamoni . 
the prime minister is officially the head of government in cambodia . 
thus ,  in effect ,  cambodia could be described as a country with two kings during sihanouk's lifetime: the one who was the head of state ,  the `` preahmâhaksat '' norodom sihamoni ,  and the one who was not the head of state ,  the `` preahmâhaviraksat '' norodom sihanouk . 
the prime minister and his government make up cambodia's executive branch of government . 
the king is officially the head of state and is the symbol of unity and `` perpetuity '' of the nation ,  as defined by cambodia's constitution . 
from september 24, 1993 through october 7, 2004, norodom sihanouk reigned as king ,  after having previously served in a number of offices  -lrb-  including king  -rrb-  since 1941.
the current prime minister is cambodian people's party  -lrb-  cpp  -rrb-  member hun sen . 
the prime minister of cambodia is a representative from the ruling party of the national assembly . 
cambodia is a constitutional monarchy ,  i . e . 
us companies were the fifth largest investors in cambodia ,  with more than $1.2 billion in investments over the period 1997-2007.
the garment industry represents the largest portion of cambodia's manufacturing sector ,  accounting for 80% of the country's exports . 
in 1995, with a gdp of $2.92 billion the government transformed the country's economic system from a planned economy to its present market-driven system . 
in 2007, cambodia's gross domestic product grew by an estimated 18.6% . 
in 2009 there were 9 tv broadcast stations with most operating on multiple channels ,  including 1 state-operated station broadcasting from multiple locations ,  6 stations either jointly operated or privately owned with some broadcasting from several locations ,  and 2 tv relay stations - one relaying a french tv station and the other relaying a vietnamese tv station . 
in 2009 there were roughly 50 radio broadcast stations - 1 state-owned broadcaster with multiple stations and a large mixture of public and private broadcasters . 
fixed line service in phnom penh and other provincial cities is available . 
there are radio stations in each of the following provinces: banteay meanchey ,  battambang ,  kampong cham ,  kampong thom ,  kampot ,  kandal ,  pailin ,  preah vihear ,  siem reap ,  sihanoukville and svay rieng . 
and now road construction is on going from the thailand border at poipet to siem reap  -lrb-  angkor wat  -rrb-  . 
of the current total ,  only about 50 percent of the roads and highways were covered with asphalt and were in good condition; about 50 percent of the roads were made of crushed stone ,  gravel ,  or improved earth; and the remaining approximately 30 percent were unimproved earth or were little more than tracks . 
cambodia is a transshipment site for golden triangle heroin ,  and possibly a site of money laundering . 
parts of cambodia's border with thailand are indefinite ,  and the maritime boundary with thailand is not clearly defined . 
laterite was more commonly used in the khmer provinces than at angkor itself . 
the two largest reservoirs at angkor were the west baray and the east baray located on either side of angkor thom . 
in khmer architecture  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  the period of angkor is the period in the history of the khmer empire from approximately the later half of the 8th century ce to the first half of the 15th century ce . 
angkor's neighbor state of champa was also the home to numerous brick temples that are similar in style to those of angkor . 
the angkorian khmer preferred to work in bas-relief ,  while their neighbors the cham were partial to haut-relief . 
the earliest angkorian temples were made mainly of brick . 
in the end ,  the cham replica was more impressive than the real brick tower of the khmer ,  and the cham won the contest . 
the only stone used by angkorian builders was sandstone ,  obtained from the kulen mountains . 
angkorian builders used brick ,  sandstone ,  laterite and wood as their materials . 
apsaras and devatas are ubiquitous at angkor ,  but are most common in the foundations of the 12th century . 
during the period of angkor wat in the first half of the 12th century ,  additional half galleries on one side were introduced to buttress the structure of the temple . 
it occurs at angkor wat in the epic bas reliefs of the outer gallery . 
the lingas that survive from the angkorean period are generally made of polished stone . 
the following are some of the most important angkorian depictions of the life of krishna:
the dominant scheme for the construction of state temples in the angkorian period was that of the temple mountain ,  an architectural representation of mount meru ,  the home of the gods in hinduism . 
dvarapalas may be seen ,  for example ,  at preah ko ,  lolei ,  banteay srei ,  preah khan and banteay kdei . 
scenes from the life of krishna ,  a hero and avatar of the god vishnu ,  are common in the relief carvings decorating angkorian temples ,  and unknown in angkorian sculpture in the round . 
the numerous adventures of indra documented in hindu epic mahabharata are not depicted at angkor . 
both of these stars are of the fourth magnitude . 
β capricorni is a double star also known as dabih . 
the other bright stars in capricornus range in magnitude from 3.1 to 5.1. α capricorni is a multiple star also known as algedi or giedi . 
capricornus is a faint constellation ,  with only one star above magnitude 3; its alpha star has a magnitude of only 3.6.
the brightest star in capricornus is δ capricorni ,  also called deneb algedi ,  with a magnitude of 2.9, 39 light-years from earth . 
capricornus's brighter stars are found on a triangle whose vertices are α capricorni  -lrb-  giedi  -rrb-  ,  δ capricorni  -lrb-  deneb algiedi  -rrb-  ,  and ω capricorni . 
the population total in cameroon was in  . 
transport in cameroon is often difficult . 
cameroon  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of cameroon  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a country wedged in west and central africa . 
at  ,  cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest country . 
cameroon has four patterns of drainage . 
there have been 2 presidents since the independence of cameroon . 
french and english are the official languages of cameroon . 
cameroon has one of the highest school attendance rates in africa . 
cameroon is aiming to become an emerging country by 2035.
in 2013, the total adult literacy rate of cameroon was estimated to be 71.3% . 
cameroon became a german colony in 1884 known as kamerun . 
cameroon controls 12 nautical miles of the atlantic ocean . 
cameroon is a member of both the commonwealth of nations and la francophonie . 
school attendance in cameroon is also affected by child labour . 
cameroon is viewed as rife with corruption at all levels of government . 
an irregular chain of mountains ,  hills ,  and plateaus known as the cameroon range extends from mount cameroon on the coast—cameroon's highest point at —almost to lake chad at cameroon's northern border at 13°05'n . 
the south cameroon plateau rises from the coastal plain to an average elevation of  . 
with the defeat of germany in world war i ,  kamerun became a league of nations mandate territory and was split into french cameroons and british cameroons in 1919.
politicians in the english-speaking regions have advocated for greater decentralisation and even complete separation or independence  -lrb-  as in the southern cameroons national council  -rrb-  from cameroon . 
nevertheless ,  in practice ,  the industry is one of the least regulated in cameroon . 
the territory of present-day cameroon was first settled during the neolithic era . 
in the more peaceful british cameroons ,  the question was whether to reunify with french cameroun or join nigeria . 
there is no conscription in cameroon ,  but the government makes periodic calls for volunteers . 
cameroon's natural resources are very well suited to agriculture and arboriculture . 
the constitution divides cameroon into 10 semi-autonomous regions ,  each under the administration of an elected regional council . 
according to the latest census ,  cameroon still has slightly more women  -lrb-  50.6%  -rrb-  than men  -lrb-  49.4%  -rrb-  . 
on october 1, 1961, the largely muslim northern two-thirds of british cameroons voted to join nigeria; the largely christian southern third ,  southern cameroons ,  voted ,  in a referendum ,  to join with the republic of cameroon to form the federal republic of cameroon . 
the earliest inhabitants of cameroon were probably the baka  -lrb-  pygmies  -rrb-  . 
french cameroon achieved independence on january 1, 1960 as la republique du cameroun . 
in 1962, the francs cfa became the official currency in cameroon . 
on 13 march 1959 the united nations’ general assembly resolved that the un trusteeship agreement with france for french cameroon would end when french cameroon became independent on 1 january 1961.
on 18 december 1956, the outlawed union of the peoples of cameroon  -lrb-  upc  -rrb-  ,  based largely among the bamileke and bassa ethnic groups ,  began an armed struggle for independence in french cameroon . 
legislative elections were held on 23 december 1956 and the resulting assembly passed a decree on 16 april 1957 which made french cameroon a state . 
cameroon's landmass is  ,  with of water . 
cameroon ,  has an average annual rainfall of  . 
at  ,  cameroon is the world's 54th largest country . 
in western cameroon is an irregular chain of mountains ,  hills ,  and plateaus that extends from mount cameroon almost to lake chad at the northern tip of the country . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
the cameroon government held two national censuses during the country's first 44 years as an independent country ,  in 1976 and again in 1987.
cameroon has a number of independent newspapers . 
the supreme court may review the constitutionality of a law only at the president's request . 
the supreme court may review the constitutionality of a law only at the president's request . 
the politics of cameroon takes place in a framework of a unitary presidential republic ,  whereby the president of cameroon is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
laws are adopted by majority vote of members present or ,  if the president demands a second reading ,  of a total membership . 
legislative power is vested in both the government and the national assembly of cameroon . 
cameroon’s financial system is the largest in the cemac region . 
cameroon aims at becoming emerging by 2035.
less than 5 percent of cameroonians have access to a bank account . 
telecommunications in cameroon include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
the government maintains tight control over broadcast media . 
railways in cameroon are operated by camrail ,  a subsidiary of french investment group bolloré . 
the cameroonian armed forces have bases spread all over cameroon ,  including in ngaoundéré . 
the cameroonian armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the official national military of the republic of cameroon . 
air force bases are located in garoua ,  yaoundé ,  douala and bamenda . 
cameroon also faces a complaint filed with the african commission on human rights by the southern cameroons national council  -lrb-  scnc  -rrb-  and the southern cameroons peoples organisation  -lrb-  scapo  -rrb-  against the government of the republic of cameroon ,  in which the complainants allege that the republic of cameroon is illegally occupying the territory of southern cameroons . 
as of 10 october 2012, it has been resolved that cameroon own bakassi . 
mountains higher than are found on santiago ,  fogo ,  santo antão ,  and são nicolau . 
all but santa luzia are inhabited . 
a large proportion  -lrb-  236,000 -rrb- of cape verdeans live on the main island ,  santiago . 
survival in a country with few natural resources has historically induced cape verdeans to emigrate . 
cape verde has a population of about round -4 inhabitants ,  divided evenly of those who live in the islands and the ones who live abroad in the cape verdean diaspora in mainland africa ,  europe ,  u . s .  ,  brazil ,  et cetera . 
vital events of cape verde are not  -lrb-  yet  -rrb-  available for recent years . 
cape verde is divided into 22 municipalities  -lrb-  concelhos ,  singular - concelho  -rrb- : boa vista ,  brava ,  maio ,  mosteiros ,  paul ,  porto novo ,  praia ,  ribeira grande ,  ribeira grande de santiago ,  sal ,  santa catarina ,  santa catarina do fogo ,  santa cruz ,  são domingos ,  são filipe ,  são lourenço dos órgãos ,  são miguel ,  são nicolau ,  são salvador do mundo ,  são vicente ,  tarrafal ,  tarrafal de são nicolau . 
politics of cape verde takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the prime minister of cape verde is the head of government and the president of the republic of cape verde is the head of state ,  and of a multi-party system . 
this became the african party for the independence of cape verde  -lrb-  paicv  -rrb-  in 1980, as cape verde sought to distance itself from guinea-bissau ,  following unrest in that country . 
the pier at santa maria on sal used by both fishing and dive boats has been rehabilitated . 
most transportation in cape verde is done by plane . 
the cape verdean armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  cabo verdean armed forces or facv are the military of cape verde . 
the cape verdean armed forces are part of the ministry of national defense of cape verde and include:
the cape verdean farp consisted of two independent branches ,  the army  -lrb-    -rrb-  and the coast guard  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the cayman islands historically has been a tax-exempt destination . 
the first recorded permanent inhabitant of the cayman islands ,  isaac bodden ,  was born on grand cayman around 1661.
the islands are in the western caribbean sea and are the peaks of a massive underwater ridge ,  known as the cayman ridge  -lrb-  or cayman rise  -rrb-  . 
the cayman islands  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is an autonomous british overseas territory in the western caribbean sea . 
both cayman brac and little cayman suffered damage ,  although not to the same extent as grand cayman . 
cayman ceased to be a dependency of jamaica . 
damage on grand cayman has been extensive . 
grand cayman was the only island of the three that create the cayman islands that had instituted slavery . 
england took formal control of cayman ,  along with jamaica ,  under the treaty of madrid in 1670 after the first settlers came from jamaica in 1661-71 to little cayman and cayman brac . 
the democratic alliance won 2 seats in george town ,  team cayman won one in bodden town and independents won seats in george town ,  cayman brac and little cayman . 
from 1670, the cayman islands were effective dependencies of jamaica ,  although there was considerable self-government . 
in 1971 the governmental structure of the islands was again changed with a governor now running the cayman islands . 
columbus had found the two smaller sister islands  -lrb-  cayman brac and little cayman  -rrb-  and it was these two islands that he named `` las tortugas '' . 
athel long cmg ,  cbe was the last administrator and the first governor of the cayman islands . 
the islands are located on the cayman rise which forms the northern margin of the cayman trough . 
the cayman islands are a british dependency and island country . 
due to the islands' location ,  the cayman islands do get earthquakes . 
the official language of the cayman islands is english . 
the predominant religion on the cayman islands is christianity . 
the cayman islands also hosts a growing jewish community . 
the politics of the cayman islands takes place within a framework of parliamentary democracy ,  within the confines of the government of the cayman islands . 
the cayman islands stock exchange was opened in 1997.
the government of the cayman islands agreed on a model agreement ,  which set out how the eusd would be implemented with the cayman islands . 
the cayman islands is a major international financial centre . 
sir vassel johnson was a pioneer of cayman’s financial services industry . 
the cayman islands is the fifth-largest banking centre in the world ,  with $1.5 trillion in banking liabilities  . 
without his input ,  cayman might well have remained the islands that time forgot . ’
the cayman islands' tax-free status has attracted numerous banks and other companies to its shores . 
however ,  the cayman islands still participates in some international organisations ,  being a full member of the central development bank and international olympic committee ,  an associate member of caricom and unesco ,  and a member of a subbureau of interpol . 
though the cayman islands are involved in no major international disputes ,  they have come under some criticism due to the use of their territory for narcotics trafficking and money laundering . 
bangui is the transport hub of the central african republic . 
at  ,  the central african republic is the world's 45th-largest country . 
women's health is poor in the central african republic . 
the central african republic is a landlocked nation within the interior of the african continent . 
car is one of the few african countries to have an african language as their official language . 
the central african republic  -lrb-  car; sango: `` ködörösêse tî bêafrîka '';    ,  or ``  ''   -rrb-  is a landlocked country in central africa . 
the central african republic is a member of the united nations ,  the african union ,  the economic community of central african states ,  the organisation internationale de la francophonie and the non-aligned movement . 
public education in the central african republic is free and is compulsory from ages 6 to 14.
bangui m'poko international airport is central african republic's only international airport . 
in 2008, central african republic was the world's least light pollution affected country . 
the population of the central african republic has almost quadrupled since independence . 
like in many other former french colonies ,  the central african republic's legal system is based on french law . 
malaria is endemic in the central african republic ,  and one of the leading causes of death . 
the central african republic primarily uses hydroelectricity as there are few other resources for energy and power . 
the european penetration of central african territory began in the late 19th century during the scramble for africa . 
in 2004 the central african republic bush war began ,  as forces opposed to bozizé took up arms against his government . 
politics in the central african republic formally take place in a framework of a semi-presidential republic . 
its national team won the african championship twice and was the first sub-saharan african team to qualify for the basketball world cup . 
this african union force of 6,000 personnel was accompanied by the french operation sangaris . 
the central african republic is the focal point of the bangui magnetic anomaly ,  one of the largest magnetic anomalies on earth . 
production of copper ,  salt ,  dried fish ,  and textiles dominated the economic trade in the central african region . 
the currency of central african republic is the cfa franc ,  which is accepted across the former countries of french west africa and trades at a fixed rate to the euro . 
the country also has a national football team ,  which is governed by the central african football federation ,  and stages matches at the barthélemy boganda stadium . 
the climate of the central african republic is generally tropical ,  with a wet season that lasts from june to september in the northern regions of the country ,  and from may to october in the south . 
the university of bangui ,  a public university located in bangui ,  includes a medical school ,  and euclid university ,  an international university in bangui ,  are the two institutions of higher education in the central african republic . 
the central african republic's two official languages are french and sango  -lrb-  also spelled sangho  -rrb-  ,  a creole developed as an inter-ethnic lingua franca based on the local ngbandi language . 
the central african republic is heavily dependent upon foreign aid and numerous ngos provide services that the government does not provide . 
in november 2012, séléka ,  a coalition of rebel groups ,  took over towns in the northern and central regions of the country . 
in response to concerns of a potential genocide ,  a peacekeeping force – the international support mission to the central african republic  -lrb-  misca  -rrb-  – was authorized in december 2013.
in 1889, the french established a post on the ubangi river at bangui . 
in september 1940, during the second world war ,  pro-gaullist french officers took control of ubangi-shari . 
after the power of local african rulers was destroyed by the french ,  slave raiding greatly diminished . 
on 20 september 1979, dacko ,  with french support ,  led a bloodless coup that overthrew bokassa while he was out of the country . 
the final period has been the era during which the central african republic has been an independent state . 
the european penetration of central african territory began in the late 19th century during the scramble for africa . 
peacekeeping largely transitioned from the eccas led micopax to the au led misca to the un led minusca while the french peacekeeping mission was known as operation sangaris . 
after bozizé seized power in 2003, the central african republic bush war began with the rebellion by the union of democratic forces for unity  -lrb-  ufdr  -rrb-  ,  led by michel djotodia . 
the history of the central african republic is roughly composed of four distinct periods . 
at the same time ,  the french colonial administration began to force the local population to pay taxes and to provide the state with free labor . 
the french constitutional referendum of september 1958 dissolved the aef ,  and on 1 december of the same year the assembly declared the birth of the autonomous central african republic with boganda as head of government . 
during the first decade of french colonial rule ,  from about 1900 to 1910, the rulers of the ubangi-shari region increased both their slave-raiding activities and the selling of local produce to europe . 
french president françois hollande rejected the plea ,  saying that the 250 french troops stationed at bangui m'poko international airport are there `` in no way to intervene in the internal affairs '' . 
production of copper ,  salt ,  dried fish ,  and textiles dominated the economic trade in the central african region . 
on 13 august 1960 the central african republic became an independent country and david dacko became its first president . 
much of the southern border is formed by tributaries of the congo river ,  with the mbomou river in the east merging with the uele river to form the ubangi river . 
the central african republic is a landlocked nation within the interior of the african continent . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
registration of vital events is in the central african republic not complete . 
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 40.4% ,  55.6% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 4% was 65 years or older
elections were held on march 13, 2005.
since march 30, 2016, faustin-archange touadéra is the president of the central african republic . 
on december 14, 2015, a new constitution by referendum and ratified on march 27, 2016.
since march 27, 2016, the parliament of the central african republic is composed of two bodies: the national assembly and the senate . 
the informal economy of the car is more important than the formal economy for most central africans . 
the central african republic  -lrb-  car  -rrb-  is classified as one of the world's least developed countries ,  with an estimated annual per capita income of $547 ppp  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- . 
with less than 1 percent of the total population holding a bank account ,  access to financial services is extremely limited in the car . 
there are 22.2 million hectares  -lrb-  56.5 million acres  -rrb-  of forest  -lrb-  36 percent of the total land area  -rrb-  ,  but only 3.4 million hectares  -lrb-  8.4 million acres  -rrb-  of dense forest ,  all in the south in the regions bordering the drc ,  republic of congo and cameroon . 
this accounts for 40% of the countries total export earnings . 
the importance of foodcrops over exported cash crops is illustrated by the fact that the total production of cassava ,  the staple food of most central africans ,  ranges between c .  200,000 and 300,000 tons a year ,  while the production of cotton ,  the principal exported cash crop ,  ranges from c .  25,000 to 45,000 tons a year . 
much of the income derived from the sale of foods and alcohol is not `` on the books '' and thus is not considered in calculating per capita income ,  which is one reason why official figures for per capita income are not accurate in the case of the car . 
in the 40 years since independence ,  the car has made slow progress toward economic development . 
radio is the most-popular communications medium . 
starting 24 november 2011 `` la radio et la télévision nationale centrafricaine  -lrb-  tvca  -rrb- ``   -lrb-  central african radio  -lrb-  car  -rrb-  and national television  -rrb-  are available via satellite . 
many ,  such as radio notre dame ,  run by religious organisations . 
modes of transport in the central african republic include road ,  water ,  and air . 
in 1993, ange-félix patassé became the central african republic's first elected president . 
the central african armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  are the armed forces of the central african republic ,  established after independence in 1960.
in 2002, he seized bangui for a short period ,  and in march 2003 took power in a coup d'état  . 
the faca has been dominated by soldiers from the yakoma ethnic group since the time of kolingba . 
bozizé has created an amphibious force . 
there has been an almost uninterrupted french military presence in central african republic since independence ,  regulated through agreements between the two governments . 
this later had disastrous consequences when kolingba was replaced by a member of a northerner tribe ,  ange-félix patassé . 
in central african republic ,  the bouar base and the béal camp  -lrb-  at that time home to 1,400 french soldiers  -rrb-  in bangui were shut down ,  as the french concentrated its african presence to abidjan ,  dakar ,  djibouti ,  libreville and n'djamena and the deployment of a `` force d'action rapide '' ,  based in france . 
the military has played an important role in the history of central african republic . 
the faca proved to be incompetent in 2013 when militants of the séléka rebel coalition seized power and overthrew president bozizé ,  committing executions of many faca troops . 
the central african republic is an active member in several central african organizations ,  including the economic and monetary union  -lrb-  cemac  -rrb-  ,  the economic community of central african states  -lrb-  ceeac  -rrb-  ,  the central african peace and security council  -lrb-  copax- still under formation  -rrb-  ,  and the central bank of central african states  -lrb-  beac  -rrb-  . 
is a participant in the community of sahel-saharan states  -lrb-  cen-sad  -rrb-  ,  and the african union  -lrb-  au  -rrb-  . 
chad  -lrb-  ;  ,  ;  ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of chad  -lrb-   ``  ''; `` republic of the chad ''  -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked country in north-central africa . 
since 2012 chad has been divided into 23 regions . 
at  ,  chad is the world's 22nd-largest country . 
football is chad's most popular sport . 
chad's currency is the cfa franc . 
chad is a religiously diverse country . 
millet is the staple food throughout chad . 
chad's television audience is limited to n'djamena . 
chad's major rivers—the chari ,  logone and their tributaries—flow through the southern savannas from the southeast into lake chad . 
chad had an estimated 59 airports ,  only 9 of which had paved runways . 
the most popular religion of chad is islam  -lrb-  at 55%  -rrb-  ,  followed by christianity  -lrb-  at 40%  -rrb-  . 
there have been numerous rebel groups in chad throughout the last few decades . 
chad ranked number 148 out of 148 overall in the 2014 nri ranking ,  down from 142 in 2013.
in southern chad ,  bitter conflicts over land are becoming more and more common . 
at 33 percent ,  chad has one of the lowest literacy rates of sub-saharan africa . 
in 2003 chad's sole literary critic ,  ahmat taboye ,  published his to further knowledge of chad's literature internationally and among youth and to make up for chad's lack of publishing houses and promotional structure . 
in chad ,  homosexual acts are illegal and can be punished by 15 to 20 years in prison . 
chad is home to foreign missionaries representing both christian and islamic groups . 
chad is listed as a failed state by the fund for peace  -lrb-  ffp  -rrb-  . 
chad has more than 200 distinct ethnic groups ,  which create diverse social structures . 
the cia world factbook estimates the military budget of chad to be 4.2% of gdp as of 2006. . 
on 14 july 2006, the world bank and chad signed a memorandum of understanding under which the government of chad commits 70% of its spending to priority poverty reduction programmes . 
chad's official languages are arabic and french ,  but over 100 languages and dialects are spoken . 
civil war crippled the development of transport infrastructure; in 1987, chad had only of paved roads . 
issa serge coelo directed chad's two other films ,  `` daresalam '' and ``  '' . 
chad's animal and plant life correspond to the three climatic zones . 
the disintegration of chad caused the collapse of france's position in the country . 
the peoples of chad carry significant ancestry from eastern ,  central ,  western ,  and northern africa . 
chile is a `` country of poets '' . 
chile's 2017 census reported a population of 17,574,003.
chile is home to the world renowned patagonian trail that resides on the border between argentina and chile . 
church and state are officially separate in chile . 
chile has a total of 372 runways  -lrb-  62 paved and 310 unpaved  -rrb-  . 
there are various theories about the origin of the word `` chile '' . 
in chile ,  education begins with preschool until the age of 5.
chile is among the longest north-south countries in the world . 
the government junta of chile proclaimed chile an autonomous republic within the spanish monarchy  -lrb-  in memory of this day ,  chile celebrates its national day on 18 september each year  -rrb-  . 
chile had joined the stand as one of the high-income countries in south america by 1870.
chile currently utilizes 14,015 hectares of agricultural land . 
this ruling severely impacted fishers in the country making chile lose a valuable trade in northwest chile . 
hospitals in chile are mainly located in the santiago metropolitan region . 
the central bank of chile in santiago serves as the central bank for the country . 
music in chile ranges from folkloric ,  popular and classical music . 
chile's judiciary is independent and includes a court of appeal ,  a system of military courts ,  a constitutional tribunal ,  and the supreme court of chile . 
tourism in chile has experienced sustained growth over the last few decades . 
the congress of chile has a 38-seat senate and a 120-member chamber of deputies . 
just over 3,000 species of fungi are recorded in chile ,  but this number is far from complete . 
in 1978 chile was administratively divided into regions ,  and in 1979 subdivided into provinces and these into communes . 
chile  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of chile  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a south american country occupying a long ,  narrow strip of land between the andes to the east and the pacific ocean to the west . 
standard & poor's gives chile a credit rating of aa- . 
chile slowly started to expand its influence and to establish its borders . 
roughly 500,000 of chile's population is of full or partial palestinian origin . 
museums in chile such as the chilean national museum of fine arts built in 1880, feature works by chilean artists . 
fonasa is part of the nhss and has executive power through the ministry of health  -lrb-  chile  -rrb-  . 
chile also claims about of antarctica ,  although all claims are suspended under the antarctic treaty . 
although the spanish did not find the extensive gold and silver they sought ,  they recognized the agricultural potential of chile's central valley ,  and chile became part of the spanish empire . 
the older spelling `` chili '' was in use in english until at least 1900 before switching to `` chile '' . 
descendants of different european ethnic groups often intermarried in chile . 
due to chile's topography a functioning transport network is vital to its economy . 
the national flower is the copihue  -lrb-  `` lapageria rosea '' ,  chilean bellflower  -rrb-  ,  which grows in the woods of southern chile . 
chile has a telecommunication system which covers much of the country ,  including chilean insular and antarctic bases . 
since july 2013, chile is considered by the world bank as a `` high-income economy '' . 
add to that the enormous length of chile  -lrb-  over   -rrb-  and this results in a wide range of climates and environments that can be divided into three general zones: the desert provinces of the north ,  central chile ,  and the humid regions of the south . 
chile achieved global recognition for the successful rescue of 33 trapped miners in 2010.
in 2006, chile became the country with the highest nominal gdp per capita in latin america . 
on 27 february 2010, chile was struck by an 8.8 earthquake ,  the fifth largest ever recorded at the time . 
the 1891 chilean civil war brought about a redistribution of power between the president and congress ,  and chile established a parliamentary style democracy . 
however ,  like the texan flag ,  the flag of chile is modeled after the flag of the united states . 
the arid atacama desert in northern chile contains great mineral wealth ,  principally copper . 
the native flora of chile consists of relatively fewer species compared to the flora of other south american countries . 
chile's approach to foreign direct investment is codified in the country's foreign investment law . 
these islands are notable because they extend chile's claim to territorial waters out from its coast into the pacific ocean . 
the patron saints of chile are our lady of mount carmel and saint james the greater  -lrb-  `` santiago ''  -rrb-  . 
in addition ,  us financial pressure restricted international economic credit to chile . 
during the 19th century ,  chile's commercial ties were primarily with britain ,  a nation that had a major influence on the formation of the chilean navy . 
cut off to the north by desert ,  to the south by the mapuche ,  to the east by the andes mountains ,  and to the west by the ocean ,  chile became one of the most centralized ,  homogeneous colonies in spanish america . 
since its return to democracy in 1990, chile has been an active participant in the international political arena . 
chile's geographical isolation has restricted the immigration of faunal life ,  so that only a few of the many distinctive south american animals are found . 
most of the traditions of the culture of chile have a festive purpose ,  but some ,  such as dances and ceremonies ,  have religious components . 
chile is a founding member of the united nations ,  the union of south american nations  -lrb-  unasur  -rrb-  and the community of latin american and caribbean states  -lrb-  celac  -rrb-  . 
