the `` enchiridion '' appears to be a loosely-structured selection of maxims . 
the separate editions and translations of the `` enchiridion '' are very many . 
the `` enchiridion '' was first translated into latin by niccolò perotti in 1450, and then by angelo poliziano in 1479.
the `` enchiridion '' was adapted three different times by greek christian writers . 
for many centuries ,  the `` enchiridion '' maintained its authority both with pagans and christians . 
the `` enchiridion '' begins with the statement that `` of things ,  some depend upon ourselves ,  others do not depend upon ourselves . `` 
the `` commentary '' enjoyed its own period of popularity in the 17th and 18th centuries . 
the `` enchiridion '' was well-known in the ancient world ,  and in the medieval period it was specially adapted for use in greek-speaking monasteries . 
in the english-speaking world it was particularly well-known in the 17th-century: at that time it was the `` enchiridion '' rather than the `` discourses '' which was usually read . 
nevertheless ,  according to the traditional account ,  it was not until the death of emperor kinmei's older brother emperor senka that he gained the throne . 
according to this account ,  emperor senka died in 539 at the age of 73; and succession passed to the third son of emperor keitai . 
the years of reign of bidatsu start in 572 and end in 585; however ,  there are no certain dates for this emperor's life or reign . 
empress kōgyoku reigned for four years . 
kōgyoku's reign spanned the years from 642 to 645.
the years of kōgyoku's reign are not more specifically identified by more than one era name or `` nengō '' which was an innovation of kōtoku's brief reign . 
empress saimei ruled for seven years . 
during kōgyoku's reign ,  this apex of the `` daijō-kan '' included:
as empress ,  her name would have been `` ametoyo takara ikashi hitarashi hime . 
 ,  also known as emperor tenchi ,  was the 38th emperor of japan ,  according to the traditional order of succession . 
empress kōken's personal name  -lrb-  `` imina ''  -rrb-  was  . 
empress kōken first reigned from 749 to 758, then ,  following the fujiwara no nakamaro rebellion ,  she reascended the throne as empress shōtoku from 765 until her death in 770.
 ,  also known as  ,  was the 46th  -lrb-  with empress kōken name  -rrb-  and the 48th monarch of japan  -lrb-  with empress shōtoku name  -rrb-  ,  according to the traditional order of succession . 
her father was emperor shōmu ,  and her mother was empress kōmyō . 
the posthumous name of emperor junnin was given by emperor meiji a thousand years later . 
though junnin had ,  technically ,  been emperor ,  he was not featured on the official list of japanese emperors until the late nineteenth century . 
his place in the traditional order of succession was confirmed at the same time as announcements about emperor kōbun and emperor chūkyō were made public . 
heizei's reign lasted from 806 to 809.
heizei was the eldest son of the emperor kanmu and empress fujiwara no otomuro . 
his title heizei was derived from the official name of the capital in nara ,  heizei kyō . 
saga was the second son of emperor kanmu and fujiwara no otomuro . 
during saga's reign  -lrb-  809–823 -rrb- ,  this `` kugyō '' included:
saga had 49 children by at least 30 different women . 
emperor saga played an important role as a stalwart supporter of the buddhist monk kūkai . 
empress: `` imperial princess shōshi ''/masako  -lrb-  正子内親王; 810–879 -rrb- ,  emperor saga's daughter
during junna's reign ,  this apex of the `` daijō-kan '' included:
his father was emperor kōgon . 
this nanboku-chō `` sovereign '' was named after his father emperor kōgon and `` go- ''  -lrb-  後  -rrb-  ,  translates literally as `` later; '' and thus ,  he may be called the `` later emperor kōgon '' ,  or ,  in some older sources ,  may be identified as `` emperor kōgon ,  the second '' ,  or as `` emperor kōgon ii . `` 
this nanboku-chō `` sovereign '' was named after the 10th century emperor en'yū and `` go- ''  -lrb-  後  -rrb-  ,  translates literally as `` later; '' and thus ,  he may be called the `` later emperor en'yū '' ,  or ,  in some older sources ,  may be identified as `` emperor en'yū ,  the second '' ,  or as `` emperor en'yū ii . `` 
suizei is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' and there is a paucity of information about him . 
jien records that suizei was one of the sons of emperor jimmu ,  and that he ruled from the palace of `` takaoka-no-miya '' at katsuragi in what would come to be known as yamato province . 
modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; suizei's descendant ,  emperor sujin is the first that many agree might have actually existed . 
emperor annei was either the eldest son or the only son of emperor suizei with isuzuyori-hime . 
the actual site of annei's grave is not known . 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-   – 571 ad  -rrb-  ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  737–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
emperor kōshō was the eldest son of emperor itoku . 
kōshō is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' . 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-   – 571 ad  -rrb-  ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  737–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
kōan is a posthumous name . 
the actual site of kōan's grave is not known . 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-  539–571 ad  -rrb-  ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  781–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; kōrei's descendant ,  emperor sujin is the first that many agree might have actually existed . 
kōgen is a posthumous name . 
kōgen is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' . 
the actual site of kōgen's grave is not known . 
the site of kaika's grave is not known . 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-   – 571 ad  -rrb-  ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  737–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
jien records that kaika was the second son of emperor kōgen and that he ruled from the palace of `` isakawa-no-miya '' at kasuga in what came to be known as yamato province . 
in the 48th year  -lrb-  50 b . c . 
in the 60th year  -lrb-  38 b . c . 
the emperor received the title  . 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-   – 571 ad  -rrb-  ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  737–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
the `` kujiki '' records the legendary appointment of 137 governors for the provinces ruled by emperor sujin . 
the legendary emperor's reign is conventionally assigned the years of reign 97 bc – 30 bc ,  but he may have lived in the early 1st century ,  or the third or fourth century . 
the emperor may have been the first to perform a census and establish and regularize a system of taxation . 
 ,  also known as `` mimakiiribikoinie no sumeramikoto ''  -lrb-  御間城入彦五十瓊殖天皇  -rrb-  or `` hatsukunishirasu sumeramikoto ''  -lrb-  御肇國天皇  -rrb- ; was the tenth emperor of japan . 
empress  -lrb-  first  -rrb- : sahohime  -lrb-  狭穂姫命 ,  d . 34 -rrb- ,  prince hikoimasu's daughter  -lrb-  emperor kaika’s son  -rrb- 
consort: nubataniirihime  -lrb-  渟葉田瓊入媛  -rrb-  ,  prince tanba-no-michinoushi's daughter  -lrb-  also prince hikoimasu's son and emperor kaika’s grandson  -rrb- 
consort: matonohime  -lrb-  真砥野媛  -rrb-  ,  prince tanba-no-michinoushi's daughter  -lrb-  also prince hikoimasu's son and emperor kaika’s grandson  -rrb- 
consort: azaminiirihime  -lrb-  薊瓊入媛  -rrb-  ,  prince tanba-no-michinoushi's daughter  -lrb-  also prince hikoimasu's son and emperor kaika’s grandson  -rrb- 
consort: kaguyahime  -lrb-  迦具夜比売  -rrb-  ,  prince ootsutsukitarine's daughter  -lrb-  also prince hikoyumusu's grandson and emperor kaika’s great grandson  -rrb- 
empress  -lrb-  second  -rrb- : yasakairihime  -lrb-  八坂入媛命  -rrb-  ,  prince yasakairihiko’s daughter  -lrb-  emperor sujin’s son  -rrb- 
empress  -lrb-  first  -rrb- : princess harima no inabi no ooiratsume  -lrb-  播磨稲日大郎姫 ,  d . 123 -rrb- ,  prince wakatakehiko’s daughter  -lrb-  emperor korei’s son  -rrb- 
consort: mizuhanoiratume  -lrb-  水歯郎媛  -rrb-  ,  prince iwatsukuwake‘s daughter  -lrb-  emperor suinin’s son  -rrb- 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-   – 571 -rrb- ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  737–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
these emperor chuai and empress jingu both are great-great-great-grandchildren of emperor kaika ,  ninth emperor of japan . 
he was the first emperor who was not the child of the previous emperor ,  being instead the nephew of his predecessor emperor seimu . 
according to the `` kojiki '' and `` nihonshoki '' ,  he was the father of emperor ōjin . 
chūai's father was yamato takeru ,  a son of the yamato monarch emperor keikō ,  but yamato takeru's story is problematic . 
ōjin was traditionally identified as the father of emperor nintoku ,  who acceded after ōjin's death . 
ōjin is also identified by some as the earliest `` historical '' emperor . 
ōjin is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' of the 5th century . 
no firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign ,  but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 313 to 399.
according to `` nihon shoki '' ,  he was the fourth son of emperor ōjin and his mother was nakatsuhime no mikoto ,  a great-granddaughter of emperor keikō . 
richū is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' of the 5th century . 
no firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign ,  but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 400 to 405.
 ,  also known as `` emperor hanshō , ``  was the 18th emperor of japan ,  according to the traditional order of succession . 
hanzei is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' of the 5th century . 
no firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign ,  but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 406 ce to 410 ce . 
empress: oshisaka no ōnakatsuhime  -lrb-  忍坂大中姫  -rrb-  ,  prince wakanuke-futamata’s daughter  -lrb-  emperor ojin’s son  -rrb- 
consort: sotoshi no iratsume  -lrb-  衣通郎姫  -rrb-  ,  prince wakanuke-futamata’s daughter  -lrb-  emperor ojin’s son  -rrb- 
ingyō is regarded by historians as a `` legendary emperor '' of the 5th century . 
according to `` kojiki '' and `` nihon shoki '' ,  he was the fourth son of emperor nintoku and his consort iwanohime ,  and therefore a younger brother of his predecessor emperor hanzei . 
no firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign ,  but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 453 to 456.
ankō was a 5th-century monarch . 
the actual site of ankō's grave is not known . 
seinei fathered no children; however ,  two grandsons of the 17th emperor ,  emperor richū ,  were found—later to ascend as prince oke and prince woke . 
seinei was a 5th-century monarch . 
no firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign ,  but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 480 to 484.
prince oka  -lrb-  袁祁王  -rrb-  ,  later to become emperor kenzō ,  is said to have been the grandson of emperor richū ,  and the son of ichinobe-no oshiwa . 
kenzō arranged to have his father's remains retrieved and reinterred in a mausoleum appropriate for the son of an emperor and the father of another . 
this emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial shinto shrine  -lrb-  `` misasagi ''  -rrb-  at osaka . 
alternatively ,  kenzō might have been referred to as  -lrb-  ヤマト大王/大君  -rrb-  or the `` great king of yamato . `` 
the actual site of kenzō's grave is not known . 
when emperor kenzo died without heirs ,  prince oke succeeded him as emperor ninken . 
oke's younger brother ,  who would become posthumously known as emperor kenzō ,  ascended before his elder brother . 
 ,  also known as `` ninken-okimi '' ,  was the 24th emperor of japan ,  according to the traditional order of succession . 
buretsu was a son of emperor ninken and his mother is `` kasuga no ōiratsume no kōgō ''  -lrb-  春日大郎皇后  -rrb-  . 
if emperor keitai began a new dynasty as some historians believe ,  then buretsu is the last emperor of the first recorded dynasty of japan . 
the actual site of buretsu's grave is not known . 
among his sons ,  emperor ankan ,  emperor senka and emperor kinmei ascended to the throne . 
if emperor keitai began a new dynasty as some historians believe ,  then emperor buretsu would have been the last monarch of the first recorded dynasty of japan . 
it says he was a son of ushi no kimi ,  a grandson of ohi no kimi ,  a great-grandson of ohohoto no kimi  -lrb-  brother to emperor ingyō's consort  -rrb-  ,  a great-great-grandson of wakanuke futamata no kimi ,  and a great-great-great-grandson of emperor ōjin . 
the `` kojiki '' puts this emperor's birth year at 485; and his date of death is said to have been april 9, 527.
a confrontation arose between adherents of two branches of the yamato ,  pitting the supporters of sons who would become known as emperor ankan and emperor senka against those who were backers of the son who would become known as emperor kinmei . 
his father was a descendant of emperor ōjin by his son ,  prince wakanuke no futamata . 
keitai was not the son of the immediate previous monarch . 
emperor ankan’s father was emperor keitai and his mother was menokohime  -lrb-  目子媛  -rrb-  ,  daughter of owari no muraji kusaka  -lrb-  尾張連草香  -rrb-  . 
empress: princess kasuga no yamada  -lrb-  春日山田皇女 ,  d . 539 -rrb- ,  emperor ninken's daughter
emperor senka's father was emperor keitai and his mother was menokohime ,  daughter of owari no muraji kusaka . 
when emperor ankan died ,  he had no offspring; and succession passed to his youngest brother who will come to be known as emperor senka . 
 ,  also known as senkwa ,  was the 28th emperor of japan ,  according to the traditional order of succession . 
the reed college campus is located on the opposite side of se woodstock ,  bordering northern eastmoreland . 
theodor kocher's mother was maria kocher  -lrb-  née wermuth  -rrb-  living from 1820 to 1900.
kocher's father was jakob alexander kocher  -lrb-  1814–1893 -rrb- ,  the sixth of seven children to samuel kocher  -lrb-  1771–1842 -rrb- ,  a carpenter ,  and barbara sutter  -lrb-  1772–1849 -rrb- . 
theodor kocher was born on 25 august 1841 in bern and baptized in the local bern minster on 16 september 1841.
in spring 1865, kocher followed his teacher biermer to zürich ,  where theodor billroth was director of the hospital and influenced kocher significantly . 
the call for an ordinary professorship at the university of bern at the age of 30 was the first big career step for theodor kocher . 
three main factors contributed to kocher's success as a surgeon ,  according to bonjour  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- . 
like his mother ,  kocher was a deeply religious man and also part of the moravian church . 
as soon as kocher became professor ,  he wanted to modernize the practices at the bernese inselspital . 
nauck also extended the puzzle to the `` n '' queens problem ,  with `` n '' queens on a chessboard of `` n '' × `` n '' squares . 
the eight queens puzzle is the problem of placing eight chess queens on an 8×8 chessboard so that no two queens threaten each other . 
the eight queens puzzle is an example of the more general `` n '' queens problem of placing `` n '' non-attacking queens on an `` n ''× ''n '' chessboard ,  for which solutions exist for all natural numbers `` n '' with the exception of `` n ''=2 and `` n ''=3.
of the 12 fundamental solutions to the problem with eight queens on an 8×8 board ,  exactly one  -lrb-  solution 12 below  -rrb-  is equal to its own 180° rotation ,  and none is equal to its 90° rotation; thus ,  the number of distinct solutions is 11×8 + 1×4 = 92  -lrb-  where the 8 is derived from four 90° rotational positions and their reflections ,  and the 4 is derived from two 180° rotational positions and their reflections  -rrb-  . 
bombieri was an assistant professor  -lrb-  1963–1965 -rrb- and then a full professor  -lrb-  1965–1966 -rrb- at the università di cagliari ,  at the università di pisa in 1966–1974, and then at the scuola normale superiore di pisa in 1974–1977.
in 2011 he became professor emeritus . 
eos is cognate to the vedic goddess `` ushas '' ,  lithuanian goddess `` aušrinė '' ,  and roman goddess `` aurora ''  -lrb-  old latin `` ausosa ''  -rrb-  ,  all three of whom are also goddesses of the dawn . 
this agreement leads to the reconstruction of a proto-indo-european dawn goddess . 
it is located in the tyrrhenian sea about east of the french island of corsica . 
there is an airport on the island ,  marina di campo airport . 
elba  -lrb-   ,  ; ; ancient greek: αἰθαλία ,  `` aithalia ''  -rrb-  is a mediterranean island in tuscany ,  italy ,  from the coastal town of piombino ,  and the largest island of the tuscan archipelago . 
the island itself is made up of slices of rocks which once formed part of the ancient tethyan seafloor . 
the island was invaded by the etruscans and later  -lrb-  after 480 bc  -rrb-  by the romans . 
the table below shows the average temperatures for the islands by month . 
the municipalities are portoferraio  -lrb-  which is also the island's principal town  -rrb-  ,  campo nell'elba ,  capoliveri ,  marciana ,  marciana marina ,  porto azzurro ,  and rio . 
the british landed on the island of elba in 1796, after the occupation of livorno by the french republican troops ,  to protect the 4,000 french royalists who had found asylum in portoferraio two years earlier . 
this mingling of waters was known in sumerian as nammu ,  and was identified as the mother of enki . 
in the epic `` enki and ninhursag '' ,  enki ,  as lord of `` ab '' or fresh water  -lrb-  also the sumerian word for semen  -rrb-  ,  is living with his wife in the paradise of dilmun where
this portrayal reflects enki's role as the god of water ,  life ,  and replenishment . 
the myth `` enki and inanna '' tells the story of how the young goddess of the é-anna temple of uruk feasts with her father enki . 
ab in abzu also means water . 
enki  -lrb-  ; sumerian:   -rrb-  is the sumerian god of water ,  knowledge  -lrb-  `` gestú ''  -rrb-  ,  mischief ,  crafts  -lrb-  `` gašam ''  -rrb-  ,  and creation  -lrb-  `` nudimmud ''  -rrb-  . 
his mother nammu  -lrb-  creatrix also of abzu and tiamat  -rrb-  `` brings the tears of the gods '' before enki and says
enki thus takes on all of the functions of the abzu ,  including his fertilising powers as lord of the waters and lord of semen . 
and nammu told him that with the help of enki  -lrb-  her son  -rrb-  she can create humans in the image of gods . 
enki then advises that they create a servant of the gods ,  humankind ,  out of clay and blood . 
samuel noah kramer believes that behind this myth of enki's confinement of abzu lies an older one of the struggle between enki and the dragon kur  -lrb-  the underworld  -rrb-  . 
in one evocative passage in a sumerian hymn ,  enki stands at the empty riverbeds and fills them with his 'water' '' . 
in the earliest surviving version of the myth of the slaying of the kur ,  enki is the hero responsible for the kur being slain . 
a third time enki succumbs to temptation ,  and attempts seduction of uttu . 
wallach ,  however ,  claimed to have no regrets . 
wallach's final performance was in the short film `` the train ''  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- . 
his niece is the historian joan wallach scott  -lrb-  the daughter of his brother ,  sam wallach  -rrb-  . 
wallach said `` yes ,  you'll enjoy the challenge , ``  and fonda later thanked wallach for that advice . 
in the comedy ,  wallach and the other actors mocked axis dictators ,  with wallach portraying adolf hitler . 
wallach appeared as dc comics' supervillain mr . 
wallach died on june 24, 2014 of natural causes at the age of 98.
in 2003 wallach acted in `` mystic river '' ,  produced and directed by eastwood ,  who once said `` working with eli wallach has been one of the great pleasures of my life . `` 
eli wallach was married to stage actress anne jackson  -lrb-  1926–2016 -rrb- for 66 years from march 5, 1948, until his death . 
wallach was born in red hook ,  brooklyn ,  at 156 union street ,  a son of jewish immigrants abraham and bertha  -lrb-  schorr  -rrb-  wallach ,  both from poland . 
wallach went on to a prolific career as `` one of the greatest 'character actors' ever to appear on stage and screen , ``  notes turner classic movies ,  acting in over 90 films . 
a few years before 2005, wallach lost sight in his left eye as the result of a stroke . 
on 10 september 2015, it was announced that a new elo album would be released . 
in 1979, the multi-platinum album `` discovery '' was released ,  reaching number one on the uk albums chart . 
their sixth album ,  the platinum selling `` a new world record '' ,  became their first uk top ten album when it was released in 1976.
bevan  -lrb-  under an agreement with lynne who co-owned the elo name with him  -rrb-  continued on in 1989 as elo part ii ,  initially with no other former elo members . 
in 1981, elo's sound changed again with the science fiction concept album `` time '' ,  a throwback to earlier ,  more progressive rock albums like `` eldorado '' . 
in 2014, lynne re-formed the band again with tandy as jeff lynne's elo ,  where he resumed concert touring and new recordings under the moniker . 
in november 2016, jeff lynne's elo won band of the year at the classic rock roll of honour awards . 
for the band's fourth album ,  `` eldorado ,  a symphony '' ,  a concept album about a daydreamer ,  lynne stopped overdubbing strings and hired an orchestra and choir instead . 
bevan retired from the line-up in 1999 and sold his share of the elo name to jeff lynne in 2000.
the electric light orchestra  -lrb-  elo  -rrb-  are an english rock band formed in birmingham in 1970, by songwriters/multi-instrumentalists jeff lynne and roy wood with drummer bev bevan . 
in 2017, the elo line-up of wood ,  lynne ,  bevan ,  and tandy were inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame .  . 
evil dead ii  -lrb-  also known in publicity materials as evil dead 2: dead by dawn  -rrb-  is a 1987 american comedy horror film directed by sam raimi ,  and a parody sequel to the 1981 horror film `` the evil dead '' . 
the concept of a sequel to `` the evil dead '' was discussed during location shooting on the first film . 
the film has been released together with the first `` evil dead '' film by green nara media in south korea in region a . 
 ''entertainment weekly '' ranked the film #19 on their list of `` the top 50 cult films '' . 
the film was followed by a third installment ,  `` army of darkness '' ,  in 1992 and a television series ,  `` ash vs evil dead '' ,  in 2015.
the film was released on dvd in the uk in 2003 as part of a region 2 `` evil dead '' trilogy box set . 
at dawn ,  the evil force throws ash through the woods . 
 ''evil dead ii '' opened on march 13, 1987 to a weekend gross of $807,260.
while raimi and campbell have stated that `` evil dead 2 '' was intended as a direct sequel ,  there are differences between the first movie and the recap at the beginning of the second: for example ,  the necronomicon is destroyed in a fire by ash during the conclusion of `` the evil dead '' yet remains intact in `` evil dead 2 '' . 
after the release of `` the evil dead '' ,  raimi moved on to `` crimewave '' ,  a cross between a crime film and a comedy produced by raimi and joel and ethan coen . 
the film's production was not nearly as chaotic or strange as the original film's production ,  largely because of raimi ,  tapert and campbell's additional film making experience . 
the cabin itself remains perfectly intact until the events of this film despite much of it having been destroyed in the original film . 
at the time ,  the nobel prize in physics did not recognize work done in astronomy . 
however ,  the prize is not one that can be awarded posthumously . 
 '' -lrb-  note that the assertion that he would have won the nobel prize in 1953 is likely false ,  although he was nominated for the prize that year . ``   -rrb- 
edwin powell hubble  -lrb-  november 20, 1889 – september 28, 1953 -rrb- was an american astronomer . 
for his work there ,  he received the legion of merit award . 
he won seven first places and a third place in a single high school track and field meet in 1906.
this published work earned him an award titled the american association prize and five hundred dollars from burton e .  livingston of the committee on awards . 
edwin hubble's arrival at mount wilson observatory ,  california in 1919 coincided roughly with the completion of the hooker telescope ,  then the world's largest . 
hubble was also a dutiful son ,  who despite his intense interest in astronomy since boyhood ,  acquiesced to his father's request to study law ,  first at the university of chicago and later at oxford ,  though he managed to take a few math and science courses . 
a decade before ,  the american astronomer vesto slipher had provided the first evidence that the light from many of these nebulae was strongly red-shifted ,  indicative of high recession velocities . 
consort  -lrb-  `` nyōgo ''  -rrb- : fujiwara no `` takushi ''/sawako  -lrb-  藤原沢子; d . 839 -rrb- ,  fujiwara no fusatsugu’s daughter
consort  -lrb-  `` nyōgo ''  -rrb- : fujiwara no `` teishi ''/sadako  -lrb-  藤原貞子; d . 864 -rrb- ,  fujiwara no mimori’s daughter
ninmyō was the second son of emperor saga and the empress tachibana no kachiko . 
the baikal seal is the only species of exclusively freshwater seal . 
the earless seals ,  phocids or true seals are one of the three main groups of mammals within the seal lineage ,  pinnipedia . 
unlike otariids ,  true seals do not communicate by 'barking' . 
phocids spend most of their time at sea ,  although they return to land or pack ice to breed and give birth . 
monk seals and elephant seals are believed to have first entered the pacific through the open straits between north and south america ,  which only closed in the pliocene . 
espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern . 
today ,  espionage agencies target the illegal drug trade and terrorists as well as state actors . 
however ,  the benefits gained through espionage are often so great that most governments and many large corporations make use of it . 
the games have three modes including outdoor mode ,  town mode and combat mode . 
combat mode can be ended at any time in towns ,  but can only end outdoors when all enemies are killed . 
 ''exile ii '' was a finalist for `` macuser ''s award for the best shareware game of 1996.
inside mac games nominated the first `` exile '' as its pick for the best role-playing game of 1996, but ultimately gave the award to ``  '' . 
 ''exile iii: ruined world '' received the shareware game of the year award from `` computer gaming world '' and ziff-davis publishing . 
the games are designed to be non-linear and long in gameplay length . 
the second `` exile '' game follows directly from the first ,  released in november 1996.
costello ,  start using the first name elvis . 
costello's retirement ,  although short-lived ,  was accompanied by two compilations ,  `` elvis costello: the man '' in the uk ,  europe and australia ,  and `` the best of elvis costello & the attractions '' in the u . s . 
in 1987, costello began a songwriting collaboration with paul mccartney . 
costello appeared in stephen colbert's television special ``  '' . 
growing antipathy between costello and bruce thomas contributed to the attractions' first split in 1986 when costello was preparing to make a comeback . 
costello turned to older songs to reflect the national malaise at the time . 
costello signed to columbia records ,  cbs in the u . s .  ,  a few months later . 
costello is also a music fan and ,  in print ,  often champions the works of others . 
costello's first single for stiff was `` less than zero '' ,  released on 25 march 1977.
costello's recording contract with columbia records ended after `` blood & chocolate '' . 
the song became costello's first top 40 hit single in the u . s .  also in the same year ,  costello provided vocals on a version of the madness song `` tomorrow's just another day '' released as a b-side . 
in 2007, costello collaborated with the argentinean/uruguayan electro-tango band bajofondo on the song `` fairly right '' from the album `` mar dulce '' . 
in october 2015, costello's memoir ,  `` unfaithful music & disappearing ink '' ,  was released . 
costello has been married three times ,  the first time in 1974 to mary burgoyne ,  with whom he had a son ,  matthew . 
in 2005, costello performed with green day frontman billie joe armstrong . 
in 2004, `` rolling stone '' ranked costello number 80 on their list of the 100 greatest artists of all time . 
also in 2010, elvis costello appeared as himself in david simon's television series ,  `` treme '' . 
costello would still continue to work frequently with attractions steve nieve and pete thomas; eventually ,  both would be members of costello's new back-up band ,  the imposters . 
that year ,  costello also produced `` rum sodomy & the lash '' for the irish punk/folk band the pogues . 
costello also found time in 1979 to produce the debut album for the 2 tone ska revival band the specials and worked as a backing vocalist on 'this is your life' ,  an album by new wave band twist . 
buell has said she was the inspiration behind some of costello's most bitter love songs from the `` armed forces '' era ,  though costello countered by claiming most of those songs had been written before he ever met buell . 
on october 12, 2018, elvis costello released the album `` look now '' ,  which was recorded with the imposters and features three songs co-written with burt bacharach . 
in 1988, costello co-wrote `` at the other end  -lrb-  of the telescope  -rrb- ``  with aimee mann; this song appears on the til tuesday album `` everything's different now '' . 
costello sits on the advisory board of the board of directors of the jazz foundation of america . 
his first three albums all appeared on `` rolling stone ''s list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
the album also featured costello's song `` almost blue '' ,  inspired by the music of jazz singer and trumpeter chet baker ,  who would later perform and record a version of the song  -lrb-  `` chet baker in tokyo ''  -rrb-  . 
costello is also an avid country music fan and has cited george jones as his favourite country singer . 
video and eeg monitoring may be useful in difficult cases . 
these seizures may present in several ways depending on the part of the brain involved and the person's age . 
children may have behaviors that are easily mistaken for epileptic seizures but are not . 
neurostimulation may be another option in those who are not candidates for surgery . 
while generalized seizures in horses are fairly easy to diagnose ,  it may be more difficult in non-generalized seizures and eegs may be useful . 
when it occurs it typically lasts for seconds to minutes but may rarely last for a day or two . 
gastroesophageal reflux may cause arching of the back and twisting of the head to the side in infants ,  which may be mistaken for tonic-clonic seizures . 
the stigma may result in some people with epilepsy denying that they have ever had seizures . 
failure of the blood–brain barrier may also be a causal mechanism as it would allow substances in the blood to enter the brain . 
epilepsy is also more common in children with autism . 
epilepsy surgery may be an option for people with focal seizures that remain a problem despite other treatments . 
following surgery ,  medications may be slowly withdrawn in many cases . 
epilepsy may occur as a result of a number of other conditions including tumors ,  strokes ,  head trauma ,  previous infections of the central nervous system ,  genetic abnormalities ,  and as a result of brain damage around the time of birth . 
cases of epilepsy may be organized into epilepsy syndromes by the specific features that are present . 
normally brain electrical activity is non-synchronous . 
those who do not meet this requirement may acquire a restricted license if free from seizures for five years . 
in children additional tests may be required such as urine biochemistry and blood testing looking for metabolic disorders . 
epilepsy is usually treated with daily medication once a second seizure has occurred ,  while medication may be started after the first seizure in those at high risk for subsequent seizures . 
an electroencephalogram  -lrb-  eeg  -rrb-  can assist in showing brain activity suggestive of an increased risk of seizures . 
epilepsy occurs in a number of other animals including dogs and cats and is the most common brain disorder in dogs . 
those with epilepsy due to an unknown cause have little increased risk . 
focal seizures begin in one hemisphere of the brain while generalized seizures begin in both hemispheres . 
in identical twins ,  if one is affected there is a 50–60% chance that the other will also be affected . 
in drug-resistant cases different management options may be looked at including a special diet ,  the implantation of a neurostimulator ,  or neurosurgery . 
seizures may also occur as a consequence of other health problems; if they occur right around a specific cause ,  such as a stroke ,  head injury ,  toxic ingestion or metabolic problem ,  they are known as acute symptomatic seizures and are in the broader classification of seizure-related disorders rather than epilepsy itself . 
most of those with the disorder  -lrb-  80%  -rrb-  are in the developing world . 
while many cases are not preventable ,  efforts to reduce head injuries ,  provide good care around the time of birth ,  and reduce environmental parasites such as the pork tapeworm may be effective . 
in the 1960s parapsychologists became increasingly interested in the cognitive components of esp ,  the subjective experience involved in making esp responses ,  and the role of esp in psychological life . 
the scientific community rejects esp due to the absence of an evidence base ,  the lack of a theory which would explain esp and the lack of positive experimental results; it considers esp to be pseudoscience . 
parapsychology is the study of paranormal psychic phenomena ,  including esp . 
reports of second sight are known only from anecdotal evidence given after the fact . 
many of the studies only appeared to have significant occurrence of esp ,  when in fact ,  this result was due to the many methodological errors in the research . 
there are many gaelic words for the various aspects of second sight ,  but `` an da shealladh '' is the one mostly recognized by non-gaelic speakers ,  even though ,  strictly speaking ,  it does not really mean second sight ,  but rather `` two sights '' . 
diseconomies of scale are the opposite . 
 -lrb-  in economics ,  `` scale '' is synonymous with quantity .   -rrb- 
in microeconomics ,  economies of scale are the cost advantages that enterprises obtain due to their scale of operation  -lrb-  typically measured by amount of output produced  -rrb-  ,  with cost per unit of output decreasing with increasing scale . 
if the firm is a perfect competitor in all input markets ,  and thus the per-unit prices of all its inputs are unaffected by how much of the inputs the firm purchases ,  then it can be shown that at a particular level of output ,  the firm has economies of scale if and only if it has increasing returns to scale ,  has diseconomies of scale if and only if it has decreasing returns to scale ,  and has neither economies nor diseconomies of scale if it has constant returns to scale . 
economies of scale is related to and can easily be confused with the theoretical economic notion of returns to scale . 
overall costs of capital projects are known to be subject to economies of scale . 
homogeneous production functions with constant returns to scale are first degree homogeneous ,  increasing returns to scale are represented by degrees of homogeneity greater than one ,  and decreasing returns to scale by degrees of homogeneity less than one . 
economies of scale often have limits ,  such as passing the optimum design point where costs per additional unit begin to increase . 
another source of scale economies is the possibility of purchasing inputs at a lower per-unit cost when they are purchased in large quantities . 
the simple meaning of economies of scale is doing things more efficiently with increasing size or speed of operation . 
they had one son ,  shlomo elisha wiesel ,  named after wiesel's father . 
wiesel was tattooed with inmate number `` a-7713 '' on his left arm . 
for ten years after the war ,  wiesel refused to write about or discuss his experiences during the holocaust . 
in `` night '' ,  wiesel recalled the shame he felt when he heard his father being beaten and was unable to help . 
wiesel had three siblings—older sisters beatrice and hilda ,  and younger sister tzipora . 
elie wiesel was born in sighet  -lrb-  now sighetu marmației  -rrb-  ,  maramureș ,  in the carpathian mountains in romania . 
in 1955, wiesel moved to new york as foreign correspondent for the israel daily ,  `` yediot ahronot '' . 
tzipora ,  shlomo ,  and sarah did not survive the holocaust . 
in 1970, wood made his own pornographic film ,  `` take it out in trade '' . 
in 1969, wood appeared in `` the photographer ''  -lrb-  a . k . a . 
in wood's 1992 biography `` nightmare of ecstasy: the life and art of edward d .  wood jr . ``  ,  wood's wife kathy recalls that wood told her that his mother dressed him in girls' clothing as a child . 
wood's career and camp approach has earned him and his films a cult following . 
wood's father ,  edward sr .  ,  worked for the u . s . 
wood married his second wife ,  kathy o'hara ,  in 1959.
the couple broke up in 1955 after wood cast another actress in the lead role of `` bride of the monster ''  -lrb-  wood originally wrote the part for fuller and reduced her part to a 1-minute cameo  -rrb-  and because of wood's excessive drinking . 
during his childhood ,  wood was interested in the performing arts and pulp fiction . 
in 1953 wood wrote and directed the semi-documentary film `` glen or glenda ''  -lrb-  originally titled `` i changed my sex ! ``   -rrb- 
in 1965, wood wrote the quasi-memoir `` hollywood rat race '' ,  which was eventually published in 1998.
following the publication of rudolph grey's 1992 oral biography `` nightmare of ecstasy: the life and art of edward d .  wood jr . ``  ,  the public took a greater interest in wood ,  leading up to director tim burton's biopic of wood's life ,  `` ed wood ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- ,  a critically acclaimed film starring johnny depp as wood that earned two academy awards . 
while making `` bride of the monster '' in late 1955, wood married norma mccarty . 
a typical edif file looks like this:
the expectation was that with edif the number of translators could be reduced to the number of involved systems . 
essential tremor  -lrb-  et ,  also referred to as benign tremor ,  familial tremor ,  or idiopathic tremor  -rrb-  is a progressive neurological disorder that is also the most common movement disorder . 
the book of enos is the fourth book of the book of mormon . 
god told enos he was forgiven because he had faith in christ ,  even though he never heard or saw christ ,  and indeed it would be far in the future before he came in the flesh . 
nevertheless ,  god made a covenant with enos that he would bring the records of the nephites to the lamanites in due time . 
the popularity of the term was enhanced by bjørn lomborg's 2001 book `` the skeptical environmentalist '' . 
but it is not the end of the world . `` 
the authors also note that their work shows that better measures of cynicism are needed for a clearer picture . 
in 2010, lomborg reversed course and stated that he believes in the need for `` tens of billions of dollars a year to be invested in tackling climate change '' and declared global warming to be `` undoubtedly one of the chief concerns facing the world today '' and `` a challenge humanity must confront '' . 
a timeline of all the el niño episodes between 1900 and 2016.
some sources say that the el niños of 2006-07 and 2014-16 were also central pacific el niños . 
since 2000, el niño events have been observed in 2002–03, 2004–05, 2006–07, 2009–10 and 2014–16.
observations of el niño events since 1950, show that impacts associated with el niño events depend on what season it is . 
the phenomenon is called central pacific  -lrb-  cp  -rrb-  el niño ,  `` dateline '' el niño  -lrb-  because the anomaly arises near the dateline  -rrb-  ,  or el niño `` modoki ''  -lrb-  modoki is japanese for `` similar ,  but different ''  -rrb-  . 
when this warming occurs for seven to nine months ,  it is classified as el niño `` conditions ''; when its duration is longer ,  it is classified as an el niño `` episode '' . 
the effects of the cp el niño are different from those of the traditional ep el niño—e . g .  ,  the recently discovered el niño leads to more hurricanes more frequently making landfall in the atlantic . 
it is thought that there have been at least 30 el niño events since 1900, with the 1982–83, 1997–98 and 2014–16 events among the strongest on record . 
the major 1982–83 el niño led to an upsurge of interest from the scientific community . 
 ''la niña '' ,  chosen as the 'opposite' of el niño ,  translates to `` the girl '' . 
major enso events were recorded in the years 1790–93, 1828, 1876–78, 1891, 1925–26, 1972–73, 1982–83, 1997–98, and 2014–16.
el niño may have led to the demise of the moche and other pre-columbian peruvian cultures . 
the traditional niño ,  also called eastern pacific  -lrb-  ep  -rrb-  el niño ,  involves temperature anomalies in the eastern pacific . 
the first recorded el niño that originated in the central pacific and moved toward the east was in 1986.
there is no consensus on if climate change will have any influence on the occurrence ,  strength or duration of el niño events ,  as research supports el niño events becoming stronger ,  longer ,  shorter and weaker . 
more generally ,  el niño can affect commodity prices and the macroeconomy of different countries . 
it gives the flute a bright sound . 
the western concert flute ,  a descendant of the medieval german flute ,  is a transverse treble flute that is closed at the top . 
flutes may be open at one or both ends . 
the bamboo flute is an important instrument in indian classical music ,  and developed independently of the western flute . 
the flute is a family of musical instruments in the woodwind group . 
other sizes of flutes and piccolos are used from time to time . 
another division is between side-blown  -lrb-  or transverse  -rrb-  flutes ,  such as the western concert flute ,  piccolo ,  fife ,  dizi and bansuri; and end-blown flutes ,  such as the ney ,  xiao ,  kaval ,  danso ,  shakuhachi ,  anasazi flute and quena . 
some early flutes were made out of tibias  -lrb-  shin bones  -rrb-  . 
flutes are the earliest extant musical instruments ,  as paleolithic instruments with hand-bored holes have been found . 
instruments made according to an older pitch standard ,  used principally in wind-band music ,  include d piccolo ,  soprano flute  -lrb-  the primary instrument ,  equivalent to today's concert c flute  -rrb-  ,  f alto flute ,  and b bass flute . 
flutes can be played with several different air sources . 
a musician who plays the flute can be referred to as a flute player ,  flautist ,  flutist or ,  less commonly ,  fluter or flutenist . 
in its most basic form ,  a flute is an open tube which is blown into . 
under the laws ,  the two basic states of play during a game are `` ball in play '' and `` ball out of play '' . 
 ''phaininda '' and `` episkyros '' were greek ball games . 
women may have been playing `` football '' for as long as the game has existed . 
a number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game . 
the object of the game is to score by moving the ball beyond the goal line into the opposing goal . 
a foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the laws of the game while the ball is in play . 
in england ,  the first recorded game of football between women took place in 1895.
when the ball becomes out of play ,  play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play:
the modern game traces its origins to 1863 when the laws of the game were originally codified in england by the football association . 
there has been a football tournament at every summer olympic games since 1900, except at the 1932 games in los angeles . 
association football has been played by women since at least the time of the first recorded women's games in the late 19th century . 
association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the laws of the game . 
association football ,  more commonly known as football or soccer ,  is a team sport played with a spherical ball between two teams of eleven players . 
this is generally regarded as a warm-up tournament for the upcoming fifa world cup and does not carry the same prestige as the world cup itself . 
rather than stopping play ,  the referee may allow play to continue if doing so will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed . 
today ,  football is played at a professional level all over the world . 
the team played in the first women's international matches in 1920, against a team from paris ,  france ,  in april ,  and also made up most of the england team against a scottish ladies xi in 1920, and winning 22-0.
the sheffield fa played by its own rules until the 1870s with the fa absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games . 
the winners of each continental competition contest the fifa club world cup . 
in the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together ,  with a latex bladder for pressurisation but modern balls at all levels of the game are now synthetic . 
other games included `` kemari '' in japan and `` chuk-guk '' in korea . 
unlike fox's early feature films ,  the `` fox news '' and `` fox movietone news '' libraries have largely survived . 
fox invested further in the film industry by founding the greater new york film rental company as a film distributor . 
the fox film corporation was an american company that produced motion pictures ,  formed by william fox on 1 february 1915.
fox's expansion into spanish-language films in the early 1930s also included shorts . 
fox film briefly experimented with serial films ,  releasing the 15-episode `` bride 13 '' and the 20-episode `` fantômas '' in 1920.
in 1914, fox film began making motion pictures in california ,  and in 1915 decided to build its own permanent studio . 
william fox entered the film industry in 1904 when he purchased a one-third share of a brooklyn nickelodeon for $1,667.
the first film released through first national was the 1916 british film ,  `` the mother of dartmoor '' . 
a number of warner bros .  films were thereafter branded first national pictures until 1936, when first national pictures ,  inc .  ,  was dissolved . 
first national exhibitors' circuit was reincorporated in 1919 as associated first national pictures ,  inc .  ,  and its subsidiary ,  associated first national theatres ,  inc .  ,  with 5,000 independent theater owners as members . 
on november 4, 1929, fox sold its interest in first national to warner bros .  for $10 million . 
warner bros .  and first national continued to operate as separate entities . 
in 2009, coppola released `` tetro '' . 
the film failed to win any of these awards ,  the only film in the trilogy not to do so . 
during the filming of `` the conversation '' ,  coppola wrote the screenplay for `` the great gatsby '' . 
the following year ,  coppola re-teamed with james caan for `` gardens of stone '' ,  but the film was overshadowed by the death of coppola's eldest son gian-carlo coppola during the film's production . 
the film won the golden shell at the 1969 san sebastian film festival . 
francis ford coppola  -lrb-  ; born april 7, 1939 -rrb- is an american film director ,  producer ,  screenwriter and film composer . 
in 1971, coppola and george lucas co-produced the latter's first film ,  `` thx 1138 '' . 
after earning his theater arts degree from hofstra in 1960, coppola enrolled in ucla film school for graduate work in film . 
coppola ,  however ,  is the only one to have produced the pictures . 
at ucla ,  coppola met jim morrison . 
the last film coppola directed in the 90s ,  `` the rainmaker '' ,  was based on the 1995 novel of the same name by john grisham . 
the movie was a critical success and coppola won his first palme d'or at the 1974 cannes film festival . 
coppola's next film ,  `` the conversation '' ,  further cemented his position as one of the most talented auteurs of hollywood . 
coppola was the third director to have two nominations for best picture in the same year . 
but ,  in mid-1991, coppola and warners came to disagreement over the compensation to be paid to coppola for his directing services on `` pinocchio '' . 
coppola's next project was `` jack '' ,  which was released on august 9, 1996.
as a result ,  coppola announced his plans to produce his own films in order to avoid the marketing input that goes into most films that results in trying to make films appeal to too wide an audience . 
in 1984 coppola directed the robert evans-produced `` the cotton club '' . 
coppola was the jury president at the 1996 cannes film festival and he also took part as a special guest at the 46th international thessaloniki film festival in greece . 
while a number of coppola's ventures in the 1980s and 1990s were critically lauded ,  he has never quite achieved the same commercial success with films as in the 1970s . 
in 1992, coppola directed and produced `` bram stoker's dracula '' . 
the film bombed at the box office ,  earning a meagre $2.5 million against a budget of $10 million and once again aggravated coppola's financial troubles . 
coppola was born in detroit ,  michigan ,  to father carmine coppola  -lrb-  1910–1991 -rrb- ,  a flautist with the detroit symphony orchestra ,  and mother italia coppola  -lrb-  née pennino; 1912–2004 -rrb- . 
coppola directed `` tucker: the man and his dream '' the following year . 
in 2007, 1,801 patents were filed in finland . 
finnish and swedish are the official languages of finland . 
finland consists of 19 regions ,  called in finnish and in swedish . 
 ,  2.4 million households reside in finland . 
the head of state of finland is president of the republic of finland  -lrb-  in finnish: `` suomen tasavallan presidentti ''; in swedish: `` republiken finlands president ''  -rrb-  . 
this was followed by the lapland war of 1944–1945, when finland fought retreating german forces in northern finland . 
various sporting events are popular in finland . 
relatively speaking ,  finland is rising from the sea . 
finland has about 168,000 lakes  -lrb-  of area larger than   -rrb-  and 179,000 islands . 
finland is the only nordic country to have joined the eurozone . 
this is mainly because of the high cost of meat in finland . 
in 2017, finland's gdp reached eur 224billion . 
finland is highly productive in scientific research . 
finland has the world's highest per capita consumption of coffee . 
much of the geography of finland is a result of the ice age . 
finland also has a notable history in figure skating . 
around 92% of residents have confidence in finland's security institutions . 
finland has successfully fought against government corruption ,  which was more common in the 1970s and 80s . 
in the business competitiveness index 2007–2008 finland ranked third in the world . 
all official holidays in finland are established by acts of parliament . 
following the 1917 russian revolution ,  finland declared itself independent . 
there are many attractions in finland which attracted over 8 million visitors in 2013.
finland  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of finland  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a country in northern europe bordering the baltic sea ,  gulf of bothnia ,  and gulf of finland ,  between norway to the north ,  sweden to the northwest ,  and russia to the east . 
at the time finland had three main cultural areas – southwest finland ,  tavastia and karelia – as reflected in contemporary jewellery . 
the constitution of finland defines the political system; finland is a parliamentary republic within the framework of a representative democracy . 
refugees from karelia contributed to foods in eastern finland . 
finland fought the soviet union in the winter war of 1939–1940 after the soviet union attacked finland and in the continuation war of 1941–1944, following operation barbarossa ,  when finland aligned with germany following germany's invasion of the soviet union . 
finland has the highest concentration of cooperatives relative to its population . 
finland was one of the most successful countries at the olympic games before world war ii . 
in 1906, universal suffrage was adopted in the grand duchy of finland . 
the 2007 imd world competitiveness yearbook ranked finland 17th most competitive . 
he remains one of finland's most popular national figures and is a symbol of the nation . 
the swedish era ended in the finnish war in 1809.
with 3.9 million members ,  the evangelical lutheran church of finland is one of the largest lutheran churches in the world and is also by far finland's largest religious body; at the end of 2017, 70.9% of finns were members of the church . 
finland has top levels of economic freedom in many areas . 
this phenomenon was given the name `` finlandization '' by the west german press . 
finland's population is 5.52 million  -lrb-  2018 -rrb- ,  and the majority of the population is concentrated in the southern region . 
the visual arts in finland started to form their individual characteristics in the 19th century ,  when romantic nationalism was rising in autonomic finland . 
today ,  finland has a very low number of corruption charges; transparency international ranks finland as one of the least corrupt countries in europe . 
finland also has urbanised regions with many cultural events and activities . 
finland was inhabited when the last ice age ended ,  approximately 9000 bce . 
finland suffered a severe famine in 1696–1697, during which about one third of the finnish population died ,  and a devastating plague a few years later . 
these take over some of the tasks of the earlier provinces of finland  -lrb-  `` lääni ''/ ''län ''  -rrb-  ,  which were abolished . 
finnish skaters have won 8 world championships and 13 junior world cups in synchronized skating ,  and finland is considered one of the best countries at the sport . 
the earliest written appearance of the name `` finland '' is thought to be on three runestones . 
the sami languages that are spoken in finland are northern sami ,  inari sami ,  and skolt sami . 
notwithstanding the efforts of finland's elite and nobility to break ties with sweden ,  there was no genuine independence movement in finland until the early twentieth century . 
tatar language is spoken by a finnish tatar minority of about 800 people who moved to finland mainly during the russian rule from the 1870s until the 1920s . 
during world war ii ,  the soviet union sought repeatedly to occupy finland ,  with finland losing parts of karelia ,  salla ,  kuusamo ,  petsamo and some islands ,  but retaining independence . 
despite close relations with the soviet union ,  finland maintained a market economy . 
other notable sporting events held in finland include the 1983 and 2005 world championships in athletics . 
finland rejected marshall aid ,  in apparent deference to soviet desires . 
the autonomous province of åland ,  which forms a federacy with finland ,  elects one member to the parliament ,  who traditionally joins the parliamentary group of the swedish people's party of finland . 
finnish romani is spoken by some 5,000–6,000 people; it and finnish sign language are also recognized in the constitution . 
among the biggest of these are the three salpausselkä ridges that run across southern finland . 
after finnish hard rock/heavy metal band lordi won the 2006 eurovision song contest ,  finland hosted the competition in 2007.
no part of finland has arctic tundra ,  but alpine tundra can be found at the fells lapland . 
thanks to its emphasis on transparency and equal rights ,  finland's press has been rated the freest in the world . 
by this time finland was the predominant term for the whole area from the gulf of bothnia to the russian border . 
finnish defence expenditure per capita is one of the highest in the european union . 
finland joined the united nations in 1955 and established an official policy of neutrality . 
finland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge . 
on 29 march 1809, having been taken over by the armies of alexander i of russia in the finnish war ,  finland became an autonomous grand duchy in the russian empire until the end of 1917.
main exports from finland were furs ,  slaves ,  castoreum ,  and falcons to european courts . 
an increasingly vocal elite in finland soon determined that finnish ties with sweden were becoming too costly ,  and following russo-swedish war  -lrb-  1788–1790 -rrb- ,  the finnish elite's desire to break with sweden only heightened . 
six regional state administrative agencies were created by the state of finland in 2010, each of them responsible for one of the regions called in finnish and in swedish; in addition ,  åland was designated a seventh region . 
flagella are generally used for propulsion . 
a flagellate is a cell or organism with one or more whip-like appendages called flagella . 
they were sometimes grouped with sarcodina  -lrb-  ameboids  -rrb-  in the group sarcomastigophora . 
although the taxonomic group flagellata was abandoned ,  the term `` flagellate '' is still used as the description of a and also as an ecological functional group . 
the flavor of the food ,  as such ,  can be altered with natural or artificial flavorants which affect these senses . 
flavorings are focused on altering the flavors of natural food product such as meats and vegetables ,  or creating flavor for food products that do not have the desired flavors such as candies and other snacks . 
flavors from food products are usually the result of a combination of natural flavors ,  which set up the basic smell profile of a food product ,  while artificial flavors modify the smell to accent it . 
the color of food can affect one's expectations of the flavor significantly . 
a flavor lexicon can aid the development of objective language for food . 
the flavorings of commercially produced food products are typically created by flavorists . 
in 2011, about us$10.6 billion were generated with the sale of flavors; the majority of the flavors used are consumed in processed and packaged food . 
additional work may also be done by the flavor company . 
artificial sweeteners are also technically flavorants . 
there are three varieties of frisian: west frisian ,  saterland frisian ,  and north frisian . 
frisian is called `` frysk '' in west frisian ,  `` fräisk '' in saterland frisian ,  and `` frasch '' ,  `` fresk '' ,  `` freesk '' ,  and `` friisk '' in the dialects of north frisian . 
speakers who had west frisian as their first language often maintained the west frisian system of no homophony when speaking west frisian . 
one major difference between old frisian and modern frisian is that in the old frisian period  -lrb-  c . 1150-c . 1550 -rrb- grammatical cases still existed . 
nb: * see also west frisian language#sample text . 
in east frisia ,  east frisian low saxon is spoken ,  which is not a frisian language ,  but a variant of low german/low saxon . 
the new iso 639 code codice_3 is used for the saterland frisian language ,  a variety of eastern frisian  -lrb-  not to be confused with east frisian low saxon ,  a west low german dialect  -rrb-  . 
there are three different frisian languages: west frisian ,  by far the most spoken of the three ,  is an official language in the dutch province of friesland ,  where it is spoken on the mainland and on two of the west frisian islands: terschelling and schiermonnikoog . 
old frisian ,  however ,  was very similar to old english . 
the transition from the old frisian to the middle frisian period  -lrb-  c . 1550-c . 1820 -rrb- in the 16th century is based on the fairly abrupt halt in the use of frisian as a written language . 
the revival of the west frisian language comes from the poet gysbert japiks ,  who had begun to write in the language as a way to show that it was possible ,  and created a collective west frisian identity and west frisian standard of writing through his poetry . 
french is a morphophonemic language . 
the language's early forms include old french and middle french . 
french is a moderately inflected language . 
in the french special collectivity of new caledonia ,  97% of the population can speak ,  read and write french while in french polynesia ,  this figure is 95% ,  and in the french collectivity of wallis and futuna ,  it is 78% . 
in 1990, a reform accepted some changes to french orthography . 
french  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is a romance language of the indo-european family . 
french writing ,  as with any language ,  is affected by the spoken language . 
french is one of haiti's two official languages . 
french was the official language of the colony of french indochina ,  comprising modern-day vietnam ,  laos ,  and cambodia . 
the future of the french language is often discussed in the news . 
the french language consists of both finite and non-finite moods . 
every french noun is either masculine or feminine . 
french is the native language of about 23% of the swiss population ,  and is spoken by 50% of the population . 
as a result of french and belgian colonialism from the 16th century onward ,  french was introduced to new territories in the americas ,  africa and asia . 
french pronunciation follows strict rules based on spelling ,  but french spelling is often based more on history than phonology . 
the language is taught as the primary second language in the german `` land '' of saarland ,  with french being taught from pre-school and over 43% of citizens being able to speak french . 
many secondary schools offer french as a foreign language . 
for example ,  old french made use of all possible word orders just as latin did . 
on social media ,  french was used on facebook by just 10% of lebanese in 2014, far behind english  -lrb-  78%  -rrb-  . 
politically ,  the ordinance of villers-cotterêts  -lrb-  1539 -rrb- named french the language of law . 
formula fiction is similar to genre fiction . 
the label of formula fiction is assigned because of the reuse of plot ,  plot devices and stock characters . 
in popular culture ,  formula fiction is literature in which the storylines and plots have been reused to the extent that the narratives are predictable . 
a `` subfield '' of a field is a subset of that is a field with respect to the field operations of  . 
the field of fractions of is  ,  the rationals ,  while the residue fields of are the finite fields  . 
the best known fields are the field of rational numbers ,  the field of real numbers and the field of complex numbers . 
such fields are also known as real closed fields . 
field homomorphisms are maps between two fields such that  ,   ,  and  ,  where and are arbitrary elements of  . 
the relation of two fields is expressed by the notion of a field extension . 
the field of the rational fractions over a field  -lrb-  or an integral domain  -rrb-  is the field of fractions of the polynomial ring  . 
this field is called a finite field with four elements ,  and is denoted or  . 
fields can be constructed inside a given bigger container field . 
if has only one maximal ideal  ,  this field is called the residue field of  . 
a field with elements can be constructed as the splitting field of the polynomial  such a splitting field is an extension of in which the polynomial has zeros . 
in these axioms ,  and are arbitrary elements of the field  . 
 ''finite fields ''  -lrb-  also called `` galois fields ''  -rrb-  are fields with finitely many elements ,  whose number is also referred to as the order of the field . 
in addition the field of fractions ,  which embeds injectively into a field ,  a field can be obtained from a commutative ring by means of a surjective map onto a field  . 
otherwise the prime field is isomorphic to  . 
a field `` f '' is called an `` ordered field '' if any two elements can be compared ,  so that and whenever and  . 
a field is called a prime field if it has no proper  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  strictly smaller  -rrb-  subfields . 
the english term `` field '' was introduced by  . 
every finite field has elements ,  where is prime and  . 
the hyperreals form an ordered field that is not archimedean . 
the completion of is another field in which ,  informally speaking ,  the `` gaps '' in the original field are filled ,  if there are any . 
the existence of this homomorphism makes fields in characteristic quite different from fields of characteristic 0.
most cryptographic protocols rely on finite fields ,  i . e .  ,  fields with finitely many elements . 
this means that every field is an integral domain . 
now the nature of these methods is such ,  that the changes on one number comprehends includes the changes on all lesser numbers  .  .  .  insomuch that a compleat peal of changes on one number seemeth to be formed by uniting of the compleat peals on all lesser numbers into one entire body . 
the notation was introduced by the french mathematician christian kramp in 1808.
this film is also considered one of the anti-bolshevik films of that era . 
the german film industry soon became the largest in europe . 
the german film industry ,  which was protected during the war by the ban on foreign films import ,  became exposed at the end of the war to the international film industry while having to face an embargo ,  this time on its own films . 
in total defa produced some 900 feature films during its existence as well as around 800 animated films and over 3000 documentaries and short films . 
today's biggest german production studios include babelsberg studio ,  bavaria film ,  constantin film and ufa . 
many of the german films of the immediate post-war period can be characterised as belonging to the genre of the `` trümmerfilm ''  -lrb-  literally `` rubble film ''  -rrb-  . 
despite the foundation of the `` kuratorium junger deutscher film ''  -lrb-  young german film committee  -rrb-  in 1965, set up under the auspices of the federal ministry of the interior to support new german films financially ,  the directors of this new german cinema were consequently often dependent on money from television . 
in essence it was `` the german equivalent to hollywood '' . 
nevertheless ,  the german film industry enjoyed an unprecedented development – during the 14 years which comprise the weimar period ,  an average of 250 film were being produced each year ,  a total of 3,500 full-feature films . 
the polarised politics of the weimar period were also reflected in some of its films . 
with the german film industry now effectively an arm of the totalitarian state ,  no films could be made that were not ostensibly in accord with the views of the ruling regime . 
american films took up around 30 percent of the market despite having around twice as many films in distribution as the german industry in the same time frame . 
however ,  many german film companies followed the 1960s trends of international co-productions with italy and spain in such genres as spaghetti westerns and eurospy films with films shot in those nations or in yugoslavia that featured german actors in the casts . 
the new german cinema dealt with contemporary german social problems in a direct way; the nazi past ,  the plight of the `` gastarbeiter ''  -lrb-  `` guest workers ''  -rrb-  ,  and modern social developments ,  were all subjects prominent in new german cinema films . 
the new millennium since 2000 has seen a general resurgence of the german film industry ,  with a higher output and improved returns at the german box office . 
even though there are countless film adaptations of edgar wallace novels worldwide ,  the crime films produced by the german company rialto film between 1959 and 1972 are the best-known of those ,  to the extent that they form their own subgenre known as krimis  -lrb-  abbreviation for the german term `` kriminalfilm ''  -lrb-  or `` kriminalroman ''  -rrb-  . 
many films were remakes of earlier ufa productions . 
a sister `` company '' ,  progress film ,  had also been established as a similar monopoly for domestic film distribution ,  its principal `` competition '' being sovexportfilm ,  which handled distribution of soviet films . 
prior to 1914, however ,  many foreign films were imported . 
one of the main film genres associated with the weimar republic cinema is german expressionism which was inspired by the expressionist movement in art . 
the arrival of sound at the very end of the 1920s ,  produced a final artistic flourish of german film before the collapse of the weimar republic in 1933.
as a consequence ,  such films tended to be unsuccessful at the box office . 
this led to films being made in a vast array of genres and styles . 
the berlin international film festival ,  also called `` berlinale '' ,  is one of the world's leading film festivals and most reputable media events . 
the international significance of the west german film industry of the 1950s could no longer measure up to that of france ,  italy ,  or japan . 
a claim may be deemed frivolous because existing laws unequivocally prohibit such a claim ,  such as a so-called good samaritan law . 
frivolous litigation may be based on absurd legal theories ,  may involve a superabundance or repetition of motions or additional suits ,  may be uncivil or harassing to the court ,  or may claim extreme remedies . 
in the united states tax court ,  frivolous arguments may result in a penalty of up to $25,000 under  . 
the law firm may also be sanctioned ,  or even held in contempt . 
monetary civil penalties for violation of this rule may in some cases be imposed on the litigant or the attorney under rule 11.
a similar rule penalizing frivolous litigation applies in u . s .  bankruptcy court under rule 9011.
in `` washington v .  alaimo '' the court listed more than seventy-five frivolous `` motions ''  -lrb-  a request for a court to issue an order  -rrb-  ,  all of which required the attention of the court ,  including the following:
the difference was likely compounded by the different sounds expected of violin music and fiddle music . 
the fiddle is part of many traditional  -lrb-  folk  -rrb-  styles of music which are aural traditions ,  taught 'by ear' rather than via written music . 
to a greater extent than classical violin playing ,  fiddle playing is characterized by a huge variety of ethnic or folk music traditions ,  each of which has its own distinctive sound . 
a three stringed double bass variant is also used . 
orchestral violins ,  on the other hand ,  are commonly grouped in sections ,  or `` chairs '' . 
the flugelhorn is built in the same b pitch as many trumpets and cornets . 
the flugelhorn is a standard member of the british-style brass band ,  and it is also used frequently in jazz . 
the shank of the flugelhorn mouthpiece is similar in size to a cornet mouthpiece shank ,  and standard tapered flugelhorns are interchangeable with cornets . 
due to poor intonation these e flugelhorns are mostly replaced by the e trumpet or cornet . 
folk music may include most indigenous music . 
folk music includes traditional folk music and the genre that evolved from it during the 20th-century folk revival . 
the terms `` folk music '' ,  `` folk song '' ,  and `` folk dance '' are comparatively recent expressions . 
minute quantities of the fullerenes ,  in the form of c ,  c ,  c ,  c and c molecules ,  are produced in nature ,  hidden in soot and formed by lightning discharges in the atmosphere . 
the c molecule has two bond lengths . 
the nucleus to nucleus diameter of a c molecule is about 0.71 nm . 
the van der waals diameter of a c molecule is about 1.1 nanometers  -lrb-  nm  -rrb-  . 
the discoverers of the buckminsterfullerene  -lrb-  c  -rrb-  allotrope of carbon named it after richard buckminster fuller ,  a noted architectural modeler who popularized the geodesic dome . 
also in 1970, r .  w .  henson  -lrb-  then of the atomic energy research establishment  -rrb-  proposed the structure and made a model of c .  unfortunately ,  the evidence for this new form of carbon was very weak and was not accepted ,  even by his colleagues . 
