in his 1892 us patent  -lrb-  granted in 1895 -rrb- #542846 diesel describes the compression required for his cycle:
diesel engines may be designed as either two-stroke or four-stroke cycles . 
the definition of a diesel engine to many has become an engine that uses compression ignition . 
drawing is one of the oldest forms of human expression within the visual arts . 
drawing is a form of visual art in which a person uses various drawing instruments to mark paper or another two-dimensional medium . 
dedham is located at  -lrb-  42.244609, −71.165531 -rrb- . 
the town was first settled by europeans in 1635.
dedham is a town in and the county seat of norfolk county ,  massachusetts ,  united states . 
the first man-made canal in north america ,  mother brook ,  was created in dedham in 1639.
at the first public meeting on august 15, 1636, eighteen men signed the town covenant . 
the structure is often described as a series of three speeches or sermons  -lrb-  chapters 1:1–4:43, 4:44–29:1, 29:2–30:20 -rrb- followed by a number of short appendices – miller refers to this as the `` literary '' structure; alternatively ,  it is sometimes seen as a ring-structure with a central core  -lrb-  chapters 12–26, the deuteronomic code  -rrb-  and an inner and an outer frame  -lrb-  chapters 4–11/27–30 and 1–3/31–34 -rrb- – miller calls this the covenantal substructure; and finally the theological structure revealed in the theme of the exclusive worship of yahweh established in the first of the ten commandments  -lrb-  `` thou shalt have no other god before me ''  -rrb-  and the shema . 
 ,  the deuteronomic code ,  is the oldest part of the book and the core around which the rest developed . 
verses 6:4–5 were also quoted by jesus in as part of the great commandment . 
saul sets david over his army . 
saul confesses that he has been wrong to pursue david and blesses him . 
yet ,  while almost half of the psalms are headed `` a psalm of david ''  -lrb-  also translated as `` to david '' or `` for david ''  -rrb-  and tradition identifies several with specific events in david's life  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  psalms 3, 7, 18, 34, 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63 and 142 -rrb- ,  the headings are late additions and no psalm can be attributed to david with certainty . 
the two are thus reconciled and saul recognises david as his successor . 
later ,  david wanted michal back and saul's son ish-boshet delivered her to david ,  causing her husband  -lrb-  palti  -rrb-  great grief . 
apart from these ,  all that is known of david comes from the biblical literature . 
likewise ,  kings of the frankish carolingian dynasty frequently connected themselves to david; charlemagne himself occasionally used the name of david as his pseudonym . 
a different tradition is recalled in  ,  namely that saul ceased to pursue david because david took refuge a second time with achish ,  the philistine king of gath . 
during a siege of the ammonite capital of rabbah ,  david remains in jerusalem . 
david is described in the hebrew bible as the second king of the united kingdom of israel and judah after saul and ish-bosheth . 
according to midrashim ,  adam gave up 70 years of his life for the life of david . 
the first book of samuel portrays david as the youngest of the eight sons of jesse of bethlehem . 
god ultimately forgave david and bathsheba but would not remove their sins from scripture . 
building on the success of its predecessor `` diablo ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  `` diablo ii '' was one of the most popular games of 2000.
 ''diablo ii ''s storyline progresses through four chapters or `` acts '' . 
 ''diablo ii '' includes an item crafting system . 
 ''diablo ii '' uses a system of randomly generated equipment similar to the original `` diablo '' ,  but more complicated . 
a designer's sequence of activities is called a design process while the scientific study of design is called design science . 
the person designing is called a designer ,  which is also a term used for people who work professionally in one of the various design areas usually specifying which area is being dealt with  -lrb-  such as a textile designer ,  fashion designer ,  product designer ,  concept designer ,  web designer or interior designer  -rrb-  . 
design can have different connotations in different fields of application  -lrb-  see design disciplines below  -rrb-  . 
design  -lrb-  as a verb: to design  -rrb-  is the intentional creation of a plan ,  process ,  or specification for the construction of an object or system or for the implementation of an activity or process . 
while the definition of design is fairly broad ,  design has a myriad of specifications that professionals utilize in their fields . 
another approach is to denormalize the logical data design . 
a denormalized data model is not the same as a data model that has not been normalized ,  and denormalization should only take place after a satisfactory level of normalization has taken place and that any required constraints and/or rules have been created to deal with the inherent anomalies in the design . 
on the other hand ,  smooth manifolds are more rigid than the topological manifolds . 
they must have access to each entire  -lrb-  `` global ''  -rrb-  object . 
from the point of view of differential geometry ,  the coffee cup and the donut are `` different '' because it is impossible to rotate the coffee cup in such a way that its configuration matches that of the donut . 
more mathematically ,  for example ,  the problem of constructing a diffeomorphism between two manifolds of the same dimension is inherently global since `` locally '' two such manifolds are always diffeomorphic . 
some constructions of smooth manifold theory ,  such as the existence of tangent bundles ,  can be done in the topological setting with much more work ,  and others cannot . 
 ''f '' -lrb-  1,0 -rrb- =  -lrb-  1,0 -rrb- = `` f '' -lrb-  −1,0 -rrb- . 
when `` f '' is a map between `` differentiable '' manifolds ,  a diffeomorphic `` f '' is a stronger condition than a homeomorphic `` f '' . 
given two manifolds `` m '' and `` n '' ,  a differentiable map `` f '' : `` m '' → `` n '' is called a diffeomorphism if it is a bijection and its inverse `` f '' : `` n '' → `` m '' is differentiable as well . 
two manifolds `` m '' and `` n '' are diffeomorphic  -lrb-  symbol usually being ≃  -rrb-  if there is a diffeomorphism `` f '' from `` m '' to `` n '' . 
given a smooth map from dimension `` n '' to dimension `` k '' ,  if `` df ''  -lrb-  or ,  locally ,  `` df ''  -rrb-  is surjective ,  `` f '' is said to be a submersion  -lrb-  or ,  locally ,  a `` local submersion ''  -rrb- ; and if `` df ''  -lrb-  or ,  locally ,  `` df ''  -rrb-  is injective ,  `` f '' is said to be an immersion  -lrb-  or ,  locally ,  a `` local immersion ''  -rrb-  . 
otheym ,  one of paul's former fedaykin death commandos ,  reveals evidence of a fremen conspiracy against paul . 
the unraveling of the fremen conspiracy reveals that korba ,  a former fedaykin and now high priest of paul's church ,  is among paul's enemies . 
duncan notes the irony that paul and chani's deaths had enabled them to triumph against their enemies ,  and that paul has escaped deification by walking into the desert as a man ,  while guaranteeing fremen support for the atreides line . 
 ''duke nukem 3d '' features multiplayer . 
it is a sequel to the platform games `` duke nukem '' and `` duke nukem ii '' ,  published by 3d realms . 
 ''duke nukem 3d '' was developed on a budget of roughly $300,000.
duke nukem 3d is a first-person shooter video game developed by 3d realms . 
 ''duke nukem 3d '' features the adventures of the titular duke nukem ,  voiced by jon st .  john ,  who fights against an alien invasion on earth . 
 ''duke nukem 3d '' is set on earth `` sometime in the early 21st century '' . 
the environments in `` duke nukem 3d '' are highly destructible and interactive; most props can be destroyed by the player . 
 ''lameduke '' is a beta version of `` duke nukem 3d '' ,  which was released by 3d realms as a `` bonus '' one year after the release of the official version . 
the game cover itself is a parody of `` army of darkness '' ,  with duke posing as ash williams . 
in `` duke nukem 3d: atomic edition '' ,  a new game play mode was introduced: duke-tag ,  a `` capture the flag '' style mode . 
the english words daoism  -lrb-    -rrb-  and taoism  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  are alternative spellings for the same-named chinese philosophy and religion . 
the `` oxford english dictionary ''  -lrb-  2nd ed .   -rrb- 
having explained that both `` daoism '' and `` taoism '' are pronounced `` with a 'd' sound '' ,  i . e .  ,  /ˈdaʊ . ɪzəm/ ,  komjathy describes a new religious movement labeled `` american taoism '' or `` popular western taoism ''  -lrb-  a term coined by herman 1998 -rrb- in which `` taoism '' is pronounced with a `` hard 't' sound '' ,  /ˈtaʊ . ɪzəm/  -lrb-  2014: 1, 206 -rrb- . 
records the progression of occurrences over the succeeding centuries: `` tao '' 1736, `` tau '' 1747, `` taouism '' and `` taouist '' 1838, `` taoistic '' 1856, `` tao-ism '' 1858, `` taoism '' 1903, `` daoism '' 1948, `` dao '' and `` daoist '' 1971.
while many scholars prefer the more familiar spelling `` taoism '' ,  arguing that it is now an english word in its own right ,  the term `` daoism '' is becoming increasingly popular . 
in order to explain why english `` taoism '' might be pronounced  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  it is necessary to introduce some technical terminology from linguistics . 
in phonetics ,  the consonant of chinese `` tao '' or `` dào '' 道 is classified as an unaspirated denti-alveolar stop . 
the root for daoism or taoism is the chinese word 道  -lrb-  `` road '' or `` way ''  -rrb-  ,  which was transcribed `` tao '' or `` tau '' in the earliest systems for the romanization of chinese and `` dao '' or `` dau '' in 20th century systems . 
the `` tao te ching '' ,  along with the `` zhuangzi '' ,  is a fundamental text for both philosophical and religious taoism . 
in 2003, the team added black trim to their logo and the jerseys . 
the team was purchased and relocated to detroit for the 1934 season . 
in 1994, every nfl team wore throwback jerseys ,  and the lions' were similar to the jerseys used during their 1935 championship season . 
the design consists of silver helmets ,  silver pants ,  and either blue or white jerseys . 
the tigers concluded the season with an 88–74 record . 
the tigers won the al by just a half-game over the 90–64 cleveland naps with a 90–63 record . 
in 1909, detroit posted a 98–54 season ,  winning the al pennant by 3.5 games over the athletics . 
the tigers ,  at 88–74, finished second in the al central . 
the team also responded with an 85–77 season in 1993, but it would be their last winning season for a number of years . 
in 1989, the team collapsed to a 59–103 record ,  worst in the majors . 
the tigers' best record over this span was 79–83, recorded in 1997 and 2000.
the tigers suffered a disappointing 1970 season ,  finishing fourth in the al east with a 79–83 record . 
the tigers won the 1934 al pennant with a 101–53 record ,  at the time a team record for wins ,  and still the best win percentage  -lrb-   . 656 -rrb- in team history . 
the 1973 season saw the tigers drop to third place in the division ,  with an 85–77 record . 
detroit finished the season two games ahead of toronto ,  securing the best record in the majors  -lrb-  98–64 -rrb- . 
at the midway point of the 2012 season ,  the tigers were three games under  . 500  -lrb-  39-42 -rrb- . 
the tigers beat the new york yankees by a score of 3–2 in game 5 of the alds ,  winning the series 3–2.
a late season slump left the team in second place at 88–74, one game behind the boston red sox . 
the twins clinched the series in game 5 at tiger stadium ,  9–5.
mike maroth went 9–21 for the 2003 tigers and became the first pitcher to lose 20 games in more than 20 years . 
the tigers entered the final week of the 1987 season 2.5 games behind . 
the tigers dropped to third place in the american league in 1910 with an 86–68 record . 
mullin's 11–0 start in 1909 was a tiger record for 104 years ,  finally being broken by max scherzer's 13–0 start in 2013.
in a tight three-team race ,  the 90–64 tigers won the 1940 al pennant by one game over the cleveland indians and two games over the new york yankees . 
the tigers finally won their first world series ,  defeating the chicago cubs ,  4–2.
the tigers finished 43–119, the worst record in franchise history . 
in 1915, the tigers won a then-club record 100 games ,  but narrowly lost the al pennant to the boston red sox ,  who won 101 games . 
after a pair of third-place finishes in 1985 and 1986, the 1987 tigers faced lowered expectations – which seemed to be confirmed by an 11–19 start to the season . 
the 1950 season was particularly frustrating ,  as the tigers posted a 95–59 record for a  . 617 winning percentage ,  the fourth best in team history at the time . 
justin verlander enjoyed another strong season  -lrb-  18–9 record ,  3.37 era ,  219 strikeouts  -rrb-  . 
in game 1, larry herndon hit a two-run home run that gave the tigers a 3–2 lead . 
the tigers scored only three runs in the succeeding four games ,  never scoring more than one run in a game ,  and lost the series ,  4–0.
while playing outstanding baseball at home ,  the tigers were just 29–52 on the road . 
game 1 ended in a rare 3–3 tie ,  called due to darkness after 12 innings . 
the tigers dropped to third place in 1916 with an 87–67 record ,  and would remain mired in the middle of the al standings the rest of the decade ,  never winning more than 80 games . 
in game 6, mclain ensured a game 7 by notching his only win of the world series ,  a 13–1 blowout ,  despite pitching on only two days' rest . 
1992 saw the tigers win only 75 games ,  with fielder being one of the few bright spots as he won the al rbi title for a third straight season  -lrb-  124 -rrb- . 
the team currently plays its home games at comerica park in downtown detroit . 
the 1984 team got off to a 9–0 start highlighted by jack morris tossing a nationally televised no-hitter against chicago in the fourth game of the season . 
maroth ,  jeremy bonderman  -lrb-  6–19 -rrb- ,  and nate cornejo  -lrb-  6–17 -rrb- led the majors in losses ,  the first time in history that this had occurred . 
fryman was also the winning pitcher in the division-clinching game against the boston red sox ,  a 3–1 victory on october 3.
with the end of world war ii and the timely return of hank greenberg and others from the military ,  the tigers won the al pennant by just 1.5 games over the washington senators with an 88–65 record . 
as in 1968, the tigers' next world series season would be preceded by a disappointing second-place finish ,  as the 1983 tigers won 92 games to finish six games behind the baltimore orioles in the al east . 
they played their first western league game at bennett park on april 28, 1896, defeating the columbus senators 17–2.
the tigers spent 146 days of the 2009 season in first place ,  but became the first team in major league history to lose a three-game lead with four games left to play . 
they advanced to the alcs ,  but they lost to the defending al champion texas rangers ,  4–2.
the tigers were in first place as late as september 18, but would finish one game behind the st .  louis browns for the al pennant . 
schoolboy rowe led a strong pitching staff ,  winning 16 straight decisions at one point of the season and finishing with a 24–8 record . 
with hank greenberg serving in world war ii for all or parts of the 1941–44 seasons ,  the tigers struggled to recapture the glory of 1940.
after the season was over ,  pujols was let go . 
diocletian wintered in nicomedia . 
diocletian would soon follow . 
from ravenna ,  diocletian left for the danube . 
diocletian retired to his homeland ,  dalmatia . 
diocletian was led to devise a new system of taxation . 
diocletian entered the city of rome in the early winter of 303.
diocletian  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  born diocles  -lrb-  22 december 244 – 3 december 311 -rrb- ,  was a roman emperor from 284 to 305.
diocletian's edicts emphasized the common liability of all taxpayers . 
constantine ignored those parts of diocletian's rule that did not suit him . 
diocletian replaced the prefect of rome with his consular colleague bassus . 
the relationship between diocletian and maximian was quickly couched in religious terms . 
diocletian was demonized by his christian successors: lactantius intimated that diocletian's ascendancy heralded the apocalypse ,  and in serbian mythology ,  diocletian is remembered as dukljan ,  the adversary of god . 
diocletian met maximian in milan in the winter of 290–91, either in late december 290 or january 291.
when diocletian reappeared in public on 1 march 305, he was emaciated and barely recognizable . 
in the east ,  diocletian engaged in diplomacy with desert tribes in the regions between rome and persia . 
after diocletian's reform of the provinces ,  governors were called `` iudex '' ,  or judge . 
at the behest of his court ,  diocletian acceded to demands for universal persecution . 
on 23 february 303, diocletian ordered that the newly built church at nicomedia be razed . 
it is archaeologically difficult to distinguish diocletian's fortifications from those of his successors and predecessors . 
diocletian was born near salona in dalmatia  -lrb-  solin in modern croatia  -rrb-  ,  some time around 244.
at the conclusion of the peace of nisibis ,  diocletian and galerius returned to syrian antioch . 
maximian ,  according to these accounts ,  swore to uphold diocletian's plan in a ceremony in the temple of jupiter . 
at some time in 285 at mediolanum  -lrb-  milan  -rrb-  ,  diocletian raised his fellow-officer maximian to the office of caesar ,  making him co-emperor . 
diocletian was not the only challenger to carinus' rule; the usurper m .  aurelius julianus ,  carinus' `` corrector venetiae '' ,  took control of northern italy and pannonia after diocletian's accession . 
diocletian exacted an oath of allegiance from the defeated army and departed for italy . 
in preparation for their future roles ,  constantine and maxentius were taken to diocletian's court in nicomedia . 
diocletian's reign stabilized the empire and marks the end of the crisis of the third century . 
diocletian led the subsequent negotiations and achieved a lasting and favourable peace . 
the city itself grew around the heavily fortified diocletian's palace the emperor had built in anticipation of his retirement . 
lord herbert of cherbury  -lrb-  1583–1648 -rrb- is considered the `` father of english deism '' ,  and his book `` de veritate ''  -lrb-  1624 -rrb- the first major statement of deism . 
edward ,  lord herbert of cherbury  -lrb-  d .  1648 -rrb- has been called the `` father of english deism '' . 
modern deism may also include a spiritual element ,  involving experiences of god and nature . 
deism is a theological theory concerning the relationship between a creator and the natural world . 
these lead to many subdivisions of modern deism ,  which serves as an overall category of belief . 
deist authors – and 17th- and 18th-century theologians in general – referred to god using a variety of vivid circumlocutions such as:
deism is usually thought of as having taken root first in england and subsequently spread to mainland europe . 
deism  -lrb-   or ; derived from latin `` deus '' meaning `` god ''  -rrb-  is a philosophical belief that posits that god exists as an uncaused first cause ultimately responsible for the creation of the universe ,  but does not interfere directly with the created world . 
the words `` deism '' and `` theism '' ,  originally synonyms in english ,  both derive from words for `` god '': the former from latin `` deus '' ,  the latter from greek `` theos ''  -lrb-  θεός  -rrb-  . 
later deism spread to france  -lrb-  notably through the work of voltaire  -rrb-  ,  to germany ,  and to north america . 
deists hold a variety of beliefs about the soul . 
the concept of deism covers a wide variety of positions on a wide variety of religious issues . 
some dramaturgies are worried ,  however ,  that this growth may slow down ,  due to a decrease in the number of modern plays being written . 
since gotthold lessing didn’t create an official definition for his own position at the hamburg national theater ,  modern dramaturgies have to infer their tasks based on what lessing did during his career ,  and adapt to the current needs of modern theater . 
a second type of dyson sphere is the `` dyson bubble '' . 
the variant of the dyson sphere most often depicted in fiction is the `` dyson shell '': a uniform solid shell of matter around the star . 
the existence of such a system of collectors would alter the light emitted from the star system . 
such a shell would have no net gravitational interaction with its englobed star  -lrb-  see shell theorem  -rrb-  ,  and could drift in relation to the central star . 
as noted below ,  such a cloud of collectors would alter the light emitted by the star system . 
the variant closest to dyson's original conception is the `` dyson swarm '' . 
in such cases ,  some form of illumination would have to be devised ,  or the sphere made at least partly transparent ,  because the star's light would otherwise be completely hidden . 
in theory ,  if enough satellites were created and deployed around their star ,  they would compose a non-rigid version of the dyson shell mentioned below . 
this would decrease communication distances that would be important for computer-based societies as those described above . 
such a shell would ,  however ,  have the same optical and thermal properties as the rigid form ,  and would be detected by searchers in a similar fashion  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
there are several serious theoretical difficulties with the solid shell variant of the dyson sphere:
for a dyson shell of 1-au radius around a star with the same mass as the sun ,  a mass travelling ten times the orbital velocity  -lrb-  297.9 km/s  -rrb-  would support 99  -lrb-  a=v/r  -rrb-  times its own mass in additional shell structure . 
some of the proposed stellar engine designs are based on the dyson sphere . 
it would be similar to a dyson swarm ,  composed of many independent constructs and likewise could be constructed incrementally . 
unlike the dyson swarm ,  the constructs making it up are not in orbit around the star ,  but would be statites—satellites suspended by use of enormous light sails using radiation pressure to counteract the star's pull of gravity . 
building structures encircling a star would enable a civilization to harvest far more energy . 
democide is the murder of any person or people by their government ,  including genocide ,  politicide and mass murder . 
this definition covers any murder of any number of persons by any government . 
domitian  -lrb-  ; ; 24 october 51 – 18 september 96 ad  -rrb-  was roman emperor from 81 to 96.
in 80, domitia and domitian's only attested son was born . 
unlike his brother titus ,  domitian was not educated at court . 
domitian had a minor and largely ceremonial role during the reigns of his father and brother . 
prior to becoming emperor ,  domitian's role in the flavian government was largely ceremonial . 
as emperor ,  domitian quickly dispensed with the republican facade his father and brother had maintained during their reign . 
during the night ,  he was joined by his relatives ,  including domitian . 
domitian's reign came to an end in 96 when he was assassinated by court officials . 
after their father vespasian became emperor in 69 following the civil war known as the year of the four emperors ,  titus held a great many offices ,  while domitian received honours ,  but no responsibilities . 
equally curtailed by mucianus were domitian's military ambitions . 
historian brian jones concludes in `` the emperor domitian '' that assessing the true nature of domitian's personality is inherently complicated by the bias of the surviving sources . 
of the three flavian emperors ,  domitian would rule the longest ,  despite the fact that his youth and early career were largely spent in the shadow of his older brother . 
the following day ,  21 december ,  the senate proclaimed vespasian emperor of the roman empire . 
the political career of vespasian included the offices of quaestor ,  aedile ,  and praetor ,  and culminated in a consulship in 51, the year of domitian's birth . 
as a consequence ,  domitian was popular with the people and army ,  but considered a tyrant by members of the roman senate . 
domitian was born in rome on 24 october 51, the youngest son of titus flavius vespasianus—commonly known as vespasian—and flavia domitilla major . 
by the time he was 16 years old ,  domitian's mother and sister had long since died ,  while his father and brother were continuously active in the roman military ,  commanding armies in germania and judaea . 
the family procession was headed by vespasian and titus ,  while domitian ,  riding a magnificent white horse ,  followed with the remaining flavian relatives . 
ancient authors have implicated domitian in the death of his brother ,  either by directly accusing him of murder ,  or implying he left the ailing titus for dead ,  even alleging that during his lifetime ,  domitian was openly plotting against his brother . 
damascus steel was the forged steel comprising the blades of swords smithed in the near east from ingots of wootz steel imported from india and sri lanka . 
recreating damascus steel is a subfield of experimental archaeology . 
pattern-welded steel has been referred to as `` damascus steel '' since 1973 when bladesmith william f .  moran unveiled his `` damascus knives '' at the knifemakers' guild show . 
damascus blades were first manufactured in the near east from ingots of wootz steel that were imported from india ,  as well as sri lanka . 
from the 3rd century to the 17th century ,  steel ingots were being shipped to the middle east from india . 
several individuals in modern times have claimed that they have rediscovered the methods by which the original damascus steel was produced . 
this `` modern damascus '' is made from several types of steel and iron slices welded together to form a billet  -lrb-  semi-finished product  -rrb-  ,  and currently ,  the term `` damascus ''  -lrb-  although technically incorrect  -rrb-  is widely accepted to describe modern pattern welded steel blades in the trade . 
rosenberg accused german zionists of working for a german defeat and supporting britain and the implementation of the balfour declaration . 
the antisemitic instincts of the german army were revealed well before the stab-in-the-back myth became the military's excuse for losing the war . 
ludendorff said:
the stab-in-the-back myth  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  was the notion ,  widely believed and promulgated in right-wing circles in germany after 1918, that the german army did not lose world war i on the battlefield but was instead betrayed by the civilians on the home front ,  especially the republicans who overthrew the hohenzollern monarchy in the german revolution of 1918–19.
according to historian john wheeler-bennett ,  speaking from the british perspective , it was necessary for the nazi régime and/or the german generals to surrender unconditionally in order to bring home to the german people that they had lost the war by themselves; so that their defeat should not be attributed to a `` stab in the back '' . 
throughout his career ,  he railed against the `` november criminals '' of 1918, who had stabbed the german army in the back . 
the theme of stab-in-the-back was articulated in 1919 most prominently by general erich ludendorff ,  one of the two top german commanders . 
scholars inside and outside germany unanimously reject the notion ,  pointing out the german army was out of reserves ,  was being overwhelmed by the entrance of the united states into the war ,  and by late 1918 had lost the war militarily . 
it was particularly this testimony of hindenburg that led to the widespread `` dolchstoßlegende '' in post-world war i germany . 
the phrase was to ludendorff's liking ,  and he let it be known among the general staff that this was the `` official '' version ,  which led to it being disseminated throughout german society . 
ebert had meant these sayings as a tribute to the german soldier ,  but it only contributed to the prevailing feeling . 
to many germans ,  the expression `` stab in the back '' was evocative of richard wagner's 1876 opera `` götterdämmerung '' ,  in which hagen murders his enemy siegfried – the hero of the opera – with a spear in his back . 
davenport is located on the banks of the mississippi river . 
he later was credited with founding davenport . 
davenport has several neighborhoods dating back to the 1840s . 
the census bureau estimated davenport's 2011 population to be 100,802.
farmland surrounds davenport ,  outside the quad cities area . 
the davenport city hall was built in 1895 for price of $100,000  -lrb-  $ in dollars  -rrb-  . 
on august 27, 1805, pike camped on the present-day site of davenport . 
davenport has a federal court house for the united states district court for the southern district of iowa . 
the percent of all races ,  with the exception of white ,  are higher in davenport ,  than iowa averages ,  with the black population in davenport six times the average of iowa  -lrb-  data used was extrapolated from the 2016 acs for the entire state ,  and not merely davenport  -rrb-  . 
the annual bix 7 is a road race held in late july in davenport . 
davenport often makes national headlines when it suffers seasonal flooding by the mississippi river . 
as of september 2009, the unemployment rate in davenport and the rest of the quad cities ,  had risen to 15.6% . 
at the state level ,  davenport is represented by the 41st ,  42nd ,  and 43rd iowa senate districts and in the iowa house of representatives by the 81st ,  84th ,  85th ,  and 86th districts . 
davenport is the county seat of scott county in iowa and is located along the mississippi river on the eastern border of the state . 
by 1932 thousands of davenport residents were on public relief due to the great depression . 
cnn money ranked davenport as the 16th most affordable housing in the country . 
davenport's biggest labor industry is manufacturing ,  with over 7,600 jobs in the sector . 
davenport is the headquarters for department store von maur ,  which has 24 stores . 
diffraction occurs with all waves ,  including sound waves ,  water waves ,  and electromagnetic waves such as visible light ,  x-rays and radio waves . 
all these effects are a consequence of the fact that light propagates as a wave . 
diffraction can occur with any kind of wave . 
the quantum approach has some striking similarities to the huygens-fresnel principle ,  in that principle the light becomes a series of individually distributed light sources across the slit which is similar to the limited number of paths  -lrb-  or wave functions  -rrb-  available for the photons to travel through the slit . 
diffraction refers to various phenomena that occur when a wave encounters an obstacle or a slit . 
 -lrb-  years later ,  donaldson received a copy of his fbi file through the freedom of information act .   -rrb- 
at age 12, donaldson was expelled from boy scouts for engaging in sexual behavior with other boys  -lrb-  who ,  as recipients ,  were not punished  -rrb-  . 
the word `` dolmen '' has an unclear history . 
nonetheless it has now replaced cromlech as the usual english term in archaeology ,  when the more technical and descriptive alternatives are not used . 
for instance an object marked as declination -5 would have a npd of 95, and a declination of -90  -lrb-  the south celestial pole  -rrb-  would have a npd of 180.
declinations with magnitudes greater than 90° do not occur ,  because the poles are the northernmost and southernmost points of the celestial sphere . 
rogers brubaker  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- also notes that use of the term diaspora has been widening . 
the majority of works in the 1960s were also about the jewish diaspora ,  but in 2002 only two out of 20 books sampled  -lrb-  out of a total of 253 -rrb- were about the jewish case ,  with a total of eight different diasporas covered . 
while safran's definitions were influenced by the idea of the jewish diaspora ,  he recognised the expanding use of the term . 
an academic field ,  diaspora studies ,  has become established relating to this sense of the word . 
breeds listed here may be traditional breeds with long histories as registered breeds ,  rare breeds with their own registries ,  or new breeds that may still be under development . 
some dogs ,  such as the löwchen ,  have an uncertain origin and are listed under several countries . 
it was here that the cardinal vowel diagram made a first appearance . 
the resulting work ,  `` an outline of english phonetics '' ,  followed in 1918 and is the first truly comprehensive description of british received pronunciation ,  and the first such description of the standard pronunciation of any language . 
he briefly took private lessons from the british phonetician henry sweet . 
the problem of the phonetic description of vowels is of long standing ,  going back to the era of the ancient indian linguists . 
later modifications to his theory allowed for an additional set of eight `` secondary cardinal vowels '' with reverse lip shapes ,  permitting the representation of eight secondary cardinal vowels  -lrb-  front rounded and back unrounded  -rrb-  . 
 ,  beckham had more than 50 tattoos . 
beckham also scored in the shootout . 
beckham dismissed both claims as `` ludicrous '' . 
beckham has played along to jokes about his voice . 
beckham also received death threats after the world cup . 
beckham never personally appeared in the 2002 film `` bend it like beckham '' ,  except in archive footage . 
with beckham playing in the centre of midfield ,  the galaxy won the 2011 mls cup . 
in international football ,  beckham made his england debut on 1 september 1996 at the age of 21.
in 2005, beckham founded the david beckham academy football school ,  operating from two sites ,  in london and los angeles . 
beckham made his first appearance for the england national team on 1 september 1996, in a world cup qualifying match against moldova . 
shortly afterwards ,  beckham signed as a professional on 23 january 1993.
beckham was the first england player ever to collect two red cards ,  and the first england captain to be sent off . 
beckham had made 265 premier league appearances for united and scored 61 goals . 
beckham has several eponymous video games ,  including `` go ! 
this was later confirmed by beckham ,  revealing what was described as a unique `` timeshare '' deal ,  in which beckham would play with l . a .  from mid-july until the end of the 2009 mls season . 
by the early 2000s ,  the relationship between ferguson and beckham had begun to deteriorate ,  possibly as a result of beckham's fame and commitments away from football . 
the abuse that beckham was receiving from english supporters peaked during england's 3–2 defeat by portugal in euro 2000, a match where beckham set up two goals ,  when a group of england supporters taunted him throughout the match . 
beckham then went to preston north end on loan for part of the 1994–95 season to get some first team experience . 
on 22 august 2007, beckham played in a friendly for england against germany ,  becoming the first to play for england while with a non-european club team . 
at the beginning of the 1996–97 season ,  beckham was given the number 10 shirt that had most recently been worn by mark hughes . 
when asked about it later ,  however ,  beckham responded that protests are not his business . 
in england's opening game at the 2006 world cup ,  against paraguay on 10 june 2006, beckham's free kick led to an own-goal by carlos gamarra as england won 1–0.
in 1997, beckham started dating victoria adams ,  after she attended a manchester united match . 
beckham helped the galaxy to a fourth-place finish in the mls western conference 2012 regular season with beckham scoring seven goals and adding nine assists . 
beckham was born at whipps cross university hospital in leytonstone ,  london ,  england . 
during january and february 2011, ahead of the 2011 mls season ,  beckham trained with tottenham hotspur . 
on 20 march 2008, beckham was recalled to the england squad by capello for the friendly against france in paris on 26 march . 
beckham was partially fit by the time of the 2002 world cup held in japan and south korea ,  and played in the first match against sweden . 
he later criticised beckham for this in his autobiography ,  claiming he had not been `` fair to his teammates '' beckham had a good season for his club ,  though ,  and helped united to win the premier league by a record margin . 
on 26 may 2007, mcclaren announced that beckham would be recalled to the england squad for the first time since stepping down as their captain . 
a global ambassador for the sport ,  beckham is regarded as a british cultural icon . 
beckham was announced as the new ambassadorial president of the british fashion council on 11 may 2018.
on 15 may ,  beckham scored his first goal of the season for the galaxy from a 30-yard free kick ,  in a 4–1 victory over sporting kansas city . 
beckham's most notorious red card was during the 1998 world cup after argentina's diego simeone had fouled him: beckham ,  lying face down on the pitch ,  kicked out at the argentine midfielder ,  who fell dramatically . 
milan ,  however ,  failed to match galaxy's valuation of beckham ,  in the us$10–15 million range . 
beckham has expressed no interest in pursuit of acting roles ,  saying he is too `` stiff '' . 
beckham's many endorsement deals make him one of the most recognisable athletes throughout the world . 
beckham makes a cameo appearance with zinedine zidane and raúl ,  in the 2005 film `` goal ! ``  . 
a mobile academy is being developed by beckham ,  to travel around the uk and further afield . 
after being passed over by new england coach and beckham's former manager at real madrid ,  fabio capello ,  for a friendly against switzerland which would have given him his hundredth cap; beckham admitted that he was not in shape at the time ,  as he had not played a competitive match in three months . 
beckham played a major role in helping england qualify for the 2002 fifa world cup ,  starring in an impressive 5–1 victory over germany in munich . 
beckham's professional club career began with manchester united ,  where he made his first-team debut in 1992 aged 17.
on 16 may 2013, beckham announced that he would retire from professional football at the end of that year's french football season . 
capello had hinted on 25 march 2008 that beckham had a long-term future in his side ahead of crucial qualifiers for the 2010 world cup . 
having stepped down as captain after the world cup ,  beckham was dropped completely from the england national team selected by new coach steve mcclaren on 11 august 2006.
dianic wicca itself is named after the roman goddess of the same name . 
dianic wicca ,  also known as dianic witchcraft ,  is a neopagan religion of female-centered goddess ritual and tradition . 
the most noticeable difference between the two are that dianic covens of budapest lineage are composed entirely of women . 
dianic wicca developed from the women's liberation movement and covens traditionally align themselves with radical feminism . 
within a local network ,  a dhcp server assigns a local ip address to each device connected to the network . 
the dynamic host configuration protocol  -lrb-  dhcp  -rrb-  is a network management protocol used on udp/ip networks whereby a dhcp server dynamically assigns an ip address and other network configuration parameters to each device on a network so they can communicate with other ip networks . 
sobel was born on june 15, 1947, in the bronx ,  new york city . 
dava sobel  -lrb-  born june 15, 1947 -rrb- is an american writer of popular expositions of scientific topics . 
riemannian geometry studies riemannian manifolds ,  smooth manifolds with a `` riemannian metric '' . 
a symplectic manifold is an almost symplectic manifold for which the symplectic form `` ω '' is closed:  . 
a finsler structure on a manifold is a function such that:
 ''complex differential geometry '' is the study of complex manifolds . 
is a volume form on `` m '' ,  i . e . 
it follows from this definition that an almost complex manifold is even-dimensional . 
a distance-preserving diffeomorphism between riemannian manifolds is called an isometry . 
the etymology of `` dhole '' is unclear . 
on some occasions ,  dholes may attack tigers . 
a dhole may have been presented as a gift to ibbi-sin as tribute . 
historically ,  up to 10 subspecies of dholes have been recognised . 
domestic dogs may kill dholes ,  though they will feed alongside them on occasion . 
in some areas ,  dholes are sympatric to tigers and leopards . 
like african wild dogs and dingoes ,  dholes will avoid killing prey close to their dens . 
dholes in the moscow zoo moult once a year from march to may . 
there are numerous records of leopards being treed by dholes . 
the dhole only rarely takes domestic livestock . 
dhole populations in the himalayas and northwest india are fragmented . 
dholes still occur in tibet and possibly also in north korea . 
in northern laos ,  dholes have been studied  -lrb-  2012 -rrb- in protected areas . 
once large prey is caught ,  one dhole will grab the prey's nose ,  while the rest of the pack pulls the animal down by the flanks and hindquarters . 
in india ,  the dhole is protected under schedule 2 of the wildlife protection act ,  1972.
the fur trade does not pose a significant threat to dholes . 
since leopards are smaller than tigers and are more likely to hunt dholes ,  dhole packs tend to react more aggressively toward them than they do towards tigers . 
rumsfeld has been awarded 11 honorary degrees . 
in february 1973, rumsfeld left washington to serve as u . s . 
on december 18, 2006, rumsfeld's resignation took effect . 
bush nominated robert gates to succeed rumsfeld . 
at the pentagon ,  rumsfeld oversaw the transition to an all-volunteer military . 
rumsfeld was known in media circles for his outspokenness and candor . 
this plan was approved by president bush and implemented under the oversight of rumsfeld . 
rumsfeld married joyce p .  pierson on december 27, 1954.
rumsfeld gradually lost political support and he resigned in late 2006.
rumsfeld wrote in `` known and unknown '' ,  `` much has been written about the bush administration's focus on iraq after 9/11.
donald henry rumsfeld was born on july 9, 1932, in chicago ,  illinois ,  the son of jeannette kearsley  -lrb-  née husted  -rrb-  and george donald rumsfeld . 
rumsfeld and the churchill family said that profits from the game would be donated to charity . 
early on the morning of 9/11, rumsfeld had spoken at a pentagon breakfast meeting with members of congress . 
rumsfeld was named secretary of defense soon after president george w .  bush took office in 2001 despite rumsfeld's past rivalry with the previous president bush . 
rumsfeld told hume that franks ultimately decided against such a troop level . 
as a result ,  rumsfeld stirred controversy as to whether the forces that did invade iraq were enough in size . 
rumsfeld served as chairman and chief executive officer of general instrument corporation from 1990 to 1993.
in 2007, rumsfeld established the rumsfeld foundation ,  which focuses on encouraging public service in the united states and supporting the growth of free political and free economic systems abroad . 
in 1977, rumsfeld was awarded the nation's highest civilian award ,  the presidential medal of freedom . 
rumsfeld served in the united states navy from 1954 to 1957, as a naval aviator and flight instructor . 
rumsfeld was appointed secretary of defense for a second time in january 2001 by president george w .  bush . 
as director ,  rumsfeld sought to reorganize the office to serve as `` a laboratory for experimental programs '' . 
during his business career ,  rumsfeld continued part-time public service in various posts . 
many republicans were unhappy with the delay ,  believing they would have won more votes if voters had known rumsfeld was resigning . 
as secretary of defense ,  rumsfeld was deliberate in crafting the public message from the department of defense . 
rumsfeld briefly sought the presidential nomination in 1988, but withdrew from the race before primaries began . 
in the film rumsfeld `` discusses his career in washington d . c .  from his days as a congressman in the early 1960s to planning the invasion of iraq in 2003 '' . 
diego garcia and the rest of the chagos islands were uninhabited until the late 18th century . 
nothing is known of pre-european contact history of diego garcia . 
diego garcia was rumoured to have been one of the locations of the cia's black sites in 2005.
from 1881 until 1888, diego garcia was the location of two coaling stations for steamships crossing the indian ocean . 
there are two transnational political issues which affect diego garcia and the biot ,  through the british government . 
diego garcia is an atoll just south of the equator in the central indian ocean ,  and the largest of 60 small islands comprising the chagos archipelago . 
the first map to delineate the island under its present name ,  diego garcia ,  is the `` world map '' of edward wright  -lrb-  london 1599 -rrb- ,  possibly as a result of misreading dio  -lrb-  or simply `` d . ``   -rrb-  as diego ,  and gratia as garcia . 
diego garcia is the only inhabited island in the british indian ocean territory ,  an overseas territory of the united kingdom ,  usually abbreviated as `` biot '' . 
diego garcia lies within the influence of the south equatorial current year-round . 
those who still remained on the island of diego garcia between 1971 and 1973 were forced onto cargo ships that were heading to mauritius and the seychelles . 
to the united states ,  diego garcia was a prime territory for setting up a foreign military base . 
in 2004, the uk applied for ,  and received ,  ramsar site wetlands conservation status for the lagoon and other waters of diego garcia . 
between 1971 and 2001, the only residents on diego garcia were uk and united states military personnel and civilian employees of those countries . 
both middle island and anniversary island are part of the spur reef complex . 
diego garcia is frequently subject to earthquakes caused by tectonic plate movement along the carlsberg ridge located just to the west of the island . 
three small islands are located in the pass . 
of major concern to the biot administration is the relationship with the united states military forces resident on diego garcia . 
a peak population of 1,142 on all islands was recorded in 1953.
scientific expeditions in 1996 and 2006 described the lagoon and surrounding waters of diego garcia ,  along with the rest of the chagos archipelago ,  as `` exceptionally unpolluted '' and `` pristine '' . 
throughout their recorded history ,  the plantations of the chagos archipelago had a population of approximately 1,000 individuals ,  about two-thirds of whom lived on diego garcia . 
the horizontal structure of each lens is influenced by variations in the type and porosity of the subsurface deposits ,  which on diego garcia are minor . 
diego garcia had no permanent inhabitants when discovered by the spanish explorer diego garcía de moguer in the 16th century ,  then in the service of portugal ,  and this remained the case until it was settled as a french colony in 1793.
diego garcia is the largest land mass in the chagos archipelago  -lrb-  which includes peros banhos ,  the salomon islands ,  the three brothers ,  the egmont islands ,  and the great chagos bank  -rrb-  ,  being an atoll occupying approximately  ,  of which is dry land . 
in 1997, the united states navy contracted a vegetation survey that identified about 280 species of terrestrial vascular plants on diego garcia . 
no species of plants ,  birds ,  amphibians ,  reptiles ,  molluscs ,  crustaceans ,  or mammals is endemic on diego garcia or in the surrounding waters . 
diego garcia became a colony of the united kingdom after the napoleonic wars as part of the treaty of paris  -lrb-  1814 -rrb- ,  and from 1814 to 1965, it was administered from mauritius . 
all the inhabitants of diego garcia were forcibly resettled to other islands in the chagos archipelago ,  mauritius or seychelles by 1971 to satisfy the requirements of a uk/united states exchange of notes signed in 1966 to depopulate the island when the united states constructed a base upon it . 
the band originally announced in august 2013 that work had commenced on the band's next album . 
dimmu borgir  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a norwegian symphonic black metal band from oslo ,  norway ,  formed in 1993.
the album also featured a dvd with a live performance from the 2004 ozzfest tour . 
dimmu borgir's eighth studio album ,  `` in sorte diaboli '' ,  was released on 24 april 2007.
in 2005, the band did a complete re-recording of the `` stormblåst '' album ,  featuring hellhammer of mayhem fame as the session drummer . 
in 2004, dimmu borgir performed on the mainstage at ozzfest . 
today ,  thousands of israeli druze belong to 'druze zionist' movements . 
reincarnation is a paramount principle in the druze faith . 
the prayer-houses of the druze are called `` khalwa '' or `` khalwat '' . 
the primary sanctuary of the druze is at khalwat al-bayada . 
druze people reside primarily in syria ,  lebanon ,  israel and jordan . 
the epistles of wisdom is the foundational text of the druze faith . 
many yemenite druzes thereupon immigrated to the hawran region and thus laid the foundation of druze power there . 
the maronite-druze conflict in 1840–60 was an outgrowth of the maronite christian independence movement ,  directed against the druze ,  druze feudalism ,  and the ottoman-turks . 
the pact of time custodian  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  is considered the entrance to the druze religion ,  and they believe that all druze in their past lives have signed this charter ,  and druze believe that this charter embodies with human souls after death . 
the druze faith is one of the major religious groups in the levant ,  with between 800,000 and a million adherents . 
the druze conception of the deity is declared by them to be one of strict and uncompromising unity . 
in 1017, hamza officially revealed the druze faith and began to preach the unitarian doctrine . 
although the druze consider ad-darazī a heretic ,  the name has been used to identify them . 
the qalb loze massacre was a reported massacre of syrian druze on 10 june 2015 in the village of qalb loze in syria's northwestern idlib governorate in which 20-24 druze were killed . 
shishakli launched a brutal campaign to defame the druzes for their religion and politics . 
in 1038, two years after the death of al-zahir ,  the druze movement was able to resume because the new leadership that replaced him had friendly political ties with at least one prominent druze leader . 
although the druze religious books describe ad-darazi as the `` insolent one '' and as the `` calf '' who is narrow-minded and hasty ,  the name `` druze '' is still used for identification and for historical reasons . 
the latter title has since been usurped by the hawran region ,  which since the middle of the 19th century has proven a haven of refuge to druze emigrants from lebanon and has become the headquarters of druze power . 
the druze also use a similar formula ,  called al-'ahd ,  when one is initiated into the ʻuqqāl . 
in 1967, a community of druze in the golan heights came under israeli control ,  today about 20,000 strong . 
after the shehab dynasty converted to christianity ,  the druze community and feudal leaders came under attack from the regime with the collaboration of the catholic church ,  and the druze lost most of their political and feudal powers . 
some authorities see in the name `` druze '' a descriptive epithet ,  derived from arabic '  -lrb-  `` she who studies ''  -rrb-  . 
the number of druze people worldwide is between 800,000 and one million ,  with the vast majority residing in the levant . 
about two percent of the druze population are also scattered within other countries in the middle east . 
the main druze doctrine states that god is both transcendent and immanent ,  in which he is above all attributes but at the same time he is present . 
a bypass door is a door unit that has two or more sections . 
a dutch door or stable door consists of two halves . 
the ancient greek and roman doors were either single doors ,  double doors ,  triple doors ,  sliding doors or folding doors ,  in the last case the leaves were hinged and folded back . 
doors can be hinged so that the axis of rotation is not in the plane of the door to reduce the space required on the side to which the door opens . 
french doors are derived from an original french design called the casement door . 
in some cases ,  such as hinged garage doors ,  the axis may be horizontal ,  above the door opening . 
the selfbolting door principle can be used both for hinged doors as for rotating doors ,  as well as up-and-over doors  -lrb-  in the latter case ,  the bolts are then placed at top and bottom rather than at the sides  -rrb-  . 
most doors are hinged along one side to allow the door to pivot away from the doorway in one direction ,  but not the other . 
a garden door resembles a french window  -lrb-  with lites  -rrb-  ,  but is more secure because only one door is operable . 
each of the four doors are 139 meters  -lrb-  456 feet  -rrb-  high . 
