baghdad  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the capital of iraq . 
the name baghdad is pre-islamic ,  and its origin is disputed . 
this would prove to be the last great library built by the caliphs of baghdad . 
the four surrounding walls of baghdad were named kufa ,  basra ,  khurasan ,  and syria; named because their gates pointed in the directions of these destinations . 
by the 11th century ,  `` baghdad '' became almost the exclusive name for the world-renowned metropolis . 
baghdad was the largest city of the middle ages for much of the abbasid era ,  peaking at a population of more than a million . 
arab authors ,  realizing the pre-islamic origins of baghdad's name ,  generally looked for its roots in persian . 
by the 8th century ad ,  several villages had developed there ,  including a persian hamlet called `` baghdad , ``  the name which would come to be used for the abbasid metropolis . 
tughril beg saw himself as the protector of the abbasid caliphs . 
the british thermal unit  -lrb-  btu or btu  -rrb-  is a traditional unit of heat; it is defined as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound of water by one degree fahrenheit . 
the unit `` quad '' is commonly used to represent one quadrillion  -lrb-  10 -rrb- btus . 
the unit `` therm '' is used to represent 100,000  -lrb-  or 10 -rrb- btus . 
bugatti cars were extremely successful in racing . 
famous bugattis include the type 35 grand prix cars ,  the type 41 `` royale '' ,  the type 57 `` atlantic '' and the type 55 sports car . 
bugattis are noticeably focused on design . 
according to bugatti ,  `` weight was the enemy '' . 
ettore bugatti also designed a successful motorised railcar ,  the ``  ''  -lrb-  autorail bugatti  -rrb-  . 
after the war ,  bugatti designed and planned to build a series of new cars ,  including the type 73 road car and type 73c single seat racing car ,  but in all bugatti built only five type 73 cars . 
the company attempted a comeback under roland bugatti in the mid-1950s with the mid-engined type 251 race car . 
the death of ettore bugatti's son ,  jean bugatti ,  on 11 august 1939 marked a turning point in the company's fortunes . 
the others were a `` type 22 '' and a `` type 23 '' with wheelbases of respectively . 
the black death is estimated to have killed 30–60% of europe's total population . 
the black death ravaged much of the islamic world . 
a number of alternative theories – implicating other diseases in the black death pandemic – have also been proposed by some modern scientists  -lrb-  see below – `` alternative explanations ''  -rrb-  . 
the first north american plague epidemic was the san francisco plague of 1900–1904, followed by another outbreak in 1907–1908.
renewed religious fervour and fanaticism bloomed in the wake of the black death . 
one development as a result of the black death was the establishment of the idea of quarantine in dubrovnik in 1377 after continuing outbreaks . 
monks and priests were especially hard-hit since they cared for victims of the black death . 
other arguments include the lack of accounts of the death of rats before outbreaks of plague between the 14th and 17th centuries; temperatures that are too cold in northern europe for the survival of fleas; that ,  despite primitive transport systems ,  the spread of the black death was much faster than that of modern bubonic plague; that mortality rates of the black death appear to be very high; that ,  while modern bubonic plague is largely endemic as a rural disease ,  the black death indiscriminately struck urban and rural areas; and that the pattern of the black death ,  with major outbreaks in the same areas separated by 5 to 15 years ,  differs from modern bubonic plague—which often becomes endemic for decades with annual flare-ups . 
the dominant explanation for the black death is the plague theory ,  which attributes the outbreak to `` yersinia pestis '' ,  also responsible for an epidemic that began in southern china in 1865, eventually spreading to india . 
the black death is thought to have originated in the dry plains of central asia ,  where it travelled along the silk road ,  reaching crimea by 1343.
a death rate as high as 60% in europe has been suggested by norwegian historian ole benedictow:
the third plague pandemic  -lrb-  1855–1859 -rrb- started in china in the mid-19th century ,  spreading to all inhabited continents and killing 10 million people in india alone . 
the black death ,  also known as the great plague ,  the black plague ,  or simply the plague ,  was one of the most devastating pandemics in human history ,  resulting in the deaths of an estimated people in eurasia and peaking in europe from 1347 to 1351.<ref name= ''abc/reuters ''></ref> the bacterium `` yersinia pestis '' ,  which results in several forms of plague ,  is believed to have been the cause . 
there are no exact figures for the death toll; the rate varied widely by locality . 
whether or not this hypothesis is accurate ,  it is clear that several existing conditions such as war ,  famine ,  and weather contributed to the severity of the black death . 
from there ,  it was most likely carried by oriental rat fleas living on the black rats that were regular passengers on merchant ships ,  spreading throughout the mediterranean basin and europe . 
according to geoffrey parker ,  `` france alone lost almost a million people to the plague in the epidemic of 1628–31. ''
the most widely accepted estimate for the middle east ,  including iraq ,  iran and syria ,  during this time ,  is for a death rate of about a third . 
gm crops also provide a number of ecological benefits ,  if not used in excess . 
there is a scientific consensus that currently available food derived from gm crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food ,  but that each gm food must be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction . 
for thousands of years ,  humans have used selective breeding to improve production of crops and livestock to use them for food . 
gm livestock have also been experimentally developed; in november 2013 none were available on the market ,  but in 2015 the fda approved the first gm salmon for commercial production and consumption . 
farmers have widely adopted gm technology . 
biotechnology has also led to the development of antibiotics . 
for thousands of years ,  humankind has not used biotechnology in agriculture ,  food production ,  and medicine . 
genetically modified crops  -lrb-  `` gm crops '' ,  or `` biotech crops ''  -rrb-  are plants used in agriculture ,  the dna of which has been modified with genetic engineering techniques . 
although the process of fermentation was not fully understood until louis pasteur's work in 1857, it is still the first use of biotechnology to convert a food source into another form . 
these processes also were included in early fermentation of beer . 
for example ,  this technique was used with corn to produce the largest and sweetest crops . 
depending on the coexistence regulations ,  incentives for cultivation of gm crops differ . 
as the french advanced ,  the english launched their charge . 
the french were heavily defeated; an english counter-attack captured king john ii along with his youngest son and much of the french nobility . 
the english army's divisions were led by edward ,  the black prince ,  the earl of warwick ,  the earl of salisbury ,  sir john chandos and captal de buch . 
following the battle ,  edward resumed his march back to the english stronghold at bordeaux . 
at the start of the battle ,  the english removed their baggage train from the field ,  prompting a hasty french assault ,  believing that what they saw was the english retreating . 
the english army was led by edward ,  the black prince and composed primarily of english and welsh troops ,  though there was a large contingent of gascon and breton soldiers with the army . 
poitiers was the second major english victory of the hundred years' war . 
the french army was led by john ii of france ,  and was composed largely of native french soldiers ,  though there was a contingent of german knights ,  and a large force of scottish soldiers . 
other prominent members of the cabal were brian reid ,  richard sexton ,  chuq von rospach ,  neil crellin and rick adams . 
the cabal was created in an effort to facilitate reliable propagation of new usenet posts: while in the 1970s and 1980s many news servers only operated during night time to save on the cost of long distance communication ,  servers of the backbone cabal were available 24 hours a day . 
the backbone cabal was an informal organization of large-site administrators of the worldwide distributed newsgroup-based discussion system usenet . 
bongos are one of the largest of the forest antelopes . 
bongos are hunted for their horns by humans . 
when in distress ,  the bongo emits a bleat . 
all bongos in captivity are from the isolated aberdare mountains of central kenya . 
bongos are further classified into two subspecies: `` t .  e .  eurycerus '' ,  the lowland or western bongo ,  and the far rarer `` t .  e .  isaaci '' ,  the mountain or eastern bongo ,  restricted to the mountains of kenya only . 
the lips of a bongo are white ,  topped with a black muzzle . 
the eastern or mountain bongo ,  `` t .  e .  isaaci '' ,  of kenya ,  has a coat even more vibrant than that of `` t .  e .  eurycerus '' . 
the first known use of the name `` bongo '' dates back to 1861.
like other forest ungulates ,  bongos are seldom seen in large groups . 
bongo populations have been greatly reduced by hunting ,  poaching ,  and animal trapping ,  although some bongo refuges exist . 
suitable habitats for bongos must have permanent water available . 
historically ,  bongos are found in three disjunct parts of africa: east ,  central and west . 
bongos have two heavy and slightly spiralled horns that slope over their backs ,  and like many other antelope species ,  both male and female bongos have horns . 
although bongos are quite easy for humans to catch using snares ,  many people native to the bongos' habitat believed that if they ate or touched bongo ,  they would have spasms similar to epileptic seizures . 
another similarity to the okapi ,  though the bongo is unrelated ,  is that the bongo has a long prehensile tongue which it uses to grasp grasses and leaves . 
the eastern/mountain bongo's survival in the wild is dependent on more effective protection of the surviving remnant populations in kenya . 
descriptions of bunyips vary widely . 
he emphasized the bunyip was believed to have supernatural powers . 
this appears to be the first use of the word `` bunyip '' in a written publication . 
the word `` bunyip '' can still be found in a number of australian contexts ,  including place names such as the bunyip river  -lrb-  which flows into westernport bay in southern victoria  -rrb-  and the town of bunyip ,  victoria . 
the word `` bunyip '' may have first appeared in print in english about the mid-1840s . 
the australian tourism boom of the 1970s brought a renewed interest in bunyip mythology . 
the word `` bunyip '' is usually translated by aboriginal australians today as `` devil '' or `` evil spirit '' . 
by the 1850s ,  `` bunyip '' was also used as a `` synonym for impostor ,  pretender ,  humbug and the like '' in the broader australian community . 
the challicum bunyip ,  an outline image of a bunyip carved by aborigines into the bank of fiery creek ,  near ararat ,  victoria ,  was first recorded by `` the australasian '' newspaper in 1851.
another association to the bunyip is the shy australasian bittern  -lrb-  `` botaurus poiciloptilus ''  -rrb-  . 
the age distribution is 5.8% under 18, 65.9% from 18 to 24, 12.1% from 25 to 44, 9.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.1% who were 65 or older . 
boone is the home of appalachian state university ,  a constituent member of the university of north carolina . 
boone is a town located in the blue ridge mountains of western north carolina ,  united states . 
out of the total population ,  6.3% of those under the age of 18 and 9.1% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . 
junaluska is also home to one of the few majority-african american mennonite brethren congregations . 
for every 100 females age 18 and over ,  there were 94.7 males . 
the banshee also is a predictor of death . 
irish legend speaks of a lament being sung by a fairy woman ,  or banshee . 
a banshee or bean-sídhe  -lrb-   ; modern irish  ,   ,  from  ,   ,  `` woman of the fairy mound '' or `` fairy woman ''  -rrb-  is a female spirit in irish mythology who heralds the death of a family member ,  usually by wailing ,  shrieking ,  or keening . 
the tales sometimes recounted that the woman ,  though called a fairy ,  was a ghost ,  often of a specific murdered woman ,  or a mother who died in childbirth . 
in those cases ,  her wailing would be the first warning the household had of the death . 
as of 2011, herbicide-resistant gm corn was grown in 14 countries . 
the bt protein is expressed throughout the plant . 
typically ,  20% of corn in a grower's fields must be refuge; refuge must be at least 0.5 miles from bt corn for lepidopteran pests ,  and refuge for corn rootworm must at least be adjacent to a bt field . 
the european corn borer causes about a billion dollars in damage to corn crops each year . 
in 1996, the first gm maize producing a bt cry protein was approved ,  which killed the european corn borer and related species; subsequent bt genes were introduced that killed corn rootworm larvae . 
corn varieties resistant to glyphosate herbicides were first commercialized in 1996 by monsanto ,  and are known as `` roundup ready corn '' . 
gm sweet corn varieties include `` attribute '' ,  the brand name for insect-resistant sweet corn developed by syngenta and performance series™ insect-resistant sweet corn developed by monsanto . 
corn genetically modified to produce vip was first approved in the us in 2010.
us environmental protection agency  -lrb-  epa  -rrb-  regulations require farmers who plant bt corn to plant non-bt corn nearby  -lrb-  called a refuge  -rrb-  to provide a location to harbor vulnerable pests . 
unmodified crops received most of the economic benefits of bt corn in the us in 1996-2007, because of the overall reduction of pest populations . 
bt corn is a variant of maize that has been genetically altered to express one or more proteins from the bacterium `` bacillus thuringiensis '' including delta endotoxins . 
bsi is similar in nature to universal precautions ,  but goes further in isolating workers from pathogens ,  including substances now known to carry hiv . 
body substance isolation went further than universal precautions in isolating workers from pathogens ,  including substances now currently known to carry hiv . 
boudica has been known by several versions of her name . 
the location of boudica's defeat is unknown . 
it is agreed that boudica was of royal descent . 
an estimated 70,000–80,000 romans and british were then killed in the three cities by those led by boudica ,  many by torture . 
the crisis caused nero to consider withdrawing all roman forces from britain ,  but suetonius' victory over boudica confirmed roman control of the province . 
boudica or boudicca  -lrb-  also boadicea or boudicea  ,  and known in welsh as   -rrb-  was a queen of the british celtic iceni tribe who led an uprising against the occupying forces of the roman empire in ad 60 or 61, and died shortly after its failure ,  having supposedly poisoned herself . 
in ad 60 or 61, when the roman governor gaius suetonius paulinus was campaigning on the island of anglesey off the northwest coast of wales ,  boudica led the iceni ,  the trinovantes ,  and others in revolt . 
it was in the victorian era that boudica's fame took on legendary proportions as queen victoria came to be seen as boudica's `` namesake '' ,  their names being identical in meaning . 
boudica's husband ,  prasutagus ,  was the king of the iceni ,  a people who inhabited roughly what is now norfolk . 
the immediate cause of the rebellion was gross mistreatment by the romans . 
interest in these events was revived in the english renaissance and led to boudica's fame in the victorian era . 
boudica led a very large army of iceni ,  trinovantes ,  and others to defeat a detachment of  ,  and they burned and destroyed and  . 
boudica's husband ,  prasutagus ,  ruled as a nominally independent ally of rome ,  and left his kingdom jointly to his daughters and to the roman emperor in his will . 
the rebels' first target was  -lrb-  colchester  -rrb-  ,  the former trinovantian capital and ,  at that time ,  a roman  . 
borneo  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  is the third-largest island in the world and the largest in asia . 
some ballpoint pens use a hybrid ink formulation whose viscosity is lower than that of standard ballpoint ink ,  but greater than rollerball ink . 
ballpoint pens with erasable ink were pioneered by the paper mate pen company . 
bíró's patent ,  and other early patents on ballpoint pens often used the term `` ball-point fountain pen '' . 
sometimes ballpoint pens combine a ballpoint tip on one end and touchscreen stylus on the other . 
rollerball pens employ the same ballpoint mechanics ,  but with the use of water-based inks instead of oil-based inks . 
because of a ballpoint pen's reliance on gravity to coat the ball with ink ,  most cannot be used to write upside-down . 
paper mate pens ,  among the emerging ballpoint brands of the 1950s ,  bought the rights to distribute their own ballpoint pens in canada . 
ballpoint pens are produced in both disposable and refillable models . 
effects not generally associated with ballpoint pens can be achieved . 
using ballpoint pens to create artwork is not without limitations . 
ballpoint pen ink is normally a paste containing around 25 to 40 percent dye . 
pen manufacturers produce designer ballpoint pens for the high-end and collectors' markets . 
a ballpoint pen ,  also known as a biro or ball pen ,  is a pen that dispenses ink  -lrb-  usually in paste form  -rrb-  over a metal ball at its point ,  i . e . 
the sensitronic was followed by the e1000, e2000, e3000, e4000, e6000 and the e8000, which were computer systems supporting card reader/punches and a line printer . 
at the same time ,  burroughs was very much a competitor . 
in conjunction with these products ,  burroughs also manufactured an extensive range of cheque processing equipment ,  normally attached as terminals to a larger system such as a b2700 or b1700.
burroughs b205 hardware has appeared as props in many hollywood television and film productions from the late 1950s . 
the burroughs corporation was a major american manufacturer of business equipment . 
two basic categories of bricks are `` fired '' and `` non-fired '' bricks . 
bricks continued to be used during 2nd millennium bc at a site near xi'an . 
by the qujialing period  -lrb-  3300 bc  -rrb-  ,  fired bricks were being used to pave roads and as building foundations at chengtoushan . 
the earliest bricks were `` dried brick '' ,  meaning that they were formed from clay-bearing earth or mud and dried  -lrb-  usually in the sun  -rrb-  until they were strong enough for use . 
air-dried bricks ,  also known as mudbricks ,  have a history older than fired bricks ,  and have an additional ingredient of a mechanical binder such as straw . 
ceramic ,  or `` fired brick '' was used as early as 3000 bc in early indus valley cities like kalibangan . 
in an interview in 1939 bartók said
bartók reluctantly accepted this  . 
bartók had a diverse ancestry . 
bartók became first acquainted with debussy's music in 1907 and regarded his music highly . 
this sparked his lifelong dedication to folk music  . 
the cataloguing of bartók's works is somewhat complex . 
in 1907, bartók began teaching as a piano professor at the royal academy  . 
in 1936 he travelled to turkey to collect and study folk music . 
bartók and kodály quickly set about incorporating elements of such magyar peasant music into their compositions . 
later in life he would have this to say on the incorporation of folk and art music:
the viola concerto was revised and published in the 1990s by bartók's son ,  peter ; this version may be closer to what bartók intended  . 
in his search for new forms of tonality ,  bartók turned to hungarian folk music ,  as well as to other folk music of the carpathian basin and even of algeria and turkey; in so doing he became influential in that stream of modernism which exploited indigenous music and techniques  . 
the question is ,  what are the ways in which peasant music is taken over and becomes transmuted into modern music ? 
in 1909, at the age of 28, bartók married márta ziegler  -lrb-  1893–1967 -rrb- ,  aged 16.
the negative reception of his work led him to focus on folk music research after 1911 and abandon composition with the exception of folk music arrangements  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  . 
in 1911, bartók wrote what was to be his only opera ,  `` bluebeard's castle '' ,  dedicated to márta . 
milton babbitt ,  in his 1949 critique of bartók's string quartets ,  criticized bartók for using tonality and non tonal methods unique to each piece . 
in 1927–28, bartók wrote his third and fourth string quartets ,  after which his compositions demonstrated his mature style . 
after his disappointment over the fine arts commission competition ,  bartók wrote little for two or three years ,  preferring to concentrate on collecting and arranging folk music . 
in 1953, `` rock around the clock '' was recorded by haley . 
soon after ,  the band's name was revised to `` bill haley & his comets '' . 
during the 1940s haley was considered one of the top cowboy yodelers in america as `` silver yodeling bill haley '' . 
william john clifton haley  -lrb-  ; july 6, 1925 – february 9, 1981 -rrb- was an american rock and roll musician . 
bill haley was born july 6, 1925 in highland park ,  michigan ,  as william john clifton haley . 
this is a moderately-sized quail and is the only small galliform native to eastern north america . 
some captive bobwhite hybrids recorded are between blue quail  -lrb-  scaled quail  -rrb-  ,  gambel's quail ,  california quail ,  mountain quail and it has long been suggested that there are japanese quail hybrids being bred commercially; there is a distinct lack of photographic proof to substantiate this . 
the asian rain quail is smaller in size and has a black breast . 
like most game birds ,  the northern bobwhite is shy and elusive . 
the northern bobwhite ,  virginia quail or  -lrb-  in its home range  -rrb-  bobwhite quail  -lrb-  `` colinus virginianus ''  -rrb-  is a ground-dwelling bird native to canada ,  the united states ,  mexico ,  and the caribbean . 
the northern bobwhite has also been introduced to new zealand . 
there are 21 subspecies of northern bobwhite ,  many of which are hunted extensively as game birds . 
it would be fair to suggest most birds in the wild are no more than one generation from captive stock . 
however ,  it is extremely rare for bobwhites to hatch more than 2 successful nests within one nesting season . 
estrogen in women ,  has been linked to bipolar disorder . 
hospitalization may be required especially with the manic episodes present in bipolar i . 
a number of medications are used to treat bipolar disorder . 
studies using dsm criteria show that up to 1 percent of youth may have bipolar disorder . 
vmat2 binding was found to be increased in one study of people with bipolar mania . 
bipolar spectrum disorders includes: bipolar i disorder ,  bipolar ii disorder ,  cyclothymic disorder and cases where subthreshold symptoms are found to cause clinically significant impairment or distress . 
the lifetime risk of suicide has been estimated to be as high as 20 percent in those with bipolar disorder . 
one study also found that in 10 percent of bipolar cases ,  the onset of mania had happened after the patient had turned 50.
there is a relative lack of knowledge about bipolar disorder in late life . 
ect is also recommended for use in pregnant women with bipolar disorder . 
early onset bipolar disorder is more likely to manifest as depression rather than mania or hypomania . 
people with bipolar disorder often face problems with social stigma . 
in cases of comorbid adhd and bipolar ,  stimulants may help improve both conditions . 
there are several other mental disorders with symptoms similar to those seen in bipolar disorder . 
the diagnosis of childhood bipolar disorder is controversial ,  although it is not under discussion that the typical symptoms of bipolar disorder have negative consequences for minors suffering them . 
there are a number of pharmacological and psychotherapeutic techniques used to treat bipolar disorder . 
in bipolar disorder ,  mixed state is a condition during which symptoms of both mania and depression occur simultaneously . 
a more recent analysis of data from a second us national comorbidity survey found that 1 percent met lifetime prevalence criteria for bipolar i ,  1.1 percent for bipolar ii ,  and 2.4 percent for subthreshold symptoms . 
antidepressants are not recommended for use alone in the treatment of bipolar disorder and have not been found to be of any benefit over that found with mood stabilizers . 
the dsm and the icd characterize bipolar disorder as a spectrum of disorders occurring on a continuum . 
on the other hand ,  two polymorphisms in `` tph2 '' were identified as being associated with bipolar disorder . 
on the other hand ,  instruments for screening bipolar disorder tend to have lower sensitivity . 
the concept of the bipolar spectrum is similar to that of emil kraepelin's original concept of manic depressive illness . 
there has been debate regarding the causal relationship between usage of cannabis and bipolar disorder . 
bipolar disorder can cause suicidal ideation that leads to suicidal attempts . 
it is unclear if ketamine  -lrb-  a common general anaesthetic used in surgery  -rrb-  is useful in bipolar  . 
late adolescence and early adulthood are peak years for the onset of bipolar disorder . 
the dsm5 does not specifically have bipolar disorder in children and instead refers to it as disruptive mood dysregulation disorder . 
the risk of bipolar disorder is nearly ten-fold higher in first degree-relatives of those affected with bipolar disorder when compared to the general population; similarly ,  the risk of major depressive disorder is three times higher in relatives of those with bipolar disorder when compared to the general population . 
although there are no biological tests that are diagnostic of bipolar disorder ,  blood tests and/or imaging may be carried out to exclude medical illnesses with clinical presentations similar to that of bipolar disorder . 
several rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist ,  including the bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale ,  mood disorder questionnaire ,  the general behavior inventory and the hypomania checklist . 
antipsychotic medications are effective for short-term treatment of bipolar manic episodes and appear to be superior to lithium and anticonvulsants for this purpose . 
back in hollywood ,  lancaster did another film noir with siodmak ,  `` criss cross ''  -lrb-  1949 -rrb- . 
the american film institute ranks lancaster as #19 of the greatest male stars of classic hollywood cinema . 
lancaster's next film was for wallis ,  `` i walk alone ''  -lrb-  1947 -rrb- ,  a thriller co-starring scott and a young kirk douglas ,  who was also under contract to wallis . 
during the 1950s his production company hecht-hill-lancaster was highly successful ,  making films such as `` trapeze ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb- ,  `` sweet smell of success ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  `` run silent ,  run deep ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- ,  and `` separate tables ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- . 
his third film for wallis was an adaptation of `` sorry ,  wrong number ''  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- with barbara stanwyck . 
lancaster grew up in east harlem and spent much of his time on the streets ,  where he developed a great interest and skill in gymnastics while attending dewitt clinton high school ,  where he was a basketball star . 
for all practical purposes that was the baltic language until 1919.
over time the new people formed the baltic peoples and they spread in the area from the baltic sea in the west to the volga in the east . 
this is the first reference to `` the baltic or barbarian sea ,  a day's journey from hamburg . `` 
the balts or baltic peoples ,  defined as speakers of one of the baltic languages ,  a branch of the indo-european language family ,  are descended from a group of indo-european tribes who settled the area between the lower vistula and southeast shore of the baltic sea and upper daugava and dnieper rivers . 
over time ,  the area of baltic habitation shrank ,  due to assimilation by other groups ,  and invasions . 
the germans ,  however ,  preferred some form of `` east sea ''  -lrb-  in different languages  -rrb-  until after about 1600, when they began to use forms of `` baltic sea . `` 
timecode can also be superimposed on video using a dedicated overlay device ,  often called a `` window dub inserter '' . 
videotapes that are recorded with timecode numbers overlaid on the video are referred to as `` window dubs '' ,  named after the `` window '' that displays the burnt-in timecode on-screen . 
many professional vtrs can `` burn ''  -lrb-  overlay  -rrb-  the tape timecode onto one of their outputs . 
both are `` kets '' . 
in mathematics ,  the term `` vector '' is used to refer generally to any element of any vector space . 
the right part is called the ket ; it is a vector ,  typically represented as a column vector and written
which can also be represented as a matrix multiplication  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  a column vector times a row vector equals a matrix  -rrb-  . 
bra–ket notation is a notation for linear algebra ,  particularly focused on vectors ,  inner products ,  linear operators ,  hermitian conjugation ,  and the dual space ,  for both finite-dimensional and infinite-dimensional complex vector spaces . 
the scalar product or action is written as
blue eyes do not actually contain any blue pigment . 
in germany ,  about 75% have blue eyes . 
in fashion blue ,  particularly dark blue ,  was seen as a colour which was serious but not grim . 
other common blue pigments made from minerals are ultramarine  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  cerulean blue  -lrb-  primarily cobalt  -lrb-  ii  -rrb-  stanate:   -rrb-  ,  and prussian blue  -lrb-  milori blue: primarily   -rrb-  . 
blue is the colour of light between violet and green on the visible spectrum . 
blue had come from obscurity to become the royal colour . 
in the 20th century ,  it also became possible to own your own colour of blue . 
in heraldry ,  the word azure is used for blue . 
turner experimented with the new cobalt blue ,  and of the twenty colours most used by the impressionists ,  twelve were new and synthetic colours ,  including cobalt blue ,  ultramarine and cerulean blue . 
blue was also seen as a colour which was authoritative without being threatening . 
in egypt blue was associated with the sky and with divinity . 
pure blue ,  in the middle ,  has a wavelength of 470 nanometres . 
in russian and some other languages ,  there is no single word for blue ,  but rather different words for light blue  -lrb-  голубой ,  goluboy  -rrb-  and dark blue  -lrb-  синий ,  siniy  -rrb-  . 
the wearing of blue implied some dignity and some wealth . 
the baseball team the los angeles dodgers developed its own blue ,  called dodger blue ,  and several american universities invented new blues for their colours . 
blue dye was also used to colour the cloth in which mummies were wrapped . 
it was replaced with uniforms of a light blue-grey colour called horizon blue . 
another common blue pigment was smalt ,  which was made by grinding blue cobalt glass into a fine powder . 
in painting and traditional colour theory ,  blue is one of the three primary colours of pigments  -lrb-  red ,  yellow ,  blue  -rrb-  ,  which can be mixed to form a wide gamut of colours . 
he included indigo ,  the hue between blue and violet ,  as one of the separate colours ,  though today it is usually considered a hue of blue . 
 -lrb-  for more on this subject ,  see distinguishing blue from green in language  -rrb- 
once blue became the colour of the king ,  it also became the colour of the wealthy and powerful in europe . 
hues of blue include indigo and ultramarine ,  closer to violet; pure blue ,  without any mixture of other colours; cyan ,  which is midway in the spectrum between blue and green ,  and the other blue-greens turquoise ,  teal ,  and aquamarine . 
the traditional blue jacket with silver buttons of the london `` bobbie '' was not abandoned until the mid-1990s ,  when it was replaced by a light blue shirt and a jumper or sweater of the colour officially known as nato blue . 
linguistic research indicates that languages do not begin by having a word for the colour blue . 
most german soldiers wore dark blue uniforms until the first world war ,  with the exception of the bavarians ,  who wore light blue . 
blue continued to be the colour of the field uniform of the us army until 1902, and is still the colour of the dress uniform . 
the 20th century saw the invention of new ways of creating blue ,  such as chemiluminescence ,  making blue light through a chemical reaction . 
matisse wrote ,  `` a certain blue penetrates your soul . `` 
of the colours in the visible spectrum of light ,  blue has a very short wavelength ,  while red has the longest wavelength . 
blue is one of the three primary colours of pigments in painting and traditional colour theory ,  as well as in the rgb colour model . 
mctell was born in thomson ,  georgia . 
mctell died of a stroke in milledgeville ,  georgia ,  in 1959.
mctell married ruth kate williams ,  now better known as kate mctell ,  in 1934.
bob dylan paid tribute to mctell on at least four occasions . 
mctell's influence extended over a wide variety of artists ,  including the allman brothers band ,  who covered his `` statesboro blues , ``  and bob dylan ,  who paid tribute to him in his 1983 song `` blind willie mctell , ``  the refrain of which is `` and i know no one can sing the blues like blind willie mctell . `` 
on a physical level ,  bdsm is commonly misconceived to be `` all about pain '' . 
 ''bdsm '' is an umbrella term for certain kinds of erotic behavior between consenting adults . 
the initialism `` bdsm '' includes these psychological and physiological facets:
in general ,  bdsm play is usually structured such that it is possible for the consenting partner to withdraw his or her consent at any point during a scene; for example ,  by using a safeword that was agreed on in advance . 
this model for differentiating among these aspects of bdsm is increasingly used in literature today . 
there is a wide array of bdsm practitioners who take part in sessions for which they do not receive any personal gratification . 
it is mutual consent that makes a clear legal and ethical distinction between bdsm and such crimes as sexual assault or domestic violence . 
advocates of bdsm have sought to distinguish themselves from widely held notions of antiquated psychiatric theory by the adoption of the initialized term ,  `` bdsm '' as a distinction from the now common usage of those psychological terms ,  abbreviated as `` s&m '' . 
bdsm actions can often take place during a specific period of time agreed to by both parties ,  referred to as `` play '' ,  a `` scene '' ,  or a `` session '' . 
the bash command syntax is a superset of the bourne shell command syntax . 
bash is a posix-compliant shell ,  but with a number of extensions . 
bash supports here documents . 
elements of bash derive from the bourne shell and csh . 
bash's syntax has many extensions lacking in the bourne shell . 
a `` bashism '' is a portion of bash code that does not run properly on other unix shells . 
the bash shell has two modes of execution for commands: batch ,  and concurrent mode . 
it is also the default user shell in solaris 11.
bash is a unix shell and command language written by brian fox for the gnu project as a free software replacement for the bourne shell . 
but in posix mode ,  bash conforms with posix more closely . 
ground blizzard refers to a weather condition where loose snow or ice on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds . 
a blizzard also may be formed when a cold front and warm front mix together and a blizzard forms at the border line . 
the australia bureau of meteorology describes a blizzard as ,  `` violent and very cold wind which is laden with snow ,  some part ,  at least ,  of which has been raised from snow covered ground . `` 
while severe cold and large amounts of drifting snow may accompany blizzards ,  they are not required . 
the primary difference between a ground blizzard as opposed to a regular blizzard is that in a ground blizzard no precipitation is produced at the time ,  but rather all the precipitation is already present in the form of snow or ice at the surface . 
in the united states ,  the national weather service defines a blizzard as a severe snow storm characterized by strong winds causing blowing snow that results in low visibilities . 
the 1972 iran blizzard ,  which caused 4,000 reported deaths ,  was the deadliest blizzard in recorded history . 
the tan lines created by the wearing of a bikini while tanning are known as a bikini tan . 
string bikinis and other revealing clothes are common in surfing ,  though most surfing bikinis are more robust with more coverage than sunning bikinis . 
modern bikinis were first made of cotton and jersey . 
bikini waxing is the epilation of pubic hair beyond the bikini line by use of waxing . 
certain types of underwear are described as bikini underwear and designed for men and women . 
there is a range of distinct bikini styles available — string bikinis ,  monokinis  -lrb-  topless or top and bottom connected  -rrb-  ,  trikinis  -lrb-  three pieces instead of two  -rrb-  ,  tankinis  -lrb-  tank top ,  bikini bottom  -rrb-  ,  camikinis  -lrb-  camisole top ,  bikini bottom  -rrb-  ,  bandeaukini  -lrb-  bandeau top ,  bikini bottom  -rrb-  ,  skirtini  -lrb-  bikini top ,  skirt bottom  -rrb-  ,  `` granny bikini ''  -lrb-  bikini top ,  boy shorts bottom  -rrb-  ,  hikinis  -lrb-  also hipkini  -rrb-  ,  seekinis  -lrb-  transparent  -rrb-  ,  minikinis ,  microkinis ,  miniminis ,  slingshots  -lrb-  or suspender bikinis  -rrb-  ,  thong bottoms ,  tie-sides  -lrb-  a variety of string bikini  -rrb-  and teardrops . 
in 1994, the bikini became the official uniform of women's olympic beach volleyball . 
while the name `` bikini '' was at first applied only to beachwear that revealed the wearer's navel ,  today the fashion industry considers any two-piece swimsuit a bikini . 
women in athletics often wear bikinis of similar size as those worn in beach volleyball . 
similarly ,  a variety of men's and women's underwear types are described as bikini underwear . 
similarly ,  a variety of men's and women's underwear types are described as bikini underwear . 
however ,  the fivb's mandating of the bikini ran into problems . 
in 1950, elvira pagã walked at the rio carnival ,  brazil in a golden bikini ,  starting the bikini tradition of the carnival . 
the bikini remains preferred by most players and corporate sponsors . 
as popularity of bikinis grew ,  the acceptability of pubic hair diminished . 
her role wearing the leather bikini raised welch to a fashion icon and the photo of her in the bikini became a best-selling pinup poster . 
costumes are regulation `` posing trunks ''  -lrb-  bikini briefs  -rrb-  for both men and women . 
bikinis can and have been made out of almost every possible clothing material ,  and the fabrics and other materials used to make bikinis are an essential element of their design . 
due to its controversial and revealing design ,  the bikini was accepted very slowly by the public . 
by the early 2000s ,  bikinis had become a us$811 million business annually ,  and boosted spin-off services such as bikini waxing and sun tanning . 
bikinis have become a major component of marketing various women's sports . 
indian women wear bikinis when they vacation abroad or in goa without the family . 
one feminist viewpoint sees the bikini uniform as objectification of women athletes . 
male bikini tops also exist and are often used as visual gags . 
the maximum sales for bikinis happen in the winter ,  the honeymoon season . 
the minimalist bikini design became common in most western countries by the mid-1960s as both swimwear and underwear . 
soon after ,  louis réard created a competing two-piece swimsuit design ,  which he called the `` bikini '' . 
babur married several times . 
babur marched on to delhi via sirhind . 
babur was born in andijan ,  in the fergana valley ,  in modern uzbekistan . 
after losing samarkand for the third time ,  babur turned his attention to india . 
 ''baburnama '' was translated into persian during the rule of babur's grandson akbar . 
babur started for lahore ,  punjab ,  in 1524 but found that daulat khan lodi had been driven out by forces sent by ibrahim lodi . 
babur was the eldest son of umar sheikh mirza ,  governor of fergana and great grandson of timur the great . 
in november 1525 babur got news at peshawar that daulat khan lodi had switched sides ,  and he drove out ala-ud-din . 
in 1501, babur laid siege to samarkand once more ,  but was soon defeated by his most formidable rival ,  muhammad shaybani ,  khan of the uzbeks . 
babur's memoirs form the main source for details of his life . 
babur was born on 14 february 1483 in the city of andijan ,  andijan province ,  fergana valley ,  contemporary uzbekistan . 
in 1139, bernard assisted at the second council of the lateran . 
bernard was only nineteen years of age when his mother died . 
again reproaches arose against bernard and he was denounced ,  even in rome . 
in 1830 pope pius viii bestowed upon bernard the title `` doctor of the church '' . 
after the christian defeat at the siege of edessa ,  the pope commissioned bernard to preach the second crusade . 
in 1925 the kara-kirghiz autonomous oblast was established in russian turkestan ,  promoting pishpek to its capital . 
it lay within the general governorship of russian turkestan and its semirechye oblast . 
it was filmed in scotland and ireland . 
braveheart is a 1995 american epic war film directed by mel gibson . 
worldwide ,  the film grossed $210,409,945 and was the thirteenth highest-grossing film of 1995.
empire readers had previously voted `` braveheart '' the best film of 1995.
gibson and his production company ,  icon productions ,  had difficulty raising enough money for the film . 
at the 68th academy awards ,  the film was nominated for ten academy awards and won five: best picture ,  best director ,  best cinematography ,  best makeup ,  and best sound editing . 
according to gibson in an 2016 interview with `` collider '' ,  there is a four-hour version of the film and would be interested in reassembling it if both paramount and fox are interested . 
the film also has a score of 68 out of 100 on metacritic based on 20 critic reviews indicating `` generally favorable reviews '' . 
aldiss was associated with the british new wave of science fiction . 
brian wilson aldiss ,  obe  -lrb-  ; 18 august 1925 – 19 august 2017 -rrb- was an english writer and anthologies editor ,  best known for science fiction novels and short stories . 
about this time he also began to write science fiction for various magazines . 
aldiss invented a form of extremely short story called the `` mini-saga '' . 
his byline reads either brian w .  aldiss or simply brian aldiss ,  except for occasional pseudonyms during the mid-1960s . 
greatly influenced by science fiction pioneer h .  g .  wells ,  aldiss was a vice-president of the international h .  g .  wells society . 
at jutland ,  the germans ,  with a 99-strong fleet ,  sank of british ships ,  while a 151-strong british fleet sank of german ships . 
british ships adopted the german system . 
while the british had not destroyed the german fleet and had lost more ships than their enemy ,  the germans had retreated to harbour; at the end of the battle the british were in command of the area . 
fourteen british and eleven german ships sank ,  with a total of 9,823 casualties . 
germany's high seas fleet intended to lure out ,  trap ,  and destroy a portion of the grand fleet ,  as the german naval force was insufficient to openly engage the entire british fleet . 
according to scheer ,  the german naval strategy should be:
the german battle fleet was hampered by the slow speed and relatively poor armament of the six pre-dreadnoughts of ii squadron ,  which limited maximum fleet speed to  ,  compared to maximum british fleet speed of  . 
beatty had ordered his ships to engage in a line ,  one british ship engaging with one german and his flagship doubling on the german flagship  . 
the hope was that scheer would thus be able to ambush a section of the british fleet and destroy it . 
of the british destroyers ,   ,   ,   ,  and were lost during the night fighting . 
the total loss of life on both sides was 9,823 personnel: the british losses numbered 6,784 and the german 3,039.
british and german propellant charges differed in packaging ,  handling ,  and chemistry . 
while his battlecruisers drew the fire of the british fleet ,  scheer slipped away ,  laying smoke screens . 
the route of the british battlecruiser fleet took it through the patrol sector allocated to `` u-32 '' . 
british gunnery control systems ,  based on dreyer tables ,  were well in advance of the german ones ,  as demonstrated by the proportion of main calibre hits made on the german fleet . 
the german high seas fleet under scheer was also split into a main force and a separate reconnaissance force . 
the official british admiralty examination of the grand fleet's performance recognised two main problems:
the british admiralty's room 40 maintained direction finding and interception of german naval signals . 
german naval radio communications could therefore often be quickly deciphered ,  and the british admiralty usually knew about german activities . 
in january 1916, admiral von pohl ,  commander of the german fleet ,  fell ill . 
the german fleet would only sortie into the north sea thrice more ,  with a raid on 19 august ,  one in october 1916 and another in april 1918.
however ,  the germans had failed in their objective of destroying a substantial portion of the british fleet ,  and no progress had been made towards the goal of allowing the high seas fleet to operate in the atlantic ocean . 
jellicoe's grand fleet was split into two sections . 
jellicoe and his commanders did not understand that the furious gunfire and explosions to the north  -lrb-  seen and heard for hours by all the british battleships  -rrb-  indicated that the german heavy ships were breaking through the screen astern of the british fleet . 
just after midnight on 1 june ,  and other german battleships sank of the ill-fated 1st cruiser squadron ,  which had blundered into the german battle line . 
german armour-piercing shells were far more effective than the british ones ,  which often failed to penetrate heavy armour . 
the germans maintained a fleet of zeppelins that they used for aerial reconnaissance and occasional bombing raids . 
commodore goodenough's 2nd light cruiser squadron dodged the fire of german battleships for a second time to re-establish contact with the high seas fleet shortly after 19:00.
apart from these three abortive operations the high seas fleet – unwilling to risk another encounter with the british fleet – confined its activities to the baltic sea for the remainder of the war . 
throughout the battle ,  british ships experienced difficulties with communications ,  whereas the germans did not suffer such problems . 
a plan was devised to station submarines offshore from british naval bases ,  and then stage some action that would draw out the british ships to the waiting submarines . 
british reconnaissance was provided by the battlecruiser fleet under david beatty: six battlecruisers ,  four fast s ,  14 light cruisers and 27 destroyers . 
in this battle ,  when the fleet turned away from scheer's destroyer attack covering his retreat ,  not all the british ships had been affected ,  and could have continued to engage the enemy . 
simultaneously ,  the disabled british destroyer hms `` shark '' fought desperately against a group of four german torpedo boats and disabled with gunfire ,  but was eventually torpedoed and sunk at 19:02 by the german destroyer  . 
unfortunately for the german plan ,  the british had obtained a copy of the main german codebook from the light cruiser  ,  which had been boarded by the russian navy after the ship ran aground in russian territorial waters in 1914.
by the time jellicoe finally learned of scheer's whereabouts at 04:15, the german fleet was too far away to catch and it was clear that the battle could no longer be resumed . 
not knowing the germans' objective ,  jellicoe and his staff decided to position the fleet to head off any attempt by the germans to enter the north atlantic or the baltic through the skagerrak ,  by taking up a position off norway where they could potentially cut off any german raid into the shipping lanes of the atlantic or prevent the germans from heading into the baltic . 
it was hoped that ,  following a successful german submarine attack ,  fast british escorts ,  such as destroyers ,  would be tied down by anti-submarine operations . 
the germans had no equivalent to `` engadine '' and no heavier-than-air aircraft to operate with the fleet but had the imperial german naval airship service's force of rigid airships available to patrol the north sea . 
command and control of such huge fleets remained difficult . 
the german fleet assembled in the jade river and at wilhelmshaven and was instructed to raise steam and be ready for action from midnight on 28 may . 
most of the british losses in tonnage occurred in beatty's force . 
taken with a wireless intercept of more ships leaving scapa flow earlier in the night ,  they created the impression in the german high command that the british fleet ,  whatever it was doing ,  was split into separate sections moving apart ,  which was precisely as the germans wished to meet it . 
by 18:30, the main battle fleet action was joined for the first time ,  with jellicoe effectively `` crossing scheer's t '' . 
however ,  scheer seems to have quickly realised that further battles with a similar rate of attrition would exhaust the high seas fleet long before it reduced the grand fleet . 
seven minutes passed before the british managed to score their first hit . 
jellicoe was now aware that full fleet engagement was nearing ,  but had insufficient information on the position and course of the germans . 
in tactical terms ,  the high seas fleet had clearly inflicted significantly greater losses on the grand fleet than it had suffered itself at jutland and the germans never had any intention of attempting to hold the site of the battle ,  so some historians support the german claim of victory at jutland . 
at 15:48, with the opposing forces roughly parallel at  ,  with the british to the south-west of the germans  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  on the right side  -rrb-  ,  hipper opened fire ,  followed by the british ships as their guns came to bear upon targets  -lrb-  position 2 -rrb- . 
with 16 dreadnought-type battleships ,  compared with the royal navy's 28, the german high seas fleet stood little chance of winning a head-to-head clash . 
at 19:17, for the second time in less than an hour ,  scheer turned his outnumbered and out-gunned fleet to the west using the `` battle about turn ''  -lrb-  german: `` gefechtskehrtwendung ''  -rrb-  ,  but this time it was executed only with difficulty ,  as the high seas fleet's lead squadrons began to lose formation under concentrated gunfire . 
bambara does not inflect for gender . 
bambara uses many french loan words . 
bambara is spoken throughout mali as a lingua franca . 
 ''sabali '' is a bambara word that means patience . 
as there has never been snow in mali ,  there was no unique word in bambara to describe it . 
bambara uses postpositions in much the same manner as languages like english and french use prepositions . 
n'ko and the arabic script are still in use for bambara ,  although the latin script is much more common . 
bambara is one of several languages designated by mali as a national language . 
baku is the sole metropolis in azerbaijan . 
baku is divided into twelve administrative baku's  -lrb-  raions  -rrb-  and 48 townships . 
the old city of baku ,  also known as the walled city of baku ,  refers to the ancient baku settlement . 
the hamam tradition in baku is interesting . 
this is one of the earliest written evidences for baku . 
baku was the realm of the shirvanshahs during the 8th century ce . 
baku is situated on the western coast of caspian sea . 
some of the most influential baku newspapers include the daily `` azadliq '' ,  `` zaman ''  -lrb-  the time  -rrb-  ,  `` bakinskiy rabochiy ''  -lrb-  baku worker  -rrb-  ,  `` echo '' and the english-language `` baku today '' . 
the city walls of baku were also rebuilt and strengthened . 
the urban landscape of baku is shaped by many communities . 
today the vast majority of the population of baku are ethnic azerbaijanis  -lrb-  more than 90%  -rrb-  . 
on 28 april 1920, the 11th red army invaded baku and reinstalled the bolsheviks ,  making baku the capital of the azerbaijan soviet socialist republic . 
in 2003 baku additionally had 153,400 internally displaced persons and 93,400 refugees . 
teze bey is the most popular hamam  -lrb-  traditional bath  -rrb-  in baku . 
the music scene in baku can be traced back to ancient times and villages of baku ,  generally revered as the fountainhead of meykhana and mugham in the azerbaijan . 
international and local exhibitions are presented at the baku expo center . 
hamams play a very important role in the architectural appearance of baku . 
among baku's prominent annual fairs and festivals is baku international jazz festival ,  which features some of the world's most identifiable jazz names . 
baku has wildly varying architecture ,  ranging from the old city core to modern buildings and the spacious layout of baku port . 
shortly after this baku was proclaimed the new capital of the azerbaijan democratic republic . 
fifty years before the battle ,  baku produced half of the world's oil supply . 
the population increased again from about 13,000 in the 1860s to 112,000 in 1897 and 215,000 in 1913, making baku the largest city in the caucasus region . 
the balalaika `` family of instruments '' includes instruments of various sizes ,  from the highest-pitched to the lowest: the piccolo balalaika ,  prima balalaika ,  secunda balalaika ,  alto balalaika ,  bass balalaika ,  and contrabass balalaika . 
balalaikas are often used for russian folk music and dancing . 
the bank of china tower  -lrb-  abbreviated boc tower  -rrb-  is one of the most recognisable skyscrapers in central ,  hong kong . 
located at 1 garden road ,  the tower houses the headquarters of the bank of china  -lrb-  hong kong  -rrb-  limited . 
the building was initially built by the hong kong branch of the bank of china; its garden road entrance continues to display the name `` bank of china '' ,  rather than bochk . 
at the time ,  the use of asbestos was only partially banned in hong kong . 
ownership has since been transferred to bochk ,  although the bank of china has leased back several floors for use by its own operations in hong kong . 
it is now the fourth tallest skyscraper in hong kong ,  after international commerce centre ,  two international finance centre and central plaza . 
according to his cousin alec jefferson ,  quoted in the notes for `` blind lemon jefferson ,  classic sides '':
jefferson was born blind ,  near coutchman ,  texas . 
jefferson was reputedly unhappy with his royalties  -lrb-  although williams said that jefferson had a bank account containing as much as $1500 -rrb- . 
jefferson was buried at wortham negro cemetery  -lrb-  later wortham black cemetery  -rrb-  . 
jefferson's `` old-fashioned '' sound and confident musicianship made it easy to market him . 
jefferson's performances were distinctive because of his high-pitched voice and the originality of his guitar playing . 
jefferson had an intricate and fast style of guitar playing and a particularly high-pitched voice . 
in recent years ,  there have been changes in how the baku is depicted . 
in the 1910s ,  it was common for japanese children to keep a baku talisman at their bedside . 
teach's movements between late 1717 and early 1718 are not known . 
teach was one of those who came to enjoy the island's benefits . 
ocracoke inlet was teach's favourite anchorage . 
on 28 november teach's two ships attacked a french merchant vessel off the coast of saint vincent . 
various superstitious tales exist of teach's ghost . 
by may 1718, teach had awarded himself the rank of commodore and was at the height of his power . 
teach and several of his crew were killed by a small force of sailors led by lieutenant robert maynard . 
there teach disembarked the crew of the captured spanish sloop ,  before proceeding north to the port of charles town ,  south carolina ,  attacking three vessels along the way . 
teach may have recruited some of their slaves ,  but the remainder were left on the island and were later recaptured by the returning crew of `` mauvaise rencontre '' . 
teach may have used other aliases; on 30 november ,  the `` monserrat merchant '' encountered two ships and a sloop ,  commanded by a captain kentish and captain edwards  -lrb-  the latter a known alias of stede bonnet  -rrb-  . 
on 5 december 1717 teach stopped the merchant sloop `` margaret '' off the coast of crab island ,  near anguilla . 
maynard took command of the two armed sloops on 17 november . 
wragg agreed to teach's demands ,  and a mr .  marks and two pirates were given two days to collect the drugs . 
it was during this cruise with hornigold that the earliest known report of teach was made ,  in which he is recorded as a pirate in his own right ,  in command of a large crew . 
teach continued on to bath ,  where in june 1718—only days after bonnet had departed with his pardon—he and his much-reduced crew received their pardon from governor eden . 
teach's corpse was thrown into the inlet and his head was suspended from the bowsprit of maynard's sloop so that the reward could be collected . 
bugzilla 4.0 was released on february 15, 2011 and bugzilla 5.0 was released in july 2015.
bugzilla 2.0 was the result of that port to perl ,  and the first version was released to the public via anonymous cvs . 
modern variations include `` jazz ballads '' ,  `` pop ballads '' ,  ``  ''rock ballads '' ,  `` r&b ballads '' and `` power ballads '' . 
a ballad is a form of verse ,  often a narrative set to music . 
native american ballads are ballads that are native to north america  -lrb-  not to be confused with ballads performed by native americans  -rrb-  . 
the blues ballad has been seen as a fusion of anglo-american and afro-american styles of music from the 19th century . 
for the late 19th century the music publishing industry found a market for what are often termed sentimental ballads ,  and these are the origin of the modern use of the term 'ballad' to mean a slow love song . 
the satiric elements of ballad opera can be seen in some modern musicals such as `` chicago '' and `` cabaret '' . 
more recently scholars have pointed to the interchange of oral and written forms of the ballad . 
literary or lyrical ballads grew out of an increasing interest in the ballad form among social elites and intellectuals ,  particularly in the romantic movement from the later 18th century . 
broadside ballads  -lrb-  also known as 'broadsheet' ,  'stall' ,  'vulgar' or 'come all ye' ballads  -rrb-  were a product of the development of cheap print in the 16th century . 
the band returned to touring by the fall of 2009.
blue öyster cult also released a third live album `` extraterrestrial live '' . 
the band then released another live album ,  `` some enchanted evening ''  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- . 
the band also did a co-headlining tour with black sabbath in support of the album ,  calling the tour `` black and blue '' . 
the band was billed ,  for the only time ,  as `` the '' blue öyster cult on the cover and label of their second album ,  `` tyranny and mutation '' . 
after a few more temporary band names ,  including the santos sisters ,  the band settled on blue öyster cult in 1971  -lrb-  see below for its origin  -rrb-  . 
the album outsold its predecessor ,  a trend that would continue with their next few albums . 
it was followed by the studio album `` mirrors ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- . 
neither album sold well . 
birch produced the band's next album as well ,  `` fire of unknown origin ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- . 
their next album `` tyranny and mutation '' ,  released in 1973, was written while the band was on tour for their first lp . 
the band then went to the studio for the next album ,  `` the revölution by night ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- ,  with bruce fairbairn as producer . 
the band's first live album `` on your feet or on your knees ''  -lrb-  1975 -rrb- achieved greater success and went gold . 
the album marked a strong commercial resurgence for the band and achieved gold status ,  their first studio album since `` spectres '' to do so . 
heavy metal journalist martin popoff has stated that blue öyster cult is one of his favorite bands . 
the album featured bloom as their main lead singer ,  but roeser also sang lead on a few songs ,  a pattern of sharing lead vocals that has continued throughout the band's career . 
this album also featured the bloom ,  roeser ,  lainer ,  miranda ,  rondinelli lineup . 
the hook-and-cross logo was designed by bill gawlik in january 1972, and appears on all of the band's albums . 
the band toured in germany ,  after which bassist bouchard left ,  leaving only two members of the classic lineup ,  eric bloom and donald roeser—some referred to the band as `` two öyster cult '' during this period . 
columbia records was not interested in releasing the `` imaginos '' project as an albert bouchard solo album ,  so it was arranged for it to be released in 1988 by columbia as a blue öyster cult album ,  with some new lead vocal overdubs from bloom and roeser and lead guitar overdubs from roeser . 
under the 1989 agreement between the bpca and the city of new york ,  $600 million was transferred by the bpca to the city . 
additionally ,  a park restoration was completed in 2013.
in 1968, the new york state legislature created the battery park city authority  -lrb-  bpca  -rrb-  to oversee development . 
battery park city is a mainly residential planned community on the west side of the southern tip of the island of manhattan in new york city . 
by 2018, thirty residential buildings had been built in battery park city and no new construction was planned . 
battery park city is bounded on the east by west street ,  which separates the area from the financial district of lower manhattan . 
battery park city is owned and managed by the hugh l .  carey battery park city authority  -lrb-  bpca  -rrb-  ,  a class a new york state public-benefit corporation created by new york state in 1968 to redevelop outmoded and deteriorated piers ,  a project that has involved reclaiming the land ,  replanning the area and facilitating new construction of a mixed commercial and residential community . 
initially ,  in the 1980s ,  23 buildings were built in the area . 
the landscaping of the park space and later the winter garden was designed by m .  paul friedberg . 
the first residential building in battery park city ,  gateway plaza ,  was completed in 1983.  ,  the population of the area was 13,386.
charles j .  urstadt ,  the first chairman and ceo of the bpca ,  noted in an august 19, 2007 op-ed piece in the `` new york post '' that the aggregate figure of funds transferred to the city of new york is above $1.4 billion ,  with the bpca continuing to contribute $200 million a year . 
covering an area of  ,  the neighborhood had a population density of  . 
having a female partner increases the risk of bv by 60% . 
one of the main risks for developing bv is douching ,  which alters the vaginal microbiota and predisposes women to developing bv . 
it has been shown that hiv-infected women with bacterial vaginosis  -lrb-  bv  -rrb-  are more likely to transmit hiv to their sexual partners than those without bv . 
bv may increase the risk of infection with or reactivation of human papillomavirus  -lrb-  hpv  -rrb-  . 
bv may be transmitted via the perineal enteric bacteria from the microbiota of the female and male genitalia . 
but the cdc does not specifically identify bv as sexually transmitted infection . 
