 -lrb-  for a generalization of this argument to complex numbers ,  see `` proof of the triangle inequality for complex numbers '' below .   -rrb- 
from an analytic geometry point of view ,  the absolute value of a real number is that number's distance from zero along the real number line ,  and more generally the absolute value of the difference of two real numbers is the distance between them . 
generalisations of the absolute value for real numbers occur in a wide variety of mathematical settings . 
is equivalent to the definition above ,  and may be used as an alternative definition of the absolute value of real numbers . 
an analog signal uses some property of the medium to convey the signal's information . 
an analog signal is any continuous signal for which the time-varying feature  -lrb-  variable  -rrb-  of the signal is a representation of some other time varying quantity ,  i . e .  ,  `` analogous '' to another time varying signal . 
hercule poirot  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  is a fictional belgian detective ,  created by agatha christie . 
poirot also bears a striking resemblance to a .  e .  w .  mason's fictional detective ,  inspector hanaud of the french sûreté ,  who first appeared in the 1910 novel `` at the villa rose '' and predates the first poirot novel by ten years . 
a more obvious influence on the early poirot stories is that of arthur conan doyle . 
miss marple never married and has no close living relatives . 
her first appearance in a full-length novel was in `` the murder at the vicarage '' in 1930.
the character of jane marple in the first miss marple book ,  `` the murder at the vicarage '' ,  is markedly different from how she appears in later books . 
miss marple is a fictional character in agatha christie's crime novels and short stories . 
the lyrids meteor shower appears on april 16 – april 26 each year ,  with the peak generally occurring on april 22.
the anglo-saxons called april `` ēastre-monaþ '' . 
the virginids also shower at various dates in april . 
april is the fourth month of the year in the gregorian calendar ,  the fifth in the early julian ,  the first of four months to have a length of 30 days ,  and the second of five months to have a length of less than 31 days . 
certain meteor showers take place in august . 
august is the eighth month of the year in the julian and gregorian calendars ,  and the fifth of seven months to have a length of 31 days . 
aaron was 123 at the time of his death . 
aaron once again escaped any retribution . 
there are two accounts of the death of aaron in the torah . 
muhammad ,  in many of his sayings ,  speaks of aaron . 
aaron is also mentioned in the new testament of the bible . 
aaron  -lrb-  arabic: هارون ,  `` hārūn ''  -rrb-  is also mentioned in the quran as a prophet of god . 
each ward includes a quorum of one or more of each office of the aaronic priesthood . 
the quran then adds that moses here lamented the sins of israel ,  and said that he only had power over himself and aaron  -lrb-  quran 5: 25 -rrb- . 
during the journey in the wilderness ,  aaron was not always prominent or active . 
aaron is later commemorated in the quran as one who had a `` clear authority ''  -lrb-  quran 23: 45 -rrb- and one who was `` guided to the right path ''  -lrb-  quran 37: 118 -rrb- . 
according to islamic tradition ,  the tomb of aaron is located on `` jabal harun ''  -lrb-   ,  mountain of aaron  -rrb-  ,  near petra in jordan . 
the incident of the golden calf as it is narrated in the quran paints aaron in a positive light . 
aaron  -lrb-   or ; `` ahärôn ''  -rrb-  is a prophet ,  high priest ,  and the brother of moses in the abrahamic religions . 
in general ,  the hydroxyl group makes alcohols polar . 
in other less formal contexts ,  an alcohol is often called with the name of the corresponding alkyl group followed by the word `` alcohol '' ,  e . g .  ,  methyl alcohol ,  ethyl alcohol . 
all alcohols are mild skin irritants . 
the term `` ethanol '' was invented 1892, combining the word ethane with the `` -ol '' ending of `` alcohol '' . 
alcohols have a long history of myriad uses . 
simple alcohols are found widely in nature . 
the word `` alcohol '' is from the arabic `` kohl ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  a powder used as an eyeliner . 
the island's population has declined from around 6,000 before the great hunger . 
while a number of attempts at setting up small industrial units on the island have been made ,  the economy of the island is largely dependent on tourism . 
she died around 1603 and is buried in the o'malley family tomb on clare island . 
achillbeg  -lrb-  ``  '' ,  `` little achill ''  -rrb-  is a small island just off achill's southern tip . 
national schools closed down include dooega ns ,  crumpaun ns ,  ashleam ns . 
the historic valley house is located in the valley ,  near dugort in the north-east of achill island . 
achill island  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  in county mayo is the largest of the irish isles ,  and is situated off the west coast of ireland . 
the mountain slievemore  -lrb-  672 m  -rrb-  rises dramatically in the north of the island and the atlantic drive  -lrb-  along the south/west of the island  -rrb-  has some dramatic views . 
the table below reports data on achill island's population taken from `` discover the islands of ireland ''  -lrb-  alex ritsema ,  collins press ,  1999 -rrb- and the census of ireland . 
in the 17th and 18th centuries ,  there was much migration to achill from other parts of ireland ,  particularly ulster ,  due to the political and religious turmoil of the time . 
caisleán ghráinne ,  also known as kildownet castle ,  is a small tower house built in the early 1400s . 
each family would then have two or three small pieces of land scattered about the village ,  which they used to grow crops . 
the cliffs of croaghaun on the western end of the island are the third highest sea cliffs in europe but are inaccessible by road . 
many holiday homes have been built but many of these houses have been built in prominent scenic areas and have damaged traditional views of the island while lying empty for most of the year . 
achill irish still has many traces of ulster irish . 
ginsberg moved to san francisco during the 1950s . 
ginsberg was also involved with krishnaism . 
ginsberg and corso remained lifelong friends and collaborators . 
in 1957, ginsberg surprised the literary world by abandoning san francisco . 
also ,  in new york ,  ginsberg met gregory corso in the pony stable bar . 
the event was organized by ginsberg's friend ,  the filmmaker barbara rubin . 
ginsberg received a letter from his mother after her death responding to a copy of `` howl '' he had sent her . 
ginsberg referred to his parents ,  in a 1985 interview ,  as `` old-fashioned delicatessen philosophers '' . 
naomi ginsberg's mental illness often manifested as paranoid delusions . 
ginsberg was a pulitzer prize finalist in 1995 for his book `` cosmopolitan greetings: poems 1986–1992 '' . 
ginsberg first heard about the four noble truths and such sutras as the diamond sutra at this time . 
in may 1965, ginsberg arrived in london ,  and offered to read anywhere for free . 
irwin allen ginsberg  -lrb-  ; june 3, 1926 – april 5, 1997 -rrb- was an american poet ,  philosopher and writer . 
ginsberg was a practicing buddhist who studied eastern religious disciplines extensively . 
this poem is considered an autobiography of ginsberg up to 1955, and a brief history of the beat generation through its references to his relationship to other beat artists of that time . 
allen ginsberg called attention to the suffering of victims during the bangladesh liberation war in 1971.
in 1954, in san francisco ,  ginsberg met peter orlovsky  -lrb-  1933–2010 -rrb- ,  with whom he fell in love and who remained his lifelong partner . 
music and chanting were both important parts of ginsberg's live delivery during poetry readings . 
ginsberg claimed at one point that all of his work was an extended biography  -lrb-  like kerouac's `` duluoz legend ''  -rrb-  . 
ginsberg was born into a jewish family in newark ,  new jersey ,  and grew up in nearby paterson . 
given a field `` f '' ,  the assertion ``  ''f '' is algebraically closed '' is equivalent to other assertions:
in other words ,  there are elements `` k '' ,  `` x '' ,  `` x '' ,   .  .  .  ,  `` x '' of the field `` f '' such that `` p '' -lrb-  `` x ''  -rrb-  = `` k '' -lrb-  `` x '' − `` x ''  -rrb-  -lrb-  `` x '' − `` x ''  -rrb-  ···  -lrb-  `` x '' − `` x ''  -rrb-  . 
if `` f '' has this property ,  then clearly every non-constant polynomial in `` f '' ''x '' has some root in `` f ''; in other words ,  `` f '' is algebraically closed . 
every field `` f '' has some extension which is algebraically closed . 
the field `` f '' is algebraically closed if and only if ,  for each natural number `` n '' ,  every linear map from `` f '' into itself has some eigenvector . 
the field `` f '' is algebraically closed if and only if it has no proper algebraic extension . 
j .  shipman showed in 2007 that if every polynomial over `` f '' of prime degree has a root in `` f '' ,  then every non-constant polynomial has a root in `` f '' ,  thus `` f '' is algebraically closed . 
on the other hand ,  suppose that the property stated above holds for the field `` f '' . 
kasparov won the match 9–3.
the next major meeting of kasparov and karpov was the 1994 linares chess tournament . 
karpov remained a formidable opponent  -lrb-  and the world no . 
karpov then won the very next game to retain the title  -lrb-  +6−5=21 -rrb- . 
karpov refused to defend his title ,  and ceased to be fide world champion after the fide world chess championship 1999.
in their five world championship matches ,  karpov scored 19 wins ,  21 losses ,  and 104 draws in 144 games . 
in 1992, karpov lost a candidates match against nigel short . 
as a result ,  most chess professionals soon agreed that karpov was a legitimate world champion . 
in olympiad play ,  karpov lost only two games out of 68 played . 
karpov and kasparov played a mixed 12-game match from september 21–24, 2009, in valencia ,  spain . 
karpov handily won this match ,  11–7  -lrb-  +6−2=10 -rrb- ,  in what is remembered as the `` massacre in merano '' . 
karpov defended his fide title against gata kamsky  -lrb-  +6−3=9 -rrb- in 1996.
the aspect ratio of a geometric shape is the ratio of its sizes in different dimensions . 
touring car racing is a style of road racing that is run with production-derived race cars . 
from 1962, sports cars temporarily took a back seat to gt cars ,  with the fia replacing the world championship for sports cars with the international championship for gt manufacturers . 
most rounds have two races and are support races to the fia world touring car championship . 
the sports car club of america's speed world challenge touring car and gt championships are dominant in north america . 
all three le mans series run gt cars in addition to le mans prototypes; these cars have different restrictions than the fia gt cars . 
the major touring car championships conducted worldwide are the supercars championship  -lrb-  australia  -rrb-  ,  british touring car championship ,  deutsche tourenwagen masters  -lrb-  dtm  -rrb-  ,  and the world touring car championship . 
in north america ,  stock car racing is the most popular form of auto racing . 
the world's first all-female formula racing team was created in 2006.
the largest stock car racing governing body is nascar  -lrb-  national association for stock car auto racing  -rrb-  . 
in the uk ,  british stock car racing is also referred to as `` short circuit racing '' . 
auto racing  -lrb-  also known as car racing ,  motor racing ,  or automobile racing  -rrb-  is a motorsport involving the racing of automobiles for competition . 
uk stock car racing started in the 1950s and grew rapidly through the 1960s and 1970s . 
in sports car racing ,  production-derived versions of sports cars ,  also known as grand tourers  -lrb-  gts  -rrb-  ,  and purpose-built sports prototype cars compete within their respective classes on closed circuits . 
primarily raced on oval tracks ,  stock cars vaguely resemble production cars ,  but are in fact purpose-built racing machines that are built to tight specifications and ,  together with touring cars ,  also called silhouette racing cars . 
there are also single-chassis single seater formulae ,  such as formula renault and formula bmw ,  usually as `` feeder '' series for `` senior '' race formula  -lrb-  in the fashion of farm teams  -rrb-  . 
another prototype and gt racing championship exists in the united states; the grand-am ,  which began in 2000, sanctions its own endurance series ,  the rolex sports car series ,  which consists of slower and lower-cost race cars compared to lmp and fia gt cars . 
rallying at international and most national championship levels involves two classes of homologated road-legal production-based cars; group n production cars and more modified group a cars . 
the top series is the world rally championship  -lrb-  wrc  -rrb-  ,  first contested in 1973, but there are also regional championships ,  and many countries have their own national championships . 
turismo carretera  -lrb-  road racing ,  lit .  ,  road touring  -rrb-  is a popular touring car racing series in argentina ,  and the oldest car racing series still active in the world . 
the other major international single-seater racing series is formula 2  -lrb-  formerly known as formula 3000 and gp2 series  -rrb-  . 
there are also other stock car governing bodies ,  most notably the automobile racing club of america  -lrb-  arca  -rrb-  . 
the european touring car cup is a one-day event open to super 2000 specification touring cars from europe's many national championships . 
formula one is a european-based series that runs only street circuit and race tracks . 
rothbard says:
rothbard points out that corporations would exist in a free society as they are simply the pooling of capital . 
other interpretations conclude that banning such contracts would in itself be an unacceptably invasive interference in the right to contract . 
anarcho-capitalists see free market capitalism as the basis for a free and prosperous society . 
murray rothbard argues that the capitalist system of today is indeed not properly anarchistic because it so often colludes with the state . 
the bank robber would find insurance companies listing him as a very poor risk and other firms would be reluctant to enter into contracts with him . 
tucker thought that unregulated banking and money issuance would cause increases in the money supply so that interest rates would drop to zero or near to it . 
anarcho-capitalists tend to concur with free market environmentalists regarding the environmentally destructive tendencies of the state and other communal arrangements . 
however ,  rothbard also wrote a piece ,  published posthumously ,  entitled `` are libertarians 'anarchists' ? `` 
included in the right of contract is the right to contract oneself out for employment by others . 
some anarcho-capitalists ,  such as rothbard ,  accept the nonaggression axiom on an intrinsic moral or natural law basis . 
others ,  such as rothbard ,  do not express a preference either way but justify employment as a natural occurrence in a free market that is not immoral in any way . 
tucker said: `` defense is a service like any other service; that it is labor both useful and desired ,  and therefore an economic commodity subject to the law of supply and demand; that in a free market this commodity would be furnished at the cost of production; that ,  competition prevailing ,  patronage would go to those who furnished the best article at the lowest price; that the production and sale of this commodity are now monopolized by the state; and that the state ,  like almost all monopolists ,  charges exorbitant prices '' . 
this pact would recognize self-ownership ,  property ,  contracts ,  and tort law ,  in keeping with the universal non-aggression principle  -lrb-  nap  -rrb-  . 
although anarcho-capitalists assert a right to private property ,  some anarcho-capitalists also point out that common ,  i . e . 
however ,  while also supporting a natural prohibition on force and fraud ,  rothbard supports the establishment of a mutually agreed-upon centralized libertarian legal code which private courts would pledge to follow . 
anarcho-capitalism is a political philosophy and school of anarchist thought that advocates the elimination of centralized state dictum in favor of self-ownership ,  private property and free markets . 
rothbard was influenced by the work of the 19th-century american individualist anarchists  -lrb-  who were also influenced by classical liberalism  -rrb-  . 
by accepting an axiomatic definition of private property and property rights ,  anarcho-capitalists deny the legitimacy of a state on principle:
less is known about aristophanes than about his plays . 
the production process might also have influenced the views expressed in the plays . 
aristophanes won second prize at the city dionysia in 427 bc with his first play `` the banqueters ''  -lrb-  now lost  -rrb-  . 
aristophanes' second play ,  `` the babylonians ''  -lrb-  now lost  -rrb-  ,  was denounced by cleon as a slander against the athenian `` polis '' . 
in aristophanes' plays ,  the attic dialect is couched in verse and his plays can be appreciated for their poetic qualities . 
similarly ,  the hero in `` the acharnians '' complains about cleon `` dragging me into court '' over `` last year's play '' but here again it is not clear if this was said in reference to aristophanes or callistratus ,  either of whom might have been prosecuted by cleon . 
the language of aristophanes' plays ,  and in old comedy generally ,  was valued by ancient commentators as a model of the attic dialect . 
schweitzer's first language was the alsatian dialect of german language . 
schweitzer was born in kaysersberg ,  haute alsace ,  the son of louis schweitzer and adèle schillinger . 
his mother-tongue was alsatian ,  a germanic dialect ,  although he was also fluent in french and german . 
as a music scholar and organist ,  he studied the music of german composer johann sebastian bach and influenced the organ reform movement  -lrb-  `` orgelbewegung ''  -rrb-  . 
schweitzer also studied piano under isidor philipp ,  head of the piano department at the paris conservatory . 
schweitzer rapidly gained prominence as a musical scholar and organist ,  dedicated also to the rescue ,  restoration and study of historic pipe organs . 
the school originated in vienna in the austrian empire . 
while marginalism was generally influential ,  there was also a more specific school that began to coalesce around menger's work ,  which came to be known as the `` psychological school '' ,  `` vienna school '' ,  or `` austrian school '' . 
after the 1940s ,  austrian economics can be divided into two schools of economic thought and the school `` split '' to some degree in the late 20th century . 
chinese economist zhang weiying supports some austrian theories such as the austrian theory of the business cycle . 
however ,  both criticisms from hoppe and block to hayek seem to also apply to the founder of the austrian school carl menger . 
according to block ,  while hayek can be considered an austrian economist ,  his views on political theory clash with the libertarian political theory which block sees as an integral part of the austrian school . 
the austrian school owes its name to members of the german historical school of economics ,  who argued against the austrians during the late-19th century `` methodenstreit ''  -lrb-  `` methodology struggle ''  -rrb-  ,  in which the austrians defended the role of theory in economics as distinct from the study or compilation of historical circumstance . 
the austrian school originated in late-19th and early-20th century vienna with the work of carl menger ,  eugen böhm von bawerk ,  friedrich von wieser and others . 
the austrian school is a heterodox school of economic thought that is based on methodological individualism—the concept that social phenomena result from the motivations and actions of individuals . 
the austrian theory of capital and interest was first developed by eugen böhm von bawerk . 
abscesses may be classified as either `` skin abscesses '' or `` internal abscesses '' . 
skin abscesses are also called cutaneous or subcutaneous abscesses . 
if superficial ,  abscesses may be fluctuant when palpated . 
skin abscesses are common and have become more common in recent years . 
most people who have an uncomplicated skin abscess should not use antibiotics . 
like other abscesses ,  perianal abscesses may require prompt medical treatment ,  such as an incision and debridement or lancing . 
warm compresses and elevation of the limb may be beneficial for a skin abscess . 
the standard treatment for an uncomplicated skin or soft tissue abscess is opening and draining . 
internal abscesses rarely heal themselves ,  so prompt medical attention is indicated if such an abscess is suspected . 
an abscess can potentially be fatal depending on where it is located . 
if foreign objects are not the cause ,  incising and draining the abscess is standard treatment . 
even without treatment ,  skin abscesses rarely result in death ,  as they will naturally break through the skin . 
rarely parasites can cause abscesses and this is more common in the developing world . 
the area is typical for the north of jutland . 
the metropolitan area is a conurbation of the aalborg urban area in himmerland  -lrb-  102,312 -rrb- and the nørresundby urban area in vendsyssel  -lrb-  21,120 -rrb- . 
aalborg city has a total population at 123,432.
they also export . 
the port of aarhus is one of the largest industrial ports in northern europe with the largest container terminal in denmark ,  processing more than 50% of denmark's container traffic and accommodating the largest container vessels in the world . 
the largest research park in aarhus is incuba science park ,  focused on it and biomedical research ,  it is based on denmark's first research park ,  `` forskerpark aarhus ''  -lrb-  research park aarhus  -rrb-  ,  founded in 1986, which in 2007 merged with another research park to form incuba science park . 
libraries in denmark are also cultural and community centres . 
it was ranked the best hospital in denmark in 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014.
with the danish spelling reform of 1948, `` aa '' was changed to `` å '' . 
aarhus was the seat of aarhus county until the 2007 danish municipal reform ,  which substituted the danish counties with five regions and replaced aarhus county with central denmark region  -lrb-  `` region midtjylland ''  -rrb-  ,  seated in viborg . 
with over 1,700 students ,  the danish school of media and journalism  -lrb-  `` danmarks medie- og journalisthøjskole ''  -rrb-  is the country's largest and oldest school of journalism . 
on 1 january 2012, aarhus university  -lrb-  au  -rrb-  was the largest university in denmark by number of students enrolled . 
the bakken bears have most recently won the danish basketball championships in 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014.
aarhus is home to aarhus university hospital ,  one of six danish `` super hospitals '' officially established in 2007 when the regions reformed the danish healthcare sector . 
after an agreement on 1 july 2014, tvaarhus can be watched by 130,000 households in aarhus ,  making it the largest cable-transmitted local tv channel in denmark . 
the city has grown up around the main transport hubs ,  the river ,  the harbour and later the railway station ,  and as a result ,  the oldest parts of the city are also the most central and busiest today . 
 ''aa '' was also used by some major institutions between 1948-2011 as well ,  such as aarhus university  -lrb-  au  -rrb-  or the largest local sports club ,   -lrb-  agf  -rrb-  ,  who have never used the `` å ''-spelling . 
the aros art museum ,  the old town museum and tivoli friheden are among denmark's top tourist attractions . 
being the danish city with the youngest demographics ,  with 48,482 inhabitants aged under 18, aarhus is also the second fastest growing danish city ,  with an average growth of 4,500 people per annum since 2008.
aarhus has an unusually high number of parks and green spaces ,  134 of them ,  covering a total area of around  . 
marienlyst park is a relatively new park from 1988, situated in hasle out of the inner city and is less crowded ,  but it is the largest park in aarhus ,  including woodlands ,  large open grasslands and soccer fields . 
dsb has connections to destinations throughout denmark and also services to flensburg and hamburg in germany . 
today ,  aarhus is at the cultural and economic core of the region and the largest centre for trade ,  services and industry in jutland . 
founded in the early viking age ,  aarhus is one of the oldest cities in denmark ,  along with ribe and hedeby . 
some official authorities such as the danish language committee ,  publisher of the danish orthographic dictionary ,  still retain as the main name ,  providing as a new ,  second option ,  in brackets and some institutions are still using explicitly in their official name ,  such as the local newsmedia and the schools and for example . 
aarhus has a large variety of restaurants and eateries offering food from cultures all over the world ,  especially mediterranean and asian ,  but also international gourmet cuisine ,  traditional danish food and new nordic cuisine . 
aarhus has the highest ratio of immigrants in denmark ,  14.8% of the population ,  outside the copenhagen area . 
several of the construction projects are among the largest in europe ,  such as the new university hospital  -lrb-  dnu  -rrb-  and the harbourfront redevelopment . 
tivoli friheden  -lrb-  tivoli freedom  -rrb-  opened in 1903 and has since been the largest amusement park in the city and a tourist attraction . 
strictly speaking it is not a museum but an arts centre ,  and one of the oldest in europe ,  built and founded in 1917.
by far ,  the largest part of the present day city was built during and after the industrialization of the late 1800s and the most represented architectural styles are historicism and modernism ,  especially danish functionalism of which there are many fine examples . 
aarhus is the central city in business region aarhus and in the east jutland metropolitan area ,  which had a total population of 1.378 million in 2016.
aarhus is known for its musical history . 
aarhus is home to many annual cultural events and festivals ,  museums ,  theatres ,  and sport events of both national and international importance ,  and presents some of the largest cultural attractions in denmark . 
western winds from the atlantic and north sea are dominant resulting in more precipitation in western denmark . 
some 15,000 have come from within europe ,  with poland ,  germany ,  romania and norway being the largest contributors . 
the royal academy of music in aarhus  -lrb-  `` det jyske musikkonservatorium ''  -rrb-  is a conservatoire ,  established under the auspices of the danish ministry of culture in 1927.
on 9 april 1940, germany invaded denmark ,  occupying aarhus the following day and 5 years hence . 
aarhus letbane is an electric light rail or tram system that opened in december 2017, connecting the central station and the inner city with the university hospital in skejby and also replaced local railway services to grenaa and odder in late 2018.
several major companies have their headquarters in aarhus such as arla foods ,  one of the largest dairy groups in europe ,  dansk supermarked ,  denmark's largest retailer ,  jysk ,  a worldwide retailer specialising in household goods ,  bedding ,  furniture and interior design ,  vestas ,  one of the major wind turbine developers worldwide ,  and several leading retail companies . 
in 2016 some 1000 people worked at agro food park ,  spread across 50 companies and institutions and in august 2016 agro food park management published plans to expand facilities from 92.000 m to  . 
amateurism can be seen in both a negative and positive light . 
the line between `` amateur '' and `` professional '' has always been blurred in athletics with the central idea being that amateurs should not receive material reward for taking part in sports . 
an amateur ,  from french `` amateur '' `` lover of '' ,  is generally considered a person who pursues a particular activity or field of study independently from their source of income . 
lindbergh considered carrel his closest friend ,  and said he would preserve and promote carrel's ideals after his death . 
both lindbergh and carrel appeared on the cover of `` time '' magazine on june 13, 1938.
it is not certain how carrel obtained his anomalous results . 
carrel was also interested in the phenomenon of senescence ,  or aging . 
for much of his life ,  carrel and his wife spent their summers on the  ,  which they owned . 
in 1979, the lunar crater carrel was named after him as a tribute to his scientific breakthroughs . 
carrel was a young surgeon in 1894, when the french president sadi carnot was assassinated with a knife . 
 ''visit to a church or oratory on all souls day . 
at the reformation the celebration of all souls' day was fused with all saints' day in the church of england or ,  in the judgement of some ,  it was `` deservedly abrogated '' . 
the formal commemoration of the saints and martyrs  -lrb-  all saints' day  -rrb-  existed in the early christian church since its legalization ,  and alongside that developed a day for commemoration of all the dead  -lrb-  all souls' day  -rrb-  . 
in christianity ,  all souls' day or the commemoration of all the faithful departed ,  that is ,  of the souls of all christians who have died ,  follows all saints' day . 
in countries where all saints' day is not a holy day of obligation attendance at an evening mass of all saints on saturday 1 november satisfies the sunday obligation . 
the indulgence is plenary ,  under the usual conditions ,  each day from the first to the eighth of november; a partial indulgence is granted on any other days of the year . 
in the anglican communion ,  all souls' day is known liturgically as the commemoration of all faithful departed ,  and is an optional observance seen as `` an extension of all saints' day '' ,  the latter of which marks the second day of allhallowtide . 
known as the commemoration of all the faithful departed ,  in some countries the celebration is known as the `` day of the dead '' . 
patricia bays ,  with regard to the anglican view of all souls' day ,  wrote that:
beliefs and practices associated with all souls' day vary widely among christian churches and denominations . 
among eastern orthodox and byzantine  -lrb-  greek  -rrb-  catholics ,  there are several all souls' days during the year . 
france wrote about the affair in his 1901 novel `` monsieur bergeret '' . 
in 1876 he was appointed librarian for the french senate . 
he was awarded the nobel prize in 1921.
'  -lrb-  ; born ' ,  ; 16 april 1844 – 12 october 1924 -rrb- was a french poet ,  journalist ,  and successful novelist with several best-sellers . 
this index was abolished in 1966.
gide's biographer alan sheridan summed up gide's life as a writer and an intellectual:
but as gide's biographer alan sheridan points out ,  `` it is the fiction that lies at the summit of gide's work . `` 
wilde had the impression that he had introduced gide to homosexuality ,  but ,  in fact ,  gide had already discovered this on his own . 
gide's surviving letters run into the thousands . 
 ''gide's fame rested ultimately ,  of course ,  on his literary works . 
andré paul guillaume gide  -lrb-  ; 22 november 1869 – 19 february 1951 -rrb- was a french author and winner of the nobel prize in literature  -lrb-  in 1947 -rrb- . 
in 1893 and 1894, gide travelled in northern africa ,  and it was there that he came to accept his attraction to boys . 
in the 1920s ,  gide became an inspiration for writers such as albert camus and jean-paul sartre . 
gide was born in paris on 22 november 1869, into a middle-class protestant family . 
in the 1949 anthology `` the god that failed '' gide describes his early enthusiasm:
a formula for calculating the variance of an entire population of size `` n '' is:
this algorithm can easily be adapted to compute the variance of a finite population: simply divide by `` n '' instead of `` n '' − 1 on the last line . 
almond oil is obtained from the dried kernel of almonds . 
almond cookies ,  chinese almond biscuits ,  and italian `` ricciarelli '' are made with almonds . 
the bitter almond is slightly broader and shorter than the sweet almond and contains about 50% of the fixed oil that occurs in sweet almonds . 
the almond fruit measures long . 
the 'marcona' almond cultivar is recognizably different from other almonds and is marketed by name . 
almonds are susceptible to aflatoxin-producing molds . 
the almond  -lrb-  `` prunus dulcis '' ,  syn . 
the almond is highly revered in some cultures . 
due to the cyanide found in bitter almonds ,  modern syrups generally are produced only from sweet almonds . 
the usda approved a proposal by the almond board of california to pasteurize almonds sold to the public ,  after tracing cases of salmonellosis to almonds . 
almonds may cause allergy or intolerance . 
eating such almonds could result in vertigo and other typical bitter almond  -lrb-  cyanide  -rrb-  poisoning effects . 
almonds are a rich source of oil ,  with 50% of kernel dry mass as fat  -lrb-  whole almond nutrition table  -rrb-  . 
almonds were one of the earliest domesticated fruit trees due to `` the ability of the grower to raise attractive almonds from seed . 
almonds are 4% water ,  22% carbohydrates ,  21% protein ,  and 50% fat  -lrb-  table  -rrb-  . 
the value of total us exports of shelled almonds in 2016 was $3.2 billion . 
raw ,  untreated california almonds have not been available in the u . s .  since then . 
according to the 2011 census the estimated resident population of antigua and barbuda was 86,295.
antigua and barbuda is a member of the eastern caribbean supreme court . 
antigua and barbuda elects on national level a legislature . 
in addition to the eastern caribbean supreme court ,  antigua and barbuda has a magistrates' court ,  which deals with lesser civil and criminal cases . 
antigua is also a member of the caribbean court of justice ,  although it has not yet acceded to part iii of the 2001 agreement establishing a caribbean court of justice . 
observed from a non-religious perspective ''  -rrb-  in which he used the word `` semitismus '' interchangeably with the word `` judentum '' to denote both `` jewry ''  -lrb-  the jews as a collective  -rrb-  and `` jewishness ''  -lrb-  the quality of being jewish ,  or the jewish spirit  -rrb-  . 
his next pamphlet ,  `` der weg zum siege des germanenthums über das judenthum ''  -lrb-  `` the way to victory of the germanic spirit over the jewish spirit '' ,  1880 -rrb- ,  presents a development of marr's ideas further and may present the first published use of the german word ``  antisemitismus '' ,  `` antisemitism '' . 
this use of ``  '' was followed by a coining of ``  '' which was used to indicate opposition to the jews as a people and opposition to the jewish spirit ,  which marr interpreted as infiltrating german culture . 
the compound word `` antisemite '' was popularized in germany in 1879 as a scientific-sounding term for `` judenhass ''  -lrb-  `` jew-hatred ''  -rrb-  ,  and this has been its common use since then . 
in 2015, turkey and azerbaijan agreed to boost mutual trade to usd$15 billion by 2023.
in 2010, azerbaijan entered into the top eight biggest oil suppliers to eu countries with €9.46 billion . 
in 1992, azerbaijan became member of the economic cooperation organization . 
azerbaijan has an economy that has completed its post-soviet transition into a major oil based economy  -lrb-  with the completion of the baku-tbilisi-ceyhan pipeline  -rrb-  ,  from one where the state played the major role . 
about 15% of the land in azerbaijan is arable . 
azerbaijan is nearly surrounded by mountains . 
except for its eastern caspian shoreline and some areas bordering georgia and iran ,  azerbaijan is ringed by mountains . 
azerbaijan is situated in the caucasus region of eurasia . 
located in the region of the southern caucasus mountains ,  azerbaijan borders the caspian sea to the east ,  georgia and russia to the north ,  iran to the south ,  and armenia to the southwest and west . 
azerbaijan also maintains good relations with the european union ,  in the framework of its eastern european neighbourhood policy  -lrb-  `` see azerbaijan and the european union ''  -rrb-  . 
azerbaijan has not yet established diplomatic relations with:
the red army invaded azerbaijan on 28 april 1920.
the history of the modern azerbaijan army dates back to azerbaijan democratic republic in 1918, when the armed forces of azerbaijan republic were created on 26 june 1918.
azerbaijan approved the cfe flank agreement in may 1997.
during the cold war ,  azerbaijan had been the deployment area of units of the soviet 4th army whose principle formations in 1988 included four motor rifle divisions  -lrb-  23rd guards ,  60th ,  75th ,  and 295th  -rrb-  . 
the armed forces of azerbaijan  -lrb-    -rrb-  were re-established according to the law of the republic of azerbaijan on the armed forces from 9 october 1991.
however ,  in 2017 global firepower ranked azerbaijan 59th among 127 countries for its military strength . 
azerbaijan has acceded to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state . 
during world war ii ,  azerbaijan played a crucial role in the strategic energy policy of soviet union . 
armenia is a landlocked country in the transcaucasia region ,  between the black and caspian seas ,  bordered on the north and east by georgia and azerbaijan and on the south and west by iran and turkey . 
armenia is trying to address its environmental problems . 
after registering a steady increase during soviet period ,  the population of armenia declined from peak value 3.633 mln in 1992 to 2.986 mln in 2017.
during soviet period life expectancy was traditionally high in armenia and topped all other republics of ussr and most of countries in eastern europe in 1978-1980.
after double-digit  -lrb-  in pro mile  -rrb-  crude natural increase rates during 1982-1992 these did not exceed 5.5 after 1998.
the politics of armenia take place in the framework of the parliamentary representative democratic republic of armenia ,  whereby the president of armenia is the head of state and the prime minister of armenia the head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
armenia became independent from the transcaucasian democratic federative republic on 28 may 1918 as the first republic of armenia . 
the unicameral national assembly of armenia  -lrb-  `` azgayin zhoghov ''  -rrb-  is the legislative branch of the government of armenia . 
the united nations development programme in armenia views corruption in armenia as `` a serious challenge to its development . `` 
the tsfsr dissolved in 1936 and armenia became a constituent republic of the soviet union known as the armenian ssr . 
the observance of human rights in armenia is uneven and is marked by shortcomings . 
armenia's industry was especially dependent on the soviet military-industrial complex . 
armenia is ranked 20th freest among the 44 countries in the europe region . 
with 5.5% annual gdp growth rate in june 2017 armenia was 4th best economy in europe . 
armenia ranks 70th out of 140 economies according to the 2018 global competitiveness index . 
armenia ranks 47th out of 185 economies according to the 2018 ease of doing business index . 
in 1991, armenia's last year as a soviet republic ,  national income fell 12% from the previous year ,  while per capita gross national product was 4,920 rubles ,  only 68% of the soviet average . 
the economy of armenia grew by 7.5% in 2017 and reached a nominal gdp of $11.537 billion per annum ,  while per capita gdp grew by 10.1% and reached $3,880  -lrb-  from $3,525 in 2016 -rrb- . 
at that point ,  only american relief efforts saved armenia from total collapse . 
by 1926 agricultural production in armenia had reached nearly three-quarters of its prewar level . 
like other former states ,  armenia's economy suffers from the legacy of a centrally planned economy and the breakdown of former soviet trading patterns . 
for soviet transportation ,  see transport in the soviet union . 
russia is armenia's closest ally . 
being a landlocked country ,  armenia has no navy . 
the armenian air defense is the anti-aircraft branch of the armed forces of armenia . 
in june 2008, armenia sent 72 peacekeepers to kosovo for a total of 106 peacekeepers . 
as of 2015, armenia is involved in peacekeeping operations in kosovo ,  afghanistan and lebanon . 
armenia is not a significant exporter of conventional weapons ,  but it has provided support ,  including material ,  to the armenians of nagorno-karabakh during the nagorno-karabakh war . 
the commander-in-chief of the military is the prime minister of armenia ,  nikol pashinyan . 
armenia has plans to send one officer to mali as part of the peacekeeping mission there . 
greece is armenia's closest ally in nato and the two cooperate on multiple issues . 
armenia signed a military cooperation plan with lebanon on 27 november 2015.
according to unconfirmed reports by the azeri media ,  russia has supplied $1 billion worth of arms and ammunitions to armenia in 1996; and handed over an additional $800 million worth of arms to armenia in 2008-2009.
the u . s .  and other western governments have discussed efforts to establish effective nuclear export control systems with armenia and expressed satisfaction with armenia's full cooperation . 
in february 2003, armenia sent 34 peace keepers to kosovo where they became part of the greek contingent . 
a russian-armenian defense agreement signed in august 2010 extends russia's military presence in armenia till 2044 and commits russia to supplying armenia with modern and compatible weaponry and special military hardware at reduced prices . 
the armenian armed forces are headquartered in yerevan ,  where most of the general staff is based . 
the armed forces of armenia  -lrb-    -rrb-  comprise two services: the army ,  and the air force and air defense  -lrb-  a unified branch  -rrb-  . 
the current conflict over nagorno-karabakh began in 1988 when armenian demonstrations against azerbaijani rule broke out in nagorno–karabakh and later in armenia and the nagorno-karabakh supreme soviet voted to secede from azerbaijan and join armenia . 
in 2008, in what became known as the 2008 mardakert skirmishes ,  armenia forces and azerbaijan clashed over nagorno-karabakh . 
zohrab mnatsakanian serves as minister of foreign affairs of armenia . 
armenia is a member of more than 50 different international organizations ,  including the following:
armenia provides political ,  material and military support to the republic of artsakh in the longstanding nagorno-karabakh conflict against the azerbaijani government . 
the following statistics are from the world factbook ,  unless otherwise indicated . 
the government of american samoa is defined under the constitution of american samoa . 
the judiciary of american samoa is independent of the executive and the legislature ,  and the high court of american samoa is the highest court below the united states supreme court in american samoa ,  with the district courts below it . 
the secretary promulgated the constitution of american samoa which was approved by a constitutional convention of the people of american samoa and a majority of the voters of american samoa voting at the 1966 election ,  and came into effect in 1967.
tourism ,  a developing sector ,  may be held back by the current financial difficulties in east asia . 
his full name was abū ʿalī al-ḥusayn ibn ʿabd allāh ibn al-ḥasan ibn ʿalī ibn sīnā  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
at 22 years old ,  avicenna lost his father . 
carl benjamin boyer described avicenna's  -lrb-  `` ibn sīnā ''  -rrb-  theory on the rainbow as follows:
avicenna's theology on metaphysical issues  -lrb-  `` ilāhiyyāt ''  -rrb-  has been criticized by some islamic scholars ,  among them al-ghazali ,  ibn taymiyya ,  and ibn al-qayyim . 
in 1973, avicenna's `` canon of medicine '' was reprinted in new york . 
according to his autobiography ,  avicenna had memorised the entire quran by the age of 10.
an early formal system of temporal logic was studied by avicenna . 
it is unclear if buridan was influenced by avicenna ,  or by philoponus directly . 
avicenna  -lrb-  ; also ibn sīnā or abu ali sina; ;  – june 1037 -rrb- was a persian polymath who is regarded as one of the most significant physicians ,  astronomers ,  thinkers and writers of the islamic golden age . 
ibn sīnā wrote on earth sciences such as geology in `` the book of healing '' . 
however ,  avicenna posited the brain as the place where reason interacts with sensation . 
avicenna made an argument for the existence of god which would be known as the `` proof of the truthful ''  -lrb-  arabic: `` al-burhan al-siddiqin ''  -rrb-  . 
avicenna memorized the quran by the age of ten ,  and as an adult ,  he wrote five treatises commenting on suras from the quran . 
avicenna argued that the islamic prophets should be considered higher than philosophers . 
avicenna first began to learn the quran and literature in such a way that when he was ten years old he had essentially learned all of them . 
correspondence between ibn sina  -lrb-  with his student ahmad ibn 'ali al-ma'sumi  -rrb-  and al-biruni has survived in which they debated aristotelian natural philosophy and the peripatetic school . 
avicenna authored a five-volume medical encyclopedia: `` the canon of medicine ''  -lrb-  `` al-qanun fi't-tibb ''  -rrb-  . 
avicenna's first appointment was that of physician to the emir ,  nuh ii ,  who owed him his recovery from a dangerous illness  -lrb-  997 -rrb- . 
abu rayhan began by asking avicenna eighteen questions ,  ten of which were criticisms of aristotle's `` on the heavens '' . 
for example ,  avicenna considers the motion of the solar apogee ,  which ptolemy had taken to be fixed . 
the ashes is a test cricket series played between england and australia . 
england won only one test out of 15 from the end of the war until 1925.
england and australia were evenly matched until the outbreak of the first world war in 1914.
ivo bligh promised that on 1882–83 tour of australia ,  he would ,  as england's captain ,  `` recover those ashes '' . 
because the urn itself is so delicate ,  it has been allowed to travel to australia only twice . 
this match ended in a victory for australia . 
australia resoundingly won the 1897–98 series by 4–1 under the captaincy of harry trott . 
the first test match between england and australia was played in melbourne ,  australia ,  in 1877, though the ashes legend started later ,  after the ninth test ,  played in 1882.
there have been 70 ashes series: australia have won 33, england 32 and five series have been drawn . 
he made the following statement about how he was given the urn:
the 1894–95 series began in sensational fashion when england won the first test at sydney by just 10 runs having followed on . 
in a rain-hit series in 1926, england managed to eke out a 1–0 victory with a win in the final test at the oval . 
later in 1882, following the famous australian victory at the oval ,  bligh led an england team to australia ,  as he said ,  to `` recover those ashes '' . 
it won the first eight matches in succession including a 5–0 whitewash in 1920–1921 at the hands of warwick armstrong's team . 
an ashes series is traditionally of five tests ,  hosted in turn by england and australia at least once every two years . 
in 1896 england under the captaincy of w .  g .  grace won the series 2–1, and this marked the end of england's longest period of ashes dominance . 
the ruthless and belligerent armstrong led his team back to england in 1921 where his men lost only two games late in the tour to narrowly miss out of being the first team to complete a tour of england without defeat . 
as a formal concept ,  the method has variously been ascribed to alhazen ,  rené descartes  -lrb-  `` discourse on the method ''  -rrb-  ,  and galileo galilei . 
  -rrb-  ,  though `` analysis '' as a formal concept is a relatively recent development . 
doubleday initially served in coastal garrisons and then in the mexican–american war from 1846 to 1848 and the seminole wars from 1856 to 1858.
doubleday rode with lincoln on the train to gettysburg for the gettysburg address and col .  and mrs .  doubleday attended events with mr .  and mrs .  lincoln in washington . 
doubleday's indecision as a commander in the war resulted in his uncomplimentary nickname `` forty-eight hours . `` 
after the civil war ,  doubleday mustered out of the volunteer service on august 24, 1865, reverted to the rank of lieutenant colonel ,  and became the colonel of the 35th u . s .  infantry in september 1867.
he formally requested reinstatement as i corps commander ,  but meade refused ,  and doubleday left gettysburg on july 7 for washington . 
at all times ,  the carrier itself remains constant ,  and of greater power than the total sideband power . 
consider a carrier wave  -lrb-  sine wave  -rrb-  of frequency `` f '' and amplitude `` a '' given by:
another disadvantage of am is that it is inefficient in power usage; at least two-thirds of the power is concentrated in the carrier signal . 
therefore ,  the modulated signal has three components: the carrier wave `` c -lrb-  t  -rrb- ``  which is unchanged ,  and two pure sine waves  -lrb-  known as sidebands  -rrb-  with frequencies slightly above and below the carrier frequency `` f '' . 
at the receiving station ,  the message signal is extracted from the modulated carrier by demodulation . 
so if formula_8, carrier amplitude varies by 50% above  -lrb-  and below  -rrb-  its unmodulated level ,  as is shown in the first waveform ,  below . 
in electronics and telecommunications ,  modulation means varying some aspect of a continuous wave carrier signal with an information-bearing modulation waveform ,  such as an audio signal which represents sound ,  or a video signal which represents images . 
the am modulation index is a measure based on the ratio of the modulation excursions of the rf signal to the level of the unmodulated carrier . 
in modern radio systems ,  modulated signals are generated via digital signal processing  -lrb-  dsp  -rrb-  . 
this technique contrasts with frequency modulation ,  in which the frequency of the carrier signal is varied ,  and phase modulation ,  in which its phase is varied . 
john renshaw carson in 1915 did the first mathematical analysis of amplitude modulation ,  showing that a signal and carrier frequency combined in a nonlinear device would create two sidebands on either side of the carrier frequency ,  and passing the modulated signal through another nonlinear device would extract the original baseband signal . 
amplitude modulation  -lrb-  am  -rrb-  is a modulation technique used in electronic communication ,  most commonly for transmitting information via a radio carrier wave . 
in amplitude modulation ,  the amplitude or `` strength '' of the carrier oscillations is varied . 
