the tall tale is a fundamental element of american folk literature . 
native american cultures are numerous and diverse . 
betsy ross  -lrb-  january 1, 1752 – january 30, 1836 -rrb- is widely credited with making the first american flag . 
american folklore encompasses the folk traditions that have evolved on the north american continent since europeans arrived in the 16th century . 
christopher columbus ,  as a hero and symbol to the then immigrants ,  is an important figure in the pantheon of american myth . 
plymouth rock is the traditional site of disembarkation of william bradford and the mayflower pilgrims who founded plymouth colony in 1620, and an important symbol in american history . 
 ''alpha centauri '' also won several awards for best game of the year and best strategy game of the year . 
the game focuses on the leaders of seven factions ,  chosen by the player from the 14 possible leaders in `` alpha centauri '' and `` alien crossfire '' ,  and planet  -lrb-  voiced by alena kanka  -rrb-  . 
sid meier's alpha centauri is a 4x video game ,  considered a spiritual sequel to the `` civilization '' series . 
in `` alien crossfire '' ,  these factions compete along with the human factions for control over the destiny of planet . 
in 1993, abu sayyaf kidnapped an american bible translator . 
the 14k triad has militarily supported abu sayyaf . 
by 1995, abu sayyaf was active in large-scale bombings and attacks . 
abu sayyaf proclaimed themselves to be mujahideen and freedom fighters . 
on 24 june ,  abu sayyaf released filipina marites flor . 
the death of aburajik marked a turning point in abu sayyaf operations . 
on 15 november 2013, abu sayyaf militants raided a resort on the malaysian island of pom pom . 
crowdsourcing for ransom ,  and social media  -lrb-  such as ,  facebook and youtube  -rrb-  were used by abu sayyaf during negotiations . 
abu rami ,  an asg spokesman ,  claimed $638,000 was paid as ransom . 
abu sayyaf has carried out numerous bombings ,  kidnappings ,  assassinations ,  and extortion activities . 
between march 2016 - july 2017, the majority of abu sayyaf kidnap for ransom operations shifted to the high seas . 
abu sayyaf conducted a second raid on the island of pandanan near sipadan on 10 september and seized three more malaysians . 
the chart below collects events that abu sayyaf received ransoms or payments that are euphemistically called `` board and lodgings '' . 
al-qaeda-affiliated terrorist ramzi yousef operated in the philippines in the mid-1990s and trained abu sayyaf soldiers . 
abs-cbn's `` newsbreak '' reported that abu sayyaf abducted at least 20 journalists from 2000 - 2008  -lrb-  mostly foreign journalists  -rrb-  . 
on 15 april ,  four indonesian sailors were kidnapped when two indonesian tugboats from cebu ,  `` henry '' and `` cristi '' ,  were attacked by abu sayyaf militants . 
on 2 april 2014, a kidnap gang believed to originate from abu sayyaf militants raided singamata reef resort off semporna . 
on 6 may ,  five abu sayyaf gunmen raided a malaysian fish farm on baik island sabah ,  kidnapped the fish farm manager and took him to jolo island . 
as of mid-2005, jemaah islamiyah personnel reportedly had trained about 60 abu sayyaf cadres in bomb assembling and detonations . 
in a video published in the summer of 2014, senior abu sayyaf leader isnilon hapilon and other masked men swore their allegiance or `` bay'ah '' to abu bakr al-baghdadi ,  the `` islamic state ''  -lrb-  isil  -rrb-  caliph . 
on 15 january 2009, abu sayyaf kidnapped international committee of the red cross  -lrb-  icrc  -rrb-  delegates in patikul ,  sulu province ,  philippines . 
on 16 june ,  two gunmen believed to be from abu sayyaf kidnapped a chinese fish farm manager and one filipino worker in kampung air sapang . 
on 15 may 2015, four armed abu sayyaf members kidnapped two malaysian nationals from ocean king restaurant in an upscale resort in sandakan ,  sabah and took them to parang ,  sulu . 
many commentators have been critical of schilling ,  who claims to have walked willingly into the camp after he was invited by his wife's cousin ,  a member of abu sayyaf . 
on 3 may 2000, abu sayyaf guerillas occupied the malaysian dive resort island sipadan and took 21 hostages ,  including 10 tourists and 11 resort workers – 19 foreign nationals in total . 
schilling was one of more than forty hostages taken by abu sayyaf in 2000, including twenty-one tourists and workers seized in a raid on sipadan diving resort in neighbouring malaysia . 
in february 2018, abu sayyaf sub-commander nurhassan jamiri was reported by malaysia regional intelligence sources as one of three gunmen killed in a gunfight with police in sabah . 
the armenian language  -lrb-   ``  ''  -rrb-  is an indo-european language spoken primarily by armenians . 
modern armenian has six monophthongs . 
the armenian soviet socialist republic  -lrb-  1920–1990 -rrb- used eastern armenian as its official language ,  whereas the diaspora created after the armenian genocide preserved the western armenian dialect . 
armenian is written in its own writing system ,  the armenian alphabet ,  introduced in 405 ad by mesrop mashtots . 
in the 19th century ,  the traditional armenian homeland was once again divided . 
armenian is an independent branch of the indo-european languages . 
there are two standardized modern literary forms ,  eastern armenian and western armenian ,  with which most contemporary dialects are mutually intelligible . 
the first armenian periodical ,  `` azdarar '' ,  was published in `` grabar '' in 1794.
graeco-aryan has comparatively wide support among indo-europeanists for the indo-european homeland to be located in the armenian highlands ,  the `` armenian hypothesis '' . 
the following table lists the eastern armenian consonantal system . 
the sounds that are heard in everyday life are not characterized by a single frequency . 
fourier analysis is the technique that is used to determine these exact timbre parameters from an overall sound signal; conversely ,  the resulting set of frequencies and amplitudes is called the fourier series of the original sound signal . 
in the case of a musical note ,  the lowest frequency of its timbre is designated as the sound's fundamental frequency . 
as `` runways at sea '' ,  aircraft carriers have a flat-top flight deck ,  which launches and recovers aircraft . 
the top of the carrier is the flight deck ,  where aircraft are launched and recovered . 
india started the construction of a 40,000-tonne ,  aircraft carrier in 2009.
she will be the first chinese aircraft carrier to use catapult take off system . 
as of  ,  there are 41 active aircraft carriers in the world operated by thirteen navies . 
 ''light aircraft carriers '' were fast enough to operate with the main fleet but of smaller size with reduced aircraft capacity . 
aircraft carriers today are usually divided into the following four categories based on the way that aircraft take off and land:
on the recovery side of the flight deck ,  the adaptation to the aircraft loadout is mirrored . 
also known as `` commando carriers '' or `` helicopter carriers '' ,  many have the capability to operate vstol aircraft . 
an aircraft carrier is a warship that serves as a seagoing airbase ,  equipped with a full-length flight deck and facilities for carrying ,  arming ,  deploying ,  and recovering aircraft . 
world war ii in the pacific ocean involved clashes between aircraft carrier fleets . 
the form of launch assistance a carrier provides is strongly related to the types of aircraft embarked and the design of the carrier itself . 
several systems of identification symbol for aircraft carriers and related types of ship have been used . 
1 catobar carrier: is a 42,000 tonne nuclear-powered aircraft carrier ,  commissioned in 2001 and is the flagship of the french navy  -lrb-  marine nationale  -rrb-  . 
the soviet aircraft carrier `` admiral kusnetsov '' was termed a `` heavy aircraft-carrying cruiser '' . 
to facilitate working on the flight deck of a u . s .  aircraft carrier ,  the sailors wear colored shirts that designate their responsibilities . 
a second carrier was launched on 26 april 2017.
egypt is the first and so far only country in africa or the middle east to possess an aircraft carrier . 
there is no single definition of an `` aircraft carrier '' ,  and modern navies use several variants of the type . 
the apicomplexa are unicellular and spore-forming . 
diseases caused by apicomplexa include:
besides the conserved apical complex ,  apicomplexa are morphologically diverse . 
most regions of argentina are known for their beef-oriented diet . 
all of these cultures influenced the dishes of argentina . 
a traditional drink of argentina is an infusion called mate  -lrb-  in spanish ,  `` mate '' ,  with the accent on the first syllable mah-teh  -rrb-  . 
the principal product of this region is certainly yerba mate . 
italian staples ,  such as pizza and pasta ,  are eaten as commonly as beef . 
among these ,  `` mate '' has long been the most widely enjoyed; in 2006, over 700,000 metric tons were harvested in argentina ,  mostly for domestic consumption . 
the people of argentina greatly enjoy `` helado ''  -lrb-  ice creams of italian lineage or sorbets spanish lineage  -rrb-  . 
argentina can also be conceived as a great industry engaged in the production of dried fruits ,  olives ,  all types of oils and spices . 
 ''sandwiches de miga '' are delicate sandwiches made with crustless buttered white bread ,  very thinly sliced cured meat ,  cheese ,  and lettuce . 
viennese and german cuisine and pastries are also typically associated with this region . 
in spanish colonial times a type of sorbet was made from hail or snow . 
although asado is eaten all over the country ,  its origin may be traced back to the pampas . 
english cultural influence  -lrb-  reinforced at the end of the 19th century and beginnings of the 20th by british contacts with the far east  -rrb-  has also made the consumption of tea very common . 
the most common sandwiches are those made of `` milanesa '' ,  baked ham and cheese ,  'pan de miga '' ,  toast ,  `` pebetes '' ,  `` panchos ''  -lrb-  hot dogs  -rrb-  ,  `` choripanes '' ,  `` morcipanes '' ,  etc . 
they are often purchased from entrepreneurial home cooks and may be eaten for a light evening meal . 
vegetables and salads are also eaten by argentines; tomatoes ,  onions ,  lettuce ,  eggplants ,  squashes ,  and zucchini are common side dishes . 
though wine  -lrb-  `` vino ''  -rrb-  has traditionally been the most popular alcoholic beverage in argentina ,  beer  -lrb-  `` cerveza ''; the italian `` birra '' is frequently used  -rrb-  in recent decades has competed with wine in popularity . 
breaded and fried meats — `` milanesas '' — are used as snacks ,  in sandwiches ,  or eaten warm with mashed potatoes — `` purée '' . 
breakfast typically is small and consists of coffee  -lrb-  or mate  -rrb-  and pastry . 
this is fallacious because a disposition to make a certain argument does not make the argument invalid; this overlaps with the genetic fallacy  -lrb-  an argument that a claim is incorrect due to its source  -rrb-  . 
 ''ad hominem tu quoque ''  -lrb-  literally: `` you also ''  -rrb-  refers to a claim that the source making the argument has spoken or acted in a way inconsistent with the argument . 
ad hominem  -lrb-  latin for `` to the person ''  -rrb-  ,  short for argumentum ad hominem ,  is a fallacious argumentative strategy whereby genuine discussion of the topic at hand is avoided by instead attacking the character ,  motive ,  or other attribute of the person making the argument ,  or persons associated with the argument ,  rather than attacking the substance of the argument itself . 
when not otherwise specified ,  the function describing the performance of an algorithm is usually an upper bound ,  determined from the worst case inputs to the algorithm . 
in computer science ,  the analysis of algorithms is the determination of the computational complexity of algorithms ,  that is the amount of time ,  storage and/or other resources necessary to execute them . 
ælle was the first king recorded by the 8th century chronicler bede to have held `` imperium '' ,  or overlordship ,  over other anglo-saxon kingdoms . 
the `` chronicle '' has three entries for ælle ,  from 477 to 491, as follows:
ælle  -lrb-  also aelle or ella  -rrb-  is recorded in early sources as the first king of the south saxons ,  reigning in what is now called sussex ,  england ,  from 477 to perhaps as late as 514.
the other information bede gives is that ælle was not a christian—bede mentions a later king as `` the first to enter the kingdom of heaven '' . 
in may 2009, infogrames entertainment sa ,  the parent company of atari ,  and atari interactive ,  announced it would change its name to atari sa . 
the atari logo was designed by george opperman who was atari's first in-house graphic designer . 
in 1989, atari released the atari lynx ,  a handheld console with color graphics ,  to much fanfare . 
on september 26, 2017, atari sent out a press release about the new `` atari vcs '' ,  which confirmed more details about the console . 
atari rebounded ,  earning a $25 million profit that year . 
atari sa  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a french corporate and brand name owned by several entities since its inception in 1972, currently by atari interactive ,  a subsidiary of the french publisher atari ,  sa . 
in 1998, hasbro interactive acquired all atari corporation related properties from jts ,  creating a new subsidiary ,  atari interactive . 
in october 2001, infogrames  -lrb-  now atari sa  -rrb-  announced that it was `` reinventing '' the atari brand with the launch of three new games featuring a prominent atari branding on their boxarts: `` splashdown '' ,  `` mx rider '' and `` transworld surf '' . 
by 1996, a series of successful lawsuits had left atari with millions of dollars in the bank ,  but the failure of the lynx and jaguar left atari without a product to sell . 
atari eventually lost the case when it was rejected by a us district court in 1992.
another iesa division ,  infogrames inc .   -lrb-  formerly gt interactive  -rrb-  ,  changed its name to atari inc .  the same year ,  licensing the atari name and logo from its fellow subsidiary . 
the term `` afghani '' refers to the unit of afghan currency . 
the afghani currency unit was created in 1925.
acadia college awarded its first degrees in 1843 and became acadia university in 1891, established by the acadia university act . 
acadia began as an extension of horton academy  -lrb-  1828 -rrb- ,  which was founded in horton ,  nova scotia ,  by baptists from nova scotia and queen's college  -lrb-  1838 -rrb- . 
the enabling legislation consists of acadia university act and the amended acadia university act 2000.
like the classical guitar ,  it is often referred to simply as an acoustic guitar . 
the most common type is often called a flat top guitar ,  to distinguish it from the more specialized archtop guitar and other variations . 
the steel-string acoustic guitar is a modern form of guitar that descends from the nylon-strung classical guitar ,  but is strung with steel strings for a brighter ,  louder sound . 
from the 1960s through the 1980s ,  `` by far the most significant developments in the design and construction of acoustic guitars '' were made by the ovation guitar company . 
steel-string guitars vary in construction and materials . 
there was no john xx; this is why gibbon refers to the antipope john as john xxii . 
he should not be confused with pope john xxiii of the twentieth century . 
pope martin v protested in vain against the inscription on the sarcophagus: `` john the former pope '' . 
the council resolved that all three popes should abdicate and a new pope be elected . 
martin v was elected as new pope in 1417.
baldassarre cossa  -lrb-  c .  1370 – 22 december 1419 -rrb- was pisan antipope john xxiii  -lrb-  1410–1415 -rrb- during the western schism . 
salieri's first great success was in the realm of serious opera . 
salieri's next two operas were not particular or lasting successes . 
salieri and gassmann arrived in vienna on 15 june 1766.
salieri was a pivotal figure in the development of late 18th-century opera . 
in 2003, mezzo-soprano cecilia bartoli released `` the salieri album '' ,  a cd with 13 arias from salieri's operas ,  most of which had never been recorded before . 
appointed the director of the italian opera by the habsburg court ,  a post he held from 1774 until 1792, salieri dominated italian-language opera in vienna . 
in 1788 salieri returned to vienna ,  where he remained for the rest of his life . 
these works are among the most frequently recorded of salieri's compositions . 
salieri's earliest surviving work is a mass in c major . 
salieri has even begun to attract some attention from hollywood . 
the majority of salieri's modest number of instrumental works also date from this time . 
the modest success of this opera launched salieri's 34-year operatic career as a composer of over 35 original dramas . 
in november 2009, `` il mondo alla rovescia '' was given its first staging in modern times at the teatro salieri in legnago in a co-production between the fondazione culturale antonio salieri and the fondazione arena di verona for the salieri opera festival . 
during his time in vienna ,  salieri acquired great prestige as a composer and conductor ,  particularly of opera ,  but also of chamber and sacred music . 
during the next three years salieri was primarily concerned with rehearsing and conducting the italian opera company in vienna and with teaching . 
salieri traveled abroad to fulfill an important commission . 
the ends of the tunnel were sealed in the fall of 1861.
the cobble hill tunnel  -lrb-  also known as the atlantic avenue tunnel  -rrb-  is an abandoned long island rail road  -lrb-  lirr  -rrb-  tunnel beneath atlantic avenue in brooklyn ,  new york city ,  running through the neighborhoods of downtown brooklyn and cobble hill . 
the cobble hill tunnel was part of the first rail link between new york city and boston ,  massachusetts . 
the similar murray hill tunnel on the new york and harlem railroad was built as an open cut around 1836, roofed over around the 1850s ,  and is now in use for automobile traffic . 
the annapolis valley is a valley and region in the canadian province of nova scotia . 
communities in the valley from west to east include:
the annapolis valley regional library was established in 1949.
also flowing east ,  in two smaller valleys north of the cornwallis river ,  are the canard river and the habitant river ,  both of which also flow into the minas basin . 
within the valley itself are two `` major '' rivers ,  the annapolis river which flows west from the caribou bog in the central part of the valley into the annapolis basin ,  and the cornwallis river which flows east from caribou bog into the minas basin . 
an analgesic or painkiller is any member of the group of drugs used to achieve analgesia ,  relief from pain . 
analgesic choice is also determined by the type of pain: for neuropathic pain ,  traditional analgesics are less effective ,  and there is often benefit from classes of drugs that are not normally considered analgesics ,  such as tricyclic antidepressants and anticonvulsants . 
abiotic stress comes in many forms . 
research has also shown that abiotic stressors are at their most harmful when they occur together ,  in combinations of abiotic stress factors . 
the form used for the direct object  -lrb-  `` him '' ,  `` virum '' ,  `` feminam ''  -rrb-  is known as the `` accusative case '' ,  while the form used for the subject  -lrb-  `` he '' ,  `` vir '' ,  `` femina ''  -rrb-  is known as the nominative case . 
the accusative case  -lrb-  abbreviated   -rrb-  of a noun is the grammatical case used to mark the direct object of a transitive verb . 
in latin ,  nouns ,  adjectives ,  or pronouns in the accusative case  -lrb-  `` accusativus ''  -rrb-  can be used
it spoke of episcopal succession as something that churches that do not have bishops can see `` as a sign ,  though not a guarantee ,  of the continuity and unity of the church '' and that all churches can see `` as a sign of the apostolicity of the life of the whole church '' . 
the lutheran church of finland was then one with the church of sweden and so holds the same view regarding the see of åbo/turku . 
churches that claim some form of episcopal apostolic succession ,  dating back to the apostles or to leaders from the apostolic era ,  include the roman catholic church ,  the eastern orthodox church ,  the oriental orthodox churches ,  the church of the east ,  the anglican communion ,  some lutheran churches  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  ,  the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ,  and other smaller bodies incorporating the term `` catholic '' . 
this apostolic succession is recognized by unity catholic church ,  an independent catholic church . 
let no man do anything connected with the church without the bishop . `` 
the church of north india ,  church of pakistan and church of south india are members of the world alliance of reformed churches and the clergy of these three united protestant churches possess lines of apostolic succession ,  according to the anglican understanding of this doctrine ,  through the church of india ,  burma and ceylon  -lrb-  cibc  -rrb-  ,  which finished merging with these three in the 1970s . 
the armenian apostolic church ,  which is one of the oriental orthodox churches ,  recognises roman catholic episcopal consecrations without qualification . 
the validity of a priest's ordination is decided by each autocephalous orthodox church . 
today ,  the united methodist church follows this ancient alexandrian practice as bishops are elected from the presbyterate: the `` discipline of the methodist church '' ,  in ¶303, affirms that `` ordination to this ministry is a gift from god to the church . 
at present ,  most of these church bodies have memberships numbering in the hundreds . 
the church of north india ,  church of pakistan and church of south india are members of the world methodist council and the clergy of these three united protestant churches possess lines of apostolic succession ,  according to the anglican understanding of this doctrine ,  through the church of india ,  burma and ceylon  -lrb-  cibc  -rrb-  ,  which finished merging with these three in the 1970s . 
the moravian church teaches that it has preserved apostolic succession . 
roman catholics recognise the validity of the apostolic successions of the bishops ,  and therefore the rest of the clergy ,  of the eastern orthodox ,  oriental orthodox ,  church of the east ,  old catholic church  -lrb-  union of utrecht only  -rrb-  ,  and polish national catholic church . 
the lutheran church in great britain also joined the porvoo agreement ,  in 2014.
in june 2014, the church of ireland ,  a province of the anglican communion ,  extended its lines of apostolic succession into the methodist church in ireland ,  as `` the archbishop of dublin and bishop of down and dromore took part in the installation of the new president of the methodist church of ireland ,  the rev . 
for the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  ,  the largest denomination in the latter-day saint movement ,  apostolic succession involves the leadership of the church being established through the quorum of the twelve apostles . 
in may 2014, the `` church of ireland’s general synod approved an agreement signed with the methodist church that provided for the interchangeability of clergy ,  allowing an ordained minister of either church to come under the discipline and oversight of the other . `` 
the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints also claims apostolic succession . 
an important historical context to explicate the wide differences among german lutheran churches is the prussian union of 1817, whereby the secular government directed the lutheran churches in prussia to merge with non-lutheran reformed churches in prussia . 
anglican clergy from then on were from then on to be ordained as catholic priests upon entry into the catholic church . 
of note is the fact that at least one of the scandinavian lutheran churches in the porvoo communion of churches ,  the church of denmark has bishops ,  but strictly speaking they were not in the historic apostolic succession prior to their entry into the porvoo communion ,  since their episcopate and holy orders derived from johannes bugenhagen ,  who was a pastor ,  not a bishop . 
others de-emphasize it ,  e . g .  ,  many german lutheran churches in former prussian lands ,  resulting from their state-ordered union with reformed  -lrb-  calvinist  -rrb-  churches in 1817.
as such ,  apostolic succession is a foundational doctrine of authority in the catholic church . 
joint international commission for theological dialogue between the catholic church and the orthodox church asserts that apostolic succession means something more than just a transmission of authorities; it witnesses to the apostolic faith from the same apostolic faith ,  and in communion with other churches  -lrb-  attached to the apostolic communion  -rrb-  . 
the porvoo common statement  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  agreed to by the anglican churches of the british isles and most of the lutheran churches of scandinavia and the baltic ,  echoed the munich  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- and finland  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- statements of the joint international commission for theological dialogue between the roman catholic church and the orthodox church by stating that `` the continuity signified in the consecration of a bishop to episcopal ministry cannot be divorced from the continuity of life and witness of the diocese to which he is called . `` 
brown asserts that the ministry was not ordained by the church to act on its own authority ,  but as an important part to continue the ministry of jesus christ and helps to make the church what it is . 
accordingly ,  in some parts of the eastern orthodox church ,  anglican clergy who convert to orthodoxy are reordained ,  rather than vested . 
each time the president of the church dies ,  the most senior apostle ,  who is designated as the president of the quorum of the twelve apostles ,  is set apart as the new church president . 
in recent years a number of lutheran churches at the most catholic edge of the evangelical catholic high church lutheran spectrum in the united states of america have accepted the doctrine of apostolic succession and have successfully recovered it ,  generally from independent catholic churches . 
the evangelical lutheran church in america is headed by a presiding bishop who is elected by the churchwide assembly for a six-year term . 
ascorbic acid is an organic compound with formula  ,  originally called hexuronic acid . 
ascorbic acid is a vinylogous carboxylic acid and forms the ascorbate anion when deprotonated on one of the hydroxyls . 
ascorbic acid can also react with organic acids as an alcohol forming esters such as ascorbyl palmitate and ascorbyl stearate . 
jong ajax  -lrb-  `` formerly more commonly known as ajax 2 ''  -rrb-  is the reserve team of afc ajax . 
in 1900, when the club was founded ,  the emblem of ajax was just a picture of an ajax player . 
amsterdamsche football club ajax  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as afc ajax ,  ajax amsterdam or simply ajax ,  is a dutch professional football club based in amsterdam . 
ajax was founded in amsterdam on 18 march 1900.
it was ajax's first time winning the award . 
feyenoord from rotterdam are ajax's archrivals . 
ajax has historically been one of the most successful clubs in the world . 
ajax remain on the stock exchange . 
the following clubs are currently affiliated with afc ajax: the following clubs were affiliated with afc ajax in the past:
the 2013–14 season marked the jupiler league debut of the ajax reserves' squad ,  jong ajax . 
afc ajax amateurs ,  better known as ajax zaterdag ,  is a dutch amateur football club founded 18 march 1900.
afc ajax are the only dutch club with an initial public offering  -lrb-  ipo  -rrb-  . 
ajax has also expanded its talent searching programme to south africa with ajax cape town . 
the supporters club ajax  -lrb-    -rrb-  is officially the largest supporters club in the netherlands with 94,000 members . 
listed below are the most significant of the rivalries involving ajax . `` 
ajax won the dutch championship in 1966, 1967 and 1968, and reached the 1969 european cup final ,  losing to milan . 
ajax's shirts have been sponsored by tdk from 1982 to 1991, and by abn amro from 1991 to 2008.
in 1995, ajax was crowned as `` world team of the year '' by `` world soccer '' magazine . 
ajax is also one of four teams to win the continental treble and the intercontinental cup or club world cup in the same season/calendar year; this was achieved in the 1971–72 season . 
afc ajax vrouwen  -lrb-  `` english: afc ajax women ''  -rrb-  are the women's team of afc ajax ,  competing in the bene league ,  the highest level of professional football in belgium and the netherlands . 
historically ,  ajax was popularly seen as having `` jewish roots '' . 
in 1985, cruyff returned to ajax as manager and the team ended his first season in charge with 120 goals from 34 matches . 
in 1893 eddington entered brynmelyn school . 
eddington's paper ,  based on knowledge at the time ,  reasoned that:
eddington also investigated the interior of stars through theory ,  and developed the first true understanding of stellar processes . 
at that time ,  the source of stellar energy was a complete mystery; eddington was the first to correctly speculate that the source was fusion of hydrogen into helium . 
eddington was born 28 december 1882 in kendal ,  westmorland  -lrb-  now cumbria  -rrb-  ,  england ,  the son of quaker parents ,  arthur henry eddington ,  headmaster of the quaker school ,  and sarah ann shout . 
the approach taken in the disk ii controller is typical of wozniak's designs . 
revision 0 apple iis could display only four colors ,  but wozniak was later able to generate 16 in low-res mode . 
the first 1000 or so apple iis shipped with a 68-page mimeographed `` apple ii mini manual '' bound with brass paper fasteners . 
the apple ii's pcb underwent several revisions as steve wozniak made modifications to it . 
the apple ii at first used data cassette storage like most other microcomputers of the time . 
color on the apple ii series uses a quirk of the ntsc television signal standard ,  which made color display relatively easy and inexpensive to implement . 
the apple ii display provides two pixels per subcarrier cycle . 
the apple ii had the defining feature of being able to display color graphics ,  and this capability was the reason why the apple logo was redesigned to have a spectrum of colors . 
initially ,  the apple ii was shipped with integer basic encoded in the motherboard rom chips . 
the pcb had three ram banks for a total of 24 ram chips . 
apple ii accelerator cards double or quadruple the computer's speed . 
the disk ii interface ,  created by wozniak ,  is regarded as an engineering masterpiece for its economy of electronic components . 
in the 1970s korner's main career was in broadcasting . 
korner said ,  `` from then on all i wanted to do was play the blues . `` 
he was survived by a daughter ,  singer sappho gillett korner  -lrb-  died 2006 -rrb- and two sons ,  guitarist nicholas 'nico' korner  -lrb-  died 1988 -rrb- and sound engineer damian korner  -lrb-  died 2010 -rrb- . 
they would continue to collaborate right up until korner's death . 
on 17 october 1967, korner interviewed the jimi hendrix experience for the bbc radio show `` top gear '' . 
korner was born in paris ,  to an austrian jewish father and a greek mother . 
the primary german assault gun was the `` sturmgeschütz iii ''  -lrb-  stug iii  -rrb-  . 
american tank destroyer units were often used in the assault gun role for infantry support . 
the sheridan ,  however ,  was not developed as an assault gun but as a light reconnaissance vehicle . 
assault guns were primarily used during world war ii by the forces of nazi germany and the soviet union . 
later in the war ,  both the germans and the soviets introduced fully armoured purpose-built assault guns into their arsenals . 
german and soviet assault guns introduced during world war ii usually carried their main armament in a fully enclosed casemate rather than a gun turret . 
german tank destroyers based on the panzer iii and later german tanks were unique in that they had more armor than their tank counterparts . 
while there was a general move to a general purpose gun that was usable against both tanks and in supporting infantry ,  there was a need to put the 17 pdr into a tank for use against the enemy's heavy tanks . 
as of 2017, italian forces use the wheeled tank destroyer centauro ,  armed with a 105 or 120 mm gun . 
some gun-armed tank destroyers remain in use . 
the self-propelled guns that were built in the `` tank destroyer '' mould came about through the desire to field the qf 17 pounder anti-tank gun and simultaneous lack of suitable standard tanks to carry it . 
the first german tank destroyers were the `` panzerjäger ''  -lrb-  `` tank hunters ''  -rrb-  ,  which mounted an existing anti-tank gun on a convenient chassis for mobility ,  usually with just a three-sided gun shield for crew protection . 
during world war 2, the romanians made some tank destroyers by removing the turrets of some of their tanks and adding a compartment and a stronger gun that could face the new soviet tanks that were much stronger than the romanian ones . 
the most famous italian tank destroyer of the second world war was technically not a tank destroyer ,  but self-propelled artillery . 
of these tank destroyers ,  only the gun of the m36 proved effective against the frontal armor of germans' larger armored vehicles at long range . 
a tank destroyer or tank hunter is a type of armoured fighting vehicle ,  armed with a direct-fire artillery gun or missile launcher ,  with limited operational capacities and designed specifically to engage enemy tanks . 
two planned tank destroyers were the tacam r-1 and the tacam t-38.
the closest the british came to developing an armored tank destroyer in the vein of the german jagdpanzers or soviet isu series was the churchill 3-inch gun carrier—a churchill tank chassis with a boxy superstructure in place of the turret and mounting a 3-inch anti-aircraft gun . 
since world war ii ,  gun-armed tank destroyers have fallen out of favor as armies have favored multirole main battle tanks . 
the 17 pounder was also used to re-equip the us-supplied m10 tank destroyer ,  replacing the american 3-inch gun to produce the 17pdr sp achilles . 
the italians used armored cars during the italo-turkish war . 
generally ,  the armored cars were used by more or less independent car commanders . 
light armored cars ,  such as the british ferret are armed with just a machine gun . 
in the second half of the war ,  the american m8 greyhound and the british daimler armoured cars featured turrets mounting light guns  -lrb-  40 mm or less  -rrb-  . 
armored cars also saw action on the eastern front . 
in the 1930s ,  a new sub-class of armored car emerged in the united states ,  known as the `` scout car '' . 
an iron shield in front of the car protected the driver . 
a great variety of armored cars appeared on both sides during world war i and these were used in various ways . 
 ''fordson '' armored cars were rolls-royce armored cars which received new chassis from a fordson truck in egypt . 
during the anglo-iraqi war ,  some of the units located in the british mandate of palestine were sent to iraq and drove fordson armored cars . 
near the end of the battle ,  the russians used four russo-balt armored cars and a armored car to break through the germans' lines and force the germans to retreat . 
a predecessor of the wwii german `` 88 '' anti-aircraft gun ,  the wwi german 77 mm anti-aircraft gun ,  was truck-mounted and used to great effect against british tanks . 
the gun could be elevated for anti-aircraft use . 
later in the war similar german halftracks mounted quadruple 20 mm weapons . 
an anti-aircraft vehicle ,  also known as a self-propelled anti-aircraft gun  -lrb-  spaag  -rrb-  or self-propelled air defense system  -lrb-  spad  -rrb-  ,  is a mobile vehicle with a dedicated anti-aircraft capability . 
anti-aircraft machine guns have long been mounted on trucks ,  and these were quite common during world war i . 
the british developed their own spaags throughout the war mounting multiple machine guns and light cannon on various tank and armoured car chassis and by 1943, the crusader aa tanks ,  which mounted the bofors 40 mm gun or two-three oerlikon 20 mm cannon . 
the russian equivalent of `` spaag '' is `` zsu '' ,  for `` zenitnaya samokhodnaya ustanovka '' ,   -lrb-  `` anti-aircraft self-propelled mount ''  -rrb-  . 
the success of the zsu-23 led to a resurgence of spaag development . 
az has won the eredivisie twice ,  in 1980–81 and 2008–09.
az was relegated in 1988 from the eredivisie . 
for the 2010–11 season ,  az appointed gertjan verbeek as its new manager . 
as cup winners ,  az automatically qualified for the 2013–14 europa league . 
despite playing strongly for the majority of the 2006–07 season ,  az's season ended in disappointment . 
az was founded on 10 may 1967 as az '67, the result of a merger of alkmaar '54 and fc zaanstreek . 
in the 2016–17 europa league ,  az finished second in group d ,  surviving the group stage for the third time in five seasons . 
alkmaar zaanstreek  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  better known as az alkmaar or simply az  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a dutch professional football club from alkmaar and the zaanstreek . 
the 2015–16 eredivisie started with az selling most of its first-team players from the previous season during the summer transfer period . 
the adrenal cortex is the outermost layer of the adrenal gland . 
the glands are yellowish in colour . 
the adrenal medulla is at the centre of each adrenal gland ,  and is surrounded by the adrenal cortex . 
venous blood is drained from the glands by the suprarenal veins ,  usually one for each gland:
the outermost zone of the adrenal cortex is the zona glomerulosa . 
cortisol is the main glucocorticoid in humans . 
the adrenal cortex itself is divided into three zones: the zona glomerulosa ,  the zona fasciculata and the zona reticularis . 
corticosteroids are a group of steroid hormones produced from the cortex of the adrenal gland ,  from which they are named . 
the adrenal glands  -lrb-  also known as suprarenal glands  -rrb-  are endocrine glands that produce a variety of hormones including adrenaline and the steroids aldosterone and cortisol . 
the zona fasciculata is situated between the zona glomerulosa and zona reticularis . 
thin strands of the capsule enter the glands ,  carrying blood to them . 
each adrenal gland has two distinct parts ,  each with a unique function ,  the outer adrenal cortex and the inner medulla ,  both of which produce hormones . 
the cortex of the adrenal gland is derived from mesoderm ,  whereas the medulla is derived from the neural crest ,  which is of ectodermal origin . 
the gland may develop with a partial or complete absence of the cortex ,  or may develop in an unusual location . 
in a fetus the glands are first detectable after the sixth week of development . 
the adrenal glands have one of the greatest blood supply rates per gram of tissue of any organ: up to 60 small arteries may enter each gland . 
the adrenal cortex produces three main types of steroid hormones: mineralocorticoids ,  glucocorticoids ,  and androgens . 
the adrenal gland secretes a number of different hormones which are metabolised by enzymes either within the gland or in other parts of the body . 
the layers of the adrenal gland differ by function ,  with each layer having distinct enzymes that produce different hormones from a common precursor . 
the innermost cortical layer ,  the zona reticularis ,  lies directly adjacent to the medulla . 
american media ,  inc . 
american media is not to be confused with american media distribution the international news coverage firm . 
in march 2017, american media acquired `` us weekly '' from wenner media for a reported $100 million . 
in 2009, american media was taken over by its bondholders to keep it out of bankruptcy . 
three months later ,  in june 2017, american media also acquired `` men's journal '' from wenner media . 
roger altman ,  through evercore partners ,  bought a controlling stake in american media in 1999.
the earliest aramaic alphabet was based on the phoenician alphabet . 
a highly modified form of the aramaic alphabet ,  the mandaic alphabet ,  is used by the mandaeans . 
there are still also a small number of first-language speakers of western aramaic varieties in isolated villages in western syria . 
in addition to these writing systems ,  certain derivatives of the aramaic alphabet were used in ancient times by particular groups: the nabataean alphabet in petra and the palmyrene alphabet in palmyra . 
the more widely spoken eastern aramaic and mandaic forms are today largely restricted to iraqi kurdistan ,  northeastern syria ,  northwestern iran and southeastern turkey ,  whilst the severely endangered western neo-aramaic is spoken by small communities in northwestern syria . 
the scribes of the neo-assyrian bureaucracy had also used aramaic ,  and this practice—together with other administrative practices—was subsequently inherited by the succeeding neo-babylonians  -lrb-  605–539 bc  -rrb-  ,  and the achaemenids  -lrb-  539–323 bc  -rrb-  . 
titus brought a fundraising letter from paul to corinth ,  to collect for the poor in jerusalem . 
paul summoned titus from crete to join him at nicopolis in epirus . 
after success on this mission ,  titus journeyed north and met paul in macedonia . 
chrysostom says that this is an indication of the esteem st .  paul held for titus . 
early church tradition holds that paul ,  after his release from his first imprisonment in rome ,  stopped at the island of crete to preach . 
uranium and thorium were the first actinides discovered . 
the most abundant or easily synthesized actinides are uranium and thorium ,  followed by plutonium ,  americium ,  actinium ,  protactinium ,  neptunium ,  and curium . 
the same isolation method was later used by péligot for uranium . 
the actinide series derives its name from the first element in the series ,  actinium . 
of the actinides ,  primordial thorium and uranium occur naturally in substantial quantities . 
while actinium and the late actinides  -lrb-  from americium onwards  -rrb-  behave similarly to the lanthanides ,  the elements thorium ,  protactinium ,  and uranium are much more similar to transition metals in their chemistry ,  with neptunium and plutonium occupying an intermediate position . 
for example ,  under irradiation with reactor neutrons ,  uranium-238 partially converts to plutonium-239:
it was miller's most successful play since `` death of a salesman . `` 
the following year miller won the jerusalem prize . 
in 1949, miller exchanged letters with eugene o'neill regarding miller's production of `` all my sons '' . 
miller was an unusually articulate commentator on his own work . 
miller spent much of 1996 working on the screenplay for the film . 
miller's experience with the huac affected him throughout his life . 
in 1940, miller married mary grace slattery . 
during the early-mid 1990s ,  miller wrote three new plays: `` the ride down mt . 
arthur miller is also a member of the american theater hall of fame . 
in 1948, miller built a small studio in roxbury ,  connecticut . 
later that year ,  miller was subpoenaed by the huac ,  and monroe accompanied him . 
arthur miller's son-in-law ,  actor daniel day-lewis ,  is said to have visited daniel frequently ,  and to have persuaded arthur miller to meet with him . 
arthur miller's career as a writer spanned over seven decades ,  and at the time of his death ,  miller was considered to be one of the greatest dramatists of the twentieth century . 
miller later married photographer inge morath in february 1962.
in 1817 he started a music publishing business and in 1818 he formed a partnership with pietro cappi to create the music publishing firm of cappi & diabelli . 
anton  -lrb-  or antonio  -rrb-  diabelli  -lrb-  6 september 17817 april 1858 -rrb- was an austrian music publisher ,  editor and composer . 
diabelli was born in mattsee near salzburg ,  then in the archbishopric of salzburg . 
hill was raised in the baptist faith . 
hill agreed to take a polygraph test . 
anita hill became a proponent for women's rights and feminism . 
anita hill was born to a family of farmers in lone tree ,  oklahoma ,  the youngest of albert and erma hill's 13 children . 
on october 20, 1998, anita hill published the book `` speaking truth to power '' . 
anita faye hill  -lrb-  born july 30, 1956 -rrb- is an american attorney and academic . 
hill received the american bar association's commission on women in the profession's `` women of achievement '' award in 1992.
in october 2010, thomas's wife virginia ,  a conservative activist ,  left a voicemail at hill's office asking that hill apologize for her 1991 testimony . 
in 2011, hill's second book ,  `` reimagining equality: stories of gender ,  race ,  and finding home '' was published . 
the university of oklahoma law school defunded the anita f .  hill professorship in may 1999, without the position having ever been filled . 
doubts about the veracity of hill's 1991 testimony persisted long after thomas took his seat on the court . 
an audio file format is a file format for storing digital audio data on a computer system . 
the origin of the area 51 name is unclear . 
when documents that mention the nevada test site  -lrb-  nts  -rrb-  and operations at groom are declassified ,  mentions of area 51 and groom lake are routinely redacted . 
the air force began funding improvements to area 51 in 1977 under project score event . 
the usgs topographic map for the area only shows the long-disused groom mine . 
the first a-12 test aircraft was covertly trucked from burbank on 26 february 1962, arrived at groom lake on 28 february ,  was assembled ,  and made its first flight 26 april 1962 when the base had over 1,000 personnel . 
groom was also the site of the first lockheed d-21 drone test flight on 22 december 1964  -lrb-  not launched until 5 march 1966 -rrb- . 
some of the activities mentioned in such theories at area 51 include:
groom lake is a salt flat in nevada used for runways of the nellis bombing range test site airport  -lrb-  kxta  -rrb-  on the north of the area 51 usaf military installation . 
since the f-117 became operational in 1983, operations at groom lake have continued . 
he notified lockheed ,  who sent an inspection team out to groom lake . 
although ideal for testing ,  area 51 was not a suitable location for an operational group ,  so a new covert base had to be established for f-117 operations . 
the cia asked the aec to acquire the land ,  designated `` area 51 '' on the map ,  and add it to the nevada test site . 
production fsd airframes from lockheed were shipped to area 51 for acceptance testing . 
the original rectangular base of is now part of the so-called `` groom box '' ,  a rectangular area measuring  ,  of restricted airspace . 
the united states air force facility commonly known as area 51 is a highly classified remote detachment of edwards air force base ,  within the nevada test and training range . 
located within the namesake groom lake valley portion of the tonopah basin ,  the lake is south of rachel ,  nevada . 
groom performed radar profiling ,  f-117 weapons testing ,  and training of the first group of frontline usaf f-117 pilots . 
the area around area 51, including the small town of rachel on the `` extraterrestrial highway '' ,  is a popular tourist destination . 
2 ends `` three oxcart aircraft and the necessary task force personnel will be deployed from area 51 to kadena . `` 
in the mid-1950s ,  civilian aircraft flew under 20,000 feet while military aircraft flew under 40,000 feet . 
by early 1982, four more yf-117as were operating at the southern end of the base ,  known as the `` southend '' or `` baja groom lake '' . 
the yucca mountain nuclear waste repository is southwest of groom lake . 
these show the runway markings ,  base facilities ,  aircraft ,  and vehicles . 
a joint air force-navy team was assembled for a series of dogfight tests . 
the groom lake test facility was established in april 1955 by the central intelligence agency  -lrb-  cia  -rrb-  for project aquatone ,  the development of the lockheed u-2 strategic reconnaissance aircraft . 
by the end of 1963, nine a-12s were at area 51, assigned to the cia operated `` 1129th special activities squadron '' . 
at tonopah testing of foreign technology aircraft continued and expanded throughout the 1970s and 1980s . 
difficulties were addressed throughout 1964 and 1965 at groom lake with various technical issues . 
audio synthesis is the electronic generation of audio signals . 
audio signal processing is a subfield of signal processing that is concerned with the electronic manipulation of audio signals . 
audio effects are systems designed to alter how an audio signal sounds . 
the audio processor here must
amdahl's law is often used in parallel computing to predict the theoretical speedup when using multiple processors . 
this combined brew is what is taken by participants in ayahuasca ceremonies . 
ayahuasca is used largely as a treasured sacrament . 
dietary taboos are often associated with the use of ayahuasca . 
ayahuasca  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  iowaska ,  or yagé  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is an entheogenic brew made out of `` banisteriopsis caapi '' vine and other ingredients . 
the word `` ayahuasca '' has been variously translated as `` liana of the soul '' ,  `` liana of the dead '' ,  and `` spirit liana '' . 
shamans and experienced users of ayahuasca advise against consuming ayahuasca when not in the presence of one or several well-trained shamans . 
ayahuasca is known by many names throughout northern south america and brazil . 
traditional ayahuasca brews are usually made with `` banisteriopsis caapi '' as an maoi ,  while dimethyltryptamine sources and other admixtures vary from region to region . 
where `` n '' ,  `` n '' and `` n '' are the refractive indices of the material at the wavelengths of the fraunhofer d- ,  f- and c- spectral lines  -lrb-  589.3 nm ,  486.1 nm and 656.3 nm respectively  -rrb-  . 
an abbe diagram ,  also called 'the glass veil' ,  is produced by plotting the abbe number `` v '' of a material versus its refractive index `` n '' . 
the abbe number ,  `` v '' ,  of a material is defined as
in sanskrit ,  the ablative case is the fifth case  -lrb-  `` pañcamī ''  -rrb-  and has a similar function to that in latin . 
the ablative case is found in albanian; it is the fifth case ,  `` rasa rrjedhore '' . 
the ablative case has several uses . 
the latin ablative case was derived from three proto-indo-european cases: ablative  -lrb-  from  -rrb-  ,  instrumental  -lrb-  with  -rrb-  ,  and locative  -lrb-  in/at  -rrb-  . 
in particular ,  the chief hebrew name for god in scholastic tradition ,  `` el '' ,  must be derived of a different adamic name for god ,  which dante gives as `` i '' . 
johnson '' ,  asserts that the name of god is `` awmen '' . 
traditional jewish exegesis such as midrash  -lrb-  genesis rabbah 38 -rrb- says that adam spoke the hebrew language because the names he gives eve – `` isha ''  -lrb-  book of genesis 2:23 -rrb- and `` chava ''  -lrb-  genesis 3:20 -rrb- – only make sense in hebrew . 
the adamic language is ,  according to jewish tradition  -lrb-  as recorded in the `` midrashim ''  -rrb-  and some christians ,  the language spoken by adam  -lrb-  and possibly eve  -rrb-  in the garden of eden . 
some believe that the `` pay lay ale '' sentence is derived from the hebrew phrase `` pe le-el ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` mouth to god '' . 
apostle orson pratt declared that `` ahman '' ,  part of the name of the settlement `` adam-ondi-ahman '' in daviess county ,  missouri ,  was the name of god in the adamic language . 
it has played in opera houses around the world . 
the opera was banned by the nazis in 1933 and did not have a significant production until the 1960s . 
the los angeles opera presented the opera in september 1989 under conductor kent nagano and with a jonathan miller production . 
in 2014 it was performed using an alternate libretto as a `` wrestling opera '' at the oakland metro by the performers of hoodslam . 
the lyrics for the `` alabama song '' and another song ,  the `` benares song '' are in english  -lrb-  albeit specifically idiosyncratic english  -rrb-  and are performed in that language even when the opera is performed in its original  -lrb-  german  -rrb-  language . 
hopwood was born to james and jule hopwood on may 28, 1882, in cleveland ,  ohio . 
hopwood was asked to write the third act of mary roberts rinehart's play `` the bat '' . 
the terms of hopwood's will left a substantial portion of his estate to his alma mater ,  the university of michigan for the establishment of the avery hopwood and jule hopwood creative writing awards . 
in 1906, hopwood was introduced to writer and photographer carl van vechten . 
the feast day of the roman martyr felix is 29 july . 
this felix was later confused with a roman martyr named felix ,  with the result that he was included in lists of the popes as felix ii and that the succeeding popes of the same name  -lrb-  pope felix iii and pope felix iv  -rrb-  were given wrong numerals ,  as was antipope felix v . 
as well as the roman martyrology ,  the roman missal identified the saint felix of 29 july with the antipope . 
more recent classifications are based on similarity of the carbon skeleton  -lrb-  `` e . g . 
the term `` morphine '' ,  used in english and french ,  was given by the french physicist joseph louis gay-lussac . 
there are also at least 86 alkaloids whose names contain the root `` vin '' because they are extracted from `` vinca '' plants such as `` vinca rosea ''  -lrb-  `` catharanthus roseus ''  -rrb- ; these are called `` vinca '' alkaloids . 
the name `` alkaloids ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  was introduced in 1819 by the german chemist  ,  and is derived from late latin root '  -lrb-  which ,  in turn ,  comes from the arabic `` al-qalwī '' – `` ashes of plants ''  -rrb-  and the suffix – `` like '' . 
the first complete synthesis of an alkaloid was achieved in 1886 by the german chemist albert ladenburg . 
it merged with the adventist christian church in 1964.
the primitive advent christian church is a small group which separated from the advent christian church . 
the advent christian church was founded in 1860 and had 25,277 members in 302 churches in 2002 in america . 
the seventh-day adventist church officially formed in 1863.
four groups emerged from the conference: the evangelical adventists ,  the life and advent union ,  the advent christian church ,  and the seventh-day adventist church . 
adventism began as an inter-denominational movement . 
the advent christian church officially formed in 1861 grew rapidly at first . 
the archbishop of canterbury is the senior bishop and principal leader of the church of england ,  the symbolic head of the worldwide anglican communion and the diocesan bishop of the diocese of canterbury . 
the first classes were held in albion in 1843.
albion incorporated as a village in 1855 and as a city in 1885.
albion is a sister city with noisy-le-roi ,  france . 
other names used in the west include the unction or blessing of consecrated oil ,  the unction of god ,  and the office of the unction . 
anointing of the sick ,  known also by other names ,  is a form of religious anointing or `` unction ''  -lrb-  an older term with the same meaning  -rrb-  for the benefit of a sick person . 
other names are also used ,  such as ἅγιον ἔλαιον  -lrb-  holy oil  -rrb-  ,  ἡγιασμένον ἔλαιον  -lrb-  consecrated oil  -rrb-  ,  and χρῖσις or χρῖσμα  -lrb-  anointing  -rrb-  . 
an abstract data type is defined as a mathematical model of the data objects that make up a data type as well as the functions that operate on these objects . 
here it is implicitly assumed that operations on a stack instance do not modify the state of any other adt instance ,  including other stacks; that is , 
in computer science ,  an abstract data type  -lrb-  adt  -rrb-  is a mathematical model for data types ,  where a data type is defined by its behavior  -lrb-  semantics  -rrb-  from the point of view of a `` user '' of the data ,  specifically in terms of possible values ,  possible operations on data of this type ,  and the behavior of these operations . 
code that uses an adt object will not need to be edited if the implementation of the adt is changed . 
imperative-style definitions of adt often depend on the concept of an `` abstract variable '' ,  which may be regarded as the simplest non-trivial adt . 
for example ,  an abstract stack ,  which is a last-in-first-out structure ,  could be defined by three operations: push ,  that inserts a data item onto the stack; pop ,  that removes a data item from it; and peek or top ,  that accesses a data item on top of the stack without removal . 
an adt consists not only of operations ,  but also of values of the underlying data and of constraints on the operations . 
as another example ,  an imperative-style definition of an abstract stack could specify that the state of a stack `` s '' can be modified only by the operations with the constraint that
some algorithms need to create new instances of some adt  -lrb-  such as new variables ,  or new stacks  -rrb-  . 
the notion of abstract data types is related to the concept of data abstraction ,  important in object-oriented programming and design by contract methodologies for software development . 
instead of create -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  a functional-style definition of an abstract stack may assume the existence of a special stack state ,  the `` empty stack '' ,  designated by a special symbol like λ or ``  -lrb-    -rrb- `` ; or define a bottom -lrb-    -rrb-  operation that takes no arguments and returns this special stack state . 
when analyzing the efficiency of algorithms that use stacks ,  one may also specify that all operations take the same time no matter how many data items have been pushed into the stack ,  and that the stack uses a constant amount of storage for each element . 
different implementations of the adt ,  having all the same properties and abilities ,  are equivalent and may be used somewhat interchangeably in code that uses the adt . 
the bidding war for players between the afl and nfl escalated in 1965.
in 1966, the rivalry between the afl and nfl reached an all-time peak . 
the afl also planned to add two more teams by 1967.
the last game in afl history was the afl all-star game ,  held in houston's astrodome on january 17, 1970.
hunt was elected president of the afl on january 26, 1960.
in 1963, the texans became the second afl team to relocate . 
the hall of fame game was the first of several `` legacy weekends '' ,  during which each of the `` original eight '' afl teams sported uniforms from their afl era . 
the nfl adopted some of the innovations introduced by the afl immediately and a few others in the years following the merger . 
the afl and nfl operated as separate leagues until 1970, with separate regular season and playoff schedules except for the championship game . 
on-field officials also wore red-and-white-striped afl uniforms during these games . 
this fourth version of the afl was the most successful ,  created by a number of owners who had been refused nfl expansion franchises or had minor shares of nfl franchises . 
while the oilers found instant success in the afl ,  other teams did not fare as well . 
after the afl–nfl merger agreement in 1966, and after the afl's jets defeated an extremely strong baltimore colts team ,  a popular misconception fostered by the nfl and spread by media reports was that the afl defeated the nfl because of the common draft instituted in 1967.
in 1970, the afl was absorbed into the nfl and the league reorganized with the ten afl franchises along with the previous nfl teams baltimore colts ,  cleveland browns ,  and pittsburgh steelers becoming part of the newly-formed american football conference . 
the afl's free agents came from several sources . 
the afl took advantage of the burgeoning popularity of football by locating teams in major cities that lacked nfl franchises . 
while many afl players and observers believed their league was the equal of the nfl ,  their first two super bowl performances did nothing to prove it . 
from 1960 to 1968, the afl determined its champion via a single-elimination playoff game between the winners of its two divisions . 
the court upheld the houston contract ,  and with cannon the oilers appeared in the afl's first three championship games  -lrb-  winning two  -rrb-  . 
it was only after the merger agreement was announced that cbs began to give afl scores . 
the afl's challenge to the nfl also laid the groundwork for the super bowl ,  which has become the standard for championship contests in the united states of america . 
in the late 1950s ,  many players released by the nfl ,  or un-drafted and unsigned out of college by the nfl ,  went north to try their luck with the cfl ,  and later returned to the states to play in the afl . 
the nfl also adapted how the afl used the growing power of televised football games ,  which were bolstered with the help of major network contracts  -lrb-  first with abc and later with nbc  -rrb-  . 
in european competitions ,  roma won the inter-cities fairs cup in 1960–61 and were runners-up in the 1983–84 european cup and the 1990–91 uefa cup . 
a few years later ,  roma won their first coppa italia trophy in 1963–64 after defeating torino 1–0.
in the 1953–54 season ,  roma moved to the olympic arena ,  stadio olimpico ,  which it shares with lazio . 
it is slated to open in time for the 2020–21 season and will replace the stadio olimpico as roma's ground . 
roma have won serie a three times ,  in 1941–42, 1982–83 and 2000–01, as well as winning nine coppa italia titles and two supercoppa italiana titles . 
roma's successful run in the 1980s would finish with a runners-up spot in 1985–86 and a coppa italia victory ,  beating out sampdoria 3–2.
roma ,  however ,  was eliminated from 2011–12 uefa europa league play-off round . 
in 2014–15, roma finished second behind juventus for the second consecutive season after a poor run of form in 2015.
as a result ,  roma missed out on european competition for the second-straight season . 
unicredit later disinvested neep roma holding to sell to `` as roma spv ,  llc '' and pallotta . 
that year ,  roma played its home matches at stadio flaminio . 
roma returned to form after being inconsistent for much of the late 1930s . 
founded by a merger in 1927, roma have participated in the top-tier of italian football for all of their existence except for 1951–52.
roma were able to add another cup to their collection in 1972, with a 3–1 victory over blackpool in the anglo-italian cup . 
in italian football ,  roma is a club with many rivalries; first and foremost is their rivalry with lazio ,  the club with whom they share the stadio olimpico . 
in november 2015, roma's ultras and their lazio counterparts boycotted roma's 1–0 victory in the `` derby della capitale '' in protest at new safety measures imposed at the stadio olimpico . 
associazione sportiva roma  -lrb-   ,  ; `` rome sport association ''  -rrb-  ,  commonly referred to as simply roma  ,  is a professional italian football club based in rome . 
there have been multiple instances of roma ultras attacking supporters of foreign clubs when playing in rome . 
the ano was originally formed as a result of the 1974 rejectionist front split in the plo ,  after arafat's fatah had pushed through amendments of the plo's goals ,  which were seen as a step towards compromise with israel . 
the abu nidal organization  -lrb-  ano  -rrb-  is the most common name for the palestinian nationalist militant group fatah – the revolutionary council  -lrb-  `` fatah al-majles al-thawry ''  -rrb-  . 
abu nidal then moved to ba'athist iraq where he set up the ano ,  which soon began a vicious string of terrorist attacks . 
