the paper is one of mandelbrot's first publications on the topic of fractals . 
the small asteroid 27500 mandelbrot was named in his honor . 
mandelbrot also put his ideas to work in cosmology . 
mandelbrot was born in warsaw during the second polish republic . 
because of his access to ibm's computers ,  mandelbrot was one of the first to use computer graphics to create and display fractal geometric images ,  leading to his discovering the mandelbrot set in 1980.
in 1936, while he was a child ,  mandelbrot's family emigrated to france from warsaw ,  poland . 
mandelbrot left ibm in 1987, after 35 years and 12 days ,  when ibm decided to end pure research in his division . 
much of france was occupied by the nazis at the time ,  and mandelbrot recalls this period:
benedict's main achievement is his `` rule of saint benedict '' ,  containing precepts for his monks . 
he is a patron saint of europe . 
benedict was sent to rome to study ,  but was dissatisfied by the life he found there . 
by his advice benedict became a hermit and for three years ,  unknown to men ,  lived in this cave above the lake . 
for this reason ,  benedict is often called the founder of western christian monasticism . 
benedict founded twelve communities for monks at subiaco ,  lazio ,  italy  -lrb-  about to the east of rome  -rrb-  ,  before moving to monte cassino in the mountains of southern italy . 
now at full strength ,  caesar felt confident to take the fight to pompey . 
the two armies confronted each other over several months of uncertainty ,  caesar being in a much weaker position than pompey . 
as pompey was assassinated on 3 september 48 bc ,  the battle must have taken place in the true month of august ,  when the harvest was becoming ripe  -lrb-  or pompey's strategy of starving caesar would not be plausible  -rrb-  . 
although pompey was strongly against it — he wanted to surround and starve caesar's army instead — he eventually gave in and accepted battle from caesar on a field near pharsalus . 
tom biscardi is a long-time bigfoot enthusiast and ceo of searching for bigfoot inc . 
in 2007 the bigfoot field researchers organization put forward some photos which they claimed showed a juvenile bigfoot . 
he said that he did kill a bigfoot ,  but did not take the real body on tour for fear that it would be stolen . 
in january 2014, rick dyer ,  perpetrator of a previous bigfoot hoax ,  said that he had killed a bigfoot creature in september 2012 outside san antonio ,  texas . 
bigfoot proponents grover krantz and geoffrey h .  bourne believed that bigfoot could be a relict population of `` gigantopithecus '' . 
according to david daegling ,  the legends predate the name `` bigfoot '' . 
members of the lummi tell tales about `` ts'emekwes '' ,  the local version of bigfoot . 
the debate over the legitimacy of bigfoot sightings reached a peak in the 1970s ,  and bigfoot has been regarded as the first widely popularized example of pseudoscience in american culture . 
most reports are considered mistakes or hoaxes ,  even by those researchers who say that bigfoot exists . 
in time ,  bingo got shortened to bing . >
harry lillis `` bing '' crosby  -lrb-  ; may 3, 1903 – october 14, 1977 -rrb- was an american singer and actor . 
 ''de mille: `` i'll vouch for it ,  bing . `` 
on september 2, 1931, crosby made his nationwide solo radio debut . 
he was the fourth of seven children: brothers laurence earl  -lrb-  larry  -rrb-   -lrb-  1895–1975 -rrb- ,  everett nathaniel  -lrb-  1896–1966 -rrb- ,  edward john  -lrb-  ted  -rrb-   -lrb-  1900–1973 -rrb- ,  and george robert  -lrb-  bob  -rrb-   -lrb-  1913–1993 -rrb-; and two sisters ,  catherine cordelia  -lrb-  1904–1974 -rrb- and mary rose  -lrb-  1906–1990 -rrb- . 
he was also known for his collaborations with longtime friend bob hope ,  starring in the `` road to .  .  . ``  films from 1940 to 1962.
he signed a contract with jack kapp's new record company ,  decca ,  in late 1934.
also in 1948, `` music digest '' estimated that his recordings filled more than half of the 80,000 weekly hours allocated to recorded radio music . 
during the early portion of his solo career  -lrb-  about 1931–1934 -rrb- ,  crosby's emotional ,  often pleading style of crooning was popular . 
kapp helped crosby have number one hits in christmas music ,  hawaiian ,  and country music ,  and top-thirty hits in irish music ,  french music ,  rhythm and blues ,  and ballads . 
the biggest hit song of crosby's career was his recording of irving berlin's `` white christmas '' ,  which he introduced on a christmas day radio broadcast in 1941.
his first commercial sponsor on radio was cremo cigars and his fame spread nationwide . 
the oecd council also has its own control system that governs the trans-boundary movement of hazardous materials between oecd member countries . 
a waste falls under the scope of the convention if it is within the category of wastes listed in annex i of the convention and it exhibits one of the hazardous characteristics contained in annex iii . 
this allows ,  among other things ,  the oecd countries to continue trading in wastes with countries like the united states that have not ratified the basel convention . 
one of the incidents which led to the creation of the basel convention was the `` khian sea '' waste disposal incident ,  in which a ship carrying incinerator ash from the city of philadelphia in the united states dumped half of its load on a beach in haiti before being forced away . 
the nine un member states that are not party to the treaty are east timor ,  fiji ,  grenada ,  haiti ,  san marino ,  solomon islands ,  south sudan ,  tuvalu ,  and united states . 
the basel convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal ,  usually known as the basel convention ,  is an international treaty that was designed to reduce the movements of hazardous waste between nations ,  and specifically to prevent transfer of hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries  -lrb-  ldcs  -rrb-  . 
kemeny wrote the first version of basic . 
in addition to the language itself ,  kemeny and kurtz developed the dartmouth time sharing system  -lrb-  dtss  -rrb-  ,  which allowed multiple users to edit and run basic programs at the same time . 
the main cpu was later replaced by a ge-235, and still later by a ge-635
this led to increasing interest in a system using time-sharing and a new language specifically for use by non-stem students . 
traditionally ,  the line of byzantine emperors is held to begin with the roman emperor constantine the great ,  the first christian emperor ,  who rebuilt the city of byzantium as an imperial capital ,  constantinople ,  and who was regarded by the later emperors as the model ruler . 
the byzantine empire was the direct legal continuation of the eastern half of the roman empire following the division of the roman empire in 395.
though lorenz gave a name to the phenomenon ,  the idea that small causes may have large effects in general and in weather specifically was earlier recognized by french mathematician and engineer henri poincaré and american mathematician and philosopher norbert wiener . 
in 1985 borland acquired analytica and its reflex database product . 
richard schwartz ,  a cofounder of ansa ,  became borland's cto and ben rosen joined the borland board . 
in 1987 borland purchased wizard systems and incorporated portions of the wizard c technology into turbo c .  bob jervis ,  the author of wizard c became a borland employee . 
borland developed a series of well-regarded software development tools . 
a change in market conditions also contributed to borland's fall from prominence . 
main shareholders at the incorporation of borland were niels jensen  -lrb-  250,000 shares  -rrb-  ,  ole henriksen  -lrb-  160,000 -rrb- ,  mogens glad  -lrb-  100,000 -rrb- ,  and kahn  -lrb-  80,000 -rrb- . 
richard buckminster fuller  -lrb-  ; july 12, 1895 – july 1, 1983 -rrb- was an american architect ,  systems theorist ,  author ,  designer ,  inventor and futurist . 
watterson was born in washington ,  d . c .  ,  where his father james g .  watterson  -lrb-  1932–2016 -rrb- worked as a patent attorney . 
william boyd watterson ii  -lrb-  born july 5, 1958 -rrb- is a former american cartoonist and the author of the comic strip `` calvin and hobbes '' ,  which was syndicated from 1985 to 1995.
in the visible spectrum ,  black is the absorption of all colors . 
old high german also had two words for black: `` swartz '' for dull black and `` blach '' for a luminous black . 
the black beret and the color black is also a symbol of special forces in many countries . 
the ancient romans had two words for black: `` ater '' was a flat ,  dull black ,  while `` niger '' was a brilliant ,  saturated black . 
black was one of the first colors used in art . 
in fashion ,  black did not have the prestige of red ,  the color of the nobility . 
it developed into the black power movement in the late 1960s and 1970s ,  and popularized the slogan `` black is beautiful '' . 
black was also appreciated by henri matisse . 
but after the french revolution ,  black again became the dominant color . 
in heraldry ,  the word used for the black color is sable ,  named for the black fur of the sable ,  an animal . 
in the 20th century ,  black was the color of italian and german fascism . 
some 19th-century french painters had a low opinion of black: `` reject black , ``  paul gauguin said ,  `` and that mix of black and white they call gray . 
in the 14th century ,  the status of black began to change . 
for the ancient egyptians ,  black had positive associations; being the color of fertility and the rich black soil flooded by the nile . 
in the late 19th century ,  black also became the color of anarchism . 
the black they wore was not deep and rich; the vegetable dyes used to make black were not solid or lasting ,  so the blacks often turned out faded gray or brown . 
black is the absorption of all colors of light ,  or an exhaustive combination of multiple colors of pigment . 
 ''kuanos ''' could mean both dark blue and black . 
black symbolized both power and secrecy in the medieval world . 
for the ancient greeks ,  black was also the color of the underworld ,  separated from the world of the living by the river acheron ,  whose water was black . 
black has been a traditional color of cavalry and armoured or mechanized troops . 
cennini also noted that `` there is another black which is made from burnt almond shells or peaches and this is a perfect ,  fine black . `` 
good-quality black dyes were not known until the middle of the 14th century . 
and this is a lean and black pigment and is one of the perfect pigments that we use . `` 
in art ,  black regained some of the territory that it had lost during the 19th century . 
when black is combined with white ,  however ,  it symbolizes harmony and equilibrium . 
gall-nuts were also used for making fine black writing ink . 
black was also adopted by adolf hitler and the nazis in germany . 
black is the darkest color ,  the result of the absence or complete absorption of visible light . 
black was one of the first colors used by artists in neolithic cave paintings . 
in finland ,  black is the symbolic color for both armoured troops and combat engineers ,  and military units of these specialities have black flags and unit insignia . 
bletchley park was known as `` b . p . `` 
initially ,  a wireless room was established at bletchley park . 
the first personnel of the government code and cypher school  -lrb-  gc&cs  -rrb-  moved to bletchley park on 15 august 1939.
for a long time ,  the british government didn't recognize the contributions the personnel at bletchley park made . 
naval enigma deciphering was in hut 8, with translation in hut 4.
in january 1945, at the peak of codebreaking efforts ,  some 10,000 personnel were working at bletchley and its outstations . 
be careful even in your hut .  .  . `` 
joan clarke  -lrb-  eventually deputy head of hut 8 -rrb- was one of the few women employed at bletchley as a full-fledged cryptanalyst . 
due to the long radio aerials stretching from the wireless room ,  the radio station was moved from bletchley park to nearby whaddon hall to avoid drawing attention to the site . 
according to the official historian of british intelligence ,  the `` ultra '' intelligence produced at bletchley shortened the war by two to four years ,  and without it the outcome of the war would have been uncertain . 
coded messages were taken down by hand and sent to bletchley on paper by motorcycle despatch riders or  -lrb-  later  -rrb-  by teleprinter . 
bede became known as `` venerable bede ''  -lrb-  lat . 
bede also had correspondents who supplied him with material . 
some historians have questioned the reliability of some of bede's accounts . 
bede was a northumbrian ,  and this tinged his work with a local bias . 
cuthbert's letter also relates a five-line poem in the vernacular that bede composed on his deathbed ,  known as `` bede's death song '' . 
the young boy was almost certainly bede ,  who would have been about 14.
in 733, bede travelled to york to visit ecgbert ,  who was then bishop of york . 
at the time bede wrote the `` historia ecclesiastica '' ,  there were two common ways of referring to dates . 
however ,  there are no descriptions of bede by that term right after his death . 
some manuscripts of the `` life of cuthbert '' ,  one of bede's works ,  mention that cuthbert's own priest was named bede; it is possible that this priest is the other name listed in the `` liber vitae '' . 
bede  -lrb-   ; ; 672/3 – 26 may 735 -rrb- ,  also known as saint bede ,  venerable bede ,  and bede the venerable  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was an english benedictine monk at the monastery of st .  peter and its companion monastery of st .  paul in the kingdom of northumbria of the angles  -lrb-  contemporarily monkwearmouth–jarrow abbey in tyne and wear ,  england  -rrb-  . 
there is no evidence for cult being paid to bede in england in the 8th century . 
in his own time ,  bede was as well known for his biblical commentaries and exegetical ,  as well as other theological ,  works . 
bede wrote some works designed to help teach grammar in the abbey school . 
bede also wrote homilies ,  works written to explain theology used in worship services . 
both types of bede's theological works circulated widely in the middle ages . 
modern historians and editors of bede have been lavish in their praise of his achievement in the `` historia ecclesiastica '' . 
the english heritage organization created jarrow hall  -lrb-  previously known as bede's world  -rrb-  ,  a museum that celebrates the history of bede and other parts of english heritage . 
according to his disciple cuthbert ,  bede was also `` doctus in nostris carminibus ''  -lrb-  `` learned in our songs ''  -rrb-  . 
bede's best-known work is the `` historia ecclesiastica gentis anglorum '' ,  or `` an ecclesiastical history of the english people '' ,  completed in about 731.
bede's primary intention in writing the `` historia ecclesiastica '' was to show the growth of the united church throughout england . 
when bede was about 17 years old ,  adomnán ,  the abbot of iona abbey ,  visited monkwearmouth and jarrow . 
bede's work as a hagiographer ,  and his detailed attention to dating ,  were both useful preparations for the task of writing the `` historia ecclesiastica '' . 
bubble teas fall under two categories: teas  -lrb-  without milk  -rrb-  and milk teas . 
the two most popular varieties are black pearl milk tea and green pearl milk tea . 
decaffeinated versions of teas are sometimes available when the tea house freshly brews the tea base . 
there are also smoothies that contain both tea and fruit . 
each of the ingredients of bubble tea can have many variations depending on the tea store . 
bubble tea cafés will frequently offer drinks without coffee or tea in them . 
other varieties of the drink can include blended tea drinks . 
cooking tapioca pearls for boba tea will depend on the manufacturer . 
bubble tea is also offered in some restaurants . 
marlborough ordered the formation forward . 
with villeroi shadowing marlborough's every move ,  marlborough's gamble that the french would not move against the weakened dutch position in the netherlands paid off . 
count horn's dutch infantry managed to push the french back from the water's edge ,  but it was apparent that before marlborough could launch his main effort against tallard ,  oberglauheim would have to be secured . 
marshal tallard ,  with 34,000 men ,  reached ulm ,  joining with the elector and marsin in augsburg on 5 august  -lrb-  although tallard was not impressed to find that the elector had dispersed his army in response to marlborough's campaign of ravaging the region  -rrb-  . 
whilst these events around blenheim and lutzingen were taking place ,  marlborough was preparing to cross the nebel . 
meanwhile ,  marlborough's and baden's forces would combine ,  totalling 80,000 men ,  for the march on the danube to seek out the elector and marsin before they could be reinforced . 
once again they fell back across the stream . 
lacking in numbers ,  eugene could not seriously disrupt tallard's march but the french marshal's progress was proving pitifully slow . 
their commander-in-chief that day ,  marshal tallard – who ,  unlike his subordinates ,  had not been ransomed or exchanged – was taken to england and imprisoned in nottingham until his release in 1711.
with salutes and courtesies ,  the marshal was escorted to marlborough's coach . 
tallard's march presented a dilemma for eugene . 
french losses were immense ,  with over 27,000 killed ,  wounded and captured . 
the elector in augsburg was informed on 14 july that tallard was on his way through the black forest . 
with eugene's forces at höchstädt on the north bank of the danube ,  and marlborough's at rain on the south bank ,  tallard and the elector debated their next move . 
mérode-westerloo later wrote – `` they died to a man where they stood ,  stationed right out in the open plain – supported by nobody . `` 
at about 08:00 the french artillery on their right wing opened fire ,  answered by colonel blood's batteries . 
in this assumption marlborough proved correct: villeroi shadowed the duke with 30,000 men in 60 squadrons and 42 battalions . 
during 11 august ,  tallard pushed forward from the river crossings at dillingen; by 12 august ,  the franco-bavarian forces were encamped behind the small river nebel near the village of blenheim on the plain of höchstädt . 
marlborough's march started on 19 may from bedburg ,  north-west of cologne . 
although the allies were again repulsed ,  these persistent attacks on blenheim eventually bore fruit ,  panicking clérambault into making the worst french error of the day . 
the resilience of the french king and the efforts of his generals ,  also added to marlborough’s problems . 
marlborough ,  however ,  noticed several important weaknesses in the french dispositions . 
in the words of marshal villars ,  the french defeat at ramillies was – `` the most shameful ,  humiliating and disastrous of routs . `` 
the duke left the hague on 9 may . 
marlborough later told bishop burnet that ,  ‘the french army looked the best of any he had ever seen’ . 
villeroi's right flank fell into chaos and was now open and vulnerable . 
with marlborough's departure north ,  the french transferred troops from the moselle valley to reinforce villeroi in flanders ,  while villars marched off to the rhine . 
by the time marlborough had closed down the ramillies campaign he had denied the french most of the spanish netherlands west of the meuse and north of the sambre – it was an unsurpassed operational triumph for the english duke but once again it was not decisive as these gains did not defeat france . 
because of this ,  as well as to maintain their momentum ,  the french and their allies took the offensive in 1706.
on their left ,  on the broad plain between taviers and ramillies – and where marlborough thought the decisive encounter must take place – overkirk drew the 69 squadrons of the dutch and danish horse ,  supported by 19 battalions of dutch infantry and two artillery pieces . 
although villeroi had the option of enveloping the flanks of the allied army as they deployed on the plateau of jandrenouille – threatening to encircle their army – the duke correctly gauged that the characteristically cautious french commander was intent on a defensive battle along the ridge-line . 
after their disastrous defeat at blenheim in 1704, the next year brought the french some respite . 
as the french ranks wavered ,  the leading squadrons of württemberg's danish horse – now unhampered by enemy fire from either village – were also sent into the attack and fell upon the exposed flank of the franco-swiss infantry and dragoons . 
in less than four hours marlborough's dutch ,  english ,  and danish forces overwhelmed villeroi's and max emanuel's franco-spanish-bavarian army . 
to the west of the petite gheete rises the plateau of mont st .  andré; a second plain ,  the plateau of jandrenouille – upon which the anglo-dutch army amassed – rises to the east . 
nevertheless ,  the danger passed ,  enabling the duke to attend to the positioning of the cavalry reinforcements feeding down from his right flank – a change of which villeroi remained blissfully unaware . 
far to the south ,  the remnants of de la colonie's brigade headed in the opposite direction towards the french held fortress of namur . `` 
kernighan's original 1978 implementation of hello ,  world ! 
kernighan coined the term unix and helped popularize thompson's unix philosophy . 
kernighan was the software editor for prentice hall international . 
kernighan has held a professorship in the department of computer science at princeton since 2000.
the first mud was also written in bcpl  -lrb-  mud1 -rrb- . 
the book `` bcpl: the language and its compiler '' describes the philosophy of bcpl as follows:
bcpl is the language in which the original hello world program was written . 
the single-line codice_5 comments of bcpl ,  which were not adopted by c ,  reappeared in c++ and later in c99.
bcpl has been rumored to have originally stood for `` bootstrap cambridge programming language '' ,  but cpl was never created since development stopped at bcpl ,  and the acronym was later reinterpreted for the bcpl book . 
martin richards maintains a modern version of bcpl on his website ,  last updated in 2018.
bcpl was also the initial language used in the seminal xerox parc alto project ,  the first modern personal computer; among other projects ,  the bravo document preparation system was written in bcpl . 
battleships were the embodiment of sea power . 
the battleship ,  particularly the dreadnought ,  was the dominant naval weapon of the world war i era . 
the naval treaties of the 1920s and 1930s limited the number of battleships ,  though technical innovation in battleship design continued . 
while the role of battleships in both world wars reflected mahanian doctrine ,  the details of battleship deployment were more complex . 
the only other 20th-century battleship on display is the japanese pre-dreadnought  . 
in 1921, he bombed and sank numerous ships ,  including the `` unsinkable '' german world war i battleship and the american pre-dreadnought  . 
jutland was the largest naval battle and the only full-scale clash of battleships in the war ,  and it was the last major battle fought primarily by battleships in world history . 
even during the cold war ,  the psychological impact of a battleship was significant . 
this suggested even for inferior naval powers a battleship fleet could have important strategic effect . 
the value of the battleship has been questioned ,  even during their heyday . 
naval vessel register in the 2000s . 
the remaining battleships met a variety of ends . 
battleships were a symbol of naval dominance and national might ,  and for decades the battleship was a major factor in both diplomacy and military strategy . 
mahan was highly influential in naval and political circles throughout the age of the battleship ,  calling for a large fleet of the most powerful battleships possible . 
in japan ,  the two battleships of the 1903–04 programme were the first to be laid down as all-big-gun designs ,  with eight 12-inch guns . 
between those two events ,  it had become clear that aircraft carriers were the new principal ships of the fleet and that battleships now performed a secondary role . 
at the outbreak of the spanish civil war ,  the spanish navy included only two small dreadnought battleships ,  and  . 
even when war threatened again in the late 1930s ,  battleship construction did not regain the level of importance it had held in the years before world war i . 
whilst the escape of the german fleet from the superior british firepower at jutland was effected by the german cruisers and destroyers successfully turning away the british battleships ,  the german attempt to rely on u-boat attacks on the british fleet failed . 
during the first world war and subsequently ,  battleships were rarely deployed without a protective screen of destroyers . 
battleship doctrine emphasised the concentration of the battlegroup . 
during the late 19th and early 20th centuries the battleship was the most powerful type of warship ,  and a fleet of battleships was considered vital for any nation that desired to maintain command of the sea . 
for many years ,  germany simply had no battleships . 
the term `` battleship '' came into formal use in the late 1880s to describe a type of ironclad warship ,  now referred to by historians as pre-dreadnought battleships . 
from 1794, the alternative term 'line of battle ship' was contracted  -lrb-  informally at first  -rrb-  to 'battle ship' or 'battleship' . 
two poems in the `` poetic edda '' and two books in the `` prose edda '' provide information about the bridge:
the bridge is mentioned in the `` prose edda '' books `` gylfaginning '' and `` skáldskaparmál '' ,  where it is referred to as `` bifröst '' . 
in chapter 17, high tells gangleri that the location of himinbjörg `` stands at the edge of heaven where bifrost reaches heaven . `` 
when the `` sons of muspell '' ride over bifröst it will break ,  `` as was said above . `` 
in the `` poetic edda '' ,  the bridge is mentioned in the poems `` grímnismál '' and `` fáfnismál '' ,  where it is referred to as `` bilröst '' . 
john lindow points to a parallel between bifröst ,  which he notes is `` a bridge between earth and heaven ,  or earth and the world of the gods '' ,  and the bridge gjallarbrú ,  `` a bridge between earth and the underworld ,  or earth and the world of the dead . `` 
both ships were scrapped after the war . 
the heavy armour and relatively slow speed of these ships made them more similar to german designs than to british ships; construction of the `` borodino ''s was halted by the first world war and all were scrapped after the end of the russian civil war . 
many armoured cruisers of the new kind were just as large and expensive as the equivalent battleship . 
the class had a very marked increase in speed ,  displacement and firepower compared to the most recent armoured cruisers but no more armour . 
the increasing size and power of the armoured cruiser led to suggestions in british naval circles that cruisers should displace battleships entirely . 
with six 15-inch guns but only 6-inch armour they were a further step forward from `` tiger '' in firepower and speed ,  but returned to the level of protection of the first british battlecruisers . 
the first ship would have been laid down in june of that year . 
however ,  mainstream british naval thinking between 1902 and 1904 was clearly in favour of heavily armoured battleships ,  rather than the fast ships that fisher favoured . 
under the selborne plan of 1902, the royal navy intended to start three new battleships and four armoured cruisers each year . 
1912 saw work begin on three more german battlecruisers of the  ,  the first german battlecruisers to mount 12-inch guns . 
the `` mackensen ''s were a development of the `` derfflinger '' class ,  with 13.8-inch guns and a broadly similar armour scheme ,  designed for  . 
a late renaissance in popularity of ships between battleships and cruisers in size occurred on the eve of world war ii . 
the first armoured cruisers had been built in the 1870s ,  as an attempt to give armour protection to ships fulfilling the typical cruiser roles of patrol ,  trade protection and power projection . 
in the years immediately after world war i ,  britain ,  japan and the us all began design work on a new generation of ever more powerful battleships and battlecruisers . 
the admiral class would have been the only british ships capable of taking on the german `` mackensen '' class; nevertheless ,  german shipbuilding was drastically slowed by the war ,  and while two `` mackensen ''s were launched ,  none were ever completed . 
for most of the combatants ,  capital ship construction was very limited during the war . 
the final british battlecruiser design of the war was the  ,  which was born from a requirement for an improved version of the `` queen elizabeth '' battleship . 
nevertheless ,  armoured cruisers would remain vital for commerce protection . 
the better-armoured german battlecruisers fared better ,  in part due to the poor performance of british fuzes  -lrb-  the british shells tended to explode or break up on impact with the german armour  -rrb-  . 
the german battlecruiser perhaps made the most impact early in the war . 
in the early years of the war various german ships had a measure of success hunting merchant ships in the atlantic . 
only the central armoured hull section of the first ship ,  `` stalingrad '' ,  was launched in 1954 and then used as a target . 
he is the longest-serving labor party prime minister . 
hawke is the only australian prime minister to be born in south australia ,  and the only one raised and educated in western australia . 
hawke was born in south australia but moved to western australia as a child . 
he joined the labor party in 1947 at the age of eighteen . 
after labor's landslide victory ,  hawke was sworn in as the 23rd prime minister of australia by the governor-general on 11 march 1983.
robert james lee hawke ,   -lrb-  born 9 december 1929 -rrb- is an australian former politician who was the 23rd prime minister of australia and the leader of the labor party from 1983 to 1991.
three years later ,  he led labor to a landslide victory at the 1983 election and was sworn in as prime minister . 
this convinced many labor mps that only hawke would be able to lead labor to victory at the upcoming election . 
at the age of fifteen ,  he presciently boasted to friends that he would one day become the prime minister of australia . 
his uncle ,  albert ,  was the labor premier of western australia between 1953 and 1959, and was also a close friend of prime minister john curtin ,  who was in many ways bob hawke's role model . 
the labor caucus was still given the authority to determine who would make up the ministry ,  but gave hawke unprecedented powers for a labor prime minister to select which individual ministers would comprise the 13-strong cabinet . 
initially hayden believed that he could remain in his job ,  but button's defection proved to be the final straw in convincing hayden that he would have to resign as labor leader . 
in 1973, hawke was elected as the federal president of the labor party . 
in 2002, hawke was named an honorary member of south australia's economic development board during rann's labor government . 
his popularity with the public was ,  if anything ,  enhanced by this period of rehabilitation ,  and opinion polling suggested that he was a far more popular public figure than either labor leader bill hayden or liberal prime minister malcolm fraser . 
after keating's defeat and the election of the howard government at the 1996 election ,  he began to be more involved with labor ,  regularly appearing at a number of labor election launches and campaigns ,  often alongside keating . 
less than two months after the disastrous result at the flinders by-election ,  hayden announced his resignation as leader of the labor party to the caucus on 3 february 1983.
he wrote his thesis on wage-fixing in australia and successfully presented it in january 1956.
labor party power-brokers ,  such as graham richardson and barrie unsworth ,  now openly switched their allegiance from hayden to hawke . 
the political partnership between hawke and his treasurer ,  paul keating ,  proved essential to labor's success in government . 
but the interpretation of baldr as `` the brave god '' may be secondary . 
baldr  -lrb-  also balder ,  baldur  -rrb-  is a god in norse mythology ,  and a son of the god odin and the goddess frigg . 
in the poetic edda the tale of baldr's death is referred to rather than recounted at length . 
according to rudolf simek ,  the original name for baldr must be understood as 'shining day' . 
after a lengthy battle at singasteinn ,  heimdallr wins and returns brísingamen to freyja . 
in norse mythology ,  brísingamen  -lrb-  or brísinga men  -rrb-  is the torc or necklace of the goddess freyja . 
the pendant may represent freyja herself . 
snorri sturluson quoted this old poem in `` skáldskaparmál '' ,  saying that because of this legend heimdallr is called `` seeker of freyja's necklace ''  -lrb-  `` skáldskaparmál '' ,  section 8 -rrb- and loki is called `` thief of brísingamen ''  -lrb-  `` skáldskaparmál '' ,  section 16 -rrb- . 
formally: if formula_1 is continuous then there exists an formula_2 such that: formula_3.
recall that formula_6 is the `` n ''-sphere and formula_7 is the `` n ''-ball:
pascal concludes with the proof , 
pascal's work was so precocious that descartes was convinced that pascal's father had written it . 
in 2014, nvidia announced its new pascal microarchitecture ,  which is named for pascal . 
for a while ,  pascal pursued the life of a bachelor . 
pascal also wrote in defence of the scientific method . 
the first graphics cards featuring pascal were released in 2016.
pascal had two sisters ,  the younger jacqueline and the elder gilberte . 
particularly of interest to pascal was a work of desargues on conic sections . 
pascal continued to influence mathematics throughout his life . 
by 1647, pascal had learned of evangelista torricelli's experimentation with barometers . 
pascal was born in clermont-ferrand ,  which is in france's auvergne region . 
after a religious experience in 1654, pascal mostly gave up work in mathematics . 
in honour of his scientific contributions ,  the name `` pascal '' has been given to the si unit of pressure ,  to a programming language ,  and pascal's law  -lrb-  an important principle of hydrostatics  -rrb-  ,  and as mentioned above ,  pascal's triangle and pascal's wager still bear his name . 
pascal also used `` de l'esprit géométrique '' to develop a theory of definition . 
pascal's results caused many disputes before being accepted . 
the young pascal showed an amazing aptitude for mathematics and science . 
the headaches which afflicted pascal are generally attributed to his brain lesion . 
this caused the barrel to leak ,  in what became known as pascal's barrel experiment . 
pascal's `` pensées '' is widely considered to be a masterpiece ,  and a landmark in `` french prose '' . 
jackson ,  and later john t .  koch ,  use `` british '' only for the early phase of the common brittonic language . 
 -lrb-  for a discussion ,  see celtic languages .   -rrb- 
the brittonic ,  brythonic or british celtic languages  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  form one of the two branches of the insular celtic language family; the other is goidelic . 
 ''out & about '' ,  the unreleased bronski beat album from 1987, was released digitally via steve bronski's website . 
foster left bronski beat after their second album ,  and the band used a series of vocalists before dissolving in 1996.
foster left the band in 1987.
the original member set of bronski beat was jimmy somerville  -lrb-  vocals  -rrb-  ,  steve bronski and larry steinbachek  -lrb-  keyboards  -rrb-  . 
in 2016, steve bronski again teamed up with ian donaldson ,  with the aim of bringing bronski beat back ,  enlisting a new singer ,  stephen granville . 
bronski beat signed a recording contract with london records in 1984 after doing only nine live gigs . 
in 2017, the new bronski beat released a reworked version of `` age of consent '' entitled `` age of reason '' . 
bronski beat formed in 1983 when somerville ,  bronski  -lrb-  both from glasgow  -rrb-  ,  and steinbachek  -lrb-  from southend  -rrb-  shared a three-bedroom flat at lancaster house in brixton . 
bronski beat recruited john foster as somerville's replacement  -lrb-  foster is credited as `` jon jon ''  -rrb-  . 
the first terabyte  -lrb-  si prefix ,  bytes  -rrb-  hard disk drive was introduced in 2007.
software that uses iec binary prefixes for powers of 1024 `` and '' uses standard si prefixes for powers of 1000 includes:
the first letter of each such prefix is therefore identical to the corresponding si prefixes ,  except for `` k '' ,  which is used interchangeably with `` k '' ,  whereas in si ,  only the lower-case k represents 1000.
this style was used from about 1965 to 1975.
the iec 60027-2 amendment 2 also states that the iec position is the same as that of bipm  -lrb-  the body that regulates the si system  -rrb- ; the si prefixes retain their definitions in powers of 1000 and are never used to mean a power of 1024.
the ieee decided that their standards would use the prefixes `` kilo '' ,  etc . 
along with `` giga- '' or g- ,  meaning  ,  they are now known as si prefixes after the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  ,  introduced in 1960 to formalize aspects of the metric system . 
the iec prefixes were defined for use alongside the international system of quantities  -lrb-  isq  -rrb-  in 2009.
one of the stated goals of the introduction of the iec prefixes was `` to preserve the si prefixes as unambiguous decimal multipliers . `` 
the hp 21mx real-time computer  -lrb-  1974 -rrb- denoted  -lrb-  which is 192×1024 -rrb- as `` 196k '' and as `` 1m '' ,  while the hp 3000 business computer  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- could have `` 64k '' ,  `` 96k '' ,  or `` 128k '' bytes of memory . 
 ''advanced format '' drives using 4096-byte sectors are described as having `` 4k sectors . `` 
programs such as fdisk/cfdisk ,  parted ,  and apt-get use si prefixes with their decimal meaning . 
nist has stated the si prefixes `` refer strictly to powers of 10 '' and that the binary definitions `` should not be used '' for them . 
in 2008, the iec prefixes were incorporated into the international standard system of units used alongside the international system of quantities  -lrb-  see iso/iec 80000 -rrb- . 
according to these recommendations ,  operating systems and other software would also use binary and si prefixes in the same way ,  so the purchaser of a `` 500 gb '' hard drive would find the operating system reporting either `` 500 gb '' or `` 466 gib '' ,  while bytes of ram would be displayed as `` 512 mib '' . 
the hardware industry measures system memory  -lrb-  ram  -rrb-  using the binary meaning while magnetic disk storage uses the si definition . 
today ,  the hard drive industry continues to use decimal prefixes for drive capacity  -lrb-  as well as for transfer rate  -rrb-  . 
in contrast ,  hard disk drive manufacturers used `` megabytes '' or `` mb '' ,  meaning 10 bytes ,  to characterize their products as early as 1974.
the international bureau of weights and measures  -lrb-  bipm  -rrb-  ,  which maintains the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  ,  expressly prohibits the use of si prefixes to denote binary multiples ,  and recommends the use of the iec prefixes as an alternative since units of information are not included in si . 
compliance with the si requires that the prefixes take their 1000-based meaning ,  and that they are not to be used as placeholders for other numbers ,  like 1024.
software that supports decimal prefixes for powers of 1000 `` and '' binary prefixes for powers of 1024  -lrb-  but does not follow si or iec nomenclature for this  -rrb-  includes:
the names for the new prefixes are derived from the original si prefixes combined with the term `` binary '' ,  but contracted ,  by taking the first two letters of the si prefix and `` bi '' from binary . 
for a time ,  memory capacities were often expressed in k ,  even when m could have been used: the ibm system/370 model 158 brochure  -lrb-  1972 -rrb- had the following: `` real storage capacity is available in 512k increments ranging from 512k to 2,048k bytes . `` 
the plaintiffs acknowledged that the iec and ieee standards define a mb as one million bytes but stated that the industry has largely ignored the iec standards . 
in the optical disks market ,  compact discs use `` mb '' to mean 1024 bytes while dvds use `` gb '' to mean 1000 bytes . 
goes into detail about who he believes does and does not belong in the hall of fame . 
the national baseball hall of fame and museum is an american history museum and hall of fame ,  located in cooperstown ,  new york ,  and operated by private interests . 
the hall of fame includes one female member ,  effa manley . 
the hall of fame was established in 1939 by stephen carlton clark ,  the owner of a local hotel . 
the word cooperstown is often used as shorthand  -lrb-  or a metonym  -rrb-  for the national baseball hall of fame and museum ,  similarly to canton for the pro football hall of fame in canton ,  ohio . 
among baseball fans ,  `` hall of fame '' means not only the museum and facility in cooperstown ,  new york ,  but the pantheon of players ,  managers ,  umpires ,  executives ,  and pioneers who have been enshrined in the hall . 
the hall selects the logo `` based on where that player makes his most indelible mark . `` 
from 2008 to 2010, following changes made by the hall in july 2007, the main veterans committee ,  then made up of living hall of famers ,  voted only on players whose careers began in 1943 or later . 
in 2001, the veterans committee was reformed to comprise the living hall of fame members and other honorees . 
although the hall always made the final decision on which logo was shown ,  until 2001 the hall deferred to the wishes of players or managers whose careers were linked with multiple teams . 
the hall has seen a noticeable decrease in attendance in recent years . 
the hall of fame also presents an annual exhibit at fanfest at the major league baseball all-star game . 
in symbols ,  bpp = bpp . 
it is known that bpp is closed under complement; that is ,  bpp = co-bpp . 
it is known that rp is a subset of bpp ,  and bpp is a subset of pp . 
the relationship between bpp and np is unknown: it is not known whether bpp is a subset of np ,  np is a subset of bpp or neither . 
besides the problems in p ,  which are obviously in bpp ,  many problems were known to be in bpp but not known to be in p .  the number of such problems is decreasing ,  and it is conjectured that p = bpp . 
thus either p = bpp or p ≠ np or both . 
it is the quantum analogue of the complexity class bpp . 
alternatively ,  one can define bqp in terms of quantum turing machines . 
a decision problem is a member of bqp if there exists a quantum algorithm  -lrb-  an algorithm that runs on a quantum computer  -rrb-  that solves the decision problem with `` high '' probability and is guaranteed to run in polynomial time . 
in computational complexity theory ,  bounded-error quantum polynomial time  -lrb-  bqp  -rrb-  is the class of decision problems solvable by a quantum computer in polynomial time ,  with an error probability of at most 1/3 for all instances . 
bqp contains p and bpp and is contained in awpp ,  pp and pspace . 
sarah brings rachael back to the corporation to meet with deckard ,  and they escape . 
 ''  -rrb-  ,  learning more about the nature of the blade runners and the replicants . 
blade runner 2: the edge of human  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- is a science fiction novel by american writer k .  w .  jeter . 
several brainfuck compilers have been made smaller than 200 bytes ,  and one is only 100 bytes . 
so the first `` brainfuck '' programs appear in böhm's 1964 paper – and they were programs sufficient to prove turing completeness . 
brainfuck simply requires one to break commands into microscopic steps . 
brainfuck is an esoteric programming language created in 1993 by urban müller ,  and notable for its extreme minimalism . 
bartolomeo ammannati  -lrb-  18 june 151113 april 1592 -rrb- was an italian architect and sculptor ,  born at settignano ,  near florence . 
in 1550 ammannati married laura battiferri ,  an elegant poet and an accomplished woman . 
bishops in all of these communions are ordained by other bishops through the laying on of hands . 
cme church bishops may be male or female . 
bishops form the leadership in the catholic church ,  the eastern orthodox church ,  the oriental orthodox churches ,  the anglican communion ,  the lutheran church ,  the independent catholic churches ,  the independent anglican churches ,  and certain other ,  smaller ,  denominations . 
church members frequently refer to a former bishop as `` bishop '' as a sign of respect and affection . 
the conference of methodist bishops includes the united methodist `` council of bishops '' plus bishops from affiliated autonomous methodist or united churches . 
one of twelve bishops of the general board is also elected the `` presiding bishop '' of the church ,  and two others are appointed by the presiding bishop himself ,  as his first and second assistant presiding bishops . 
in catholicism ,  eastern orthodoxy ,  oriental orthodoxy ,  and anglicanism ,  only a bishop can ordain other bishops ,  priests ,  and deacons . 
according to the `` book of discipline of the united methodist church '' ,  a bishop's responsibilities are
instead ,  the metropolitan bishop  -lrb-  the bishop in a large city  -rrb-  appointed priests to minister each congregation ,  acting as the bishop's delegate . 
 ''the `` elders ''  -lrb-  greek ,  presbuteros  -rrb-  or `` bishops ''  -lrb-  episkopos  -rrb-  were the most important officers of the church . 
in the united methodist church  -lrb-  the largest branch of methodism in the world  -rrb-  bishops serve as administrative and pastoral superintendents of the church . 
in the african methodist episcopal church ,  `` bishops are the chief officers of the connectional organization . 
since the implementation of concordats between the elca and the episcopal church of the united states and the elcic and the anglican church of canada ,  all bishops ,  including the presiding bishop  -lrb-  elca  -rrb-  or the national bishop  -lrb-  elcic  -rrb-  ,  have been consecrated using the historic succession ,  with at least one anglican bishop serving as co-consecrator . 
the collegial expression of episcopal leadership in the united methodist church is known as the council of bishops . 
in 2006, katharine jefferts schori ,  the episcopal bishop of nevada ,  became the first woman to become the presiding bishop of the episcopal church . 
in the polity of the church of god  -lrb-  cleveland ,  tennessee  -rrb-  ,  the international leader is the presiding bishop ,  and the members of the executive committee are executive bishops . 
in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ,  the bishop is the leader of a local congregation ,  called a ward . 
in some christian denominations ,  for example ,  the anglican communion ,  parish churches may maintain a chair for the use of the bishop when he visits; this is to signify the parish's union with the bishop . 
the bishop is the ordinary minister of the sacrament of confirmation in the latin rite catholic church ,  and in the anglican and old catholic communion only a bishop may administer this sacrament . 
united methodist bishops may be male or female ,  with marjorie matthews being the first woman to be consecrated a bishop in 1980.
of the several kinds of priest .  .  . ministries ,  the bishop is the highest . 
as opposed to ward bishoprics ,  where the counselors do not hold the office of bishop ,  all three men in the presiding bishopric hold the office of bishop ,  and thus the counselors ,  as with the presiding bishop ,  are formally referred to as `` bishop '' . 
the presiding bishop of the elca and the national bishop of the elcic ,  the national bishops of their respective bodies ,  are elected for a single 6-year term and may be elected to an additional term . 
thus ,  in time ,  the bishop changed from being the leader of a single church confined to an urban area to being the leader of the churches of a given geographical area . 
some baptists also have begun taking on the title of `` bishop '' . 
as well as traditional diocesan bishops ,  many churches have a well-developed structure of church leadership that involves a number of layers of authority and responsibility . 
the pope ,  in addition to being the bishop of rome and spiritual head of the catholic church ,  is also the patriarch of the latin rite . 
the 18th century was the golden age of bordeaux . 
no bishops were mentioned during the whole 8th century and part of the 9th in bordeaux . 
the municipality  -lrb-  commune  -rrb-  of bordeaux proper has a population of 246,586  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- . 
around 585, gallactorius is cited as count of bordeaux and fighting the basque people . 
bordeaux is located close to the european atlantic coast ,  in the southwest of france and in the north of the aquitaine region . 
bordeaux is a major centre for business in france as it has the sixth largest metropolitan population in france . 
in 1870, at the beginning of the franco-prussian war against prussia ,  the french government temporarily relocated to bordeaux from paris . 
bordeaux  -lrb-  ; gascon   -rrb-  is a port city on the garonne in the gironde department in southwestern france . 
there are no rounds in the two player game . 
in some versions ,  the two player game can also be played by one player against a computer opponent . 
the game consists of 32 levels . 
two different versions of the original game were released . 
the characters and theme of the game are based on the 1986 arcade game `` bubble bobble '' . 
the objective of the game is to clear all the bubbles from the arena without any bubble crossing the bottom line . 
it is the bone mineralization that give bones rigidity . 
the hard outer layer of bones is composed of cortical bone also called compact bone being much denser than cancellous bone . 
endochondral ossification occurs in long bones and most other bones in the body; it involves the development of bone from cartilage . 
the formation of bone is called ossification . 
bone marrow ,  also known as myeloid tissue in red bone marrow ,  can be found in almost any bone that holds cancellous tissue . 
trabecular bone accounts for the remaining 20% of total bone mass but has nearly ten times the surface area of compact bone . 
cancellous bone ,  also called trabecular or spongy bone ,  is the internal tissue of the skeletal bone and is an open cell porous network . 
osteoclasts are very large multinucleate cells that are responsible for the breakdown of bones by the process of bone resorption . 
in adults ,  red marrow is mostly found in the bone marrow of the femur ,  the ribs ,  the vertebrae and pelvic bones . 
bone is actively constructed and remodeled throughout life by special bone cells known as osteoblasts and osteoclasts . 
when two bones join together ,  they are said to `` articulate '' . 
bretwalda  -lrb-  also brytenwalda and bretenanwealda ,  sometimes capitalised  -rrb-  is an old english word . 
brouwer's fixed-point theorem is a fixed-point theorem in topology ,  named after l .  e .  j . 
the theorem has several formulations ,  depending on the context in which it is used and its degree of generalization . 
benzoic acid is relatively nontoxic . 
benzoic acid was discovered in the sixteenth century . 
these latter also investigated how hippuric acid is related to benzoic acid . 
food-grade benzoic acid is now produced synthetically . 
the salts and esters of benzoic acid are known as benzoates  . 
benzoic acid is cheap and readily available ,  so the laboratory synthesis of benzoic acid is mainly practiced for its pedagogical value . 
benzoic acid  ,  cho  -lrb-  or chcooh  -rrb-  ,  is a colorless crystalline solid and a simple aromatic carboxylic acid . 
typical levels of use for benzoic acid as a preservative in food are between 0.05–0.1% . 
benzoic acid is produced commercially by partial oxidation of toluene with oxygen . 
where `` p '' is the probability of state `` i '' ,  `` ε '' the energy of state `` i '' ,  `` k '' the boltzmann constant ,  `` t '' the temperature of the system and `` m '' is the number of all states accessible to the system of interest . 
where is the probability of the system being in state  ,  is the energy of that state ,  and a constant of the distribution is the product of boltzmann's constant and thermodynamic temperature  . 
the boltzmann distribution is a probability distribution that gives the probability of a certain state as a function of that state's energy and temperature of the system to which the distribution is applied . 
the `` ratio '' of probabilities of two states is known as the boltzmann factor and characteristically only depends on the states' energy difference:
leg theory is a bowling tactic in the sport of cricket . 
jardine called this modified form of the tactic `` fast leg theory '' . 
leg theory can be a moderately successful tactic when used with both fast bowling and spin bowling ,  particularly leg spin to right-handed batsmen or off spin to left-handed batsmen . 
simply put ,  leg theory involves concentrating the bowling attack at or near the line of leg stump . 
danner is the sister of harry danner and the widow of bruce paltrow . 
she is the mother of actress gwyneth paltrow and director jake paltrow . 
danner was married to producer and director bruce paltrow ,  who died of oral cancer in 2002.
blythe katherine danner paltrow  -lrb-  born february 3, 1943 -rrb- is an american actress . 
in 1972, danner portrayed martha jefferson in the film version of `` 1776 '' . 
she and paltrow had two children together ,  actress gwyneth paltrow and director jake paltrow . 
pyrite leaching  -lrb-  fes  -rrb- : in the first step ,  disulfide is spontaneously oxidized to thiosulfate by ferric ion  -lrb-  fe  -rrb-  ,  which in turn is reduced to give ferrous ion  -lrb-  fe  -rrb- :
rock climbing first appeared as a sport in the late-1800s . 
limestone and volcanic rock are also used for bouldering . 
the characteristics of boulder problems depend largely on the type of rock being climbed . 
 ''the process '' ,  a 55 foot v16 in bishop ,  california first climbed by daniel woods in 2015.
highball bouldering began in 1961 when john gill climbed a 37 foot  -lrb-  11 meter  -rrb-  boulder he called ``  ''the thimble '' '' . 
bouldering is a form of rock climbing that is performed on small rock formations or artificial rock walls ,  known as boulders ,  without the use of ropes or harnesses . 
highball bouldering is simply climbing tall boulders . 
groundbreaking ascents in this style include; `` ambrosia '' ,  a 55 foot  -lrb-  18 meter  -rrb-  boulder in bishop ,  california climbed by kevin jorgeson in 2015 sporting the grade of v11.
the boiling point cannot be reduced below the triple point . 
the boiling point of a substance is the temperature at which the vapor pressure of the liquid equals the pressure surrounding the liquid and the liquid changes into a vapor . 
liquids may change to a vapor at temperatures below their boiling points through the process of evaporation . 
the normal boiling point  -lrb-  also called the atmospheric boiling point or the atmospheric pressure boiling point  -rrb-  of a liquid is the special case in which the vapor pressure of the liquid equals the defined atmospheric pressure at sea level ,  1 atmosphere . 
the earliest phases of the big bang are subject to much speculation . 
since the clouds of gas have no heavy elements ,  they likely formed in the first few minutes after the big bang ,  during big bang nucleosynthesis . 
the big bang is not an explosion of matter moving outward to fill an empty universe . 
an important feature of the big bang spacetime is the presence of particle horizons . 
physics may conclude that time did not exist before 'big bang' ,  but 'started' with the big bang and hence there might be no 'beginning' ,  'before' or potentially 'cause' and instead always existed . 
indirect evidence for dark matter comes from its gravitational influence on other matter ,  as no dark matter particles have been observed in laboratories . 
as with any theory ,  a number of mysteries and problems have arisen as a result of the development of the big bang theory . 
quantum fluctuations ,  or other laws of physics that may have existed at the start of the big bang could then create the conditions for matter to occur . 
the big bang theory developed from observations of the structure of the universe and from theoretical considerations . 
english astronomer fred hoyle is credited with coining the term `` big bang '' during a 1949 bbc radio broadcast ,  saying: `` these theories were based on the hypothesis that all the matter in the universe was created in one big bang at a particular time in the remote past . `` 
the lambda-cdm model is the current `` standard model '' of big bang cosmology ,  consensus is that it is the simplest model that can account for the various measurements and observations relevant to cosmology . 
what later will be known as the `` big bang theory '' of the origin of the universe ,  he called his `` hypothesis of the primeval atom '' or the `` cosmic egg '' . 
though most of the mass in the universe seems to be in the form of dark matter ,  big bang theory and various observations seem to indicate that it is not made out of conventional baryonic matter  -lrb-  protons ,  neutrons ,  and electrons  -rrb-  but it is unclear exactly what it `` is '' made out of . 
the big bang theory depends on two major assumptions: the universality of physical laws and the cosmological principle . 
the big bang theory is the prevailing cosmological model for the observable universe from the earliest known periods through its subsequent large-scale evolution . 
detailed observations of the morphology and distribution of galaxies and quasars are in agreement with the current state of the big bang theory . 
using the big bang model it is possible to calculate the concentration of helium-4, helium-3, deuterium ,  and lithium-7 in the universe as ratios to the amount of ordinary hydrogen . 
it would become denser and hotter again ,  ending with a state similar to that in which it started—a big crunch . 
what follows are a list of the mysterious aspects of the big bang theory still under intense investigation by cosmologists and astrophysicists . 
negative pressure is believed to be a property of vacuum energy ,  but the exact nature and existence of dark energy remains one of the great mysteries of the big bang . 
precise modern models of the big bang appeal to various exotic physical phenomena that have not been observed in terrestrial laboratory experiments or incorporated into the standard model of particle physics . 
it is not yet understood why the universe has more matter than antimatter . 
consequently ,  the state of the universe in the earliest instants of the big bang expansion is still poorly understood and an area of open investigation and speculation . 
large particle accelerators can replicate the conditions that prevailed after the early moments of the universe ,  resulting in confirmation and refinement of the details of the big bang model . 
additionally ,  there are outstanding problems associated with the currently favored cold dark matter model which include the dwarf galaxy problem and the cuspy halo problem . 
this primordial singularity is itself sometimes called `` the big bang '' ,  but the term can also refer to a more generic early hot ,  dense phase of the universe . 
cosmologists now have fairly precise and accurate measurements of many of the parameters of the big bang model ,  and have made the unexpected discovery that the expansion of the universe appears to be accelerating . 
this resulted in the predominance of matter over antimatter in the present universe . 
much of the current work in cosmology includes understanding how galaxies form in the context of the big bang ,  understanding the physics of the universe at earlier and earlier times ,  and reconciling observations with the basic theory . 
bock is a strong lager of german origin . 
the maibock style ,  also known as helles bock or heller bock ,  is a helles lager brewed to bock strength; therefore ,  still as strong as traditional bock ,  but lighter in colour and with more hop presence . 
the following commercial products are indicative of the style: point bock  -lrb-  stevens point brewery  -rrb-  einbecker ur-bock dunkel ,  pennsylvania brewing st .  nick bock ,  aass bock ,  great lakes rockefeller bock ,  stegmaier brewhouse bock . 
originally a dark beer ,  a modern bock can range from light copper to brown in colour . 
