the vendor's telephony equipment then connects the calls to the call centre operator's agents . 
call centres increased with the deregulation of long distance calling and growth in information dependent industries . 
inbound call centres can be outsourced or managed in-house . 
in virtual call centre model ,  the call centre operator pays a monthly or annual fee to a vendor that hosts the call centre telephony equipment in their own data centre . 
a call centre or call center is a centralised office used for receiving or transmitting a large volume of requests by telephone . 
these include the call centre industries in the philippines ,  in bangladesh ,  and in india . 
historically ,  call centres have been built on private branch exchange  -lrb-  pbx  -rrb-  equipment that is owned ,  hosted ,  and maintained by the call centre operator themselves . 
simulation algorithms are increasingly being used to model call arrival ,  queueing and service levels . 
the 2014 bbc fly on the wall documentary series `` the call centre '' gave an often distorted although humorous view of life in a welsh call centre . 
charles messier  -lrb-  ; 26 june 1730 – 12 april 1817 -rrb- was a french astronomer most notable for publishing an astronomical catalogue consisting of 110 nebulae and star clusters ,  which came to be known as the messier objects . 
messier was born in badonviller in the lorraine region of france ,  being the tenth of twelve children of françoise b .  grandblaise and nicolas messier ,  a court usher . 
remains of the culture have been dated from about 1900 bce until about 1300 bce . 
the cemetery h culture was a bronze age culture in the punjab region in the northern part of the indian subcontinent ,  from about 1900 bce until about 1300 bce . 
gini was born on may 23, 1884, in motta di livenza ,  near treviso ,  into an old landed family . 
his first published work was `` il sesso dal punto di vista statistico ''  -lrb-  1908 -rrb- . 
corrado gini  -lrb-  may 23, 1884 – march 13, 1965 -rrb- was an italian statistician ,  demographer and sociologist who developed the gini coefficient ,  a measure of the income inequality in a society . 
some expensive ,  high performance crankshafts also use heavy-metal counterweights to make the crankshaft more compact . 
monolithic crankshafts are most common ,  but some smaller and larger engines use assembled crankshafts . 
corneliszoon was granted a patent for his crankshaft in 1597.
see the main article on crossplane crankshafts . 
the technician micro-polishes each of the rebuilt crankshafts by hand . 
in an effort to reduce costs ,  used crankshafts may also be machined . 
in a paired counter-rotating crankshaft arrangement ,  each piston is connected to two crankshafts so lateral forces due to the angle of the connecting rods cancel each other out . 
the crankshaft is once more heated to 500-600 degrees to relieve structural stress . 
his twin-cylinder pump incorporated a crankshaft ,  including both the crank and shaft mechanisms . 
in a conventional piston-crank arrangement in an engine or compressor ,  a piston is connected to a crankshaft by a connecting rod . 
crankshafts can also be machined out of a billet ,  often a bar of high quality vacuum remelted steel . 
machining or remanufacturing crankshafts are precision machined to exact tolerances with no odd size crankshaft bearings or journals . 
quality control inspects all of the finished crankshafts mistakes . 
if the re-manufactured crankshaft is out of alignment ,  then the technician must re-straighten the structure . 
crankshaft grinding involves rough grinding the excess material from the rod or journals . 
some engines also use cast iron crankshafts for low output versions while the more expensive high output version use forged steel . 
remanufacturing a crankshaft typically involves the following steps:
the magnetic particle inspection is repeated after the crankshaft has been straightened . 
the remanufactured crankshafts are then rustproofed using cosmoline and packaged in damage-proof coverings . 
the welding process for re-manufactured crankshafts is called submerged arc welding . 
rostrally to the spinal cord lies the brain . 
the central nervous system  -lrb-  cns  -rrb-  is the part of the nervous system consisting of the brain and spinal cord . 
the central nervous system consists of the two major structures: the brain and spinal cord . 
the neural tube gives rise to both brain and spinal cord . 
the tracts passing from the spinal cord to the brain pass through here . 
while the spinal cord has certain processing ability such as that of spinal locomotion and can process reflexes ,  the brain is the major processing unit of the nervous system . 
from and to the spinal cord are projections of the peripheral nervous system in the form of spinal nerves  -lrb-  sometimes segmental nerves  -rrb-  . 
the spinal cord relays information up to the brain through spinal tracts through the `` final common pathway '' to the thalamus and ultimately to the cortex . 
the spinal cord is derived from the posterior or 'caudal' portion of the neural tube . 
microscopically ,  there are differences between the neurons and tissue of the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system . 
this differentiates the central nervous system from the peripheral nervous system ,  which consists of neurons ,  axons and schwann cells . 
additionally parts of the visual and auditory systems are located in the mid brain ,  including control of automatic eye movements . 
planarians ,  members of the phylum platyhelminthes  -lrb-  flatworms  -rrb-  ,  have the simplest ,  clearly defined delineation of a nervous system into a central nervous system  -lrb-  cns  -rrb-  and a peripheral nervous system  -lrb-  pns  -rrb-  . 
cell cycle checkpoints are used by the cell to monitor and regulate the progress of the cell cycle . 
before a cell can enter cell division ,  it needs to take in nutrients . 
the cell then divides in cytokinesis ,  to produce two identical daughter cells . 
in general ,  cells are most radiosensitive in late m and g phases and most resistant in late s phase . 
after cell division ,  each of the daughter cells begin the interphase of a new cycle . 
the cell cycle consists of four distinct phases: g phase ,  s phase  -lrb-  synthesis  -rrb-  ,  g phase  -lrb-  collectively known as interphase  -rrb-  and m phase  -lrb-  mitosis or meiosis  -rrb-  . 
for cells with a longer cell cycle time and a significantly long g phase ,  there is a second peak of resistance late in g . 
this accounts for approximately 10% of the cell cycle . 
the g/m checkpoint is where the cell ensures that it has enough cytoplasm and phospholipids for two daughter cells . 
g is a resting phase where the cell has left the cycle and has stopped dividing . 
g2 phase occurs after dna replication and is a period of protein synthesis and rapid cell growth to prepare the cell for mitosis . 
to ensure the proper division of the cell ,  there are control mechanisms known as cell cycle checkpoints . 
passage through the g check point commits the cell to division . 
many cells do not enter g and continue to divide throughout an organism's life ,  e . g .  ,  epithelial cells . 
the cell cycle ,  or cell-division cycle ,  is the series of events that take place in a cell leading to its division and duplication of its dna  -lrb-  dna replication  -rrb-  to produce two daughter cells . 
thus there is a net increase in cell number as the number of cells that die by apoptosis or senescence remains the same . 
the cell's nuclear dna contents are duplicated during s phase but may continue till g in case of heterochromatin . 
an unhealthy or malnourished cell will get stuck at this checkpoint . 
in some styles of lindy hop ,  the tension may become quite high without initiating movement . 
when creating frame ,  tension is the primary means of establishing communication . 
in swing dances ,  tension and compression may be maintained for a significant period of time . 
connection occurs in both open and closed dance positions  -lrb-  also called `` open frame '' and `` closed frame ''  -rrb-  . 
the nepalese caste system resembles that of the indian `` jāti '' system with numerous `` jāti '' divisions with a `` varna '' system superimposed for a rough equivalence . 
with the gabo reform of 1896, the class system of korea was officially abolished . 
frederik barth in his review of this system of social stratification in pakistan suggested that these are castes . 
today ,  the hukou system is considered by various sources as the current caste system of china . 
the songhai economy was based on a caste system . 
ethel m .  albert in 1960 claimed that the societies in central africa were caste-like social stratification systems . 
during the period of yuan dynasty ,  ruler kublai khan enforced a `` four class system '' ,  which was a legal caste system . 
the socially isolated cagots were endogamous ,  and chances of social mobility non-existent . 
the caste system in sri lanka is a division of society into strata ,  influenced by the textbook `` varnas '' and `` jāti '' system found in india . 
various sociologists have reported caste systems in africa . 
whereas the old registration system signified household members according to their hierarchical social status ,  the new system called for an occupation . 
the caste system in india and the united states has higher groups which desire to retain their position for themselves and thus perpetuate the system . 
in a review published in 1977, todd reports that numerous scholars report a system of social stratification in different parts of africa that resembles some or all aspects of caste system . 
historians believe society comprised four social classes:
the hereditary nobi system was officially abolished around 1886–87 and the rest of the nobi system was abolished with the gabo reform of 1894, but traces remained until 1930.
geographical factors also determine adherence to the caste system . 
in 1392, with the foundation of the confucian joseon dynasty ,  korea systemised its own native class system . 
modern india's caste system is based on the artificial superimposition of a four-fold theoretical classification called the `` varna '' on the natural social groupings called the `` jāti '' . 
the borana oromo of southern ethiopia in the horn of africa also have a class system ,  wherein the wata ,  an acculturated hunter-gatherer group ,  represent the lowest class . 
pre-islamic sassanid society was immensely complex ,  with separate systems of social organization governing numerous different groups within the empire . 
in a review of social stratification systems in africa ,  richter reports that the term caste has been used by french and american scholars to many groups of west african artisans . 
coral 66 is a general-purpose programming language based on algol 60, with some features from coral 64, jovial ,  and fortran . 
most implementers avoided this by producing coral interfaces to existing fortran and ,  later ,  c libraries . 
a variant of coral 66 was developed during the late 1970s/early 1980s by the british gpo ,  in conjunction with gec ,  stc and plessey ,  for use on the system x digital telephone exchange control computers ,  known as po-coral . 
rhyming slang is a form of slang word construction in the english language . 
the canchim breed ,  being a synthetic breed ,  permits breeders ,  in the development of new crossbreeding systems ,  to use the breeds used to form the canchim breed ,  besides the breed itself ,  in its development . 
the european breed used in the formation of canchim cattle was charolais . 
on 18 may 1983 the ministry of agriculture ,  recognized canchim type cattle as a breed . 
the communist party of the soviet union  -lrb-  cpsu  -rrb-  was the founding and ruling political party of the soviet union . 
there were few ,  if any ,  who believed that the soviet union was on the verge of collapse by 1985.
 ''pravda ''  -lrb-  `` the truth ''  -rrb-  was the leading newspaper in the soviet union . 
yet ,  it was not preordained that the entire soviet union would break up . 
marxism–leninism was the cornerstone of soviet ideology . 
when the binding power of the narrative dissolved ,  the soviet union itself dissolved . 
regardless of leadership style ,  all political power in the soviet union was concentrated in the organization of the cpsu . 
the success of industrialization in the soviet union led western countries ,  such as the united states ,  to open diplomatic relations with the soviet government . 
all policies were justifiable if it contributed to the soviet union's achievement of that stage . 
it accepted yeltsin's argument that the cpsu was not a true party ,  but a criminal organisation that had ruled the soviet union as a dictatorship in violation of the soviet constitution . 
he concluded that the only viable threat to socialism in the soviet union was a military intervention . 
a number of causes contributed to cpsu's loss of control and the dissolution of the soviet union during the early 1990s . 
the cpc criticizes the cpsu of pursuing soviet imperialism in its foreign policies . 
after the dissolution of the soviet union ,  russian adherents to the cpsu tradition ,  particularly as it existed before gorbachev ,  reorganised themselves as the communist party of the russian federation . 
in the aftermath of the october revolution ,  the soviets united federally and the russian socialist federative soviet republic ,  the world's first constitutionally socialist state ,  was established . 
a central tenet of leninism was that of the vanguard party . 
an unintended consequence of these reforms was the increased anti-cpsu pressure; in march 1990 at a session of the supreme soviet of the soviet union ,  the party was forced to relinquish its political monopoly of power ,  in effect turning the soviet union into a liberal democracy . 
until 1990, the russian soviet federative socialist republic was the only republic which did not have its own republican branch ,  being instead represented by the cpsu central committee . 
the russian soviet federative socialist republic itself had no separate communist party until 1990 because the cpsu controlled affairs there directly . 
at the 1939 18th congress ,  stalin abandoned the idea that the state would wither away . 
the cpsu was a communist party ,  organized on the basis of democratic centralism . 
however ,  with the establishment of socialist regimes in eastern europe ,  stalin said that socialism in one country was only possible in a large country like the soviet union and that to survive ,  the other states had to follow the soviet line . 
the cpsu was outlawed on 29 august 1991 on soviet territory ,  extended its further ban on 6 november on russian soil by yeltsin and gorbachev resigned from the presidency on 25 december; the following day the soviet union was dissolved . 
the politburo was abolished and replaced by a presidium in 1952 at the 19th congress . 
the higher party school  -lrb-  hps  -rrb-  was the organ responsible for teaching cadres in the soviet union . 
for instance ,  at the 22nd congress ,  khrushchev announced that the soviet union would see `` communism in twenty years '' a position later retracted . 
the soviet union was the first to warn of impending danger of invasion from nazi germany to the international community . 
lenin justified these policies by claiming that all states were class states by nature and that these states were maintained through class struggle . 
he died on 21 january 1924, only thirteen months after the founding of the soviet union ,  of which he would become regarded as the founding father . 
to be elected to the politburo ,  a member had to serve in the central committee . 
the emphasis on peaceful coexistence did not mean that the soviet union accepted a static world with clear lines . 
the first research into the collapse of the soviet union and the eastern bloc were very simple and did not take into account several factors . 
stalin explained the reasoning behind it at the 16th congress held in 1930;
democratic centralism is an organizational principle conceived by lenin . 
in the 1920s ,  if the central committee could not convene the politburo and the orgburo would hold a joint session in its place . 
despite this ,  their ideas gained them increasing popularity in elections to the soviets . 
when he acceded ,  the soviet union was stagnating but was stable and may have continued largely unchanged into the 21st century if not for gorbachev's reforms . 
this system survived until the dissolution of the cpsu in 1991.
the united methodist church allowed in may 2018 lgbt clergy and same-sex marriages in their churches . 
the positions of the evangelical churches are varied . 
the eastern orthodox churches ,  like the catholic church ,  condemns only homosexual acts . 
in 2014, moravian church in europe allowed blessings of same-sex unions . 
most of the anglican communion does not approve of homosexual activity ,  with the exception of the episcopal church ,  the scottish episcopal church and the anglican church of canada ,  which is facing a possible exclusion from international anglican bodies over the issue . 
further ,  not all members of a denomination necessarily support their church's views on homosexuality . 
some mainline protestant denominations ,  such as the african methodist churches , the reformed church in america , and the presbyterian church in america have a conservative position on the subject . 
confessional lutheran churches teach that it is sinful to have homosexual desires ,  even if they do not lead to homosexual activity . 
another such organization is the affirming pentecostal church international ,  currently the largest affirming pentecostal organization ,  with churches in the us ,  uk ,  central and south america ,  europe and africa . 
although adamawa languages are spoken adjacently to chadic languages ,  interaction between chadic and adamawa is limited . 
chadic languages contain many nilo-saharan loanwords from either the songhay or maban branches ,  pointing to early contact between chadic and nilo-saharan speakers as chadic was migrating west . 
the cushitic languages with the greatest number of total speakers are oromo  -lrb-  41 million  -rrb-  ,  somali  -lrb-  16.2 million  -rrb-  ,  beja  -lrb-  3.2 million  -rrb-  ,  sidamo  -lrb-  3 million  -rrb-  ,  and afar  -lrb-   6 million  -rrb-  . 
beja is part of the cushitic branch of the afroasiatic family ,  constituting the only member of the northern cushitic subgroup . 
a number of extinct populations are thought to have spoken afroasiatic languages of the cushitic branch . 
additionally ,  afar is a language of instruction in djibouti ,  as well as the working language of the afar region in ethiopia . 
these unique features are also attributed to the fact that the beja language ,  along with the saho-afar dialect cluster ,  are the most conservative forms of cushitic speech . 
chapter 11 cases dropped by 60% from 1991 to 2003.
chapter 11 follows the same priority scheme as other bankruptcy chapters . 
chapter 11 affords the debtor in possession a number of mechanisms to restructure its business . 
in contrast ,  chapter 7 governs the process of a liquidation bankruptcy ,  though liquidation can be done under chapter 11 also; while chapter 13 provides a reorganization process for the majority of private individuals . 
chapter 11 is a chapter of title 11, the united states bankruptcy code ,  which permits reorganization under the bankruptcy laws of the united states . 
in chapter 11, in most instances the debtor remains in control of its business operations as a `` debtor in possession '' ,  and is subject to the oversight and jurisdiction of the court . 
in chapter 11, unless a separate trustee is appointed for cause ,  the debtor ,  as debtor in possession ,  acts as trustee of the business . 
the word was coined from the latin `` controversia '' ,  as a composite of `` controversus '' – `` turned in an opposite direction , ``  from `` contra '' – `` against '' – and `` vertere '' – to turn ,  or `` versus ''  -lrb-  see verse  -rrb-  ,  hence ,  `` to turn against . `` 
such confidence in the group to find the ground truth is explicable through the success of wisdom of the crowd based inferences ,  however ,  if there is no access to the ground truth ,  as there was not in this model ,  the method will fail . 
controversies are frequently thought to be a result of a lack of confidence on the part of the disputants – as implied by benford's law of controversy ,  which only talks about lack of information  -lrb-  `` passion is inversely proportional to the amount of real information available ''  -rrb-  . 
in other controversies – such as that around the hpv vaccine ,  the same evidence seemed to license inference to radically different conclusions . 
each chromosome has two arms ,  labeled `` p ''  -lrb-  the shorter of the two  -rrb-  and `` q ''  -lrb-  the longer  -rrb-  . 
a chromosome is metacentric if its two arms are roughly equal in length . 
their shape is l shape . 
there are ,  broadly speaking ,  two types of centromeres . 
the c64 dominated the low-end computer market for most of the 1980s . 
all c64 motherboards were manufactured in hong kong . 
the c64 uses an 8-bit mos technology 6510 microprocessor . 
clones are computers that imitate c64 functions . 
in 1990, the c64 was repackaged in the form of a game console ,  called the c64 games system  -lrb-  c64gs  -rrb-  ,  with most external connectivity removed . 
the c64 retained the de-9 joystick atari joystick port from the vic-20 and added another; any atari specification game controller can be used on a c64.
also in 1983, commodore released the sx-64, a portable version of the c64.
in the last revision of the 64c motherboard ,  the 2114 color ram was integrated into the superpla . 
in the uk market ,  the c64 faced competition from the bbc micro and the zx spectrum ,  but the c64 was still one of the two most popular computers in the uk . 
as is common for home computers of the early 1980s ,  the c64 comes with a basic interpreter ,  in rom . 
as the c64 has a bitmapped screen ,  it is possible to draw each pixel individually . 
many third party operating systems have been developed for the c64.
in 1986, commodore released the last revision to the classic c64 motherboard . 
on a real c64, scrolling was absolutely glasslike and blur-free . 
there are two versions of the sid chip: the 6581 and the 8580.
the c64 cp/m cartridge is also not compatible with anything except the early 326298 motherboards . 
commodore basic 2.0 is used instead of the more advanced basic 4.0 from the pet series since c64 users were not expected to need the disk-oriented enhancements of basic 4.0.
the c64 performs a ram test on power up and if a ram error is detected ,  the amount of free basic memory will be lower than the normal 38911 figure . 
utility software such as a machine language monitor designed to be used from within basic loads at $8000 or $c000 and can generally be exited from and control returned to basic . 
the c64 has a resolution of 320 x 200 pixels ,  consisting of a 40 x 25 grid of 8 x 8 character blocks . 
in the final years of the c64, larger software companies such as ocean began releasing games on bank-switched cartridges . 
the c64 uses a somewhat complicated memory banking scheme; the normal power-on default is to have the basic rom mapped in at $a000-$bfff and the screen editor/kernal rom at $e000-$fff9.
the success of the vic-20 and c64 contributed significantly to the exit from the field of texas instruments and other smaller competitors . 
because of lower incomes and the domination of the sinclair spectrum in the uk ,  almost all british c64 software used cassette tapes . 
commodore had a reputation for announcing products that never appeared ,  so sought to quickly ship the c64.
that year `` computer gaming world '' published a survey of ten game publishers which found that they planned to release forty-three commodore c64 games that year ,  compared to nineteen for atari and forty-eight for apple ii ,  and alan miller stated that accolade developed first for the c64 because `` it will sell the most on that system '' . 
cartography  -lrb-  ; from greek χάρτης `` chartēs '' ,  `` papyrus ,  sheet of paper ,  map ''; and γράφειν `` graphein '' ,  `` write ''  -rrb-  is the study and practice of making maps . 
below is a full list of plants from which cardiac glycosides can be derived . 
the general structure of a cardiac glycoside consists of a steroid molecule attached to a sugar  -lrb-  glycoside  -rrb-  and an r group . 
later ,  in the 15th century some european states established their own empires during the european colonial period . 
in the late 19th century ,  many european powers were involved in the scramble for africa . 
the spread of colonial empires was reduced in the late 18th and early 19th centuries by the american revolutionary war and the latin american wars of independence . 
after world war ii decolonization progressed rapidly . 
the world's colonial population at the time of the first world war totaled about 560 million people ,  of whom 70% were in british domains ,  10% in french ,  9% in dutch ,  4% in japanese ,  2% in german ,  2% in american ,  2% in portuguese ,  1% in belgian and 1/2 of 1% in italian possessions . 
second ,  many colonial powers were significantly weakened by world war ii . 
the major european empires consisted of the following colonies at the start of world war i  -lrb-  former colonies of the spanish empire became independent before 1914 and are not listed; former colonies of other european empires that previously became independent ,  such as the former french colony haiti ,  are not listed  -rrb-  . 
the 17th century saw the creation of the french colonial empire and the dutch empire ,  as well as the english overseas possessions ,  which later became the british empire . 
the `` stanford encyclopedia of philosophy '' `` uses the term 'colonialism' to describe the process of european settlement and political control over the rest of the world ,  including the americas ,  australia ,  and parts of africa and asia '' . 
casablanca is a commune ,  part of the region of casablanca-settat . 
casablanca is morocco's chief port and one of the largest financial centers on the continent . 
casablanca is located in the chawiya plain which has historically been the breadbasket of morocco . 
about 33% of national industrial exportations ,  mad 27 billion ,  comes from the grand casablanca; 30% of the moroccan banking network is concentrated in casablanca . 
casablanca was an important strategic port during world war ii and hosted the casablanca conference in 1943, in which churchill and roosevelt discussed the progress of the war . 
the biggest cbd of casablanca and maghreb is in the north of the town in sidi maarouf near the mosque of hassan ii and the biggest project of skycrapers of maghreb and africa casablanca marina . 
the grand casablanca region is considered the locomotive of the development of the moroccan economy . 
the french period ville nouvelle  -lrb-  new town  -rrb-  of casablanca was designed by the french architect henri prost ,  and was a model of a new town at that time . 
casablanca is home to the hassan ii mosque ,  designed by the french architect michel pinseau . 
in october 1958, casablanca hosted a grand prix ,  held at the new anfa racecourse . 
the closest permanent river to casablanca is oum rabia ,  to the south-east . 
casablanca also hosts the primary naval base for the royal moroccan navy . 
the americans attacked at three locations in french north africa ,  one of the three being the landings at casablanca because of its important port and the major administrative centres . 
the original name of casablanca was `` anfa '' ,  in berber language ,  by at least the seventh century bc . 
while early christians used the t-shape to represent the cross in writing and gesture ,  the use of the greek cross and latin cross ,  i . e . 
the latter shapes include not only the traditional †-shaped cross  -lrb-  the `` crux immissa ''  -rrb-  ,  but also the t-shaped cross  -lrb-  the `` crux commissa '' or tau cross  -rrb-  ,  which the early christian descriptions of the execution cross indicate as the normal form in use at that time ,  and the x-shaped cross  -lrb-  the `` crux decussata '' or saltire  -rrb-  . 
the cross mark is used to mark a position ,  or as a check mark ,  but also to mark deletion . 
in the phoenician alphabet and derived scripts ,  the cross symbol represented the phoneme /t/ ,  i . e . 
this word ,  by conflation with latin `` crux '' ,  gave rise to old french `` crocier ''  -lrb-  modern french `` crosse ''  -rrb-  ,  the term for a shepherd's crook ,  adopted in english as crosier . 
a cross of oblique lines ,  in the shape of the latin letter x ,  is also termed a saltire in heraldic terminology . 
metal ions may have more than one coordination number . 
a coordination complex whose centre is a metal atom is called a metal complex . 
the number of donor atoms attached to the central atom or ion is called the coordination number . 
metal complexes that have unpaired electrons are magnetic . 
a hydrated ion is one kind of a complex ion  -lrb-  or simply a complex  -rrb-  ,  a species formed between a central metal ion and one or more surrounding ligands ,  molecules or ions that contain at least one lone pair of electrons , 
if all the ligands are monodentate ,  then the number of donor atoms equals the number of ligands . 
the central atoms or ion and the donor atoms comprise the first coordination sphere . 
the ions or molecules surrounding the central atom are called ligands . 
the central atom or ion ,  together with all ligands ,  comprise the coordination sphere . 
in coordination chemistry ,  a structure is first described by its coordination number ,  the number of ligands attached to the metal  -lrb-  more specifically ,  the number of donor atoms  -rrb-  . 
any donor atom will give a pair of electrons . 
typically the chemistry of transition metal complexes is dominated by interactions between s and p molecular orbitals of the donor-atoms in the ligands and the d orbitals of the metal ions . 
coleco continued to do well in electronics . 
coleco withdrew from electronics early in 1985.
coleco returned to the video game console market in 1982 with the launch of the colecovision . 
coleco as a brand name has been owned by several entities since it was created in 1961 by coleco industries ,  inc . 
coleco industries ,  inc .  started life in 1932 as the connecticut leather company . 
it also introduced the coleco gemini ,  a clone of the popular atari 2600.
the colecovision was discontinued in 1985 when coleco withdrew from the video game market . 
in december 2012 opcode games released their own expansion ,  also named the super game module . 
expansion module #3 was originally the super game module . 
by christmas of 1982, coleco had sold more than 500,000 units ,  in part on the strength of its bundled game . 
over the next 18 months ,  the coleco company ramped down its video game division ,  ultimately withdrawing from the video game market by the end of the summer of 1985.
the adam computer expansion with its 256kb tape drive and 64kb ram fulfilled the specifications promised by the super game module . 
in 2014, atgames began producing the colecovision flashback console that includes 60 games ,  but not the original pack-in game ,  `` donkey kong '' . 
this sort of war has defined the field since world war ii . 
thus ,  no two nuclear powers have yet fought a conventional war directly ,  with the exception of brief skirmishes between for example ,  united states and china in the korean war  -lrb-  1950-1953 -rrb- ,  china and russia in the 1969 sino-soviet conflict and between india and pakistan in the 1999 kargil war . 
within this statist paradigm ,  only the state and its appointed representatives were allowed to bear arms and enter into war . 
conventional warfare ,  which is waged by the state ,  has become something not worthy of a declaration of war . 
the state and clausewitzian principles peaked in the world wars of the 20th century ,  but also laid the groundwork for their dilapidation due to nuclear proliferation and the manifestation of culturally aligned conflict . 
in modern english ,  the word has come to be used in some quarters as shorthand for `` male chauvinism '' ,  a trend reflected in merriam-webster's dictionary ,  which ,  as of 2018, begins its first example of use of the term `` chauvinism '' with `` an attitude of superiority toward members of the opposite sex '' . 
his single-minded blind devotion to his cause ,  despite neglect by his faction and harassment by its enemies ,  started the use of the term . 
there is debate about the effectiveness of methane and other hydrocarbons as a solvent for life compared to water or ammonia . 
in addition to carbon compounds ,  all currently known terrestrial life also requires water as a solvent . 
however ,  ammonia has some problems as a basis for life . 
some of the properties of water that are important for life processes include:
not all properties of water are necessarily advantageous for life ,  however . 
carl sagan once described himself as both a carbon chauvinist and a water chauvinist; however on another occasion he said he was a carbon chauvinist but `` not that much of a water chauvinist '' . 
numerous chemical reactions are possible in an ammonia solution ,  and liquid ammonia has chemical similarities with water . 
however ,  hydrogen fluoride is cosmically rare ,  unlike water ,  ammonia ,  and methane . 
ammonia ,  like water ,  can either accept or donate an h ion . 
the element silicon has been much discussed as a hypothetical alternative to carbon . 
however ,  silicon has several drawbacks as an alternative to carbon . 
hydrogen sulfide ,  like hydrogen cyanide and ammonia ,  suffers from the small temperature range where it is liquid ,  though that ,  like that of hydrogen cyanide and ammonia ,  increases with increasing pressure . 
reasons for which may be that silicon is less versatile than carbon in forming compounds ,  that the compounds formed by silicon are unstable ,  and that it blocks the flow of heat . 
hypothetical alternatives to water include ammonia ,  which ,  like water ,  is a polar molecule ,  and cosmically abundant; and non-polar hydrocarbon solvents such as methane and ethane ,  which are known to exist in liquid form on the surface of titan . 
he speculated on hydrocarbons ,  hydrofluoric acid ,  and ammonia as possible alternatives to water . 
creation myths often share a number of features . 
most crucifixes portray jesus on a latin cross ,  rather than any other shape ,  such as a tau cross or a coptic cross . 
a crucifix  -lrb-  from latin `` cruci fixus '' meaning ``  -lrb-  one  -rrb-  fixed to a cross ''  -rrb-  is an image of jesus on the cross ,  as distinct from a bare cross . 
eastern christian liturgical processions called crucessions include a cross or crucifix at their head . 
in the west altar crosses and processional crosses began to be crucifixes in the 11th century ,  which became general around the 14th century ,  as they became cheaper . 
very large crucifixes have been built ,  the largest being the cross in the woods in michigan ,  with a high statue . 
more sculptural small crucifixes in metal relief are also used in orthodoxy  -lrb-  see gallery examples  -rrb-  ,  including as pectoral crosses and blessing crosses . 
modern roman catholic churches often have a crucifix above the altar on the wall; for the celebration of mass ,  the roman rite of the catholic church requires that ,  `` on or close to the altar there is to be a cross with a figure of christ crucified '' . 
the lutheran churches retained the use of the crucifix ,  `` justifying `` their continued use of medieval crucifixes with the same arguments employed since the middle ages ,  as is evident from the example of the altar of the holy cross in the cistercian church of doberan . `` 
before the term copernican principle was even coined ,  earth was repeatedly shown not to have any special location in the universe . 
cosmological models are often derived with reference to the cosmological principle ,  slightly more general than the copernican principle ,  and many tests of these models can be considered tests of the copernican principle . 
named for copernican heliocentrism ,  it is a working assumption that arises from a modified cosmological extension of copernicus's argument of a moving earth . 
recent and planned tests relevant to the cosmological and copernican principles include:
in physical cosmology ,  the copernican principle is an alternative name for the principle of relativity ,  stating that humans ,  on the earth or in the solar system ,  are not privileged observers of the universe . 
cyprinids are highly important food fish; they are fished and farmed across eurasia . 
cyprinids are popular for angling especially for match fishing  -lrb-  due to their dominance in biomass and numbers  -rrb-  and fishing for common carp because of its size and strength . 
cyprinids are stomachless fish with toothless jaws . 
strong pharyngeal teeth allow fish such as the common carp and ide to eat hard baits such as snails and bivalves . 
the smallest known fish is `` paedocypris progenetica '' ,  reaching at the longest . 
in the latter country ,  from the 18th century onwards ,  the common carp was bred into the ornamental variety known as koi – or more accurately  ,  as simply means `` common carp '' in japanese . 
carp in particular can stir up sediment ,  reducing the clarity of the water and making it difficult for plants to grow . 
some cyprinids ,  such as the grass carp ,  are specialized herbivores; others ,  such as the common nase ,  eat algae and biofilms ,  while others ,  such as the black carp ,  specialize in snails ,  and some ,  such as the silver carp ,  are specialized filter feeders . 
the term `` cdna '' is also used ,  typically in a bioinformatics context ,  to refer to an mrna transcript's sequence ,  expressed as dna bases  -lrb-  gcat  -rrb-  rather than rna bases  -lrb-  gcau  -rrb-  . 
there are 2 kinds of end systems 1.
cdpd had very limited consumer products . 
primary elements of a cdpd network are: 1.
fixed end system: common host/server that is connected to the cdpd backbone and providing access to specific application and data
the same concept is also expressed with the phrase `` creature of the state . `` 
a creature of statute  -lrb-  also known as creature of the state  -rrb-  is a legal entity ,  such as a corporation ,  created by statute . 
the cgpm acts on behalf of the governments of its members . 
the 25th meeting of the cgpm took place from 18 to 20 november 2014, and the 26th meeting of the cgpm took place in versailles from 13 to 16 november 2018.
the cgpm recognises two classes of membership – full membership for those states that wish to participate in the activities of the bipm and associate membership for those countries or economies that only wish to participate in the cipm mra program . 
cowboy bebop remix was itself collected as the cowboy bebop remix dvd collection in 2008.
the music for `` cowboy bebop '' was composed by yoko kanno . 
in canada ,  `` cowboy bebop '' was first broadcast on december 24, 2006, on razer . 
 ''cowboy bebop '' received widespread critical acclaim . 
he closes by writing ,  ``  ''cowboy bebop '' ends with a bang . `` 
the first non-asian country to air cowboy bebop was italy . 
watchmojo . com has also placed `` cowboy bebop '' on multiple ranking lists . 
 ''cowboy bebop '' has been featured in several lists published by ign . 
in the 2000 seiun awards ,  cowboy bebop was awarded for best media of the year . 
 ''cowboy bebop '' has been released in four separate editions in north america . 
 ''cowboy bebop '' was watanabe's first project as solo director ,  as he had been co-director in his previous works . 
in 2001, `` cowboy bebop '' became the first anime title to be broadcast on adult swim in the united states . 
 ''cowboy bebop '' debuted on tv tokyo ,  one of the main broadcasters of anime in japan ,  airing from april 3 until june 26, 1998.
ign movies also placed `` cowboy bebop '' in their list of `` 10 cartoon adaptations we'd like to see '' . 
a `` cowboy bebop '' video game ,  developed and published by bandai ,  was released in japan for the playstation on may 14, 1998.
additionally ,  michael toole of anime news network named `` cowboy bebop '' as one of the most important anime of the 1990s . 
after the creation of the series ,  an interviewer asked watanabe if he had any plans to create more `` cowboy bebop '' material . 
in 2012, madman entertainment compiled the votes of fans online for `` the top 20 madman anime titles '' and ranked `` cowboy bebop '' at #7.
his parents were pagans ,  and clement was a convert to christianity . 
clement is usually regarded as a church father . 
according to clement ,  it is through faith in christ that we are enlightened and come to know god . 
during the severian persecutions of 202–203, clement left alexandria . 
in the second book ,  clement provides practical rules on living a christian life . 
photios i of constantinople writes against clement's theology in the `` bibliotheca '' ,  although he is appreciative of clement's learning and the literary merits of his work . 
neither clement's birthdate or birthplace is known with any degree of certainty . 
in around 180, clement reached alexandria ,  where he met pantaenus ,  who taught at the catechetical school of alexandria . 
in the beginning of the sixth book ,  clement intends to demonstrate that the works of greek poets were derived from the prophetic books of the bible . 
three of clement's major works have survived in full ,  and they are collectively referred to as the trilogy:
eusebius is the first writer to provide an account of clement's life and works ,  in his `` ecclesiastical history '' ,  5.11.1-5, 6.6.1 eusebius provides a list of clement's works ,  biographical information ,  and an extended quotation from the `` stromata '' . 
titus flavius clemens ,  also known as clement of alexandria  -lrb-  ; c .  150 – c .  215 -rrb- ,  was a christian theologian who taught at the catechetical school of alexandria . 
although christ ,  like man ,  is made in the image of god ,  he alone shares the likeness of god the father . 
descartes first wrote the phrase in french in his 1637 `` discourse on the method '' . 
the phrase first appeared  -lrb-  in french  -rrb-  in descartes's 1637 `` discourse on the method '' in the first paragraph of its fourth part:
for a time the barkses lived in goleta ,  california ,  before returning to the inland empire by moving to temecula . 
meanwhile ,  he had his first divorce . 
it was the first book of its kind ever reviewed in `` time magazine `` and subsequently in `` newsweek '' ,  and the first book review in `` time magazine '' with large color illustrations . 
according to barks ,  this period of his life would later influence his best known fictional characters: walt disney's donald duck and his own scrooge mcduck . 
will eisner called him `` the hans christian andersen of comic books . `` 
in 1985, a new division was founded ,  gladstone publishing ,  which took up the then-dormant disney comic book license . 
he wrote one uncle scrooge story ,  three donald duck stories and from 1970–1974 was the main writer for the junior woodchucks comic book  -lrb-  issues 6 through 25 -rrb- . 
but to earn a living in the meantime he inquired whether western publishing ,  which had published `` pirate gold '' ,  had any need for artists for donald duck comic book stories . 
barks' donald duck stories were rated #7 on `` the comics journal '' list of 100 top comics; his uncle scrooge stories were rated #20.
at boston's newcon convention ,  in october 1975, the first carl barks oil painting auctioned at a comic book convention  -lrb-  `` she was spangled and flashy ''  -rrb-  sold for $2,500.
this actually was not his first work in comics ,  as earlier the same year barks along with hannah and fellow storyman nick george scripted `` pluto saves the ship '' ,  which was among the first original disney comic book stories published in the united states . 
in 1987, barks was one of the three inaugural inductees of the will eisner comic book hall of fame . 
the outlines for barks' final donald duck story `` somewhere in nowhere '' ,  were first published in 1997, in italy ,  with art by pat block . 
people who worked for disney  -lrb-  and its comic book licensees  -rrb-  generally did so in relative anonymity; stories would only carry walt disney's name and  -lrb-  sometimes  -rrb-  a short identification number . 
in this period barks made only one public appearance ,  at a comic book shop near grants pass . 
he started at disney studios in 1935, more than a year after the debut of donald duck on june 9, 1934, in the short animated film `` the wise little hen '' . 
in 1976, barks and garé went to boston for the newcon show ,  their first comic convention appearance . 
his first story sale was the climax of `` modern inventions '' ,  for a sequence where a robot barber chair gives donald duck a haircut on his bottom . 
in 1983, another rainbow took up the daunting task of collecting the entire disney comic book oeuvre of barks—over 500 stories in all—in the ten-set ,  thirty-volume `` carl barks library '' . 
in november 1935, when he learned that walt disney was seeking more artists for his studio ,  barks decided to apply . 
william's anxiety over them was probably what caused his first nervous breakdown . 
 ''the victory garden '' ,  that initial ten-page story published in april ,  1943 was the first of about 500 stories featuring the disney ducks barks would produce for western publishing over the next three decades ,  well into his purported retirement . 
unit of  .  .  . ``  . 
the centimetre–gram–second system of units  -lrb-  abbreviated cgs or cgs  -rrb-  is a variant of the metric system based on the centimetre as the unit of length ,  the gram as the unit of mass ,  and the second as the unit of time . 
in mechanics ,  the cgs and si systems of units are built in an identical way . 
the two systems differ only in the scale of two out of the three base units  -lrb-  centimetre versus metre and gram versus kilogram ,  respectively  -rrb-  ,  while the third unit  -lrb-  second as the unit of time  -rrb-  is the same in both systems . 
thus ,  for example ,  the cgs unit of pressure ,  barye ,  is related to the cgs base units of length ,  mass ,  and time in the same way as the si unit of pressure ,  pascal ,  is related to the si base units of length ,  mass ,  and time:
the cgs system has been largely supplanted by the mks system based on the metre ,  kilogram ,  and second ,  which was in turn extended and replaced by the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  . 
the definitions of all derived units in terms of the three base units are therefore the same in both systems ,  and there is an unambiguous one-to-one correspondence of derived units:
the term `` person of christ '' refers to the prosopic  -lrb-  and hypostatic  -rrb-  union of the human and divine natures of jesus christ as they coexist within one person  -lrb-  prosopon  -rrb-  and one hypostasis . 
paul's central themes included the notion of the pre-existence of christ and the worship of christ as `` kyrios ''  -lrb-  greek: `` lord ''  -rrb-  . 
in early christian belief ,  the concept of `` kyrios '' included the pre-existence of christ ,  for they believed if christ is one with god ,  he must have been united with god from the very beginning . 
john calvin maintained there was no human element in the person of christ which could be separated from the person of the word . 
the pre-existence of christ became a central theme of christology . 
calvin also emphasized the importance of the `` work of christ '' in any attempt at understanding the person of christ and cautioned against ignoring the works of jesus during his ministry . 
in contrast ,  the antiochian school views christ as a single ,  unified human person apart from his relationship to the divine . 
in 325, the first council of nicaea defined the persons of the godhead and their relationship with one another ,  decisions which were ratified at the first council of constantinople in 381.
the fourth ecumenical council ,  held in chalcedon in 451, reaffirmed the notion of `` one person '' of jesus christ ,  and formulated the famous chalcedonian definition with its `` monoprosopic ''  -lrb-  mono-prosopic: having one person  -rrb-  clauses ,  explicitly denying the validity of `` dyoprosopic ''  -lrb-  dyo-prosopic: having two persons  -rrb-  views . 
the debate about the single or dual nature of christ ensued in ephesus . 
the study of the person of christ continued into the 20th century ,  with modern theologians such as karl rahner and hans von balthasar . 
in civil law ,  a “complaint” is the very first formal action taken to officially begin a lawsuit . 
several united states federal courts publish general guidelines for the petitioners and civil rights complaint forms . 
casimir iii the great  -lrb-  ; 30 april 1310 – 5 november 1370 -rrb- reigned as the king of poland from 1333 to 1370.
casimir was facetiously named `` the peasants' king '' . 
kazimierz is the only king in polish history to both receive and retain the title of `` great ''  -lrb-  bolesław i chrobry is also called `` great '' ,  but more commonly `` valiant ''  -rrb-  . 
kazimierz left no lawful male heir to his throne ,  producing only daughters . 
he was the third son of king władysław i  -lrb-  `` the elbow-high ''  -rrb-  and duchess jadwiga of kalisz ,  and the last polish king from the piast dynasty . 
complexity of an object or system is a relative property . 
the source of disorganized complexity is the large number of parts in the system of interest ,  and the lack of correlation between elements in the system . 
the number of parts does not have to be very large for a particular system to have emergent properties . 
the organized aspect of this form of complexity vis-a-vis to other systems than the subject system can be said to `` emerge , ``  without any `` guiding hand '' . 
there are generally rules which can be invoked to explain the origin of complexity in a given system . 
the study of these complex linkages at various scales is the main goal of complex systems theory . 
 ''the law of chastity requires that sexual relations be reserved for marriage between a man and a woman . 
in many christian traditions ,  chastity is synonymous with sexual purity . 
for many muslims and christians ,  acts of sexual nature are restricted to marriage . 
in marriage ,  the spouses commit to a lifelong relationship that excludes sexual intimacy with other persons . 
sexual acts outside or apart from marriage ,  such as adultery ,  fornication ,  and prostitution ,  are considered sinful . 
the term is closely associated  -lrb-  and can be used interchangeably  -rrb-  with sexual abstinence ,  especially in the context of premarital and extramarital sex . 
chastity is a virtue related to temperance ,  one of the seven virtues and it is defined as refraining from deviant sexual conduct . 
the discovery of cmb is landmark evidence of the big bang origin of the universe . 
as a result ,  most cosmologists consider the big bang model of the universe to be the best explanation for the cmb . 
the cosmic microwave background  -lrb-  cmb ,  cmbr  -rrb-  is electromagnetic radiation as a remnant from an early stage of the universe in big bang cosmology . 
the cmb spectrum has become the most precisely measured black body spectrum in nature . 
the purposes of comparative law are:
conversely ,  sociology of law and law & economics may help comparative law answer questions ,  such as:
also ,  the usefulness of comparative law for sociology of law and law and economics  -lrb-  and vice versa  -rrb-  is very large . 
comparative law is different from the fields of general jurisprudence  -lrb-  legal theory  -rrb-  ,  international law ,  including both public international law and private international law  -lrb-  also known as conflict of laws  -rrb-  . 
comparative law is the study of differences and similarities between the law  -lrb-  legal systems  -rrb-  of different countries . 
several disciplines have developed as separate branches of comparative law ,  including comparative constitutional law ,  comparative administrative law ,  comparative civil law  -lrb-  in the sense of the law of torts ,  delicts ,  contracts and obligations  -rrb-  ,  comparative commercial law  -lrb-  in the sense of business organisations and trade  -rrb-  ,  and comparative criminal law . 
the term `` cyberspace '' first appeared in the visual arts in the late 1960s ,  when danish artist susanne ussing  -lrb-  1940-1998 -rrb- and her partner architect carsten hoff  -lrb-  b . 
this word cyberspace first appeared in the art installation of the same name by danish artist susanne ussing ,  1968 -rrb- . <ref name= ''http://www . kunstkritikk . dk ''>kunstkritikk ,  ``  ''the  -lrb-  re  -rrb- invention of cyberspace '' ''</ref>
such moral responsibilities go hand in hand when working online with global networks ,  specifically ,  when opinions are involved with online social experiences . 
the major communities of the region include halifax and cape breton in nova scotia ,  saint john ,  fredericton and moncton in new brunswick ,  and charlottetown in prince edward island . 
both the colonies of nova scotia  -lrb-  present-day nova scotia and new brunswick  -rrb-  and st .  john's island  -lrb-  prince edward island  -rrb-  were affected by the american revolutionary war ,  largely by privateering against american shipping ,  but several coastal communities were also the targets of american raiders . 
the maritimes ,  also called the maritime provinces  -lrb-    -rrb-  or the canadian maritimes ,  is a region of eastern canada consisting of three provinces: new brunswick ,  nova scotia ,  and prince edward island  -lrb-  pei  -rrb-  . 
in 1820, the colony of cape breton island was merged back into the colony of nova scotia for the second time by the british government . 
new brunswick and nova scotia felt that if the union conference were held in charlottetown ,  they might be able to convince island politicians to support the proposal . 
some of the acadians who had been deported came back but went to new brunswick . 
over the next nine years over 12,000 acadians of 15,000 were removed from nova scotia . 
some predominantly coastal areas have become major tourist centres ,  such as parts of prince edward island ,  cape breton island ,  the south shore of nova scotia and the gulf of st .  lawrence and bay of fundy coasts of new brunswick . 
the war of 1812 had some effect on the shipping industry in the maritime colonies of new brunswick ,  nova scotia ,  prince edward island ,  and cape breton island; however ,  the significant royal navy presence in halifax and other ports in the region prevented any serious attempts by american raiders . 
the colony of st .  john's island was renamed to prince edward island on november 29, 1798.
the northernmost areas of new brunswick are only just above subarctic with very cold continental winters . 
important manufacturing centres in the region include pictou county ,  truro ,  the annapolis valley and the south shore ,  and the strait of canso area in nova scotia ,  as well as summerside in prince edward island ,  and the miramichi area ,  the north shore and the upper saint john river valley of new brunswick . 
british settlement of the maritimes ,  as the colonies of nova scotia ,  new brunswick and prince edward island came to be known ,  accelerated throughout the late 18th century and into the 19th century with significant immigration to the region as a result of scottish migrants displaced by the highland clearances and irish escaping the great irish famine  -lrb-  1845–1849 -rrb- . 
over 74 years  -lrb-  1689–1763 -rrb- there were six colonial wars ,  which involved continuous warfare between new england and acadia  -lrb-  see the french and indian wars as well as father rale's war and father le loutre's war  -rrb-  . 
the `` late period '' extended from 3,000 years ago until first contact with european settlers and was dominated by the organization of first nations peoples into the algonquian-influenced abenaki nation which existed largely in present-day interior vermont ,  new hampshire ,  and maine ,  and the mi'kmaq nation which inhabited all of nova scotia ,  prince edward island ,  eastern new brunswick and the southern gaspé . 
the maritimes ,  together with canada's easternmost province ,  newfoundland and labrador ,  make up the region of atlantic canada . 
in the second war ,  queen anne's war  -lrb-  the north american theater of the war of the spanish succession  -rrb-  ,  the british conducted the conquest of acadia ,  while the region remained primarily in control of maliseet militia ,  acadia militia and mi'kmaq militia . 
improvements in infrastructure and the regional economy notwithstanding ,  the three provinces remain one of the poorer regions of canada . 
cyril of alexandria  -lrb-  ; ; c .  376 – 444 -rrb- was the patriarch of alexandria from 412 to 444.
the prefect then wrote to the emperor theodosius ii ,  as did cyril . 
cyril was a scholarly archbishop and a prolific writer . 
little is known for certain of cyril's early life . 
cyril is well-known due to his dispute with nestorius and his supporter patriarch john of antioch ,  whom cyril excluded from the council of ephesus for arriving late . 
cyril of alexandria became noted in church history because of his spirited fight for the title `` theotokos '' during the first council of ephesus  -lrb-  431 -rrb- . 
news of hypatia's murder provoked great public denouncement ,  not only against cyril but against the whole alexandrian christian community . 
according to socrates scholasticus ,  after cyril rounded up all the jews in alexandria ,  he ordered them to be stripped of all possessions ,  banished them from alexandria ,  and allowed their goods to be pillaged by the remaining citizens of alexandria . 
this order had two aims: the first was to quell the riot ,  the other to mark orestes' authority over cyril . 
cyril of jerusalem  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was a distinguished theologian of the early church  -lrb-   313 386 ad  -rrb-  . 
cyril was once again banished from jerusalem by the arian emperor valens in 367.
acacius charged cyril with selling church property . 
in the 13th lecture ,  cyril of jerusalem discusses the crucifixion and burial of jesus christ . 
not surprisingly ,  in cyril's eschatological analysis ,  jerusalem holds a central position . 
cyril was ordained a deacon by bishop st .  macarius of jerusalem in about 335 and a priest some eight years later by bishop st .  maximus . 
according to butler ,  cyril was born at or near the city of jerusalem ,  and was apparently well-read in both the church fathers and the pagan philosophers . 
cyril stressed the themes of healing and regeneration in his catechesis . 
relations between metropolitan acacius of caesarea and cyril became strained . 
in hebrew ,  the word hanukkah is written or  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the name `` hanukkah '' derives from the hebrew verb ``  '' ,  meaning `` to dedicate '' . 
adapting the classical hebrew pronunciation with the geminate and pharyngeal can lead to the spelling `` hanukkah '' ,  while adapting the modern hebrew pronunciation with no gemination and uvular leads to the spelling  . 
they call for a wife to be `` obedient '' to her `` head '' ,   -lrb-  her husband  -rrb-  . 
in christian marriage ,  the union between a man and a woman is instituted and ordained by god as the lifelong relationship between one man as husband ,  and one woman as wife . 
scriptures such as 1 corinthians 11:3: `` but i would have you know ,  that the head of every man is christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of christ is god '' ,   -lrb-  kjv  -rrb-  are understood as meaning the wife is to be subject to her husband ,  if not unconditionally . 
two of these christianized codes are found in  -lrb-  which contains the phrases `` husband is the head of the wife '' and `` wives ,  submit to your husband ''  -rrb-  and in  ,  which instructs wives to subordinate themselves to their husbands . 
they teach that a wife is to be `` obedient '' to her `` head ''  -lrb-  husband  -rrb-  ,  based upon old testament teachings and models . 
complementarians hold to a hierarchical structure between husband and wife . 
christians today hold three competing views as to what is the biblically-ordained relationship between husband and wife . 
 ''there is neither jew nor gentile ,  neither slave nor free ,  nor is there male and female ,  for you are all one in christ jesus . `` 
by extension ,  they then conclude that in marriage and in the church ,  the man is the authoritative head over the woman . 
therefore ,  what god has joined together ,  let no one separate '' . 
this view holds that ,  `` god has created men and women equal in their essential dignity and human personhood ,  but different and complementary in function with male headship in the home and in the church . `` 
it subordinates all women . 
christian egalitarians  -lrb-  from the french word `` égal '' meaning `` equal ''  -rrb-  believe that christian marriage is intended to be a marriage without any hierarchy—a full and equal partnership between the wife and husband . 
another potential way to define the word `` head '' ,  and hence the relationship between husband and wife as found in bible ,  is through the example given in the surrounding context in which the word is found . 
in these languages ,  a class that creates classes is called a metaclass . 
languages that support class inheritance also allow classes to inherit interfaces from the classes that they are derived from . 
in some languages ,  classes are only a compile-time feature  -lrb-  new classes cannot be declared at runtime  -rrb-  ,  while in other languages classes are first-class citizens ,  and are generally themselves objects  -lrb-  typically of type class or similar  -rrb-  . 
for example , if `` class a '' inherits from `` class b '' and if `` class b '' implements the interface `` interface b '' then `` class a '' also inherits the functionality -lrb-  constants and methods declaration  -rrb-  provided by `` interface b '' . 
classes are composed from structural and behavioral constituents . 
the behavior of class or its instances is defined using methods . 
