in the 1917 season ,  bell led penn to a 9–2 record . 
bell was then an employee of the ritz-carlton in philadelphia . 
bell was born de benneville bell ,  on february 25, 1895, in philadelphia to john c .  bell and fleurette de benneville myers . 
bell's resignation was accommodated prior to the start of the 1929 season . 
the bert bell benefit bowl was exhibited in his honor from 1960 through 1969.
years later ,  after witnessing bell openly crying after the game ,  raymond berry attributed it to bell's realization of the impact the game would have on the prevalence of the sport . 
however ,  bell was speaking only for himself and without the auspices of the owners . 
in december 1940, bell conciliated the sale of rooney's steelers to alexis thompson ,  and then rooney acquired half of bell's interest in the eagles . 
thereafter ,  bell regularly engaged in football games with childhood friends . 
by early 1933, bell's opinion on the nfl had changed ,  and he wanted to become an owner of a team based in philadelphia . 
bell was criticized as being too strict with his refusal to let sold-out games to be televised locally . 
bell was interred at calvary cemetery in west conshohocken ,  pennsylvania . 
bell and the owners were advised by john c .  jr .  that this lawsuit was potentially not winnable ,  and the ramifications from the outcome of the case weighed heavily on bell . 
bell became the steelers head coach and rooney became the general manager . 
in 1904, bell matriculated at the episcopal academy ,  the delancey school from 1909 to 1911 and then the haverford school until 1914.
costas hosted `` later with bob costas '' on nbc from 1988 until 1994.
before becoming the studio host for `` the nfl on nbc '' in 1984, costas did play-by-play of nfl games with analyst bob trumpy . 
in 2006, costas returned to nfl studio hosting duties for nbc's new `` sunday night football '' ,  hosting its pre-game show `` football night in america '' . 
costas hosted nbc's coverage of the 2008, 2009, and the 2010 nhl winter classic . 
costas has also hosted nbc's coverage of the u . s .  open golf tournament from 2003-2014.
he hosted the event in 2012 as well as a post-game edition of `` nhl live '' on the nbc sports network . 
with the introduction of the nbc sports network ,  costas also became the host of the new monthly interview program `` costas tonight '' . 
he was the prime-time host of 11 olympic games from 1992 until 2016.
costas has frontlined many olympics broadcasts for nbc . 
costas also co-anchored  -lrb-  with hannah storm  -rrb-  nbc's nba finals coverage in 2002, which was their last to-date  -lrb-  before the nba's network television contract moved to abc  -rrb-  . 
when nbc gained the nba network contract from cbs in 1990, costas hosted the telecasts and was teamed in the studio with ex-lakers coach pat riley . 
costas anchored nbc's pre- and post-game shows for nfl broadcasts and the pre and post-game shows for numerous world series and major league baseball all-star games during the 1980s  -lrb-  the first being for the 1982 world series  -rrb-  . 
he was also employed by cbs sports as a regional cbs nfl and cbs nba announcer from 1976 to 1979, after which he moved to nbc . 
bamberg  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a town in upper franconia ,  germany ,  on the river regnitz close to its confluence with the river main . 
since 1279 the coat of arms of the city of bamberg is known in form of a seal . 
mumy attends `` lost in space '' reunions and shows ,  and co-authored a 2015 book ,  `` lost  -lrb-  and found  -rrb-  in space '' with angela cartwright . 
in 1996, mumy was a writer and co-creator of `` space cases '' ,  a nickelodeon television show with themes similar to those of `` lost in space '' . 
in 2018, mumy appeared in the pilot episode of the netflix remake series ,  `` lost in space '' . 
in 1996, mumy and his `` lost in space '' costar jonathan harris were reunited at a walt disney convention in orlando ,  florida . 
he created the band the be five with other `` babylon 5 '' actors . 
he has also worked as a musician ,  songwriter ,  recording artist ,  and writer . 
from 1965 to 1968, mumy portrayed will robinson in `` lost in space '' ,  who was the recipient of numerous warnings ,   -lrb-  most famously `` danger ,  will robinson ''  -rrb-  from the show's robot character ,  voiced by dick tufeld . 
in may 2013, 11 years after harris' death in november 2002, mumy commented on his connection with his friend and acting mentor offscreen and their onscreen connection while working in character as will robinson and dr .  smith onscreen ,  in `` lost in space '' . 
he played teft in the film `` bless the beasts and children ''  -lrb-  1971 -rrb- . 
louis-napoléon  -lrb-  1808–1873 -rrb- ,  son of louis ,  was president of france  -lrb-  1848–1852 -rrb- and then emperor of the french  -lrb-  1852–1870 -rrb- ,  reigning as napoleon iii . 
following his conquest of most of western europe ,  napoleon i made his elder brother joseph  -lrb-  1768–1844 -rrb- king first of naples  -lrb-  1806–1808 -rrb- and then of spain  -lrb-  1808–1813 -rrb- ,  his younger brother louis  -lrb-  1778–1846 -rrb- king of holland  -lrb-  1806–1810; subsequently forcing his abdication after his failure to subordinate dutch interests to those of france  -rrb-  ,  and his youngest brother jérôme  -lrb-  1784–1860 -rrb- king of westphalia ,  the short-lived realm created from some of the states of northwestern germany  -lrb-  1807–1813 -rrb- . 
napoleon's son napoléon françois charles joseph  -lrb-  1811–1832 -rrb- was created king of rome  -lrb-  1811–1814 -rrb- and was later styled as napoléon ii by loyalists of the dynasty ,  though he only ruled for two weeks after his father's abdication . 
a buonaparte tomb lies in the church of san francesco in san miniato . 
the psi-loop  -lrb-  ψ-loop  -rrb-  motif consists of two antiparallel strands with one strand in between that is connected to both by hydrogen bonds . 
adjacent β-strands can form hydrogen bonds in antiparallel ,  parallel ,  or mixed arrangements . 
in parallel β-sheet structure ,  if two atoms c and c are adjacent in two hydrogen-bonded β-strands ,  then they do `` not '' hydrogen bond to each other; rather ,  one residue forms hydrogen bonds to the residues that flank the other  -lrb-  but not vice versa  -rrb-  . 
finally ,  an individual strand may exhibit a mixed bonding pattern ,  with a parallel strand on one side and an antiparallel strand on the other . 
in this case ,  if two atoms c and c are adjacent in two hydrogen-bonded β-strands ,  then they form two mutual backbone hydrogen bonds to each other's flanking peptide groups; this is known as a close pair of hydrogen bonds . 
the β-sheet  -lrb-  also β-pleated sheet  -rrb-  is a common motif of regular secondary structure in proteins . 
the secondary structure of a β-sheet can be described roughly by giving the number of strands ,  their topology ,  and whether their hydrogen bonds are parallel or antiparallel . 
there is also evidence that parallel β-sheet may be more stable since small amyloidogenic sequences appear to generally aggregate into β-sheet fibrils composed of primarily parallel β-sheet strands ,  where one would expect anti-parallel fibrils if anti-parallel were more stable . 
open β-sheets can assemble face-to-face  -lrb-  such as the β-propeller domain or immunoglobulin fold  -rrb-  or edge-to-edge ,  forming one big β-sheet . 
the majority of β-strands are arranged adjacent to other strands and form an extensive hydrogen bond network with their neighbors in which the n−h groups in the backbone of one strand establish hydrogen bonds with the c=o groups in the backbone of the adjacent strands . 
colorless beryl is called `` goshenite '' . 
beryl is also an ore source of beryllium . 
like emerald and unlike most other varieties of beryl ,  red beryl is usually highly included . 
beryl belongs to the hexagonal crystal system . 
emerald is green beryl ,  colored by trace amounts of chromium and sometimes vanadium . 
 ''golden beryl '' can range in colors from pale yellow to a brilliant gold . 
while gem beryls are ordinarily found in pegmatites and certain metamorphic stones ,  red beryl occurs in topaz-bearing rhyolites . 
basel has an area ,   ,  of  . 
from that time ,  basel has been an alemannic settlement . 
in 1897 the first world zionist congress was held in basel . 
on 9 june 1501, basel joined the swiss confederation as its eleventh canton . 
in 1347, the plague came to europe but it did not reach basel until june 1349.
its collection became the core of the later basel museum of art . 
the official language of basel is  -lrb-  the swiss variety of standard  -rrb-  german ,  but the main spoken language is the local basel german dialect . 
basel  -lrb-  ; also basle ; ; ;   -rrb-  is a city in northwestern switzerland on the river rhine . 
basel is switzerland's third-most-populous city  -lrb-  after zürich and geneva  -rrb-  with about 180,000 inhabitants . 
basel has often been the site of peace negotiations and other international meetings . 
altogether the world zionist congress was held in basel ten times ,  more than in any other city in the world . 
basel has been the seat of a prince-bishopric since the 11th century ,  and joined the swiss confederacy in 1501.
at the same time the new craft of printing was introduced to basel by apprentices of johann gutenberg . 
fantasy games unlimited published a second edition of the game in 1982, and the game was modified and republished by steve jackson games as an official `` gurps '' supplement in 1992.
 ''bunnies & burrows '' was the first role-playing game to allow for non-humanoid play . 
originally published by fantasy games unlimited in 1976, only two years after the first role-playing game `` dungeons & dragons '' was published ,  this edition is now long out of print . 
although newer systems have updated game mechanics significantly ,  the ideas presented in `` bunnies & burrows '' created the framework for modern role-playing games . 
bunnies & burrows  -lrb-  b&b  -rrb-  is a role-playing game  -lrb-  rpg  -rrb-  inspired by the novel `` watership down '' . 
bundaberg rum is a dark rum produced in bundaberg ,  australia ,  by the bundaberg distilling company . 
ben nevis  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  is the highest mountain in the british isles . 
a mountain in svalbard is also named ben nevis ,  after the scottish peak . 
ben nevis is becoming popular with ski mountaineers and boarders . 
as is common for many scottish mountains ,  it is known both to locals and visitors as simply `` the ben '' . 
the 1883 pony track to the summit  -lrb-  also known as the `` ben path '' ,  the `` mountain path '' or the `` tourist route ''  -rrb-  remains the simplest and most popular route of ascent . 
it was not until 1847 that ben nevis was confirmed by the ordnance survey as the highest mountain in britain and ireland ,  ahead of its rival ben macdhui . 
the summit of ben nevis comprises a large stony plateau of about  . 
in 2000, the ben nevis estate ,  comprising all of the south side of the mountain including the summit ,  was bought by the scottish conservation charity the john muir trust . 
 ''ben nevis '' is an anglicisation of the scottish gaelic name `` beinn nibheis '' . 
the ben nevis distillery is a single malt whisky distillery at the foot of the mountain ,  near victoria bridge to the north of fort william . 
ben nevis's popularity ,  climate and complex topography contribute to a high number of mountain rescue incidents . 
the history of hill running on ben nevis dates back to 1895.
the ben nevis race has been run in its current form since 1937.
ben nevis forms a massif with its neighbour to the northeast ,  càrn mòr dearg ,  to which it is linked by the càrn mòr dearg arête . 
this tells the story of the funding ,  building and operating of the ben nevis observatory in fort william ,  scotland . 
bipolar i disorder  -lrb-  bd-i; pronounced `` type one bipolar disorder ''  -rrb-  is a bipolar spectrum disorder characterized by the occurrence of at least one manic episode ,  with or without mixed or psychotic features . 
the essential feature of bipolar i disorder is a clinical course characterized by the occurrence of one or more manic episodes or mixed episodes  -lrb-  dsm-iv-tr ,  2000 -rrb- . 
bacardi bottling was fined $192,000 by osha . 
bacardi drinks are not easily found in cuba today . 
bacardi limited has made numerous acquisitions to diversify away from the eponymous bacardi rum brand . 
in 1964 bacardi opened its new us headquarters in miami ,  florida . 
drinks now made in the former cuban bacardi distillery are sold in cuba under the name caney . 
the bacardi building in havana was designed by the cuban architect esteban rodríguez-castells . 
bacardi rums have been entered for a number of international spirit ratings awards . 
in its 150-year history ,  bacardi rum has won more than 550 awards for quality and product profile ,  making it the world's most awarded rum . 
pepin founded bacardi imports in new york city ,  and became cuba's minister of the treasury in 1949.
bacardi had employees in seven buildings across miami-dade county at the time . 
proof66, a website that aggregates professional ratings from the beverage testing institute and other professional rating organizations ,  places bacardi reserva limitada ,  bacardi 1873 solera ,  and bacardi 8 in the first tier or top 10th percentile of all rated spirits . 
bacardi limited  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is the largest privately held ,  family-owned spirits company in the world . 
emilio bacardi ,  don facundo's eldest son ,  was repeatedly imprisoned and exiled from cuba for having fought in the rebel army against spain in the cuban war of independence . 
the main targets of the ira offensive were the royal irish constabulary  -lrb-  ric  -rrb-  and the british army in ireland . 
about 7,000 black and tans served in ireland in 1920–22.
the black and tans  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the royal irish constabulary special reserve ,  was a force of temporary constables recruited to assist the royal irish constabulary  -lrb-  ric  -rrb-  during the irish war of independence . 
the black and tans were sometimes confused with the auxiliary division ,  a counter-insurgency unit of the ric made up of former british officers . 
the actions of the black and tans alienated public opinion in both ireland and great britain . 
a total of 404 members of the royal irish constabulary died in the conflict and more than 600 were wounded but it is not clear how many of these were regular ric men and how many were black and tans or auxiliaries . 
the most important alternatives to the bunsen burner are:
however ,  unless the airflow is adjusted as well ,  the flame temperature will decrease because an increased amount of gas is now mixed with the same amount of air ,  starving the flame of oxygen . 
bunsen burners are now used in laboratories all around the world . 
other burners based on the same principle exist . 
blue whales are rorquals  -lrb-  family balaenopteridae  -rrb-  ,  a family that includes the humpback whale ,  the fin whale ,  bryde's whale ,  the sei whale ,  and the minke whale . 
the blue whale  -lrb-  `` balaenoptera musculus ''  -rrb-  is a marine mammal belonging to the baleen whale parvorder ,  mysticeti . 
blue whales most commonly live alone or with one other individual . 
the pygmy blue whale formed from a founder group of antarctic blue whales about 20,000 years ago ,  around the last glacial maximum . 
the blue whale has a long tapering body that appears stretched in comparison with the stockier build of other whales . 
blue whales have twin blowholes shielded by a large splashguard . 
the blue whale has the greatest genetic diversity of any baleen whale ,  and a higher than average diversity among mammals . 
in 1918, the party renamed itself the russian communist party  -lrb-  bolsheviks  -rrb-  at lenin's suggestion . 
lenin was firmly opposed to any re-unification ,  but was outvoted within the bolshevik leadership . 
tensions had existed between lenin and alexander bogdanov as early as 1904.
at the end ,  the congress was evenly split between the two factions . 
the remaining member ,  with the power of appointing a new one ,  was won over by the bolsheviks . 
the two factions were originally known as `` hard ''  -lrb-  lenin's supporters  -rrb-  and `` soft ''  -lrb-  martov's supporters  -rrb-  ,  but the terminology soon changed to `` bolsheviks '' and `` mensheviks '' ,  from the russian `` bolshinstvo ''  -lrb-  `` majority ''  -rrb-  and `` menshinstvo ''  -lrb-  `` minority ''  -rrb-  . 
the bolshevik leadership eventually prevailed and the bolsheviks formed their own duma faction in september 1913.
he remained a self-described `` non-factional social democrat '' until august 1917, when he joined lenin and the bolsheviks as their positions assembled and he came to believe that lenin was right on the issue of the party . 
from 1925–1952, the name was all-union communist party  -lrb-  bolsheviks  -rrb-  and from 1952–1991 communist party of the soviet union . 
in the 2nd congress of the rsdlp held in brussels ,  belgium and london ,  uk during august 1903, lenin and julius martov disagreed over the membership rules . 
however ,  all factions retained their respective factional structure and the bolsheviks formed the bolshevik centre ,  the `` de facto '' governing body of the bolshevik faction within the rsdlp . 
the polish forces consisted mostly of the mercenaries hired by the polish king ,  casimir iv the jagiellon and the city of danzig  -lrb-  gdańsk  -rrb-  . 
1000 cavalry and 400 infantry were mercenaries hired by polish king ,  while the rest were units from danzig  -lrb-  gdańsk  -rrb-  . 
the teutonic infantry tried to defend themselves at the tabor but its resistance was broken by a quick attack of polish cavalry . 
auxiliary forces sent by duke eric ii of pomerania ,  an ally of the polish king ,  did not enter the battle . 
barney bubbles joined stiff records as designer and art director early in 1977.
in 1976 his design relationship with hawkwind came to an end . 
after leaving college in 1963 fulcher worked as an assistant at the design company michael tucker + associates in london . 
barney bubbles  -lrb-  born colin fulcher; 30 july 1942 – 14 november 1983 -rrb- was an english graphic artist whose work encompassed graphic design and music video direction . 
in may 1965, fulcher was recruited by the conran group as senior graphic designer alongside stafford cliff ,  virginia clive-smith and john muggeridge . 
when riviera left stiff in late 1977, bubbles joined him at his new label radar records and later at riviera's f-beat records . 
tucker's studio produced the posters for hugh hudson's pirelli-sponsored film `` the tortoise & the hare ''  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- ,  for which fulcher designed the poster lettering on a freelance basis . 
fulcher was born in tranmere road ,  whitton ,  middlesex  -lrb-  now greater london  -rrb-  ,  in july 1942.
during his five years at the college fulcher received a multi-disciplinary education that included training in cardboard design ,  display and packaging ,  skills that would be utilised later in his record sleeve work . 
what survives today of ogden's basic english is the basic 850-word list used as the beginner's vocabulary of the english language taught worldwide ,  especially in asia . 
basic english later inspired his use of newspeak in `` nineteen eighty-four '' . 
in 1944, readability expert rudolf flesch published an article in `` harper's magazine '' ,  `` how basic is basic english ? `` 
it was presented in ogden's book `` basic english: a general introduction with rules and grammar ''  -lrb-  1930 -rrb- . 
the grammar is based on english ,  but is much simpler . 
brass instruments are also called `` labrosones '' ,  literally meaning `` lip-vibrated instruments '' . 
there are several factors involved in producing different pitches on a brass instrument . 
thus one finds brass instruments made of wood ,  like the alphorn ,  the cornett ,  the serpent and the didgeridoo ,  while some woodwind instruments are made of brass ,  like the saxophone . 
the view of most scholars  -lrb-  see organology  -rrb-  is that the term `` brass instrument '' should be defined by the way the sound is made ,  as above ,  and not by whether the instrument is actually made of brass . 
a brass instrument is a musical instrument that produces sound by sympathetic vibration of air in a tubular resonator in sympathy with the vibration of the player's lips . 
traditionally the valves lower the pitch of the instrument by adding extra lengths of tubing based on a just tuning:
the instruments in this list fall for various reasons outside the scope of much of the discussion above regarding families of brass instruments . 
since each lengthening of the tubing has an inversely proportional effect on pitch  -lrb-  pitch of brass instruments  -rrb-  ,  while pitch perception is logarithmic ,  there is no way for a simple ,  uncompensated addition of length to be correct in every combination when compared with the pitches of the open tubing and the other valves . 
modern brass instruments generally come in one of two families: there are two other families that have ,  in general ,  become functionally obsolete for practical purposes . 
blood libel  -lrb-  also blood accusation  -rrb-  is an antisemitic canard accusing jews of kidnapping and murdering the children of christians in order to use their blood as part of religious rituals . 
much like the blood libel of england ,  the history of blood libel in continental europe consists of unsubstantiated claims made about the  -lrb-  sometimes  -rrb-  discovered corpses of christian children . 
they even said that jewish men menstruated ,  and that the latter therefore practiced the drinking of christian blood as a remedy . 
in jewish lore ,  blood libels were the impetus for the creation of the by rabbi judah loew ben bezalel in the 16th century . 
there have been several explanations put forth as to why these blood libel accusations were made and perpetuated . 
yuval rejects the blood libel story as a fantasy of some christians which could not contain any element of truth in it due to the precarious nature of the jewish minority's existence in christian europe . 
blood libels typically say that jews require human blood for the baking of matzos for passover ,  although this element was allegedly absent in the earliest cases which claimed that then-contemporary jews reenacted the crucifixion . 
supposedly ,  jews cut into the child to acquire his blood and the child apparently continued bleeding for five days . 
the supposed torture and human sacrifice alleged in the blood libels run contrary to the teachings of judaism . 
the term 'blood libel' can also refer to any unpleasant and damaging false accusation ,  and it has taken on a broader metaphorical meaning . 
professor israel jacob yuval of the hebrew university of jerusalem published an article in 1993 which argues that the blood libel may have originated in the 12th century from christian views of jewish behavior during the first crusade . 
nicholas donin and another jewish convert ,  theobald of cambridge ,  are greatly credited with the adoption and the belief of the blood libel myth in europe . 
bagpuss is now retired . 
when emily had left ,  bagpuss woke up . 
the shop window was at the firmin family home in blean . 
bagpuss is a british children's television series ,  made by peter firmin and oliver postgate through their company smallfilms . 
oliver chose him as one of the characters in bagpuss and peter made a new ,  slightly larger version . 
in 1999 `` bagpuss '' topped a bbc poll for the uk's favourite children's tv programme . 
it was the best thing that ever happened , ``  said firmin . 
then bagpuss would start yawning again ,  and as he fell asleep the narrator would speak as the colour faded to sepia and they all became toys again . 
it does `` not '' follow from this definition `` how '' sets can be formed ,  and what operations on sets again will produce a set . 
the intersection of `` a '' and `` b '' is the set of all objects which are both in `` a '' and in `` b '' . 
note that the empty set is a subset of every set  -lrb-  the statement that all elements of the empty set are also members of any set `` a '' is vacuously true  -rrb-  . 
the first development of set theory was a naïve set theory . 
it follows immediately from the definition of equality of sets above that ,  given two sets `` a '' and `` b '' ,  `` a '' = `` b '' if and only if `` a '' ⊆ `` b '' and `` b '' ⊆ `` a '' . 
if the sets `` a '' and `` b '' are equal ,  this is denoted symbolically as `` a '' = `` b ''  -lrb-  as usual  -rrb-  . 
some variants of set builder notation are:
in naïve set theory ,  a set is described as a well-defined collection of objects . 
the set of all subsets of a given set `` a '' is called the power set of `` a '' and is denoted by formula_2 or formula_3; the ``  ''p '' '' is sometimes in a script font . 
a true universal set is not included in standard set theory  -lrb-  see paradoxes below  -rrb-  ,  but is included in some non-standard set theories . 
the empty set ,  often denoted ø and sometimes formula_1, is a set with no members at all . 
in particular ,  each set `` b '' is a subset of itself; a subset of `` b '' that is not equal to `` b '' is called a proper subset . 
given two sets `` a '' and `` b '' ,  their union is the set consisting of all objects which are elements of `` a '' or of `` b '' or of both  -lrb-  see axiom of union  -rrb-  . 
given two sets `` a '' and `` b '' ,  `` a '' is a subset of `` b '' if every element of `` a '' is also an element of `` b '' . 
murmured vowels are most often written etc . 
a stop with murmured release or a murmured nasal is transcribed in the international phonetic alphabet as etc . 
in the case of xhosa ,  there is a four-way contrast analogous to indic in oral clicks ,  and similarly a two-way contrast among nasal clicks ,  but a three-way contrast among plosives and affricates  -lrb-  murmured ,  aspirated ,  and ejective  -rrb-  ,  and two-way contrasts among fricatives  -lrb-  voiceless and murmured  -rrb-  and nasals  -lrb-  voiced and murmured  -rrb-  . 
both accept the term `` murmur '' ,  popularised by ladefoged . 
there is some confusion as to the nature of murmured phonation . 
there are several ways to produce murmured sounds such as  . 
a bézout domain is an integral domain in which bézout's identity holds . 
if both `` a '' and `` b '' are nonzero ,  the extended euclidean algorithm produces one of the two pairs such that formula_1 and formula_2  -lrb-  equality may occur only if one of `` a '' and `` b '' is a multiple of the other  -rrb-  . 
banacek's success as an investigator allowed him to live well . 
felix was the series' only character to ever call banacek by his first name . 
a&e continued rebroadcasts of `` banacek '' in syndication . 
 ''banacek '' was well received by television critics ,  and as a result was picked up for a third season . 
 ''banacek '' borrowed elements of both characters and plot points . 
part of the joke was that ralph manza as banacek's chauffeur jay drury ,  would often ask `` what does it mean ,  boss ? `` 
the aircraft silhouettes change as the team changes aircraft . 
he would return to lead the team in 1993.
the first female blue angel flight surgeon was lt .  tamara schnurr ,  who was a member of the 2001 team . 
for a single year ,  in 1949, the team performed in an all-yellow scheme with blue markings . 
he joined the blue angels in september 2017.
7 aircraft in friday's `` practice '' shows . 
the blue angels' show season runs each year from march until november . 
in 2006, the blue angels marked their 60th year of performing . 
the `` blues '' have flown eight different demonstration aircraft and five support aircraft models:
the `` blues '' toured europe again in 1967 touring six sites . 
since 1946, the blue angels have flown for more than 260 million spectators . 
in 1949, the team acquired a douglas r4d skytrain for logistics to and from show sites . 
in 1992 the blue angels deployed for a month-long european tour ,  their first in 19 years ,  conducting shows in sweden ,  finland ,  russia  -lrb-  first foreign flight demonstration team to perform there  -rrb-  ,  romania ,  bulgaria ,  italy ,  the united kingdom ,  and spain . 
also in 1986, lcdr donnie cochran ,  joined the blue angels as the first african-american naval aviator to be selected . 
the blue angels team was formed in 1946, making it the second oldest formal flying aerobatic team  -lrb-  under the same name  -rrb-  in the world ,  after the french patrouille de france formed in 1931.
the blue angels is the united states navy's flight demonstration squadron ,  with aviators from the navy and marines . 
in 2009, the blue angels were inducted into the international air & space hall of fame at the san diego air & space museum . 
modern catholic interpreters have noted that the phrase 'born from above' or 'born again'  -lrb-  john 3:3 -rrb- is clarified as 'being born of water and spirit'  -lrb-  john 3:5 -rrb- . 
only those belonging to the `` 144,000 '' are considered to be born again . 
the greek phrase in the text is ambiguous ,  resulting in a wordplay in which `` born again '' is rendered as `` born from above '' in some translations such as the net and the nrsv . 
she teaches that whoever lives in sins after his baptism has again lost the grace of baptism . `` 
the phrase consistently referred to baptism in the early church . 
the phrase `` born again '' is mentioned in the 39 articles of the anglican church in article xv ,  entitled `` of christ alone without sin '' . 
born again ,  or to experience the new birth ,  is a phrase ,  particularly in evangelicalism ,  that refers to `` spiritual rebirth '' ,  or a regeneration of the human spirit from the holy spirit ,  contrasted with physical birth . 
the modern expression being `` born again '' is really about the concept of `` conversion '' . 
although the phrase `` baptized and born again in christ '' occurs in article xv ,  the reference is clearly to the scripture passage in john 3:3.
the lutheran church holds that `` we are cleansed of our sins and born again and renewed in holy baptism by the holy ghost . 
the phrase `` born again '' is also used as an adjective to describe individual members of the movement who espouse this belief ,  as well as the movement itself  -lrb-  `` born-again christian '' and the `` born-again movement ''  -rrb-  . 
by 1988, all 100 aircraft had been delivered . 
the b-1 has higher survivability and speed than the older b-52, which it was intended to replace . 
the b-1 was first envisioned in the 1960s as a platform that would combine the mach 2 speed of the b-58 hustler with the range and payload of the b-52, and would ultimately replace both bombers . 
it is one of three strategic bombers in the u . s .  air force fleet  ,  the other two being the b-2 spirit and the b-52 stratofortress . 
although effective ,  the b-52 was not ideal for the low-level role . 
the much smaller bomb bay of the b-70 would have made it much less useful in this role . 
in 1955, the usaf issued requirements for a new bomber combining the payload and range of the boeing b-52 stratofortress with the mach 2 maximum speed of the convair b-58 hustler . 
the arguments that led to the cancellation of the b-70 program had led some to question the need for a new strategic bomber of any sort . 
in 2007, the sniper xr targeting pod was integrated on the b-1 fleet . 
the b-1 has also been equipped to carry the ale-50 towed decoy system . 
the b-1b has a maximum speed of mach 1.25 at higher altitudes . 
the rockwell b-1 lancer is a supersonic variable-sweep wing ,  heavy bomber used by the united states air force . 
the b-1's main computer is the ibm ap-101, which was also used on the space shuttle orbiter and the b-52 bomber . 
beginning in 2014, the b-1 was used by the u . s .  against the islamic state  -lrb-  is  -rrb-  in the syrian civil war . 
the 100th and final b-1b was delivered on 2 may 1988; before the last b-1b was delivered ,  the usaf had determined that the aircraft was vulnerable to soviet air defenses . 
with upgrades to keep the b-1 viable ,  the air force may keep it in service until approximately 2038.
a program to improve the b-52 and develop and deploy the alcm would cost perhaps 20% of the price to deploy the planned 244 b-1as . 
after the inactivation of strategic air command  -lrb-  sac  -rrb-  and the establishment of the air combat command  -lrb-  acc  -rrb-  in 1992, the b-1 developed a greater conventional weapons capability . 
the second b-1b ,  `` the star of abilene '' ,  was the first b-1b delivered to the usaf strategic air command  -lrb-  sac  -rrb-  in june 1985.
in january 1982, the u . s .  air force awarded two contracts to rockwell worth a combined $2.2 billion for the development and production of 100 new b-1 bombers . 
he again vetoed funding for amsa aircraft development in 1968.
the first printed book in ireland was in english ,  the `` book of common prayer '' . 
the church in wales began revising the book of common prayer in the 1950s . 
the welsh edition of the book of common prayer was published in 1567.
the effect of the failure of the 1928 book was salutary: no further attempts were made to revise the `` book of common prayer '' . 
the `` book of common prayer '' has had a great influence on a number of other denominations . 
the church of england ,  supported by the prayer book society ,  publishes an online edition of the book of common prayer with permission of cambridge university press . 
the book of common prayer  -lrb-  bcp  -rrb-  is the short title of a number of related prayer books used in the anglican communion ,  as well as by other christian churches historically related to anglicanism . 
william bedell had undertaken an irish translation of the `` book of common prayer '' in 1606.
in 1927, the work on a new version of the prayer book reached its final form . 
article x of the canons of the episcopal church provides that `` the book of common prayer ,  as now established or hereafter amended by the authority of this church ,  shall be in use in all the dioceses of this church , ``  which ,  of course ,  is a reference to the 1979 book of common prayer . 
as in other places ,  there has been a reaction and the canadian version of the `` book of common prayer '' has found supporters . 
previous to its organization ,  there were several translations of the anglican book of common prayer into spanish in 1623 and in 1707.
before the end of the english civil war  -lrb-  1642-1651 -rrb- and the introduction of the 1662 prayer book ,  something like a half a million prayer books are estimated to have been in circulation  . 
 ''a prayer book for australia '' ,  produced in 1995 and again not technically a substitute for 1662, nevertheless departed from both the structure and wording of the `` book of common prayer '' ,  prompting conservative reaction . 
newer editions of their prayer book are available in portuguese and with an english translation . 
traditional english lutheran ,  methodist and presbyterian prayer books have borrowed from the `` book of common prayer '' and the marriage and burial rites have found their way into those of other denominations and into the english language . 
however ,  when john knox returned to scotland in 1559, he continued to use the `` form of prayer '' he had created for the english exiles in geneva and ,  in 1564, this supplanted the `` book of common prayer '' under the title of the `` book of common order '' . 
in south africa a `` book of common prayer '' was `` set forth by authority for use in the church of the province of south africa '' in 1954.
the diction of the books has changed from the 1965 version to the 2004 version . 
following a royal commission report in 1906, work began on a new prayer book . 
as for other parts of the british empire ,  the 1662 book of common prayer was initially the standard of worship for anglicans in new zealand . 
following the publication of the 1552 prayer book ,  a revised english primer was published in 1553; adapting the offices and morning and evening prayer ,  and other prayers ,  for lay domestic piety  . 
it was this edition which was to be the official `` book of common prayer '' during the growth of the british empire and ,  as a result ,  has been a great influence on the prayer books of anglican churches worldwide ,  liturgies of other denominations in english ,  and of the english people and language as a whole . 
john evelyn records ,  in `` diary '' ,  receiving communion according to the 1604 prayer book rite:
a `` book of common prayer '' with local variations is used in churches around ,  or deriving from ,  the anglican communion in over 50 different countries and in over 150 different languages . 
in 1881 the church combined a spanish translation of the 1662 edition of the book of common prayer with the mozarabic rite liturgy ,  which had recently been translated . 
that edition remains the official prayer book of the church of england ,  although through the later twentieth century alternative forms which were technically supplements largely displaced the `` book of common prayer '' for the main sunday worship of most english parish churches . 
john knox took `` the form of prayers '' with him to scotland ,  where it formed the basis of the scottish `` book of common order '' . 
in 1557, the scots protestant lords had adopted the english prayer book of 1552, for reformed worship in scotland . 
the first manx translation of the `` book of common prayer '' was made by john phillips  -lrb-  bishop of sodor and man  -rrb-  in 1610.
the prayer book cross was erected in san francisco's golden gate park in 1894 as a gift from the church of england . 
the new anglican churches used and revised the use of the `` book of common prayer '' ,  until they ,  like the english church ,  produced prayer books which took into account the developments in liturgical study and practice in the 19th and 20th centuries which come under the general heading of the liturgical movement . 
to this day ,  king's chapel uniquely uses `` the book of common prayer according to the use in king's chapel '' in its worship; the book eliminates trinitarian references and statements . 
 ''suburito '' are `` bokken '' designed for use in `` suburi '' . 
the all japan kendo federation specify the dimensions of `` bokken '' for use in the modern kendo kata ,  called `` nippon kendo kata '' . 
the `` standard bokken '' ,  mostly used in kendo and aikido was created by master aramaki in collaboration with the all japan kendo federation in the 50's and was the first standardized bokken ever created . 
 ''bokken '' should not be confused with `` shinai '' ,  practice swords made of flexible bamboo . 
the entire bsa production sold out in 1911, 1912 and 1913.
dudley docker retired as a bsa director in 1912 and installed lincoln chandler on the bsa board as his replacement . 
the attraction for daimler shareholders was the apparent stability of bsa . 
bsa forever ceased production of their hub gears in 1955.
the next year ,  1880, bsa branched out into bicycle manufacture . 
so in 1910 bsa purchased daimler with bsa shares but docker who negotiated the arrangements either ignored or failed in his assessment of their consequences for the new combine . 
dudley docker had joined the board in 1906 and was appointed deputy chairman of bsa in 1909.
in 1889, the bovril company was formed . 
bovril is owned and distributed by unilever uk . 
in 2004, unilever removed beef ingredients from the bovril formula ,  rendering it vegetarian . 
bovril holds the unusual position of having been advertised with a pope . 
unilever now produces bovril using beef extract and a chicken variety using chicken extract . 
bovril's instant beef stock was launched in 1966 and its `` king of beef '' range of instant flavours for stews ,  casseroles and gravy in 1971.
since its invention ,  bovril has become an icon of british culture . 
santer received a b . sc . 
in 1998 santer was awarded a macarthur fellowship for research supporting the finding that human activity contributes to global warming . 
santer was the convening lead author of chapter 8 of 1995 ipcc working group i report  -lrb-  ar2 wgi  -rrb-  ,  which addressed the global warming issue . 
the bernoulli numbers are special values of the bernoulli polynomials formula_2, with formula_3 and formula_4.
thus bernoulli's formula can be written
note that the formula for formula_9 in the first half contains an error at the last term: it must be formula_10 instead of formula_11.
bernoulli's formula is sometimes called faulhaber's formula after johann faulhaber who found remarkable ways to calculate sum of powers but never stated bernoulli's formula . 
in the formulas below ,  one can switch from one sign convention to the other with the relation formula_1.
bernoulli's formula for sums of powers is the most useful and generalizable formulation to date . 
the coefficients in bernoulli's formula are now called bernoulli numbers ,  following a suggestion of abraham de moivre . 
putting things together ,  for positive  ,  today a mathematician is likely to write bernoulli's formula as:
in the game ,  each player controls one of the two dragons . 
the game boy color version was co-created by the video game developers dreams and i . t . l . 
the spectrum version was voted number 58 in the `` your sinclair readers' top 100 games of all time '' . 
of the original 8- and 16-bit ports ,  the msx2, nes/famicom disk system ,  game boy and master system ones were made by taito itself  -lrb-  though the master system version was published by sega instead of taito  -rrb-  . 
one common rule is that the last suit bid before 4nt bid is the key suit ,  lacking trump agreement . 
5♣ – 0 or 4 key cards 5 – 1 or 5 key cards  5 – 2 key cards  5♠ – 3 key cards
roman key card blackwood is predicated on existence of a trump suit ,  which determines which of the four kings and queens responder should show as key cards . 
both versions are initiated by a bid of four notrump  -lrb-  4nt  -rrb-  ,  and the entire family of conventions may be called `` blackwood 4nt '' in both versions ,  or `` key card 4nt '' in the key card variation . 
a 4 level bid in the suit above the agreed trump suit is the ace / key card ask and the name comes from the fact that this bid will always be a red suit:
the key card replies to 4nt are more compressed than standard ones and they also begin to locate the queen of trumps . 
a half-way house between standard blackwood and rkcb is keycard blackwood . 
an option is for the positive calls to show a feature ,  such as a king in that suit ,  and 6 of the trump suit can show the queen of trumps with no outside kings . 
again there are five key cards ,  including the trump king ,  but unlike rkcb ,  the queen of trumps is not considered . 
in 1995, cruz named his own son lincoln bixby cruz . 
show ,  after he broke down weeping . `` 
abc canceled the sitcom in 1972 at the end of season three . 
brandon cruz said of the show which developed a professional father-son relationship ,  compared to that of `` the andy griffith show '' ,  `` we dealt with issues that were talked about but were never brought up on television . 
in a 2011 interview with marilyn beck and stacy jenel smith about how bill bixby's fame was supposed to posthumously honor him for a star on the hollywood walk of fame ,  cruz said ,  `` when i found out they were putting this out ,  i thought ,  ‘it’s about time . ’ bill bixby had an amazing body of work ,  not only `` courtship of eddie’s father , ``  but `` my favorite martian , ``  `` the magician , ``  `` the incredible hulk '' and so many other things ,  as an actor ,  as a director — and he never got an emmy . 
after the show was canceled ,  bixby and cruz remained in contact ,  with cruz making a guest appearance on bixby's later series `` the incredible hulk '' . 
boer  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the dutch and afrikaans noun for `` farmer '' . 
the trek boers of the 19th century were the lineal descendants of the trek boers of the 18th century . 
when the war of the third coalition broke out in 1803, a british force was once more sent to the cape . 
after the second anglo-boer war ,  a boer diaspora occurred . 
many boers had german ancestry and many members of the government were themselves former boer military leaders who had fought with the maritz rebels against the british in the second boer war . 
in contemporary south africa ,  boer and afrikaner have often been used interchangeably . 
the boer quest for independence manifested in a tradition of declaring republics ,  which predates the arrival of the british; when the british arrived ,  boer republics had already been declared and were in rebellion from the voc  -lrb-  dutch east india company  -rrb-  . 
the maritz rebellion  -lrb-  also known as the boer revolt ,  the five shilling rebellion or the third boer war  -rrb-  occurred in 1914 at the start of world war i ,  in which men who supported the re-creation of the old boer republics rose up against the government of the union of south africa because they did not want to side with the british against germany so soon after a long bloody war with the british . 
from 1652 to 1795 the dutch east india company controlled this area ,  but the united kingdom incorporated it into the british empire in 1806.
they emigrated from the cape primarily to escape british rule and to get away from the constant border wars between the british imperial government and the indigenous peoples on the eastern frontier . 
in addition ,  the term `` boers '' also applied to those who left the cape colony during the 19th century to settle in the orange free state ,  transvaal  -lrb-  together known as the boer republics  -rrb-  ,  and to a lesser extent natal . 
although the colony was fairly prosperous ,  many of the dutch farmers were as dissatisfied with british rule as they had been with that of the dutch east india company ,  though their grounds for complaint were not the same . 
the colonists had lost their slaves ,  the eastern frontier was in a state of insecurity ,  the british immigrants of 1820 were still struggling against heavy odds ,  and the dutch colonists were in a state of great indignation . 
the term `` afrikaner '' is generally used in modern-day south africa for the afrikaans-speaking white population of south africa ,  the descendants of `` boer '' settlers and the bulk of white africans . 
the medal is a bronze star in circumscribing diameter . 
when the medal is awarded by the army and air force for acts of valor in combat ,  the `` v '' device is authorized for wear on the medal . 
for more information: http://www . bronzestarmedal . org/ bronze star medal recipients assc . 
a number of bronze star medals with the `` v '' device were awarded to veterans of the battle of mogadishu . 
the bronze star medal is awarded only to service members in combat zones who are receiving imminent danger pay . 
when the medal is awarded by the navy ,  marine corps ,  and coast guard for acts of valor or meritorious service in combat ,  the combat `` v '' is authorized for wear on the medal . 
 -lrb-  freund also designed the silver star .   -rrb- 
tourism in ballarat is promoted by ballarat regional tourism . 
ballarat was proclaimed a city in 1871.
the median age in ballarat is 35.8 years . 
ballarat has 55.2 clear days annually . 
ballarat is the main retail economy in the region . 
ballarat is a primarily low-rise city . 
other tourist attractions include the eureka centre; the gold museum ,  ballarat; ballarat botanic gardens and lake wendouree; the museum of australian democracy; the ballarat tramway museum and ballarat ghost tours and ballarat wildlife park . 
in the post-war era ,  ballarat's growth continued . 
on 2 march 1958 the queen mother visited ballarat . 
the ballarat agricultural and pastoral society formed in 1856 and has run the ballarat show annually since 1859.
ballarat is unique in australia—and internationally—for having retained much of its commons land ,  which can be used by any resident of ballarat . 
the ballarat urban area has witnessed accelerated growth since 2006.
the city's two municipalities ,  ballarat east and west town councils ,  finally amalgamated in 1921 to form the city of ballarat . 
since 2006 ballarat has averaged an annual population growth of 1680 and in june 2011 the estimated resident population of ballarat was 93,470 and 101,588 by june 2016.
the contiguous urban area of ballarat covers approximately of the local government area's  . 
while there are no national parks in ballarat's proximity ,  ballarat is bordered by extensive bushland to the north ,  south and south west and sensitive wetlands to the east . 
unlike melbourne ,  ballarat does not have a defined urban growth boundary . 
the ballarat environment network formed in 1993 to provide a voice for environmental and nature conservation issues in ballarat and its surroundings . 
the present spelling was officially adopted by the city of ballarat in 1996.
ballarat attracts investment from several international manufacturers . 
ballarat is a city located on the yarrowee river in the central highlands of victoria ,  australia . 
several businesses and attractions have capitalised on ballarat's gold mining history . 
in terms of population ballarat is the third largest inland city in australia . 
ballarat attracts 2.2 million visitors a year and the tourism and hospitality industry is a a$480 million a year sector which accounts for around 15% of ballarat's economy and employs around 2,870 people . 
the city of ballarat released an environment sustainability strategy for the city in 2007.
ballarat lies at the foothills of the great dividing range in central western victoria . 
the average income of ballarat ,  while lower than melbourne ,  is higher than average for regional victoria . 
while officially a part of the central highlands of victoria ,  ballarat is part of the midlands geological region . 
a significant heritage tourism industry has not grown substantially in ballarat since the 1960s . 
the barbarians would not be expelled from roman territory until 271.
it was one of the worst defeats suffered by the roman empire against germanics ,  rated by the roman historian ammianus marcellinus as on par with the battle of the teutoburg forest in ad 9, the marcomannic invasion of roman italy in 170, and the battle of adrianople in 378.
the new roman emperor trebonianus gallus was forced to allow the goths to return home with their loot and prisoners . 
the number of polish troops is uncertain . 
a total of 33,313 registered cossacks from the above . 
the polish army and cossack camp exchanged artillery fire for ten days while both sides built fortifications . 
there is no reliable source on the number of cossack and crimean tatar troops . 
there were also 2 thousand don cossacks and a few thousand of turks and vlachs . 
the battle of berestechko  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was fought between the ukrainian cossacks ,  led by hetman bohdan khmelnytsky ,  aided by their crimean tatar allies ,  and a polish army under king john ii casimir . 
while khmelnytsky found no support from the polish officials ,  he found it in his cossack friends and subordinates . 
many orthodox ukrainians considered the union of brest as a threat to their orthodox faith . 
the polish envoys recognized that khmelnytsky claimed to be leader of the zaporozhian cossacks but also of ukraine and the heritage of the rus . 
in 1664 a polish hetman stefan czarniecki recaptured subotiv ,  which according to some ukrainian historians ,  ordered the bodies of the hetman and his son ,  tymish ,  to be exhumed and desecrated ,  while others claim that is not the case . 
khmelnytsky was praised not only for re-unifying ukraine with russia ,  but also for organizing the class struggle of oppressed ukrainian peasants against polish exploiters . 
khmelnytsky was viewed as a national hero of russia for bringing ukraine into the `` eternal union '' of all the russias — great ,  little and white russia . 
khmelnytsky's role in the history of the polish state has been viewed mostly in a negative light . 
mikeshin also created the monument to the millennium of russia in novgorod ,  which has khmelnytsky shown as one of russia's prominent figures . 
the other possible ally was the orthodox tsar of moskovia . 
during this time ,  he met several higher polish officials to discuss the cossacks' war with the tatars ,  and used this occasion again to plead his case with czapliński ,  still unsuccessfully . 
in 1654, he concluded the treaty of pereyaslav with the tsardom of russia . 
initially ,  polish authorities took the news of khmelnytsky's arrival at the sich and reports about the rebellion lightly . 
during the uprising ,  however ,  khmelnytsky would stress his mother's cossack roots and his father's exploits with the cossacks of the sich . 
had the cossacks stayed at khortytsia ,  they might have been defeated ,  as in many other rebellions . 
the differences were expressed during the ceremony of the oath of allegiance to the tsar: the russian envoy refused to reciprocate with an oath from the ruler to his subjects ,  as the cossacks and ruthenians expected since it was the custom of the polish king . 
khmelnytsky has been a subject to several works in the 19th century polish literature ,  but the most notable treatment of him in polish literature is found in henryk sienkiewicz's `` with fire and sword '' . 
old adversaries of both poland and russia ,  they occupied a share of lithuania before the russians could get there . 
ben bova was born on november 8, 1932 in philadelphia . 
after leaving `` analog '' in 1978, bova went on to edit `` omni '' ,  from 1978 to 1982.
at `` analog '' ,  bova won six hugo awards for best professional editor . 
in 1972, bova became editor of `` analog science fact & fiction '' ,  after john w .  campbell's death in 1971.
benjamin william `` ben '' bova  -lrb-  born november 8, 1932 -rrb- is an american writer . 
the 32nd army initially consisted of the 9th ,  24th ,  and 62nd divisions ,  and the 44th independent mixed brigade . 
while the 6th marine division cleared northern okinawa ,  the us army 96th and 7th infantry divisions wheeled south across the narrow waist of okinawa . 
the 27th infantry division—which had landed on april 9—took over on the right ,  along the west coast of okinawa . 
the united states created the tenth army ,  a cross-branch force consisting of the 7th ,  27th ,  77th ,  and 96th infantry divisions of the us army with the 1st ,  2nd ,  and 6th divisions of the marine corps ,  to fight on the island . 
okinawa was the bloodiest battle of the pacific war . 
meanwhile ,  the 77th infantry division assaulted ie island  -lrb-  ie shima  -rrb- —a small island off the western end of the peninsula—on april 16.
buckner launched another american attack on may 11.
at the end of april ,  after army forces had pushed through the machinato defensive line ,  the 1st marine division relieved the 27th infantry division ,  and the 77th infantry division relieved the 96th . 
the 6th marine division headed up the ishikawa isthmus and by april 7, had sealed off the motobu peninsula . 
to this ,  would be added the americans' abundant naval and air firepower . 
between the american landing on april 1 and may 25, seven major `` kamikaze '' attacks were attempted ,  involving more than 1,500 planes . 
under attack from more than 300 aircraft over a two-hour span ,  the world's largest battleship sank on april 7, 1945, after a one-sided battle ,  long before she could reach okinawa . 
on april 10, its attention was shifted to airfields on northern formosa . 
for their part ,  by april 30, the japanese had lost more than 1,100 planes to allied naval forces alone . 
on june 4, elements of the 6th marine division launched an amphibious assault on the peninsula . 
following the practice of changing the fleet designation with the change of commanders ,  us naval forces began the campaign as the us 5th fleet under admiral raymond spruance ,  but ended it as the 3rd fleet under admiral william halsey . 
six days later on april 13, the 2nd battalion ,  22nd marine regiment ,  reached hedo point  -lrb-  hedo-misaki  -rrb-  at the northernmost tip of the island . 
the main landing was made by the xxiv corps and the iii amphibious corps on the hagushi beaches on the western coast of okinawa on l-day ,  april 1, which was both easter sunday and april fools' day in 1945.
the force withdrew to san pedro bay on april 23.
the british pacific fleet ,  taking part as task force 57, was assigned the task of neutralizing the japanese airfields in the sakishima islands ,  which it did successfully from march 26 to april 10.
it had become clear that the soviet union was beginning to loosen up . 
it is possible to pinpoint the renouncement of the brezhnev doctrine as to what started the end for the soviet union . 
the soviet union was not the only socialist country to intervene militarily in fellow socialist countries . 
on may 29, 1972, it was implied in an agreement between richard nixon and leonid brezhnev ,  that the brezhnev doctrine was to be repealed from the soviets' agenda . 
the soviet union ,  once again ,  fell back to the brezhnev doctrine for rationale ,  claiming that it was both morally and politically justified . 
with the fall of the brezhnev doctrine ,  came the fall of the man ,  brezhnev himself ,  the share of power in the warsaw pact ,  and perhaps the final moment for the soviet union ,  the berlin wall . 
the brezhnev doctrine coming to a close ,  was perhaps the beginning of the end for one of the strongest empires in the world's history ,  the soviet union . 
exploiting this turmoil ,  the soviets ,  on december 27, 1979, had somewhere around 5,000 troops in afghanistan . 
gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika finally opened the door for soviet bloc countries and republics to make reforms without soviet intervention . 
however ,  the water bath was known many centuries earlier  -lrb-  hippocrates and theophrastus  -rrb-  . 
when the working fluid is water and the bain-marie is used at sea level ,  the maximum temperature of the material in the lower container will not exceed 100 degrees celsius  -lrb-  212 °f  -rrb-  ,  the boiling point of water at sea level . 
electric bains-marie can also be wet ,  using either hot water or vapor ,  or steam ,  in the heating process . 
under the outer container of the bain-marie  -lrb-  or built into its base  -rrb-  is a heat source . 
barbagia  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is a mountain area of inner sardinia . 
the area is usually divided into five barbagias: the barbagia of ollolai ,  the barbagia of seulo ,  the barbagia of belvì ,  the mandrolisai ,  and finally the `` barbagia trigònia '' ,  the historical name by which the area of ogliastra was once referred to . 
hospito apparently permitted the evangelisation of pagan barbagia by christian missionaries . 
brabham made one car for formula 5000 racing ,  the brabham bt43.
brabham cars were also widely used by other teams ,  and not just in formula one . 
the brabham team took the constructors' world championship in both years . 
the team used the bt49 over four seasons . 
results achieved by the `` works '' brabham team . 
the angular bt41 was the final formula three brabham . 
in 1959 and 1960, brabham won the formula one world drivers' championship in cooper's revolutionary mid-engined cars . 
the team won two more formula one drivers' championships in the 1980s with brazilian nelson piquet . 
the first formula three brabham ,  the bt9, won only four major races in 1964.
brabham intended to retire at the end of the 1969 season and sold his share in the team to tauranac . 
after jack brabham sold his shares in mrd to ron tauranac at the end of 1969, the works formula one team was mrd . 
in the 1974 season ,  reutemann took the first three victories of his formula one career ,  and brabham's first since 1970.
the cars were subsequently known as brabhams ,  with type numbers starting with bt for `` brabham tauranac '' . 
the team finished 9th in the constructors' championship at the end of the season . 
his `` old fashioned '' cars won the brabham team the 1966 and 1967 championships ,  and were competitive in formula one until rule changes forced a move to monocoques in 1970.
the team was also aiming to enter the fia formula e championship and return to formula one in the future . 
brabham is the common name for motor racing developments ltd .  ,  a british racing car manufacturer and formula one racing team . 
the team finished second in the constructors' championship ,  behind the williams team . 
the brabham team was founded by jack brabham and ron tauranac ,  who met in 1951 while both were successfully building and racing cars in their native australia . 
by the 1961 formula one season ,  the lotus and ferrari teams had developed the mid-engined approach further than cooper . 
in addition to its role as a bomber ,  the b-17 was also employed as a transport ,  antisubmarine aircraft ,  drone controller ,  and search-and-rescue aircraft . 
by september 1944, 27 of the 42 bomb groups of the 8th air force and six of the 21 groups of the 15th air force used b-17s . 
four b-17s were shot down in these operations . 
many pilots who flew both the b-17 and the b-24 preferred the b-17 for its greater stability and ease in formation flying . 
during world war ii ,  the b-17 equipped 32 overseas combat groups ,  inventory peaking in august 1944 at 4,574 usaaf aircraft worldwide . 
the b-17, a versatile aircraft ,  served in dozens of usaaf units in theaters of combat throughout world war ii ,  and in other roles for the raf . 
category:boeing aircraft|b-17 flying fortress category:united states bomber aircraft 1930–1939 category:four-engined tractor aircraft category:low-wing aircraft category:world war ii bombers of the united states category:boeing b-17 flying fortress|  category:aircraft first flown in 1935 category:world war ii heavy bombers
the allison v-1710 was allocated to fighter aircraft . 
in the campaign against german aircraft forces in preparation for the invasion of france ,  b-17 and b-24 raids were directed against german aircraft production while their presence drew the luftwaffe fighters into battle with allied fighters . 
in a 1943 consolidated aircraft poll of 2,500 men in cities where consolidated adverts had been run in newspapers ,  73% had heard of the b-24 and 90% knew of the b-17.
following the end of world war ii ,  the b-17 was quickly phased out of use as a bomber and the army air forces retired most of its fleet . 
the b-17 began operations in world war ii with the royal air force  -lrb-  raf  -rrb-  in 1941, and in the southwest pacific with the u . s .  army . 
the u . s .  did not offer b-17s to the soviet union as part of its war materiel assistance program ,  but at least 73 aircraft were acquired by the soviet air force . 
during world war ii ,  after crash-landing or being forced down ,  approximately 40 b-17s were captured and refurbished ,  with about a dozen put back into the air . 
the b-17 flying fortress became symbolic in the united states of that country's air power . 
b-17s were used by the cia front companies civil air transport ,  air america and intermountain aviation for special missions . 
at their peak ,  168 b-17 bombers were in the pacific theater in september 1942, but already in mid-1942 gen .  arnold had decided that the b-17 was unsuitable for the kind of operations required in the pacific and made plans to replace all of the b-17s in the theater with b-24s  -lrb-  and later ,  b-29s  -rrb-  as soon as they became available . 
a total of 155 b-17s of all variants was delivered between 1937 and 1941, but production quickly accelerated ,  with the b-17 once holding the record for the highest production rate for any large aircraft . 
the germans shot down 36 aircraft with the loss of 200 men ,  and coupled with a raid earlier in the day against regensburg ,  a total of 60 b-17s was lost that day . 
opposition to the air corps' ambitions for the acquisition of more b-17s faded ,  and in late 1937, 10 more aircraft designated b-17b were ordered to equip two bombardment groups ,  one on each u . s .  coast . 
as use by bomber command had been curtailed ,  the raf transferred its remaining fortress i aircraft to coastal command for use as a long-range maritime patrol aircraft ,  instead . 
these aircraft were nicknamed dumbos ,  and remained in service for many years after the end of world war ii . 
however ,  b-17s were operating at heights too great for most a6m zero fighters to reach ,  and the b-17's heavy gun armament was more than a match for lightly protected japanese aircraft . 
official swiss records identify 6,501 airspace violations during the course of the war ,  with 198 foreign aircraft landing on swiss territory and 56 aircraft crashing there . 
despite an inferior performance and smaller bombload than the more numerous b-24, a survey of eighth air force crews showed a much higher rate of satisfaction in the b-17.
the boeing b-17 flying fortress is a four-engined heavy bomber developed in the 1930s for the united states army air corps  -lrb-  usaac  -rrb-  . 
b-17s were still used in the pacific later in the war ,  however ,  mainly in the combat search and rescue role . 
the b-17 also participated to a lesser extent in the war in the pacific ,  early in world war ii ,  where it conducted raids against japanese shipping and airfields . 
on 8 august 1934, the usaac tendered a proposal for a multiengine bomber to replace the martin b-10.
from then on ,  red and white neutrality bands were added to the wings of swiss aircraft to stop accidental attacks by allied aircraft . 
the pressure sphere provided just enough room for two people . 
on 23 january 1960, she reached the ocean floor in the challenger deep  -lrb-  the deepest southern part of the mariana trench  -rrb-  ,  carrying jacques piccard and don walsh . 
the crew occupied the 2.16 m  -lrb-  7.09 ft  -rrb-  pressure sphere ,  attached to the underside of the float and accessed from the deck of the vessel by a vertical shaft that penetrated the float and continued down to the sphere hatch . 
 ''trieste '' was the first manned vessel to have reached the bottom of the challenger deep . 
its original terni pressure sphere was incorporated into the `` trieste ii '' . 
to withstand the enormous pressure of 1.25 metric tons per cm  -lrb-  110 mpa  -rrb-  at the bottom of challenger deep ,  the sphere's walls were thick  -lrb-  it was overdesigned to withstand considerably more than the rated pressure  -rrb-  . 
otto decided to launch an attack on what was then the french rearguard . 
he thus broke allegiance with philip and assembled a broad coalition including emperor otto iv ,  king john i of england ,  duke henry i of brabant ,  count william i of holland ,  duke theobald i of lorraine ,  and duke henry iii of limburg . 
in early 1214, a coalition was assembled against king philip augustus of france ,  consisting of otto iv ,  king john of england ,  count ferrand of flanders ,  duke henry i of brabant ,  count william i of holland ,  duke theobald i of lorraine ,  and duke henry iii of limburg . 
a french army of approximately 7,000 men commanded by king philip augustus defeated an allied army of approximately 9,000 commanded by holy roman emperor otto iv . 
octavian's fleet was largely made up of smaller `` liburnian '' vessels . 
it is estimated that antony had around 140 ships ,  as opposed to the 260 ships of octavian's fleet . 
octavian was not behind in his strategic preparations . 
octavian's fleet was commanded by marcus vipsanius agrippa ,  while antony's fleet was supported by the power of queen cleopatra of ptolemaic egypt . 
octavian learned of this and debated how to prevent it . 
cleopatra killed herself on 12 august 30 bc . 
cleopatra's fleet ,  in the rear ,  retreated to the open sea without engaging . 
octavian's victory enabled him to consolidate his power over rome and its dominions . 
octavian had caesarion killed later that month ,  finally securing his legacy as caesar's only 'son' . 
both octavian and antony had fought against their common enemies in the civil war that followed the assassination of caesar . 
