many `` final fantasy '' games have been included in various lists of top games . 
two games ,  `` final fantasy tactics advance '' and `` final fantasy: unlimited '' ,  have been adapted into radio dramas . 
 ''final fantasy vi '' was released in japan in 1994, titled `` final fantasy iii '' in north america . 
several video game publications have created rankings of the mainline `` final fantasy '' games . 
the 2009 edition listed two games from the series among the top 50 consoles games: `` final fantasy xii '' at number 8 and `` final fantasy vii '' at number 20.
the playstation console saw the release of three main `` final fantasy '' games . 
 ''final fantasy '' has spawned numerous spin-offs and metaseries . 
tim schafer also cited `` final fantasy vii '' as one of his favourite games of all time . 
the `` final fantasy '' games feature a variety of music ,  and frequently reuse themes . 
mihara was the character designer for `` final fantasy xi '' ,  and yoshida served as character designer for `` final fantasy tactics '' ,  the square-produced `` vagrant story '' ,  and `` final fantasy xii '' . 
the main antagonist introduced at the beginning of the game is not always the final enemy ,  and the characters must continue their quest beyond what appears to be the final fight . 
other spin-offs have taken the form of subseries— ''compilation of final fantasy vii '' ,  `` ivalice alliance '' ,  and `` fabula nova crystallis final fantasy '' . 
in `` final fantasy '' games ,  players command a party of characters as they progress through the game's story by exploring the game world and defeating opponents . 
in a 2008 public poll held by the game group plc ,  `` final fantasy '' was voted the best game series ,  with five games appearing in their `` greatest games of all time '' list . 
daisuke watanabe co-wrote the scenarios for `` final fantasy x '' and `` xii '' ,  and was the main writer for the `` xiii '' games . 
 ''final fantasy xiii '' and `` final fantasy xiv '' both make use of crystal tools ,  a middleware engine developed by square enix . 
for the original `` final fantasy '' ,  sakaguchi required a larger production team than square's previous games . 
three `` final fantasy '' installments were released on the nintendo entertainment system  -lrb-  nes  -rrb-  . 
two animated tie-ins for `` final fantasy xv '' were announced at the uncovered final fantasy xv fan and press event ,  forming part of a larger multimedia project dubbed the `` final fantasy xv '' universe .  ``  ''
the concept of fatty acid  -lrb-  `` acide gras ''  -rrb-  was introduced by michel eugène chevreul ,  though he initially used some variant terms: `` graisse acide '' and `` acide huileux ''  -lrb-  `` acid fat '' and `` oily acid ''  -rrb-  . 
dr .  perlman accompanies max back to his home where his wife laura  -lrb-  isabella rossellini  -rrb-  begins noticing his strange behavior . 
max and carla bond and develop a close friendship as he helps her to get past her depression and free herself from her guilt . 
max ,  laura and nan meet with attorney steven brillstein  -lrb-  tom hulce  -rrb-  ,  who encourages max to exaggerate his testimony in order to increase nan's compensation settlement offer from the airline . 
while taking a business trip ,  architect max klein  -lrb-  jeff bridges  -rrb-  survives a crash of a flight headed from san francisco to houston . 
roosevelt ran successfully for reelection in 1940.
roosevelt grew up in a wealthy family . 
at 3:35 p . m .  that day ,  roosevelt died at the age of 63.
roosevelt's third term was dominated by world war ii . 
roosevelt carried 102 of the nation's 106 cities with a population of 100,000 or more . 
roosevelt won 57% of the popular vote and carried all but six states . 
roosevelt and his associates approached herbert hoover about running for the 1920 democratic presidential nomination ,  with roosevelt as his running mate . 
roosevelt's father died in 1900, causing great distress for him . 
roosevelt has also appeared on several u . s .  postage stamps . 
though his mother favored his retirement from public life ,  roosevelt ,  his wife ,  and roosevelt's close friend and adviser ,  louis howe ,  were all determined that roosevelt continue his political career . 
the axis powers surrendered to the allies in the months following roosevelt's death ,  during the presidency of roosevelt's successor ,  harry s .  truman . 
historians categorized roosevelt's program as `` relief ,  recovery and reform . `` 
roosevelt and churchill agreed to jointly pursue the project ,  and roosevelt helped ensure that american scientists cooperated with their british counterparts . 
like most of his groton classmates ,  roosevelt went to harvard college . 
roosevelt won the 1940 election with 55% of the popular vote ,  38 of the 48 states ,  and almost 85% of the electoral vote . 
attempting to shoot roosevelt ,  zangara instead mortally wounded chicago mayor anton cermak ,  who was sitting alongside roosevelt . 
when roosevelt was inaugurated on march 4, 1933, the u . s .  was at the nadir of the worst depression in its history . 
in his acceptance speech ,  roosevelt declared ,  `` i pledge you ,  i pledge myself to a new deal for the american people .  .  . 
in november 1943, roosevelt ,  churchill ,  and stalin met to discuss strategy and post-war plans at the tehran conference ,  where roosevelt met stalin for the first time . 
despite their opposition to roosevelt's domestic policies ,  many of these conservative congressmen would provide crucial support for roosevelt's foreign policy before and during world war ii . 
roosevelt's declining physical health had been kept secret from the general public . 
roosevelt was born on january 30, 1882, in the hudson valley town of hyde park ,  new york ,  to businessman james roosevelt i and his second wife ,  sara ann delano . 
thus ,  roosevelt had committed the u . s .  to the allied side with a policy of `` all aid short of war . `` 
franklin had a half-brother ,  james `` rosy '' roosevelt ,  from his father's previous marriage . 
hospital physicians and two outside specialists ordered roosevelt to rest . 
roosevelt was born in hyde park ,  new york ,  to a dutch american family made well known by theodore roosevelt ,  the 26th president of the united states and william henry aspinwall . 
as was his wish ,  roosevelt was buried on april 15 in the rose garden of his springwood estate . 
on march 22, roosevelt signed the cullen–harrison act ,  which effectively ended federal prohibition . 
beginning in 1925, roosevelt spent most of his time in the southern united states ,  at first on his houseboat ,  the `` larooco '' . 
following his defeat in the senate primary ,  roosevelt refocused on the navy department . 
during the campaign ,  cox and roosevelt defended the wilson administration and the league of nations ,  both of which were unpopular in 1920.
in the 1932 presidential election ,  roosevelt defeated republican president herbert hoover in a landslide . 
due to his aggressive and effective campaign ,  the roosevelt name's influence in the hudson valley ,  and the democratic landslide that year ,  roosevelt won the election ,  surprising almost everyone . 
on march 17, 1905, roosevelt married eleanor in new york city ,  despite the fierce resistance of his mother . 
in mid-1902, franklin began courting his future wife eleanor roosevelt ,  whom he had been acquainted with as a child . 
roosevelt was elected in november 1932 but ,  like his predecessors ,  would not take office until the following march . 
roosevelt had expected that the japanese would attack either the dutch east indies or thailand . 
roosevelt attended groton school ,  an episcopal boarding school in groton ,  massachusetts . 
roosevelt's plan to convince hoover to run for the democratic nomination fell through after hoover publicly declared himself to be a republican ,  but roosevelt nonetheless decided to seek the 1920 vice presidential nomination . 
congress overrode roosevelt's veto to pass a smaller revenue bill raising $2 billion . 
the four freedoms speech was given on january 6, 1941.
the speech delivered by president roosevelt incorporated the following text ,  known as the `` four freedoms '':
the four freedoms speech was popular ,  and the goals were influential in the postwar politics . 
while the freedoms did become a forceful aspect of american thought on the war ,  they were never the exclusive justification for the war . 
the franklin d .  roosevelt four freedoms park is a park designed by the architect louis kahn for the south point of roosevelt island . 
the 1939 new york world's fair had celebrated four freedoms - religion ,  speech ,  press and assembly - and commissioned leo friedlander to create sculptures representing them . 
the four freedoms were goals articulated by united states president franklin d .  roosevelt on monday ,  january 6, 1941.
the park celebrates the famous speech ,  and text from the speech is inscribed on a granite wall in the final design of the park . 
on the other hand ,  formula_10 is not a formula ,  although it is a string of symbols from the alphabet . 
the resolution rule states that from the hypotheses formula_97 and formula_98, the conclusion formula_99 can be obtained . 
the formulas obtained from the first two rules are said to be atomic formulas . 
intuitively ,  a sequent expresses the idea that formula_92 implies formula_93.
for example ,  an interpretation may assign the value formula_41 to the constant symbol formula_42.
a rule of inference states that ,  given a particular formula  -lrb-  or set of formulas  -rrb-  with a certain property as a hypothesis ,  another specific formula  -lrb-  or set of formulas  -rrb-  can be derived as a conclusion . 
a formula is logically valid  -lrb-  or simply valid  -rrb-  if it is true in every interpretation . 
in a formula ,  a variable may occur free or bound  -lrb-  or both  -rrb-  . 
thus the formula might be written as
the formation rules define the terms and formulas of first order logic . 
in polish notation ,  the formula becomes
free and bound variables of a formula need not be disjoint sets: in the formula formula_34, the first occurrence of `` x '' ,  as argument of `` p '' ,  is free while the second one ,  as argument of `` q '' ,  is bound . 
a formula φ is a logical consequence of a formula ψ if every interpretation that makes ψ true also makes φ true . 
a deductive system is sound if any formula that can be derived in the system is logically valid . 
for example ,  one can take formula_40 to be the set of integer numbers . 
quantifiers can be applied to variables in a formula . 
a deductive system is used to demonstrate ,  on a purely syntactic basis ,  that one formula is a logical consequence of another formula . 
these formulas play a role similar to tautologies in propositional logic . 
the resolution method works only with formulas that are disjunctions of atomic formulas; arbitrary formulas must first be converted to this form through skolemization . 
satisfiability of formulas with free variables is more complicated ,  because an interpretation on its own does not determine the truth value of such a formula . 
next ,  each formula is assigned a truth value . 
in other words ,  a sentence is true according to `` m '' and formula_66 if and only if it is true according to `` m '' and every other variable assignment formula_67.
to see why the restriction on bound variables is necessary ,  consider the logically valid formula φ given by formula_87, in the signature of  -lrb-  0,1,+ , × , =  -rrb-  of arithmetic . 
a formula in first-order logic with no free variable occurrences is called a first-order sentence . 
but the sentence formula_35 will be either true or false in a given interpretation . 
the set of formulas  -lrb-  also called well-formed formulas or wffs  -rrb-  is inductively defined by the following rules: only expressions which can be obtained by finitely many applications of rules 1–5 are formulas . 
the intended replacement can be obtained by renaming the bound variable `` x '' of φ to something else ,  say `` z '' ,  so that the formula after substitution is formula_89, which is again logically valid . 
in this case one says that φ is logically implied by ψ . 
there is no effective procedure that ,  given formulas a and b ,  always correctly decides whether a logically implies b . 
the free and bound variable occurrences in a formula are defined inductively as follows . 
if a sentence φ evaluates to true under a given interpretation `` m '' ,  one says that `` m '' satisfies φ; this is denoted formula_83.
a deduction in a hilbert-style deductive system is a list of formulas ,  each of which is a logical axiom ,  a hypothesis that has been assumed for the derivation at hand ,  or follows from previous formulas via a rule of inference . 
a functor `` f '' from `` c '' to `` d '' is a mapping that
we then define a contravariant functor `` f '' from `` c '' to `` d '' as a mapping that
the choice of subject was not easy for hausdorff . 
magda dierkesmann ,  who was often a guest in the home of hausdorff as a student in bonn in the years 1926–1932, reported in 1967 that:
hausdorff's mother ,  hedwig  -lrb-  1848–1902 -rrb- ,  who is also referred to in various documents as johanna ,  came from the jewish tietz family . 
it means `` great winter '' . 
fimbulwinter is the harsh winter that precedes the end of the world and puts an end to all life on earth . 
the prefix `` fimbul '' means `` the great/big '' so the correct interpretation of the word is `` the great winter '' . 
frankfurt's youngest city district is frankfurter berg . 
the `` frankfurter messe ''  -lrb-  frankfurt trade fair  -rrb-  was first mentioned in 1150.
after the war ,  frankfurt regained its wealth . 
frankfurt was historically a protestant-dominated city . 
in 1914, the citizens founded the university of frankfurt ,  later named goethe university frankfurt . 
frankfurt has many high-rise buildings in the city centre ,  forming the frankfurt skyline . 
the common abbreviations for the city ,  primarily used in railway services and on road signs ,  are `` frankfurt  -lrb-  main  -rrb- ``  ,  `` frankfurt  -lrb-  m  -rrb- ``  ,  `` frankfurt a .  m . ``  ,  `` frankfurt/main '' or `` frankfurt/m '' . 
frankfurt is the centre of the densely populated frankfurt rhine-main metropolitan region with a population of 5.5 million . 
frankfurt is the largest financial centre in continental europe . 
frankfurt has a temperate-oceanic climate  -lrb-  köppen: `` cfb ''  -rrb-  . 
frankfurt was severely bombed in world war ii  -lrb-  1939–1945 -rrb- . 
bergen-enkheim was the last suburb to become part of frankfurt on 1 january 1977.
after the ill-fated revolution of 1848, frankfurt was the seat of the first democratically elected german parliament ,  the frankfurt parliament ,  which met in the frankfurter paulskirche  -lrb-  st .  paul's church  -rrb-  and was opened on 18 may 1848.
in sports ,  the city is known as the home of the top tier football club eintracht frankfurt ,  the löwen frankfurt ice hockey team ,  the basketball club frankfurt skyliners ,  the frankfurt marathon and the venue of ironman germany . 
also in use is `` fra '' ,  the iata code for frankfurt airport . 
frankfurt lost its independence after the austro-prussian war in 1866 when prussia annexed several smaller states ,  among them the free city of frankfurt . 
frankfurt was one of the most important cities in the holy roman empire . 
by the 19th century ,  the name `` frankfurt '' had been established as the official spelling . 
the geographical centre is in bockenheim district near frankfurt west station . 
major fairs include the frankfurt motor show ,  the world's largest motor show ,  the music fair ,  and the frankfurt book fair ,  the world's largest book fair . 
frankfurt is the largest city in the rhine franconian dialect area  -lrb-  franconian ,  central german dialects  -rrb-  . 
the largest city district by population and area is sachsenhausen ,  while the smallest is altstadt ,  frankfurt's historical center . 
therein lay the early roots for the frankfurt stock exchange . 
on the death of his father king john on 29 october 1873, the crown prince succeeded to the throne as king albert . 
when the austro-prussian war broke out in 1866, albert then crown prince  -lrb-  german: `` kronprinz ''  -rrb-  ,  took up the command of the saxon forces opposing the prussian army of prince friedrich karl of prussia . 
albert died at sibyllenort on 19 june 1902, and was succeeded by his brother ,  who became king george . 
albert had a successful military career leading saxon troops which participated in the first schleswig war ,  the austro-prussian war ,  and the franco-prussian war . 
in the 1870s ,  albert initiated the construction of a dresden suburb ,  the albertstadt . 
albert  -lrb-  `` frederick augustus albert anton ferdinand joseph karl maria baptist nepomuk wilhelm xaver georg fidelis ''; 23 april 1828 – 19 june 1902 -rrb- was a german king of saxony and a member of the house of wettin . 
françois d'aguilon  -lrb-  also d'aguillon or in latin franciscus aguilonius  -rrb-   -lrb-  4 january 1567 – 20 march 1617 -rrb- was a belgian jesuit mathematician ,  physicist and architect . 
information flow in freenet is different from networks like emule or bittorrent; in freenet:
freenet has been under continuous development since 2000.
while freenet provides an http interface for browsing freesites ,  it is not a proxy for the world wide web; freenet can be used to access only the content that has been previously inserted into the freenet network . 
while users can insert data into the network ,  there is no way to delete data . 
reports of freenet's use in authoritarian nations is difficult to track due to the very nature of freenet's goals . 
freenet is a peer-to-peer platform for censorship-resistant communication . 
freenet's focus lies on free speech and anonymity . 
however ,  freenet traffic is blocked in china around the 2010s . 
unlike other p2p networks ,  freenet not only transmits data between nodes but actually stores them ,  working as a huge distributed cache . 
fortified wine is a wine to which a distilled spirit ,  usually brandy ,  is added . 
marsala wine is a wine from sicily that is available in both fortified and unfortified versions . 
madeira is a fortified wine made in the madeira islands . 
 ''gwaha-ju '' is a fortified rice wine made in korea . 
many different styles of fortified wine have been developed ,  including port ,  sherry ,  madeira ,  marsala ,  commandaria wine ,  and the aromatised wine vermouth . 
although rice wine is not made from grapes ,  it has a similar alcohol content to grape wine ,  and the addition of the distilled spirit ,  soju ,  and other ingredients like ginseng ,  jujubes ,  ginger ,  etc .  ,  to the rice wine ,  bears similarity to the above-mentioned fortified wines . 
port wine  -lrb-  also known simply as port  -rrb-  is a fortified wine from the douro valley in the northern provinces of portugal . 
exemptions are allowed for certain quality liqueur wines . 
fortified wines are often termed dessert wines in the united states to avoid association with hard drinking . 
in the case of some fortified wine styles  -lrb-  such as late harvest and botrytized wines  -rrb-  ,  a naturally high level of sugar will inhibit the yeast . 
hoyle was born near bingley in gilstead ,  west riding of yorkshire ,  england . 
during the 16th and 17th centuries ,  french cuisine assimilated many new food items from the new world . 
the french revolution was integral to the expansion of french cuisine ,  because it abolished the guild system . 
the most well known french chef of the middle ages was guillaume tirel ,  also known as taillevent . 
there are many dishes that are considered part of french national cuisine today . 
queen marie is also credited with introducing lentilles to the french diet . 
many new dishes were introduced ,  as well as techniques . 
in french medieval cuisine ,  banquets were common among the aristocracy . 
shortly before the french revolution ,  dishes like bouchées à la reine gained prominence . 
knowledge of french cooking has contributed significantly to western cuisines . 
french cuisine consists of the cooking traditions and practices from france . 
ragout ,  a stew still central to french cookery ,  makes its first appearance as a single dish in this edition as well; prior to that ,  it was listed as a garnish . 
more important to carême's career was his contribution to the refinement of french cuisine . 
five-spice powder or wuxiang powder is a spice mixture of five or more spices used predominantly in chinese and taiwanese cuisine and also used less commonly in other asian and arabic cuisines . 
let `` x '' be a topological space ,  and let `` x '' be a point of `` x '' . 
now the fundamental group of x with base point x is this set modulo homotopy `` h ''
the fundamental group is a topological invariant: homeomorphic topological spaces have the same fundamental group . 
this custom still has some effect around the world ,  for example with respect to name days in hungary . 
asyst was a forth expansion for measuring and controlling on pcs . 
these standards were unified by ansi in 1994, commonly referred to as ans forth . 
after their work at nrao ,  charles moore and elizabeth rather formed forth ,  inc .  in 1973, refining and porting forth systems to dozens of other platforms in the next decade . 
as of 2018 the source for the original 1130 version of forth has been recovered ,  and is now being updated to run on a restored or emulated 1130 system . 
forth evolved from charles h .  moore's personal programming system ,  which had been in continuous development since 1968.
for example ,  forth was the first resident software on the new intel 8086 chip in 1978 and macforth was the first resident development system for the first apple macintosh in 1984.
the bestselling 1986 computer game `` starflight '' ,  from electronic arts ,  was written with a custom forth . 
then algarotti went together with frederick to königsberg where he was crowned . 
in 1762 algarotti moved to pisa ,  where he died of tuberculosis . 
algarotti did not succeed to have the kingdom of sardinia attack austria in the back . 
algarotti was born in venice as the son of a rich merchant . 
francisco álvares' work has been translated into english at least twice . 
father álvares remained six years in ethiopia ,  returning to lisbon in either 1526 or 1527.
huntingford furnish evidence that points to álvares death in rome ,  and admit that he may have died before his work was published . 
a number of fifth monarchists took a leading part in the events of the time . 
the fifth monarchists or fifth monarchy men were an extreme puritan sect active from 1649 to 1660 during the interregnum ,  following the english civil wars of the 17th century . 
the number 666 had been identified in the book of revelation with the ultimate human despot to rule the world ,  who would be replaced by the second coming of the messiah; this only added to the belief that the fifth monarchy was about to begin . 
fifth monarchists believed that the timing of the events of the interregnum were significant because the calendar year 1666 loomed large on the near horizon . 
francis hopkinson was born at philadelphia in 1737, the son of thomas hopkinson and mary johnson . 
hopkinson obtained a public appointment as a customs collector for new castle ,  delaware on may 1, 1772.
after his return ,  hopkinson operated a dry goods business in philadelphia and married ann borden on september 1, 1768.
only a few years into his service as a federal judge ,  hopkinson died in philadelphia at the age of 53 from a sudden apoplectic seizure . 
honorius  -lrb-  ; 9 september 384 – 15 august 423 -rrb- was western roman emperor from 395 to 423.
during his reign ,  rome was sacked for the first time in almost 800 years . 
so great ,  they say ,  was the folly with which this emperor was possessed . `` 
he convinced the emperor that his arian father-in-law was conspiring with the barbarians to overthrow him . 
on his return to ravenna ,  honorius ordered the arrest and execution of stilicho . 
the following year ,  however ,  the eastern emperor theodosius ii elected his cousin valentinian iii ,  son of galla placidia and constantius iii ,  as emperor . 
stilicho hurried back to protect honorius and the legions of gaul and britain were summoned to defend italy . 
it was eventually subdued by stilicho ,  under the local command of mascezel ,  the brother of gildo . 
 ''at that time they say that the emperor honorius in ravenna received the message from one of the eunuchs ,  evidently a keeper of the poultry ,  that rome had perished . 
in 414, constantius attacked ataulf ,  who proclaimed priscus attalus emperor again . 
by 410, britain was effectively told to look after its own affairs and expect no aid from rome . 
the time course of these changes in vowel formant frequencies are referred to as 'formant transitions' . 
spectrograms are used to visualise formants . 
the liquid usually has an extra formant at 1500 hz ,  whereas the english `` r '' sound  -lrb-    -rrb-  is distinguished by a very low third formant  -lrb-  well below 2000 hz  -rrb-  . 
for `` a '' ,  for example ,  the “formant” may vary from 350 to 440 hz even in the same person . 
plosives  -lrb-  and ,  to some degree ,  fricatives  -rrb-  modify the placement of formants in the surrounding vowels . 
film stock manufacturers began to diversify their products . 
eastman's first motion picture film stock was offered in 1889.
eastman became edison's supplier of film . 
eastman kodak introduced their first 35mm colour negative stock ,  eastman colour negative film 5247, in 1950.
since the late 1990s ,  almost all release prints have used polyester film stock . 
film stock is an analog medium that is used for recording motion pictures or animation . 
this has also led to the replacement of film projectors with digital projection . 
in black-and-white photographic film there is usually one layer of silver salts . 
experiments with colour films were made as early as the late 19th century ,  but practical colour film was not commercially viable until 1908, and for amateur use when kodak introduced kodachrome for 16 mm in 1935 and 8 mm in 1936.
as the quantity of film and filmmakers grew ,  the demand for standardization increased . 
corporation income tax return . 
form 1040  -lrb-  or a variant thereof  -rrb-  is the main tax form filed by individuals who are deemed residents of the united states for tax purposes . 
an automatic extension until october 15 to file form 1040 can be obtained by filing form 4868.
douglass wrote several autobiographies . 
frederick douglass  -lrb-  born frederick augustus washington bailey;  – february 20, 1895 -rrb- was an american social reformer ,  abolitionist ,  orator ,  writer ,  and statesman . 
in addition to the above ,  fluids are assumed to obey the  . 
in physics and engineering ,  fluid dynamics is a subdiscipline of fluid mechanics that describes the flow of fluids—liquids and gases . 
the fact that the fluid is made up of discrete molecules is ignored . 
for fluids that are sufficiently dense to be a continuum ,  do not contain ionized species ,  and have flow velocities small in relation to the speed of light ,  the momentum equations for newtonian fluids are the navier–stokes equations—which is a non-linear set of differential equations that describes the flow of a fluid whose stress depends linearly on flow velocity gradients and pressure . 
some fishes ,  such as puffer fish ,  filefish and trunkfish ,  rely on pectoral fins for swimming and hardly use tail fins at all . 
the bodies of reef fishes are often shaped differently from open water fishes . 
fins first evolved on fish as a means of locomotion . 
fish use multiple fins ,  so it is possible that a given fin can have a hydrodynamic interaction with another fin . 
once motion has been established ,  the motion itself can be controlled with the use of other fins . 
 ''the researchers found that males clearly preferred females with a larger pelvic fin and that pelvic fins grew in a more disproportionate way than other fins on female fish . `` 
robotic fish offer some research advantages ,  such as the ability to examine an individual part of a fish design in isolation from the rest of the fish . 
engineering fins are also used as heat transfer fins to regulate temperature in heat sinks or fin radiators . 
foil shaped fins generate thrust when moved ,  the lift of the fin sets water or air in motion and pushes the fin in the opposite direction . 
the loss of freyr's sword has consequences . 
in the `` gylfaginning '' section of his `` prose edda '' ,  snorri introduces freyr as one of the major gods . 
the most extensive surviving freyr myth relates freyr's falling in love with the female jötunn gerðr . 
the only extended myth related about freyr in the `` prose edda '' is the story of his marriage . 
freyr is referred to several times in skaldic poetry . 
freyr is fated to fight the fire-giant surtr and since he does not have his sword he will be defeated . 
freyja agrees:
freyja agreed . 
however ,  freyja did not disappear . 
indignant ,  freyja responds:
the pendant may represent freyja herself . 
the two go to see the beautiful freyja . 
several plants were named after freyja ,  such as `` freyja's tears '' and `` freyja's hair ''  -lrb-  `` polygala vulgaris ''  -rrb-  ,  but during the process of christianization ,  the name of the goddess was replaced with that of the virgin mary . 
freyja receives a final mention in the `` prose edda '' in chapter 75, where a list of goddesses is provided that includes freyja . 
freyja had a beautiful bower ,  and when the door was shut no one could enter without freyja's permission . 
having made his way into freyja's chambers ,  loki looked around to be sure that no one was awake ,  and found that freyja was asleep . 
 ''völuspá '' contains a stanza that mentions freyja ,  referring to her as `` óð's girl ''; freyja being the wife of her husband ,  óðr . 
in chapter 29, high recounts the names and features of various goddesses ,  including freyja . 
freyja went home to her bower as if nothing happened . 
in chapter 32, poetic ways to refer to gold are provided ,  including `` freyja's weeping '' and `` rain or shower  .  .  .  from freyja's eyes '' . 
the poem `` þrymskviða '' features loki borrowing freyja's cloak of feathers and thor dressing up as freyja to fool the lusty jötunn þrymr . 
comments that freyja became a particular target under christianization:
as related in chapter 2, loki ,  under the service of odin ,  found out about freyja's actions and told odin . 
chapter 33 tells that once the gods journeyed to visit ægir ,  one of whom was freyja . 
freyja appears in the `` prose edda '' books `` gylfaginning '' and `` skáldskaparmál '' . 
due to numerous similarities ,  scholars have frequently connected freyja with the goddess frigg . 
gustav neckel ,  writing in 1920, connects freyja to the phrygian goddess cybele . 
rural scandinavians continued to acknowledge freyja as a supernatural figure into the 19th century ,  and freyja has inspired various works of art . 
the term `` first-class cricket '' was formally defined by the then imperial cricket conference  -lrb-  icc  -rrb-  on 19 may 1947.
test cricket ,  the highest standard of cricket ,  is statistically a form of first-class cricket ,  though the term `` first-class '' is mainly used to refer to domestic competition . 
first-class cricket is an official classification of the highest-standard international or domestic matches in the sport of cricket . 
a player's first-class statistics include any performances in test matches . 
he was born in geneva in 1857.
in turn ,  his son was the psychoanalyst raymond de saussure . 
saussure is one of the founding fathers of semiotics . 
ferdinand de saussure  -lrb-  ; ; 26 november 1857 – 22 february 1913 -rrb- was a swiss linguist and semiotician . 
ferdinand de saussure is one of the world's most quoted linguists ,  which is remarkable as he himself hardly published anything during his lifetime . 
the `` course '' became one of the seminal linguistics works of the 20th century not primarily for the content  -lrb-  many of the ideas had been anticipated in the works of other 20th century linguists  -rrb-  but for the innovative approach that saussure applied in discussing linguistic phenomena . 
though the sign may also have a referent ,  saussure took that to lie beyond the linguist's purview . 
he taught at the école pratique des hautes études for eleven years during which he was named chevalier de la légion d'honneur  -lrb-  knight of the legion of honor  -rrb-  . 
saussure had a major impact on the development of linguistic theory in the first half of the 20th century . 
fats therefore have `` ester '' bonds . 
the terms `` lipid '' ,  `` oil '' and `` fat '' are often confused . 
fatty acid chains may also differ by length ,  often categorized as short to very long . 
fats are also sources of essential fatty acids ,  an important dietary requirement . 
the properties of any specific fat molecule depend on the particular fatty acids that constitute it . 
the harvard school of public health advises that replacing `` trans '' fats and saturated fats with `` cis '' monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats is beneficial for health . 
in a military conflict ,  then ,  when facing the front line ,  you face the enemy . 
the attributive adjective version of the term front line  -lrb-  as in `` our front-line personnel ''  -rrb-  describes materiel or personnel intended for or actively in forward use: at sea ,  on land or in the air: `` at '' the front line . 
although the term `` front line '' first appeared in the 1520s ,  it was only in 1842 that it was recorded used in the military sense . 
in 1994 fifa published the fifa world cup all-time team . 
the fifa anthem is played at the beginning of official fifa sanctioned matches and tournaments such as international friendlies ,  the fifa world cup ,  fifa women's world cup ,  fifa u-20 world cup ,  fifa u-17 world cup ,  football at the summer olympics ,  fifa u-20 women's world cup ,  fifa women's u-17 world cup ,  fifa futsal world cup ,  fifa beach soccer world cup and fifa club world cup . 
congress elects the president of fifa ,  its general secretary ,  and the other members of the fifa council in the year following the fifa world cup . 
the current fifa flag was first flown during the opening ceremony of the 2018 fifa world cup in russia . 
the fifa statutes form the overarching document guiding fifa's governing system . 
bin hammam also responded by writing to fifa ,  protesting unfair treatment in suspension by the fifa ethics committee and fifa administration . 
the first president of fifa was robert guérin . 
i am sure fifa can emerge stronger and from within '' . 
the continental confederations are provided for in fifa's statutes ,  and membership of a confederation is a prerequisite to fifa membership . 
all six fifa voters have denied wrongdoing . 
fifa publishes its results according to ifrs . 
fifa's choice to award the 2018 world cup to russia and the 2022 world cup to qatar has been widely criticised by media . 
fifa's supreme body is the fifa congress ,  an assembly made up of representatives from each affiliated member association . 
in 2002 fifa announced the fifa dream team ,  an all-time all-star team chosen by fans in a poll . 
the fifa working committee of small nations has categorized potential fifa members into three categories:
at the ballon d'or banquet ,  the fifa puskás award ,  fifa/fifpro best xi ,  fifa fair play award ,  and fifa presidential award are also awarded . 
akin to the uefa champions league ,  fifa has adopted an anthem composed by the german composer franz lambert since the 1994 fifa world cup . 
after being re-elected as president of fifa ,  sepp blatter responded to the allegations by promising to reform fifa in wake of the bribery scandal ,  with danny jordaan ,  ceo of the 2010 fifa world cup in south africa ,  saying there is great expectation for reform . 
australian sports minister mark arbib said it was clear fifa needed to change ,  saying `` there is no doubt there needs to be reform of fifa . 
fifa is responsible for the organization of football's major international tournaments ,  notably the world cup which commenced in 1930 and the women's world cup which commenced in 1991.
fifa is headquartered in zürich ,  and is an association established under the law of switzerland . 
the fifa emergency committee deals with all matters requiring immediate settlement in the time frame between the regular meetings of the fifa council . 
fifa's worldwide organisational structure also consists of several other bodies ,  under the authority of the fifa council or created by congress as standing committees . 
the fifa flag has a blue background ,  with the organisation's logo in the middle . 
fascists saw world war i as a revolution that brought massive changes to the nature of war ,  society ,  the state and technology . 
since the end of world war ii in 1945, few parties have openly described themselves as fascist and the term is instead now usually used pejoratively by political opponents . 
each group described as fascist has at least some unique elements ,  and many definitions of fascism have been criticized as either too wide or narrow . 
tongs are used by the blacksmith for holding hot metals securely . 
a blacksmith balances the fuel and air in the fire to suit particular kinds of work . 
the anvil serves as a work bench to the blacksmith ,  where the metal to be forged is placed . 
if a larger fire is necessary ,  the smith increases the air flowing into the fire as well as feeding and deepening the coke heart . 
a forge typically uses bituminous coal ,  industrial coke or charcoal as the fuel to heat metal . 
coke and charcoal may be burned in the same forges that use coal ,  but since there is no need to convert the raw fuel at the heart of the fire  -lrb-  as with coal  -rrb-  ,  the fire is handled differently . 
often this involves adjusting and maintaining the shape of the fire . 
drop forging is a process used to shape metal into complex shapes by dropping a heavy hammer with a die on its face onto the work piece . 
the slack tub also provides water to control the fire in the forge . 
the smith can also adjust the length and width of the fire in such a forge to accommodate different shapes of work . 
 ''salah ''  -lrb-  `` ṣalāh ''  -rrb-  is the islamic prayer . 
they make up muslim life ,  prayer ,  concern for the needy ,  self-purification ,  and the pilgrimage ,  if one is able . 
there are several types of friction:
faith itself is not a religious concept in judaism . 
faith itself is not a religious concept in sikhism . 
to a christian ,  faith is not static but causes one to learn more of god and to grow; christian faith has its origin in god . 
then there are numerous views regarding the results of faith . 
the result of the work of the holy spirit is faith . `` 
ccc 144 initiates a section on the `` obedience of faith '' . 
the word translated as `` faith '' in the new testament is the greek word `` πίστις ''  -lrb-  `` pístis ''  -rrb-  which can also be translated `` belief '' ,  `` faithfulness '' ,  and `` trust '' . 
fideism is an epistemological theory which maintains that faith is independent of reason ,  or that reason and faith are hostile to each other and faith is superior at arriving at particular truths  -lrb-  see natural theology  -rrb-  . 
regardless of which approach to faith a christian takes ,  all agree that the christian faith is aligned with the ideals and the example of the life of jesus . 
in christianity ,  faith causes change as it seeks a greater understanding of god . 
british christian apologist john lennox argues that `` faith conceived as belief that lacks warrant is very different from faith conceived as belief that has warrant '' . 
thus ,  the role of faith increased throughout buddhist history . 
buddhists usually recognize multiple objects of faith ,  but many are especially devoted to one particular object of faith ,  such as one particular buddha . 
while faith in buddhism does not imply `` blind faith '' ,  buddhist practice nevertheless requires a degree of trust ,  primarily in the spiritual attainment of gautama buddha . 
 ''evidence-based faith is the normal concept on which we base our everyday lives . `` 
 ''now faith is the assurance that what we hope for will come about and the certainty that what we cannot see exists . `` 
a forest is a large area dominated by trees . 
a forest is made up of many layers . 
net primary production is estimated at 21.9 gigatonnes carbon per year for tropical forests ,  8.1 for temperate forests ,  and 2.6 for boreal forests . 
forests at different latitudes and elevations form distinctly different ecozones: boreal forests near the poles ,  tropical forests near the equator and temperate forests at mid-latitudes . 
human activities ,  including harvesting forest resources ,  can negatively affect forest ecosystems . 
sparse trees and savanna are forests with lower canopy cover of trees . 
there are many different types of tropical moist forests ,  with lowland evergreen broad leaf tropical rainforests ,  for example várzea and igapó forests and the terra firma forests of the amazon basin; the peat swamp forests ,  dipterocarp forests of southeast asia; and the high forests of the congo basin . 
as a general rule ,  forests dominated by angiosperms  -lrb-  `` broadleaf forests ''  -rrb-  are more species-rich than those dominated by gymnosperms  -lrb-  `` conifer '' ,  `` montane '' ,  or `` needleleaf forests ''  -rrb-  ,  although exceptions exist . 
there are three broad categories of forest definitions in use: administrative ,  land use ,  and land cover . 
some classifications now reserve the term `` woodland '' for an area with more open space between trees and distinguish among woodlands ,  `` open forests '' ,  and `` closed forests '' based on crown cover . 
frankish * ''forhist '' is attested by old high german `` forst '' `` forest '' ,  middle low german `` vorst '' `` forest '' ,  old english `` fyrhþ '' `` forest ,  woodland ,  game preserve ,  hunting ground ''  -lrb-  english `` frith ''  -rrb-  ,  and old norse `` fýri '' `` coniferous forest '' ,  all of which derive from proto-germanic * ''furhísa- '' ,  * ''furhíþija- '' `` a fir-wood ,  coniferous forest '' ,  from proto-indo-european * ''perku- '' `` a coniferous or mountain forest ,  wooded height '' . 
the finger lakes are classic overdeepened ,  glacial ,  finger lakes . 
the origin of the name `` finger lakes '' is uncertain . 
power kites are multi-line steerable kites designed to generate large forces which can be used to power activities such as kite surfing ,  kite landboarding ,  kite fishing ,  kite buggying and snow kiting . 
kites are now mostly used for recreation . 
many countries have kite museums . 
malaysia has also the kite museum in malacca . 
traction kites may have an additional line to de-power the kite and quick-release mechanisms to disengage flyer and kite in an emergency . 
in indonesia kites is flown as both sport and recreation . 
kite flying is popular in many asian countries ,  where it often takes the form of `` kite fighting '' ,  in which participants try to snag each other's kites or cut other kites down . 
tails are used for some single-line kite designs to keep the kite's nose pointing into the wind . 
kites were first used in warfare by the chinese . 
kites can be used for radio purposes ,  by kites carrying antennas for mf ,  lf or vlf-transmitters . 
these museums may have a focus on historical kites ,  preserving the country’s kite traditions . 
the period from 1860 to about 1910 became the `` golden age of kiting '' . 
kites have been flown in china since ancient times . 
snow kiting has also become popular in recent years . 
the term was coined in an october 1940 science fiction fanzine by russ chauvenet and first popularized within science fiction fandom ,  and from there it was adopted by other communities . 
as with comics zines ,  horror film fanzines grew from related interest within science fiction fan publications . 
among later titles ,  `` maximum rocknroll '' is a major punk zine ,  with over 300 issues published . 
by the mid-1960s ,  several fans active in science fiction and comics fandom recognized a shared interest in rock music ,  and the rock fanzine was born . 
many of the punk zines were printed in small quantities and promoted the local scene . 
comics were mentioned and discussed as early as the late 1930s in the fanzines of science fiction fandom . 
in the late 1970s ,  fiction that included a sexual relationship between two of the male characters of the media source  -lrb-  first kirk/spock ,  then later starsky/hutch ,  napoleon/illya ,  and many others  -rrb-  started to appear in zines . 
in the us ,  `` flipside '' and `` slash '' were important punk zines for the los angeles scene ,  both debuting in 1977.
starting earlier ,  in 1976, `` punk '' was published in new york and played a major part in popularizing punk rock  -lrb-  a term coined a few years earlier in `` creem ''  -rrb-  as the term for the music and the bands being written about . 
these publications were produced first on small tabletop printing presses ,  often by students . 
science fiction fanzines used a variety of printing methods . 
punk bands and independent labels often sent records to the zines for review and many of the people who started the zines became critical connections for punk bands on tour . 
for the past 6 years ,  suburban rebels in northern california has been leading the punk zine way . 
by 2000, when web publishing of stories became more popular than zine publishing ,  thousands of media fanzines had been published; over 500 of them were k/s zines . 
a proportion of his income from the game is donated to cancer research charities . 
rowland is believed to have pioneered the concept of shareware tabletop role-playing games with this system ,  although there were earlier shareware computer games with role-playing elements . 
