as of 2015, the english congregation consists of three abbeys of nuns and ten abbeys of monks . 
st .  lawrence's abbey in ampleforth ,  yorkshire was founded in 1802.
the benedictines ,  officially the order of saint benedict  -lrb-   ,  abbreviated as osb  -rrb-  ,  are a monastic catholic religious order of monks and nuns that follow the rule of saint benedict . 
lérins abbey ,  for instance ,  founded by honoratus in 375, probably received its first knowledge of the benedictine rule from the visit of st .  augustine and his companions in 596.
there are an estimated 2,400 celibate anglican religious  -lrb-  1,080 men and 1,320 women  -rrb-  in the anglican communion as a whole ,  some of whom have adopted the rule of st .  benedict . 
the forty-eighth rule of saint benedict prescribes extensive and habitual `` holy reading '' for the brethren . 
in 1955, ampleforth set up a daughter house ,  a priory at st .  louis ,  missouri which became independent in 1973 and became saint louis abbey in its own right in 1989.
saint blaise abbey in the black forest of baden-württemberg is believed to have been founded around the latter part of the tenth century . 
finally ,  bayezid occupied elbistan and malatya . 
one of bayezid's sons ,  mustafa çelebi ,  was captured with him and held captive in samarkand until 1405.
bayezid i  -lrb-  ;  -lrb-  nicknamed yıldırım  -lrb-  ottoman turkish: یلدیرم  -rrb-  ,  `` lightning ,  thunderbolt ''  -rrb- ; 1360 – 8 march 1403 -rrb- was the ottoman sultan from 1389 to 1402.
in 1397, bayezid defeated the emir of karaman in akçay ,  killing him and annexing his territory . 
bayezid built the magnificent ulu cami in bursa ,  to celebrate this victory . 
bayezid ii  -lrb-  3 december 1447 – 26 may 1512 -rrb-  -lrb-  ottoman turkish: بايزيد ثانى `` bāyezīd-i s̱ānī '' ,  turkish: `` ii . 
a boxer must be well rounded to be effective using this style . 
this style was also used by fictional boxer apollo creed . 
this style was also used by the `` street fighter '' character balrog . 
this style of boxing is also used by fictional boxer little mac . 
 ''style '' is often defined as the strategic approach a fighter takes during a bout . 
when a boxer is knocked down ,  the other boxer must immediately cease fighting and move to the furthest neutral corner of the ring until the referee has either ruled a knockout or called for the fight to continue . 
as such ,  knockouts are more common than one would expect from a defensive style . 
an example of a style matchup was the historical fight of julio césar chávez ,  a swarmer or in-fighter ,  against meldrick taylor ,  the boxer or out-fighter  -lrb-  see julio césar chávez vs .  meldrick taylor  -rrb-  . 
early fighting had no written rules . 
should the referee count to ten ,  then the knocked-down boxer is ruled `` knocked out ''  -lrb-  whether unconscious or not  -rrb-  and the other boxer is ruled the winner by knockout  -lrb-  ko  -rrb-  . 
each boxer enters into the ring from their assigned corners at the beginning of each round and must cease fighting and return to their corner at the signalled end of each round . 
there was also a sport in ancient rus called kulachniy boy or `` fist fighting '' . 
it follows the rock-paper-scissors scenario - boxer beats brawler ,  brawler beats swarmer ,  and swarmer beats boxer . 
for example ,  an out-fighter will sometimes plant his feet and counter punch ,  or a slugger may have the stamina to pressure fight with his power punches . 
the fight is controlled by a referee who works within the ring to judge and control the conduct of the fighters ,  rule on their ability to fight safely ,  count knocked-down fighters ,  and rule on fouls . 
this style of boxing was also used by fictional boxers rocky balboa and james `` clubber '' lang . 
a brawler is a fighter who generally lacks finesse and footwork in the ring ,  but makes up for it through sheer punching power . 
boxers practice their skills on several types of punching bags . 
brawlers tend to be more predictable and easy to hit but usually fare well enough against other fighting styles because they train to take punches very well . 
headgear is not permitted in professional bouts ,  and boxers are generally allowed to take much more damage before a fight is halted . 
professional bouts are usually much longer than amateur bouts ,  typically ranging from ten to twelve rounds ,  though four-round fights are common for less experienced fighters or club fighters . 
boxers also use punch/focus mitts in which a trainer calls out certain combinations and the fighter strikes the mitts accordingly . 
in contrast with amateur boxing ,  professional male boxers have to be bare-chested . 
the positioning of the hands may also vary ,  as some fighters prefer to have both hands raised in front of the face ,  risking exposure to body shots . 
in addition ,  they also allow trainers to make boxers utilize footwork and distances more accurately . 
steele then concluded that taylor was unfit to continue and signaled that he was ending the fight ,  resulting in a tko victory for chávez with only two seconds to go in the bout . 
bollywood film music is called filmi music  -lrb-  from hindi ,  meaning `` of films ''  -rrb-  . 
indian cinema is the world's largest film industry in terms of film production ,  with an annual output of 1,986 feature films  ,  and bollywood is its largest film producer ,  with 364 hindi films produced annually  . 
the 1970s was also when the name `` bollywood '' was coined ,  and when the quintessential conventions of commercial bollywood films were established . 
it set a new template for bollywood musical romance films that defined hindi cinema in the 1990s . 
for film clans ,  see list of hindi film clans . 
bollywood employs people from all parts of india . 
bollywood is also used to advertise other products . 
eventually ,  this became the standard for indian films . 
the blend of hindi ,  urdu and english occasionally seen in modern bollywood films is often referred to as hinglish ,  which has become increasingly prevalent in modern bollywood films . 
bollywood plots have tended to be melodramatic . 
urdu continues to be extensively used in bollywood films ,  in dialogues and particularly songs . 
bollywood has influenced indian society and culture for a long time . 
bollywood has also had a socio-political impact on indian society ,  reflecting indian politics over the decades . 
hindi cinema ,  often metonymously referred to as bollywood and formerly known as bombay cinema ,  is the indian hindi-language film industry ,  based in the city of mumbai  -lrb-  formerly bombay  -rrb-  ,  maharashtra ,  india . 
the filmfare awards ceremony is one of the most prominent film events given for hindi films in india . 
the period of hindi cinema from the 1990s onwards is referred to as `` new bollywood '' cinema ,  linked to economic liberalisation in india during the early 1990s . 
funding for bollywood films often comes from private distributors and a few large studios . 
there was clearly a huge market for talkies and musicals; bollywood and all the regional film industries quickly switched to sound filming . 
the bollywood sports film `` lagaan ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- was nominated for the academy award for best foreign language film ,  and two other bollywood films `` devdas ''  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- and `` rang de basanti ''  -lrb-  2006 -rrb- were nominated for the bafta award for best film not in the english language . 
another problem facing bollywood is widespread copyright infringement of its films . 
linguistically ,  bollywood films tend to use a colloquial dialect of hindi-urdu ,  or hindustani ,  mutually intelligible to both hindi and urdu speakers ,  while modern bollywood films also increasingly incorporate elements of hinglish . 
as more indians migrate to these countries ,  they form a growing market for upscale indian films . 
sound in bollywood films was once rarely recorded on location  -lrb-  otherwise known as sync sound  -rrb-  . 
the 1975 film `` chhoti si baat '' is believed to have inspired `` hitch ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- ,  which in turn inspired the bollywood film `` partner ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
the term `` bollywood '' itself has origins in the 1970s ,  when india overtook the united states as the world's largest film producer . 
there have always been indian films with more artistic aims and more sophisticated stories ,  both inside and outside the bollywood tradition  -lrb-  see parallel cinema  -rrb-  . 
perhaps the biggest influence of bollywood has been on nationalism in india itself ,  where along with rest of indian cinema ,  it has become part and parcel of the 'indian story' . 
the national film awards were introduced in 1954.
the influence of `` filmi '' bollywood music can also be seen in popular music elsewhere in the world . 
bollywood can be very clannish ,  and the relatives of film-industry insiders have an edge in getting coveted roles in films or being part of a film's crew . 
in the 2000s ,  bollywood began influencing musical films in the western world ,  and played a particularly instrumental role in the revival of the american musical film genre . 
releasing the film music ,  or music videos ,  before the actual release of the film can also be considered a form of advertising . 
lawn bowls is played on grass and variations from green to green are common . 
bowls are played by the blind and paraplegic . 
should a player win a set each ,  they then play a further 3 ends that will decide the winner . 
the world's oldest surviving bowling green is the southampton old bowling green ,  which was first used in 1299.
triples is with three players while fours is with four players in each team and is played over 21 ends . 
in the laws of the sport of bowls the winner in a singles game is the first player to score 21 shots . 
the exercise is then repeated for the next end ,  a game of bowls typically being of twenty-one ends . 
games can be decided when:
if each player wins a set ,  or both sets end tied ,  there is a 3-end tiebreaker to determine a winner . 
games to a specified number of ends may also be drawn . 
bowls or lawn bowls is a sport in which the objective is to roll biased balls so that they stop close to a smaller ball called a `` jack '' or `` kitty '' . 
once it has come to rest ,  the jack is aligned to the centre of the rink and the players take turns to roll their bowls from the mat towards the jack and thereby build up the `` head '' . 
the town's inhabitants are known as `` barcelonnettes '' . 
the town of barcelonnette was founded in 1231 by ramon berenguer iv ,  count of provence . 
barcelonnette is situated in the wide and fertile ubaye valley ,  of which it is the largest town . 
the town was retaken by the duke of savoy in 1630; and in 1691 it was captured by the troops of the marquis de vins during the war of the league of augsburg . 
the inhabitants of the town are called `` barcelonnettes '' ,  or `` vilandroises '' in valéian . 
between 1990 and 1999 the town's annual mean population growth was -0.6% ,  though between 1999 and 2007 this increased to an average of -0.1% . 
the town was afforded a `` consulat ''  -lrb-  giving it the power to administer and defend itself  -rrb-  in 1240.
a `` significant '' part of the town's inhabitants had ,  by the 16th century ,  converted to protestantism ,  and were repressed during the french wars of religion . 
in 1588 the troops of françois ,  duke of lesdiguières entered the town and set fire to the church and convent during their campaign against the duke of savoy . 
a plaque in the town commemorates the deaths of ten mexican citizens who returned to barcelonnette to fight in the first world war . 
 ''barcino nova '' is the town's latin name meaning `` new barcelona ''; `` barcino '' was the roman name for barcelona in catalonia from its foundation by emperor augustus in 10 bc ,  and it was only changed to `` barcelona '' in the middle ages . 
control of the area in the middle ages swung between the counts of savoy and of provence . 
the teachings of bahá'u'lláh ,  the founder of the bahá'í faith ,  form the foundation for bahá'í belief . 
a bahá'í published document reported 4.74 million bahá'ís in 1986 growing at a rate of 4.4% . 
bahá'ís see the báb as the forerunner of the bahá'í faith ,  because the báb's writings introduced the concept of `` he whom god shall make manifest '' ,  a messianic figure whose coming ,  according to bahá'ís ,  was announced in the scriptures of all of the world's great religions ,  and whom bahá'u'lláh ,  the founder of the bahá'í faith ,  claimed to be in 1863.
in english-language use ,  the word `` bahá'í ``  is used either as an adjective to refer to the bahá'í faith or as a term for a follower of bahá'u'lláh . 
the bahá'í faith  -lrb-  ; ``  ''  -rrb-  is a religion teaching the essential worth of all religions ,  and the unity and equality of all people . 
bahá'ís do not expect a new manifestation of god to appear within 1000 years of bahá'u'lláh's revelation . 
bahá'u'lláh's `` kitáb-i-aqdas '' and `` the will and testament of `abdu'l-bahá '' are foundational documents of the bahá'í administrative order . 
the bahá'í faith formed from the persian religion of the báb ,  a merchant who began preaching a new interpretation of shia islam in 1844.
bahá'í teachings are in some ways similar to other monotheistic faiths: god is considered single and all-powerful . 
since 1963, the universal house of justice has been the elected head of the bahá'í faith . 
currently it has between 5 and 8 million adherents ,  known as bahá'ís ,  spread out into most of the world's countries and territories . 
in 1937, shoghi effendi launched a seven-year plan for the bahá'ís of north america ,  followed by another in 1946.
any male bahá'í ,  21 years or older ,  is eligible to be elected to the universal house of justice; all other positions are open to male and female bahá'ís . 
bahá'í teachings state that god is too great for humans to fully comprehend ,  or to create a complete and accurate image of by themselves . 
bahá'í notions of progressive religious revelation result in their accepting the validity of the well known religions of the world ,  whose founders and central figures are seen as manifestations of god . 
thus ,  in addition to the `` lex gundobada '' ,  gundobad also issued  -lrb-  or codified  -rrb-  a set of laws for roman subjects of the burgundian kingdom ,  the `` lex romana burgundionum ''  -lrb-  `` the roman law of the burgundians ''  -rrb-  . 
in the late 3rd century ,  the burgundians appear on the east bank of the rhine ,  confronting roman gaul . 
ammianus marcellinus ,  on the other hand ,  claimed that the burgundians were descended from romans . 
in all ,  eight burgundian kings of the house of gundahar ruled until the kingdom was overrun by the franks in 534.
following his consolidation of power ,  between 501 and his death in 516, gundobad issued the second half of his law ,  which was more originally burgundian . 
at this time or shortly afterwards ,  the burgundian kingdom was divided among gundobad and his brothers ,  godigisel ,  chilperic ii ,  and gundomar i . 
one group of alans was settled in northern gaul by the romans . 
he also mentions that the goths had previously defeated the burgundians . 
approximately four decades later ,  the burgundians appear again . 
in 369/370, the emperor valentinian i enlisted the aid of the burgundians in his war against the alemanni . 
the liber constitutionum sive lex gundobada  -lrb-  `` the book of constitutions or law of gundobad ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the `` lex burgundionum '' ,  or more simply the `` lex gundobada '' or the `` liber '' ,  was issued in several parts between 483 and 516, principally by gundobad ,  but also by his son ,  sigismund . 
some burgundians also migrated westwards and settled as `` foederati '' in the roman province of germania secunda along the middle rhine . 
in 411, the burgundian king gundahar  -lrb-  or `` gundicar ''  -rrb-  set up a puppet emperor ,  jovinus ,  in cooperation with goar ,  king of the alans . 
their arianism proved a source of suspicion and distrust between the burgundians and the catholic western roman empire . 
if the chains are long enough ,  then this player will win . 
dots and boxes is a pencil-and-paper game for two players  -lrb-  sometimes more  -rrb-  . 
with a's next move ,  player a gets them all and wins 3–1.
but ,  with their last move ,  they have to open the next ,  larger chain ,  and the novice loses the game . 
the magazine `` book '' ranked big brother no . 
the phrase `` big sister is watching '' is a reference to the 1984 phrase `` big brother is watching '' . 
big brother is a fictional character and symbol in george orwell's novel `` nineteen eighty-four '' . 
in party propaganda ,  big brother is presented as one of the founders of the party ,  along with goldstein . 
big brother and other orwellian imagery are often referenced in the joke known as the russian reversal . 
the people are constantly reminded of this by the slogan `` big brother is watching you '': a maxim that is ubiquitously on display . 
a spontaneous ritual of devotion to big brother  -lrb-  `` bb ''  -rrb-  is illustrated at the end of the `` two minutes hate '':
binary search works on sorted arrays . 
given an array formula_1 of formula_2 elements with values or records formula_3sorted such that formula_4, and target value formula_5, the following subroutine uses binary search to find the index of formula_5 in formula_1.
in computer science ,  binary search ,  also known as half-interval search ,  logarithmic search ,  or binary chop ,  is a search algorithm that finds the position of a target value within a sorted array . 
the procedure may return any index whose element is equal to the target value ,  even if there are duplicate elements in the array . 
32 in the charts ,  thus becoming the band's first top 40 single . 
belle and sebastian are a scottish band formed in glasgow in january 1996.
in mid-2017, the band put out a new single ,  `` we were beautiful '' . 
the vaselines are an alternative rock band from glasgow formed in glasgow in 1986.
it was their first album with dave mcgowan ,  who had been their touring bassist since 2011.
the band released their third lp ,  `` the boy with the arab strap '' in 1998, and it reached no . 
the band left jeepster in 2002, signing a four-album deal with rough trade records . 
the band received an 'outstanding contribution to music award' at the nme awards 2014.
in 1999 the band was awarded with best newcomer  -lrb-  for their third album  -rrb-  at the brit awards ,  upsetting better-known acts such as steps and 5ive . 
in 2013, pitchfork tv released an hour-long documentary in february ,  directed by rj bentler which focused on the band's 1996 album if you're feeling sinister ,  as well as the formation and early releases of the band . 
a broadcast domain is a logical division of a computer network ,  in which all nodes can reach each other by broadcast at the data link layer . 
a broadcast domain can be within the same lan segment or it can be bridged to other lan segments . 
this is because a virtual lan  -lrb-  or vlan  -rrb-  is technically a broadcast domain . 
separating vlans divides broadcast domains as well . 
collision domains are generally smaller than ,  and contained within ,  broadcast domains . 
beechcraft is a brand of textron aviation since 2014.
textron has kept both the beechcraft and cessna names as separate brands . 
the entry into bankruptcy of hawker beechcraft on may 3, 2012 ended with its emergence on february 16, 2013 as a new entity ,  beechcraft corporation ,  with the hawker beechcraft name being retired . 
in 1994, raytheon merged beechcraft with the hawker product line it had acquired in 1993 from british aerospace ,  forming raytheon aircraft company . 
the 5th marine regiment ,  under colonel harold d .  harris ,  would land in the center ,  and the 7th marine regiment ,  under col .  herman h .  hanneken ,  would land at the southern end . 
by 1944, peleliu island was occupied by about 11,000 japanese of the 14th infantry division with korean and okinawan laborers . 
the division's artillery regiment ,  the 11th marines under col .  william h .  harrison ,  would land after the infantry regiments . 
the battle of peleliu ,  codenamed operation stalemate ii by the united states military ,  was fought between the u . s .  and japan during the mariana and palau campaign of world war ii ,  from september to november 1944, on the island of peleliu . 
u . s .  marines of the 1st marine division ,  and later soldiers of the u . s .  army's 81st infantry division ,  fought to capture an airstrip on the small coral island . 
only one battalion was left behind in reserve ,  with the u . s .  army's 81st infantry division available for support from angaur ,  just south of peleliu . 
however ,  before macarthur could retake the philippines ,  the palau islands ,  specifically peleliu and angaur ,  were to be neutralized and an airfield built to protect macarthur's right flank . 
955 soviet civilians died in stalingrad and its suburbs from aerial bombing by `` luftflotte '' 4 as the german 4th panzer and 6th armies approached the city . 
by the end of july ,  the germans had pushed the soviets across the don river . 
however ,  there were only about 50,000 german soldiers at el alamein in egypt ,  while at stalingrad 200,000 germans had been lost . 
the german offensive to capture stalingrad began in august 1942, using the 6th army and elements of the 4th panzer army . 
on 5 september ,  the soviet 24th and 66th armies organized a massive attack against xiv panzer corps . 
out of the nearly 91,000 german prisoners captured in stalingrad ,  only about 5,000 returned . 
of the 120 tanks the soviets had committed ,  30 were lost to air attack . 
the reverse was the case on the soviet side . 
the germans inside the pocket retreated from the suburbs of stalingrad to the city itself . 
stalingrad has been described as the biggest defeat in the history of the german army . 
the germans formed bridgeheads across the don on 20 august ,  with the 295th and 76th infantry divisions enabling the xivth panzer corps `` to thrust to the volga north of stalingrad . `` 
the germans pushing forward into stalingrad suffered heavy casualties . 
the actions resulted in more than 200,000 soviet army casualties but did slow the german assault . 
on 20 november ,  a second soviet offensive  -lrb-  two armies  -rrb-  was launched to the south of stalingrad against points held by the romanian 4th army corps . 
at least three women won the title hero of the soviet union while driving tanks at stalingrad . 
on 25 july the germans faced stiff resistance with a soviet bridgehead west of kalach . 
on 23 august the 6th army reached the outskirts of stalingrad in pursuit of the 62nd and 64th armies ,  which had fallen back into the city . 
several soviet regiments were wiped out; the entire staff of the soviet 339th infantry regiment was killed the following morning during an air raid . 
the plan was to punch through the overstretched and weakly defended german flanks and surround the german forces in the stalingrad region . 
the nine armies amassed for the counteroffensive were the 24th army ,  65th army ,  66th army and 16th air army from the north as part of the don front offensive and 1st guards army ,  5th tank ,  21st army ,  2nd air army and 17th air army from the south as part of the southwestern front . 
many women fought on the soviet side ,  or were under fire . 
on the next day ,  the southern pocket in stalingrad collapsed . 
on 26 january 1943, the german forces inside stalingrad were split into two pockets north and south of mamai-kurgan . 
it fought as part of the 100th jäger division . 
soviet forces consolidated their positions around stalingrad ,  and fierce fighting to shrink the pocket began . 
the expansion of objectives was a significant factor in germany's failure at stalingrad ,  caused by german overconfidence and an underestimation of soviet reserves . 
but in its defensive position on the volga ,  the 6th army continued to tie down a significant number of soviet armies . 
with the advance now slowed ,  hitler changed his mind and reassigned the 4th panzer army back to the attack on stalingrad . 
the germans were now not only starving ,  but running out of ammunition . 
soviet operations were constantly hampered by the `` luftwaffe '' . 
similarly ,  on the southern flank of the stalingrad sector the front southwest of kotelnikovo was held only by the romanian 4th army . 
pavlov was awarded the hero of the soviet union for his actions . 
though initially successful ,  the german attacks stalled in the face of soviet reinforcements brought in from across the volga . 
this slowed the german advance and reduced the effectiveness of the german advantage in supporting fire . 
amid the debris of the wrecked city ,  the soviet 62nd and 64th armies ,  which included the soviet 13th guards rifle division ,  anchored their defense lines with strongpoints in houses and factories . 
with the initial operations being very successful ,  the germans decided that their summer campaign in 1942 would be directed at the southern parts of the soviet union . 
during the defence of stalingrad ,  the red army deployed five armies  -lrb-  28th ,  51st ,  57th ,  62nd and 64th armies  -rrb-  in and around the city and an additional nine armies in the encirclement counter offensive . 
the 4th panzer army ,  ordered south on 13 july to block the soviet retreat `` weakened by the 17th army and the 1st panzer army '' ,  had turned northwards to help take the city from the south . 
four soviet armies were deployed against the remaining northern pocket . 
the initial advance of the 6th army was so successful that hitler intervened and ordered the 4th panzer army to join army group south  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  to the south . 
the royal romanian air force was also involved in the axis air operations at stalingrad . 
by mid-november 1942, the germans had pushed the soviet defenders back at great cost into narrow zones along the west bank of the volga river . 
hitler reiterated that the sixth army would stay at stalingrad and that the air bridge would supply it until the encirclement was broken by a new german offensive . 
bodhidharma then either returned to india or died . 
bodhidharma was a buddhist monk who lived during the 5th or 6th century . 
thirdly ,  daoxuan suggests a date for bodhidharma's arrival in china . 
there are two known extant accounts written by contemporaries of bodhidharma . 
secondly ,  more detail is provided concerning bodhidharma's journeys . 
finally ,  daoxuan provides information concerning bodhidharma's death . 
bodhidharma's tomb was then opened ,  and only a single sandal was found inside . 
bodhidharma's teachings and practice centered on meditation and the `` laṅkāvatāra sūtra '' . 
failing to make a favorable impression in south china ,  bodhidharma is said to have travelled to the shaolin monastery . 
conversely ,  the japanese tradition generally regards bodhidharma as persian . 
the most popular account relates that bodhidharma was admitted into the shaolin temple after nine years in the cave and taught there for some time . 
several contemporary popular traditions also exist regarding bodhidharma's origins . 
where the rule is that wherever instances of `` formula_1 '' and `` formula_2 '' appear on lines of a proof ,  `` formula_3 '' can validly be placed on a subsequent line . 
biconditional elimination is the name of two valid rules of inference of propositional logic . 
some new base pairs have been reported . 
may be used for base pairs . 
experts said the synthetic dna incorporating the unnatural base pair raises the possibility of life forms based on a different dna code . 
in the human genome ,  the centimorgan is about 1 million base pairs . 
the gu pairing ,  with two hydrogen bonds ,  does occur fairly often in rna  -lrb-  see wobble base pair  -rrb-  . 
an unnatural base pair  -lrb-  ubp  -rrb-  is a designed subunit  -lrb-  or nucleobase  -rrb-  of dna which is created in a laboratory and does not occur in nature . 
the following dna sequences illustrate pair double-stranded patterns . 
the ravens won the game 20–17.
their final record that year was 7–9.
they were also the only team to defeat the 15–1 pittsburgh steelers in the regular season . 
the 1997 ravens started 3–1.
the ravens ended the regular season with a franchise-best 13–3 record . 
the team regrouped and won each of their last seven games ,  finishing 12–4 and making the playoffs for the first time . 
the ravens finished 1998 with a 6–10 record . 
the two teams met again on january 20, 2013 in the afc championship ,  where the ravens won 28–13.
new england would go on to win the game 41-7.
the 2006 baltimore ravens season began with the team trying to improve on their 6–10 record of 2005.
the ravens played the patriots for the third consecutive season ,  in the 2011 afc championship game in which the ravens lost 23–20.
three interceptions by grbac ended the ravens' season ,  as they lost 27–10.
the ravens initially struggled with a record of 4–7 but managed to finish with an 8–8 record . 
the ravens did not make the playoffs in 2004 and finished the season with a record of 9–7 with kyle boller spending the season at qb . 
the eventual super bowl champion colts won 15–6, ending baltimore's season . 
this was the first time the ravens missed the playoffs in consecutive seasons since 2004–2005, as well as the first in the harbaugh/flacco era . 
the titans won 20–17 on a late field goal ,  and baltimore's season ended early . 
injuries and their inability to win close games early in the season led to the first losing season in the john harbaugh-flacco era . 
but in week 2, the ravens collapsed in tennessee and lost 26–13.
for the incident ,  rice was initially suspended for the first two games of the 2014 nfl season on july 25, 2014, which led to widespread criticism of the nfl . 
the 2015 season marked 20 seasons of the franchise's existence competing in the nfl ,  which the franchise recognized with a special badge being worn on their uniforms during the 2015 nfl season . 
the ravens hosted their arch-enemy in week 1 of the 2011 season . 
it was the first time ever that tom brady lost a game at home after leading at halftime ,  and the first time a road team beat the patriots in the afc championship . 
on december 22, 2013, the teams met again ,  this rematch of the afc championship game was a mismatch from the outset . 
the 2016 ravens improved on their 5–11 record from 2015, finishing 8–8, but failed to qualify the playoffs for the second straight year . 
the team plays its home games at m&t bank stadium and is headquartered in owings mills . 
during the 2000 season ,  the ravens defense broke two notable nfl records . 
after a stellar 2006 season ,  the ravens hoped to improve upon their 13–3 record but injuries and poor play plagued the team . 
the ravens faced the patriots in a 2009 afc wild card playoff game and won 33–14; the ravens ran the ball for more than 250 yards . 
in the 2002 season the ravens began the practice of wearing white jerseys for the home opener and ,  occasionally ,  other early games in the season that have a 1:00 kickoff . 
the ravens became champions with a 34–7 win ,  becoming only the third wild card team to win a super bowl championship . 
they held opposing teams to 165 total points ,  surpassing the 1985 chicago bears mark of 198 points for a 16-game season as well as surpassing the 1986 chicago bears mark of 187 points for a 16-game season ,  which at that time was the current nfl record . 
nationally ,  the bnp received 6.26% . 
in total the bnp polled 42,197 votes  -lrb-  4.3%  -rrb-  . 
between 2007 and 2009 the bnp accumulated debts of £500,000.
under tyndall's leadership ,  the bnp was openly anti-semitic . 
for most of its history ,  the bnp had a whites-only membership policy . 
in the period between 2002 and 2006, over 40% of the bnp's voters were in northern england . 
the bnp adheres to an ideology of ethnic nationalism . 
the bnp won two seats in the european parliament in the 2009 elections . 
at 14.6% ,  this was the bnp's best result in any of the seats it contested that year . 
the bnp often received a hostile response from other sections of the british extreme-right . 
as of 2011, the bnp had yet to make `` a major breakthrough '' on local councils . 
opposition to the bnp also came from the organised anti-fascist movement . 
around 1,000 bnp members attended the party's 2001 festival . 
the bnp claimed that bbc editors were following an agenda . 
opposition to immigration has been central to the bnp's political platform . 
davey characterised the bnp as a `` populist ethno-nationalist '' party . 
under tyndall ,  the bnp called for the re-criminalisation of homosexual activity . 
in 2014, after nick griffin lost the leadership of bnp ,  he set up british voice ,  but before it was launched ,  he decided to set up a different group ,  british unity . 
it combined the electoral tactics of the bnp with the street marches of the edl . 
the british national party  -lrb-  bnp  -rrb-  was founded by the extreme-right political activist john tyndall . 
the british national party  -lrb-  bnp  -rrb-  is a far-right ,  fascist political party in the united kingdom . 
the bnp was formally launched on 7 april 1982 at a press conference in victoria . 
in september 2008, an academic symposium on the bnp was held at teesside university . 
the anti-fascist activist gerry gable referred to the bnp as a `` nazi organisation '' ,  while the anti-nazi league published leaflets describing the bnp as the `` british nazi party '' . 
the bnp has contested seats in england ,  wales ,  scotland and northern ireland . 
research indicated that bnp voters also held opinions that were distinct from the average british citizen . 
copsey noted that despite griffin's reforms ,  a `` culture of anti-semitism '' still pervaded the bnp . 
a year later ,  in october 2009, another list of bnp members was leaked . 
the british police ,  fire brigades union ,  and church of england ,  prohibited its members from joining the bnp . 
various political scientists and historians have described the bnp as being fascist in ideology . 
in 2011, goodwin described the bnp as being `` the most successful party in the history of the extreme right in britain '' . 
the british government announced in 2009 that the bnp's two meps would be denied some of the access and information afforded to other meps . 
the bnp had little success in gaining support from women ,  the middle classes ,  and the more educated . 
the bnp has a highly centralised structure that gives its chairman near-total control . 
ideologically positioned on the extreme-right or far-right of british politics ,  the bnp has been characterised as fascist or neo-fascist by political scientists . 
research also indicated that bnp voters were more mistrustful of the establishment than average citizens . 
the leaders and senior officers of the bnp have criminal convictions for inciting racial hatred . 
more liberal sections of the anti-fascist movement sought to counter the bnp through community-based initiatives . 
there were also allegations made that bnp councillors had particularly low attendance at council meetings ,  although research indicated that this was not the case ,  with the bnp's attendance record being largely average . 
the first academic attention to be directed at the bnp appeared after it gained a councillor in the 1993 local elections . 
the bnp has taken part in european parliament elections since 1999, when they received 1.13% of the total vote  -lrb-  102,647 votes  -rrb-  . 
after the 2013 local county council elections ,  the bnp was left with a total of two borough councillors in england:
the tribal name ,  probably a derivation from `` batawjō ''  -lrb-  `` good island '' ,  from germanic `` bat- '' `` good ,  excellent , ``  which is also in the english `` better , ``  and `` awjō '' `` island ,  land near water ''  -rrb-  ,  refers to the region's fertility ,  today known as the `` fruitbasket of the netherlands ''  -lrb-  the betuwe  -rrb-  . 
quakers and the salvation army do not practice baptism with water . 
christians consider jesus to have instituted the sacrament of baptism . 
baptism is practiced in several different ways . 
much more than half of all christians baptize infants; many others regard only believer's baptism as true baptism . 
in the west ,  this method of baptism began to be replaced by affusion baptism from around the 8th century ,  but it continues in use in eastern christianity . 
on these three meanings of the word `` immersion '' ,  see immersion baptism . 
baptism  -lrb-  from the greek noun βάπτισμα `` baptisma ''; see below  -rrb-  is a christian rite of admission and adoption ,  almost invariably with the use of water ,  into christianity . 
baptism has similarities to tvilah ,  a jewish purification ritual of immersing in water ,  which is required for ,  among other things ,  conversion to judaism ,  but which differs in being repeatable ,  while baptism is to be performed only once . 
the side that first attempted to place the jack is given the opportunity to bowl first . 
if the first team misses twice ,  the other team is awarded the opportunity to place the jack anywhere they choose within the prescribed zone . 
in slovenia the sport is known as ' or colloquially 'playing '' ,  or '  -lrb-  from italian ' and venetian ``  '' ,  meaning 'balls'  -rrb-  . 
beatmatching or pitch cue is a disc jockey technique of pitch shifting or timestretching an upcoming track to match its tempo to that of the currently playing track ,  and to adjust them such that the beats  -lrb-  and ,  usually ,  the bars  -rrb-  are synchronised — i . e .  ,  the kicks and snares in two house records hit at the same time when both records are played simultaneously . 
in 2014, this was on 5 may . 
some wiccans enact a ritual union of the may lord and may lady . 
beltane  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the anglicised name for the gaelic may day festival . 
the dictionary also states that `` dia céadamhan '' is may day and `` mí céadamhan '' is the month of may . 
similar may day customs are found across europe . 
the may bush was popular in parts of ireland until the late 19th century . 
afterwards ,  they would drink the caudle . 
traditional festival foods may also be prepared . 
wiccans use the name `` beltane '' or `` beltain '' for their may day celebrations . 
in modern scottish gaelic ,  `` latha buidhe bealltainn '' or `` là buidhe bealltainn ''  -lrb-  `` the yellow day of beltane ''  -rrb-  is used to describe the first day of may . 
there are over thirty hotels in bethlehem . 
by 2016, the christian population of bethlehem had declined to only 16% . 
bethlehem is the `` muhfaza ''  -lrb-  seat  -rrb-  or district capital of the bethlehem governorate . 
in the center of bethlehem is its old city . 
tourism is bethlehem's main industry . 
hartmann found that bethlehem had 520 houses . 
bethlehem was administered by the british mandate from 1920 to 1948.
bethlehem is home to the palestinian heritage center ,  established in 1991.
the women embroiderers of bethlehem were known for their bridalwear . 
bethlehem now has a muslim majority ,  but is still home to a significant palestinian christian community . 
since the 1995 oslo accords ,  bethlehem has been administered by the palestinian authority . 
bethlehem paid taxes on wheat ,  barley and grapes . 
bethlehem is situated on the southern portion in the judean mountains . 
the influx of refugees significantly transformed bethlehem's christian majority into a muslim one . 
the industry was noted by richard pococke ,  who visited bethlehem in 1727.
the gospel of matthew and the gospel of luke represent jesus as having been born in bethlehem . 
in 2008, bethlehem hosted the largest economic conference to date in the palestinian territories . 
the church of the nativity is one of bethlehem's major tourist attractions and a magnet for christian pilgrims . 
bethlehem is located at an elevation of about above sea level ,  higher than nearby jerusalem . 
bethlehem became part of jund filastin following the muslim conquest in 637.
another bethlehem clan ,  al-anatreh ,  also trace their ancestry to the ghassanids . 
bethlehem is home to bethlehem university ,  a catholic christian co-educational institution of higher learning founded in 1973 in the lasallian tradition ,  open to students of all faiths . 
bethlehem receives an average of of rainfall annually ,  70% between november and january . 
bethlehem celebrates festivals related to saints and prophets associated with palestinian folklore . 
in the hebrew bible unlike rachel's first son ,  joseph ,  benjamin was born in canaan . 
as with jewish tradition ,  it also further links a connection between the names of benjamin's children and joseph . 
it continues by stating that benjamin divined that the `` man on the throne '' was joseph ,  so joseph identified himself to benjamin  -lrb-  but not the other brothers  -rrb-  ,  and revealed his scheme  -lrb-  as in the torah  -rrb-  to test how fraternal the other brothers were . 
in the samaritan pentateuch ,  benjamin's name appears as `` binyaamem ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
these sources go on to state that benjamin's oath touched joseph so deeply that joseph was no longer able to pretend to be a stranger . 
though not named in the quran ,  benjamin is referred to as the righteous youngest son of jacob ,  in the narrative of joseph in islamic tradition . 
later that month ,  the band started recording an album . 
the band returned to the studio in june 1970, just four months after `` black sabbath '' was released . 
the band's first show as black sabbath took place on 30 august 1969, in workington ,  england . 
the band were toxic ,  very toxic . `` 
that lasted one album and one tour and then that was it . `` 
black sabbath began work for their next album at criteria studios in miami ,  florida ,  in june 1976.
under pressure from their record label ,  the band released their seventeenth studio album ,  `` cross purposes '' ,  on 8 february 1994, under the black sabbath name . 
the band's popularity grew ,  and by 1973's `` sabbath bloody sabbath '' ,  critics were starting to respond favourably . 
black sabbath began work on their sixth album in february 1975, again in england at morgan studios in willesden ,  this time with a decisive vision to differ the sound from `` sabbath ,  bloody sabbath '' . 
black sabbath's first major exposure came when the band appeared on john peel's `` top gear '' radio show in 1969, performing `` black sabbath '' ,  `` n . i . b . 
fenholt gives a detailed account in garry sharpe-young's book `` sabbath bloody sabbath: the battle for black sabbath '' . 
i make it easy for myself and always say the first five sabbath albums . `` 
the u . s .  release was held off until january 1971, as the `` black sabbath '' album was still on the charts at the time of `` paranoid ''s uk release . 
on 13 january 2013, the band announced that the album would be released in june under the title `` 13 '' . 
black sabbath were a heavy metal band ,  whose music has also been described as psychedelic rock ,  and acid rock . 
 -lrb-  in 2003, `` rolling stone '' would place the album at number 300 on their 500 greatest albums of all time list .   -rrb- 
black sabbath was one of the first bands to tour russia ,  after mikhail gorbachev opened the country to western acts for the first time in 1989.
although he performed on the album ,  drummer ward was unable to tour because of the pressures of the road ,  and quit the band after the commencement of the `` born again '' album . 
beginning with their third album ,  `` master of reality ''  -lrb-  1971 -rrb- ,  black sabbath began to feature tuned-down guitars . 
ronnie james dio left black sabbath in november 1982 to start his own band ,  and took drummer vinny appice with him . 
in late 1977, while in rehearsal for their next album ,  and just days before the band was set to enter the studio ,  osbourne abruptly quit the band . 
iommi has stated that he has not ruled out the possibility of new material or one-off shows under the black sabbath name . 
asked in november 2016 about his plans after black sabbath's final tour ,  iommi replied ,  `` i'll be doing some writing . 
the band's first single from `` 13 '' ,  `` god is dead ? 
for the first time in their career ,  the band's touring cycle did not include u . s .  dates . 
black sabbath released `` headless cross '' in april 1989, and it was also ignored by contemporary reviewers ,  although allmusic contributor eduardo rivadavia gave the album four stars and called it `` the finest non-ozzy or dio black sabbath album '' . 
in an april 2017 interview ,  butler revealed that black sabbath considered making a blues album as the follow-up to `` 13 '' ,  but added that ,  `` the tour got in the way . `` 
black sabbath has sold over 70 million records worldwide ,  including a riaa-certified 15 million in the u . s . 
records released a compilation album in 1996 to fulfill the band's contract ,  titled `` the sabbath stones '' ,  which featured songs from `` born again ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- to `` forbidden ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- . 
earned black sabbath their first grammy award in 14 years for best metal performance in 2014.
on 18 august 1980, after a show in minneapolis ,  ward quit the band . 
iommi released his first official solo album ,  `` iommi '' ,  in 2000, while osbourne continued work on `` down to earth ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- . 
black sabbath toured the u . s .  throughout 1980 with blue öyster cult on the `` black and blue '' tour ,  with a show at nassau coliseum in uniondale ,  new york filmed and released theatrically in 1981 as `` black and blue '' . 
the album marked the band's fifth consecutive platinum selling album in the u . s .  ,  reaching number four on the united kingdom charts ,  and number eleven in the u . s . 
in june 1972, the band reconvened in los angeles to begin work on their next album at the record plant . 
the band completed the `` heaven and hell '' world tour in february 1981, and returned to the studio to begin work on their next album . 
in 2009, the band announced the title of their debut studio album ,  `` the devil you know '' ,  released on 28 april . 
after completing asian dates in december 1995, tony iommi put the band on hiatus ,  and began work on a solo album with former black sabbath vocalist glenn hughes ,  and former judas priest drummer dave holland . 
on 3 september 2015, it was announced that black sabbath would embark on their final tour ,  titled the end ,  from january 2016 to february 2017.
according to `` rolling stone '' holly george-warren ,  `` black sabbath was the heavy metal king of the 70s . `` 
he later is disappointed to learn the team is not the new york giants or new york jets ,  but the buffalo bills . 
the buffalo bills radio network is flagshipped at wgr ,  am 550 in buffalo . 
buffalo currently leads the series 26-21-1.
on november 12, 2015, the bills and the new york jets became the first two teams to participate in the nfl's color rush uniform initiative ,  with buffalo wearing an all-red combination for the first time in team history . 
the team's original colors were honolulu blue ,  silver and white ,  and the helmets were silver with no striping . 
buffalo sporadically wore white at home in the 1980s ,  but stopped doing so before their super bowl years . 
buffalo leads the series 61-54 as of 2017, including a playoff win in 1981.
this is often considered buffalo's most famous rivalry . 
the new nike uniform was unveiled on april 3, 2012.
the buffalo bills are a professional american football team based in the buffalo–niagara falls metropolitan area . 
the bills introduced blue pants worn with the white jerseys in 1973, the last year of the standing buffalo helmet . 
the buffalo bills have retired three numbers in franchise history: no . 
the face mask on the helmet was blue from 1974 through 1986 before changing to white . 
the bills are the team that eventually unseats the orlando breakers ,  the fictional nfl team that serves as the focus of the sitcom `` coach '' in later seasons ,  in the playoffs . 
the bills and jets both represent the state of new york ,  though the jets actually play their games in east rutherford ,  new jersey . 
the buffalo bills were featured on the direct-to-tv movie `` second string '' ,  and in the vincent gallo drama `` buffalo 66 '' . 
this change includes a return to the white helmets with `` charging buffalo '' logo ,  and a return to royal blue instead of navy . 
the rivalry with the new england patriots first started when both teams were original franchises in the american football league prior to the nfl-afl merger . 
the bills backers are the official fan organization of the buffalo bills . 
since the earliest days of the team ,  the number 31 was not supposed to be issued to any other player . 
during the preseason ,  most games are televised on buffalo's abc affiliate ,  wkbw-tv channel 7.
planning for the big dig as a project officially began in 1982, with environmental impact studies starting in 1983.
a number of public transportation projects were included as part of an environmental mitigation for the big dig . 
when construction began ,  the project cost ,  including the charles river crossing ,  was estimated at $5.8 billion . 
silver line buses now use this tunnel and the ted williams tunnel to link south station and logan airport . 
at the beginning of the project ,  engineers had to figure out the safest way to build the tunnel without endangering the existing elevated highway above . 
by the end of december 2004, 95% of the big dig was completed . 
the project was managed by the massachusetts turnpike authority ,  with the big dig and the turnpike's boston extension from the 1960s being financially and legally joined by the legislature as the metropolitan highway system . 
the project was conceived in the 1970s by the boston transportation planning review to replace the rusting elevated six-lane central artery . 
the nature of the charles river crossing had been a source of major controversy throughout the design phase of the project . 
to build slurry walls past these tunnels ,  it was necessary to dig beneath the tunnels and to build an underground concrete bridge to support the tunnels' weight ,  without interrupting rail service . 
other challenges included existing subway tunnels crossing the path of the underground highway . 
interest brought this cost to $21.93 billion . 
the central artery/tunnel project  -lrb-  ca/t  -rrb-  ,  known unofficially as the big dig ,  was a megaproject in boston that rerouted the central artery of interstate 93, the chief highway through the heart of the city ,  into the 1.5-mile  -lrb-  2.4 km  -rrb-  thomas p .  o'neill jr . 
in their second terms ,  michael dukakis  -lrb-  governor  -rrb-  and fred salvucci  -lrb-  secretary of transportation  -rrb-  came up with the strategy of tying the two projects together—thereby combining the project that the business community supported with the project that they and the city of boston supported . 
jewish and christian tradition identified this author as the 5th century bc figure ezra ,  who gives his name to the book of ezra; ezra was also believed to be the author of both chronicles and ezra–nehemiah ,  but later critical scholarship abandoned the identification with ezra and called the anonymous author `` the chronicler '' . 
much of the content of chronicles is a repetition of material from other books of the bible ,  from genesis to kings ,  and so the usual scholarly view is that these books ,  or an early version of them ,  provided the author with the bulk of his material . 
the last events in chronicles take place in the reign of cyrus the great ,  the persian king who conquered babylon in 539 bc; this sets an earliest possible date for the book . 
the latter half of the 20th century saw a radical reappraisal ,  and many now regard it as improbable that the author of chronicles was also the author of the narrative portions of ezra–nehemiah . 
searching a binary search tree for a specific key can be programmed recursively or iteratively . 
consider the following tree:
when removing a node from a binary `` search '' tree it is mandatory to maintain the in-order sequence of the nodes . 
binary search trees keep their keys in sorted order ,  so that lookup and other operations can use the principle of binary search: when looking for a key in a tree  -lrb-  or a place to insert a new key  -rrb-  ,  they traverse the tree from root to leaf ,  making comparisons to keys stored in the nodes of the tree and deciding ,  on the basis of the comparison ,  to continue searching in the left or right subtrees . 
because in the worst case this algorithm must search from the root of the tree to the leaf farthest from the root ,  the search operation takes time proportional to the tree's `` height ''  -lrb-  see tree terminology  -rrb-  . 
however ,  in the worst case ,  binary search trees can have height ,  when the unbalanced tree resembles a linked list  -lrb-  degenerate tree  -rrb-  . 
insertion begins as a search would begin; if the key is not equal to that of the root ,  we search the left or right subtrees as before . 
we begin by examining the root node . 
this process continues ,  until the new node is compared with a leaf node ,  and then it is added as this node's right or left child ,  depending on its key: if the key is less than the leaf's key ,  then it is inserted as the leaf's left child ,  otherwise as the leaf's right child . 
the bst property—every node on the right subtree has to be larger than the current node and every node on the left subtree has to be smaller than the current node—is the key to figuring out whether a tree is a bst or not . 
the leaves  -lrb-  final nodes  -rrb-  of the tree contain no key and have no structure to distinguish them from one another . 
a binary tree is a special case of an ordered k-ary tree ,  where `` k '' is 2.
in computer science ,  a binary tree is a tree data structure in which each node has at most two children ,  which are referred to as the ' and the ' . 
also ,  the borel measure and the lebesgue measure coincide on the borel sets  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  formula_17 for every borel measurable set ,  where formula_4 is the borel measure described above  -rrb-  . 
let formula_1 be a locally compact hausdorff space ,  and let formula_2 be the smallest σ-algebra that contains the open sets of formula_1; this is known as the σ-algebra of borel sets . 
if `` x '' and `` y '' are second-countable ,  hausdorff topological spaces ,  then the set of borel subsets formula_19 of their product coincides with the product of the sets formula_20 of borel subsets of `` x '' and `` y '' . 
this series is set in 1917, on the western front in the trenches of the first world war . 
atkinson has said about the making of the first series:
 ''the black adder '' ,  the first series of `` blackadder '' ,  was written by richard curtis and rowan atkinson and produced by john lloyd . 
the first series ,  `` the black adder '' ,  was written by richard curtis and rowan atkinson ,  while subsequent episodes were written by curtis and ben elton . 
 ''blackadder the third ''  -lrb-  1987 -rrb- was set during the late 18th and early 19th centuries in the reign of george iii ,  and `` blackadder goes forth ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- was set in 1917 in the trenches of the great war . 
 ''blackadder the third '' is set in the late 18th and early 19th centuries ,  a period known as the regency . 
each series tended to feature the same set of regular actors in different period settings ,  although throughout the four series and specials ,  only blackadder and baldrick were constant characters . 
 ''blackadder ii '' is set in england during the reign of queen elizabeth i  -lrb-  1558–1603 -rrb- ,  who is portrayed by miranda richardson . 
each series was set in a different period of british history ,  beginning in 1485 and ending in 1917, and comprised six half-hour episodes . 
the first series was odd ,  it was very extravagant . 
rowan atkinson and richard curtis developed the idea for the sitcom while working on `` not the nine o'clock news '' . 
this is the only `` written source '' provided by the boii themselves . 
the eastern boii on the danube were incorporated into the roman empire in 8 ad . 
in the second half of the 3rd century bc ,  the boii allied with the other cisalpine gauls and the etruscans against rome . 
contemporary derived words include `` boiorix ''  -lrb-  `` king of the boii '' ,  one of the chieftains of the cimbri  -rrb-  and `` boiodurum ''  -lrb-  `` gate/fort of the boii '' ,  modern passau  -rrb-  in germany . 
plautus refers to the boii in `` captivi '': there is a play on words: `` boia '' means `` woman of the boii '' ,  also `` convicted criminal's restraint collar '' . 
the boii would thus be either `` the herding people '' or `` the warrior people . `` 
when all of a player's checkers are in that player's home board ,  that player may start removing them; this is called `` bearing off '' . 
the 7-point is referred to as the bar point ,  and the 13-point as the midpoint . 
hypergammon is a variant of backgammon in which players have only three checkers on the board ,  starting with one each on the 24- ,  23- and 22-points . 
to start the game ,  each player rolls one die ,  and the player with the higher number moves first using the numbers shown on both dice . 
the two players move their chips in opposing directions ,  from the 24-point towards the 1-point . 
in the course of a move ,  a checker may land on any point that is unoccupied or is occupied by one or more of the player's own checkers . 
acey-deucey is a variant of backgammon in which players start with no checkers on the board ,  and must bear them on at the beginning of the game . 
backgammon is one of the oldest known board games . 
the first player to bear off all fifteen of his/her own checkers wins the game . 
after rolling the dice ,  players must ,  if possible ,  move their checkers according to the number shown on each die . 
points 1 through 6 are called the home board or inner board ,  and points 7 through 12 are called the outer board . 
their allocated lands  -lrb-  joshua 24:28 -rrb- . 
land is the central topic of joshua . 
the book of joshua is an anonymous work . 
joshua is `` old ,  advanced  -lrb-  or stricken  -rrb-  in years '' by this time  -lrb-  joshua 13:1 -rrb- . 
the book of joshua holds little historical value . 
the book of joshua takes forward deuteronomy's theme of israel as a single people worshipping yahweh in the land god has given them . 
joshua ,  in his old age and conscious that he is `` going the way of all the earth ''  -lrb-  joshua 23:14 -rrb- ,  gathers the leaders of the israelites together and reminds them of yahweh's great works for them ,  and of the need to love yahweh  -lrb-  joshua 23:11 -rrb- . 
in deuteronomistic theology ,  `` rest '' meant israel's unthreatened possession of the land ,  the achievement of which began with the conquests of joshua . 
god commissions joshua to take possession of the land and warns him to keep faith with the covenant . 
chapter 1 commences `` after the death of moses ''  -lrb-  joshua 1:1 -rrb- and presents the first of three important moments in joshua marked with major speeches and reflections by the main characters; here first god ,  and then joshua ,  make speeches about the goal of conquest of the promised land; in chapter 12, the narrator looks back on the conquest; and in chapter 23 joshua gives a speech about what must be done if israel is to live in peace in the land . 
joshua meets again with all the people at shechem in chapter 24 and addresses them a second time . 
the book of joshua  -lrb-   ``  ''  -rrb-  is the sixth book in the hebrew bible  -lrb-  the christian old testament  -rrb-  and the first book of the deuteronomistic history ,  the story of israel from the conquest of canaan to the babylonian exile . 
the book reaffirms moses' allocation of land east of the jordan to the tribes of reuben and gad and the half-tribe of manasseh  -lrb-  joshua 13:8-32; cf . 
the book of joshua closes with three concluding items  -lrb-  referred to in the jerusalem bible as `` two additions ''  -rrb- :
there is now general agreement that joshua was composed as part of a larger work ,  the deuteronomistic history ,  stretching from the book of deuteronomy to the books of kings . 
the book of ezra is a book of the hebrew bible; which formerly included the book of nehemiah in a single book ,  commonly distinguished in scholarship as ezra–nehemiah . 
the book of ezra consists of ten chapters: chapters 1–6, covering the period from the cyrus the great to the dedication of the second temple ,  are told in the third person; chapters 7–10, dealing with the mission of ezra ,  are told largely in the first person . 
the book of daniel is divided between the court tales of chapters 1–6 and the apocalyptic visions of 7–12, and between the hebrew of chapters 1 and 8–12 and the aramaic of chapters 2–7.
in more mundane language ,  it is `` an account of the activities and visions of daniel ,  a noble jew exiled at babylon , ``  its message being that just as the god of israel saved daniel and his friends from their enemies ,  so he would save all of israel in their present oppression . 
