the korean zodiac is identical to the chinese one . 
the 1st century bce egyptian dendera zodiac shares two signs – the balance and the scorpion – with mesopotamian astrology . 
it uses the tropical zodiac ,  which is aligned to the equinoctial points . 
in 525 bce ,  egypt was conquered by the persians . 
the indian techniques may also have been augmented with some of the babylonian techniques . 
astrology's modern representation in western popular media is usually reduced to sun sign astrology ,  which considers only the zodiac sign of the sun at an individual's date of birth ,  and represents only 1/12 of the total chart . 
along with tarot divination ,  astrology is one of the core studies of western esotericism ,  and as such has influenced systems of magical belief not only among western esotericists and hermeticists ,  but also belief systems such as wicca that have borrowed from or been influenced by the western esoteric tradition . 
the thai zodiac begins ,  not at chinese new year ,  but either on the first day of fifth month in the thai lunar calendar ,  or during the songkran festival  -lrb-  now celebrated every 13–15 april  -rrb-  ,  depending on the purpose of the use . 
he also argues that the interpretation of the moon's conjunction with a planet as good when the moon is full ,  but bad when the moon is waning ,  is clearly wrong ,  as from the moon's point of view ,  half of its surface is always in sunlight; and from the planet's point of view ,  waning should be better ,  as then the planet sees some light from the moon ,  but when the moon is full to us ,  it is dark ,  and therefore bad ,  on the side facing the planet . 
astrology has been dated to at least the 2nd millennium bce ,  with roots in calendrical systems used to predict seasonal shifts and to interpret celestial cycles as signs of divine communications . 
western astrology is founded on the movements and relative positions of celestial bodies such as the sun ,  moon and planets ,  which are analysed by their movement through signs of the zodiac  -lrb-  twelve spatial divisions of the ecliptic  -rrb-  and by their aspects  -lrb-  based on geometric angles  -rrb-  relative to one another . 
plotinus argued that since the fixed stars are much more distant than the planets ,  it is laughable to imagine the planets' effect on human affairs should depend on their position with respect to the zodiac . 
english astrology had reached its zenith by the 17th century . 
with the occupation by alexander the great in 332 bce ,  egypt became hellenistic . 
one of the first astrologers to bring hermetic astrology to rome was thrasyllus ,  astrologer to the emperor tiberius ,  the first emperor to have had a court astrologer ,  though his predecessor augustus had used astrology to help legitimise his imperial rights . 
astrology was taken up by islamic scholars following the collapse of alexandria to the arabs in the 7th century ,  and the founding of the abbasid empire in the 8th . 
hindu natal astrology originated with hellenistic astrology by the 3rd century bce ,  though incorporating the hindu lunar mansions . 
sole use of the tropical zodiac is inconsistent with references made ,  by the same astrologers ,  to the age of aquarius ,  which depends on when the vernal point enters the constellation of aquarius . 
the constellations of the zodiac of western asia and europe were not used; instead the sky is divided into three enclosures  -lrb-  三垣 sān yuán  -rrb-  ,  and twenty-eight mansions  -lrb-  二十八宿 èrshíbā xiù  -rrb-  in twelve ci  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
thus there are two distinct forms of confirmation bias that are under study with respect to astrological belief . 
the first definite reference to astrology in rome comes from the orator cato ,  who in 160 bce warned farm overseers against consulting with chaldeans ,  who were described as babylonian 'star-gazers' . 
western astrology is a form of divination based on the construction of a horoscope for an exact moment ,  such as a person's birth . 
western astrology has taken the earth's axial precession  -lrb-  also called precession of the equinoxes  -rrb-  into account since ptolemy's `` almagest '' ,  so the 'first point of aries' ,  the start of the astrological year ,  continually moves against the background of the stars . 
these include hindu astrology  -lrb-  also known as `` indian astrology '' and in modern times referred to as `` vedic astrology ''  -rrb-  and chinese astrology ,  both of which have influenced the world's cultural history . 
in the seventh century ,  isidore of seville argued in his `` etymologiae '' that astronomy described the movements of the heavens ,  while astrology had two parts: one was scientific ,  describing the movements of the sun ,  the moon and the stars ,  while the other ,  making predictions ,  was theologically erroneous . 
for example ,  the field extension r/q ,  that is the field of real numbers as an extension of the field of rational numbers ,  is transcendental ,  while the field extensions c/r and q -lrb-    -rrb- /q are algebraic ,  where c is the field of complex numbers . 
in the special case where `` k '' = q is the field of rational numbers ,  q ''a '' is an example of an algebraic number field . 
if `` a '' is algebraic over `` k '' ,  then `` k '' ''a '' ,  the set of all polynomials in `` a '' with coefficients in `` k '' ,  is not only a ring but a field: an algebraic extension of `` k '' which has finite degree over `` k '' . 
difranco and gilchrist divorced in 2003.
difranco started her own record company ,  righteous babe records ,  in 1989 at age 19.
difranco was born in buffalo ,  new york ,  the daughter of elizabeth  -lrb-  ross  -rrb-  and dante americo difranco  -lrb-  died 2004 -rrb- ,  who had met while attending mit . 
difranco released an album on january 17, 2012, titled `` ¿which side are you on ? ``  . 
in an interview on september 13, 2012, difranco mentioned that she was pregnant and on april 6, 2013 she gave birth to her second child ,  son dante difranco napolitano . 
difranco has received positive feedback from critics for much of her career . 
at the end of the 2012 season ,  the team announced that neither sutton nor grace would be returning for the 2013 season . 
it was used on a solid black cap ,  which in the beginning ,  was worn as a road cap . 
depending on the cap ,  the `` a '' logo on the front of the cap had different color variations . 
they remain the only major league men's sports team from arizona to have won a championship title . 
arizona also kept the throwback pinstriped sleeveless uniforms from their 2001 championship season for use during thursday home games . 
the arizona diamondbacks ,  often shortened as the d-backs ,  are an american professional baseball team based in phoenix ,  arizona . 
prior to the 2016 season ,  the diamondbacks reincorporated teal into its color scheme while keeping sedona red ,  sonoran sand and black . 
philosophical aesthetics has not only to speak about art and to produce judgments about art works ,  but also has to give a definition of what art is . 
hence ,  there are two different conceptions of art in aesthetics: art as knowledge or art as action ,  but aesthetics is neither epistemology nor ethics . 
however ,  one may not be able to pin down these qualities in a work of art . 
some separate aesthetics and philosophy of art ,  claiming that the former is the study of beauty while the latter is the study of works of art . 
in practice ,  aesthetic judgement refers to the sensory contemplation or appreciation of an object  -lrb-  not necessarily an art object  -rrb-  ,  while artistic judgement refers to the recognition ,  appreciation or criticism of art or an art work . 
british philosopher and theorist of conceptual art aesthetics ,  peter osborne ,  makes the point that `` 'post-conceptual art' aesthetic does not concern a particular type of contemporary art so much as the historical-ontological condition for the production of contemporary art in general  .  .  . ``  . 
by `` art '' we may frame several artistic `` works '' or `` creations '' as so though this reference remains within the institution or special event which creates it and this leaves some works or other possible `` art '' outside of the frame work ,  or other interpretations such as other phenomenon which may not be considered as `` art '' . 
at issue was the question of whether the aesthetic intentions of the artist in creating the work of art ,  whatever its specific form ,  should be associated with the criticism and evaluation of the final product of the work of art ,  or ,  if the work of art should be evaluated on its own merits independent of the intentions of the artist . 
during the first half of the twentieth century ,  a significant shift to general aesthetic theory took place which attempted to apply aesthetic theory between various forms of art ,  including the literary arts and the visual arts ,  to each other . 
as well as being applied to art ,  aesthetics can also be applied to cultural objects ,  such as crosses or tools . 
osborne noted that contemporary art is 'post-conceptual in a public lecture delivered in 2010.
the philosophy of aesthetics as a practice has been criticized by some sociologists and writers of art and society . 
a third major topic in the study of aesthetic judgments is how they are unified across art forms . 
aestheticians compare historical developments with theoretical approaches to the arts of many periods . 
denis dutton in `` the art instinct '' also proposed that an aesthetic sense was a vital evolutionary factor . 
it also studies how they feel about art—why they like some works and not others ,  and how art can affect their moods ,  beliefs ,  and attitude toward life . 
more broadly ,  scholars in the field define aesthetics as `` critical reflection on art ,  culture and nature '' . 
the levites were appointed to minister before the ark . 
the ark is finally to be placed under the veil of the covering . 
solomon worshipped before the ark after his dream in which god promised him wisdom . 
the book of exodus gives detailed instructions on how the ark is to be constructed . 
in 1 chronicles 13:3 it is stated that the people were not accustomed to consulting the ark in the days of saul . 
the philistines took the ark to several places in their country ,  and at each place misfortune befell them . 
the ark was with the army during the siege of rabbah; and when david fled from jerusalem at the time of absalom's conspiracy ,  the ark was carried along with him until he ordered zadok the priest to return it to jerusalem . 
the name comes from anglia ,  a peninsula located on the baltic shore of what is now schleswig-holstein . 
the name of the angles may have been first recorded in latinised form ,  as `` anglii '' ,  in the `` germania '' of tacitus . 
according to sources such as the `` history '' of bede ,  after the invasion of britannia ,  the angles split up and founded the kingdoms of northumbria ,  east anglia ,  and mercia . 
ptolemy describes the coast to the east of the saxons as inhabited by the farodini ,  a name not known from any other sources . 
gregory the great ,  in an epistle ,  simplified the latinised name `` anglii '' to `` angli '' ,  the latter form developing into the preferred form of the word . 
during the fifth century ,  all germanic tribes who invaded britain were referred to as `` englisc '' ,  who were speakers of old english  -lrb-  which was known as `` englisc '' ,  `` ænglisc '' ,  or `` anglisc ''  -rrb-  . 
during the fifth century ,  the anglii invaded great britain ,  after which time their name does not recur on the continent except in the title of the legal code issued to the thuringians: `` lex anglorum et werinorum hoc est thuringorum '' . 
remarkably `` aster '' was also the name given to a dutch supercomputer much later ,  in 2002.
after the aster having been a few years on the market tandy released its own improved model ,  the trs-80 model iii computer which solved many of the same problems that the aster also had solved ,  but the model 3 still did not fully support cp/m as the aster did . 
three models were sold . 
the aster ct-80, an early  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- home/personal computer developed by the small dutch company mcp  -lrb-  later renamed to aster computers  -rrb-  ,  was sold in its first incarnation as a kit for hobbyists . 
the aster was chosen for dutch schools by the dutch ministry of education ,  in a set-up with eight disk-less asters ,  and one aster with high-capacity floppy drives all connected by a lan based on the aster's high-speed serial port hardware ,  and special cables that permitted that any single computer on the lan could broadcast to all other computers . 
there was also hardware in place through which the teacher could see the display of each pupils screen on his own monitor . 
the first version of the aster consisted of four `` eurocard's '' ,  one z80 cpu card with 64 kb memory ,  one motorola mc6845-based video card ,  one double density floppy disk controller card and one `` keyboard/rs232/cassette interface '' card . 
the braves were a  . 500 team in their first few years in atlanta; 85–77 in 1966, 77–85 in 1967, and 81–81 in 1968.
the braves lost the game 6–3, ending their season . 
mathews played with the braves for their last season in boston ,  the team's entire tenure in milwaukee ,  and their first season in atlanta . 
in 2012, the braves began their 138th season after an upsetting end to the 2011 season . 
with 27 games to play ,  the braves went 9–18 in september to finish the season with a record of 89–73.
the braves finished the season 68–93 and in last place in nl east . 
after struggling during the second half of the 2007 season ,  atlanta finished over  . 500 and missed the post season again . 
the braves finished the season in a distant second place with a 79–83 record ,  which was their first losing season since 2008 and only their third since 1990.
by the end of the 1973 season ,  aaron had hit 713 home runs ,  one short of ruth's record . 
by the beginning of the season ,  the braves did 11 trades in all . 
after three straight losing seasons ,  bobby cox was hired for his first stint as manager for the 1978 season . 
the 1959 season saw the braves finish the season in a tie with the los angeles dodgers ,  both with 86–68 records . 
to this day ,  the milwaukee braves are the only major league team who played more than one season and never had a losing record . 
the cincinnati red stockings ,  established in 1869 as the first openly all-professional baseball team ,  voted to dissolve after the 1870 season . 
at first ,  it appeared that ruth was the final piece the team needed in 1935.
the braves began the season on a nine-game losing streak ,  which is the worst opening by the franchise since 1988, when they dropped the first 10 games of that season . 
the cream alternate uniforms were introduced in february 2012 as a tribute to the braves' first season in atlanta in 1966.
chipper jones played his last regular season game for the braves on september 30, 2012.
the 2010 atlanta braves season features the braves' attempt to reclaim a postseason berth for the first time since 2005.
hitting coach larry parrish was fired two days following the last game of the season . 
from 1987 to 2008, the red brimmed ,  primary home cap was also worn on the road . 
due to this rule ,  the gray uniforms are worn when the home team chooses to wear navy blue ,  and sometimes when the home team chooses to wear black . 
eight players made their major league debuts for the team in 2011.
however ,  in the 1948 season ,  the braves actually had the same record in games that spahn and sain started that the team had overall ,  in terms of winning percentage . 
the white home uniform ,  introduced in 1987, is the primary home uniform . 
over its 138 seasons ,  the braves franchise has won a total of three world series championships ,  one in each of the three cities they have played in . 
the team's tenure in atlanta is noted for hank aaron breaking babe ruth's career home run record in 1974.
the 2007 season was the last for braves baseball on the tbs superstation . 
the boston red caps played in the first game in the history of the national league ,  on saturday ,  april 22, 1876, defeating the athletics ,  6–5.
keeping with a new mlb rule for the 2012 season ,  the top two wild card teams in each league must play each other in a playoff game before entering into the division series . 
fuchs lost control of the team in august 1935, and the new owners tried to change the team's image by renaming it the `` boston bees '' . 
although the braves won two of their last three games against the astros ,  including rookie chuck james besting roger clemens ,  atlanta finished the season in third place ,  one game ahead of the marlins ,  at 79–83.
the braves are one of only two major league baseball teams under majority corporate ownership  -lrb-  and the only nl team with this distinction  -rrb- ; the other team is the toronto blue jays  -lrb-  owned by canadian media conglomerate rogers communications  -rrb-  . 
the cream uniforms are paired with the standard home cap and are worn for saturday and sunday home games . 
in december 2005, team owner time warner ,  who inherited the braves after purchasing tbs in 1996, announced it was placing the team for sale . 
they are nicknamed `` the `` bravos '' '' ,  and often referred to as `` america's team '' in reference to the team's games being broadcast on the nationally available tbs from the 1970s until 2007, giving the team a nationwide fan base . 
in 1976, the team was purchased by media magnate ted turner ,  owner of superstation wtbs ,  as a means to keep the team  -lrb-  and one of his main programming staples  -rrb-  in atlanta . 
liberty media began negotiations to purchase the team . 
the atari st is a line of home computers from atari corporation and the successor to the atari 8-bit family . 
the st was superseded by the atari ste ,  atari tt ,  atari mega ste ,  and falcon computers . 
the atari st was born from the rivalry between home-computer makers atari ,  inc .  and commodore international . 
atari had intended to release versions with 128 kb and 256 kb of ram as the `` 130st '' and `` 260st '' respectively . 
among unix clones ,  idris ,  minix had an atari st port and the mint os was developed specifically for the atari st . 
st systems before the mega st range have no battery-backed clock . 
atari st print advertisements stated `` america ,  we built it for you '' ,  and quoted atari president sam tramiel: `` we promised . 
the st was sold with either atari's color monitor or the less expensive monochrome monitor . 
atari's rapid development of the st amazed many ,  but others were more skeptical ,  citing the st's `` cheap '' appearance ,  atari's uncertain financial health ,  and the poor relations the tramiel-led commodore had with software developers . 
the original 520st case design was created by ira velinsky atari's chief industrial designer . 
besides the original tos operating system ,  a number of third-party oses were developed or ported to the atari st . 
aaliyah had the vocal range of a soprano . 
in 2005, aaliyah's second compilation album ,  `` ultimate aaliyah '' was released in the uk by blackground records . 
aaliyah was viewed by others as a role model . 
he also said virgin records had rushed the album and aaliyah had specifically requested missy elliott and timbaland work on `` aaliyah '' with her . 
jackson also stated she would have enjoyed collaborating with aaliyah . 
as an artist ,  aaliyah often voiced that she was inspired by a number of performers . 
her mother stayed home and raised aaliyah and her brother . 
aaliyah's hands reminded her of her aunt ,  who died when she was very young and whom aaliyah remembered as an `` amazingly beautiful woman '' . 
aaliyah focused on her public image throughout her career . 
aaliyah admitted in court documents that she had lied about her age . 
in 2012, british singer-songwriter katy b released the song `` aaliyah '' as a tribute to aaliyah's legacy and lasting impression on r&b music . 
aaliyah's family played a major role in the course of her career . 
aaliyah reportedly developed a friendship with kelly during the recording of her debut album . 
hankerson also expressed confusion over why `` they were upset '' with aaliyah given her age at the time . 
in june 2013, aaliyah was featured on a new track by chris brown ,  titled `` don't think they know ''; with aaliyah singing the song's hook . 
in august 2018 `` billboard '' ranked aaliyah at number 47 on their top 60 female artists of all-time list . 
there has been continuing belief that aaliyah would have achieved greater career success had it not been for her death . 
during the recording stages for the album ,  aaliyah's publicist disclosed that the album's release date was most likely in october 2000.
in 1996, aaliyah left jive records and signed with atlantic records . 
gladys knight ,  who had been married to aaliyah's uncle barry hankerson ,  was essential to the start of aaliyah's career as she gave her many of her earlier performances . 
in 1999, aaliyah landed her first film role in `` romeo must die '' ,  released march 22, 2000.
in march 2012, music producer jeffrey `` j-dub '' walker announced on his twitter account that a song `` steady ground '' ,  which he produced for aaliyah's third album ,  would be included in the forthcoming posthumous aaliyah album . 
in september 2015, `` aaliyah by xyrena '' ,  an official tribute fragrance was announced . 
immediately after aaliyah's death ,  there was uncertainty over whether the music video for `` rock the boat '' would ever air . 
after completing `` romeo must die '' ,  aaliyah began to work on her second film ,  `` queen of the damned '' . 
vehicle armour is used on warships and armoured fighting vehicles . 
a second use of the term armour describes armoured forces ,  armoured weapons ,  and their role in combat . 
in east asia many types of armour were commonly used at different times by various cultures ,  including scale armour ,  lamellar armour ,  laminar armour ,  plated mail ,  mail ,  plate armour and brigandine . 
armour has been used throughout recorded history . 
after the evolution of armoured warfare ,  mechanised infantry and their weapons came to be referred to collectively as `` armour '' . 
by about 1400 the full harness of plate armour had been developed in armouries of lombardy . 
the most intensive use of armoured trains was during the russian civil war  -lrb-  1918–1920 -rrb- . 
late in the era ,  elaborate barding was used in parade armour . 
armour did not always cover all of the body; sometimes no more than a helmet and leg plates were worn . 
the coat of plates was developed ,  an armour made of large plates sewn inside a textile or leather coat . 
heavy cavalry dominated the battlefield for centuries in part because of their armour . 
in modern armoured warfare ,  armoured units equipped with tanks and infantry fighting vehicles serve the historic role of both the battle cavalry ,  light cavalry and dragoons ,  and belong to the armoured branch . 
main battle tanks ,  armoured cars ,  armoured self-propelled guns ,  and armoured personnel carriers are all examples of afvs . 
the armoured car was the first modern fully armoured fighting vehicle . 
armoured cars were first used in large numbers on both sides during world war i as scouting vehicles . 
philosophically ,  the tank is ,  by its very nature ,  an offensive weapon . 
the british gun carrier mark i ,  the first self-propelled artillery ,  was fielded in 1917.
the level of armour protection between afvs varies greatly – a main battle tank will normally be designed to take hits from other tank guns and anti-tank missiles ,  whilst light reconnaissance vehicles are often only armoured `` just in case '' . 
the armoured personnel carrier ,  designed to transport infantry troops to the frontline ,  emerged towards the end of world war i . 
notable armoured fighting vehicles extending from post-world war i to today . 
10/4 and 6/2, cargo halftracks mounting single 20 mm or 37 mm aa guns  -lrb-  respectively  -rrb-  by the start of the war . 
however ,  they fell out of favour during world war two due to the flammability of the fuel . 
different tank classifications emerged in the interwar period . 
other vehicles – such as the mrap family – may be primarily armoured against the threat from ieds and so will have heavy ,  sloped armour on the bottom of the hull . 
drexler was a poet and a member of the völkisch agitators . 
drexler mentored his successor in the nsdap ,  adolf hitler ,  during his early years in politics . 
together with harrer ,  gottfried feder and dietrich eckart ,  drexler founded the german workers' party  -lrb-  dap  -rrb-  in munich on 5 january 1919.
the book tells the story of paul bäumer who belongs to a group of german soldiers on the western front during world war i . 
all quiet on the western front  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a novel by erich maria remarque ,  a german veteran of world war i . 
in contrast ,  `` all quiet on the western front '' was trumpeted by pacifists as an anti-war book . 
one of bäumer's non-schoolmate friends . 
paul's visit on leave to his home highlights the cost of the war on his psyche . 
müller is 19 and one of bäumer's classmates ,  when he also joins the german army as a volunteer to go to the war . 
by now ,  the war is nearing its end and the german army is retreating . 
kat has the most positive influence on paul and his comrades on the battlefield . 
while the older men have already had a life of professional and personal experience before the war ,  bäumer and the men of his age have had little life experience or time for personal growth . 
in an example of tragic irony ,  behm was the only one who did not want to enter the war . 
a student in paul's class who is described as youthful and overweight . 
 ''all quiet on the western front '' sold 2.5 million copies in 22 languages in its first 18 months in print . 
the book describes the german soldiers' extreme physical and mental stress during the war ,  and the detachment from civilian life felt by many of these soldiers upon returning home from the front . 
leer is an intelligent soldier in bäumer's company ,  and one of his classmates . 
albert eventually has his leg amputated ,  while paul is deemed fit for service and returned to the front . 
kantorek was the schoolmaster of paul and his friends ,  including kropp ,  leer ,  müller ,  and behm . 
with `` all quiet on the western front '' ,  remarque emerged as an eloquent spokesman for a generation that had been ,  in his own words ,  `` destroyed by war ,  even though it might have escaped its shells . `` 
paul feels glad to be reunited with his comrades . 
the english translation by arthur wesley wheen gives the title as ``  all quiet on the western front '' . 
in 1910, about 90% of african americans lived in the south . 
some african americans follow islam . 
in 2001, there were 484 black mayors . 
african americans have also had an important role in american dance . 
surveys show that the majority of black americans have no preference for `` african american '' versus `` black american '' ,  although they have a slight preference for `` black american '' in personal settings and `` african american '' in more formal settings . 
african-american names are part of the cultural traditions of african americans . 
the poverty rate among african americans has decreased from 26.5% in 1998 to 24.7% in 2004, compared to 12.7% for all americans . 
by 1913, over 1,000 inventions were patented by black americans . 
at the time of the 2000 census ,  54.8% of african americans lived in the south . 
african americans  -lrb-  also referred to as black americans or afro-americans  -rrb-  are an ethnic group of americans with total or partial ancestry from any of the black racial groups of africa . 
by 2012, african americans had advanced greatly in education attainment . 
the majority of african americans are protestant ,  many of whom follow the historically black churches . 
she has also rejected an immigrant designation for african americans and instead prefers the term `` black '' or `` white '' to denote the african and european u . s .  founding populations . 
as a result ,  the census bureau devised a new ,  separate `` african american '' ethnic group category in 2010 for ethnic african americans . 
the term `` african american '' carries important political overtones . 
black and african americans constitute the third largest racial and ethnic group in the united states  -lrb-  after white americans and hispanic and latino americans  -rrb-  . 
the relationship between african americans and mental health has many barriers . 
the report also found that `` 94% of black victims were killed by blacks . `` 
from the icc perspective ,  african americans are one of three groups of black people in the united states . 
a large majority of african americans support the democratic party . 
now 59% of african americans support same-sex marriage ,  which is higher than support among the national average  -lrb-  53%  -rrb-  and white americans  -lrb-  50%  -rrb-  . 
african americans have a long and diverse history of business ownership . 
drymon ,  many african americans identify as having scots-irish ancestry . 
nationwide ,  the october 2008 unemployment rate for african americans was 11.1% ,  while the nationwide rate was 6.5% . 
the gains made by african americans in the civil rights movement and in the black power movement not only obtained certain rights for african americans ,  but changed american society in far-reaching and fundamentally important ways . 
many african americans have expressed a preference for the term `` african american '' because it was formed in the same way as the terms for the many other ethnic groups currently living in the nation . 
african americans also have the highest level of congressional representation of any minority group in the u . s . 
african americans have fought in every war in the history of the united states . 
most counseling approaches are westernized and do not fit within the african american culture . 
terminology is another barrier in relation to african americans and mental health . 
in 1960, nearly a third of african americans voted for republican richard nixon . 
the u . s .  public sector is the single most important source of employment for african americans . 
during the postwar period ,  many african americans continued to be economically disadvantaged relative to other americans . 
the only self-reported `` ancestral '' groups larger than african americans are the irish and germans . 
the west african ancestral component in african americans is most similar to that in present-day speakers from the non-bantu branches of the niger-congo  -lrb-  niger-kordofanian  -rrb-  family . 
by 1969, illiteracy as it had been traditionally defined ,  had been largely eradicated among younger african americans . 
altogether ,  genetic studies suggest that african americans are a multiracial people . 
counselors are encouraged to be aware of such barriers for the well-being of african american clients . 
because of this ,  many african americans instead seek mentorship within communities they trust . 
the term `` african american '' embraces pan-africanism as earlier enunciated by prominent african thinkers such as marcus garvey ,  w .  e .  b . 
many african-american authors have written stories ,  poems ,  and essays influenced by their experiences as african americans . 
queens county ,  new york is the only county with a population of 65,000 or more where african americans have a higher median household income than white americans . 
since 1977, in an attempt to keep up with changing social opinion ,  the united states government has officially classified black people  -lrb-  revised to `` black '' or `` african american '' in 1997 -rrb- as `` having origins in any of the black racial groups of africa . `` 
but in the 1970s and 1980s ,  that trend reversed ,  with more african americans moving south to the sun belt than leaving it . 
in 2006, the median earnings of african-american men was more than black and non-black american women overall ,  and in all educational levels . 
in 2008, barack obama became the first african american to be elected president of the united states . 
by 1775, africans made up 20% of the population in the american colonies ,  which made them the second largest ethnic group after the english . 
african americans have a combined buying power of over $892 billion currently and likely over $1.1 trillion by 2012.
the life expectancy for black men in 2008 was 70.8 years . 
in the 1980s ,  the term `` african american '' was advanced on the model of ,  for example ,  german-american or irish-american to give descendants of american slaves and other american blacks who lived through the slavery era a heritage and a cultural base . 
it has been adopted by some of the perl 6 implementations and has been used by the parrot virtual machine since version 0.4.13.
the terms of the artistic license 1.0 were at issue in a 2007 federal district court decision in the us ,  which suggested that foss-like licenses could only be enforced through contract law rather than through copyright law ,  in contexts where contract damages would be difficult to establish . 
in response to the request for comments  -lrb-  rfc  -rrb-  process for improving the licensing position for perl 6, kuhn's draft was extensively rewritten by roberta cairney and allison randal for readability and legal clarity ,  with input from the perl community . 
the term is ultimately derived from dutch ``  '' meaning `` african dutch '' . 
the term is ultimately derived from the dutch term ``  meaning `` african dutch '' . 
this was hard for dutch and cape dutch speakers to understand ,  and increasingly unintelligible for afrikaans speakers . 
afrikaans has been influential in the development of south african english . 
it is the majority language of the western half of south africa—the provinces of the northern cape and western cape—and the first language of 75.8% of coloured south africans  -lrb-  4.8 million people  -rrb-  ,  60.8% of white south africans  -lrb-  2.7 million  -rrb- ; 4.6% of asian south africans  -lrb-  58,000 people  -rrb-  ,  and 1.5% of black south africans  -lrb-  600,000 people  -rrb-  . 
this has enabled dutch and belgian companies to outsource their call centre operations to south africa . 
in general ,  mutual intelligibility between dutch and afrikaans is better than between dutch and frisian or between danish and swedish . 
the manuscript is to be found in the south african national library ,  cape town . 
afrikaans was considered a dutch dialect in south africa until the early 20th century ,  when it became recognised as a distinct language under south african law ,  alongside standard dutch ,  which it eventually replaced as an official language . 
the first was erected in  ,  south africa ,  in 1893, and the second ,  nowadays better-known afrikaans language monument  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  ,  was built in paarl ,  south africa ,  in 1975.
the constitution of 1983 removed any mention of dutch altogether . 
the afrikaans language arose in the dutch cape colony ,  through a gradual divergence from european dutch dialects ,  during the course of the 18th century . 
modern dutch and afrikaans share over 90 percent of their vocabulary . 
in 1925, afrikaans was recognised by the south african government as a real language ,  rather than simply a slang version of dutch proper . 
the author of the article ,  bronwyn davies ,  was an english-speaking south african . 
the term ``   -lrb-  `` cape afrikaans ''  -rrb-  is sometimes erroneously used to refer to the entire western cape dialect; it is more commonly used for a particular sociolect spoken in the cape peninsula of south africa . 
mutual intelligibility thus tends to be asymmetrical ,  as it is easier for dutch speakers to understand afrikaans than for afrikaans speakers to understand dutch . 
the afrikaans language monument  -lrb-  '  -rrb-  is located on a hill overlooking paarl ,  western cape province ,  south africa . 
an alford plea  -lrb-  also called a kennedy plea in west virginia ,  an alford guilty plea and the alford doctrine  -rrb-  ,  in united states law ,  is a guilty plea in criminal court ,  whereby a defendant in a criminal case does not admit to the criminal act and asserts innocence . 
the case was then appealed to the u . s .  supreme court . 
the term was coined as an argument against a form of realism dummett saw as 'colorless reductionism' . 
because it encompasses statements containing abstract ideal objects  -lrb-  i . e . 
according to intuitionists  -lrb-  anti-realists with respect to mathematical objects  -rrb-  ,  the truth of a mathematical statement consists in our ability to prove it . 
similarly ,  intuitionists object to the existence property for classical logic ,  where one can prove formula_1, without being able to produce any term formula_2 of which formula_3 holds . 
empiricism ,  which associates numbers with concrete physical objects ,  and platonism ,  in which numbers are abstract ,  non-physical entities ,  are the preeminent forms of mathematical realism . 
on a more abstract level ,  model-theoretic anti-realist arguments hold that a given set of symbols in a theory can be mapped onto any number of sets of real-world objects—each set being a `` model '' of the theory—provided the relationship between the objects is the same  -lrb-  compare with symbol grounding .   -rrb- 
in anti-realism ,  the truth of a statement rests on its demonstrability through internal logic mechanisms ,  such as the context principle or intuitionistic logic ,  in direct opposition to the realist notion that the truth of a statement rests on its correspondence to an external ,  independent reality . 
seasons in bold are seasons when the club won a double of the league and fa cup ,  or of the fa cup and league cup . 
arsenal won their first league and cup double in the 1970–71 season and twice repeated the feat ,  in 1997–98 and 2001–02, as well as winning a cup double of the fa cup and league cup in 1992–93.
the club's social media activity was the fifth highest in world football during the 2014–15 season . 
his work was left to joe shaw and george allison ,  who saw out a hat-trick with the 1933–34 and 1934–35 titles ,  and then won the 1936 fa cup and 1937–38 title . 
arsenal were also the first london club to reach the final of the uefa champions league ,  in 2006, losing the final 2–1 to barcelona . 
in 1891, royal arsenal became the first london club to turn professional . 
the club's only trophy during this time was a last-minute 3–2 victory over manchester united in the 1979 fa cup final ,  widely regarded as a classic . 
in the 2011–12 season ,  arsenal celebrated their 125th anniversary . 
arsenal was the first club from the south of england to join the football league ,  in 1893, and they reached the first division in 1904.
in 2018, forbes estimated the club was the third most valuable in england ,  with the club being worth $2.24 billion . 
they hold the highest number of fa cup trophies ,  with 13.
it has won 13 league titles ,  a record 13 fa cups ,  two league cups ,  the league centenary trophy ,  15 fa community shields ,  one uefa cup winners' cup and one inter-cities fairs cup . 
transformed ,  chapman's arsenal claimed their first national trophy ,  the fa cup ,  in 1930.
the club had not gained a major trophy since the 2005 fa cup until 17 may 2014 when ,  spearheaded by then club-record acquisition mesut özil ,  arsenal beat hull city in the 2014 fa cup final ,  coming back from a 2–0 deficit to win the match 3–2.
the final match under the wenger era was a 1–0 away victory against huddersfield . 
until the 1960s ,  a badge was worn on the playing shirt only for high-profile matches such as fa cup finals ,  usually in the form of a monogram of the club's initials in red on a white background . 
arsenal were not to win the league or the fa cup for another 18 years . 
his first match was an 8-0 win in a friendly against boreham wood . 
arsenal's home colours have been the inspiration for at least three other clubs . 
arsenal finished in either first or second place in the league in eight of wenger's first nine seasons at the club ,  although on no occasion were they able to retain the title . 
widely referred to as highbury ,  arsenal stadium was the club's home from september 1913 until may 2006.
during the 18th and 19th centuries ,  americans developed many new foods . 
during the 18th and 19th centuries ,  americans developed many new foods . 
as many of the new englanders were originally from england ,  game hunting was useful when they immigrated to the new world . 
the mid-atlantic states comprise the states of new york ,  new jersey ,  delaware ,  pennsylvania ,  and northern maryland . 
the british sentiment followed in the cookbooks brought to the new world as well . 
one signature characteristic of american cooking is the fusion of multiple ethnic or regional approaches into completely new cooking styles . 
each group brought foods and ideas from their respective regions . 
fascination with these and other ethnic foods may also vary with region . 
like its counterpart on the opposite coast to the east ,  there is a grand variety of shellfish in this region . 
american chefs have been influential both in the food industry and in popular culture . 
during the 1980s ,  upscale restaurants introduced a mixing of cuisines that contain americanized styles of cooking with foreign elements commonly referred as new american cuisine . 
the american colonial diet varied depending on the settled region in which someone lived . 
new england is a northeastern region of the united states bordering the maritime provinces of canada and portions of quebec in the north . 
in 1796, the first american cookbook was published ,  and others followed . 
puck went on to describe his belief in contemporary ,  new style american cuisine in the introduction to `` the wolfgang puck cookbook '':
at the universities ,  nutritionists and home economists taught a new scientific approach to food . 
some dishes that are typically considered american have their origins in other countries . 
large-scale foreign aid during and after the war brought american standards to europe . 
american cuisine reflects the history of the united states ,  blending the culinary contributions of various groups of people from around the world ,  including indigenous american indians ,  african americans ,  asians ,  europeans ,  pacific islanders ,  and south americans . 
spanish is a commonly spoken secondary language here; the state of new mexico has its own distinct dialect . 
early american indians used a number of cooking methods in early american cuisine that have been blended with early european cooking methods to form the basis of american cuisine . 
southern california has several additions like five spice powder ,  rosemary ,  curry powder ,  kimchi ,  and lemongrass ,  with many of these brought by recent immigration to the region and often a feature of southern california's fusion cuisine ,  popular in fine dining . 
pork is the popular choice for southern style barbecue and features in other preparations like sausages and sandwiches . 
coastal connecticut is known for distinctive kinds of pizza ,  locally called apizza  -lrb-  pronounced locally as `` abeetz ''  -rrb-  ,  differing in texture  -lrb-  thin and slightly blackened  -rrb-  and toppings  -lrb-  such as clams  -rrb-  from pizza further south in the so-called pizza belt ,  which stretches from new haven ,  connecticut southward through new york ,  new jersey ,  and into maryland . 
since the first reference to an alcoholic mixed drink called a cocktail comes from new york state in 1803, it is thus not a surprise that there have been many cocktails invented in new york and the surrounding environs . 
in the 20th century highly industrialized processed foods became a dominant feature of american diets . 
typical fruits of the region are cold weather crops . 
california mussels are a delicacy of the region ,  and have been a feature of the cooking for generations: there is evidence that native american tribes consumed them up and down the california coast for centuries in their masses . 
some of the ethnic influences could be found across the nation after the american civil war and into the continental expansion for most of the 19th century . 
introduction of agriculture was limited prior to the 20th century and the development of better irrigation techniques ,  but included the addition of peaches ,  a crop still celebrated by native american tribes like the havasupai ,  and oranges; today in arizona ,  texas ,  and new mexico the favored orange today is the moro blood orange ,  which often finds its way into the local cuisine ,  like cakes and marmalade . 
with the exception of southern california ,  the signature meat is beef ,  since this is one of the two regions in which cowboys lived and modern cattle ranchers still eke out their living today . 
this region is also heavily dominated by some notable wineries producing a high quality product ,  with sonoma found within this region as well as the newer vinicultural juggernauts of washington state ,  like the yakima valley . 
in new mexico ,  colorado ,  nevada ,  arizona ,  utah ,  west texas ,  and southern california ,  mexican flavors and influences are extremely common ,  especially from the mexican states of chihuahua ,  baja california ,  and sonora . 
new american cuisine refers to a type of fusion cuisine which assimilates flavors from the melting pot of traditional american cooking techniques mixed with flavors from other cultures and sometimes molecular gastronomy components . 
african american influences came with slaves from ghana ,  benin ,  mali ,  congo ,  angola ,  sierra leone ,  nigeria ,  and other portions of west africa ,  and the mark african americans and their descendants have made on southern food is extremely strong today and an essential addition to the southern table . 
southern new england ,  particularly along the coast ,  shares many specialties with the mid-atlantic ,  including especially dishes from jewish and italian-american cuisine . 
massoud managed to defend his local panjshir valley from being taken by the soviets and thereafter by the taliban . 
the soviet army and the afghan communist army were mainly defeated by massoud and his mujahideen in numerous small engagements between 1984 and 1988.
massoud came from an ethnic tajik ,  sunni muslim background in the panjshir valley of northern afghanistan . 
massoud and his mujahideen forces attacked and recaptured them one by one . 
ahmad shah massoud was born in 1953 in bazarak ,  panjshir ,  to a well-to-do family native to the panjshir valley . 
from the start of the war ,  massoud's mujahideen attacked the occupying soviet forces ,  ambushing soviet and afghan communist convoys travelling through the salang pass ,  and causing fuel shortages in kabul . 
from his native panjshir ,  his family moved briefly to herat and then to kabul ,  where massoud spent most of his childhood . 
ahmad shah massoud  -lrb-  dari persian: ; september 2, 1953september 9, 2001 -rrb- was an afghan political and military leader . 
massoud attended the renowned franco-afghan lycée esteqlal . 
the fourth phase was the `` general application '' of massoud's principles to the whole country ,  and the defeat of the afghan communist government . 
following the 1979 soviet invasion and occupation of afghanistan ,  massoud devised a strategic plan for expelling the invaders and overthrowing the communist regime . 
the united states provided massoud with comparatively less support than other factions . 
written in 360 bc ,  plato introduced atlantis in `` timaeus '':
atlantis  -lrb-   ,  `` island of atlas ''  -rrb-  is a fictional island mentioned within an allegory on the hubris of nations in plato's works `` timaeus '' and `` critias '' ,  where it represents the antagonist naval power that besieges `` ancient athens '' ,  the pseudo-historic embodiment of plato's ideal state in `` the republic '' . 
rodney castleden suggests that plato may have borrowed his title from hellanicus ,  who may have based his work on an earlier work about atlantis . 
scholars translated it for him ,  and he testified that their account fully agreed with plato's account of atlantis '' or j .  v .  luce's suggestion that crantor sent `` a special enquiry to egypt '' and that he may simply be referring to plato's own claims . 
castleden has pointed out that plato wrote of atlantis in 359 bc ,  when he returned to athens from sicily . 
fifty stadia 9 km; 6 mi from the coast was a mountain that was low on all sides  .  .  .  broke it off all round about  .  .  .  the central island itself was five stades in diameter about 0.92 km; 0.57 mi . 
the only primary sources for atlantis are plato's dialogues `` timaeus '' and `` critias ''; all other mentions of the island are based on them . 
an autobiography  -lrb-  from the greek ,  αὐτός- ''autos '' self + βίος- ''bios '' life + γράφειν- ''graphein '' to write  -rrb-  is a self-written account of the life of oneself . 
arcadius  -lrb-  ; ; 1 january 377 – 1 may 408 -rrb- was eastern roman emperor from 395 to 408.
a weak ruler ,  his reign was dominated by a series of powerful ministers and by his wife ,  aelia eudoxia . 
arcadius was born in hispania ,  the elder son of theodosius i and aelia flaccilla ,  and brother of honorius ,  who would become the first western roman emperor . 
arabs  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  are a population inhabiting the arab world . 
arabic cuisine is the cuisine of the arab people . 
arabic mythology comprises the ancient beliefs of the arabs . 
arabic philosophy refers to philosophical thought in the arab world . 
medieval arab genealogists divided arabs into three groups:
although all arab states have arabic as an official language ,  there are many non-arabic-speaking populations native to the arab world . 
the arab presence in iran did not begin with the arab conquest of persia in 633 ce . 
are all part of the cultural heritage of the arabs . 
 ''arabized arabs ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  or adnanites ,  taken to be the descendants of ishmael son of abraham . 
the total number of arabs are an estimated 450 million . 
according to the charter of the arab league  -lrb-  also known as the `` pact of the league of arab states ''  -rrb-  ,  the league of arab states is composed of independent arab states that are signatories to the charter . 
literary arabic is derived from classical arabic ,  based on the language of the quran as it was analyzed by arabic grammarians beginning in the 8th century . 
arabs are the world's second largest ethnic group . 
in 1911, arab intellectuals and politicians from throughout the levant formed al-fatat  -lrb-  `` the young arab society ''  -rrb-  ,  a small arab nationalist club ,  in paris . 
the most popular arab account holds that the word `` arab '' came from an eponymous father called ya'rub who was supposedly the first to speak arabic . 
from 1517 to 1918, much of the arab world was under the suzerainty of the ottoman empire . 
in other words ,  nearly 4–5 million arab inhabitants . 
arabic also is a liturgical language of 1.7 billion muslims . 
there are also arab communities consisting of druze and baha'is . 
the total number of arabic speakers living in the arab nations is estimated at 366 million by the cia factbook  -lrb-  as of 2014 -rrb- . 
arab polytheism was the dominant religion in pre-islamic arabia . 
arabs in modern times live in the arab world ,  which comprises 22 countries in western asia ,  north africa ,  and parts of the horn of africa . 
arabic has developed into at least two distinct forms . 
arabs did not feel the change of administration because the ottomans modeled their rule after the previous arab administration systems . 
arab identity is defined independently of religious identity ,  and pre-dates the spread of islam ,  with historically attested arab christian kingdoms and arab jewish tribes . 
arabic culture is the culture of arab people ,  from the atlantic ocean in the west to the arabian sea in the east ,  and from the mediterranean sea . 
maqama was an incredibly popular form of arabic literature ,  being one of the few forms which continued to be written during the decline of arabic in the 17th and 18th centuries . 
the table below shows the distribution of populations in the arab world ,  as well as the official language -lrb-  s  -rrb-  within the various arab states . 
the estimated number of arabs in countries outside the arab league is estimated at 17.5 million ,  yielding a total of close to 384 million . 
afro-arabs are individuals and groups from africa who are of partial arab descent . 
inscriptions dating to the 6th century bce in yemen include the term `` arab '' . 
arabic weddings have changed greatly in the past 100 years . 
arab immigration to the united states began in sizable numbers during the 1880s . 
in the arab world today between 40% and 50% of all marriages are consanguineous or between close family members ,  though these figures may vary among arab nations . 
under ottoman rule ,  cultural life and science in the arab world declined . 
the oldest surviving indication of an arab national identity is an inscription made in an archaic form of arabic in 328 using the nabataean alphabet ,  which refers to imru' al-qays ibn 'amr as `` king of all the arabs '' . 
the arabic tradition was developed by moses maimonides and ibn khaldun . 
libyan arabs e1b1b  -lrb-  35.88%  -rrb-  ,  j  -lrb-  30.53%  -rrb-  ,  e1b1a  -lrb-  8.78%  -rrb-  ,  g  -lrb-  4.20%  -rrb-  ,  r1a/r1b  -lrb-  3.43%  -rrb-  and e  -lrb-  1.53%  -rrb-  . 
arabs are a diverse group in terms of religious affiliations and practices . 
the word `` armadillo '' means `` little armoured one '' in spanish . 
the average length of an armadillo is about  ,  including tail . 
in some arab states ,  such as libya  -lrb-  which was once around 3% jewish  -rrb-  ,  the jewish community no longer exists; in other arab countries ,  only a few hundred jews remain . 
the dreyfus affair of the late nineteenth century had consequences in the arab world . 
after the 1948 arab–israeli war ,  the palestinian exodus ,  the creation of the state of israel ,  and the independence of arab countries from european control ,  conditions for jews in the arab world deteriorated . 
today it has a jewish community of less than 2,000 people . 
matthias küntzel has suggested that the decisive transfer of jewish conspiracy theory took place between 1937 and 1945 under the impact of nazi propaganda targeted at the arab world . 
antisemitism in the arab world increased greatly in the 20th century ,  for several reasons: the breakdown of the ottoman empire and traditional islamic society; european influence ,  brought about by western imperialism and arab christians; nazi propaganda; resentment over jewish nationalism  -lrb-  see zionism  -rrb- ; and the rise of arab nationalism . 
antisemitism is also malleable enough that it can unite right-wing and left-wing groups within the arab world . 
many arab newspapers ,  such as `` al-hayat al-jadidah '' ,  the palestinian authority's official newspaper ,  often write that `` the jews '' control all the world's governments ,  and that `` the jews '' plan genocide on all the arabs in the west bank . 
articles in many official arab government newspapers claim that `` the protocols of the elders of zion '' ,  reflects facts ,  and thus points to an international jewish conspiracy to take over the world . 
jordanian authorities state that the policy is in order to ensure the jewish tourists' safety . 
antisemitism in the arab world increased in the twentieth century ,  as antisemitic propaganda and blood libels were imported from europe and as resentment against zionist efforts in british mandate of palestine spread . 
traditionally ,  jews in the muslim world were considered to be people of the book and were given `` dhimmi '' status . 
jews were generally seen as a religious group  -lrb-  not a separate race  -rrb-  ,  thus being a part of the `` arab family '' . 
harvard university professor ruth r .  wisse claims that `` anti-semitism / zionism has been the cornerstone of pan-arab politics since the second world war '' and that it is the `` strongest actual and potential source of unity '' in the arab world . 
in another incident ,  an al-manar commentator recently referred to `` zionist attempts to transmit aids to arab countries '' . 
the hamas ,  an offshoot of the egyptian muslim brotherhood ,  has a foundational statement of principles ,  or `` covenant '' that claims that the french revolution ,  the russian revolution ,  colonialism and both world wars were created by the zionists . 
the muslim arab press ,  however ,  was sympathetic to the falsely accused captain dreyfus ,  and criticized the persecution of jews in france . 
the total network spans  . 
designed by paolo soleri ,  its primary purpose is to demonstrate soleri's personal designs ,  his application of principles of arcology to create a pedestrian-friendly urban form . 
the toronto downtown area features an underground pedestrian network ,  path . 
chicago has a sizeable tunnel system known as the chicago pedway connecting a portion of the buildings in the chicago loop . 
paolo soleri proposed later solutions ,  and coined the term 'arcology' . 
soleri did not advocate for enclosed cities ,  although he did sketch a design and build a model of an 'arcology' for outer space . 
certain urban projects reflect arcology principles . 
the series spawned a total of six distinct models: the `` cpc464 '' ,  `` cpc664 '' ,  and `` cpc6128 '' were highly successful competitors in the european home computer market . 
the amstrad cpc  -lrb-  short for `` colour personal computer ''  -rrb-  is a series of 8-bit home computers produced by amstrad between 1984 and 1990.
the fbi then named abdulaziz al-omari as a hijacker . 
little is known about al-omari's life ,  and it is unclear whether some information refers to omari or another person by that name . 
on september 11, 2001, omari boarded american airlines flight 11 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane ,  which was crashed into the north tower of the world trade center ,  as part of the coordinated attacks . 
omari arrived in the united states in june 2001, on a tourist visa ,  obtained through the visa express program . 
abdulaziz al-omari  -lrb-   ,   ,  also transliterated as alomari or al-umari; may 28, 1979 – september 11, 2001 -rrb- was a saudi airport security guard and imam who was one of five hijackers of american airlines flight 11 as part of the september 11 attacks . 
bohr went to high school at in copenhagen . 
aage niels bohr was born in copenhagen on 19 june 1922, the fourth of six sons of the physicist niels bohr and his wife margrethe bohr  -lrb-  née nørlund  -rrb-  . 
since his father ,  niels bohr ,  had won the prize in 1922, he and his father were one of the six pairs of fathers and sons who have both won the nobel prize and one of the four pairs who have both won the nobel prize in physics . 
because his father had been awarded the prize in 1922, bohr became one of only four pairs of fathers and sons to win the nobel prize in physics . 
specifically ,  let formula_2 be the position vector of some point formula_3, and let formula_4 be a nonzero vector . 
this familiar equation for a plane is called the `` general form '' of the equation of the plane . 
in a manner analogous to the way lines in a two-dimensional space are described using a point-slope form for their equations ,  planes in a three dimensional space have a natural description using a point in the plane and a vector orthogonal to it  -lrb-  the normal vector  -rrb-  to indicate its `` inclination '' . 
in analytic geometry ,  the plane is given a coordinate system ,  by which every point has a pair of real number coordinates . 
this system can also be used for three-dimensional geometry ,  where every point in euclidean space is represented by an ordered triple of coordinates  -lrb-  `` x '' ,  `` y '' ,  `` z ''  -rrb-  . 
the equation will be of the form
in polar coordinates ,  every point of the plane is represented by its distance `` r '' from the origin and its angle `` θ '' from the polar axis . 
as scaling all six constants yields the same locus of zeros ,  one can consider conics as points in the five-dimensional projective space formula_20
the original ``  '' order  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  used for lettering ,  derives from the order of the phoenician alphabet ,  and is therefore similar to the order of other phoenician-derived alphabets ,  such as the hebrew alphabet . 
the basic arabic alphabet contains 28 letters . 
the ' order is not a simple historical continuation of the earlier north semitic alphabetic order ,  since it has a position corresponding to the aramaic letter `` samekh/semkat ''  ,  yet no letter of the arabic alphabet historically derives from that letter . 
angels appear in byzantine art in mosaics and icons . 
angels have appeared in works of art since early christian art ,  and they have been a popular subject for byzantine and european paintings and sculpture . 
in 19th-century art ,  especially funerary art ,  this traditional convention is sometimes abandoned . 
the classical `` erotes '' or `` putto '' re-appeared in art during the italian renaissance in both religious and mythological art ,  and is often known in english as a cherub ,  the singular of cherubim ,  actually one of the higher ranks in the christian angelic hierarchy . 
they often appear in the pendentives of domes or semi-domes of churches . 
from then on christian art generally represented angels with wings ,  as in the cycle of mosaics in the basilica di santa maria maggiore  -lrb-  432-440 -rrb- . 
the arctic fox is losing ground to the larger red fox . 
the world population of arctic foxes is thus not endangered ,  but two arctic fox subpopulations are . 
the arctic fox  -lrb-  `` vulpes lagopus ''  -rrb-  ,  are also known as the white fox ,  polar fox ,  or snow fox ,  that is a small fox native to the arctic regions of the northern hemisphere and common throughout the arctic tundra biome . 
the arctic fox is the only land mammal native to iceland . 
the fur of the arctic fox provides the best insulation of any mammal . 
during the winter ,  95.5% of arctic foxes utilize commuting trips ,  which remain within the fox's home range . 
the pelts of arctic foxes with a slate-blue coloration were especially valuable . 
arctic foxes are primarily monogamous and both parents will care for the offspring . 
about 22% of the total body surface area of the arctic fox dissipates heat readily compared to red foxes at 33% . 
additionally ,  the arctic fox diverged from its sister group ,  the kit fox  -lrb-  `` vulpes macrotis ''  -rrb-  ,  at about 0.9mya . 
as a result ,  the populations of arctic fox have been carefully studied and inventoried in places such as the vindelfjällens nature reserve  -lrb-  sweden  -rrb-  ,  which has the arctic fox as its symbol . 
when food is overabundant ,  the arctic fox buries  -lrb-  caches  -rrb-  the surplus as a reserve . 
in areas of northern europe ,  programs are in place that allow the hunting of red foxes in the arctic fox's previous range . 
the origins of the arctic fox have been described by the “out of tibet” hypothesis . 
