steiner died just over a year later ,  in 1925.
 ''anthroposophy '' is an amalgam of the greek terms  -lrb-  `` anthropos '' = `` human ''  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  `` sophia '' = `` wisdom ''  -rrb-  . 
in the early 1900s ,  steiner began using the term `` anthroposophy ''  -lrb-  i . e . 
anthroposophy describes a broad evolution of human consciousness . 
anthroposophy adapted theosophy's complex system of cycles of world development and human evolution . 
the anthroposophical view is that good is found in the balance between two polar influences on world and human evolution . 
in this view ,  human evolution has accompanied the earth's evolution throughout the existence of the earth . 
in 1872, the philosopher of religion gideon spicker used the term `` anthroposophy '' to refer to self-knowledge that would unite god and world: `` the true study of the human being is the human being ,  and philosophy's highest aim is self-knowledge ,  or anthroposophy . `` 
for steiner ,  the human capacity for rational thought would allow individuals to comprehend spiritual research on their own and bypass the danger of dependency on an authority such as himself . 
the modern form is `` auerochse '' . 
it has not been tested if this gene is present in remains of the wild form of the zebu ,  the indian aurochs . 
three wild subspecies of aurochs are recognised . 
it resembles what is known about the appearance of the aurochs in colour ,  and in some cases ,  also horn shape . 
while all the wild subspecies are extinct ,  `` b .  primigenius '' lives on in domesticated cattle ,  and attempts are being made to breed similar types suitable for filling the extinct subspecies' role in the wild . 
the word `` aurochs '' was borrowed from early modern german ,  replacing archaic `` urochs '' ,  also from an earlier form of german . 
the aurochs ,  which ranged throughout much of eurasia and northern africa during the late pleistocene and early holocene ,  is the wild ancestor of modern cattle . 
a mitochondrial dna study suggests that all domesticated taurine cattle originated from about 80 wild female aurochs in the near east . 
some primitive cattle breeds display similar coat colours to the aurochs ,  including the black colour in bulls with a light eel stripe ,  a pale mouth ,  and similar sexual dimorphism in colour . 
the words aurochs ,  urus ,  and wisent have all been used synonymously in english . 
indian zebu ,  although domesticated eight to ten thousand years ago ,  are related to aurochs that diverged from the near eastern ones some 200,000 years ago . 
in accordance with the breeding aims ,  the auerrindprojekt has already set up two breeding herds of watusi × chianina and one breeding herd of sayaguesa x podolian cattle; a second breeding herd of sayaguesa × podolian cattle will be started in 2017.
the program in hungary also includes hungarian grey cattle and watusi . 
two watusi × chianina breeding herds have been set up in boxmeer and breda in the netherlands ,  another herd using barrosã is being set up in northern portugal . 
the aurochs were one of the largest herbivores in postglacial europe ,  comparable to the wisent  -lrb-  european bison  -rrb-  . 
the maximum range of the aurochs was from europe  -lrb-  excluding ireland and northern scandinavia  -rrb-  ,  to northern africa ,  the middle east ,  india ,  and central asia . 
in modern cattle ,  numerous breeds share characteristics of the aurochs ,  such as a dark colour in the bulls with a light eel stripe along the back  -lrb-  the cows being lighter  -rrb-  ,  or a typical aurochs-like horn shape . 
like many bovids ,  aurochs formed herds for at least a part of the year . 
most atm links use uni cell format . 
an atm cell consists of a 5-byte header and a 48-byte payload . 
the design of atm aimed for a low-jitter network interface . 
atm operates as a channel-based transport layer ,  using virtual circuits  -lrb-  vcs  -rrb-  . 
atm can build virtual circuits and virtual paths either statically or dynamically . 
another key atm concept involves the traffic contract . 
svcs were also used in attempts to replace local area networks with atm . 
when an atm circuit is set up each switch on the circuit is informed of the traffic class of the connection . 
atm provides functionality that is similar to both circuit switching and packet switching networks: atm uses asynchronous time-division multiplexing ,  and encodes data into small ,  fixed-sized packets  -lrb-  iso-osi frames  -rrb-  called `` cells . `` 
following the initial design of atm ,  networks have become much faster . 
to maintain network performance ,  networks may apply traffic policing to virtual circuits to limit them to their traffic contracts at the entry points to the network ,  i . e . 
in atm these frames are of a fixed  -lrb-  53 octets or bytes  -rrb-  length and specifically called `` cells '' . 
atm supports different types of services via aals . 
as these cells traverse an atm network ,  switching takes place by changing the vpi/vci values  -lrb-  label swapping  -rrb-  . 
in animals at least as complex as an earthworm ,  the embryo forms a dent on one side ,  the blastopore ,  which deepens to become the archenteron ,  the first phase in the growth of the gut . 
more recent research ,  however ,  shows that in protostomes the edges of the dent close up in the middle ,  leaving openings at the ends which become the mouth and anus . 
the cell is divided into two regions: the endoplasm and the ectoplasm . 
many acantharians ,  including some in clade b  -lrb-  holacanthida  -rrb-  and all in clades e & f  -lrb-  symphiacanthida and arthracanthida  -rrb-  ,  host single-celled algae within their inner cytoplasm  -lrb-  endoplasm  -rrb-  . 
holacanthida seems to have evolved first and includes molecular clades a ,  b ,  and d .  chaunacanthida evolved second and includes only one molecular clade ,  clade c .  arthracanthida and symphacanthida ,  which have the most complex skeletons ,  evolved most recently and constitute molecular clades e and f . 
the african national congress  -lrb-  anc  -rrb-  is the republic of south africa's governing political party . 
in 1955, the congress of the people officially adopted the freedom charter ,  stating the core principles of the south african congress alliance ,  which consisted of the african national congress and its allies the south african communist party  -lrb-  sacp  -rrb-  ,  the south african indian congress ,  the south african congress of democrats  -lrb-  cod  -rrb-  and the coloured people's congress . 
in co-operation with the south african communist party ,  mk was founded in 1961.
it was integrated into the south african national defence force by 1994.
the anc responded to attacks on the rights of black south africans ,  as well as calling for strikes ,  boycotts ,  and defiance . 
zinc supplementation may reduce the minimum effective dose of amphetamine when it is used for the treatment of adhd . 
hence ,  the latter method may be used on samples that test positive using other methods to help distinguish between the various sources of the drug . 
reviews of clinical stimulant research have established the safety and effectiveness of long-term continuous amphetamine use for the treatment of adhd . 
in other nations ,  such as canada  -lrb-  schedule i drug  -rrb-  ,  the netherlands  -lrb-  list i drug  -rrb-  ,  the united states  -lrb-  schedule ii drug  -rrb-  ,  australia  -lrb-  schedule 8 -rrb- ,  thailand  -lrb-  category 1 narcotic  -rrb-  ,  and united kingdom  -lrb-  class b drug  -rrb-  ,  amphetamine is in a restrictive national drug schedule that allows for its use as a medical treatment . 
psychosis very rarely arises from therapeutic use . 
drug tolerance develops rapidly in amphetamine abuse  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  a recreational amphetamine overdose  -rrb-  ,  so periods of extended use require increasingly larger doses of the drug in order to achieve the same effect . 
amphetamine is generally only detectable by a standard drug test for approximately 24 hours ,  although a high dose may be detectable for  days . 
sustained aerobic exercise on a regular basis also appears to be an effective treatment for amphetamine addiction; exercise therapy improves clinical treatment outcomes and may be used as a combination therapy with cognitive behavioral therapy ,  which is currently the best clinical treatment available . 
addiction is a serious risk with heavy recreational amphetamine use but is unlikely to arise from typical long-term medical use at therapeutic doses . 
amphetamine exerts its behavioral effects by altering the use of monoamines as neuronal signals in the brain ,  primarily in catecholamine neurons in the reward and executive function pathways of the brain . 
due to the effect ph has on absorption ,  amphetamine also interacts with gastric acid reducers such as proton pump inhibitors and h antihistamines ,  which increase gastrointestinal ph  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  make it less acidic  -rrb-  . 
this suggests that medical use of amphetamine does not significantly affect gene regulation . 
amphetamine also has a slight analgesic effect and can enhance the pain relieving effects of opioids . 
amphetamine is also a substrate for the presynaptic vesicular monoamine transporter ,   . 
amphetamine  -lrb-  contracted from alpha-methylphenethylamine  -rrb-  is a potent central nervous system  -lrb-  cns  -rrb-  stimulant that is used in the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder  -lrb-  adhd  -rrb-  ,  narcolepsy ,  and obesity . 
this synthetic intermediate can be transformed into amphetamine using either a hofmann or curtius rearrangement  -lrb-  method 4 -rrb- . 
it is a prescription drug in many countries ,  and unauthorized possession and distribution of amphetamine are often tightly controlled due to the significant health risks associated with recreational use . 
the first amphetamine pharmaceutical was benzedrine ,  a brand which was used to treat a variety of conditions . 
reviews of magnetic resonance imaging  -lrb-  mri  -rrb-  studies suggest that long-term treatment with amphetamine decreases abnormalities in brain structure and function found in subjects with adhd ,  and improves function in several parts of the brain ,  such as the right caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia . 
in addition to the neuronal monoamine transporters ,  amphetamine also inhibits both vesicular monoamine transporters ,  vmat1 and vmat2, as well as slc1a1, slc22a3, and slc22a5.
cognitive behavioral therapy is currently the most effective clinical treatment for psychostimulant addictions . 
in asynchronous transmission ,  data is sent one byte at a time and each byte is preceded by start bit and stop bit . 
the packets may be encapsulated in a data frame ,  with a frame synchronization bit sequence indicating the start of the frame ,  and sometimes also a bit synchronization bit sequence ,  typically 01010101, for identification of the bit transition times . 
in asynchronous serial communication the physical protocol layer ,  the data blocks are code words of a certain word length ,  for example octets  -lrb-  bytes  -rrb-  or ascii characters ,  delimited by start bits and stop bits . 
the gun was mounted on a carriage in such a way as to return the gun to firing position after the recoil . 
indirect fire ,  the firing of a projectile without relying on direct line of sight between the gun and the target ,  possibly dates back to the 16th century . 
an implication of indirect fire and improving guns was increasing range between gun and target ,  this increased the time of flight and the vertex of the trajectory . 
when it cooled the gun would contract although not back to its original size ,  which allowed an even pressure along the walls of the gun which was directed inward against the outward forces that the gun's firing exerted on the barrel . 
the gun used cased ammunition ,  was breech-loading ,  and had modern sights ,  a self-contained firing mechanism and hydro-pneumatic recoil dampening . 
weapons covered by the term 'modern artillery' include `` cannon '' artillery  -lrb-  such as howitzer ,  mortar ,  and field gun  -rrb-  and rocket artillery . 
armstrong's system was adopted in 1858, initially for `` special service in the field '' and initially he produced only smaller artillery pieces ,  6-pounder  -lrb-  2.5 in/64 mm  -rrb-  mountain or light field guns ,  9-pounder  -lrb-  3 in/76 mm  -rrb-  guns for horse artillery ,  and 12-pounder  -lrb-  3 inches /76 mm  -rrb-  field guns . 
the early 20th century saw the development of a new class of artillery for use against aircraft: anti-aircraft guns . 
in 1882, russian lieutenant colonel kg guk published `` indirect fire for field artillery '' ,  which provided a practical method of using aiming points for indirect fire by describing ,  `` all the essentials of aiming points ,  crest clearance ,  and corrections to fire by an observer '' . 
advances in metallurgy allowed for the construction of breech-loading rifled guns that could fire at a much greater muzzle velocity . 
the first cannon to contain all 'modern' features is generally considered to be the french 75 of 1897.
what made the gun really revolutionary lay in the technique of the construction of the gun barrel that allowed it to withstand much more powerful explosive forces . 
in the next 15 years leading up to world war i ,  the techniques of indirect fire became available for all types of artillery . 
modern artillery is most obviously distinguished by its long range ,  firing an explosive shell or rocket and a mobile carriage for firing and transport . 
more esoteric designs ,  like the multi-barrel `` ribauldequin ''  -lrb-  known as `` organ guns ''  -rrb-  ,  were also produced . 
in some armies ,  the weapon of artillery is the projectile ,  not the equipment that fires it . 
early battlefield use of indirect fire may have occurred at paltzig in july 1759, when the russian artillery fired over the tops of trees ,  and at the battle of waterloo ,  where a battery of the royal horse artillery fired shrapnel indirectly against advancing french troops . 
artillery used by naval forces has also changed significantly ,  with missiles replacing guns in surface warfare . 
shells ,  explosive-filled fused projectiles ,  were also developed in the 17th century . 
the british halfheartedly experimented with indirect fire techniques since the 1890s ,  but with the onset of the boer war ,  they were the first to apply the theory in practice in 1899, although they had to improvise without a lining-plane sight . 
the gunners' increasing proximity to and participation in direct combat against other combat arms and attacks by aircraft made the introduction of a gun shield necessary . 
indirect fire was the defining characteristic of 20th-century artillery and led to undreamt of changes in the amount of artillery ,  its tactics ,  organisation ,  and techniques ,  most of which occurred during world war i . 
arnulf was a fighter ,  not a negotiator . 
recognising the superiority of arnulf's position ,  in 888 king odo of france formally accepted the suzerainty of arnulf . 
on december 8, 899 arnulf died at ratisbonin present-day bavaria . 
arnulf failed to conquer the whole of great moravia in wars of 892, 893, and 899.
in 895 arnulf summoned both charles and odo to his residence at worms . 
arnulf retained power in italy only as long as he was personally there . 
pope initially gave his support to arnulf ,  but eventually became a supporter of lambert . 
arnulf took the leading role in the deposition of his uncle ,  emperor charles the fat . 
later ,  after he had been crowned king of east francia ,  arnulf turned his old territory of carinthia into the march of carinthia ,  a part of the duchy of bavaria . 
in 889 arnulf supported the claim of louis the blind to the kingdom of provence ,  after receiving a personal appeal from louis' mother ,  ermengard ,  who came to see arnulf at forchheim in may 889.
alexanderplatz  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a large public square and transport hub in the central mitte district of berlin . 
during the post-war reconstruction of the 1960s ,  alexanderplatz was completely pedestrianized . 
 -lrb-  asian development bank publication ,  `` towards a new asia '' ,  1977, p .  16 -rrb-
see full account in `` banking on the future of asia and the pacific: 50 years of the asian development bank , ``  july 2017.
at the time ,  asia was one of the poorest regions in the world . 
the board of governors also elect the bank's president ,  who is the chairperson of the board of directors and manages adb . 
the bank employs about 3,000 people ,  representing 60 of its 67 members . 
traditionally ,  and because japan is one of the largest shareholders of the bank ,  the president has always been japanese . 
 ''aswan '' is pronounced  -lrb-   . 
aswan is served by the aswan international airport . 
aswan  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a city in the south of egypt ,  and is the capital of the aswan governorate . 
the nile is nearly wide above aswan . 
aswan is one of the sunniest places on earth . 
aswan is the ancient city of swenett ,  later known as syene ,  which in antiquity was the frontier town of ancient egypt facing the south . 
in 951, adelaide was married to king otto i ,  the future holy roman emperor . 
in 983, her son otto ii died and was succeeded by her grandson otto iii under the regency of his mother adelaide's daughter-in-law dowager empress theophanu . 
pope john xii crowned otto holy roman emperor in rome on february 2, 962, and ,  breaking tradition ,  also crowned adelaide as holy roman empress . 
she was regent of the holy roman empire as the guardian of her grandson in 991-995.
the first production version . 
the type first flew on 28 october 1972.
it was later renamed the a300b . 
on 23 may 1974, the first a300 to enter service performed the first commercial flight of the type ,  flying from paris to london ,  for air france . 
during the 1960s ,  european aircraft manufacturers such as hawker siddeley and the british aircraft corporation ,  based in the uk ,  and sud aviation of france ,  had ambitions to build a new 200-seat airliner for the growing civil aviation market . 
the airbus a300 is a wide-body medium-to-long range airliner; it has the distinction of being the first twin-engine wide-body aircraft in the world . 
it was the launch of the airbus a320 in 1987 that firmly established airbus as a major player in the aircraft market – over 400 orders were placed before the narrow-body airliner had flown its first flight ,  compared to 15 for the a300 in 1972.
another feature of later aircraft were the addition of wingtip fences ,  which generated greater aerodynamic performance  -lrb-  first introduced on the a310-300 -rrb- . 
this enabled airbus to develop the aircraft as a medium/long range airliner . 
the first modification will be made at airbus toulouse in 2019 and certified in 2020.
later a300s incorporated other advanced features such as the forward-facing crew cockpit ,  which enabled a two-pilot flight crew to fly the aircraft alone without the need for a flight engineer ,  the functions of which were automated; this two-man cockpit concept was a world-first for a wide-body aircraft . 
a typical flight would last for two and a half hours ,  enabling up to 30 parabolas to be performed per flight . 
the first delivery was made to bavaria germanair  -lrb-  which later merged into hapag lloyd  -rrb-  on 23 may 1975.
other firsts included the pioneering use of center-of-gravity control ,  achieved by transferring fuel between various locations across the aircraft ,  and electrically signaled secondary flight controls . 
as of july 2017, there are 211 a300's in service with 22 operators ,  with the largest operator being fedex express with 68 a300-600f aircraft . 
in september 1969, construction of the first prototype a300 began . 
agostino carracci was born in bologna as the son of a tailor . 
he traveled to venice  -lrb-  1582, 1587–1589 -rrb- and parma  -lrb-  1586–1587 -rrb- . 
camp is known as a second messenger . 
 ,  no crystal structure is available for class i ac . 
all classes of adenylyl cyclase catalyse the conversion of adenosine triphosphate  -lrb-  atp  -rrb-  to 3' , 5'-cyclic amp  -lrb-  camp  -rrb-  and pyrophosphate . 
they are one of the most popular italian hip hop groups . 
articolo 31 released one of the first italian hip hop records ,  `` strade di città '' ,  in 1993.
articolo 31 was a band from milan ,  italy ,  formed in 1990 by j-ax and dj jad ,  combining hip hop ,  funk ,  pop and traditional italian musical forms . 
the petrograd soviet counted 3000-4000 members ,  and as their meetings drowned in a blur of everlasting orations ,  soon the executive committee of petrograd soviet or ispolkom was formed . 
during the russian civil war ,  he supported neither side ,  as he opposed both the bolshevik regime and the white movement . 
alexander fyodorovich kerensky  -lrb-   ,  ; russian: александръ ѳедоровичъ керенскій; 4 may 1881 – 11 june 1970 -rrb- was a russian lawyer and revolutionist who was a key political figure in the russian revolution of 1917.
these two instances ,  the duma and the petrograd soviet ,  or their respective executive committees rather ,  soon became each other's antagonists on most matters except regarding the end of the tsar's autocracy . 
on 1.march 1917, without any consultation with the government ,  ispolkom declared the infamous order no . 
additionally ,  the duma formed an executive committee which eventually became the so-called russian provisional government . 
kerensky was an active member of the irregular freemasonic lodge ,  the grand orient of russia's peoples ,  which derived from the grand orient of france . 
during the kornilov affair ,  kerensky had distributed arms to the petrograd workers ,  and by november most of these armed workers had gone over to the bolsheviks . 
kerensky and the other political leaders continued russia's involvement in world war i ,  thinking nothing but a glorious victory was the only road forward . 
ansgar was buried in bremen in 865.
: st .  ansgar und st .  bernhard kirche  -rrb-  . 
through all this political turmoil ,  ansgar continued his mission to the northern lands . 
it is partly concerned with ansgar's visions ,  which ,  according to the author rimbert ,  encouraged and assisted ansgar's remarkable missionary feats . 
the see of hamburg was designated a mission to bring christianity to northern europe ,  and ansgar became known as the `` apostle of the north '' . 
a simpler ,  but related ,  problem is proof verification ,  where an existing proof for a theorem is certified valid . 
first-order theorem proving is one of the most mature subfields of automated theorem proving . 
more expressive logics ,  such as higher order logics ,  allow the convenient expression of a wider range of problems than first order logic ,  but theorem proving for these logics is less well developed . 
the system used heuristic guidance ,  and managed to prove 38 of the first 52 theorems of the `` principia '' . 
there are hybrid theorem proving systems which use model checking as an inference rule . 
the theorem prover museum is an initiative to conserve the sources of theorem prover systems for future analysis ,  since they are important cultural/scientific artefacts . 
automated theorem proving  -lrb-  also known as atp or automated deduction  -rrb-  is a subfield of automated reasoning and mathematical logic dealing with proving mathematical theorems by computer programs . 
agent orange was to a lesser extent used outside vietnam . 
in 2002, vietnam and the u . s .  held a joint conference on human health and environmental impacts of agent orange . 
the aftermath of the use of agent orange in vietnam resulted in massive legal consequences . 
a widow of a vietnam veteran who died of agent orange exposure would only receive $3700.
an international group of veterans from the u . s .  and its allies during the vietnam war working with their former enemy—veterans from the vietnam veterans association—established the vietnam friendship village outside of hanoi . 
following the conference ,  the u . s .  national institute of environmental health sciences  -lrb-  niehs  -rrb-  began scientific exchanges between the u . s .  and vietnam ,  and began discussions for a joint research project on the human health impacts of agent orange . 
up to four million people in vietnam were exposed to the defoliant . 
it is estimated that about 400,000 vietnamese were killed by agent orange poisoning . 
the areas most heavily contaminated with dioxins are former u . s .  air bases . 
in a november 2004 zogby international poll of 987 people ,  79% of respondents thought the u . s .  chemical companies which produced agent orange defoliant should compensate u . s .  soldiers who were affected by the toxic chemical used during the war in vietnam . 
in the last update ,  titled veterans and agent orange: update 2014  -lrb-  and published in 2016 -rrb- ,  the links between agent orange exposure and cancer were listed as shown . 
the center provides medical care ,  rehabilitation and vocational training for children and veterans from vietnam who have been affected by agent orange . 
also ,  51% said they supported compensation for vietnamese agent orange victims . 
the government of vietnam says that 4 million of its citizens were exposed to agent orange ,  and as many as 3 million have suffered illnesses because of it; these figures include their children who were exposed . 
this exception voids any protection of any military and civilian personnel from a napalm attack or something like agent orange and is clear that it was designed to cover situations like u . s .  tactics in vietnam . 
american policy during the vietnam war was to destroy crops ,  accepting the sociopolitical impact that that would have . 
overall ,  more than 20% of south vietnam's forests were sprayed at least once over a nine-year period . 
tcdd is the most toxic of the dioxins ,  and is classified as a human carcinogen by the us environmental protection agency . 
while in vietnam ,  the veterans were told not to worry ,  and were persuaded the chemical was harmless . 
thirty-two million dollars has so far been allocated by the u . s .  congress to fund the program . 
agent orange is an herbicide and defoliant chemical ,  one of the `` tactical use '' rainbow herbicides . 
as a result ,  the u . s .  began a full-scale production of 2,4-d and 2,4,5-t and would have used it against japan in 1946 during operation downfall if the war had continued . 
with the exception of liver cancer ,  these are the same conditions the u . s .  veterans administration has determined may be associated with exposure to agent orange/dioxin ,  and are on the list of conditions eligible for compensation and treatment . 
about 17.8 percent——of the total forested area of vietnam was sprayed during the war ,  which disrupted the ecological equilibrium . 
astronomers use the julian calendar for years before 1582, including the year 0, and the gregorian calendar for years after 1582, as exemplified by jacques cassini  -lrb-  1740 -rrb- ,  simon newcomb  -lrb-  1898 -rrb- and fred espenak  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
he did so possibly to save space and put no year 0 between them . 
cassini gave the following reasons for using a year 0: fred espanak of nasa lists 50 phases of the moon within year 0, showing that it is a full year ,  not an instant in time . 
in 1066 or 1067 he was invited by archbishop adalbert of hamburg to join the church of bremen . 
adam of bremen  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-   -lrb-  before 1050 – 12 october 1081/1085 -rrb- was a german medieval chronicler . 
hadrian and antoninus pius held similar celebrations ,  in ad 121, and in ad 147 and ad 148, respectively . 
in late antiquity ,  regnal years were also in use ,  as was the diocletian era in roman egypt after ad 293, and in the byzantine empire after ad 537, following a decree by justinian . 
the anno domini  -lrb-  ad  -rrb-  year numbering was developed by a monk named dionysius exiguus in rome in ad 525, as a result of his work on calculating the date of easter . 
arapaoa island ,  formerly known as arapawa island ,  is a small island located in the marlborough sounds ,  at the north east tip of the south island of new zealand . 
arapaoa island is known for the breeds of pigs ,  sheep and goats found only on the island . 
the small brothers islands ,  which lie off the northeast coast of arapaoa island ,  are a sanctuary for the rare brothers island tuatara . 
the special administrative law consists of various laws . 
administrative law in germany can be divided into general administrative law and special administrative law . 
this difference is vital in appreciating administrative law in common law countries . 
in the netherlands ,  administrative law provisions are usually contained in separate laws . 
administrative law is the body of law that governs the activities of administrative agencies of government . 
the general administration law is basically ruled in the administrative procedures law  -lrb-  `` verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz '' vwvfg  -rrb-  . 
there are federal courts with special jurisdiction in the fields of social security law  -lrb-  bundessozialgericht  -rrb-  and tax law  -lrb-  bundesfinanzhof  -rrb-  . 
the general administrative procedure law is under way . 
civil law countries often have specialized courts ,  administrative courts ,  that review these decisions . 
the social security code  -lrb-  sozialgesetzbuch sgb  -rrb-  and the general fiscal law are less important for the administrative law . 
the american bar association's official journal concerning administrative law is the `` administrative law review '' ,  a quarterly publication that is managed and edited by students at the washington college of law . 
french administrative law ,  which is the founder of continental administrative law ,  has a strong influence on administrative laws in several other countries such as belgium ,  greece ,  turkey and tunisia . 
in addition ,  netherlands general administrative law act  -lrb-  gala  -rrb-  is a rather good sample of procedural laws in europe
as a homogeneous legal substance isolated in a system of jurisprudence ,  the administrative law of ukraine is characterized as:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- a branch of law;  -lrb-  2 -rrb- a science;  -lrb-  3 -rrb- a discipline . 
administration procedural law  -lrb-  verwaltungsgerichtsordnung vwgo  -rrb-  ,  which was enacted in 1960, rules the court procedures at the administrative court . 
a number of places in australia bear phillip's name ,  including port phillip ,  phillip island  -lrb-  victoria  -rrb-  ,  phillip island  -lrb-  norfolk island  -rrb-  ,  phillip street in sydney ,  the federal electorate of phillip  -lrb-  1949–1993 -rrb- ,  the suburb of phillip in canberra ,  the governor phillip tower building in sydney ,  and many streets ,  parks and schools including a state high school in parramatta . 
phillip was buried in st nicholas's church ,  bathampton . 
there are no surviving records of phillip's early childhood . 
captain arthur phillip was born on 11 october 1738, the youngest of two children to jacob phillip and elizabeth breach . 
after some exploration phillip decided to go on to port jackson ,  and on 26 january the marines and convicts landed at sydney cove ,  which phillip named after lord sydney . 
in 1774 phillip joined the portuguese navy as a captain ,  serving in the war against spain . 
phillip insisted that no retaliation be taken to avenge his own non-fatal spearing . 
phillip is referred to in the john williamson song `` chains around my ankle '' . 
further ,  soon after lord sydney appointed him governor of new south wales arthur phillip drew up a detailed memorandum of his plans for the proposed new colony . 
phillip had a very difficult time assembling the fleet which was to make the eight-month sea voyage to australia . 
phillip retired in 1805, but continued to correspond with his friends in new south wales and to promote the colony's interests . 
phillip spent the summer of 1754 hunting whales near svalbard in the barents sea . 
phillip showed in other ways that he recognised that new south wales could not be run simply as a prison camp . 
phillip was a far-sighted governor who soon saw that new south wales would need a civil administration and a system for emancipating the convicts . 
phillip was accompanied by a contingent of marines and a handful of other officers who were to administer the colony . 
angus council is one of the 32 local government council areas of scotland . 
20.14% were under the age of 16, 63.15% were between 16 and 65 and 18.05% were aged 65 or above . 
angus  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the 32 local government council areas of scotland ,  a registration county and a lieutenancy area . 
the council's civic head is the provost of angus . 
bronze age archaeology is to be found in abundance in the area . 
the boundaries of the present council area are the same as those of the historic county minus the city of dundee . 
in 1975 some of its administrative functions were transferred to the council district of the tayside region ,  and in 1995 further reform resulted in the establishment of the unitary angus council . 
in january 2005, wwe released `` andré the giant '' ,  a dvd focusing on the life and career of andré . 
andré returned in the winter of 1990, but it was not to the world wrestling federation . 
in 1980, he feuded with hulk hogan ,  where unlike their more famous matches in the late 1980s ,  hogan was the villain and andré was the hero ,  wrestling him at shea stadium's showdown at shea and in pennsylvania ,  where after andré pinned hogan to win the match ,  hogan bodyslammed andré much like their legendary wrestlemania iii match in 1987.
andré was led by longtime rival bobby heenan . 
andré would win by gaining the pinfall on smash . 
andré had finalized his will in new york on october 30, 1990, with his lawyer . 
later matches ,  including andré's battles against hulk hogan while a heel ,  are not included on this vhs . 
andré rené roussimoff  -lrb-  may 19, 1946 – january 27, 1993 -rrb- ,  best known as andré the giant ,  was a french professional wrestler and actor . 
one of andré's feuds pitted him against the `` mongolian giant '' killer khan . 
after wrestlemania 2, andré continued his feud with studd and king kong bundy . 
andré wrestled his final match for ajpw in 1992, after which he retired from professional wrestling . 
andré made numerous appearances as himself in video games ,  starting with `` wwf wrestlemania '' . 
in 1989, andré and the returning big john studd briefly reprised their feud ,  beginning at wrestlemania v ,  when studd was the referee in the match with roberts ,  this time with studd as a face and andré as the heel . 
andré last eliminated bret hart to win the contest . 
towards the end of his career ,  andré starred in several films . 
afterward ,  andré and hogan's feud died down after a steel cage match held at `` wrestlefest '' on july 31, 1988, in milwaukee . 
the match ,  which was actually taped on february 21, 1987, aired only two weeks before wrestlemania iii to make it seem like hogan had met his match in andré the giant . 
due to his ongoing health issues ,  andré was not able to wrestle at the time of wrestlemania vi and haku actually wrestled the entire match against demolition without tagging in andré . 
it seems that adrastea is the most copious source of this ring material ,  as evidenced by the densest ring  -lrb-  the main ring  -rrb-  being located at and within adrastea's orbit . 
adrastea is the second-fastest-moving of jupiter's moons ,  with an orbital speed of 31.378 km/s . 
adrastea is the largest contributor to material in jupiter's rings . 
adrastea is one of the few moons in the solar system known to orbit its planet in less than the length of that planet's day . 
adrastea  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  also known as  ,  is the second by distance ,  and the smallest of the four inner moons of jupiter . 
originally based on the ncsa httpd server ,  development of apache began in early 1995 after work on the ncsa code stalled . 
the apache http server ,  colloquially called apache  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is free and open-source cross-platform web server software ,  released under the terms of apache license 2.0.
in 2005 the arbroath abbey campaign was launched . 
arbroath abbey ,  in the scottish town of arbroath ,  was founded in 1178 by king william the lion for a group of tironensian benedictine monks from kelso abbey . 
the abbey fell into ruin after the reformation . 
on april 11, 1951, the missing stone was found lying on the site of the abbey's altar . 
on christmas day 1950, the stone of destiny was stolen from westminster abbey . 
accounting research is carried out both by academic researchers and practicing accountants . 
the word `` accountant '' is derived from the french word  ,  which is also derived from the italian and latin word  . 
the demise of arthur andersen following the enron scandal reduced the big five to the big four . 
an accounting information system is a part of an organization's information system that focuses on processing accounting data . 
both the words accounting and accountancy were in use in great britain by the mid-1800s ,  and are derived from the words `` accompting '' and `` accountantship '' used in the 18th century . 
this branch of accounting is also studied as part of the board exams for qualifying as an actuary . 
the international auditing and assurance standards board sets international standards for auditing ,  assurance ,  and quality control; the international ethics standards board for accountants  -lrb-  iesba  -rrb-  sets the internationally appropriate principles- based `` code of ethics for professional accounts '' the international accounting education standards board  -lrb-  iaesb  -rrb-  sets professional accounting education standards; international public sector accounting standards board  -lrb-  ipsasb  -rrb-  sets accrual-based international public sector accounting standards
tax accounting in the united states concentrates on the preparation ,  analysis and presentation of tax payments and tax returns . 
accounting research is research in the effects of economic events on the process of accounting ,  the effects of reported information on economic events ,  and the roles of accounting in organizations and society .  . 
methodologies in academic accounting research include archival research ,  which examines `` objective data collected from repositories ''; experimental research ,  which examines data `` the researcher gathered by administering treatments to subjects ''; analytical research ,  which is `` based on the act of formally modeling theories or substantiating ideas in mathematical terms ''; interpretive research ,  which emphasizes the role of language ,  interpretation and understanding in accounting practice ,  `` highlighting the symbolic structures and taken-for-granted themes which pattern the world in distinct ways ''; critical research ,  which emphasizes the role of power and conflict in accounting practice; case studies; computer simulation; and field research . 
it encompasses a broad range of research areas including financial accounting ,  management accounting ,  auditing and taxation . 
accounting can be divided into several fields including financial accounting ,  management accounting ,  external auditing ,  tax accounting and cost accounting . 
the result of research from across 20 countries in five continents ,  the principles aim to guide best practice in the discipline . 
an auditor is also required to identify circumstances in which the generally acceptable accounting principles  -lrb-  gaap  -rrb-  has not been consistently observed . 
not all ants have the same kind of societies . 
ant colonies can be long-lived . 
weaver ant  -lrb-  `` oecophylla '' spp .   -rrb- 
the life of an ant starts from an egg . 
ants use pheromones for more than just making trails . 
velvet ants look like large ants ,  but are wingless female wasps . 
some ants have toxic venom and are of medical importance . 
ants communicate with each other using pheromones ,  sounds ,  and touch . 
ants form symbiotic associations with a range of species ,  including other ant species ,  other insects ,  plants ,  and fungi . 
fungi in the genera `` cordyceps '' and `` ophiocordyceps '' infect ants . 
termites live in colonies and are sometimes called ‘white ants’ ,  but termites are not ants . 
ants and their larvae are eaten in different parts of the world . 
most ants are univoltine ,  producing a new generation each year . 
here birds rest on ant nests ,  or pick and drop ants onto their wings and feathers; this may be a means to remove ectoparasites from the birds . 
ants attack and defend themselves by biting and ,  in many species ,  by stinging ,  often injecting or spraying chemicals ,  such as formic acid in the case of formicine ants ,  alkaloids and piperidines in fire ants ,  and a variety of protein components in other ants . 
an ant's head contains many sensory organs . 
both the legs and wings of the ant are attached to the mesosoma  -lrb-  `` thorax ''  -rrb-  . 
ants have colonised almost every landmass on earth . 
south american poison dart frogs in the genus `` dendrobates '' feed mainly on ants ,  and the toxins in their skin may come from the ants . 
in some parts of the world  -lrb-  mainly africa and south america  -rrb-  ,  large ants ,  especially army ants ,  are used as surgical sutures . 
 -lrb-  false tocandiras  -rrb-  of south america and the `` myrmecia '' ants of australia . 
wingless and legless females of the malaysian phorid fly  -lrb-  `` vestigipoda myrmolarvoidea ''  -rrb-  live in the nests of ants of the genus `` aenictus '' and are cared for by the ants . 
the sting of jack jumper ants can be fatal ,  and an antivenom has been developed for it . 
the marked male is interpreted as an invader by worker ants and is killed . 
also ,  according to this estimate ,  there are approximately 1 million ants for every human on earth . 
flies in the old world genus `` bengalia ''  -lrb-  calliphoridae  -rrb-  prey on ants and are kleptoparasites ,  snatching prey or brood from the mandibles of adult ants . 
ants with this ability are able to control the direction of their descent while falling . 
the successful techniques used by ant colonies have been studied in computer science and robotics to produce distributed and fault-tolerant systems for solving problems ,  for example ant colony optimization and ant robotics . 
some ants produce sounds by stridulation ,  using the gaster segments and their mandibles . 
many tropical tree species have seeds that are dispersed by ants . 
since commercial arbitration is based upon either contract law or the law of treaties ,  the agreement between the parties to submit their dispute to arbitration is a legally binding contract . 
in the process ,  the court held that the faa preempted many state laws covering arbitration ,  some of which had been passed by state legislatures to protect their consumers against powerful corporations . 
for the relevant conflict of laws elements ,  see contract ,  forum selection clause ,  choice of law clause ,  proper law ,  and `` lex loci arbitri ''
for example ,  in `` rent-a-center ,  west ,  inc .  v .  jackson '' ,  the supreme court of the united states held that `` under the faa ,  where an agreement to arbitrate includes an agreement that the arbitrator will determine the enforceability of the agreement ,  if a party challenges specifically the enforceability of that particular agreement ,  the district court considers the challenge ,  but if a party challenges the enforceability of the agreement as a whole ,  the challenge is for the arbitrator . `` 
arbitration ,  in the context of united states law ,  is a form of alternative dispute resolution . 
some state court systems have promulgated court-ordered arbitration; family law  -lrb-  particularly child custody  -rrb-  is the most prominent example . 
in some cases ,  a party may comply with an award voluntarily . 
in insurance law ,  arbitration is complicated by the fact that insurance is regulated at the state level under the mccarran–ferguson act . 
the missouri department of insurance attempted to block a binding arbitration agreement under its state authority ,  but since this action was based only on a policy of the department and not on a state statute ,  the united states district court found that the department of insurance did not have the authority to invalidate the arbitration agreement . 
in `` at&t mobility v .  concepcion ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  the supreme court of the united states upheld an arbitration clause in a consumer standard form contract which waived the right to a lawsuit and class action . 
rep .  597  -lrb-  1609 -rrb- ,  that agreements to arbitrate were revocable by either party . 
by contrast ,  while defendants in most civil law systems can be compelled to give a statement ,  this statement is not subject to cross-examination by the prosecutor and not given under oath . 
the use of the jury in the common law system seems to have fostered the adversarial system and provides the opportunity for both sides to argue their point of view . 
the adversarial system or adversary system is a legal system used in the common law countries where two advocates represent their parties' case or position before an impartial person or group of people ,  usually a jury or judge ,  who attempt to determine the truth and pass judgment accordingly . 
the baths were destroyed by the lombards in the 6th century ,  but they were rebuilt and enlarged when abano became an autonomous comune in the 12th century and ,  again ,  in the late 14th century . 
just outside the city is san daniele abbey  -lrb-  11th century  -rrb-  . 
abatis are used alone or in combination with wire entanglements and other obstacles . 
an important weakness of abatis ,  in contrast to barbed wire ,  is that it can be destroyed by fire . 
though rarely used by modern conventional military units ,  abatises are still officially maintained in united states army and marine corps training . 
abbadie was a knight of the legion of honour ,  which he received on 27 september 1850, and a member of the french academy of sciences . 
antoine received the french legion of honor on 27 september 1850 with the order of chevalier or knight . 
the château was built between 1864 and 1879 on a cliff by the atlantic ocean ,  and was designed by viollet le duc in the neo gothic style ,  and is considered one of the most important examples of french gothic revival architecture . 
d'arrast was born a british subject ,  in dublin ,  ireland ,  from a partially basque noble family of the french province of soule . 
antoine thomson d'abbadie d'arrast  -lrb-  3 january 181019 march 1897 -rrb- was an irish-born french explorer ,  geographer ,  ethnologist ,  linguist and astronomer notable for his travels in ethiopia during the first half of the 19th century . 
abba mari collected the correspondence and added to each letter a few explanatory notes . 
abba mari ben moses ben joseph ,  was a provençal rabbi ,  born at lunel ,  near montpellier ,  towards the end of the 13th century . 
there he published his correspondence with ben adret and his colleagues . 
at the close of the work are added several eulogies written by abba mari on ben adret  -lrb-  who died in 1310 -rrb- ,  and on don vidal ,  solomon of perpignan ,  and don bonet crescas of lunel . 
by 1899 he had come to accept british counsels . 
although abbas ii no longer `` publicly '' opposed the british ,  he secretly created ,  supported ,  and sustained the egyptian nationalist movement ,  which came to be led by mustafa kamil . 
when the egyptian army was sent to fight abd al-rahman al-mahdi in sudan in 1896, he only found out about it because the austro-hungarian archduke francis ferdinand was in egypt and told him after being informed of it by a british army officer . 
abbas ii  -lrb-  full name: abbas hilmy  -rrb-  ,  the great-great-grandson of muhammad ali ,  was born in alexandria ,  egypt on 14 july 1874.
abbas mirza  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  august 20, 1789october 25, 1833 -rrb- ,  was a qajar crown prince of persia . 
abbas mirza was born on august 20, 1789 in nava ,  mazandaran . 
nevertheless ,  with abbas mirza as the military commander of the persian forces ,  iran lost all of its territories in the caucasus comprising transcaucasia and parts of the north caucasus  -lrb-  dagestan  -rrb-  to russia in conformity with the 1813 treaty of gulistan and the 1828 treaty of turkmenchay ,  following the outcomes of the 1804–1813 and 1826–1828 wars . 
this policy brought upon the archbishop the hatred of william laud  -lrb-  with whom he had previously come into collision at oxford  -rrb-  and the king's court ,  although the king himself never forsook abbot . 
george abbot  -lrb-  19 october 15625 august 1633 -rrb- was an english divine who was archbishop of canterbury from 1611 to 1633.
he was a translator of the king james version . 
guildford remembers the archbishop with his hospital ,  a statue in the high street ,  a pub and also a secondary school  -lrb-  george abbot school  -rrb-  named after him . 
some also offer a version of the software at a fee without advertising . 
the microsoft office live service was also available in an advertising-supported mode . 
some software is offered in both an advertising-supported mode and a paid ,  advertisement-free mode . 
the 2003 `` microsoft encyclopedia of security '' and some other sources use the term `` adware '' differently: `` any software that installs itself on your system without your knowledge and displays advertisements when the user browses the internet '' ,  i . e .  ,  a form of malware . 
the software may implement advertisements in a variety of ways ,  including a static box display ,  a banner display ,  full screen ,  a video ,  pop-up ad or in some other form . 
when the term is used in this way ,  the severity of its implication varies . 
aeacus was born on the island of oenone or oenopia ,  where aegina had been carried by zeus to secure her from the anger of her parents; afterward ,  this island became known as aegina . 
aeacus  -lrb-  ; also spelled eacus; ancient greek: αἰακός , aiakos , aiacos  -rrb-  was a mythological king of the island of aegina in the saronic gulf . 
aeacus was the son of zeus by aegina ,  a daughter of the river-god asopus ,  and thus ,  brother of damocrateia . 
aeclanum  -lrb-  also spelled aeculanum ,   ,    -rrb-  was an ancient town of samnium ,  southern italy ,  about 25 km east-southeast of beneventum ,  on the via appia . 
aeclanum became the chief town of the hirpini ,  after beneventum had become a roman colony . 
aedesius  -lrb-   ,  died 355 ad  -rrb-  was a neoplatonist philosopher and mystic born of a noble cappadocian family . 
aedesius was born into a wealthy cappadocian family ,  but he moved to syria ,  where he was apprenticed to iamblichos . 
in ancient roman religion ,  an aedicula  -lrb-  plural aediculae  -rrb-  is a small shrine . 
aediculae exist today in roman cemeteries as a part of funeral architecture . 
many aediculae were household shrines that held small altars or statues of the lares and penates . 
similar small shrines ,  called `` naiskoi '' ,  are found in greek religion ,  but their use was strictly religious . 
the country of the aedui is defined by reports of them in ancient writings . 
certain clientes ,  or small communities ,  were also dependent upon the aedui . 
when the sequani ,  their hereditary rivals ,  with the assistance of a germanic chieftain named ariovistus ,  defeated and massacred the aedui at the battle of magetobriga ,  the aedui sent diviciacus ,  the druid ,  to rome to appeal to the senate for help ,  but his mission was unsuccessful . 
the aedui were the first of the gauls to receive from the emperor claudius the distinction of `` jus honorum '' ,  thus being the first gauls permitted to become senators . 
the island of favignana  -lrb-  `` aegusa ''  -rrb-  ,  the largest ,  lies southwest of trapani; levanzo  -lrb-  `` phorbantia ''  -rrb-  lies west; and marettimo ,  the ancient `` hiera nesos '' ,  west of trapani ,  is now reckoned as a part of the group . 
for administrative purposes the archipelago constitutes the comune of favignana in the province of trapani . 
1450 bc  -lrb-  late helladic ,  late minoan  -rrb-  ,  the greek mycenaean civilization spreads to crete . 
aegeus and medea had one son named medus . 
father and son were thus reunited ,  and medea was sent away to asia . 
aegeus was the son of pandion ii ,  king of athens and pylia ,  daughter of king pylas of megara and thus ,  brother to pallas ,  nysus and lykos . 
pallas and his fifty sons revolted at a later time ,  being crushed by aegeus' son theseus . 
but ,  in some accounts ,  he was regarded as the son of scyrius or phemius and was not of the stock of the erechtheids ,  since he was only an adopted son of pandion . 
in 1451, aegina became venetian . 
the municipality of aegina consists of the island of aegina and a few offshore islets . 
aegina was the gathering place of myrmidons; in aegina they gathered and trained . 
aegina remained subject to nauplia . 
the capital is the town of aegina ,  situated at the northwestern end of the island . 
here ,  aegina gave birth to aeacus ,  who would later become king of oenone; thenceforth ,  the island's name was aegina . 
an extinct volcano constitutes two-thirds of aegina . 
the constitutional history of aegina is unusually simple . 
the province of aegina  -lrb-    -rrb-  was one of the provinces of the piraeus prefecture . 
the years 490–480 bc . 
aegina  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` aígina ''  ,    -rrb-  is one of the saronic islands of greece in the saronic gulf ,  from athens . 
during the naval expansion of aegina during the archaic period ,  kydonia was an ideal maritime stop for aegina's fleet on its way to other mediterranean ports controlled by the emerging sea-power aegina . 
aegina with the rest of greece became dominated successively by the macedonians  -lrb-  322–229 bc  -rrb-  ,  the achaeans  -lrb-  229–211 bc  -rrb-  ,  aetolians  -lrb-  211–210  bc  -rrb-  ,  attalus of pergamum  -lrb-  210–133 bc  -rrb-  and the romans  -lrb-  after 133 bc  -rrb-  . 
it is probable that the island was not doricised before the 9th century bc . 
in 491 bc aegina was one of the states which gave the symbols of submission  -lrb-  `` earth and water ''  -rrb-  to achaemenid persia . 
during the greek war of independence ,  aegina became an administrative centre for the greek revolutionary authorities . 
in this respect the history of aegina does but anticipate the history of greece as a whole . 
in 1537, sultan suleiman declared war upon venice and his admiral hayreddin barbarossa devastated much of the ionian islands ,  and in october invaded the island of aegina . 
during the early part of the ottoman–venetian war of 1714–1718 the ottoman fleet commanded by canum hoca captured aegina . 
the aegis  -lrb-   ; `` aigis ''  -rrb-  ,  as stated in the `` iliad '' ,  is carried by athena and zeus ,  but its nature is uncertain . 
in this context ,  graves identifies the aegis as clearly belonging first to athena . 
in a similar interpretation ,  aex ,  a daughter of helios ,  represented as a great fire-breathing chthonic serpent similar to the chimera ,  was slain and flayed by athena ,  who afterwards wore its skin ,  the aegis ,  as a cuirass  -lrb-  diodorus siculus iii . 
john tzetzes says that aegis was the skin of the monstrous giant pallas whom athena overcame and whose name she attached to her own . 
it was supposed by euripides  -lrb-  `` ion '' ,  995 -rrb- that the aegis borne by athena was the skin of the slain gorgon ,  yet the usual understanding is that the `` gorgoneion '' was `` added '' to the aegis ,  a votive offering from a grateful perseus . 
agamemnon and clytemnestra had four children: one son ,  orestes ,  and three daughters ,  iphigenia ,  electra and chrysothemis . 
the advice was to father a son with his own daughter ,  pelopia ,  and that son would kill atreus . 
while agamemnon lay siege to troy ,  his estranged queen clytemnestra took aegisthus as a lover . 
upon agamemnon's return to mycenae ,  aegisthus and clytemnestra worked together to kill agamemnon with certain accounts recording aegisthus committing the murder while others record clytemnestra herself exacting revenge on agamemnon his murder of iphigenia . 
aegisthus ruled for seven more years before his death at the hands of agamemnon's son orestes . 
when the roman emperor hadrian vowed to rebuild jerusalem from the wreckage in 130 ad ,  he considered reconstructing jerusalem as a gift to the jewish people . 
in the siege of jerusalem of 614 ad ,  after 21 days of relentless siege warfare ,  jerusalem was captured . 
aelia capitolina  -lrb-  ; latin in full:   -rrb-  was a roman colony ,  built under the emperor hadrian on the site of jerusalem ,  which was in ruins following the siege of 70 ad ,  leading in part to the bar kokhba revolt of 132–136 ad . 
according to eusebius ,  the jerusalem church was scattered twice ,  in 70 and 135, with the difference that from 70-130 the bishops of jerusalem have evidently jewish names ,  whereas after 135 the bishops of aelia capitolina appear to be greeks . 
 ''aelia capitolina '' remained the official name of jerusalem until 638 ad ,  when the arabs conquered the city and kept the first part of it as 'إلياء'  -lrb-  iliyā'  -rrb-  . 
the latin name `` aelia '' is the source of the much later arabic term iliyā'  -lrb-  إلياء  -rrb-  ,  a 7th-century islamic name for jerusalem . 
2nd century ad  -rrb-  ,  also known as aelian  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a greek military writer who lived in rome . 
aelian also gives a brief account of the constitution of a roman army at that time . 
he promises a work on naval tactics also; but this ,  if it was written ,  is lost . 
the pore size of the gel affects the size of the dna that can be sieved . 
agarose gel can have high gel strength at low concentration ,  making it suitable as an anti-convection medium for gel electrophoresis . 
ultra-low melting or gelling temperature agaroses may gel only at  . 
on standing the agarose gels are prone to syneresis  -lrb-  extrusion of water through the gel surface  -rrb-  ,  but the process is slow enough to not interfere with the use of the gel . 
however ,  for some applications such as the electrophoresis of serum protein ,  a high eeo may be desirable ,  and agaropectin may be added in the gel used . 
agarose gel electrophoresis is the routine method for resolving dna in the laboratory . 
if the separated dna fragments are needed for further downstream experiment ,  they can be cut out from the gel in slices for further manipulation . 
the agarose in the gel forms a meshwork that contains pores ,  and the size of the pores depends on the concentration of agarose added . 
deuterium hcl or even hydrogen hcl and deuterium discharge lamps are used in ls aas for background correction purposes . 
in essence there are three techniques used for background correction in ls aas:
in addition ,  as the same algorithm is used for background correction and elimination of lamp noise ,  the background corrected signals show a much better signal-to-noise ratio compared to the uncorrected signals ,  which is also in contrast to ls aas . 
another problem is that background is not measured at the same wavelength as total absorption ,  making the technique unsuitable for correcting structured background . 
the use of deuterium hcl is preferable compared to an arc lamp due to the better fit of the image of the former lamp with that of the analyte hcl . 
hollow cathode lamps  -lrb-  hcl  -rrb-  are the most common radiation source in ls aas . 
one of these corrections is that for lamp flicker noise ,  which is independent of wavelength ,  resulting in measurements with very low noise level; other corrections are those for background absorption ,  as will be discussed later . 
in ls aas background absorption can only be corrected using instrumental techniques ,  and all of them are based on two sequential measurements ,  firstly ,  total absorption  -lrb-  atomic plus background  -rrb-  ,  secondly ,  background absorption only ,  and the difference of the two measurements gives the net atomic absorption . 
in hr-cs aas background correction is carried out mathematically in the software using information from detector pixels that are not used for measuring atomic absorption; hence ,  in contrast to ls aas ,  no additional components are required for background correction . 
photomultiplier tubes are the most frequently used detectors in ls aas ,  although solid state detectors might be preferred because of their better signal-to-noise ratio . 
the above technique can obviously not correct for a background with fine structure ,  as in this case the absorbance will be different at each of the correction pixels . 
liquid or dissolved samples are typically used with flame atomizers . 
the radiation intensity emitted by these lamps decreases significantly with increasing wavelength ,  so that they can be only used in the wavelength range between 190 and about 320 nm . 
the same algorithm can actually also be used to correct for direct line overlap of two atomic absorption lines ,  making hr-cs aas the only aas technique that can correct for this kind of spectral interference . 
the relatively small number of atomic absorption lines  -lrb-  compared to atomic emission lines  -rrb-  and their narrow width  -lrb-  a few pm  -rrb-  make spectral overlap rare; there are only few examples known that an absorption line from one element will overlap with another . 
there are several techniques available to correct for background absorption ,  and they are significantly different for ls aas and hr-cs aas . 
in april 1777, st .  clair was sent to defend fort ticonderoga . 
st .  clair was born in thurso ,  caithness ,  scotland . 
st .  clair was promoted to major general in february 1777.
by the mid-1770s ,  st .  clair considered himself more of an american than a british subject . 
in retirement st .  clair lived with his daughter ,  louisa st .  clair robb ,  and her family on the ridge between ligonier and greensburg . 
st .  clair was at yorktown when lord cornwallis surrendered his army . 
arthur st .  clair  -lrb-   – august 31, 1818 -rrb- was a scottish-american soldier and politician . 
general st .  clair died in poverty in greensburg ,  pennsylvania ,  on august 31, 1818 at the age of 81.
ajaccio is located on the west coast of the island of corsica ,  southeast of marseille . 
ajaccio is located on the west coast of the island of corsica ,  southeast of marseille . 
weather data for ajaccio several hypotheses have been advanced as to the etymology of the name `` ajaccio ''  -lrb-  `` aiacciu '' in corsican ,  `` addiazzo '' on old documents  -rrb-  . 
in the 20th century the hill was covered over with buildings and became a part of downtown ajaccio . 
other dedications to him in the city include ajaccio napoleon bonaparte airport . 
north of there was a roman city ,  ourchinion . 
although the commune of ajaccio has a large area  -lrb-  82.03 km  -rrb-  ,  only a small portion of this is urbanized . 
ajaccio gives the image of a city built on two different levels . 
ajaccio experienced a demographic boom in the 1960s ,  which explains why 85% of dwellings are post-1949.
ajaccio was occupied from 1553 to 1559 by the french but it again fell to the genoese after the treaty of cateau cambresis in the latter year . 
ajaigarh or adjygurh is a town and a nagar panchayat in the panna district of madhya pradesh state in central india . 
as of 2001 india census ,  ajaigarh had a population of 13,979.
ajaigarh was the capital of a princely state of the same name during the british raj . 
cave 25 is a monastery . 
these include the ellora caves ,  ghototkacha caves ,  elephanta caves ,  bagh caves ,  badami caves ,  aurangabad caves and shivleni caves . 
cave 9  -lrb-  18.24 m x 8.04 m  -rrb-  is smaller than cave 10  -lrb-  30.5 m x 12.2 m  -rrb-  ,  but more complex . 
then ,  after cave 10 of ajanta ,  in chronological order: cave 3 at pitalkhora ,  cave 1 at kondana caves ,  cave 9 at ajanta ,  which ,  with its more ornate designs ,  may have been built about a century later ,  cave 18 at nasik caves ,  and cave 7 at bedse caves ,  to finally culminate with the `` final perfection '' of the great chaitya at karla caves . 
cave 15a is the smallest cave with a hall and one cell on each side . 
cave 27 is a monastery and it may have been planned as an attachment to cave 26.
the cave 19 drew upon on the plan and experimentation in cave 9.
cave 14 is another unfinished monastery  -lrb-  13.43 x 19.28 m  -rrb-  but carved above cave 13.
the cave has a few paintings showing bodhisattvas and the buddha . 
many of the figural and ornamental carvings in cave 20 are similar to cave 19, and to a lesser degree to those found in cave 17.
the cave 23 is also unfinished ,  consisting of a hall  -lrb-  28.32 x 22.52 m  -rrb-  but a design similar to cave 21.
cave 24's sanctum has a seated buddha in pralamba-padasana . 
cave 17 has thirty major murals . 
cave 6 is two storey monastery  -lrb-  16.85 x 18.07 m  -rrb-  . 
the four completed `` chaitya '' halls are caves 9 and 10 from the early period ,  and caves 19 and 26 from the later period of construction . 
the caves consist of 36 identifiable foundations ,  some of them discovered after the original numbering of the caves from 1 through 29.
these caves are often called monasteries . 
the cave was painted ,  but only traces remain . 
cave 29 is a late and very incomplete `` chaitya '' hall . 
the cave drew upon the experiences in building cave 10, with attached wings similar to the ancient cave 12 hinayana-style vihara . 
the most elaborate caves were produced in this period ,  which included some refurbishing and repainting of the early caves . 
cave 7 has a grand facade with two porticos . 
cave 17  -lrb-  34.5 m x 25.63 m  -rrb-  along with cave 16 with two great stone elephants at the entrance and cave 26 with sleeping buddha ,  were some of the many caves sponsored by the hindu vakataka prime minister varahadeva . 
cave 20 is a monastery hall  -lrb-  16.2 x 17.91 m  -rrb-  from the 5th century . 
spink ,  in contrast ,  states that cave 8 is perhaps the earliest cave from the second period ,  its shrine an `` afterthought '' . 
cave 2, adjacent to cave 1, is known for the paintings that have been preserved on its walls ,  ceilings ,  and pillars . 
the cave 11 is a monastery  -lrb-  19.87 x 17.35 m  -rrb-  from the later 5th century . 
cave 8 is another unfinished monastery  -lrb-  15.24 x 24.64 m  -rrb-  . 
in general the later caves seem to have been painted on finished areas as excavating work continued elsewhere in the cave ,  as shown in caves 2 and 16 in particular . 
cave 1 was built on the eastern end of the horse-shoe-shaped scarp and is now the first cave the visitor encounters . 
the entrance facade of the cave 19 worship hall is ornate . 
the construction was resumed in 475 ce after asmakas restarted work at the ajanta caves ,  but abandoned again as the artists and sponsor redesigned and focussed on an expanded cave 6 that abuts cave 5.
the earliest group's construction consists of caves 9, 10, 12, 13 and 15a . 
according to spink ,  some of the cave 16 paintings were left incomplete . 
the cave has a dedicatory sanskrit inscription in brahmi script in its verandah ,  and it calls the cave as a `` mandapa '' . 
cave 26 is a worship hall  -lrb-  chaityagriha ,  25.34 x 11.52 m  -rrb-  similar in plan to cave 19, but much larger and with elements of a vihara design . 
the cave 7 is also a monastery  -lrb-  15.55 x 31.25 m  -rrb-  but a single storey . 
in 1956, a landslide covered the footpath leading to cave 16.
the paintings in the ajanta caves predominantly narrate the jataka tales . 
cave 16  -lrb-  19.5 m x 22.25 m x 4.6 m  -rrb-  influenced the architecture of the entire site . 
the majority of the caves are `` vihara '' halls with symmetrical square plans . 
over 80% of the ajanta caves were `` vihara ''  -lrb-  temporary traveler residences ,  monasteries  -rrb-  . 
cave 10, a vast prayer hall or chaitya ,  is dated to about the 1st century bce ,  together with the nearby vihara cave no 12.
cave 21, 22, 23 and 24 are all monasteries ,  representing the final phases of ajanta's construction . 
with the ellora caves ,  ajanta is one of the major tourist attractions of maharashtra . 
ajmer had been a municipality since 1869.
ajmer was originally known as `` ajayameru '' . 
ajmer is surrounded by the aravalli mountains . 
ajmer is one of the major and oldest cities in the indian state of rajasthan and the centre of the eponymous ajmer district . 
ajmer is in the northwest of india and is surrounded by the aravali mountains . 
it became a part of independent india on 15 august 1947 when the british left india . 
ajmer-merwara ,  also known as ajmir province and as ajmer-merwara-kekri ,  is a former province of british india in the historical ajmer region . 
before the arrival of the british ,  chauhan rajputs were land-holders ,  as well as cultivators . 
part of the ajmer region ,  the territory of the future province was ceded to the british by daulat rao sindhia of gwalior state as part of a treaty dated 25 june 1818.
lilly would be the residual devisee and entitled to james's residuary estate . 
a demonstrative devise ,  is money given from a particular account . 
for example ,  if james's will states that he is leaving $500,000 to his son sam then the money would be a general devise . 
affectionate behavior is often regarded as the result of parental nurturing behavior due to its associations with hormonal rewards . 
some contrast it with `` passion '' as being free from the distinctively sensual element . 
affection exchange is seen as an adaptive human behavior that contributes to greater physical and mental well-being . 
when a bastard child ,  whose mother has not obtained an order ,  becomes chargeable to the parish ,  the guardians may proceed against the putative father for a contribution . 
an order ceases to be valid after the child reaches the age of 13, but the justices  -lrb-  also referred to as gold writers under these circumstances  -rrb-  may in the order direct the payments to be continued until the child is 16 years of age . 
according to this section - among other things - if a person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his illegitimate child ,  a magistrate of the first class may ,  upon proof of such neglect or refusal ,  order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of such child . 
the summary jurisdiction act  -lrb-  1879 -rrb- makes due provision for the enforcement of an order of affiliation . 
in new zealand affray has been codified as `` fighting in a public place '' by section 7 of the summary offences act 1981.
in queensland ,  section 72 of the criminal code of 1899 defines affray as taking part in a fight in a public highway or taking part in a fight of such a nature as to alarm the public in any other place to which the public have access . 
the mens rea of affray is that person is guilty of affray only if he intends to use or threaten violence or is aware that his conduct may be violent or threaten violence . 
in many legal jurisdictions related to english common law ,  affray is a public order offence consisting of the fighting of one or more persons in a public place to the terror  -lrb-  in   -rrb-  of ordinary people . 
in the late 19th and 20th centuries ,  many ethnic pashtuns either voluntarily or involuntarily settled in afghan turkestan . 
afghan turkestan  -lrb-  persian/uzbek/turkmen/pashto:   -rrb-  is a region in northern afghanistan ,  on the border with the former soviet republics of turkmenistan ,  uzbekistan and tajikistan . 
the city was known as afyon  -lrb-  opium  -rrb-  ,  until the name was changed to afyonkarahisar by the turkish parliament in 2004.
after 1923 afyon became a part of the republic of turkey . 
afyon has unique marble types and colors ,  which were historically very renown and are unique to afyon . 
afyon was depicted on the reverse of the turkish 50 lira banknote of 1927-1938.
the top of the rock in afyon has been fortified for a long time . 
he is commonly known simply as rav  -lrb-  or rab ,    -rrb-  . 
the method of treatment of the traditional material to which the talmud owes its origin was established in babylonia by rav . 
for that reason some attribute to rav the authorship ,  or at least the revising ,  of aleinu . 
the aleinu prayer first appeared in the manuscript of the rosh hashana liturgy by rav . 
concerning the social position and the personal history of rav we were not informed . 
r . ``  to 7:18 -rrb- . 
r .  abbahu's chief characteristic seems to have been modesty . 
abbahu had two sons ,  zeira and ḥanina . 
abbahu was an authority on weights and measures . 
r .  abbahu ,  though eminent as a halakist ,  was more distinguished as a haggadist and controversialist . 
they are first mentioned in the papal bull `` extravagantes '' of pope john xxii and in a papal bull of pope benedict xii . 
pope paul ii suppressed the college; but pope sixtus iv  -lrb-  `` constitutio '' 16, `` divina ''  -rrb-  re-instituted it . 
pope paul v ,  who in early manhood was a member of the college  -lrb-  const . 
the `` abbreviatores '' were officials of the roman curia . 
the same pope also granted many privileges to the college of abbreviators ,  but especially to the members of the greater presidency . 
pope st .  pius x abrogated the college in 1908 and their obligations were transferred to the `` protonotarii apostolici participantes '' . 
the scope of its labour ,  as well as the number of its officials ,  varied over time . 
this work was one of the earliest works on egyptology . 
al-baghdadi's `` mukhtarat fi al-tibb '' was one of the earliest works on hirudotherapy . 
abd al-latif al-baghdadi or abdallatif al-baghdadi  -lrb-   ,  1162 in baghdad–1231 -rrb- ,  short for muwaffaq al-din muhammad abd al-latif ibn yusuf al-baghdadi  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a physician ,  historian ,  egyptologist and traveler ,  and one of the most voluminous writers of the near east in his time . 
many details of abd al-latif's life are known from his autobiography . 
the date of abd al-rahman's death is approximately in 788.
it is unclear whether abd al-rahman proclaimed himself caliph . 
abd al-rahman married a woman named hulal . 
abd al-rahman was the son of mu'awiya ,  son of hisham ,  son of abd al-malik according to abd el-wahid merrakechi when reciting his ancestry . 
in his lifetime ,  abd al-rahman was known as `` al dakhil ''  -lrb-  `` the entrant ''  -rrb-  . 
some histories indicate that bedr met up with abd al-rahman at a later date . 
in 755, abd al-rahman and bedr reached modern-day morocco near ceuta . 
abd al-rahman was the father of several sons ,  but the identity of their mother -lrb-  s  -rrb-  is not clear:
bedr returned to africa to tell abd al-rahman of the invitation of the umayyad clients in al-andalus . 
abd al-rahman i ,  more fully abd al-rahman ibn mu'awiya ibn hisham ibn abd al-malik ibn marwan  -lrb-  731–788 -rrb- ,  was the founder of a muslim dynasty that ruled the greater part of iberia for nearly three centuries  -lrb-  including the succeeding caliphate of córdoba  -rrb-  . 
abd al-rahman ,  yahya ,  and bedr quit the village ,  narrowly escaping the abbasid assassins . 
abd al-rahman was only one of several surviving umayyad family members to make their way to ifriqiya at this time . 
abd ar-rahman ii was born in toledo ,  the son of emir al-hakam i . 
abd ar-rahman ii  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  792–852 -rrb- was the fourth umayyad emir of córdoba in the al-andalus iberia from 822 until his death . 
abd al-rahman iii  -lrb-  `` ′abd al-rahmān ibn muhammad ibn ′abd allāh ibn muhammad ibn ′abd al-rahman ibn al-hakam al-rabdi ibn hisham ibn ′abd al-rahman al-dakhil ''; ; 11 january 889/9115 october 961 -rrb- was an arab emir and caliph of córdoba  -lrb-  912–961 -rrb- of the umayyad dynasty in al-andalus . 
abd al-rahman was born in córdoba ,  the grandson of abdullah ibn muhammad al-umawi ,  seventh independent umayyad emir of al-andalus . 
she made sure that abd al-rahman's education was conducted with some rigor . 
