even though dolly was not the first animal cloned ,  she received media attention because she was the first cloned from an adult cell . 
dolly  -lrb-  5 july 1996 – 14 february 2003 -rrb- was a female domestic sheep ,  and the first mammal cloned from an adult somatic cell ,  using the process of nuclear transfer . 
in 2016 scientists reported no defects in thirteen cloned sheep ,  including four from the same cell line as dolly . 
 ''scientific american '' concluded in 2016 that the main legacy of dolly the sheep has not been cloning of animals but in advances into stem cell research . 
after dolly ,  researchers realised that ordinary cells could be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem cells which can be grown into any tissue . 
the cell used as the donor for the cloning of dolly was taken from a mammary gland ,  and the production of a healthy clone therefore proved that a cell taken from a specific part of the body could recreate a whole individual . 
according to fuller ,  the female lead in `` bride of the monster '' was written for her but wood gave it to loretta king instead . 
fuller's autobiography ,  `` a fuller life: hollywood ,  ed wood and me '' ,  co-authored by winnipeg writer stone wallace and her husband philip chamberlin ,  was published in 2008.
fuller was portrayed by sarah jessica parker in tim burton's 1994 wood biographical film `` ed wood '' ,  a portrayal of which she disapproved due to the fact that she was depicted smoking in the film ,  while fuller said she herself was a lifelong non-smoker . 
grey quotes fuller as saying of the period before her success ,  `` he  -lrb-  ed wood  -rrb-  begged me to marry him . 
thus ,  egypt was by ottoman law de jure a province of the ottoman empire ,  but de facto was part of the british empire . 
state of iowa archaeologist john doershuk was assisted by university of iowa archaeologists at this dig . 
age spread: 24.8% under the age of 18, 10.6% from 18 to 24, 31.8% from 25 to 44, 20.4% from 45 to 64, and 12.4% who were 65 years of age or older . 
it is the home of the iowa wolves of the nba g league ,  the iowa wild of the american hockey league ,  and the iowa barnstormers of the indoor football league . 
des moines  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital and the most populous city in the u . s .  state of iowa . 
the city of des moines is a cultural center for iowa and home to several art and history museums and performing arts groups . 
they form the civic center historic district . 
soldiers stationed at fort des moines opened the first coal mines in the area ,  mining coal from the riverbank for the fort's blacksmith . 
the science center of iowa and blank imax dome theater offers seven interactive learning areas ,  live programs ,  and hands-on activities encouraging learning and fun for all ages . 
by 1880, des moines had a population of 22,408, making it iowa's largest city . 
the museum features a genealogy and iowa history library ,  museum gift shop ,  and cafe . 
this was some from the des moines river . 
the median age in the city was 33.5 years . 
arising in the east and facing westward toward downtown ,  the iowa state capitol building with its  ,  23-karat gold leafed dome towering above the city is a favorite of sightseers . 
the principal is one of two fortune 500 companies with headquarters in iowa ,  ranking 273rd on the magazine's list in 2009.
settlers occupied the abandoned fort and nearby areas . 
the fort was abandoned in 1846 after the sauk and meskwaki were removed from the state and shifted to the indian territory . 
in the early 21st century ,  the city has had more major construction in the downtown area . 
in both 1993 and 2008, the flooding river overtopped the reservoir spillway . 
the des moines-west des moines metropolitan statistical area consists of five central iowa counties: polk ,  dallas ,  warren ,  and madison . 
iowa's tallest building ,  principal financial group's 45-story tower at 801 grand was built in 1991, and the 19-story emc insurance building was erected in 1997.
according to the united states census bureau ,  the city has an area of  ,  of which is land and is covered by water . 
historic jordan house in west des moines is a stately victorian home built in 1850 and added to in 1870 by the first white settler in west des moines ,  james c .  jordan . 
about 7.9% of families and 11.4% of the population were below the poverty line ,  including 14.9% of those under age 18 and 7.6% of those ages 65 or over . 
terrace hill ,  a national historic landmark and iowa governor's residence ,  is among the best examples of american victorian second empire architecture . 
as a center of financial and insurance services ,  other major corporations headquartered outside of iowa have a presence in the des moines metro area ,  including wells fargo ,  voya financial ,  and electronic data systems  -lrb-  eds  -rrb-  . 
he died during a water speed record attempt at coniston water in the lake district ,  england . 
campbell set seven world water speed records in k7 between july 1955 and december 1964.
bluebird mach 1.1 was to be rocket-powered . 
he had become the first ,  and so far only ,  person to set both land and water speed records in the same year . 
campbell began his speed record attempts in the summer of 1949, using his father's old boat ,  `` blue bird k4 '' ,  which he renamed bluebird k4.
campbell's 403.1 mph represented the official land speed record . 
between them ,  donald campbell and his father had set eleven speed records on water and ten on land . 
donald malcolm campbell ,   -lrb-  23 march 19214 january 1967 -rrb- was a british speed record breaker who broke eight absolute world speed records on water and on land in the 1950s and 1960s . 
campbell now planned to go after the water speed record one more time with bluebird k7 - to do what he had aimed for so many years ago ,  during the initial planning stages of cn7 – break both records in the same year . 
bluebird k7 was the seventh boat registered at lloyds in the 'unlimited' series . 
the story of campbell's last attempt at the water speed record on coniston water was told in the bbc television film `` across the lake '' in 1988, with anthony hopkins as campbell . 
campbell decided a massive jump in speed was called for following his successful 1964 lsr attempt in bluebird cn7.
it had a design speed of and remained the only successful jet-boat in the world until the late 1960s . 
as of may 2009 permission has been given for a one-off set of proving trials of bluebird on coniston water ,  where she will be tested to a safe speed for demonstration purposes only . 
when not running k7 will be housed in her own purpose built wing at the ruskin museum in coniston ,  while remaining in the care of the bluebird project . 
bluebird cn7 was designed to achieve 475–500 mph and was completed by the spring of 1960.
in order to increase publicity for his rocket car venture ,  in the spring of 1966, campbell decided to try once more for a water speed record . 
campbell was awarded the cbe in january 1957 for his water speed record breaking ,  and in particular his record at lake mead in the usa which earned him and britain very positive acclaim . 
likewise ,  lattices are directed sets both upward and downward . 
directed sets are a generalization of nonempty totally ordered sets . 
he was 48 years old at the time of his death . 
by 1891 it was reported that no fewer than 162 nationalist clubs were in existence . 
the book saw print in 1897 and would prove to be bellamy's final creation . 
edward bellamy  -lrb-  march 26, 1850 – may 22, 1898 -rrb- was an american author and socialist ,  most famous for his utopian novel ,  `` looking backward '' ,  a tale set in the distant future of the year 2000.
this phase of bellamy's life came to an end in 1894, when `` the new nation '' was forced to suspend publication owing to financial difficulties . 
the latin letter 'e' differs little from its source ,  the greek letter epsilon ,  'ε' . 
e  -lrb-  named `` e ''  ,  plural `` ees ''  -rrb-  is the fifth letter and the second vowel in the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
digraphs with are common to indicate either diphthongs or monophthongs ,  such as or for or in english ,  for in german ,  and for in french or in german . 
examples of such price stickiness in particular markets include wage rates in labour markets and posted prices in markets deviating from perfect competition . 
public goods are goods which are under-supplied in a typical market . 
the law of demand states that ,  in general ,  price and quantity demanded in a given market are inversely related . 
 ''supply '' is the relation between the price of a good and the quantity available for sale at that price . 
for a given market of a commodity ,  `` demand '' is the relation of the quantity that all buyers would be prepared to purchase at each unit price of the good . 
microeconomics examines how entities ,  forming a market structure ,  interact within a market to create a market system . 
people frequently do not trade directly on markets . 
externalities occur where there are significant social costs or benefits from production or consumption that are not reflected in market prices . 
various market structures exist . 
money is a `` means of final payment '' for goods in most price system economies ,  and is the unit of account in which prices are typically stated . 
microeconomics studies individual markets by simplifying the economic system by assuming that activity in the market being analysed does not affect other markets . 
each point on the curve shows potential total output for the economy ,  which is the maximum feasible output of one good ,  given a feasible output quantity of the other good . 
demand-and-supply analysis is used to explain the behaviour of perfectly competitive markets ,  but as a standard of comparison it can be extended to any type of market . 
neoclassical economics systematized supply and demand as joint determinants of price and quantity in market equilibrium ,  affecting both the allocation of output and the distribution of income . 
in a perfectly competitive market ,  supply and demand equate marginal cost and marginal utility at equilibrium . 
market equilibrium occurs where quantity supplied equals quantity demanded ,  the intersection of the supply and demand curves in the figure above . 
for movement to market equilibrium and for changes in equilibrium ,  price and quantity also change `` at the margin '': more-or-less of something ,  rather than necessarily all-or-nothing . 
both problems may raise insurance costs and reduce efficiency by driving otherwise willing transactors from the market  -lrb-  `` incomplete markets ''  -rrb-  . 
that is ,  the higher the price at which the good can be sold ,  the more of it producers will supply ,  as in the figure . 
some market organizations may give rise to inefficiencies associated with uncertainty . 
prices and quantities have been described as the most directly observable attributes of goods produced and exchanged in a market economy . 
economic theory may also specify conditions such that supply and demand through the market is an efficient mechanism for allocating resources . 
other inputs may include intermediate goods used in production of final goods ,  such as the steel in a new car . 
this is because increasing output of one good requires transferring inputs to it from production of the other good ,  decreasing the latter . 
firms under imperfect competition have the potential to be `` price makers '' ,  which means that ,  by holding a disproportionately high share of market power ,  they can influence the prices of their products . 
in many areas ,  some form of price stickiness is postulated to account for quantities ,  rather than prices ,  adjusting in the short run to changes on the demand side or the supply side . 
in perfectly competitive markets studied in the theory of supply and demand ,  there are many producers ,  none of which significantly influence price . 
in theory ,  in a free market the aggregates  -lrb-  sum of  -rrb-  of `` quantity demanded '' by buyers and `` quantity supplied '' by sellers may reach economic equilibrium over time in reaction to price changes; in practice ,  various issues may prevent equilibrium ,  and any equilibrium reached may not necessarily be morally equitable . 
in the real world ,  markets often experience imperfect competition . 
other applications of demand and supply include the distribution of income among the factors of production ,  including labour and capital ,  through factor markets . 
still ,  in a market economy ,  movement along the curve may indicate that the choice of the increased output is anticipated to be worth the cost to the agents . 
on the supply side of the market ,  some factors of production are described as  -lrb-  relatively  -rrb-  `` variable '' in the short run ,  which affects the cost of changing output levels . 
this method studies both changes in markets and their interactions leading towards equilibrium . 
information asymmetries and incomplete markets may result in economic inefficiency but also a possibility of improving efficiency through market ,  legal ,  and regulatory remedies ,  as discussed above . 
in microeconomics ,  it applies to price and output determination for a market with perfect competition ,  which includes the condition of no buyers or sellers large enough to have price-setting power . 
a measure of gains from trade is the `` increased income levels '' that trade may facilitate . 
some specialized fields of economics deal in market failure more than others . 
the term `` market failure '' encompasses several problems which may undermine standard economic assumptions . 
the defining features are that people can consume public goods without having to pay for them and that more than one person can consume the good at the same time . 
theory and observation set out the conditions such that market prices of outputs and productive inputs select an allocation of factor inputs by comparative advantage ,  so that  -lrb-  relatively  -rrb-  low-cost inputs go to producing low-cost outputs . 
at the level of an economy ,  theory and evidence are consistent with a positive relationship running from the total money supply to the nominal value of total output and to the general price level . 
the continuous interplay  -lrb-  exchange or trade  -rrb-  done by economic actors in all markets sets the prices for all goods and services which ,  in turn ,  make the rational managing of scarce resources possible . 
forms include monopoly  -lrb-  in which there is only one seller of a good  -rrb-  ,  duopoly  -lrb-  in which there are only two sellers of a good  -rrb-  ,  oligopoly  -lrb-  in which there are few sellers of a good  -rrb-  ,  monopolistic competition  -lrb-  in which there are many sellers producing highly differentiated goods  -rrb-  ,  monopsony  -lrb-  in which there is only one buyer of a good  -rrb-  ,  and oligopsony  -lrb-  in which there are few buyers of a good  -rrb-  . 
john stuart mill  -lrb-  1844 -rrb- defines the subject in a social context as:
risk aversion may stimulate activity that in well-functioning markets smooths out risk and communicates information about risk ,  as in markets for insurance ,  commodity futures contracts ,  and financial instruments . 
for example ,  if the supply of healthcare services is limited by external factors ,  the equilibrium price may be unaffordable for many who desire it but cannot pay for it . 
in microeconomics ,  production is the conversion of inputs into outputs . 
firms combine labour and capital ,  and can achieve far greater economies of scale  -lrb-  when the average cost per unit declines as more units are produced  -rrb-  than individual market trading . 
marginalist theory ,  such as above ,  describes the consumers as attempting to reach most-preferred positions ,  subject to income and wealth constraints while producers attempt to maximize profits subject to their own constraints ,  including demand for goods produced ,  technology ,  and the price of inputs . 
labour economics examines the interaction of workers and employers through such markets to explain patterns and changes of wages and other labour income ,  labour mobility ,  and  -lrb-  un  -rrb- employment ,  productivity through human capital ,  and related public-policy issues . 
 ''growth economics '' studies factors that explain economic growth – the increase in output `` per capita '' of a country over a long period of time . 
among each of these production systems ,  there may be a corresponding `` division of labour '' with different work groups specializing ,  or correspondingly different types of capital equipment and differentiated land uses . 
in this ,  it generalizes maximization approaches developed to analyse market actors such as in the supply and demand model and allows for incomplete information of actors . 
all determinants are predominantly taken as constant factors of demand and supply . 
even if one region has an absolute advantage as to the ratio of its outputs to inputs in every type of output ,  it may still specialize in the output in which it has a comparative advantage and thereby gain from trading with a region that lacks any absolute advantage but has a comparative advantage in producing something else . 
as a medium of exchange ,  money facilitates trade . 
for a given quantity of a consumer good ,  the point on the demand curve indicates the value ,  or marginal utility ,  to consumers for that unit . 
the display is then controlled like any other electronic color display . 
electrofluidic displays are a variation of an electrowetting display . 
electronic paper and e-paper ,  also sometimes electronic ink or e-ink ,  are display devices that mimic the appearance of ordinary ink on paper . 
in 2004 sony released the librié in japan ,  the first e-book reader with an electronic paper e ink display . 
e ink corporation of e ink holdings inc .  released the first colored e-ink displays to be used in a marketed product . 
examples of electrochromic displays include rdot displays ,  acreo ,  ajjer ,  aveso and ntera . 
this results in the availability of two thirds of the display area to reflect light in any desired color . 
several companies are simultaneously developing electronic paper and ink . 
electronic paper technologies have a very low refresh rate compared to other low-power display technologies ,  such as lcds . 
electrophoretic display technology has also been developed by sipix and bridgestone/delta . 
the ink's flexibility would also make it possible to develop rollable displays for electronic devices . 
electrophoretic displays are considered prime examples of the electronic paper category ,  because of their paper-like appearance and low power consumption . 
this system may satisfy the practical requirements of electronic paper . `` 
these are commercially referred to as: active matrix electrophoretic displays  -lrb-  amepd  -rrb-  . 
some devices ,  like usb flash drives ,  have used electronic paper to display status information ,  such as available storage space . 
technology used in electronic visual displays that can create various colors via interference of reflected light . 
earth's mass is approximately  -lrb-  5,970 yg  -rrb-  . 
the total surface area of earth is about  . 
the mean heat loss from earth is  ,  for a global heat loss of  . 
a crust formed when the molten outer layer of earth cooled to form a solid . 
during the neoproterozoic ,   ,  much of earth might have been covered in ice . 
during this time ,  earth rotates about its axis about 366.26 times . 
the radius of the inner core is about one fifth of that of earth . 
earth's expected long-term future is tied to that of the sun . 
the mass of the oceans is approximately 1.35 metric tons or about 1/4400 of earth's total mass . 
earth is the third planet from the sun and the only astronomical object known to harbor life . 
the shape of earth is approximately oblate spheroidal . 
earth's axis of rotation is tilted with respect to its orbital plane ,  producing seasons on earth . 
about 97.5% of the water is saline; the remaining 2.5% is fresh water . 
earth's biosphere has significantly altered its atmosphere . 
earth's mechanically rigid outer layer ,  the lithosphere ,  is divided into tectonic plates . 
earth's atmosphere and oceans were formed by volcanic activity and outgassing . 
the celtic sea is to the west of the channel . 
the english channel  -lrb-   ,  `` the sleeve '';  ,  `` sleeve channel '';  ,  `` sea of brittany '';  ,  `` british sea '';  ,  `` the channel ''  -rrb-  ,  also called simply the channel ,  is the body of water that separates southern england from northern france and links the southern part of the north sea to the atlantic ocean . 
until the 18th century ,  the english channel had no fixed name either in english or in french . 
the english channel coast is far more densely populated on the english shore . 
with the rise of william the conqueror the north sea and channel began to lose some of their importance . 
the naval blockade in the channel and north sea was one of the decisive factors in the german defeat in 1918.
on land ,  the german army attempted to capture channel ports in the race to the sea but although the trenches are often said to have stretched `` from the frontier of switzerland to the english channel '' ,  they reached the coast at the north sea . 
the building of the british empire was possible only because the royal navy eventually managed to exercise unquestioned control over the seas around europe ,  especially the channel and the north sea . 
the channel acts as a funnel that amplifies the tidal range from less than a metre as observed at sea to more than 6 metres as observed in the channel islands ,  the west coast of the cotentin peninsula and the north coast of brittany . 
much of the british war effort in flanders was a bloody but successful strategy to prevent the germans reaching the channel coast . 
the name in breton  -lrb-  `` mor breizh ''  -rrb-  means `` breton sea '' ,  and its cornish name  -lrb-  `` mor bretannek ''  -rrb-  means `` british sea '' . 
the channel is of geologically recent origin ,  having been dry land for most of the pleistocene period . 
in the uk shipping forecast the channel is divided into the following areas ,  from the east:
blériot's crossing signalled the end of the channel as a barrier-moat for england against foreign enemies . 
eiffel had a permit for the tower to stand for 20 years . 
the tower has three levels for visitors ,  with restaurants on the first and second levels . 
the eiffel tower  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is a wrought-iron lattice tower on the champ de mars in paris ,  france . 
cloud to the eiffel tower and back in less than half an hour . 
the tower received its th guest on 28 november 2002.
gustave eiffel responded to these criticisms by comparing his tower to the egyptian pyramids: `` my tower will be the tallest edifice ever erected by man . 
it is named after the engineer gustave eiffel ,  whose company designed and built the tower . 
the eiffel tower is the most-visited paid monument in the world; 6.91 million people ascended it in 2015.
when it was built ,  many were shocked by the tower's daring form . 
many innovations took place at the eiffel tower in the early 20th century . 
the tower is tall ,  about the same height as an 81- building ,  and the tallest structure in paris . 
excluding transmitters ,  the eiffel tower is the second tallest free-standing structure in france after the millau viaduct . 
eiffel made use of his apartment at the top of the tower to carry out meteorological observations ,  and also used the tower to perform experiments on the action of air resistance on falling bodies . 
a fire started in the television transmitter on 3 january 1956, damaging the top of the tower . 
robert moriarty flew a beechcraft bonanza under the tower on 31 march 1984.
guy de maupassant supposedly ate lunch in the tower's restaurant every day because it was the one place in paris where the tower was not visible . 
on 30 march 1885, eiffel presented his plans to the ; after discussing the technical problems and emphasising the practical uses of the tower ,  he finished his talk by saying the tower would symbolise , 
ethical egoism is the normative ethical position that moral agents ought to do what is in their own self-interest . 
egoism has also been referenced by anarcho-capitalists ,  such as murray rothbard . 
it has been argued that extreme ethical egoism is self-defeating . 
ethical egoism contrasts with ethical altruism ,  which holds that moral agents have an obligation to help others . 
ethical egoism does not ,  however ,  require moral agents to harm the interests and well-being of others when making moral deliberation; e . g . 
ethical egoism is often used as the philosophical basis for support of right-libertarianism and individualist anarchism . 
new genes can be generated from an ancestral gene when a duplicate copy mutates and acquires a new function . 
the generation of new genes can also involve small parts of several genes being duplicated ,  with these fragments then recombining to form new combinations with new functions . 
gene flow is the exchange of genes between populations and between species . 
the effective population size may not be the same for every gene in the same population . 
gene flow involves the exchange of genes between populations and between species . 
all organisms on earth are descended from a common ancestor or ancestral gene pool . 
other types of mutations can even generate entirely new genes from previously noncoding dna . 
adaptation may cause either the gain of a new feature ,  or the loss of an ancestral feature . 
gene transfer between species includes the formation of hybrid organisms and horizontal gene transfer . 
inherited traits are controlled by genes and the complete set of genes within an organism's genome  -lrb-  genetic material  -rrb-  is called its genotype . 
viruses can also carry dna between organisms ,  allowing transfer of genes even across biological domains . 
large-scale gene transfer has also occurred between the ancestors of eukaryotic cells and bacteria ,  during the acquisition of chloroplasts and mitochondria . 
if an allele increases fitness more than the other alleles of that gene ,  then with each generation this allele will become more common within the population . 
all life on earth shares a last universal common ancestor  -lrb-  luca  -rrb-  that lived approximately 3.5–3.8 billion years ago . 
the mechanisms of reproductive heritability and the origin of new traits remained a mystery . 
it is possible that eukaryotes themselves originated from horizontal gene transfers between bacteria and archaea . 
however ,  modern research has suggested that ,  due to horizontal gene transfer ,  this `` tree of life '' may be more complicated than a simple branching tree since some genes have spread independently between distantly related species . 
variation comes from mutations in the genome ,  reshuffling of genes through sexual reproduction and migration between populations  -lrb-  gene flow  -rrb-  . 
it is now becoming clear that most alterations in the form of organisms are due to changes in a small set of conserved genes . 
such cooperation within species may have evolved through the process of kin selection ,  which is where one organism acts to help raise a relative's offspring . 
in july 2016, scientists reported identifying a set of 355 genes from the last universal common ancestor  -lrb-  luca  -rrb-  of all organisms living on earth . 
one type of sympatric speciation involves crossbreeding of two related species to produce a new hybrid species . 
understanding the changes that have occurred during an organism's evolution can reveal the genes needed to construct parts of the body ,  genes which may be involved in human genetic disorders . 
in asexual organisms ,  genes are inherited together ,  or `` linked '' ,  as they cannot mix with genes of other organisms during reproduction . 
in the 17th century ,  the new method of modern science rejected the aristotelian approach . 
in the longer term ,  evolution produces new species through splitting ancestral populations of organisms into new groups that cannot or will not interbreed . 
for example ,  the human eye uses four genes to make structures that sense light: three for colour vision and one for night vision; all four are descended from a single ancestral gene . 
genetic drift is the random fluctuations of allele frequencies within a population from one generation to the next . 
the role of extinction in evolution is not very well understood and may depend on which type of extinction is considered . 
during evolution ,  some structures may lose their original function and become vestigial structures . 
the beginning of life may have included self-replicating molecules such as rna and the assembly of simple cells . 
this helped identify genes required for vision and pigmentation . 
barriers to reproduction between two diverging sexual populations are required for the populations to become new species . 
if genetic differentiation between populations develops ,  gene flow between populations can introduce traits or alleles which are disadvantageous in the local population and this may lead to organisms within these populations evolving mechanisms that prevent mating with genetically distant populations ,  eventually resulting in the appearance of new species . 
in addition to being a major source of variation ,  mutation may also function as a mechanism of evolution when there are different probabilities at the molecular level for different mutations to occur ,  a process known as mutation bias . 
morphological and biochemical traits are more similar among species that share a more recent common ancestor ,  and can be used to reconstruct phylogenetic trees . 
mayr was the second son of helene pusinelli and dr .  otto mayr . 
nice dedicated her book to `` my friend ernst mayr . `` 
mayr also greatly influenced the american ornithologist margaret morse nice . 
mayr organized a monthly seminar under the auspices of the linnean society of new york . 
mayr was co-author of six global reviews of bird species new to science  -lrb-  listed below  -rrb-  . 
 ''everyone should have a problem '' was the way one bronx county bird club member recalled mayr's refrain . 
after mayr was appointed at the american museum of natural history ,  he influenced american ornithological research by mentoring young birdwatchers . 
mayr joined the faculty of harvard university in 1953, where he also served as director of the museum of comparative zoology from 1961 to 1970.
the european union is now the largest economy in the world . 
european integration also grew after world war ii . 
over 60 million european soldiers were mobilised from 1914 to 1918.
world war i and especially world war ii diminished the eminence of western europe in world affairs . 
the european union ,  a political entity composed of 28 european states ,  comprises the largest single economic area in the world . 
28 european states are members of the politico-economic european union ,  26 of the border-free schengen area and 19 of the monetary union eurozone . 
between the 16th and 20th centuries ,  european powers controlled at various times the americas ,  almost all of africa and oceania and the majority of asia . 
sea creatures are also an important part of european flora and fauna . 
two world wars and an economic depression dominated the first half of the 20th century . 
the 17th century in southern ,  central and eastern europe was a period of general decline . 
the richer states tend to be in the west; some of the central and eastern european economies are still emerging from the collapse of the soviet union and the breakup of yugoslavia . 
world war ii ,  again ,  damaged much of europe's industries . 
capitalism has been dominant in the western world since the end of feudalism . 
the majority of central and eastern european states came under the control of the soviet union and thus were members of the council for mutual economic assistance  -lrb-  comecon  -rrb-  . 
from that time ,  the term designated the sphere of influence of the western church ,  as opposed to both the eastern orthodox churches and to the islamic world . 
european integration is the process of political ,  legal ,  economic  -lrb-  and in some cases social and cultural  -rrb-  integration of european states as it has been pursued by the powers sponsoring the council of europe since the end of world war ii the european union has been the focus of economic integration on the continent since its foundation in 1993.
the phoney war continued . 
excess deaths in russia over the course of world war i and the russian civil war  -lrb-  including the postwar famine  -rrb-  amounted to a combined total of 18 million . 
there is huge disparity between many european countries in terms of their income . 
for those aged 15–24 it was 22.4% . 
the age of enlightenment ,  the subsequent french revolution and the napoleonic wars shaped the continent culturally ,  politically and economically from the end of the 17th century until the first half of the 19th century . 
while the roman empire in the west continued to decline ,  roman traditions and the roman state remained strong in the predominantly greek-speaking eastern roman empire ,  also known as the byzantine empire . 
major shallow water bodies submerging parts of the northern plains are the celtic sea ,  the north sea ,  the baltic sea complex and barents sea . 
in asia ,  european-derived populations predominate in northern asia  -lrb-  specifically russians  -rrb-  and some parts of northern kazakhstan . 
the united states and western europe established the nato alliance and later the soviet union and central europe established the warsaw pact . 
further east ,  volga bulgaria became an islamic state in the 10th century ,  but was eventually absorbed into russia several centuries later . 
during the dark ages ,  the western roman empire fell under the control of various tribes . 
emigration from europe began with spanish and portuguese settlers in the 16th century ,  and french and english settlers in the 17th century . 
today ,  large populations of european descent are found on every continent . 
monaco is the richest country in terms of gdp per capita in the world according to the world bank report . 
however ,  in june 2016 the people of the united kingdom ,  in a non-binding referendum on eu membership voted to leave the european union . 
the largest religion in europe is christianity ,  with 76.2% of europeans considering themselves christians ,  including catholic ,  eastern orthodox and various protestant denominations . 
the industrial revolution started in great britain in the last part of the 18th century and spread throughout europe . 
the notion of `` europe '' and the `` western world '' has been intimately connected with the concept of `` christianity and christendom ''; many even attribute christianity for being the link that created a unified european identity . 
ancient greece was the founding culture of western civilisation . 
east central europe saw the creation of the first slavic states and the adoption of christianity  -lrb-  circa 1000 ad  -rrb-  . 
the european bronze age began c .  3200 bc in greece with the minoan civilization on crete ,  the first advanced civilization in europe . 
several post-war expulsions in central and eastern europe displaced a total of about 20 million people . 
maltese is the only semitic language that is official within the eu ,  while basque is the only european language isolate . 
among the smaller european organizations are the nordic council ,  the benelux ,  the baltic assembly and the visegrád group . 
the term `` europe '' is first used for a cultural sphere in the carolingian renaissance of the 9th century . 
in russia and the soviet union ,  the boundary along the kuma–manych depression was the most commonly used as early as 1906.
phylum euglenozoa euglenobionta
the euglenozoa are a large group of flagellate excavates . 
most euglenozoa have two flagella ,  which are inserted parallel to one another in an apical or subapical pocket . 
whether someone's belief is true is not a prerequisite for  -lrb-  its  -rrb-  belief . 
justification ,  or working out the reason for a true belief ,  locks down true belief . 
 .  .  .  to justify a belief one must appeal to a further justified belief . 
his vision  -rrb-  ,  since he only acquired his true belief by accident . 
we generally assume that knowledge is more valuable than mere true belief . 
the definition of knowledge as justified true belief was widely accepted until the 1960s . 
nevertheless ,  even if this belief turned out to be true ,  the patient would not have `` known '' that he would get well since his belief lacked justification . 
in other words ,  the justification for the belief must be infallible . 
the chief criticism of foundationalism is that if a belief is not supported by other beliefs ,  accepting it may be arbitrary or unjustified . 
edmund gettier is best known for a short paper entitled 'is justified true belief knowledge ? '
 '' ,  and fundamentally `` how do we know that we know ? `` 
epistemologists argue over whether belief is the proper truth-bearer . 
justification just meanders in and out through our network of beliefs ,  stopping nowhere . 
he goes on to say that it doesn't matter if the statement is true or not ,  only that if you believe in one or the other that matters . 
the value problem is important to assessing the adequacy of theories of knowledge that conceive of knowledge as consisting of true belief and other components . 
descartes was looking for some logical statement that could be true without appeal to other statements . 
this example is similar to those often given when discussing belief and truth—wherein a person's belief of what will happen can coincidentally be correct without the actual knowledge to base it on . 
this includes 'the' truth ,  and everything else we accept as 'true' for ourselves from a cognitive point of view . 
plato ,  in his gorgias ,  argues that belief is the most commonly invoked truth-bearer . 
thus ,  according to williamson ,  justification ,  truth ,  and belief are necessary but not sufficient for knowledge . 
epistemology is the study of the nature of knowledge ,  justification ,  and the rationality of belief . 
in the `` theaetetus '' ,  socrates considers a number of theories as to what knowledge is ,  the last being that knowledge is true belief `` with an account ''  -lrb-  meaning explained or defined in some way  -rrb-  . 
foundationalists have used the same `` trilemma '' argument as justification for demanding the validity of basic beliefs . 
timothy williamson has advanced a theory of knowledge according to which knowledge is not justified true belief plus some extra condition -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  but primary . 
in mathematics ,  it is known 2 + 2 = 4, but there is also knowing to add two numbers ,  and knowing a  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  knowing other persons ,  or knowing oneself  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  e . g .  ,  one's hometown  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  e . g .  ,  cars  -rrb-  ,  or  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  addition  -rrb-  . 
alvin goldman writes in his `` causal theory of knowing '' that knowledge requires a causal link between the truth of a proposition and the belief in that proposition . 
perception ,  memory ,  and a priori intuition are often considered possible examples of basic beliefs . 
among other arguments ,  skeptics used agrippa's trilemma ,  named after agrippa the skeptic ,  to claim certain belief could be achieved . 
esperanto has continued to develop in the 21st century . 
in 1908, a group of young esperanto speakers led by hector hodler established the universal esperanto association ,  in order to provide a central organization for the global esperanto community . 
aeronautical engineering deals with aircraft design process design while aerospace engineering is a more modern term that expands the reach of the discipline by including spacecraft design . 
the study of failed products is known as forensic engineering and can help the product designer in evaluating his or her design in the light of real conditions . 
the role of the chemical engineer was the design of these chemical plants and processes . 
however ,  the greater the safety factor ,  the less efficient the design may be . 
scientists may also have to complete engineering tasks ,  such as designing experimental apparatus or building prototypes . 
john smeaton was the first self-proclaimed civil engineer and is often regarded as the `` father '' of civil engineering . 
engineers typically attempt to predict how well their designs will perform to their specifications prior to full-scale production . 
the art institute of chicago ,  for instance ,  held an exhibition about the art of nasa's aerospace design . 
civil engineering is the design and construction of public and private works ,  such as infrastructure  -lrb-  airports ,  roads ,  railways ,  water supply ,  and treatment etc . 
genrich altshuller ,  after gathering statistics on a large number of patents ,  suggested that compromises are at the heart of `` low-level '' engineering designs ,  while at a higher level the best design is one which eliminates the core contradiction causing the problem . 
one who practices engineering is called an engineer ,  and those licensed to do so may have more formal designations such as professional engineer ,  chartered engineer ,  incorporated engineer ,  ingenieur ,  european engineer ,  or designated engineering representative . 
the human body ,  as a biological machine ,  has many functions that can be modeled using engineering methods . 
engineers take on the responsibility of producing designs that will perform as well as expected and will not cause unintended harm to the public at large . 
the earliest civil engineer known by name is imhotep . 
in the engineering design process ,  engineers apply mathematics and sciences such as physics to find novel solutions to problems or to improve existing solutions . 
a number of charitable organizations aim to use engineering directly for the good of mankind:
applied science lead to the development of the steam engine . 
new steel making processes ,  such as the bessemer process and the open hearth furnace ,  ushered in an area of heavy engineering in the late 19th century . 
first ,  it often deals with areas in which the basic physics or chemistry are well understood ,  but the problems themselves are too complex to solve in an exact manner . 
much work is needed to avoid huge problems in the uk and other western economies . 
both use mathematics and classification criteria to analyze and communicate observations . 
if multiple solutions exist ,  engineers weigh each design choice based on their merit and choose the solution that best matches the requirements . 
these similarities as well as the increasing importance and application of engineering principles in medicine ,  led to the development of the field of biomedical engineering that uses concepts developed in both disciplines . 
access and distribution of all this information is generally organized with the use of product data management software . 
in recent years the use of computer software to aid the development of goods has collectively come to be known as product lifecycle management  -lrb-  plm  -rrb-  . 
primary schools are often subdivided into infant schools and junior school . 
higher education ,  also called tertiary ,  third stage ,  or postsecondary education ,  is the non-compulsory educational level that follows the completion of a school such as a high school or secondary school . 
formal education is commonly divided formally into such stages as preschool or kindergarten ,  primary school ,  secondary school and then college ,  university ,  or apprenticeship . 
schools existed in egypt at the time of the middle kingdom . 
since 1909, the ratio of children in the developing world attending school has increased . 
by the start of the 21st century ,  the majority of all children in most regions of the world attended school . 
in most countries today ,  full-time education ,  whether at school or otherwise ,  is compulsory for all children up to a certain age . 
secondary education has a longer history in europe ,  where grammar schools or academies date from as early as the 16th century ,  in the form of public schools ,  fee-paying schools ,  or charitable educational foundations ,  which themselves date even further back . 
several un agencies have asserted that comprehensive sexuality education should be integrated into school curriculum . 
in india ,  for example ,  compulsory education spans over twelve years ,  with eight years of elementary education ,  five years of primary schooling and three years of upper primary schooling . 
schools deliver education ,  with support from the rest of the education system through various elements such as education policies and guidelines – to which school policies can refer – curricula and learning materials ,  as well as pre- and in-service teacher training programmes . 
the exact boundary between primary and secondary education also varies from country to country and even within them but is generally around the seventh to the tenth year of schooling . 
while informal learning often takes place outside educational establishments and does not follow a specified curriculum ,  it can also occur within educational settings and even during formal learning situations . 
charter schools are another example of alternative education ,  which have in the recent years grown in numbers in the us and gained greater importance in its public education system . 
the education sector or education system is a group of institutions  -lrb-  ministries of education ,  local educational authorities ,  teacher training institutions ,  schools ,  universities ,  etc .   -rrb- 
autodidacticism  -lrb-  also autodidactism  -rrb-  is a term used to describe self-directed learning . 
various states in the republic of india provide 12 years of compulsory school education based on a national curriculum framework designed by the national council of educational research and training . 
in most contemporary educational systems of the world ,  secondary education comprises the formal education that occurs during adolescence . 
there are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries . 
one example is the stanford encyclopedia of philosophy . 
the modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century . 
today in english ,  the word is most commonly spelled `` encyclopedia '' ,  though `` encyclopaedia ''  -lrb-  from `` encyclopædia ''  -rrb-  is also used in britain . 
wikipedia is by far the largest web-based encyclopedia ,  but it is not the only one in existence . 
encyclopedias have progressed from written form in antiquity ,  to print in modern times . 
several encyclopedias have names that include the suffix `` -p -lrb-  a  -rrb- edia '' ,  to mark the text as belonging to the genre of encyclopedias . 
the phrase `` enkyklios paideia ''  -lrb-  ἐγκύκλιος παιδεία  -rrb-  was used by plutarch and the latin word encyclopedia came from him . 
popular and affordable encyclopedias such as `` harmsworth's universal encyclopaedia '' and the `` children's encyclopaedia '' appeared in the early 1920s . 
by the late 20th century ,  encyclopedias were being published on cd-roms for use with personal computers . 
an encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations ,  as well as bibliography and statistics . 
an encyclopedia is ,  theoretically ,  not written in order to convince ,  although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader of its own veracity . 
during the 19th and early 20th century ,  many smaller or less developed languages saw their first encyclopedias ,  using french ,  german ,  and english role models . 
when placed in an enigma ,  each rotor can be set to one of 26 possible positions . 
for a two-notch rotor ,  the rotor to its left would turn over twice for each rotation . 
the right-hand rotor stepped once with each keystroke ,  and other rotors stepped less frequently . 
eventually other rotors step with a key press . 
the advancement of a rotor other than the left-hand one was called a `` turnover '' by the british . 
the rotors  -lrb-  alternatively `` wheels '' or `` drums '' ,  `` walzen '' in german  -rrb-  formed the heart of an enigma machine . 
with the exception of models `` a '' and `` b '' ,  the last rotor came before a 'reflector'  -lrb-  german: `` umkehrwalze '' ,  meaning 'reversal rotor'  -rrb-  ,  a patented feature unique to enigma among the period's various rotor machines . 
the first five rotors to be introduced  -lrb-  i–v  -rrb-  contained one notch each ,  while the additional naval rotors vi ,  vii and viii each had two notches . 
the army and air force enigmas were used with several rotors ,  initially three . 
to make room for the naval fourth rotors ,  the reflector was made much thinner . 
enzymes are known to catalyze more than 5,000 biochemical reaction types . 
eduard buchner submitted his first paper on the study of yeast extracts in 1897.
an enzyme's name is often derived from its substrate or the chemical reaction it catalyzes ,  with the word ending in `` -ase '' . 
he wrote that `` alcoholic fermentation is an act correlated with the life and organization of the yeast cells ,  not with the death or putrefaction of the cells . `` 
in 1877, german physiologist wilhelm kühne  -lrb-  1837–1900 -rrb- first used the term `` enzyme '' ,  which comes from greek ἔνζυμον ,  `` leavened '' or `` in yeast '' ,  to describe this process . 
as a field of intellectual inquiry ,  moral philosophy also is related to the fields of moral psychology ,  descriptive ethics ,  and value theory . 
let the set formula_5 have the equivalence relation formula_6.
the equivalence class of formula_2 under ~ ,  denoted formula_3, is defined as formula_4.
non-equivalence may be written ``  '' or `` formula_1 '' . 
this partition – the set of equivalence classes – is sometimes called the quotient set or the quotient space of by and is denoted by  . 
examples include quotient spaces in linear algebra ,  quotient spaces in topology ,  quotient groups ,  homogeneous spaces ,  quotient rings ,  quotient monoids ,  and quotient categories . 
the film industry is a part of the entertainment industry . 
films also re-imagine entertainment from other forms ,  turning stories ,  books and plays ,  for example ,  into new entertainments . 
music is also a universal and popular type of entertainment on its own ,  constituting an entire performance such as when concerts are given  -lrb-  2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9   -rrb-  . 
often ,  part of the entertainment for children playing a game is deciding who is part of their audience and who is a player . 
storytelling is an ancient form of entertainment that has influenced almost all other forms . 
former courtly entertainments ,  such as jousting ,  often also survived in children's games . 
courtly entertainments also demonstrate the complex relationship between entertainer and spectator: individuals may be either an entertainer or part of the audience ,  or they may swap roles even during the course of one entertainment . 
what is entertainment for one group or individual may be regarded as work by another . 
court entertainment often moved from being associated with the court to more general use among commoners . 
although most forms of entertainment have evolved and continued over time ,  some once-popular forms are no longer as acceptable . 
entertaining the audience is a normal part of dance but its physicality often also produces joy for the dancers themselves  -lrb-  9 -rrb- . 
parades are held for a range of purposes ,  often more than one . 
films are a major form of entertainment ,  although not all films have entertainment as their primary purpose: documentary film ,  for example ,  aims to create a record or inform ,  although the two purposes often work together . 
this type of act occasionally uses public transport as a venue . 
even more listeners are entertained by pre-recorded music and listen privately  -lrb-  10 -rrb- . 
entertainment also evolved into different forms and expressions as a result of social upheavals such as wars and revolutions . 
these too are developed into books ,  films ,  music and games in a way that increases their longevity and enhances their entertainment value . 
by the 16th century in europe ,  the appeal of reading for entertainment was well established . 
street entertainment ,  street performance or `` busking '' are forms of performance that have been meeting the public's need for entertainment for centuries . 
plays ,  musicals ,  monologues ,  pantomimes ,  and performance poetry are part of the very long history of theatre ,  which is also the venue for the type of performance known as stand-up comedy . 
some activities that were once considered entertaining ,  particularly public punishments ,  have been removed from the public arena . 
one of the consequences of the development of the entertainment industry has been the creation of new types of employment . 
gladiatorial combats ,  also known as `` gladiatorial games '' ,  popular during roman times ,  provide a good example of an activity that is a combination of sport ,  punishment ,  and entertainment . 
the evolution of an activity into a sport and then an entertainment is also affected by the local climate and conditions . 
computerisation and the development of barcodes also made ticketing easier ,  faster and global . 
court ceremonies ,  palace banquets and the spectacles associated with them ,  have been used not only to entertain but also to demonstrate wealth and power . 
the `` fire ,  sudden noise and smoke '' of fireworks is still a significant part of public celebration and entertainment . 
in the 20th century ,  radio and television ,  often broadcast live ,  extended the theatrical tradition that continued to exist alongside the new forms . 
the instruments used in musical entertainment are either solely the human voice  -lrb-  2, 6 -rrb- or solely instrumental  -lrb-  1, 3 -rrb- or some combination of the two  -lrb-  4, 5, 7, 8 -rrb- . 
hence ,  there is the possibility that what appears as entertainment may also be a means of achieving insight or intellectual growth . 
entertainment is also provided to children or taught to them by adults and many activities that appeal to them such as puppets ,  clowns ,  pantomimes and cartoons are also enjoyed by adults . 
animals kept in zoos in ancient times were often kept there for later use in the arena as entertainment or for their entertainment value as exotica . 
festivals devoted to music ,  film ,  or dance allow audiences to be entertained over a number of consecutive days . 
reading has been a source of entertainment for a very long time ,  especially when other forms ,  such as performance entertainments ,  were  -lrb-  or are  -rrb-  either unavailable or too costly . 
vaudeville and music halls ,  popular at this time in the united states ,  england ,  canada ,  australia and new zealand ,  were themselves eventually superseded . 
ethers are a class of organic compounds that contain an ether group—an oxygen atom connected to two alkyl or aryl groups . 
acetals  -lrb-  α-alkoxy ethers r–ch -lrb-  –or  -rrb- –o–r  -rrb-  are another class of ethers with characteristic properties . 
because earth takes one year to orbit the sun ,  the apparent position of the sun takes one year to make a complete circuit of the ecliptic . 
the ecliptic is actually the apparent path of the sun throughout the course of a year . 
the ecliptic is the mean plane of the apparent path in the sky that the sun follows over the course of one year; it is the basis of the ecliptic coordinate system . 
because earth's rotational axis is not perpendicular to its orbital plane ,  earth's equatorial plane is not coplanar with the ecliptic plane ,  but is inclined to it by an angle of about 23.4° ,  which is known as the obliquity of the ecliptic . 
the criteria for inclusion in this list is similar to that of the list of states with limited recognition . 
the quotient formula_17 is the eccentricity formula_18.
in mathematics ,  an ellipse is a curve in a plane surrounding two focal points such that the sum of the distances to the two focal points is constant for every point on the curve . 
the midpoint formula_13 of the line segment joining the foci is called the center of the ellipse . 
normally the skin of an asian elephant is covered with more hair than its african counterpart . 
in the asian species ,  only the males have large tusks . 
in his 326 b . c . 
african elephants have 21 pairs of ribs ,  while asian elephants have 19 or 20 pairs . 
african elephants have larger ears and concave backs while asian elephants have smaller ears and convex or level backs . 
the african elephant has two finger-like extensions at the tip of the trunk that allow it to grasp and bring food to its mouth . 
fertility rates in cows decline around 45–50 years of age . 
when underwater ,  the elephant uses its trunk as a snorkel . 
adult males enter a state of increased testosterone known as musth . 
lin wang ,  a captive male asian elephant ,  lived for 86 years . 
when fighting ,  they are used to attack and defend ,  and to protect the trunk . 
female same-sex behaviours have been documented only in captivity where they are known to masturbate one another with their trunks . 
males  -lrb-  `` bulls ''  -rrb-  leave their family groups when they reach puberty and may live alone or with other males . 
the former were related to `` barytherium '' and lived in africa and eurasia ,  while the latter may have descended from `` eritreum '' and spread to north america . 
the asian elephant also has dorsal bumps on its head and some patches of depigmentation on its skin . 
 ''loxodonta '' ,  the generic name for the african elephants ,  is greek for `` oblique-sided tooth '' . 
the persians used them during the achaemenid empire  -lrb-  between the 6th and 4th centuries bc  -rrb-  while southeast asian states first used war elephants possibly as early as the 5th century bc and continued to the 20th century . 
the practice of working elephants has also been attempted in africa . 
by comparison ,  human sperm has to swim around only  . 
a unique proboscis nerve – formed by the maxillary and facial nerves – runs along both sides of the trunk . 
floppy trunk syndrome is a condition of trunk paralysis in african bush elephants caused by the degradation of the peripheral nerves and muscles beginning at the tip . 
individuals of the asian species have been often trained as working animals . 
the ban allowed the elephant to recover in parts of africa . 
the trunk ,  or proboscis ,  is a fusion of the nose and upper lip ,  although in early fetal life ,  the upper lip and trunk are separated . 
although asian elephants are declining in numbers overall ,  particularly in southeast asia ,  the population in the western ghats appears to be increasing . 
elephants produce several sounds ,  usually through the larynx ,  though some may be modified by the trunk . 
the groups are led by an individual known as the matriarch ,  often the oldest cow . 
the social life of the adult male is very different . 
when a cow has mated ,  her family may produce calls of excitement known as the `` mating pandemonium '' . 
some scientists believe a cloned mammoth embryo could one day be implanted in an asian elephant's womb . 
submissive ones will lower their heads and trunks ,  as well as flatten their ears against their necks ,  while those that accept a challenge will position their ears in a v shape . 
one original researcher in the field is luc steels ,  head of the research units of sony csl in paris and the ai lab at the vrije universiteit brussel . 
there is little support ,  however ,  for the idea that `` foxp2 '' is 'the grammar gene' or that it had much to do with the relatively recent emergence of syntactical speech . 
the field re-appeared in 1988 in the `` linguistic bibliography '' as a subfield of psycholinguistics . 
another controversial dichotomy is the question of whether human language is solely human or on a continuum with  -lrb-  admittedly far removed  -rrb-  animal communication systems . 
most reports on echelon focus on satellite interception . 
 ''echelon conspiracy '' ,  inspired by the surveillance system echelon ,  is a 2009 action thriller film directed by greg marcks . 
in july 2001, the temporary committee on the echelon interception system released its final report . 
lawmakers in the united states feared that the echelon system could be used to monitor u . s .  citizens . 
britain's `` the guardian '' newspaper summarized the capabilities of the echelon system as follows:
the nsa has used many codenames ,  and shamrock was the code name used for echelon prior to 1975.
in 1988, margaret newsham ,  a lockheed employee under nsa contract ,  disclosed the echelon surveillance system to members of congress . 
the 2007 film `` the bourne ultimatum '' makes several references to echelon . 
the european parliament stated in its report that the term echelon is used in a number of contexts ,  but that the evidence presented indicates that it was the name for a signals intelligence collection system . 
critics said the echelon system emerged from the cold war as a `` big brother without a cause '' . 
in its report ,  the committee of the european parliament stated categorically that the echelon network was being used to intercept not only military communications ,  but also private and business ones . 
in 2001, the temporary committee on the echelon interception system recommended to the european parliament that citizens of member states routinely use cryptography in their communications to protect their privacy ,  because economic espionage with echelon has been conducted by the u . s .  intelligence agencies . 
the antagonist of the anime series `` digimon tamers '' ,  d-reaper ,  was created by echelon . 
in may 2001, as the committee finalised its report on the echelon system ,  a delegation travelled to washington ,  d . c .  to attend meetings with u . s .  officials from the following agencies and departments:
a detailed description of echelon was provided by new zealand journalist nicky hager in his 1996 book `` secret power: new zealand's role in the international spy network '' . 
the expressions on the two sides of the equals sign are called the `` left-hand side '' and `` right-hand side '' of the equation . 
has left-hand side formula_2, which has three terms ,  and right-hand side formula_3, consisting of just one term . 
the most common type of equation is an algebraic equation ,  in which the two sides are algebraic expressions . 
in mathematics ,  an equation is a statement of an equality containing one or more variables . 
