bald eagles are not actually bald; the name derives from an older meaning of the word ,  `` white headed '' . 
the plumage of an adult bald eagle is evenly dark brown with a white head and tail . 
the bald eagle is both the national bird and national animal of the united states of america . 
under some definitions ,  the brown bear can be construed as the paraspecies for the polar bear . 
brown bears are thought to have evolved from `` ursus etruscus '' in asia . 
the marsican brown bear ,  one of several currently isolated populations of the main eurasian brown bear population in central italy ,  is believed to have a population of just 30 to 40 bears . 
the brown bear is sometimes referred to as the `` bruin '' ,  from middle english . 
the key ingredient was leon cooper's calculation of the bound states of electrons subject to an attractive force in his 1956 paper ,  `` bound electron pairs in a degenerate fermi gas '' . 
at sufficiently low temperatures ,  electrons near the fermi surface become unstable against the formation of cooper pairs . 
it was proposed by bardeen ,  cooper ,  and schrieffer in 1957; they received the nobel prize in physics for this theory in 1972.
in 1957 bardeen and cooper assembled these ingredients and constructed such a theory ,  the bcs theory ,  with robert schrieffer . 
bcs is able to give an approximation for the quantum-mechanical many-body state of the system of  -lrb-  attractively interacting  -rrb-  electrons inside the metal . 
in 1993, the biathlon branch of the uipmb created the international biathlon union  -lrb-  ibu  -rrb-  ,  which officially separated from the uipmb in 1998.
the biathlon is a winter sport that combines cross-country skiing and rifle shooting . 
in 1948, the  -lrb-  uipmb  -rrb-  was founded ,  to standardise the rules for the biathlon and the modern pentathlon . 
the meat was traditionally added to the bubble and squeak itself ,  although nowadays it is more commonly made without meat . 
it is often served with cold meat from the sunday roast and pickles or brown sauce or as an accompaniment to a full english breakfast . 
lennon's band the quarrymen covered `` that'll be the day '' in their first recording session ,  in 1958.
before leaving new york ,  the band befriended the everly brothers . 
 ''that'll be the day '' was released on may 27, 1957.
holly bought his first fender stratocaster ,  which became his signature guitar ,  at harrod music in lubbock for us$249.50.
the rock and roll hall of fame included holly among its first class in 1986.
petty was still holding the money from the royalties ,  forcing holly to form a new band and return to touring . 
a new recording session in clovis was arranged in may; holly hired tommy allsup to play lead guitar . 
at the beginning of their music careers ,  holly and his band wore business suits . 
buddy holly and the crickets were the template for all the rock bands that followed '' . 
the album `` chirping crickets '' ,  released in november 1957, reached number five on the uk albums chart . 
in april ,  decca released `` that'll be the day '' ,  featuring the songs recorded with bradley during his early nashville sessions . 
in the last week of september ,  the band members flew to lubbock to visit their families . 
they then traveled by train to chicago to join the rest of the band . 
the musical opened in the late 1980s and its most recent uk tour occurred in february 2011.
santiago accompanied holly on tours . 
the holleys had an interest in music; all the family members except l . o . 
by 1955, after graduating from high school ,  holley decided to pursue a full-time career in music . 
the new release was successful enough to warrant an album drawing upon the other holly demos ,  using the same studio personnel ,  in january 1960.
yeast is the microorganism that is responsible for fermentation in beer . 
beer is composed mostly of water . 
filtering the beer stabilizes the flavour ,  and gives beer its polished shine and brilliance . 
darker malts will produce darker beers . 
this process makes the beer appear bright and clean ,  rather than the cloudy appearance of ethnic and older styles of beer such as wheat beers . 
the kräusening method may also be used to condition bottled beer . 
the starch source in a beer provides the fermentable material and is a key determinant of the strength and flavour of the beer . 
nearly all beer includes barley malt as the majority of the starch . 
the basic ingredients of beer are water and a fermentable starch source such as malted barley . 
kräusening is a conditioning method in which fermenting wort is added to the finished beer . 
 ''brettanomyces '' is a genus of yeast important in brewing lambic ,  a beer produced not by the deliberate addition of brewer's yeasts ,  but by spontaneous fermentation with wild yeasts and bacteria . 
bottle-conditioned beers may be either filled unfiltered direct from the fermentation or conditioning tank ,  or filtered and then reseeded with yeast . 
filters range from rough filters that remove much of the yeast and any solids  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  hops ,  grain particles  -rrb-  left in the beer ,  to filters tight enough to strain colour and body from the beer . 
packaging is putting the beer into the containers in which it will leave the brewery . 
the amount of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill . 
the proportion of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill . 
brewing is the production of beer by steeping a starch source  -lrb-  commonly cereal grains ,  the most popular of which is barley  -rrb-  in water and fermenting the resulting sweet liquid with yeast . 
after the whirlpool ,  the wort must be brought down to fermentation temperatures before yeast is added . 
after mashing ,  the beer wort is boiled with hops  -lrb-  and other flavourings if used  -rrb-  in a large tank known as a `` copper '' or brew kettle – though historically the mash vessel was used and is still in some small breweries . 
typically ,  this means putting the beer into bottles ,  aluminium cans ,  kegs ,  or casks ,  but it may include putting the beer into bulk tanks for high-volume customers . 
lautering is the separation of the wort  -lrb-  the liquid containing the sugar extracted during mashing  -rrb-  from the grains . 
cask ale or cask-conditioned beer is unfiltered and unpasteurised beer that is conditioned  -lrb-  including secondary fermentation  -rrb-  and served from a cask ,  either pumped up from a cellar via a beer engine  -lrb-  hand pump  -rrb-  ,  or from a tap by gravity . 
breast reconstruction is the rebuilding of a breast ,  usually in women . 
in nearly all cases of delayed breast reconstruction tissue must be borrowed from another part of the body to make the new breast . 
bhra had a fleet of 16 trolleys  -lrb-  15 pcc trolleys and a leased 1897 trolley car from oslo ,  norway  -rrb-  . 
the bhra's origin began with the rediscovery of the cobble hill tunnel by bob diamond in 1980.
a beta-lactam  -lrb-  β-lactam  -rrb-  ring is a four-membered lactam . 
the simplest β-lactam possible is 2-azetidinone . 
the bishopric was a suffragan diocese of the archbishopric of magdeburg ,  its seat was brandenburg an der havel . 
brandenburg was originally a suffragan of the archbishopric of mainz ,  but in 968 it came under the jurisdiction of the magdeburg archbishops . 
the prince-bishopric of brandenburg  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a state of the holy roman empire for some time ,  probably starting about 1161/1165.
the acronym `` b . a . s . e . `` 
base jumping ,  also sometimes written as b . a . s . e . 
 ,  over 2,000 base numbers have been issued . 
base jumping grew out of skydiving . 
base jumping itself is generally not illegal in most places . 
a base jump from will have a parachute ride of only 10 to 15 seconds . 
while base jumps had been made prior to that time ,  the el capitan activity was the effective birth of what is now called base jumping . 
base jumping is often featured in action movies . 
 ,  the base fatality list maintained by blincmagazine . com records 328 deaths for base jumping since april 1981.
beauty is a property or characteristic of an animal ,  idea ,  object ,  person or place that provides a perceptual experience of pleasure or satisfaction . 
thus einstein was led to consider the collective motion of brownian particles . 
brownian motion or pedesis  -lrb-  from `` leaping ''  -rrb-  is the random motion of particles suspended in a fluid  -lrb-  a liquid or a gas  -rrb-  resulting from their collision with the fast-moving molecules in the fluid . 
the first part of einstein's argument was to determine how far a brownian particle travels in a given time interval . 
this expression  -lrb-  which is a normal distribution with the mean formula_12 and variance formula_13 usually called brownian motion formula_14 -rrb- allowed einstein to calculate the moments directly . 
this motion is named after the botanist robert brown ,  who was the most eminent microscopist of his time . 
their equations describing brownian motion were subsequently verified by the experimental work of jean baptiste perrin in 1908.
where the second equality in the first line is by definition of formula_6.
his argument is based on a conceptual switch from the `` ensemble '' of brownian particles to the `` single '' brownian particle: we can speak of the relative number of particles at a single instant just as well as of the time it takes a brownian particle to reach a given point . 
barcelona  -lrb-    ,   ,    -rrb-  is a city in spain . 
barcelona is served by barcelona-el prat airport ,  about from the centre of barcelona . 
the fc barcelona museum has been the most visited museum in the city of barcelona ,  with 1,506,022 visitors in 2013.
in 1992, barcelona hosted the summer olympics . 
barcelona was also home to mies van der rohe's barcelona pavilion . 
according to barcelona's city council ,  barcelona's population was 1,608,746 people ,  on a land area of  . 
barcelona has a long-standing mercantile tradition . 
founded as a roman city ,  in the middle ages barcelona became the capital of the county of barcelona . 
an important business centre ,  the world trade center barcelona ,  is located in barcelona's port vell harbour . 
barcelona is one of the most densely populated cities in europe . 
both these lines serve barcelona sants terminal station . 
borsa de barcelona  -lrb-  barcelona stock exchange  -rrb-  is the main stock exchange in the northeastern part of the iberian peninsula . 
barcelona's cultural roots go back 2000 years . 
the barcelona metropolitan area had 67% of the total number of industrial establishments in catalonia as of 1997.
barcelona has a great number of museums ,  which cover different areas and eras . 
it is the central nucleus of the barcelona metropolitan area ,  which relies on a population of 5,474,482.
internationally ,  barcelona's name is wrongly abbreviated to 'barça' . 
freight services operate to local industries and to the port of barcelona . 
barcelona has a well-developed higher education system of public universities . 
of barcelona's parks ,  montjuïc is the largest ,  with 203 ha located on the mountain of the same name . 
barcelona is a major hub for renfe ,  the spanish state railway network . 
with its rambles ,  barcelona is ranked the most popular city to visit in spain . 
barcelona has long been an important european automobile manufacturing centre . 
the city is also the capital of the province of barcelona and the barcelonès comarca  -lrb-  district  -rrb-  . 
in 2013, 3,6 million of pleasure cruises passengers used services of the port of barcelona . 
the development of barcelona was promoted by two events in 1986: spanish accession to the european community ,  and particularly barcelona's designation as host city of the 1992 summer olympics . 
the origin of the earliest settlement at the site of present-day barcelona is unclear . 
in the case of barcelona though ,  the land distribution is extremely uneven . 
in 2012 barcelona had a gdp of $170 billion; and it was leading spain in employment rate in that moment . 
the port of barcelona has a 2000-year-old history and a great contemporary commercial importance . 
a modern re-creation by spanish architects now stands in barcelona ,  however ,  constructed in 1986.
the counts of barcelona became increasingly independent and expanded their territory to include all of catalonia ,  although on 6 july 985, barcelona was sacked by the army of almanzor . 
the headquarters of televisió de catalunya ,  catalonia's public network ,  are located in sant joan despí ,  in barcelona's metropolitan area . 
barcelona was the 24th most `` livable city '' in the world in 2015 according to lifestyle magazine `` monocle . `` 
since 2009, `` the brandery '' ,  an urban fashion show ,  has been held in barcelona twice a year until 2012.
the `` barri gòtic ''  -lrb-  catalan for `` gothic quarter ''  -rrb-  is the centre of the old city of barcelona . 
barcelona is the home of many points of interest declared world heritage sites by unesco:
barcelona was the host city for the 2013 world aquatics championships ,  which were held at the palau san jordi . 
in 2014, 322,698 out of 5.5 million people in the province of barcelona identified themselves as muslim ,  which makes 5.6% of total population . 
under the rules ,  the two basic states of play during a game are `` ball in play '' and `` ball out of play '' . 
it is played on ice like ice hockey ,  but like field hockey ,  players use bowed sticks and a small ball . 
however ,  at the time ,  the game was called `` hockey on the ice '' ,  probably as it was considered an ice variant of field hockey . 
bandy is played on ice ,  using a single round ball . 
the sport is considered a form of hockey and has a common background with association football ,  ice hockey and field hockey . 
bandy is a team winter sport played on ice ,  in which skaters use sticks to direct a ball into the opposing team's goal . 
the game is designed to be played on a rectangle of ice the same size as a football field . 
the team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner . 
two teams of 11 players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal using sticks ,  thereby scoring a goal . 
a variant of bandy ,  rink bandy ,  is played to the same rules but on a field the size of an ice hockey rink ,  with ice hockey goal cages and with six players on each team ,  or five in usa rink bandy league . 
when the ball becomes out of play ,  play is restarted by one of six restart methods depending on how it went out of play:
an old name for bandy is `` hockey on the ice ''; in the first rule books from england at the turn of the century 1900, the sport is literally called `` bandy or hockey on the ice '' . 
if both teams have scored an equal number of goals ,  then ,  with some exceptions ,  the game is a draw . 
both bandy and ice hockey were played in europe during the 20th century ,  especially in sweden ,  finland ,  and norway . 
in typical game play ,  players attempt to propel the ball toward their opponents' goal through individual control of the ball ,  such as by dribbling ,  passing the ball to a teammate ,  and taking shots at the goal ,  which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper . 
based on the number of participating athletes ,  bandy is the world's second-most participated winter sport after ice hockey . 
goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms ,  and they are only allowed to do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal . 
a bandy field is by  ,  a total of  ,  or about the same size as a football pitch and considerably larger than an ice hockey rink . 
any number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game . 
the typical european style of ice hockey ,  with flowing ,  less physical play ,  represents a heritage of bandy . 
a team can bring at the most four substitutes to the game and one of these is likely to be an extra goalkeeper . 
before canadians introduced ice hockey into europe in the early 20th century ,  `` hockey '' was another name for bandy ,  and still is in parts of russia and kazakhstan . 
the primary rule is that the players  -lrb-  other than the goalkeepers  -rrb-  may not intentionally touch the ball with their heads ,  hands or arms during play . 
the prize was originally known as the booker–mcconnell prize ,  after the company booker ,  mcconnell ltd began sponsoring the event in 1969; it became commonly known as the `` booker prize '' or simply `` the booker '' . 
the man booker prize for fiction  -lrb-  formerly known as the booker–mcconnell prize and commonly known simply as the booker prize  -rrb-  is a literary prize awarded each year for the best original novel written in the english language and published in the united kingdom . 
the book of joel is part of the hebrew bible ,  one of twelve prophetic books known as the twelve minor prophets . 
there are many parallels of language between joel and other old testament prophets . 
after a superscription ascribing the prophecy to joel  -lrb-  son of pethuel  -rrb-  ,  the book may be broken down into the following sections:
they may represent joel's literary use of other prophets ,  or vice versa . 
in other words ,  the northern kingdom had been rejected by god . 
these are delivered by the prophet hosea . 
in chapter three ,  at god's command ,  hosea seeks out gomer once more . 
in hosea 2, the woman in the marriage metaphor could be hosea's wife gomer ,  or could be referring to the nation of israel ,  invoking the metaphor of israel as god's bride . 
second ,  hosea and his wife ,  gomer ,  have a son . 
the prophecy of hosea centers around god's unending love towards a sinful israel . 
set around the fall of the northern kingdom of israel ,  the book of hosea denounces the worship of gods other than yahweh ,  metaphorically comparing israel's abandonment of yahweh to a woman being unfaithful to her husband . 
first ,  hosea was directed by god to marry a promiscuous woman of ill-repute ,  and he did so . 
the book of hosea is one of the books of the hebrew bible . 
 -lrb-  obadiah 1:11, 13 niv  -rrb- 
the later date would place obadiah as a contemporary of the prophet jeremiah . 
the book of obadiah is an oracle concerning the divine judgment of edom and the restoration of israel . 
according to obadiah 18, after judgment ,  `` there will be no survivors from the house of esau ''  -lrb-  niv  -rrb-  . 
obadiah said in judgement god would wipe out the house of esau forever ,  and not even a remnant would remain . 
god then commands the fish to vomit jonah out . 
as far as the book of jonah is concerned ,  targum jonah offers a good example of this:
god again commands jonah to travel to nineveh and prophesy to its inhabitants . 
the book of jonah is a book of the nevi’im  -lrb-  “prophets”  -rrb-  in the hebrew bible . 
the debate over the credibility of the miracle of jonah is not simply a modern one . 
the earliest christian interpretations of jonah are found in the gospel of matthew and the gospel of luke . 
the relationship between jonah and his fellow jews is ambivalent ,  and complicated by the gloss's tendency to read jonah as an allegorical prefiguration of jesus christ . 
while the book is relatively short ,  it includes lament  -lrb-  1.8–16; 7.8–10 -rrb- ,  theophany  -lrb-  1.3–4 -rrb- ,  hymnic prayer of petition and confidence  -lrb-  7.14–20 -rrb- ,  and the `` covenant lawsuit ''  -lrb-  6.1–8 -rrb- ,  a distinct genre in which yahweh  -lrb-  god  -rrb-  sues israel for breach of contract of the sinai covenant . 
according to some ,  nahum prophesied in the beginning of the reign of ahaz  -lrb-  740s bc  -rrb-  . 
it is attributed to the prophet nahum ,  and was probably written in jerusalem in the 7th century bc . 
his writings were likely written in about 615 bc ,  before the downfall of assyria . 
the book of nahum is the seventh book of the 12 minor prophets of the hebrew bible . 
the book of haggai is named after its presumed author ,  the prophet haggai . 
the book of haggai is a book of the hebrew bible or tanakh ,  and has its place as the third-to-last of the minor prophets . 
there are very few historical details in the book of malachi . 
some scholars note affinities between zechariah 9–14 and the book of malachi . 
in 1:2, malachi has the people of israel question god's love for them . 
in 2:10, malachi addresses the issue of divorce . 
the book of malachi draws upon various themes found in other books of the bible . 
malachi also criticizes his audience for questioning god's justice . 
in contrast to the book of ezra ,  malachi urges each to remain steadfast to the wife of his youth . 
little is known of the biography of the author of the book of malachi ,  although it has been suggested that he may have been levitical . 
primarily because of its messianic promise ,  the book of malachi is frequently referred to in the christian new testament . 
zechariah is specific about dating his writing  -lrb-  520–518 bc  -rrb-  . 
zechariah 1–8, sometimes referred to as first zechariah ,  was written in the 6th century bc . 
there are some scholars who go even further and divide second zechariah into second zechariah  -lrb-  9–11 -rrb- and third zechariah  -lrb-  12–14 -rrb- since each begins with a heading oracle . 
the name `` zechariah '' means `` god remembered . `` 
all that is known of zephaniah comes from the text . 
zephaniah means `` yahweh has hidden/protected , ``  or `` yahweh hides '' . 
the book of habakkuk is the eighth book of the 12 minor prophets of the bible . 
habakkuk openly questions the wisdom of god . 
the book of habakkuk is accepted as canonical by adherents of the jewish and christian faiths . 
habakkuk identifies himself as a prophet in the opening verse . 
modern christian hymns have been inspired by the words of the prophet habakkuk . 
some feel that this is echoed in habakkuk 3:19b ,  and that habakkuk may have been a levite and singer in the temple . 
of the three chapters in the book ,  the first two are a dialog between yahweh and the prophet . 
the book of habakkuk is a book of the tanakh  -lrb-  the old testament  -rrb-  and stands eighth in a section known as the 12 minor prophets in the masoretic and greek texts . 
the book consists of three chapters and the book is neatly divided into three different genres:
a good example is the sony playstation 2  -lrb-  ps2 -rrb- which was backward compatible with games for its predecessor playstation  -lrb-  ps1 -rrb- . 
modifying a system in a way that does not allow backward compatibility is sometimes called `` breaking '' backward compatibility . 
a simple example of both backward and forward compatibility is the introduction of fm radio in stereo . 
a good example is the sony playstation 3, as the first ps3 iteration was expensive to manufacture in part due to including the emotion engine from the preceding ps2 in order to run ps2 games ,  since the ps3 architecture was completely different from the ps2.
the genetic information transferred is often beneficial to the recipient . 
bacterial conjugation is the transfer of genetic material between bacterial cells by direct cell-to-cell contact or by a bridge-like connection between two cells . 
galjoen is the national fish of south africa . 
galjoen is the national fish of south africa . 
due to their abundance in the shores off south africa ,  galjoen is common in south african cuisine . 
of the 15 species of crane ,  the blue crane has the most restricted distribution of all . 
the blue crane  -lrb-  `` grus paradisea ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the stanley crane and the paradise crane ,  is the national bird of south africa . 
the blue crane is a tall ,  ground-dwelling bird ,  but is fairly small by the standards of the crane family . 
the blue crane is partially social ,  less so during the breeding season . 
the south african government has stepped up legal protection for the blue crane . 
the blue crane is migratory ,  primarily altitudinal ,  but details are little known . 
when karmal took power ,  he began expanding the support base of the pdpa . 
not long after ,  in 1996, karmal died from liver cancer . 
karmal was born in kamari ,  a village close to kabul . 
karmal was succeeded as revolutionary council chairman by haji mohammad chamkani ,  who was not a member of the pdpa . 
only one khalqi ,  saleh mohammad zeary ,  was a member of the pdpa secretariat during karmal's rule . 
imprisoned from 1953 to 1956, karmal befriended fellow inmate mir akbar khyber ,  who introduced karmal to marxism . 
karmal ,  when taking power in 1979, accused amin of ordering the assassination of khyber . 
karmal was promoted to chairman of the revolutionary council and chairman of the council of ministers on 27 december 1979.
unfortunately for karmal ,  his policies did not lead to a notable increase in support for his regime ,  and it did not help karmal that most afghans saw the soviet intervention as an invasion . 
for unknown reasons ,  karmal was invited back to kabul by najibullah ,  and `` for equally obscure reasons karmal accepted '' ,  returning on june 20, 1991.
with karmal's ascension to power ,  parchamites began to `` settle old scores '' . 
karmal still had support within the party ,  and used his base to curb najibullah's powers . 
these policy failures ,  and the stalemate that ensued after the soviet intervention ,  led the soviet leadership to become highly critical of karmal's leadership . 
to further confuse the matter ,  karmal spoke dari  -lrb-  persian  -rrb-  and not pashto . 
that evening yuri andropov ,  the chairman of the kgb ,  congratulated karmal on his rise to the chairmanship of the presidium of the revolutionary council ,  some time before karmal received an official appointment . 
other influences include buddhist tantras and the buddha nature texts . 
the japanese zen buddhist d . t . 
there are various tibetan buddhist schools or monastic orders . 
this philosophical tradition is influential in tibetan buddhist thought . 
in a buddhist view all philosophies are considered non-essential views  -lrb-  ditthis  -rrb-  and not to be clung to . 
a recurrent theme in buddhist philosophy has been the reification of concepts ,  and the subsequent return to the buddhist middle way . 
after the buddha's death ,  some buddhists such as dharmakirti went on to use the sayings of the buddha as sound evidence equal to perception and inference . 
the american theravada buddhist monk thanissaro bhikkhu has critiqued 'buddhist romanticism' in his writings . 
by implication ,  reasoning and argument shouldn't be disparaged by buddhists . 
particular points of buddhist philosophy have often been the subject of disputes between different schools of buddhism . 
vasubandhu also attacked the realist theories of buddhist atomism and the abhidharma theory of svabhava . 
in nichiren buddhism ,  the work of daisaku ikeda has also been popular . 
in tibet ,  philosophers such as sakya pandita  -lrb-  1182-28 – 1251 -rrb- ,  longchenpa  -lrb-  1308–1364 -rrb- and tsongkhapa  -lrb-  1357–1419 -rrb- continued the tradition of buddhist tantric philosophy in tibetan . 
in korea ,  this school was known as hwaeom and is represented in the work of wonhyo  -lrb-  617–686 -rrb- ,  who also wrote about the idea of essence-function ,  a central theme in korean buddhist thought . 
in this sutta  -lrb-  as well as in the soattā sutta  -rrb-  the buddha outlines six wrong views about self:
the buddha defined his teaching as `` the middle way '' . 
buddhist philosophy refers to the philosophical investigations and systems of inquiry that developed among various buddhist schools in india following the death of the buddha and later spread throughout asia . 
one major philosophical view which was rejected by all the schools mentioned above was the view held by the pudgalavadin or 'personalist' schools . 
the main indian buddhist philosophical schools practiced a form of analysis termed `` abhidharma '' which sought to systematize the teachings of the early buddhist discourses  -lrb-  sutras  -rrb-  . 
the buddha argued that there is no permanent self ,  no 'essence of a person' or 'what makes me ,  me' . 
furthermore ,  the buddha's standard for personal verification was a pragmatic and salvific one ,  for the buddha a belief counts as truth only if it leads to successful buddhist practice  -lrb-  and hence ,  to the destruction of craving  -rrb-  . 
for the indian buddhist philosophers ,  the teachings of the buddha were not meant to be taken on faith alone ,  but to be confirmed by logical analysis  -lrb-  `` pramana ''  -rrb-  of the world . 
another western buddhist philosophical trend has been the project to secularize buddhism ,  as seen in the works of stephen batchelor . 
it is also compared to the ocean ,  and phenomena to waves . 
huayan philosophy also had an influence on chan . 
the sarvāstivāda was one of the major buddhist philosophical schools in india ,  and they were so named because of their belief that dharmas exist in all three times: past ,  present and future . 
other buddhist schools such as the prajñaptivadins  -lrb-  'nominalists'  -rrb-  ,  the purvasailas and the vainasikas refused to accept the concept of svabhava . 
the buddha stated that thinking about these imponderable  -lrb-  acinteyya  -rrb-  issues led to `` a thicket of views ,  a wilderness of views ,  a contortion of views ,  a writhing of views ,  a fetter of views ''  -lrb-  aggi-vacchagotta sutta  -rrb-  . 
by passion the world is bound ,  by passion too it is released ,  but by heretical buddhists this practice of reversals is not known . 
the buddha also stressed that experience is the only criterion for verification of the truth in this passage from the majjhima nikaya  -lrb-  mn . i . 265 -rrb-:
it is the work of a buddha to let out the text so that beings can be liberated from suffering . 
the 14th dalai lama was also influenced by this eclectic approach . 
an alternative approach to the comparison of buddhist thought with western philosophy is to use the concept of the middle way in buddhism as a critical tool for the assessment of western philosophies . 
edward conze splits the development of indian buddhist philosophy into three phases . 
 ''what the buddhist has in mind is that on one occasion one part of the person might perform the executive function ,  on another occasion another part might do so . 
the buddhist traditions present a multitude of buddhist paths to liberation ,  and buddhist thinkers in india and subsequently in east asia have covered topics as varied as phenomenology ,  ethics ,  ontology ,  epistemology ,  logic and philosophy of time in their analysis of these paths . 
the kagyu and nyingma schools also tend to follow sakya anti-realism  -lrb-  with some differences  -rrb-  . 
dignāga  -lrb-  c .  480–540 -rrb- and dharmakīrti  -lrb-  c .  6-7th century  -rrb-  were buddhist philosophers who developed a system of epistemology  -lrb-  pramāṇa  -rrb-  and logic in their debates with the brahminical philosophers in order to defend buddhist doctrine . 
in japan ,  huayan is known as kegon and one of its major proponents was myōe ,  who also introduced tantric practices . 
influenced by the work of dignaga ,  bhāvaviveka's madhyamika philosophy makes use of buddhist epistemology . 
guifeng zongmi ,  who was also a patriarch of huayan buddhism ,  wrote extensively on the philosophy of chan and on the avatamsaka sutra . 
there are various reasons the buddha gave as to why someone should be ethical . 
from about the 1st century bce ,  a new textual tradition began to arise in indian buddhist thought called mahāyāna  -lrb-  great vehicle  -rrb-  ,  which would slowly come to dominate indian buddhist philosophy . 
furthermore ,  the buddha argues that the world can be observed to be a cause of suffering  -lrb-  brahman was held to be ultimately blissful  -rrb-  and that since we cannot control the world as we wish ,  the world cannot be the self . 
having studied under teachers from all major tibetan buddhist schools ,  his philosophical position tends to be that the different perspectives on emptiness are complementary:
this argument can be put in this way:
the 14th century saw increasing interest in the buddha nature texts and doctrines . 
tantric buddhism arrived in china in the 7th century ,  during the tang dynasty . 
sakya pandita  -lrb-  1182–1251 -rrb- was a 13th-century head of the sakya school and ruler of tibet . 
from the time he was 10 years old ,  thornton has been in bands . 
he also has another brother john david thornton . 
in 2004, thornton played david crockett in `` the alamo '' . 
in 2014, thornton starred as sociopathic hitman lorne malvo in the fx miniseries `` fargo '' ,  based on the 1996 film of the same name ,  for which he won a golden globe for best actor in a mini-series . 
in 2017, thornton starred in the music video `` stand down '' by kario salem  -lrb-  musically known as k . o .   -rrb-  . 
thornton's first screen role was in 1980's `` south of reno '' ,  where he played a small role as a counter man in a restaurant . 
thornton had his first break when he co-wrote and starred in the 1992 thriller `` one false move '' ,  and received international attention after writing ,  directing ,  and starring in the independent drama film `` sling blade ''  -lrb-  1996 -rrb- ,  for which he won an academy award for best adapted screenplay and was nominated for an academy award for best actor . 
billy bob thornton  -lrb-  born august 4, 1955 -rrb- is an american actor ,  filmmaker ,  singer ,  songwriter ,  and musician . 
the first season is episodic . 
 ''the big o '' premiered on 13 october 1999 on wowow . 
 ''the big o '' was conceived as a media franchise . 
in april 2001, `` the big o '' premiered on cartoon network's toonami lineup . 
 ''the big o '' is set in the fictional city-state of  . 
 ''the big o '' was scored by `` geidai '' alumnus toshihiko sahashi . 
in anticipation to the broadcast of the second season ,  a new manga series was published . 
the second season was scripted by chiaki konaka with input from the american producers . 
when the need arises ,  roger calls upon big o ,  a giant relic from the city's past . 
most ,  but not all ,  bioses load the drive number  -lrb-  as used by int 13h  -rrb-  of the boot drive into cpu register dl before jumping to the first byte of the loaded boot sector . 
as such ,  option roms may also influence or supplant the boot process defined by the motherboard bios rom . 
in most modern bioses ,  the boot priority order of all potentially bootable devices can be freely configured by the user through the bios configuration utility . 
these macs also cannot boot from cd-rom or usb flash drives . 
if the sector is read successfully ,  some bioses will also check for the boot sector signature 0x55 0xaa in the last two bytes of the sector  -lrb-  which is 512 bytes long  -rrb-  ,  before accepting a boot sector and considering the device bootable . 
 -lrb-  a cp/m machine usually has only a simple boot loader in its rom .   -rrb- 
before the bios boot specification was promulgated ,  this was the only way for expansion roms to implement boot capability for devices not supported for booting by the native bios of the motherboard . 
this is the process that is known as `` booting ''  -lrb-  sometimes informally called `` booting up ''  -rrb-  ,  which is short for `` bootstrapping '' . 
anyone who could switch on the computer could boot it . 
since few programs used basic in rom ,  clone pc makers left it out; then a computer that failed to boot from a disk would display `` no rom basic '' and halt  -lrb-  in response to int 18h  -rrb-  . 
in modern personal computers running modern operating systems the bios is used only during booting and initial loading of system software . 
historically the bios would try to boot from a floppy drive first and a hard disk second . 
however ,  the idea of including an operating system along with bios in the rom of a pc is not new; in the 1980s ,  microsoft offered a rom option for ms-dos ,  and it was included in the roms of some pc clones such as the tandy 1000 hx . 
bios versions are upgraded to take advantage of newer versions of hardware and to correct bugs in previous revisions of bioses . 
a non-disk device such as a network adapter attempts booting by a procedure that is defined by its option rom or the equivalent integrated into the motherboard bios rom . 
once  -lrb-  and if  -rrb-  an option rom returns ,  the bios continues searching for more option roms ,  calling each as it is found ,  until the entire option rom area in the memory space has been scanned . 
early ibm pcs had a little-known routine in the post that would attempt to download a maintenance program into ram through the keyboard port before performing any other elements of the boot process ,  such as before scanning for option roms or executing a boot loader . 
the platform logic maps this address into the system rom ,  mirroring address 000ffff0h . 
option roms normally reside on adapter cards . 
also ,  if an expansion rom wishes to change the way the system boots unilaterally ,  it can simply hook int 19h or other interrupts normally called from interrupt 19h ,  such as int 13h ,  the bios disk service ,  to intercept the bios boot process . 
all more advanced boot priority sequences evolved as incremental improvements on this basic system . 
after the option rom scan is completed and all detected rom modules with valid checksums have been called ,  or immediately after post in a bios version that does not scan for option roms ,  the bios calls int 19h to start boot processing . 
all memory at and above address codice_6 can be used by the boot program; it may even overwrite itself . 
the user can control the boot process ,  to cause one medium to be booted instead of another when two or more bootable media are present ,  by taking advantage of the boot priority implemented by the bios . 
bios  -lrb-   ; an acronym for basic input/output system and also known as the system bios ,  rom bios or pc bios  -rrb-  is non-volatile firmware used to perform hardware initialization during the booting process  -lrb-  power-on startup  -rrb-  ,  and to provide runtime services for operating systems and programs . 
a boot menu such as the textual menu of windows ,  which allows users to choose an operating system to boot ,  to boot into the safe mode ,  or to use the last known good configuration ,  is displayed through bios and receives keyboard input through bios . 
the bios in modern pcs initializes and tests the system hardware components ,  and loads a boot loader from a mass memory device which then initializes an operating system . 
for example ,  most computers have a hard disk that is bootable ,  but usually there is a removable-media drive that has higher boot priority ,  so the user can cause a removable disk to be booted ,  simply by inserting it ,  without removing the hard disk drive or altering its contents to make it unbootable . 
modern systems are not vulnerable to cih because of a variety of chipsets being used which are incompatible with the intel i430tx chipset ,  and also other flash rom ic types . 
an option rom should normally return to the bios after completing its initialization process . 
this state was first predicted ,  generally ,  in 1924–1925 by satyendra nath bose and albert einstein . 
satyendra nath bose first sent a paper to einstein on the quantum statistics of light quanta  -lrb-  now called photons  -rrb-  ,  in which he derived planck's quantum radiation law without any reference to classical physics . 
during 1971 and 1972 b evolved into `` new b ''  -lrb-  nb  -rrb-  and then c . 
this is historically impossible as there was no pdp-11 at the time that b was developed . 
b was derived from bcpl ,  and its name may be a contraction of bcpl . 
b is almost extinct ,  having been superseded by the c language . 
the beer–lambert law ,  also known as beer's law ,  the lambert–beer law ,  or the beer–lambert–bouguer law relates the attenuation of light to the properties of the material through which the light is travelling . 
the law was discovered by pierre bouguer before 1729.
 ''the beach boys love you '' is sometimes considered the group's `` punk album '' . 
brian wilson's artistic control over the beach boys' records was unprecedented for the time . 
in 2016, love and wilson published memoirs ,  ``  '' and `` i am brian wilson '' ,  respectively . 
love filed a defamation lawsuit against brian due to how he was presented in brian's 1992 memoir ``  '' . 
the beach boys are an american rock band formed in hawthorne ,  california ,  in 1961.
in december 2018, love described his new holiday album ,  `` reason for the season , ``  as a `` message to brian '' and admitted that he `` would love nothing more than to get together with brian and do some music . `` 
to appease capitol's demands for a beach boys lp for the 1965 christmas season ,  brian conceived `` beach boys' party ! 
 ''rolling stone '' named the beach boys the `` band of the year '' for 1974.
the beach boys began as an early garage band led by brian and managed by the wilsons' father murry . 
brian wrote his last surf song in april 1964.
at the end of january 1976, the beach boys returned to the studio with an apprehensive brian producing once again . 
the beach boys immediately recorded a new album ,  `` wild honey '' ,  which was an excursion into soul music . 
between 1983 and 1986, landy charged brian about $430,000 annually . 
the beach boys were the first group to make an entire album that departed from the usual small-ensemble electric rock band format . 
in 2004, wilson recorded and released his solo album `` brian wilson presents smile '' ,  a reinterpretation of the unfinished `` smile '' project . 
carl took over as the band's musical leader until the late 1970s . 
the album became the first beach boys lp that failed to chart in the us and uk . 
the beach boys are one of the most critically acclaimed ,  commercially successful ,  and influential bands of all time . 
the beach boys are one of the most critically acclaimed ,  commercially successful ,  and influential bands of all time . 
released in march 1965, `` the beach boys today ! `` 
carl took over as the band's musical director onstage . 
united by a shared love of the group's music ,  they named pet sounds studio in honor of the band . 
brian is quoted during the `` smile '' era: `` i'm very religious . 
between 1965 and 1967, the beach boys developed a musical and lyrical sophistication that contrasted their work from before and after . 
capitol continued to bill the beach boys as `` america's top surfin' group ! `` 
in 2012, the album was voted 271 on `` rolling stone '' magazine's list of the `` 500 greatest albums of all time '' . 
the beach boys were still under pressure and a contractual obligation to record and present an album to capitol . 
initially ,  rock music journalists valued the beach boys' early records over their experimental work . 
the beach boys completed their first album ,  `` surfin' safari '' ,  with production credited to nick venet . 
carl said that `` smile '' was chosen as an album title because of its connection to the group's spiritual beliefs . 
but i couldn't get brian's management team on board  -lrb-  brian himself doesn't make those kinds of decisions  -rrb-  . `` 
reprise's contract stipulated brian's proactive involvement with the band in all albums by the time the beach boys tenure ended with capitol in 1969, they had sold 65 million records worldwide ,  closing the decade as the most commercially successful american group in popular music . 
in 2011, brian maintained the spirituality was important to his music ,  and that he did not follow any particular religion . 
in the 1990s ,  the beach boys experienced a resurgence of popularity with the alternative rock generation . 
from late 1976 to early 1977, brian spent his time making sporadic public appearances and producing the band's next album `` the beach boys love you '' ,  a collection of 14 songs mostly written ,  arranged and produced alone . 
in june 1964, brian recorded the bulk of `` the beach boys' christmas album '' with a forty-one-piece studio orchestra in collaboration with four freshmen arranger dick reynolds . 
their last album for reprise ,  `` m . i . u . 
when asked if brian was `` still the producer of `` smiley smile '' '' ,  carl answered ,  `` most definitely . `` 
afterward ,  the group discussed finishing the album `` smile '' ,  but carl rejected the idea ,  fearing that it would cause brian another nervous breakdown . 
in late september ,  news outlets began reporting that love had dismissed wilson from the beach boys . 
in the 1970s ,  the beach boys served a `` totemic influence '' on punk rock that later gave way to indie rock . 
mike love denied landy's accusation that he and the band were keeping brian from participating with the group ,  and later wrote that landy's `` goal  .  .  .  was to destroy us  .  .  .  and become the sole custodian of brian's career and legacy . `` 
in april 2015, when asked if he was interested in making music with love again ,  wilson replied: `` i don't think so ,  no , ``  later adding in july that he `` doesn't talk to the beach boys or mike love . `` 
brian's bandmates resented the notion that he was the sole creative force in the group . 
after `` love you '' was released ,  brian assembled `` adult/child '' ,  an unreleased effort largely consisting of songs written by brian from 1976 and 1977 with select big band arrangements by dick reynolds . 
throughout the summer of 1966, brian concentrated on finishing the group's next single ,  `` good vibrations '' . 
in 1982, the bbc produced `` the tale of beatrix potter '' . 
potter was also a canny businesswoman . 
beatrix potter's parents did not discourage higher education . 
potter's work as a scientific illustrator and her work in mycology is highlighted in several chapters in linda lear ,  `` beatrix potter: a life in nature '' ,  2007; `` beatrix potter: the extraordinary life of a victorian genius '' . 
potter is also featured in susan wittig albert's series of light mysteries called the cottage tales of beatrix potter . 
potter's family on both sides were from the manchester area . 
the first of the eight-book series is `` tale of hill top farm ''  -lrb-  2004 -rrb- ,  which deals with potter's life in the lake district and the village of near sawrey between 1905 and 1913.
potter left almost all the original illustrations for her books to the national trust . 
in all ,  potter wrote thirty books; the best known being her twenty-three children's tales . 
beatrix potter was interested in every branch of natural science save astronomy . 
there are many interpretations of potter's literary work ,  the sources of her art ,  and her life and times . 
following this ,  potter began writing and illustrating children's books full-time . 
in 1905, potter and norman warne became unofficially engaged . 
in 1992, potter's famous children's book `` the tale of benjamin bunny '' was featured in the film `` lorenzo's oil '' . 
potter's country life and her farming has also been widely discussed in the work of susan denyer and by other authors in the publications of the national trust . 
in 2006, chris noonan directed `` miss potter '' ,  a biographical film of potter's life focusing on her early career and romance with her editor norman warne . 
rupert potter died in 1914 and ,  with the outbreak of world war i ,  potter ,  now a wealthy woman ,  persuaded her mother to move to the lake district and found a property for her to rent in sawrey . 
potter was pleased by this success and determined to publish her own illustrated stories . 
potter and warne may have hoped that hill top farm would be their holiday home ,  but after warne's death ,  potter went ahead with its purchase as she had always wanted to own that farm ,  and live in `` that charming village '' . 
the reform act was the climax of whiggism ,  but it also brought about the whigs' demise . 
after the third reform act ,  fewer whigs were selected as candidates . 
after decades in opposition ,  the whigs returned to power under grey in 1830 and carried the first reform act in 1832.
among the consequences of the third reform act  -lrb-  1884 -rrb- was the giving of the vote to many catholics in ireland . 
regarding ireland ,  the major liberal achievements were land reform ,  where he ended centuries of landlord oppression ,  and the disestablishment of the  -lrb-  anglican  -rrb-  church of ireland through the irish church act 1869.
there was a final weak gladstone ministry in 1892, but it also was dependent on irish support and failed to get irish home rule through the house of lords . 
a major long-term consequence of the third reform act was the rise of lib-lab candidates ,  in the absence of any committed labour party . 
a broad range of interventionist reforms were introduced by the 1892–1895 liberal government . 
boen has two shareholders: the bank of england ,  and the secretary of the bank of england .  . 
the bank of england is the central bank of the united kingdom and the model on which most modern central banks have been based . 
until 2016, the bank provided personal banking services as a privilege for employees . 
independent central banks that adopt an inflation target are known as friedmanite central banks . 
as a regulator and central bank ,  the bank of england has not offered consumer banking services for many years ,  but it still does manage some public-facing services such as exchanging superseded bank notes . 
during the governorship of montagu norman ,  from 1920 to 1944, the bank made deliberate efforts to move away from commercial banking and become a central bank . 
the last private bank in england to issue its own notes was thomas fox's fox ,  fowler and company bank in wellington ,  which rapidly expanded ,  until it merged with lloyds bank in 1927.
mark carney assumed the post of governor of the bank of england on 1 july 2013.
the road junction outside is known as bank junction . 
the bank acted as lender of last resort for the first time in the panic of 1866.
these included other types of cast phenolic resins similar to catalin ,  and urea-formaldehyde resins ,  which could be made in brighter colors than polyoxy­benzyl­methylene­glycol­anhydride . 
phenolic resins have been commonly used in ablative heat shields . 
the creation of marbled phenolic resins may also be attributable to the catalin company . 
another market for bakelite resin was the creation of phenolic sheet materials . 
he also made overseas connections to produce materials in other countries . 
the `` retro '' appeal of old bakelite products has made them collectible . 
baekeland filed a substantial number of patents in the area . 
baekeland then began experimenting on strengthening wood by impregnating it with a synthetic resin ,  rather than coating it . 
by 1912, it was being used to make billiard balls ,  since its elasticity and the sound it made were similar to ivory . 
the result is a hard plastic material . 
it was developed by the belgian-american chemist leo baekeland in yonkers ,  new york ,  in 1907.
phenolic resin products may swell slightly under conditions of extreme humidity or perpetual dampness . 
the united states patent and trademark office granted baekeland a patent for a `` method of making insoluble products of phenol and formaldehyde '' on december 7, 1909.
bakelite  -lrb-   ; sometimes spelled baekelite  -rrb-  or polyoxybenzylmethylenglycolanhydride was the first plastic made from synthetic components . 
some bean types include:
dry beans come from both old world varieties of broad beans  -lrb-  fava beans  -rrb-  and new world varieties  -lrb-  kidney ,  black ,  cranberry ,  pinto ,  navy/haricot  -rrb-  . 
beans were an important source of protein throughout old and new world history ,  and still are today . 
in more recent times ,  the so-called `` bush bean '' has been developed which does not require support and has all its pods develop simultaneously  -lrb-  as opposed to pole beans which develop gradually  -rrb-  . 
the primary function of the breasts ,  as mammary glands ,  is the nourishing of an infant with breast milk . 
at menopause ,  breast atrophy occurs . 
plastic surgery can be performed to augment or reduce the size of breasts ,  or reconstruct the breast in cases of deformative disease ,  such as breast cancer . 
by mid-pregnancy ,  the breast is physiologically capable of lactation and some women can express colostrum ,  a form of breast milk . 
in cases where a woman's breasts are severely asymmetrical ,  surgery can be performed to either enlarge the smaller breast ,  reduce the size of the larger breast ,  or both . 
many female deities representing love and fertility were associated with breasts and breast milk . 
islam forbids women from exposing their breasts in public . 
during thelarche ,  the developing breasts are sometimes of unequal size ,  and usually the left breast is slightly larger . 
breasts ,  especially the nipples ,  are an erogenous zone . 
more obvious and persistent asymmetry in breast size occurs in up to 25% of women . 
the dimensions and weight of the breast vary widely among women . 
the english word `` breast '' derives from the old english word `` brēost ''  -lrb-  breast ,  bosom  -rrb-  from proto-germanic `` breustam ''  -lrb-  breast  -rrb-  ,  from the proto-indo-european base bhreus–  -lrb-  to swell ,  to sprout  -rrb-  . 
mammoplasia  -lrb-  breast enlargement  -rrb-  in girls begins at puberty ,  unlike all other primates in which breasts enlarge only during lactation . 
both females and males develop breasts from the same embryological tissues . 
in some cultures ,  breasts play a role in human sexual activity . 
the breast is susceptible to numerous benign and malignant conditions . 
the breast is an apocrine gland that produces the milk used to feed an infant . 
