the president of the palestinian authority is a member of fatah . 
other militant groups associated with fatah include:
fatah nominated mahmoud abbas in the palestinian presidential election of 2005.
fatah became the dominant force in palestinian politics after the six-day war in 1967.
fatah joined the palestine liberation organization  -lrb-  plo  -rrb-  in 1967.
fatah activists from the palestinian diaspora were also represented and included samir rifai ,  fatah's secretary in syria ,  and khaled abu usba . 
in august 2009, at fatah's sixth general conference in bethlehem ,  fatah delegates drew up a new `` internal charter '' . 
the idf achieved this goal ,  and fatah withdrew to the north into beirut . 
fatah has maintained a number of militant groups since its founding . 
fatah is `` widely seen as being in desperate need of reform , ``  as `` the pa's performance has been a story of corruption and incompetenceand fatah has been tainted . `` 
however ,  the hamas legislative victory led to a conflict between fatah and hamas ,  with fatah retaining control of the palestinian national authority in the west bank through its president . 
on 9 august 2009, new members of the central committee of fatah and the revolutionary council were chosen . 
farouk kaddoumi is the current fatah chairman ,  elected to the post soon after arafat's death in 2004.
fatah's two most important decision-making bodies are the central committee and revolutionary council . 
fatah was appealing to palestinians who want a more hardline response to israel by reaffirming its option for `` armed resistance '' against israel . 
the total fao budget planned for 2016–2017 is usd 2.6 billion . 
fao's regular programme budget is funded by its members ,  through contributions set at the fao conference . 
this overall budget covers core technical work ,  cooperation and partnerships ,  leading to food and agriculture outcomes at 71 per cent; core functions at 11 per cent; the country office network – 5 per cent; capital and security expenditure – 2 per cent; administration – 6 per cent; and technical and cooperation program – 5 per cent . 
its functions were then transferred to the recently established fao . 
in 1951, fao's headquarters were moved from washington ,  dc ,  united states ,  to rome ,  italy . 
pierre-félix guattari  -lrb-  ; ; april 30, 1930 – august 29, 1992 -rrb- was a french psychotherapist ,  philosopher ,  semiologist ,  and activist . 
from 1955 to 1965, guattari edited and contributed to `` la voie communiste ''  -lrb-  `` communist way ''  -rrb-  ,  a trotskyist newspaper . 
in 1995, the posthumous release of guattari's `` chaosophy '' published essays and interviews concerning guattari's work as director of the experimental la borde clinic and his collaborations with deleuze . 
guattari was born in villeneuve-les-sablons ,  a working-class suburb of north-west paris ,  france . 
in the nicene creed it is translated by the english phrase `` and the son '':
in 2008, nist withdrew the fips 55-3 database . 
some of these included the use of key escrow systems . 
until then ,  previously issued fips place codes ,  renamed `` census code , ``  will continue to be used ,  with the census bureau assigning new codes as needed for their internal use during the transition . 
qasim ibn muhammad ibn abu bakr ,  hisham ibn urwah and muhammad al-baqir taught zayd ibn ali ,  jafar al-sadiq ,  abu hanifa ,  and malik ibn anas . 
along with qasim ibn muhammad ibn abu bakr ,  muhammad al-baqir ,  zayd ibn ali and over 70 other leading jurists and scholars . 
aisha then raised and taught his son qasim ibn muhammad ibn abu bakr who later taught his grandson jafar al-sadiq . 
al-shafi‘i was taught by malik ibn anas . 
muhammad al-bukhari travelled everywhere collecting hadith and his father ismail ibn ibrahim was a student of malik ibn anas . 
fiqh  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is islamic jurisprudence . 
and he was not one of the polytheists ''  -lrb-  qur'an 3:95 -rrb- . 
they also felt that muhammad's judgement was more impartial and better than their own . 
details about these issues can be found in the traditions of muhammad ,  so qur'an and sunnah are in most cases the basis for  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  . 
the first council of nicaea was the first ecumenical council of the church . 
this was the first general council in the history of the church summoned by emperor constantine i . 
this council is generally considered the beginning of the period of the first seven ecumenical councils in the history of christianity . 
this ecumenical council was the first effort to attain consensus in the church through an assembly representing all of christendom . 
the first council of nicaea  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was a council of christian bishops convened in the bithynian city of nicaea  -lrb-  now i̇znik ,  bursa province ,  turkey  -rrb-  by the roman emperor constantine i in ad 325.
this number 318 is preserved in the liturgies of the eastern orthodox church and the coptic orthodox church of alexandria . 
fox news  -lrb-  officially known as the fox news channel ,  commonly abbreviated to fnc  -rrb-  is an american pay television news channel owned by the fox news group ,  a division of fox . 
fox news also created the `` fox news alert '' ,  which interrupted its regular programming when a breaking news story occurred . 
napolitano was later suspended by fox news for making the claim . 
the fox news story fell apart within hours . 
surveys suggest fox news is widely perceived to be ideological . 
fox news employees have said that news reporting operates independently of its opinion and commentary programming ,  and have denied bias in news reporting ,  while former employees have said that fox ordered them to `` slant the news in favor of conservatives . `` 
tapper had in 2009, while a white house correspondent for abc news ,  come to the defense of fox news when obama criticized the network for not being a legitimate news organization . 
during the september 11, 2001 attacks ,  fox news was the first news organization to run a news ticker on the bottom of the screen to keep up with the flow of information that day . 
in 2006, the company also introduced fox news talk ,  a satellite radio station featuring programs syndicated by  -lrb-  and featuring  -rrb-  fox news personalities . 
between late-2005 and early-2006, fox news saw a brief decline in ratings . 
fox news channel began broadcasting in the 720p resolution format on may 1, 2008.
in september 2009, the obama administration engaged in a verbal conflict with fox news channel . 
according to the fact-checking website climate feedback ,  fox news is part of `` a network of unreliable outlets for climate news . `` 
with the growth of fnc ,  the company introduced a radio division ,  fox news radio ,  in 2003.
in 2004, robert greenwald's documentary film ``  '' argued fox news had a conservative bias and featured clips from fox news and internal memos from editorial vice president john moody directing fox news staff on how to report certain subjects . 
fox news is available on cable through french internet provider free on canal 352.
on june 29, 2018, fox news broadcast a segment by news anchor bret baier entitled `` whatever happened to the benghazi investigation ? `` 
fox news mobile is the portion of the fnc website dedicated to streaming news clips formatted for video-enabled mobile phones . 
several of trump's comments at the press conference mirrored those appearing earlier on fox news . 
fox news guest host jason chaffetz apologized to tapper for misrepresenting his statement . 
the fox news channel feed is available internationally via a number of providers ,  while `` fox extra '' segments provide alternate programming . 
a leaked memo from fox news vice president bill sammon to news staff at the height of the health care reform in the united states debate has been cited as an example of the pro-republican party bias of fox news . 
fox news is provided in 86 countries or overseas territories worldwide ,  with international broadcasts featuring fox extra segments during ad breaks . 
it found 36 percent believed fox news delivers news with neither a conservative or liberal bias ,  compared with 37 percent who said npr delivers news with no conservative or liberal bias and 32 percent who said the same of cnn . 
hannity was not sanctioned by fox news for this breach of journalistic ethics ,  with fox news releasing a statement that the channel was unaware of hannity's relationship to cohen and that it had `` spoken to sean and he continues to have our full support . `` 
licensing for the fox news archive is handled by itn source ,  the archiving division of itn . 
during the republican primaries ,  fox news was widely perceived as trying to prevent trump from clinching the nomination . 
local cable news channel sky news australia is wholly owned by news corp australia and is therefore fnc's de facto sister channel ,  although has formal partnerships with fnc competitor cnn as well as both abc news and cbs news . 
byers wrote ,  `` it showed that if fox news has a line when it comes to trump's presidency ,  it was not crossed on tuesday . `` 
in reporting the investigator's claims ,  the fox news report reignited right-wing conspiracy theories about the killing . 
fox had initially planned to launch a joint venture with canwest's global television network ,  tentatively named fox news canada ,  which would have featured a mixture of u . s .  and canadian news programming . 
a `` fivethirtyeight '' analysis of russia-related media coverage in cable news found most mentions of russia on fox news were spoken in close proximity to `` uranium '' and `` dossier '' . 
the game grew in popularity . 
for the developers ,  freeciv 1.0 was a successful proof of concept ,  but a rather boring game ,  so they went back to xpilot . 
a public server was installed on which games could be played around the clock; it retained the games and published a post-game analysis webpage with per-player statistics and an animated map replay . 
in practice ,  from around 2002, experienced players would form teams at the start of the game; a fork of freeciv included specific features for team play . 
lp 944-20 is a brown dwarf of spectral type m9 that has around 7% the mass of the sun . 
lacaille gave bayer designations to 27 stars now named alpha to omega fornacis ,  labelling two stars 3.5 degrees apart as gamma ,  three stars eta ,  two stars iota ,  two lambda and three chi . 
six star systems have been found to have exoplanets . 
nu fornacis is 370 ± 10 light-years distant from earth . 
borromini was one of several architects involved in the building of the church of sant’agnese in agone in rome . 
borromini devised the complex ground plan of the church from interlocking geometrical configurations ,  a typical borromini device for constructing plans . 
the chapel replaced a small oval chapel designs by his rival bernini and was a late work in borromini's career; he was appointed as architect in 1648 but it was not until 1660 that construction of the chapel began and although the main body of work was completed by 1665, some of the decoration was finished after his death . 
in 1634, borromini received his first major independent commission to design the church ,  cloister and monastic buildings of san carlo alle quattro fontane  -lrb-  also known as san carlino  -rrb-  . 
from 1640-1650, he worked on the design of the church of sant'ivo alla sapienza and its courtyard ,  near university of rome la sapienza palace . 
in the late sixteenth century ,  the congregation of the filippini  -lrb-  also known as the oratorians  -rrb-  rebuilt the church of santa maria in vallicella  -lrb-  known as the chiesa nuova -new church  -rrb-  in central rome . 
the foundations were laid and much of the lower level walls had been constructed when the rainaldis were dismissed due to criticisms of the design and borromini was appointed in their stead . 
the fbi was established in 1908 as the bureau of investigation ,  the boi or bi for short . 
at an fbi field office ,  a senior-level fbi officer concurrently serves as the representative of the director of national intelligence . 
flamsteed designations for stars are similar to bayer designations ,  except that they use numbers instead of greek and roman letters . 
flamsteed designations are often used instead of the bayer designation if the latter contains an extra attached number; for example ,  `` 55 cancri '' is more common than `` rho-1 cancri '' . 
they are named for john flamsteed who first used them while compiling his `` historia coelestis britannica '' . 
approximately 500 aircraft are in service as of 2014.
the swiss air force flies a total of 22 f-5e and four f-5f aircraft ,  down from a peak of 98 and 12 in 1981.
in october 1974, the brazilian air force  -lrb-  `` fab ''  -rrb-  ordered 36 f-5e and 6 f-5b aircraft from northrop for $72 million . 
this became the northrop philosophy in the development of the t-38 and f-5 lightweight trainer and fighter aircraft . `` 
in 1975, the royal malaysian air force received 14 f-5es and two f-5bs . 
as of september 2016, the mexican air force only has three f-5 tigers that are operational and combat-ready . 
the f-5e proved to be a successful combat aircraft for u . s .  allies ,  but had no combat service with the u . s .  air force  -lrb-  though the f-5a with modifications referred to as f-5c was flown by the u . s .  in vietnam  -rrb-  . 
in 1972, after all the aircraft were delivered ,  the f-86s ,  venoms ,  and vampires were finally scrapped . 
in 1970, northrop won the international fighter aircraft  -lrb-  ifa  -rrb-  competition to replace the f-5a ,  with better air-to-air performance against aircraft like the soviet mig-21.
a total of 214 f-5s were procured . 
iran aircraft manufacturing industrial company currently produces three aircraft ,  the azarakhsh ,  saegeh ,  and kowsar ,  derived from the f-5.
the philippine air force acquired 37 f-5a and f-5b from 1965 to 1998.
the republic of china air force  -lrb-  rocaf ,  taiwan's air force  -rrb-  received its first batch of seven f-5as and two f-5bs under the u . s .  military assistance program in 1965.
more were built under license overseas: 91 f-5es and -fs in switzerland ,  68 by korean air in south korea ,  and 308 in taiwan . 
it lost out on export sales to the f-16 in the 1980s . 
the first f-5e flew on 11 august 1972.
in addition ,  canadair built 240 first generation f-5s under license ,  casa in spain built 70 more aircraft . 
the royal thai air force  -lrb-  rtaf  -rrb-  had their f-5s undergo an extensive upgrade program ,  resulting in the aircraft re-designated as f-5t tigris . 
the royal norwegian air force received 108 freedom fighters: 16 rf-5a ,  78 f-5a and 14 f-5b . 
the only air combat actions rocaf f-5e/f pilots saw ,  were not over taiwan ,  but in north yemen . 
though the united states air force  -lrb-  usaf  -rrb-  had no need for a light fighter ,  it did procure approximately 1,200 northrop t-38 talon trainer aircraft ,  which were directly based on the f-5a . 
for the foreseeable future ,  the swiss air force will continue to fly its present f-5s . 
in a bid to modernize its air force ,  the royal jordanian air force put up seven f-5es for sale in 1994, these were later acquired by singapore . 
fresco  -lrb-  plural frescos or frescoes  -rrb-  is a technique of mural painting executed upon freshly laid ,  or wet lime plaster . 
the sigiriya frescoes are found in sigiriya in sri lanka . 
frescoes were also painted in ancient greece ,  but few of these works have survived . 
roman frescoes were done by the artist painting the artwork on the still damp plaster of the wall ,  so that the painting is part of the wall ,  actually colored plaster . 
 ''buon frescoes '' are difficult to create because of the deadline associated with the drying plaster . 
researchers have discovered the technique used in these frescos . 
a secco or fresco-secco painting is done on dry plaster  -lrb-  `` secco '' meaning `` dry '' in italian  -rrb-  . 
the most common form of `` fresco '' was egyptian wall paintings in tombs ,  usually using the `` a secco '' technique . 
a person who creates fresco is called a frescoist . 
 ''buon fresco '' pigment is mixed with room temperature water and is used on a thin layer of wet ,  fresh plaster ,  called the intonaco  -lrb-  after the italian word for plaster  -rrb-  . 
in a wall-sized fresco ,  there may be ten to twenty or even more `` giornate '' ,  or separate areas of plaster . 
in contrast ,  ancient egyptians painted many tombs and houses ,  but those wall paintings are not frescoes . 
in the ruins of pompeii ,  and others at herculaneum ,  were completed in `` buon fresco . `` 
the fire can be extinguished by any of the following:
fire can be extinguished by removing any one of the elements of the fire tetrahedron . 
there are numerous modern applications of fire . 
where fire prevention and fire protection have failed to prevent damage ,  fire insurance can mitigate the financial impact . 
the use of fire in warfare has a long history . 
fire fighting services are provided in most developed areas to extinguish or contain uncontrolled fires . 
model building codes require passive fire protection and active fire protection systems to minimize damage resulting from a fire . 
trained firefighters use fire apparatus ,  water supply resources such as water mains and fire hydrants or they might use a and b class foam depending on what is feeding the fire . 
every natural ecosystem has its own fire regime ,  and the organisms in those ecosystems are adapted to or dependent upon that fire regime . 
fire prevention is intended to reduce sources of ignition . 
because of this ,  the risk of fire in a spacecraft is small when it is coasting in inertial flight . this does not apply if oxygen is supplied to the fire by some process other than thermal convection . 
in contrast ,  fire is intensified by increasing the overall rate of combustion . 
in 1928 fide recognized bogoljubow as `` champion of fide '' after he won a match against max euwe . 
they organized the 2016 candidates tournament and the 2016 world chess championship ,  but have been slow with the fide grand prix 2016-17 and the 2017 world blitz and rapid championship . 
fide had a number of conflicts with the soviet chess federation . 
there are at present 185 member federations of fide . 
kasparov won the second match and became world champion . 
agon subsequently organized the four events in the fide grand prix 2014-15, the candidates tournament in 2014, and the world chess championship in 2014.
see interregnum of world chess champions for more details . 
fide's congresses in 1925 and 1926 expressed a desire to become involved in managing the world championship . 
kasparov and karpov won their matches and there were now two players claiming to be world champion . 
the events leading to garry kasparov's winning the world championship involved fide in two controversies . 
in the 1984 world championship match between karpov and kasparov the winner was to be the first to win six games . 
and fide also decided that ,  if kramnik did not win the 2007 championship tournament ,  he should play a championship match in 2008 against the winner—and this provision became applicable because viswanathan anand won the tournament and thus became world champion . 
the first tournament it organized was the london fide grand prix event in september 2012, followed by the london candidates tournament in march 2013, and the chennai world chess championship in november 2013.
the fide ethics commission ruled in september 2015 that ilyumzhinov did not violate the fide code of ethics . 
it is usually referred to as fide  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  its french acronym . 
but the split in the world-title had after-effects ,  as shown by fide's complicated regulations for the 2007–9 world championship cycle . 
fide oversees few other tournaments ,  although other top-level events ,  almost without exception ,  respect fide rules and regulations . 
the incident light is assumed to be a plane wave ,  which is sufficient to solve any problem since any incident light field can be decomposed into plane waves and polarizations . 
there are two sets of fresnel coefficients for two different linear polarization components of the incident wave . 
the s polarization refers to polarization of a wave's electric field `` normal '' to the plane of incidence  -lrb-  the z direction in the derivation below  -rrb- ; then the magnetic field is `` in '' the plane of incidence . 
ice dance blades are an inch shorter in the rear and have smaller toe picks . 
inadequate ice quality may affect skaters' performances . 
there is significant variation in the dimensions of ice rinks . 
the most visible difference in relation to ice hockey skates is that figure skates have a set of large ,  jagged teeth called `` toe picks '' on the front part of the blade . 
ice dancers' blades are about an inch shorter in the rear than those used by skaters in other disciplines ,  to accommodate the intricate footwork and close partnering in dance . 
fudge is a generic role-playing game system for use in freeform role-playing games . 
this again was changed when grey ghost press released their 1995 hardcopy version of the game ,  to `` free-form universal do-it-yourself gaming engine '' . 
 ''fudge '' has been nominated for an origins award for `` best role-playing game system '' for the `` deryni role-playing game '' . 
in 1999 `` pyramid '' magazine named `` fudge '' as one of `` the millennium's most underrated games '' . 
the same dice roll can be achieved with six-sided dice ,  treating a 1 or 2 as − ,  a 3-4 as   and a 5-6 as + . 
in 1930, copleston became a jesuit . 
copleston died on 3 february 1994 at st thomas' hospital in london ,  at the age of 86.
frederick charles copleston was born 10 april 1907 near taunton ,  somerset ,  england . 
copleston was offered memberships in the royal institute of philosophy and in the aristotelian society . 
a cash budget is also required . 
a budget may be long term or short term . 
the cash budget has the following six main sections:
financial risk management ,  an element of corporate finance ,  is the practice of creating and protecting economic value in a firm by using financial instruments to manage exposure to risk ,  particularly credit risk and market risk . 
long term budgets have a time horizon of 5–10 years giving a vision to the company; short term is an annual budget which is drawn to control and operate in that particular year . 
finance is a field that is concerned with the allocation  -lrb-  investment  -rrb-  of assets and liabilities over space and time ,  often under conditions of risk or uncertainty . 
personal finance may also involve paying for a loan ,  or debt obligations . 
in the banking sector worldwide ,  the basel accords are generally adopted by internationally active banks for tracking ,  reporting and exposing operational ,  credit and market risks . 
the cash budget is basically a detailed plan that shows all expected sources and uses of cash when it comes to spending it appropriately . 
public finance is primarily concerned with:
the film was first released on dvd in 2001.
the pinchcliffe grand prix  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a norwegian stop motion-animated feature film directed by ivo caprino . 
in 2000 a computer game based on the film was released . 
the film was made in 3.5 years by a team of approximately 5 people . 
kjell aukrust ,  ivo caprino ,  kjell syversen and remo caprino began at that point to write the script for what would later become `` the pinchcliffe grand prix '' . 
ibm's `` fortran ii '' appeared in 1958.
by 1960, versions of fortran were available for the ibm 709, 650, 1620, and 7090 computers . 
successive versions have added support for structured programming and processing of character-based data  -lrb-  fortran 77 -rrb- ,  array programming ,  modular programming and generic programming  -lrb-  fortran 90 -rrb- ,  high performance fortran  -lrb-  fortran 95 -rrb- ,  object-oriented programming  -lrb-  fortran 2003 -rrb- and concurrent programming  -lrb-  fortran 2008 -rrb- . 
the official language standards now refer to the language as `` fortran '' rather than all-caps `` fortran '' . 
the initial release of fortran for the ibm 704 contained 32 statements ,  including:
fortran's design was the basis for many other programming languages . 
early fortran compilers supported no recursion in subroutines . 
it became a standard in fortran 90 via the new keyword recursive . 
early versions of fortran provided by other vendors suffered from the same disadvantage . 
the names of earlier versions of the language through fortran 77 were conventionally spelled in all-capitals  -lrb-  fortran 77 was the last version in which the use of lowercase letters in keywords was strictly non-standard  -rrb-  . 
in 2013, fortaleza was the twelfth richest city in the country in gdp and second in the northeast ,  with 49 billion reais  -lrb-  us$21 billion  -rrb-  . 
fortaleza  -lrb-   ,  locally  ,  portuguese for `` fortress ''  -rrb-  is the state capital of ceará ,  located in northeastern brazil . 
in his book `` capitalism and freedom '' ,  american economist milton friedman argues that there are two types of freedom ,  namely political freedom and economic freedom . 
according to arendt ,  the concept of freedom became associated with the christian notion of freedom of the will ,  or inner freedom ,  around the 5th century ce and since then freedom as a form of political action has been neglected even though ,  as she says ,  freedom is `` the raison d'être of politics '' . 
in this sense ,  freedom may include freedom from poverty ,  starvation ,  treatable disease and oppression as well as freedom from force and coercion ,  from whomever they may issue . 
anarcho-socialists see negative and positive liberty as complementary concepts of freedom . 
according to political philosopher nikolas kompridis ,  the pursuit of freedom in the modern era can be broadly divided into two motivating ideals ,  namely freedom as autonomy or independence and freedom as the ability to cooperatively initiate a new beginning . 
hannah arendt traces freedom's conceptual origins to ancient greek politics . 
the etymology of `` foo '' is obscure . 
in this hello world code sample in c ,  `` foo '' and `` bar '' are used to illustrate string concatenation:
examples of banach spaces are formula_2-spaces for any real number formula_3  . 
general banach spaces are more complicated than hilbert spaces ,  and cannot be classified in such a simple manner as those . 
in banach spaces ,  a large part of the study involves the dual space: the space of all continuous linear maps from the space into its underlying field ,  so-called functionals . 
given also a measure formula_4 on set formula_5, then formula_6, sometimes also denoted formula_7 or formula_8, has as its vectors equivalence classes formula_9 of measurable functions whose absolute value's formula_10-th power has finite integral ,  that is ,  functions formula_11 for which one has
this is explained in the dual space article . 
in 1946 sinatra released `` oh ! 
in 1959, sinatra released `` come dance with me ! 
sinatra was raised roman catholic . 
sinatra was married to barbara marx from 1976 until his death . 
in 1957, sinatra released `` close to you '' ,  `` a swingin' affair ! `` 
in the 1950s ,  sinatra's career was facilitated by developments in technology . 
sinatra was known for his immaculate sense of style . 
 ''sinatra '' was written by abby mann and philip mastrosimone ,  and produced by sinatra's daughter ,  tina . 
in his first year with dorsey ,  sinatra recorded over forty songs . 
in 1962, sinatra released `` sinatra and strings '' ,  a set of standard ballads arranged by don costa ,  which became one of the most critically acclaimed works of sinatra's entire reprise period . 
sinatra's decline in popularity was evident at his concert appearances . 
sinatra has been portrayed on numerous occasions in film and on television . 
sinatra was married to hollywood actress ava gardner from 1951 to 1957.
sinatra did not serve in the military during world war ii . 
sinatra forged a highly successful career as a film actor . 
in 1973, sinatra came out of his short-lived retirement with a television special and album . 
sinatra received three honorary degrees during his lifetime . 
on june 6, 1988, sinatra made his last recordings with reprise for an album which was not released . 
sinatra's third album ,  `` christmas songs by sinatra '' ,  was originally released in 1948 as a 78 rpm album set ,  and a 10 '' lp record was released two years later . 
sinatra held differing political views throughout his life . 
sinatra attempted to pursue an acting career in hollywood in the early 1940s . 
in 1957, sinatra formed a three-year $3million contract with abc to launch `` the frank sinatra show '' ,  featuring himself and guests in 36 half hour shows . 
in crime ,  the fbi investigated sinatra and his alleged relationship with the mafia . 
santopietro notes that sinatra was a `` lifelong sympathizer with jewish causes '' . 
in 1978, sinatra filed a $1million lawsuit against a land developer for using his name in the `` frank sinatra drive center '' in west los angeles . 
barbara sinatra stated that he would `` snap at anyone for the slightest misdemeanor '' ,  while van heusen said that when sinatra got drunk it was `` best to disappear '' . 
in subsequent sessions in may and november 1953, sinatra and riddle developed and refined their musical collaboration ,  with sinatra providing specific guidance on the arrangements . 
sinatra started 1967 with a series of recording sessions with antônio carlos jobim . 
in october 1951, the second season of `` the frank sinatra show '' began on cbs television . 
sinatra typically performed there three times a year ,  and later acquired a share in the hotel . 
by may 1941, sinatra topped the male singer polls in `` billboard '' and `` downbeat '' magazines . 
in sinatra's native new jersey ,  hoboken's frank sinatra park ,  the hoboken post office ,  and a residence hall at montclair state university were named in his honor . 
in 1993, sinatra returned to capitol records and the recording studio for `` duets '' ,  which became his best-selling album . 
on one occasion ,  he gave sinatra anthony burgess's novel `` a clockwork orange ''  -lrb-  1962 -rrb- to read ,  with the idea of making a film ,  but sinatra thought it had no potential and did not understand a word . 
sinatra reportedly broke off engagements to lauren bacall in 1958 and juliet prowse in 1962.
in 1949, sinatra co-starred with gene kelly in the technicolor musical `` take me out to the ball game '' ,  a film set in 1908, in which sinatra and kelly play baseball players who are part-time vaudevillians . 
sinatra had three children ,  nancy  -lrb-  born 1940 -rrb- ,  frank jr .   -lrb-  1944–2016 -rrb- ,  and tina  -lrb-  born 1948 -rrb- with his first wife ,  nancy sinatra  -lrb-  née barbato; march 25, 1917 – july 13, 2018 -rrb- ,  to whom he was married from 1939 to 1951.
a musical tribute was aired on cbs television in december 2015 to mark sinatra's centenary . 
a dead adult hindu is cremated ,  while a dead child is typically buried . 
christian burials typically occur on consecrated ground . 
among hindus ,  the dead body is usually cremated within a day of death . 
this day ,  in some communities ,  also marks a day when the poor and needy are offered food in memory of the dead . 
this deliberate burial and reverence given to the dead has been interpreted as suggesting that neanderthals had religious beliefs ,  although the evidence is not unequivocal – while the dead were apparently buried deliberately ,  burrowing rodents could have introduced the flowers . 
a funeral is a ceremony connected with the burial ,  cremation ,  or interment of a corpse ,  or the burial  -lrb-  or equivalent  -rrb-  with the attendant observances . 
women's music  -lrb-  or womyn's music or wimmin's music  -rrb-  is the music by women ,  for women ,  and about women . 
the feminist movement produced feminist fiction ,  feminist non-fiction ,  and feminist poetry ,  which created new interest in women's writing . 
feminist activists have established a range of feminist businesses ,  including women's bookstores ,  feminist credit unions ,  feminist presses ,  feminist mail-order catalogs ,  and feminist restaurants . 
many jewish women have become leaders of feminist movements throughout their history . 
feminist jurisprudence is a branch of jurisprudence that examines the relationship between women and law . 
approaches in philosophy and psychoanalysis fuelled feminist film criticism ,  feminist independent film and feminist distribution . 
in britain ,  the women's movement was allied with the labour party . 
women were more likely to self-identify as being feminists than men in every country in the study except for poland ,  where 21% of men were and only 17% of women were likely to agree very much with the statement ,  and south korea ,  where there was no difference between men and women  -lrb-  7%  -rrb-  on this measure . 
islamic feminists advocate women's rights ,  gender equality ,  and social justice grounded within an islamic framework . 
feminist cinema ,  advocating or illustrating feminist perspectives ,  arose largely with the development of feminist film theory in the late '60s and early '70s . 
feminist views of pornography range from condemnation of pornography as a form of violence against women ,  to an embracing of some forms of pornography as a medium of feminist expression . 
for feminists ,  a woman's right to control her own sexuality is a key issue . 
feminist views on transgender people differ . 
feminist nonfiction has played an important role in voicing concerns about women's lived experiences . 
feminist theology is a movement that reconsiders the traditions ,  practices ,  scriptures ,  and theologies of religions from a feminist perspective . 
the civil rights movement has influenced and informed the feminist movement and vice versa . 
over the course of the 1970s ,  a large number of influential women accepted lesbian and bisexual women as part of feminism . 
according to 2015 poll ,  18 percent of americans consider themselves feminists ,  while 85 percent reported they believe in `` equality for women '' . 
in 1923 hoda shaarawi founded the egyptian feminist union ,  became its president and a symbol of the arab women's rights movement . 
the history of the modern western feminist movements is divided into three `` waves '' . 
projects such as psychology's feminist voices have emerged to catalogue the influence of feminist psychologists on the discipline . 
the buddhist feminist rita gross describes buddhist feminism as `` the radical practice of the co-humanity of women and men . `` 
lynn hankinson nelson notes that feminist empiricists find fundamental differences between the experiences of men and women . 
however ,  some activists proposed a new feminist movement ,  islamic feminism ,  which argues for women's equality within an islamic framework . 
although she supported equal rights for women ,  she opposed women fighting on the front and clashed with the anarcha-feminist mujeres libres . 
many overlapping feminist movements and ideologies have developed over the years . 
however ,  during the iranian revolution of 1979, many of the rights that women had gained from the women's movement were systematically abolished ,  such as the family protection law . 
much of the early period of feminist literary scholarship was given over to the rediscovery and reclamation of texts written by women . 
among women ,  some of the strongest support for feminism was found in sweden ,  where one in three  -lrb-  36%  -rrb-  agreed very much that they defined themselves as feminists . 
the iranian constitutional revolution in 1905 triggered the iranian women's movement ,  which aimed to achieve women's equality in education ,  marriage ,  careers ,  and legal rights . 
feminist theory ,  which emerged from feminist movements ,  aims to understand the nature of gender inequality by examining women's social roles and lived experience; it has developed theories in a variety of disciplines in order to respond to issues concerning gender . 
it addresses questions about the history of legal and social biases against women and about the enhancement of their legal rights . 
feminist legal scholars claim that this fails to acknowledge women's values or legal interests or the harms that they may anticipate or experience . 
changes in dress and acceptable physical activity have often been part of feminist movements . 
this is played out in the sexual objectification of women ,  with pornography and other forms of sexual entertainment creating the fantasy that all women exist solely for men's sexual pleasure ,  and that women are readily available and desiring to engage in sex at any time ,  with any man ,  on a man's terms . 
since the late nineteenth century some feminists have allied with socialism ,  whereas others have criticized socialist ideology for being insufficiently concerned about women's rights . 
these include the construction and operation of airports ,  air traffic management ,  the certification of personnel and aircraft ,  and the protection of u . s .  assets during the launch or re-entry of commercial space vehicles . 
napoleon conquered most of italy in the name of the french revolution in 1797–99.
in late 1790 the french army was in considerable disarray . 
the following day – 22 september 1792, the first morning of the new republic – was later retroactively adopted as the beginning of year one of the french republican calendar . 
this period also saw the rise of the political `` clubs '' in french politics . 
this stalemate ended in the summer of 1794 with dramatic french victories . 
by this time ,  necker had earned the enmity of many members of the french court for his overt manipulation of public opinion . 
the mobs soon had the support of some of the french guard ,  who were armed and trained soldiers . 
the modern era has unfolded in the shadow of the french revolution . 
in response to the threat of war of august 1791 from austria and prussia ,  leaders of the assembly saw such a war as a means to strengthen support for their revolutionary government ,  and the french people as well as the assembly thought that they would win a war against austria and prussia . 
a new french republican calendar was introduced to replace the christian gregorian calendar ,  renaming the year 1792 as year 1 of the republic . 
messages of support for the assembly poured in from paris and other french cities . 
the values and institutions of the revolution dominate french politics to this day . 
after the thermidorian reaction ,  an executive council known as the directory assumed control of the french state in 1795.
although the french revolution had a dramatic impact in numerous areas of europe ,  the french colonies felt a particular influence . 
britain and austria were the only major powers to remain at war with france . 
the causes of the french revolution are complex and are still debated among historians . 
meanwhile ,  france's external wars were going well ,  with victories over austrian and british troops in may and june 1794 opening up belgium for french conquest . 
that coup some historians consider the closing of the specifically republican phase of the french revolution . 
a group around robespierre – later indicated as 'montagnards' or 'jacobins' – pleaded against that war; this opposition between those groups would harden and embitter in the next 1 years . 
hanson notes ,  `` the guillotine stands as the principal symbol of the terror in the french revolution . `` 
on 24 june ,  the convention adopted the first republican constitution of france ,  variously referred to as the french constitution of 1793 or constitution of the year i . 
in the summer of 1792, all of paris was against the king ,  and hoped that the assembly would depose the king ,  but the assembly hesitated . 
the french revolution differed from other revolutions in being not only national ,  for it intended to benefit all humanity . 
the consecutive successes in the french revolutionary wars earned lazare carnot the title 'organizer of victory' . 
the king ,  alarmed by the violence ,  backed down ,  at least for the time being . 
the bourbons were restored to the throne ,  with the brother of king louis xvi becoming king louis xviii . 
the incident cost lafayette and his national guard much public support . 
the committee of public safety came under the control of maximilien robespierre ,  a lawyer ,  and the jacobins unleashed the reign of terror  -lrb-  1793–94 -rrb- . 
the price control policy was coeval with the rise to power of the committee of public safety and the reign of terror . 
three approaches attempt to explain the reign of terror imposed by the jacobins in 1793–94.
the convention on 22 august 1795 approved the new `` constitution of the year iii '' . 
by the summer of 1793, most french departments in one way or another opposed the central paris government . 
with wars against prussia and austria having started earlier in 1792, france also declared war on the kingdom of great britain and the dutch republic in november 1792.
immediately on 21 september the convention abolished the monarchy ,  making france the french first republic . 
necker then stated that each estate should verify its own members' credentials and that the king should act as arbitrator . 
when war went badly ,  prices rose and the `` sans-culottes '' – poor labourers and radical jacobins – rioted; counter-revolutionary activities began in some regions . 
'reign of terror' is a label used by some historians for  -lrb-  part of  -rrb-  french history between july 1789 and july 1794, but those historians adhere that label to different periods . 
meanwhile ,  in august 1791, a new threat arose from abroad: the king's brother-in-law holy roman emperor leopold ii ,  king frederick william ii of prussia ,  and the king's brother charles-philippe ,  comte d'artois ,  issued the declaration of pillnitz ,  declaring their intention to bring the french king in the position `` to consolidate the basis of a monarchical government '' and that they were preparing their own troops for action ,  hinting at an invasion of france on the king's behalf . 
however ,  late the next day ,  the king was recognised and arrested at varennes and returned to paris . 
a new republican calendar was established in 1793, with 10-day weeks that made it very difficult for catholics to remember sundays and saints' days . 
the french revolution  -lrb-     -rrb-  was a period of far-reaching social and political upheaval in france and its colonies beginning in 1789.
this was not received well by the king's ministers ,  and necker ,  hoping to bolster his position ,  argued to be made a minister . 
some historians consider the total civil war to have lasted until 1796 with a toll of 170,000 or 450,000 lives . 
the french people expressed no respect for the dictates of foreign monarchs ,  and the threat of force merely hastened their militarisation . 
the persecution of the church led to a counter-revolution known as the revolt in the vendée . 
most of the new nations were abolished and returned to prewar owners in 1814.
inevitably ,  the belief that public opinion had the right to decide cultural questions instead of deferring to the court transformed itself into the demand that the public also have a say on political questions as well . 
on 14 july 1790, and for several days following ,  crowds in the champ de mars celebrated the anniversary of the fall of the bastille with the `` fête de la fédération ''; talleyrand performed a mass; participants swore an oath of `` fidelity to the nation ,  the law ,  and the king ''; the king and the royal family actively participated . 
the dictatorship imposed by the committee of public safety during the reign of terror ,  from 1793 until 1794, established price controls on food and other items ,  abolished slavery in french colonies abroad ,  de-established the catholic church  -lrb-  dechristianised society  -rrb-  and created a secular republican calendar ,  religious leaders were expelled ,  and the borders of the new republic were secured from its enemies . 
the legislative assembly first met on 1 october 1791, elected by those 4 million men – out of a population of 25 million – who paid a certain minimum amount of taxes . 
but generally ,  the french opposition against 'paris' had now evolved into a plain struggle for power over the country against the 'montagnards' around robespierre and marat now dominating paris . 
necker was recalled to power ,  but his triumph was short-lived . 
the haitian revolution  -lrb-  saint domingue  -rrb-  became a central example of slave uprisings in french colonies . 
on 11 july 1789, after necker published an inaccurate account of the government's debts and made it available to the public ,  the king fired him ,  and completely restructured the finance ministry at the same time . 
the revolution caused a massive shift of power from the roman catholic church to the state . 
fukuyama is a part-time photographer . 
fukuyama endorsed barack obama in the 2008 us presidential election . 
francis fukuyama was born in the hyde park neighborhood of chicago . 
fukuyama announced the end of the neoconservative moment and argued for the demilitarization of the war on terrorism:
fukuyama is also associated with the rise of the neoconservative movement ,  from which he has since distanced himself . 
fukuyama declared he would not be voting for bush ,  and that the bush administration had made three mistakes:
yoshihiro francis fukuyama  -lrb-  ; born october 27, 1952 -rrb- is an american political scientist ,  political economist ,  and author . 
fukuyama predicted the eventual global triumph of political and economic liberalism:
fukuyama was the omer l .  and nancy hirst professor of public policy in the school of public policy at george mason university from 1996 to 2000.
fukuyama has written a number of other books ,  among them `` trust: the social virtues and the creation of prosperity '' and `` our posthuman future: consequences of the biotechnology revolution '' . 
fukuyama is best known as the author of `` the end of history and the last man '' ,  in which he argued that the progression of human history as a struggle between ideologies is largely at an end ,  with the world settling on liberal democracy after the end of the cold war and the fall of the berlin wall in 1989.
there are two families of manual alphabets used for representing the latin alphabet in the modern world . 
the most widely used modern descendant is the american manual alphabet . 
some signs ,  such as the sign commonly used for the letter `` c '' ,  may be one-handed . 
by 1720, the british manual alphabet had found more or less its present form . 
the yugoslav manual alphabet represents characters from the serbian cyrillic alphabet as well as gaj's latin alphabet . 
fingerspelling can be one-handed such as in american sign language ,  french sign language and irish sign language ,  or it can be two-handed such as in british sign language . 
two-handed manual alphabets are used by a number of deaf communities; one such alphabet is shared by users of british sign language ,  auslan and new zealand sign language  -lrb-  collectively known as the banzsl language family  -rrb-  ,  while another is used in turkish sign language . 
