it is named after andrey kolmogorov ,  who first published on the subject in 1963.
“hymn to proserpine” is a poem by algernon charles swinburne ,  published in `` poems and ballads '' in 1866.
the poem is addressed to the goddess proserpina ,  the roman equivalent of persephone ,  but laments the rise of christianity for displacing the pagan goddess and her pantheon . 
alfred the great  -lrb-   ,   ,  'elf-counsel' or 'wise-elf'; between 847 and 849 – 26 october 899 -rrb- was king of wessex from 871 to c .  886 and king of the anglo-saxons from c .  886 to 899.
he was the youngest of five sons of king æthelwulf of wessex by his first wife ,  osburh . 
when king æthelwulf died in 858 wessex was ruled by three of alfred's brothers in succession: æthelbald ,  æthelberht and æthelred . 
on their return from rome in 856 æthelwulf was deposed by his son æthelbald . 
it may also be based upon the fact that alfred later accompanied his father on a pilgrimage to rome where he spent some time at the court of charles the bald ,  king of the franks ,  around 854–855.
three weeks later the danish king and 29 of his chief men were baptised at alfred's court at aller ,  near athelney ,  with alfred receiving guthrum as his spiritual son . 
in 853 alfred is reported by the `` anglo-saxon chronicle '' to have been sent to rome where he was confirmed by pope leo iv ,  who `` anointed him as king '' . 
in april 871 king æthelred died and alfred succeeded to the throne of wessex and the burden of its defence ,  even though æthelred left two under-age sons ,  æthelhelm and æthelwold . 
algardi was not renowned for his architectural abilities . 
algardi was born in bologna ,  where at a young age ,  he was apprenticed in the studio of agostino carracci . 
in 1650 algardi met diego velázquez ,  who obtained commissions for his work from spain . 
algardi died in rome within a year of completing his famous relief ,  which was admired by contemporaries . 
in his later years algardi controlled a large studio and amassed a great fortune . 
algiers became the capital of french algeria . 
the casbah and the two quays form a triangle . 
algiers is located on the mediterranean sea and in the north-central portion of algeria . 
in fact ,  the name transcribed the punic name  ,  `` seagull island '' ,  again named after the site's former islands . 
villa abd-el-tif ,  former residence of the dey ,  was used during the french period ,  to accommodate french artists ,  chiefly painters ,  and winners of the abd-el-tif prize ,  among whom maurice boitel ,  for a while of two years . 
the lighthouse which occupies the site of fort penon was built in 1544.
the city's name is derived via french and catalan `` alger '' from the arabic name `` al-jazā’ir ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` the islands '' . 
algiers is situated on the west side of a bay of the mediterranean sea . 
however ,  these plans were ultimately ignored by the french administration . 
the main building in the kasbah was begun in 1516 on the site of an older building ,  and served as the palace of the deys until the french conquest . 
the united states fought two wars  -lrb-  the first and second barbary wars  -rrb-  over algiers' attacks on shipping . 
algiers was a walled city from the time of the deys until the close of the 19th century . 
the precipitation is very similar to coastal mediterranean spain as opposed to the interior north african arid climate . 
algeria achieved independence on july 5, 1962.
ibn al-haytham was the first to explain that vision occurs when light bounces on an object and then is directed to one's eyes . 
alhazen studied the process of sight ,  the structure of the eye ,  image formation in the eye ,  and the visual system . 
the obvious answer to the problem of multiple rays and the eye was in the choice of the perpendicular ray ,  since only one such ray from each point on the surface of the object could penetrate the eye . 
kepler's later theory of the retinal image  -lrb-  which resolved the problem of the correspondence of points on an object and points in the eye  -rrb-  built directly on the conceptual framework of alhazen . 
he later asserted  -lrb-  in book seven of the `` optics ''  -rrb-  that other rays would be refracted through the eye and perceived `` as if '' perpendicular . 
his work on catoptrics in book v of the book of optics contains a discussion of what is now known as alhazen's problem ,  first formulated by ptolemy in 150 ad . 
alhazen's most famous work is his seven-volume treatise on optics `` kitab al-manazir ''  -lrb-  `` book of optics ''  -rrb-  ,  written from 1011 to 1021.
ibn al-haytham  -lrb-  alhazen  -rrb-  was born c .  965 to an arab family in basra ,  iraq ,   which was at the time part of the buyid emirate . 
alhazen's writings were more widely available in the middle ages than those of these earlier authors ,  and that probably explains why alhazen received the credit . 
alessandro di cristofano di lorenzo del bronzino allori  -lrb-  florence ,  31 may 153522 september 1607 -rrb- was an italian portrait painter of the late mannerist florentine school . 
among his collaborators was giovanni maria butteri and his main pupil was giovanni bizzelli . 
his two successors were ibrahim ibn tashfin and ishaq ibn ali ,  but their reigns were short . 
waggag assigned him one of his residents ,  abdallah ibn yasin . 
in the early 1050s ,  the lamtuna ,  under the joint leadership of yahya ibn umar and abdallah ibn yasin—soon calling themselves the `` al-murabitin ''  -lrb-  almoravids  -rrb- —set out on a campaign to bring their neighbors over to their cause . 
abdallah ibn yasin was a gazzula berber ,  and probably a convert rather than a born muslim . 
in 1061, abu bakr ibn umar made a division of the power he had established ,  handing over the more-settled parts to his cousin yusuf ibn tashfin as viceroy ,  and also assigning to him his favourite wife zaynab . 
ibn yasin ,  however ,  found a more favorable reception among the neighboring lamtuna people . 
the name might be related to the `` ribat '' of waggag ibn zallu in the village of aglu  -lrb-  near present-day tiznit  -rrb-  ,  where the future almoravid spiritual leader abdallah ibn yasin got his initial training . 
around 1040, yahya ibn ibrahim ,  a chieftain of the gudala  -lrb-  and brother-in-law of the late tarsina  -rrb-  ,  went on pilgrimage to mecca . 
the gudala soon had enough and expelled him almost immediately after the death of his protector ,  yahya ibn ibrahim ,  sometime in the 1040s . 
yusuf ibn tashfin had in the meantime brought the large area of what is now known as morocco ,  western sahara ,  and mauritania into complete subjection . 
according to some scholars ,  ali ibn yusuf was a new generation of leadership that had forgotten the desert life for the comforts of the city . 
abdallah ibn yassin imposed very strict discipline measures on his forces for every breach of his laws . 
the 13th-century moroccan biographer ibn al-zayyat al-tadili ,  and qadi ayyad before him in the 12th century ,  note that waggag's learning center was called `` dar al-murabitin ''  -lrb-  the house of the almoravids  -rrb-  ,  and that might have inspired ibn yasin's choice of name for the movement . 
according to w .  a .  shenstone ,  two classes of aloins are recognized:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- nataloins ,  which yield picric and oxalic acids with nitric acid ,  and do not give a red coloration with nitric acid; and  -lrb-  2 -rrb- barbaloins ,  which yield aloetic acid  -lrb-  chno  -rrb-  ,  chrysammic acid  -lrb-  chno  -rrb-  ,  picric and oxalic acids with nitric acid ,  being reddened by the acid . 
the plants can also be made into types of special soaps or used in other skin care products  -lrb-  see natural skin care  -rrb-  . 
 ''aloe socotrina '' is said to be used in yellow chartreuse . 
on may 9, 2002, the us food and drug administration issued a final rule banning the use of aloin ,  the yellow sap of the aloe plant ,  for use as a laxative ingredient in over-the-counter drug products . 
 ''aloe '' species also contain a trace of volatile oil ,  to which their odour is due . 
aloe  -lrb-    ,    -rrb-  ,  also written `` aloë '' ,  is a genus containing over 500 species of flowering succulent plants . 
of the 500+ species ,  only a few were used traditionally as herbal medicines ,  `` aloe vera '' again being the most commonly used species . 
the timespan 560–546 bc for the reign of croesus is almost certainly accurate . 
alyattes  -lrb-  reigned c . 591–c . 560 bc  -rrb-  ,  sometimes described as alyattes ii ,  was the fourth king of the mermnad dynasty in lydia ,  the son of sadyattes and grandson of ardys . 
on the summit of the mound were large phalli of stone . 
the age at which a person can be legally married can differ from the age of consent . 
the age of consent is the age below which a minor is considered to be legally incompetent to consent to sexual acts . 
it should not be confused with other laws regarding age minimums including ,  but not limited to ,  the age of majority ,  age of criminal responsibility ,  voting age ,  drinking age ,  and driving age . 
the purpose of setting an age of consent is to protect an underage person from sexual advances . 
age of consent laws vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction ,  though most jurisdictions set the age of consent in the range 14 to 18.
the age of consent is a legal barrier to the minor's ability to consent and therefore obtaining consent is not in general a defense to having sexual relations with a person under the prescribed age ,  for example:
the term `` age of consent '' rarely appears in legal statutes . 
several western countries have raised their ages of consent recently . 
while ages from ten to thirteen years were typically regarded as acceptable ages for sexual consent in western countries during the mid-19th century ,  by the end of the 19th century changing attitudes towards sexuality and childhood resulted in the raising of the age of consent . 
in france ,  under the napoleonic code ,  the age of consent was set in 1832 at eleven ,  and was raised to thirteen in 1863.
reliable data for ages at marriage is scarce . 
in traditional societies ,  the age of consent for a sexual union was a matter for the family to decide ,  or a tribal custom . 
the death of amalasuntha would give justinian a reason to go to war with the ostrogoths and attempt to take italy . 
with the people's support ,  witigis had theodahad put to death . 
amalasuntha  -lrb-  also known as amalasuentha ,  amalaswintha ,  amalasuintha ,  amalswinthe ,  amalasontha or amalsenta  -rrb-   -lrb-  30 april 534/535 -rrb- was a regent of the ostrogoths during the minority of her son from 526 to 534, and ruling queen regnant from 534 to 535.
amalric of bena  -lrb-  ; ; died 1204–1207 ad  -rrb-  was a french theologian and sect leader ,  after whom the amalricians are named . 
his death was caused ,  it is said ,  by grief at the humiliation to which he had been subjected . 
it is not known who was the tutor of afonso . 
afonso was the son of henry of burgundy and teresa ,  the natural daughter of king alfonso vi of león and castile . 
meanwhile ,  king alfonso vii of león  -lrb-  afonso's cousin  -rrb-  regarded the independent ruler of portugal as nothing but a rebel . 
before his marriage to mafalda ,  king afonso fathered his first son with chamoa gómez ,  daughter of count gómez núñez and elvira pérez ,  sister of fernando and bermudo pérez de traba:
afonso then turned his arms against the persistent problem of the moors in the south . 
on 6 april 1129, afonso henriques dictated the writ in which he proclaimed himself prince of portugal or prince of the portuguese ,  an act informally allowed by afonso vii ,  as it was thought to be afonso henriques's right by blood ,  as one of two grandsons of the emperor of hispania . 
afonso succeeded his father on 27 march 1211.
as a king ,  afonso ii set a different approach of government . 
after being excommunicated for his audacities by pope honorius iii ,  afonso ii promised to make amends to the church ,  but he died in coimbra on 25 march 1223 before making any serious attempts to do so . 
afonso was born in coimbra . 
as the second son of king afonso ii of portugal ,  he was not expected to inherit the throne ,  which was destined to go to his elder brother sancho . 
he was the second son of king afonso ii of portugal and his wife ,  urraca of castile; he succeeded his brother ,  king sancho ii of portugal ,  who died on 4 january 1248.
afonso showed extraordinary vision for the time . 
in 1309, afonso iv married infanta beatrice of castile ,  daughter of king sancho iv of castile by his wife maría de molina . 
on 12 september 1309, afonso married beatrice of castile ,  daughter of sancho iv of castile ,  and maría de molina ,  and had four sons and three daughters . 
afonso broke the tradition of previous kings and did not have any children out of wedlock . 
the public humiliation of his daughter led afonso iv to have his son and heir ,  peter ,  marry the no less aggrieved castilian infanta ,  constanza . 
afonso v then turned his attentions to north africa . 
afonso v  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  15 january 1432 – 28 august 1481 -rrb- ,  called the african  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was king of portugal and of the algarves . 
as of 1471, afonso v was the first king of portugal to claim dominion over a plural `` kingdom of the algarves , ``  instead of the singular `` kingdom of the algarve . `` 
but on 9 june 1448, when the king came of age ,  peter had to surrender his power to afonso v .  the years of conspiracy by the duke of braganza finally came to a head . 
afonso was born in sintra ,  the second son of king edward of portugal by his wife eleanor of aragon . 
as a result ,  afonso sent his mother to a convent . 
afonso spent the rest of his life and reign practically a prisoner . 
afonso vi  -lrb-  ; 21 august 164312 september 1683 -rrb- ,  known as `` the victorious ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was the second king of portugal of the house of braganza from 1656 until his death . 
in 1662, the count of castelo melhor saw an opportunity to gain power at court by befriending the king . 
during his reign ,  which covered a span of 51 years ,  alfonso discovered the supposed tomb of apostle santiago in the town of compostela ,  which later became known as the city of santiago de compostela . 
the first reliable mention of the `` amarakosha '' is in the amoghavritti of shakatayana composed during the reign of amoghavarsha  -lrb-  814-867ce  -rrb- 
b .  l .  rice compiled the text in kannada script with meanings in english and kannada in 1927.
alfonso xii  -lrb-  alfonso francisco de asís fernando pío juan maría de la concepción gregorio pelayo; 28 november 185725 november 1885 -rrb- was king of spain ,  reigning from 1874 to 1885.
alfonso was a promoter of tourism in spain . 
alfonso was born in madrid on 17 may 1886.
by 1905, alfonso was looking for a suitable consort . 
alfonso xiii  -lrb-  17 may 1886 – 28 february 1941 -rrb- was king of spain from 1886 until the proclamation of the second republic in 1931.
on 31 may 1906, alfonso married scottish-born princess victoria eugenie of battenberg  -lrb-  1887–1969 -rrb- . 
alfonso distanced himself from his queen for transmitting the condition to their sons . 
on 10 may 1907, the couple's first child ,  alfonso ,  prince of asturias ,  was born . 
alfonso became gravely ill during the 1918 flu pandemic . 
on 15 january 1941, alfonso xiii abdicated his rights to the defunct spanish throne in favour of juan . 
however ,  victoria was in fact a haemophilia carrier ,  and alfonso inherited the condition . 
an avenue in the northern madrid neighbourhood of chamartín ,  avenida de alfonso xiii ,  is named after him . 
sometime during the reign of alfonso ii of aragon ,  the battler's grandnephew ,  a man came forward claiming to be alfonso the battler . 
alfonso i  -lrb-  1073/10747 september 1134 -rrb- ,  called the battler or the warrior  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was the king of aragon and pamplona from 1104 until his death in 1134.
a series of deaths put alfonso directly in line for the throne . 
alfonso spent his first four years as king in near-constant war with the muslims . 
the choice of the navarrese lords fell on garcía ramírez ,  lord of monzón ,  descendant of an illegitimate son of garcía sánchez iii and protégé of alfonso vii to be their king . 
the testament of alfonso leaving his kingdom to the three orders was dismissed out of hand by the nobility of his kingdoms ,  and possible successors were sought . 
 ''the result of the crisis produced by the result of alfonso i's will was a major reorientation of the peninsula's kingdoms: the separation of aragon and navarre ,  the union of aragon and catalonia and — a moot point but stressed particularly by some castilian historians — the affirmation of 'castilian hegemony' in spain '' by the rendering of homage for zaragoza by alfonso's eventual heir ,  ramon berenguer iv of barcelona . 
in the event it was a will that his nobles refused to carry out — instead bringing his brother ramiro from the monastery to assume royal powers — an eventuality that lourie suggests was alfonso's hidden intent . 
each bulb produces one or two leafless stems 30–60 cm tall ,  each of which bears a cluster of two to twelve funnel-shaped flowers at their tops . 
correct regardless of priority  -rrb-  and ultimately based on a specimen of the south african `` amaryllis belladonna '' from the clifford herbarium at the natural history museum in london . 
he conquered the kingdom of majorca between his succession and 1287.
he was a son of king peter iii of aragon and constance ,  daughter and heiress of king manfred of sicily . 
soon after assuming the throne ,  he conducted a campaign to reincorporate the balearic islands into the kingdom of aragon - which had been lost due to the division of the kingdom by his grandfather ,  james i of aragon . 
in february 1329, alfonso married eleanor of castile  -lrb-  1308–1359 -rrb- ,  the sister of king alfonso xi of castile . 
alfonso died in january 1336, aged only 36.
alfonso and teresa became the parents of seven children . 
he was the last great ruler of egypt before the persian conquest . 
amasis ii  -lrb-    -rrb-  or ahmose ii was a pharaoh  -lrb-  reigned 570 bce526 bce  -rrb-  of the twenty-sixth dynasty of egypt ,  the successor of apries at sais . 
egypt was finally lost to the persians during the battle of pelusium in 525 bc . 
with both now deprived of egyptian support ,  the persians conquered ,  first ,  croesus's empire in 541 bce ,  and ,  then ,  the neo-babylonian empire in 539 bce . 
amasis ii died in 526 bc . 
the final assault instead fell upon his son psamtik iii ,  whom the persians defeated in 525 bce after a reign of only six months . 
alfonso the magnanimous kg  -lrb-  also alphonso; ; 1396 – 27 june 1458 -rrb- was the king of aragon  -lrb-  as alfonso v  -rrb-  ,  valencia  -lrb-  as alfonso iii  -rrb-  ,  majorca ,  sardinia and corsica  -lrb-  as alfonso ii  -rrb-  ,  sicily  -lrb-  as alfonso i  -rrb-  and count of barcelona  -lrb-  as alfonso iv  -rrb-  from 1416, and king of naples  -lrb-  as alfonso i  -rrb-  from 1442 until his death . 
in the battle of ponza that ensued ,  alfonso was defeated and taken prisoner . 
at the time ,  alfonso was at odds with callixtus iii ,  who died shortly afterwards . 
alfonso ,  provided with the most impressive artillery of the times ,  again besieged naples . 
on his way towards barcelona ,  alfonso destroyed marseille ,  a possession of louis iii . 
an opportunity for alfonso to reconquer naples occurred in 1432, when caracciolo was killed in a conspiracy . 
amathus or amathous  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an ancient city and one of the ancient royal cities of cyprus until about 300 bc . 
a roman temple was built in the 1st century ad on top of the hellenistic predecessor . 
later ,  in the 4th century ad ,  amasus became the see of a christian bishop and continued to flourish until the byzantine period . 
a ruined byzantine church marks its site . 
the city had vanished ,  except for fragments of wall and of a great stone urn on the acropolis ,  dating from the 6th century bc of which a similar vessel was taken to the musée du louvre in 1867.
from the 4th century bc the pedestals of two sculptures donated by the last basileus of amathous ,  androkles ,  representing his two sons ,  orestheus and andragoras ,  have survived . 
the reduced form `` alfonso '' is recorded in the late 9th century ,  and the portuguese form `` afonso '' from the early 11th . 
nicolò amati  -lrb-  december 3, 1596april 12, 1684 -rrb- was the son of girolamo amati . 
andrea amati  -lrb-    -rrb-  designed and created the violin ,  viola and cello known as the `` violin family '' . 
today ,  violins created by nicolò amati are valued at around $600,000.
the cities of myrina had this name after the amazon myrina . 
greeks also used some descriptive phrases for them . 
greeks also used other descriptive phrases for them . 
herodotus used the `` androktones ''  -lrb-   ,  singular  ,  '  -rrb-   -lrb-  `` killers of men ''  -rrb-  and `` androleteirai ''  -lrb-   ,  singular  ,  '  -rrb-   -lrb-  `` destroyers of men ,  murderesses ''  -rrb-  ,  in the iliad they are also called `` antianeirai ''  -lrb-   ,  singular  ,  ``  ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  `` against men ''  -rrb-  and aeschylus ,  in his work `` prometheus bound '' ,  used `` styganor ''  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  `` those who loathe all men ''  -rrb-  . 
herodotus used the `` androktones ''  -lrb-   ,  singular  ,  '  -rrb-   -lrb-  `` killers/slayers of men ''  -rrb-  and `` androleteirai ''  -lrb-   ,  singular  ,  '  -rrb-   -lrb-  `` destroyers of men ,  murderesses ''  -rrb-  ,  in the iliad they are also called `` antianeirai ''  -lrb-   ,  singular  ,  ``  ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  `` equivalent to men ''  -rrb-  and aeschylus used the `` styganor ''  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  `` those who loathe all men ''  -rrb-  in his work prometheus bound . 
in greek mythology ,  the amazons  -lrb-   ,  ' ,  singular  ,  '  -rrb-  were a tribe of women warriors related to scythians and sarmatians . 
herodotus and strabo placed them on the banks of the thermodon and themiscyra . 
according to diodorus ,  the amazons under the rule of queen myrina ,  invaded the lands of the atlantians . 
homer tells that the amazons were sought and found somewhere near lycia . 
he mentions by name the queens menalippe ,  hippolyta ,  and penthesilea . 
it is collected from remains found at sea and on beaches ,  although its precursor originates from the sperm whale ,  which is a vulnerable species . 
ambergris is formed from a secretion of the bile duct in the intestines of the sperm whale ,  and can be found floating on the sea or washed up on the coast . 
fossilised ambergris from 1.75 million years ago has also been found . 
the sperm whale usually vomits these ,  but if one travels further down the gut ,  it will be covered in ambergris . 
ambergris  -lrb-   or  ,   ,    -rrb-  ,  `` ambergrease '' ,  or `` grey amber '' ,  is a solid ,  waxy ,  flammable substance of a dull grey or blackish colour produced in the digestive system of sperm whales . 
from the 18th to the mid-19th century ,  the whaling industry prospered . 
caesar wrote about ambiorix in his commentary about his battles against the gauls ,  `` de bello gallico '' . 
in the nineteenth century ambiorix became a belgian national hero because of his resistance against julius caesar ,  as written in caesar's `` commentarii de bello gallico '' . 
when the roman senate heard what had happened ,  caesar swore to put down all the belgic tribes . 
today ,  ambiorix is one of the most famous characters in belgian history . 
ambros was professor of the history of music at prague from 1869 to 1871.
august wilhelm ambros  -lrb-  17 november 181628 june 1876 -rrb- was an austrian composer and music historian of czech descent . 
the amazon has over 1,100 tributaries ,  12 of which are over long . 
although the amazon river remains largely undammed ,  around 412 dams are in operation in the amazon's tributary rivers . 
historians are uncertain whether the river he descended was the amazon or the orinoco river ,  which runs more or less parallel to the amazon further north . 
the low river banks are interrupted by only a few hills ,  and the river enters the enormous amazon rainforest . 
the madeira river rises and falls two months earlier than most of the rest of the amazon river . 
the tocantins river enters the southern portion of the amazon delta . 
the amazon river  -lrb-   ,  ; spanish and   -rrb-  in south america is the largest river by discharge volume of water in the world ,  and by some definitions it is the longest . 
the anaconda is found in shallow waters in the amazon basin . 
along with the orinoco ,  the amazon is one of the main habitats of the `` boto '' ,  also known as the amazon river dolphin  -lrb-  `` inia geoffrensis ''  -rrb-  . 
paralleling the amazon river is a large aquifer ,  dubbed the hamza river ,  the discovery of which was made public in august 2011.
not all of the amazon's tributaries flood at the same time of the year . 
the most distant source of the amazon was thought to be in the apurímac river drainage for nearly a century . 
the bull shark  -lrb-  `` carcharhinus leucas ''  -rrb-  has been reported up the amazon river at iquitos in peru . 
if the pará river and the marajó island ocean frontage are included ,  the amazon estuary is some wide . 
the most important microbes in the amazon river are actinobacteria ,  alphaproteobacteria ,  betaproteobacteria ,  gammaproteobacteria and crenarchaeota . 
the depth of the amazon between manacapuru and óbidos has been calculated as between  . 
the expedition reached the mouth of the amazon on 24 august 1542, demonstrating the practical navigability of the great river . 
brazilians call this section the solimões river above its confluence with the rio negro to form what brazilians call the amazon at the meeting of waters  -lrb-    -rrb-  at manaus ,  the river's largest city . 
while debate as to whether the amazon or the nile is the world's longest river has gone on for many years ,  the historic consensus of geographic authorities has been to regard the amazon as the second longest river in the world ,  with the nile being the longest . 
although the ucayali–marañón confluence is the point at which most geographers place the beginning of the amazon river proper ,  in brazil the river is known at this point as the `` solimões das águas '' . 
the river was initially known by europeans as the marañón and the peruvian part of the river is still known by that name today . 
there are no bridges across the entire width of the river . 
more than one-third of all known species in the world live in the amazon rainforest ,  a giant tropical forest and river basin with an area that stretches more than  . 
the amazon basin ,  the largest in the world ,  covers about 40% of south america ,  an area of approximately  . 
the tucuxi  -lrb-  `` sotalia fluviatilis ''  -rrb-  ,  also a dolphin species ,  is found both in the rivers of the amazon basin and in the coastal waters of south america . 
the casiquiare is the largest river on earth that links two major river systems ,  a so-called bifurcation . 
in march 1500, spanish conquistador vicente yáñez pinzón was the first documented european to sail up the amazon river . 
the amazon river and its tributaries are characterised by extensive forested areas that become flooded every rainy season . 
alfred of beverley ,  was a priest of beverley ,  and is described in the preface to his book as `` treasurer of the church of beverley '' and `` master alfred ,  sacrist of the church of beverley '' . 
alredus ,  or alfred of beverley ,   -lrb-  fl . 
1143 -rrb- ,  english chronicler ,  was sacristan of the church of beverley in the first half of the twelfth century . 
all his children except abdu'l-rahman ibn abu bakr accepted islam ,  and abu bakr separated himself from his son abdu'l-rahman . 
abu bakr's full name was abū bakr aṣ-ṣiddīq abd allah ibn 'uthman ibn aamir ibn amr ibn ka'ab ibn sa'ad ibn taym  -lrb-  from whom the at-taymi al-quraishi  -rrb-  ibn murrah ibn ka'ab ibn lu'ai ibn ghalib ibn fihr al-quraishi . 
and abu bakr was the first free man to embrace islam . 
abu bakr was a thin man with white skin . 
abu bakr was born in mecca in 573 ce to uthman abu quhafa and salma umm al-khair . 
abu bakr's father's name was uthman abu quhafa  -lrb-  nicknamed `` abu quhafa ''  -rrb-  and his mother was salma bint sakhar  -lrb-  nicknamed `` umm-ul-khair ''  -rrb-  . 
another of abu bakr's grandsons ,  abd allah ibn al-zubayr ,  was very close to husayn bin ali . 
much of the available knowledge about muhammad comes through abu bakr's daughter ,  aisha . 
the lineage of abu bakr joined that of muhammad in the eighth degree in their common ancestor murrah ibn ka'b . 
he is honored as a saint by the camaldolese order . 
the pope transferred the council from basel to ferrara on 18 september 1437.
he also translated many homilies of saint john chrysostom; the writings of dionysius areopagita  -lrb-  1436 -rrb-; saint basil's treatise on virginity; thirty-nine discourses of saint ephrem the syrian ,  and many other works of the fathers and writers of the greek church . 
ambrogio traversari ,  o . s . b . 
the nuns were esteemed by st charles borromeo . 
this order is known from a bull of pope gregory xi addressed to the monks of the church of st ambrose outside milan . 
in some sense also `` ambrosians '' are the members of a diocesan religious society founded by st charles borromeo ,  archbishop of milan . 
the nuns of st ambrose  -lrb-  ambrosian sisters  -rrb-  wore a habit of the same colour as the brothers of st ambrose ,  conformed to their constitutions ,  and followed the ambrosian rite ,  but were independent in government . 
ambrosiaster is the name given to the writer of a commentary on st paul's epistles ,  `` brief in words but weighty in matter , ``  and valuable for the criticism of the latin text of the new testament . 
the commentary itself was written during the papacy of pope damasus i ,  that is ,  between 366 and 384, and is considered an important document of the latin text of paul before the vulgate of jerome ,  and of the interpretation of paul prior to augustine of hippo . 
geoffrey ,  in the last chapters featuring vortigern ,  has the king served by magicians . 
the role of warrior king is shared by uther and his son arthur . 
geoffrey changed the word `` aurelianus '' to `` aurelius '' ,  which is the name of a roman gens . 
geoffrey closely connects the deaths of vortigern and hengist ,  which are elsewhere poorly recorded . 
eventually he was transformed into the uncle of king arthur ,  the brother of arthur's father uther pendragon ,  and predeceases them both . 
ambrosius is still underage and vortigern rises to the throne . 
the chapter relates events following the end of roman rule in britain and preceding vortigern's alliance with the saxons . 
geoffrey also introduces him into the `` historia '' under the name aurelius ambrosius as one of three sons of constantine iii ,  along with constans ii and uther pendragon . 
the names of the saxon leaders in the battle are also not recorded . 
in chapter 31, we are told that vortigern ruled in fear of ambrosius . 
conan is also featured in the `` historia regum britanniae '' ,  where he is appointed king by roman emperor magnus maximus  -lrb-  reigned 383–388 -rrb- . 
having killed vortigern ,  ambrosius next turns his attention to hengist . 
the author dates this battle as taking place 12 years from the reign of vortigern . 
geoffrey's narrative includes as a major character hengist ,  as leader of the saxons . 
ambrosius burns the castle down and vortigern dies with it . 
in `` stargate sg-1 '' ,  ambrosius and arthur are one and the same . 
he actually may appear under three different names in the narrative ,  since geoffrey elsewhere calls the interpreter of hengist `` ceretic '' ,  a variant of the same name . 
geoffrey for the first time gives a genealogy of ambrosius . 
in marion zimmer bradley's `` the mists of avalon '' ,  aurelianus is depicted as the aging high king of britain ,  a `` too-ambitious '' son of a western roman emperor . 
in chapter 48, ambrosius aurelianus is described as `` king among all the kings of the british nation '' . 
wace usually only refers to `` li roi ''  -lrb-  `` the king ''  -rrb-  without naming him ,  and someone has taken an early mention of uther's epithet `` pendragon '' as the name of his brother . 
the text never identifies who ambrosius's father is ,  just gives his title as a roman consul . 
ammon  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was an ancient semitic-speaking nation occupying the east of the jordan river ,  between the torrent valleys of arnon and jabbok ,  in present-day jordan . 
the ammonites settled to the east of the jordan ,  invading the rephaim lands east of jordan ,  between the jabbok and arnon ,  dispossessing them and dwelling in their place . 
the people of this kingdom are called `` children of ammon '' or `` ammonites '' . 
shortly before the israelite exodus ,  the amorites west of jordan ,  under king sihon ,  invaded and occupied a large portion of the territory of moab and ammon . 
hissalel is mentioned in an inscription on a bottle found at tel siran ,  jordan along with his son ,  king amminadab ii ,  who reigned around 600 bce . 
they may have regained their old territory when tiglath-pileser carried off the israelites east of the jordan into captivity  -lrb-  2 kings 15:29; 1 chronicles 5:26 -rrb- . 
ammon maintained its independence from the assyrian empire through tribute to the assyrian king ,  at a time when nearby kingdoms were being raided or conquered . 
the invasion of the amorites created a wedge and separated the two kingdoms of ammon and moab . 
an assyrian tribute-list exists from this period ,  showing that ammon paid one-fifth as much tribute as judah did . 
he was a pupil of proclus in athens ,  and taught at alexandria for most of his life ,  writing commentaries on plato ,  aristotle ,  and other philosophers . 
ammonius' father ,  hermias ,  died when he was a child ,  and his mother ,  aedesia ,  raised him and his brother ,  heliodorus ,  in alexandria . 
to add to the confusion ,  it seems that ammonius had two pupils called origen: origen the christian ,  and origen the pagan . 
the insistence of eusebius ,  origen's pupil ,  and jerome ,  all of whom were recognized fathers of the christian church ,  that ammonius saccas had not rejected his christian roots would be easier for christians to accept than the assertion of prophyry ,  who was a pagan ,  that ammonius had chosen paganism over christianity . 
later christian writers stated that ammonius was a christian ,  but it is now generally assumed that there was a different ammonius of alexandria who wrote biblical texts . 
this conversion is contested by the christian writers jerome and eusebius ,  who state that ammonius remained a christian throughout his lifetime:
god's name must be exalted . 
other major ideas in the book of amos include: social justice and concern for the disadvantaged; the idea that israel's covenant with god did not exempt them from accountability for sin; god is god of all nations; god is judge of all nations; god is god of moral righteousness; god made all people; god elected israel and then liberated israel so that he would be known throughout the world; election by god means that those elected are responsible to live according to the purposes clearly outlined to them in the covenant; if god destroys the unjust ,  a remnant will remain; and god is free to judge whether to redeem israel . 
the central idea of the book of amos is that god puts his people on the same level as the surrounding nations – god expects the same purity of them all . 
it was an ancient greek polis  -lrb-  city  -rrb-  ,  and later a roman city ,  whose large remains can still be seen . 
alexander's three finest admirals ,  nearchus ,  androsthenes and laomedon ,  resided in amphipolis ,  which is also the place where ,  after alexander's death ,  his wife roxana and their small son alexander iv were exiled and later murdered . 
in the book of exodus ,  amram  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the husband of jochebed and father of aaron ,  moses and miriam . 
amyntas i  -lrb-  greek: ἀμύντας aʹ; 498 bc  -rrb-  was king of the ancient greek kingdom of macedon  -lrb-  540 – 512 / 511 bc  -rrb-  and then a vassal of darius i from 512/511 to his death 498 bc ,  at the time of achaemenid macedonia . 
amyntas was a vassal of darius i ,  king of the persian achaemenid empire ,  since 512/511 bc . 
amyntas iii  -lrb-  ancient macedonia: makedonia; died 370 bc  -rrb-  was king of the ancient greek kingdom of macedon in 393 bc ,  and again from 392 to 370 bc . 
by her ,  amyntas had three sons ,  all of whom became kings of macedonia one after the other ,  and a daughter:
they were ultimately eliminated by their half-brother philip ii because they had a claim to the throne . 
solon laughed and accepted him as his friend . 
according to the story recounted by hermippus ,  anacharsis arrived at the house of solon and said ,  `` i have traveled here from afar to make you my friend . `` 
according to herodotus ,  when anacharsis returned to the scythians he was killed by his own brother for his greek ways and especially for the impious attempt to sacrifice to the mother goddess cybele ,  whose cult was unwelcome among the scythians . 
his rough and free discourse became proverbial among athenians as 'scythian discourse' . 
isis captured the town in 2014.
between the 14th and 17th centuries ,  anah served as a headquarters for a host of regional arab tribes . 
medieval arab poets celebrated anah's wine;
anah or ana  -lrb-   ,  `` ʾāna ''  -rrb-  ,  formerly also known as anna ,  is an iraqi town on the euphrates river ,  approximately midway between the gulf of alexandretta and the persian gulf . 
sources across most of its early history ,  however ,  place anah on an island in the euphrates . 
about 1750, the ottomans installed a rudimentary administration to run anah and its district . 
the buddha agrees to ānanda's conditions ,  and ānanda becomes the buddha's attendant ,  accompanying the buddha on most of his wanderings . 
the buddha then continues to teach ānanda and other listeners about the buddha nature . 
ānanda is attractive in appearance . 
ānanda is recognized as one of the most important disciples of the buddha . 
in the final days of the buddha's life ,  the buddha travels to kusināra . 
the final period of the buddha's life also shows that ānanda is very much attached to the buddha's person ,  and he sees the buddha's passing with great sorrow . 
ānanda is teaching till the end of his life . 
his relationship with the buddha is depicted as warm and trusting: when the buddha grows ill ,  ānanda has a sympathetic illness; when the buddha grows older ,  ānanda keeps taking care of him with devotion . 
the texts say that the buddha sometimes asks ānanda to substitute for him as teacher ,  and is often praised by the buddha for his teachings . 
ānanda is one of the most loved figures in buddhism . 
ānanda dies 20 years after the buddha ,  and `` stūpas ''  -lrb-  momuments  -rrb-  are erected at the river where he dies . 
shortly after the council ,  ānanda brings the message with regard to the buddha's directive to channa personally . 
in the role of mediator between the buddha and the lay communities ,  ānanda sometimes makes suggestions to the buddha for amendments in the monastic discipline . 
according to the texts ,  in a previous life ,  ānanda makes an aspiration to become a buddha's attendant . 
ānanda sometimes literally risks his life for his master . 
however ,  the buddha reprimands udāyī in response ,  adding that ānanda will certainly be enlightened in this life . 
buddhist studies scholar l .  s .  cousins dated ānanda's death twenty years after the buddha's . 
in the first twenty years of the buddha's ministry ,  the buddha has several personal attendants . 
in conclusion ,  ānanda is one of the most loved figures in buddhism . 
shortly after the buddha's death ,  the first council is convened ,  and ānanda manages to attain enlightenment just before the council starts ,  which is a requirement . 
he also gave a number of novel scientific accounts of natural phenomena . 
the work of arrangement ,  the segregation of like from unlike and the summation of the whole into totals of the same name ,  was the work of mind or reason  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
anaxagoras was a greek citizen of the persian empire and had served in the persian army; he may have been a member of the persian regiments that entered mainland greece during the greco-persian wars . 
in a quote chosen to begin nathanael west's first book `` the dream life of balso snell '' ,  marcel proust's character bergotte says ,  `` after all ,  my dear fellow ,  life ,  anaxagoras has said ,  is a journey . `` 
out of this process arise the things we see in this world . 
anaxarchus is said to have studied under diogenes of smyrna ,  who in turn studied under metrodorus of chios ,  who used to declare that he knew nothing ,  not even the fact that he knew nothing . 
anaxarchus is said to have possessed `` fortitude and contentment in life , ``  which earned him the epithet `` eudaimonikos ''  -lrb-  `` fortunate ''  -rrb-  ,  which may imply that he held the end of life to be `` eudaimonia . `` 
plutarch reports that he told alexander the great that there was an infinite number of worlds ,  causing the latter to become dejected because he had not yet conquered even one . 
many similarities to anaximenes’s theories are apparent in plato’s theory . 
because plato’s theory does not recognize anaximenes’s by name ,  some scholars have doubted that plato’s theory was actually influenced by anaximenes . 
because none of anaximenes’s work exists today ,  there is controversy over the amount of influence anaximenes’s had on plato . 
having concluded that everything in the world is composed of air ,  anaximenes used his theory to devise a scheme that explains the origins and nature of the earth and the surrounding celestial bodies . 
the war then focused on the latin town of medullia . 
he also built rome's first prison ,  the mamertine prison . 
ancus marcius marched from rome with a newly levied army and took the latin town of politorium  -lrb-  situated near the town of lanuvium  -rrb-  by storm . 
rajendra chola i  -lrb-  1014 to 1042 ad  -rrb-  took over the andaman and nicobar islands . 
17 may 1859 was another major day for andaman . 
the highest point is located in north andaman island  -lrb-  saddle peak at   -rrb-  . 
the andaman and nicobar islands were occupied by japan during world war ii . 
the ten degree channel separates the andamans from the nicobar islands to the south . 
on 30 march 2010, a magnitude 6.9 earthquake struck near the andaman islands . 
the andaman islands form an archipelago in the bay of bengal between india ,  to the west ,  and myanmar ,  to the north and east . 
north andaman island is south of burma ,  although a few smaller burmese islands are closer ,  including the three coco islands . 
most are part of the andaman and nicobar islands union territory of india ,  while a small number in the north of the archipelago ,  including the coco islands ,  belong to myanmar . 
the natural vegetation of the andamans is tropical forest ,  with mangroves on the coast . 
he never returned afterwards ,  and seems to have died soon after this blow . 
the best among his orations is that on the mysteries; but ,  for the history of the time ,  all are of the highest importance . 
andocides  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` andokides ''; c .  440 – c .  390 bc  -rrb-  was a logographer  -lrb-  speech writer  -rrb-  in ancient greece . 
soon afterwards ,  however ,  he was set free ,  or escaped from prison . 
andocides then went to cyprus ,  where for a time he enjoyed the friendship of evagoras; but ,  by some circumstance or other ,  he exasperated his friend ,  and was consigned to prison . 
andocides was the son of leogoras ,  and was born in athens around 440 bc . 
in the second half of the year ,  andrew invaded halych and restored his youngest son ,  andrew ,  to the throne . 
andrew ii  -lrb-   ,   ,   ,  ; 117721 september 1235 -rrb- ,  also known as andrew of jerusalem ,  was king of hungary and croatia between 1205 and 1235.
andrew's father died on 23 april 1196, and andrew's older brother ,  emeric ,  succeeded him . 
the following year ,  andrew occupied hum . 
andrew repeated his oath in esztergom in september . 
he returned in 1224, after the bishops persuaded andrew to forgive him . 
despite his victories ,  mstislavich ceded halych to andrew's son in early 1227.
coloman and andrew each ruled the principality of halych for a short period . 
in 1228, andrew authorized his son ,  béla ,  to revise his previous land grants . 
andrew was the second son of king béla iii and béla's first wife ,  agnes of antioch . 
despite the fact that andrew did not stop conspiring against emeric ,  the dying king made andrew guardian of his son ,  ladislaus iii ,  in 1204.
after andrew's death ,  his sons ,  béla and coloman ,  accused his third wife ,  beatrice d'este ,  of adultery and never considered her son ,  stephen ,  to be a legitimate son of andrew . 
john ,  archbishop of kalocsa ,  crowned andrew king in székesfehérvár on 29 may 1205.
andrew and leszek of poland signed a treaty of alliance ,  which obliged andrew's second son ,  coloman ,  to marry leszek of poland's daughter ,  salomea . 
 -lrb-  hume 1974:340 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:319 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:320-321 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:324 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:340 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:346-348 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:356-359 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:361 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:389 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:390 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:391-392 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:393-398 -rrb-
 -lrb-  hume 1974:400-402 -rrb-
andrew of longjumeau led one of four missions dispatched to the mongols by pope innocent iv . 
andrew was accompanied on this mission by brother jacques . 
at the mongol camp near kars andrew had met a certain david ,  who in december 1248 appeared at the court of king louis ix of france in cyprus . 
on arrival at the supreme mongol court – either that on the imyl river  -lrb-  near lake alakol and the present russo-chinese frontier in the altai  -rrb-  ,  or more probably at or near karakorum itself ,  south-west of lake baikal – andrew found güyük khan dead ,  poisoned ,  as the envoy supposed ,  by batu khan's agents . 
after this ,  macedonia was formally reduced to a roman province . 
in 168 bc ,  the romans invaded macedonia and overthrew king perseus in the first battle of pydna . 
andronikos iii palaiologos  -lrb-  ; 25 march 1297 – 15 june 1341 -rrb- ,  commonly latinized as andronicus iii palaeologus ,  was byzantine emperor from 1328 to 1341.
andronikos iii concluded the treaty of chernomen of 1327, an alliance with tsar michael shishman of bulgaria against stephen uroš iii dečanski of serbia . 
andronikos then waged the intermittent byzantine civil war of 1321–28 against his reigning grandfather ,  who granted him to reign as co-emperor andronikos iii . 
in 1326, andronikos iii married as his second wife anna of savoy ,  daughter of amadeus v ,  count of savoy and of his second wife marie of brabant ,  countess of savoy . 
john kantakouzenos ,  `` megas domestikos '' of andronikos iii and later emperor ,  wielded effective administrative authority during the reign ,  while the emperor personally enjoyed hunting and waging war . 
andronikos iii was first married in 1318 with irene of brunswick ,  daughter of henry i ,  duke of brunswick-lüneburg; she died in 1324.
territorial concessions and a diplomatic marriage between the son of the bulgarian emperor ,  the future michael asen iv of bulgaria ,  and maria  -lrb-  renamed irene  -rrb-  palaiologina ,  daughter of andronikos iii palaiologos ,  secured peace with bulgaria . 
andronikos iii died at constantinople ,  aged 44, on 15 june 1341, possibly due to chronic malaria . 
andronikos iii wanted nicomedia and the other few byzantine forts in anatolia not to suffer the same fate and sought to pay off the ottomans with tribute . 
andronikos iii meanwhile effected the recovery of phocaea in 1334 from the last genoese governor ,  domenico cattaneo . 
andronikos ii palaiologos  -lrb-  ; 25 march 1259 – 13 february 1332 -rrb- ,  usually latinized as andronicus ii palaeologus ,  reigned as byzantine emperor from 1282 to 1328.
andronikos ii was also plagued by economic difficulties . 
andronikos ii had resettled those cretans in the region of meander river ,  the southeastern asia minor frontier of byzantium with the turks . 
the civil war ended in andronikos ii's forced abdication in 1328 after which he retired to a monastery . 
he was the son of isaac komnenos and the grandson of the emperor alexios i . 
in 1180 the emperor manuel died and was succeeded by his ten-year-old son alexios ii ,  who was under the guardianship of his mother ,  empress maria . 
when andronikos arrived he found that isaac had been proclaimed emperor . 
the novel ends with the death of andronikos . 
by his first wife ,  whose name is not known ,  he had three children:
still under the displeasure of the emperor ,  andronikos fled to the court of raymond ,  prince of antioch . 
about 1153, a conspiracy against the emperor in which andronikos participated was discovered ,  and he was thrown in prison . 
he taught in rome ,  about 58 bc ,  and was the teacher of boethus of sidon ,  with whom strabo studied . 
andronicus of rhodes  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  was a greek philosopher from rhodes who was also the scholarch  -lrb-  head  -rrb-  of the peripatetic school . 
his work ,  known as the res gestae ,  chronicled in latin the history of rome from the accession of the emperor nerva in 96 to the death of valens at the battle of adrianople in 378, although only the sections covering the period 353–378 survive . 
his work has suffered substantially from manuscript transmission . 
ammianus served as a soldier in the army of constantius ii and julian in gaul and persia . 
modern scholarship generally describes ammianus as a pagan who was tolerant of christianity . 
ammianus marcellinus  -lrb-  born  ,  died 400 -rrb- was a roman soldier and historian who wrote the penultimate major historical account surviving from antiquity  -lrb-  preceding procopius  -rrb-  . 
while living in rome in the 380s ,  ammianus wrote a latin history of the roman empire from the accession of nerva  -lrb-  96 -rrb- to the death of valens at the battle of adrianople  -lrb-  378 -rrb- ,  in effect writing a continuation of the history of tacitus . 
that crew was composed of
according to the standard crew rotation in place during the apollo program ,  the prime crew for apollo 13 would have been the backup crew for apollo 10 with mercury and gemini veteran l .  gordon cooper in command . 
apollo 13 was the seventh manned mission in the apollo space program and the third intended to land on the moon . 
schirra ,  eisele ,  and cunningham were first named as an apollo crew on september 29, 1966.
apollo 7 fulfilled apollo 1's mission of testing the apollo command and service module  -lrb-  csm  -rrb-  in low earth orbit . 
schirra ,  eisele ,  and cunningham were the only crew ,  of all the apollo ,  skylab ,  and apollo-soyuz test project missions ,  who had not been awarded the distinguished service medal immediately following their missions  -lrb-  though schirra had received the medal twice before ,  for his mercury and gemini missions  -rrb-  . 
eisele died in 1987 and schirra in 2007.
despite the difficulties between the crew and mission control ,  the mission successfully met its objectives to verify the apollo command and service module's flight worthiness ,  allowing apollo 8's flight to the moon to proceed just two months later . 
apollo 7 was an october 1968 human spaceflight mission carried out by the united states . 
wendt remained as pad leader for the entire apollo program . 
however ,  the spacecraft contractor had changed from mcdonnell  -lrb-  mercury and gemini  -rrb-  to north american rockwell  -lrb-  apollo  -rrb-  ,  so wendt was not the pad leader for apollo 1.
it was also the only manned launch from launch complex 34, as well as the last launch from the complex . 
the apollo 7 crew was commanded by walter m .  schirra ,  with senior pilot / navigator donn f .  eisele ,  and pilot / systems engineer r .  walter cunningham . 
the mission was the second crewed launch of a saturn v rocket . 
joint pain can also be a symptom of other diseases . 
symptoms may include:
there are several diseases where joint pain is primary ,  and is considered the main feature . 
moreover ,  by decreasing inflammation ,  the joint damage may be slowed . 
furthermore ,  exercise of the arthritic joint is encouraged to maintain the health of the particular joint and the overall body of the person . 
arthritis is a term often used to mean any disorder that affects joints . 
pain ,  which can vary in severity ,  is a common symptom in virtually all types of arthritis . 
in general ,  studies have shown that physical exercise of the affected joint can noticeably improve long-term pain relief . 
blood tests and x-rays of the affected joints often are performed to make the diagnosis . 
gout is caused by deposition of uric acid crystals in the joint ,  causing inflammation . 
low level laser therapy may be considered for relief of pain and stiffness associated with arthritis . 
the term is derived from `` arthr- ''  -lrb-  meaning joint  -rrb-  and `` -itis ''  -lrb-  meaning inflammation  -rrb-  . 
a small percentage develop a severe painful and destructive form of arthritis which destroys the small joints in the hands and can lead to permanent disability and loss of hand function . 
there is no known cure for either rheumatoid or osteoarthritis . 
as an alkyne ,  acetylene is unsaturated because its two carbon atoms are bonded together in a triple bond . 
the two unchanged 2p orbitals form a pair of weaker π bonds . 
metal acetylides ,  species of the formula lm-cr ,  are also common . 
acetylene is used to volatilize carbon in radiocarbon dating . 
in terms of valence bond theory ,  in each carbon atom the 2s orbital hybridizes with one 2p orbital thus forming an sp hybrid . 
the carbide can then be reacted with water ,  as usual ,  to form acetylene gas to feed into a mass spectrometer to measure the isotopic ratio of carbon-14 to carbon-12.
it was also used as an early light source for lighthouses . 
before the advent of the wacker process ,  this reaction was conducted on an industrial scale . 
with carbon monoxide ,  acetylene reacts to give acrylic acid ,  or acrylic esters ,  which can be used to produce acrylic glass:
acetylene and its derivatives  -lrb-  2-butyne ,  diphenylacetylene ,  etc  -rrb-  form complexes with transition metals . 
it is the most common system for the symbolic representation of numbers in the world today . 
the decimal hindu–arabic numeral system with zero was developed in india by around ad 700.
the hindu-arabic numeral system was developed by indian mathematicians around ad 500 using quite different forms of the numerals . 
the system was used in russia as late as the early 18th century when peter the great replaced it with arabic numerals . 
their work was principally responsible for the diffusion of the indian system of numeration in the middle east and the west . 
cyrillic numerals were a numbering system derived from the cyrillic alphabet ,  used by south and east slavic peoples . 
the numeral system employed ,  known as algorism ,  is positional decimal notation . 
arabic numerals are the ten digits: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; or numerals written using them in the hindu–arabic numeral system  -lrb-  where the position of a digit indicates the power of 10 to multiply it by  -rrb-  . 
the symbols used to represent the system have split into various typographical variants since the middle ages:
this is known as the `` apologia '' . 
this is known as the `` apologia  -lrb-  a discourse on magic  -rrb- ``  . 
his most famous work is his bawdy picaresque novel ,  the `` metamorphoses '' ,  otherwise known as `` the golden ass '' . 
 ''the golden ass ''  -lrb-  `` asinus aureus ''  -rrb-  or `` metamorphoses '' is the only latin novel that has survived in its entirety . 
apologia  -lrb-  `` apulei platonici pro se de magia ''  -rrb-  is the version of the defense presented in sabratha ,  in 158-159, before the proconsul claudius maximus ,  by apuleius accused of the crime of magic . 
selkirk returned to privateering with a vengeance . 
by this time ,  selkirk must have had considerable experience at sea . 
at first ,  selkirk remained along the shoreline of juan fernández . 
he made selkirk `` duke ''s second mate ,  later giving him command of one of their prize ships ,  `` increase '' ,  before it was ransomed by the spanish . 
selkirk's experience as a castaway aroused a great deal of attention in england . 
selkirk was an unruly youth ,  and joined buccaneering voyages to the south pacific during the war of the spanish succession . 
selkirk's long-awaited deliverance came on 2 february 1709 by way of `` duke '' ,  a privateering ship piloted by william dampier ,  and its sailing companion `` duchess '' . 
in march 2006, china tested an interceptor system comparable to the u . s .  patriot missiles . 
there are only three systems in the world that can intercept icbms . 
the arrow project was begun after the u . s .  and israel agreed to co-fund it on 6 may 1986.
the arrow 3 system is capable of exo-atmosphere interception of ballistic missiles ,  including of icbms . 
the sources suggest the system is not operationally deployed as of 2010.
the hq-29, a counterpart to the mim-104f pac-3, was first tested in 2011.
during 1998 the israeli military conducted a successful test of their arrow missile . 
besides them ,  some smaller systems exist  -lrb-  tactical abms  -rrb-  ,  that generally cannot intercept intercontinental strategic missiles ,  even if within range—an incoming icbm simply moves too fast for these systems . 
the acre is a unit of land area used in the imperial and us customary systems . 
both the international acre and the us survey acre contain of a square mile or 4,840 square yards ,  but alternative definitions of a yard are used  -lrb-  see survey foot and survey yard  -rrb-  ,  so the exact size of an acre depends upon which yard it is based . 
one acre equals   -lrb-  0.0015625 -rrb- square mile ,  4,840 square yards ,  43,560 square feet or about  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
surveyors in the united states use both international and survey feet ,  and consequently ,  both varieties of acre . 
in neutral solution ,  ionized atp exists mostly as atp ,  with a small proportion of atp . 
a second magnesium ion is critical for atp binding in the kinase domain . 
in norse mythology ,  ægir  -lrb-  also aegir  -rrb-   -lrb-  old norse `` sea ''  -rrb-  is a sea jötunn associated with the ocean . 
the emergence of resistance of bacteria to antibiotics is a common phenomenon . 
antibiotics are also used to prevent infection in cases of neutropenia particularly cancer-related . 
additional mutations ,  however ,  may compensate for this fitness cost and can aid the survival of these bacteria . 
per `` the icu book '' `` the first rule of antibiotics is try not to use them ,  and the second rule is try not to use too many of them . `` 
interactions between alcohol and certain antibiotics may occur and may cause side-effects and decreased effectiveness of antibiotic therapy . 
safety profiles of newer drugs are often not as well established as for those that have a long history of use . 
recent drugs in development that target gram-negative bacteria have focused on re-working existing drugs to target specific microorganisms or specific types of resistance . 
there has been extensive use of antibiotics in animal husbandry . 
phage therapy is another method for treating antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria . 
in 1928, sir alexander fleming postulated the existence of penicillin ,  a molecule produced by certain molds that kills or stops the growth of certain kinds of bacteria . 
antibiotics are used to treat or prevent bacterial infections ,  and sometimes protozoan infections . 
 ''streptomyces '' research is expected to provide new antibiotics ,  including treatment against mrsa and infections resistant to commonly used medication . 
on 26 may 2016 an e coli bacteria `` superbug '' was identified in the united states resistant to colistin ,  `` the last line of defence '' antibiotic . 
resistance may take the form of biodegredation of pharmaceuticals ,  such as sulfamethazine-degrading soil bacteria introduced to sulfamethazine through medicated pig feces . 
there are few well-controlled studies on whether antibiotic use increases the risk of oral contraceptive failure . 
to avoid surgery ,  antibiotics may be given for non-complicated acute appendicitis . 
non-compound approaches  -lrb-  that is ,  products other than classical antibacterial agents  -rrb-  that target bacteria or approaches that target the host including phage therapy and vaccines are also being investigated to combat the problem . 
cross-resistance to several antibacterials may also occur when a resistance mechanism encoded by a single gene conveys resistance to more than one antibacterial compound . 
following screening of antibacterials against a wide range of bacteria ,  production of the active compounds is carried out using fermentation ,  usually in strongly aerobic conditions . 
in current usage ,  the term `` antibiotic '' is applied to any medication that kills bacteria or inhibits their growth ,  regardless of whether that medication is produced by a microorganism or not . 
horizontal transfer is more likely to happen in locations of frequent antibiotic use . 
useful antibiotic targets are those for which mutations negatively impact bacterial reproduction or viability . 
