crete was separated from cyrenaica  . 
there are a number of museums throughout crete . 
crete is the largest island in greece and the fifth largest island in the mediterranean sea . 
crete is the most populous island in greece with a population of more than 600,000 people . 
heraklion is the largest city and capital of crete . 
the palace of knossos lies in crete . 
crete has an unusual variety of insects . 
crete has its own distinctive mantinades poetry . 
the ottomans conquered crete in 1669, after the siege of candia . 
a large number of islands ,  islets ,  and rocks hug the coast of crete . 
under ottoman rule ,  in ottoman turkish ,  crete was called `` girit ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
crete  -lrb-   ,  ``  '' ; ancient greek:  ,  `` krḗtē ''  -rrb-  is the largest and most populous of the greek islands ,  the 88th largest island in the world and the fifth largest island in the mediterranean sea ,  after sicily ,  sardinia ,  cyprus ,  and corsica . 
western crete  -lrb-  chania province  -rrb-  receives more rain and is more erosive compared to the eastern part of crete . 
crete with its nearby islands form the crete region  -lrb-   ,  `` periféria krítis ''  -rrb-  ,  one of the 13 regions of greece which were established in the 1987 administrative reform . 
during world war ii ,  the island was the scene of the famous battle of crete in may 1941.
crete is one of the most popular holiday destinations in greece . 
hominids settled in crete at least 130,000 years ago . 
tortoises can be seen throughout the island . 
in the 820s ,  after 900 years as a roman ,  and then eastern roman  -lrb-  byzantine  -rrb-  island ,  crete was captured by andalusian muladis led by abu hafs ,  who established the emirate of crete . 
the economy of crete is predominantly based on services and tourism . 
crete was the centre of europe's first advanced civilization ,  the minoan  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
during the 6th to 4th centuries bc ,  crete was comparatively free from warfare . 
crete has an extensive bus system with regular services across the north of the island and from north to south . 
after the bronze age collapse ,  crete was settled by new waves of greeks from the mainland . 
a small sample of the islands includes:
crete has many football clubs playing in the local leagues . 
crete's mild climate attracts interest from northern europeans who want a holiday home or residence on the island . 
venice's rival the republic of genoa immediately seized the island and it was not until 1212 that venice secured crete as a colony . 
crete has a rich mythology mostly connected with the ancient greek gods but also connected with the minoan civilisation . 
crete was left out of the modern greek state by the london protocol of 1830, and soon it was yielded to egypt by the ottoman sultan . 
in the 2nd century bc ierapytna  -lrb-  ierapetra  -rrb-  gained supremacy on eastern crete . 
most of the smaller islands are uninhabited . 
the largest island of the cyclades is naxos . 
the cyclades  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  are an island group in the aegean sea ,  southeast of mainland greece and a former administrative prefecture of greece . 
the islands are peaks of a submerged mountainous terrain ,  with the exception of two volcanic islands ,  milos and santorini . 
as a technological discipline ,  computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models for the construction of computer vision systems . 
as a technological discipline ,  computer vision seeks to apply its theories and models for the construction of computer vision systems . 
information about the environment could be provided by a computer vision system ,  acting as a vision sensor and providing high-level information about the environment and the robot . 
computer vision is an interdisciplinary field that deals with how computers can be made to gain high-level understanding from digital images or videos . 
a few stir-fried thai dishes also use an indian style curry powder  -lrb-  thai: `` phong kari ''  -rrb-  . 
goat is a popular meat in the himalayan region of nepal . 
usually ,  meat and fish are the main ingredients for popular curries . 
curry dishes are usually thick and spicy and are eaten along with steamed rice and variety of indian breads . 
malaysian curries typically use turmeric-rich curry powders ,  coconut milk ,  shallots ,  ginger ,  belacan  -lrb-  shrimp paste  -rrb-  ,  chili peppers ,  and garlic . 
curries are the most well-known part of indian cuisine . 
barbecue style or roasted meats are also very popular in the form of kebabs . 
black pepper is native to the indian subcontinent and southeast asia and has been known to indian cooking since at least 2000 bce . 
laal maans is a popular meat curry from rajasthan . 
these dishes are usually served with steamed rice and chapatis . 
 ''rice and curry '' refers to a range of sri lankan dishes . 
peshawari karahi is another very popular version made with just meat ,  salt ,  tomatoes ,  and coriander . 
dishes called 'curry' may contain fish ,  meat ,  poultry ,  or shellfish ,  either alone or in combination with vegetables . 
in punjab and kashmir ,  the only dish known as kardhi  -lrb-  curry  -rrb-  is a dish made of dahi  -lrb-  yogurt  -rrb-  and flour dumplings . 
malayali curries of kerala typically contain shredded coconut paste or coconut milk ,  curry leaves ,  and various spices . 
most punjabi dishes are prepared using `` tadka '' ,  which is made with the frying of a `` masala '' ,  which is a mix of ginger ,  garlic ,  onions and tomatoes with some dried spices . 
daal bhaat  -lrb-  rice and lentil soup  -rrb-  is a staple dish of nepal . 
camel meat has been eaten for centuries . 
additionally ,  camel milk has been made into ice cream in a netherlands camel farm . 
by at least 1200 bc the first camel saddles had appeared ,  and bactrian camels could be ridden . 
camel meat is `` halal ''  -lrb-   ,  'allowed'  -rrb-  for muslims . 
there are around 14 million camels alive  ,  with 90% being dromedaries . 
in world war i ,  the british army also created the egyptian camel transport corps ,  which consisted of a group of egyptian camel drivers and their camels . 
in 1916, the british created the imperial camel corps . 
in syria and egypt ,  there are specialist camel butchers . 
the average life expectancy of a camel is 40 to 50 years . 
the wild bactrian camel  -lrb-  `` c .  ferus ''  -rrb-  separated from the domestic bactrian camel  -lrb-  `` c .  bactrianus ''  -rrb-  about 1 million years ago . 
the camel immune system differs from those of other mammals . 
heide suggests that mentions of camels `` in the patriarchal narratives may refer ,  at least in some places ,  to the bactrian camel '' ,  while noting that the camel is not mentioned in relationship to canaan . 
according to jewish tradition ,  camel meat and milk are not kosher . 
the kidneys and intestines of a camel are very efficient at reabsorbing water . 
discussions concerning camel domestication in mesopotamia often reference mentions of camels in the hebrew bible . 
the wild bactrian camel is a separate species and is now critically endangered . 
the bactrian camel is ,   ,  reduced to an estimated 1.4 million animals ,  most of which are domesticated . 
camel milk cannot be made into butter by the traditional churning method . 
the hybrid camel ,  a hybrid between bactrian and dromedary camels ,  has one hump ,  though it has an indentation deep that divides the front from the back . 
chaldea  -lrb-    -rrb-  or chaldaea was a nation that existed between the late 10th or early 9th and mid-6th centuries bc ,  after which it and its people were absorbed and assimilated into babylonia . 
in the early period ,  between the early 9th century and late 7th century bc ,  `` mat kaldi '' was the name of a small sporadically independent migrant-founded territory under the domination of the neo-assyrian empire  -lrb-  911-605 bc  -rrb-  in southeastern babylonia ,  extending to the western shores of the persian gulf . 
if formula_1 were a function of three arguments formula_29, its currying formula_10 would have the property
so that the original function formula_1 and its currying formula_10 convey exactly the same information . 
suppose we have a function formula_8 which takes two real arguments and outputs real numbers ,  and it is defined by formula_9.
here ,  formula_33 and formula_34 may be sets ,  or they may be types ,  or they may be other kinds of objects ,  as explored below . 
this also works for functions with more than two arguments . 
the modern persian form of the name is kourosh . 
cyrus  -lrb-  persian: سیروس  -rrb-  is a male given name . 
the name has appeared on many monuments and inscriptions in old persian . 
by connecting outward light to inward light ,  via an interaction point ,  this equation stands for the whole 'light transport' — all the movement of light — in a scene . 
in distribution ray tracing ,  at each point of intersection ,  multiple rays may be spawned . 
meaning: at a particular position and direction ,  the outgoing light  -lrb-  l  -rrb-  is the sum of the emitted light  -lrb-  l  -rrb-  and the reflected light . 
in ray casting the geometry which has been modeled is parsed pixel by pixel ,  line by line ,  from the point of view outward ,  as if casting rays out from the point of view . 
ray tracing aims to simulate the natural flow of light ,  interpreted as particles . 
the term `` rendering '' may be by analogy with an `` artist's rendering '' of a scene . 
to reduce artifacts ,  a number of rays in slightly different directions may be averaged . 
therefore ,  a few loose families of more-efficient light transport modelling techniques have emerged: the fourth type of light transport technique ,  radiosity is not usually implemented as a rendering technique ,  but instead calculates the passage of light as it leaves the light source and illuminates surfaces . 
sometimes the final light value is a derived from a `` transfer function '' and sometimes it's used directly . 
generally object order is more efficient ,  as there are usually fewer objects in a scene than pixels . 
rough simulations of optical properties may be additionally employed: a simple calculation of the ray from the object to the point of view is made . 
ray casting involves calculating the `` view direction ''  -lrb-  from camera position  -rrb-  ,  and incrementally following along that `` ray cast '' through `` solid 3d objects '' in the scene ,  while accumulating the resulting value from each point in 3d space . 
light interaction is often approximated by the even simpler models: diffuse reflection and specular reflection ,  although both can also be brdfs . 
if a pixel-by-pixel  -lrb-  image order  -rrb-  approach to rendering is impractical or too slow for some task ,  then a primitive-by-primitive  -lrb-  object order  -rrb-  approach to rendering may prove useful . 
the simulation technique may vary in complexity . 
due to the large number of calculations ,  a work in progress is usually only rendered in detail appropriate to the portion of the work being developed at a given time ,  so in the initial stages of modeling ,  wireframe and ray casting may be used ,  even where the target output is ray tracing with radiosity . 
tracing every particle of light in a scene is nearly always completely impractical and would take a stupendous amount of time . 
however ,  when advanced radiosity estimation is coupled with a high quality ray tracing algorithm ,  images may exhibit convincing realism ,  particularly for indoor scenes . 
greg stafford founded `` the chaosium '' in 1975 to publish his board game `` white bear and red moon '' . 
chaosium inc .  is one of the oldest publishers of role-playing games still in existence . 
while stafford himself has been described as `` one of the most decorated game designers of all time '' and `` the grand shaman of gaming '' ,  many other notable game designers have written material for chaosium . 
chaosium began publishing a line of non-game books  -lrb-  primarily fiction  -rrb-  in 1993.
in 1996 it was prematurely reported that chaosium had secured the rights to publish a collectible card game based on the video game doom . 
stafford took the rights to his game setting glorantha ,  setting up the company issaries ,  inc .  to continue publishing this line  -lrb-  later licensing it to moon design publications ,  along with the game heroquest  -rrb-  . 
in 1978 chaosium published steve perrin's roleplaying game `` runequest '' ,  set in stafford's mythic fantasy setting glorantha ,  following up with a second edition in 1980 and various supplements over the next six years . 
during the inaugural season of the panthers ,  the team had an official fight song ,  which the team played before each home game . 
the panthers are supported in both north carolina and south carolina; south carolina governor nikki haley declared july 30, 2012, `` carolina panthers day '' in her state ,  saying that `` when it comes to professional teams ,  the carolina panthers are the team that south carolina calls their own '' . 
after the nfl's expansion to 32 teams in 2002, the panthers were relocated from the nfc west to the newly created nfc south division . 
the panthers have three open-air fields next to bank of america stadium where they currently hold their practices; during the 1995 season ,  when the team played their home games in south carolina ,  the team held their practices at winthrop university in rock hill ,  south carolina . 
they ranked the carolina panthers as the 21st-most valuable nfl team and the 36th-most valuable sports team in the world . 
the carolina panthers are a professional american football team based in charlotte ,  north carolina . 
the carolina panthers support a variety of non-profits in north and south carolina through the carolina panthers charities . 
during the 2016 nfc championship and super bowl ,  the hashtag #onecarolina was used by college and professional sports teams from north carolina and south carolina to show unified support for the panthers . 
they have won six division titles ,  one in the nfc west and five in the nfc south . 
the carolina panthers have had four head coaches . 
the panthers first competed in the 1995 nfl season; they were one of two expansion teams to begin play that year ,  the other being the jacksonville jaguars . 
wide receiver steve smith ,  the team's leading receiver ,  recorded 12,197 receiving yards during his 13-year  -lrb-  2001–2013 -rrb- tenure with the team . 
john fox's contract expired after the season ended ,  and the team did not retain him or his staff . 
a relatively new rivalry ,  this one dates to the 2005 nfc championship game ,  in which the seahawks won the game 31–14.
the shape of the panthers logo was designed to mimic the outline of both north carolina and south carolina . 
the panthers played their first season at memorial stadium in clemson ,  south carolina ,  as their facility in uptown charlotte was still under construction . 
the team's cheerleaders are the carolina topcats ,  a group of 24 women who lead cheers and entertain fans at home games . 
the team's uniform has remained largely the same since its creation ,  with only minor alterations such as changing the sock color of the team's black uniforms from blue to black and changing the team's shoes from white to black . 
the team's fiercest rivals are the falcons and buccaneers . 
the bears lost the game ,  21–14.
the 1940 chicago bears team holds the record for the biggest margin of victory in an nfl game  -lrb-  playoff or regular season  -rrb-  with a 73–0 victory over the washington redskins in the 1940 nfl championship game . 
no other bears coach has recorded over 100 victories with the team . 
the team relocated to chicago in 1921, where the club was renamed the chicago staleys . 
however ,  during the 2016 season ,  the bears regressed heavily ,  compiling a 3–13 record  -lrb-  their worst since the nfl's change to 16-game seasons in 1978 -rrb- . 
the success of the playoff game led the nfl to institute a championship game . 
the bears have also recorded more victories than any other nfl franchise . 
their only losing season came in  . 
the team started the 2011 season strong with a 7–3 record ,  and running back matt forté led the nfl in total yards from scrimmage . 
however ,  the bears missed the playoffs with a record of 10–6  -lrb-  after starting the season 7–1, the first team to start with the record and miss the playoffs since the 1996 washington redskins  -rrb-  ,  and smith was fired on december 31.
the chicago bears are a professional american football team based in chicago ,  illinois . 
in the 2005 season ,  the bears won the nfc north division and the no . 
on january 1, 2018, fox was fired ,  ending his tenure in chicago with a 14–34 record . 
official team and league records cite halas as the founder as he took over the team in 1920 when it became a charter member of the nfl . 
none of the three quarterbacks returned for the 2017 season . 
before the 2003 season ,  the team had two unofficial mascots named `` rocky '' and `` bearman '' . 
in the 1932 `` unofficial '' nfl championship ,  the bears defeated the portsmouth spartans in the first indoor american football game at chicago stadium . 
patrick mannelly holds the record for the most seasons in a bears uniform with 16.
this was the first playoff game at soldier field since the stadium reopened . 
from 1940–1947, quarterback sid luckman led the bears to victories in four out of the five nfl championship games in which they appeared . 
after declining throughout the 1950s ,  the team rebounded in to capture its eighth nfl championship ,  which would be its last until 1985.
during the season ,  the bears played their home games at the university of illinois' memorial stadium in champaign ,  where they went 3–5.
the team also formerly had their own cheerleading squad called the chicago honey bears . 
after the merger ,  the bears finished the 1970 season last place in their division ,  a repeat of their placing in the 1969 season . 
the game also started the forward pass . 
after the 1985 championship season ,  the bears remained competitive throughout the 1980s but failed to return to the super bowl under ditka . 
in fox's first season as head coach ,  the bears saw improvements from 2014; after `` usa today '' projected the bears to win three games ,  they doubled that total and finished the season with a 6–10 record ,  including a thanksgiving win over the packers at lambeau field . 
founder paul brown coached the team for its first eight seasons . 
under palmer ,  the team advanced to the playoffs for the first time since 1990 in the 2005 season ,  which also was the first time the team had a winning percentage above  . 500 since 1990.
the bengals are one of the 12 nfl teams to not have won a super bowl ; however ,  they are also one of 8 nfl teams that have been to at least one super bowl ,  but have not won the game . 
in the 2010 season ,  the bengals posted a 4–12 record . 
 ''who dey '' is also the name of the team's mascot ,  a bengal tiger . 
when the team debuted in 1968, the bengals' uniforms were modeled after the cleveland browns . 
this was the first time the franchise made the playoffs four straight seasons . 
 ''who dey ?  ! `` 
the team finished its first season with a 3–11 record and running back paul robinson ,  who rushed for 1,023 yards ,  and was named the afl rookie of the year . 
the cleveland browns' team colors were brown ,  orange ,  and white ,  and their helmets were solid orange with a white dorsal stripe over the crest . 
in 1970, the bengals moved to play at riverfront stadium ,  a home they shared with the cincinnati reds until the team moved to paul brown stadium in 2000.
the team's official mascot is a bengal tiger named who dey . 
the bengals were founded in as a member of the american football league  -lrb-  afl  -rrb-  by former cleveland browns head coach paul brown . 
the who dey chant was first known to be used by fans of the 1980 cincinnati bengals . 
by the han dynasty ,  `` jiang '' had come to mean `` any '' river in chinese ,  and this river was distinguished as the `` great river ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
chumar is tibetan for the `` red river . `` 
in mongolian ,  this section of the river known as the `` ulaan mörön '' or the `` red river '' . 
the whole river is known in china as cháng jiāng  -lrb-  ; literally: `` long river ''  -rrb-  . 
the yangtze river  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  ,  which is long ,  is the longest river in asia and the third-longest in the world . 
the tongtian river  -lrb-    -rrb-  describes the section from yushu up to the confluence with the dangqu river . 
flooding along the river has been a major problem . 
in hubei province ,  the river is also called the jing jiang  -lrb-    -rrb-  or the `` jing river '' after jingzhou . 
the river is one of the world's busiest waterways . 
from yibin to yichang ,  the river through sichuan and chongqing municipality is also known as the chuan jiang  -lrb-    -rrb-  or `` sichuan river . `` 
for about inland from its mouth ,  the river is virtually at sea level . 
the jinsha river  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the name for of the yangtze from yibin upstream to the confluence with the batang river near yushu in qinghai province . 
chang jiang  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the modern chinese name for the lower of the yangtze from its confluence with the min river at yibin in sichuan province to the river mouth at shanghai . 
the yangtze is the sixth-largest river by discharge volume in the world . 
the river is a major transportation artery for china ,  connecting the interior with the coast . 
the tuotuo river  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the official headstream of the yangtze ,  and flows from the glaciers of the gelaindong massif in the tanggula mountains of southwestern qinghai to the confluence with the dangqu river to form the tongtian river . 
until 1881, the india and china coastal and river services were operated by several companies . 
the most recent major floods were the 1998 yangtze river floods ,  but more disastrous were the 1954 yangtze river floods ,  which killed around 30,000 people . 
the river then runs through anhui and jiangsu provinces ,  receiving more water from innumerable smaller lakes and rivers ,  and finally reaches the east china sea at shanghai . 
 ''yangtze '' was actually the name of chang jiang for the lower part from nanjing to the river mouth at shanghai . 
from the han dynasty ,  the region of the yangtze river became more and more important to china's economy . 
 ''chrono trigger ds '' added two new scenarios to the game . 
 ''chrono trigger '' is frequently listed among the greatest video games of all time . 
the nintendo ds version of `` chrono trigger '' was the 22nd best-selling game of 2008 in japan . 
 ''chrono trigger '' features standard role-playing video game gameplay . 
the game was a bestseller in japan . 
gamesradar named `` chrono trigger '' the 2nd best super nes game of all time ,  behind `` super metroid '' . 
 ''chrono trigger '' features several other distinct gameplay traits ,  including time travel . 
in contrast to the critical acclaim of `` chrono trigger '''s original snes release ,  the 2018 microsoft windows port of `` chrono trigger '' was critically panned . 
 ''chrono trigger '' was a critical and commercial success upon release ,  and is frequently cited as one of the best video games of all time . 
there are no plans for a new title ,  despite a statement from hironobu sakaguchi in 2001 that the developers of `` chrono cross '' wanted to make a new `` chrono '' game . 
 ''chrono trigger ds '' has sold 490,000 copies in japan ,  240,000 in north america and 60,000 in europe as of march 2009.
there have been two notable attempts by `` chrono trigger '' fans to unofficially remake parts of the game for pc with a 3d graphics engine . 
by exploring new areas and fighting enemies ,  players progress through `` chrono trigger ''s story . 
 ''chrono trigger '' garnered much critical praise in addition to its brisk sales . 
yoshinori kitase revealed in 2011 that he used the time travel mechanics of `` chrono trigger '' as a starting point for that of `` final fantasy xiii-2 '' . 
 ''chrono trigger '' used a 32-megabit rom cartridge with battery-backed ram for saved games ,  lacking special on-cartridge coprocessors . 
the trust is based at allet near truro in cornwall . 
luckett/greenscombe wood
cornwall wildlife trust is part of the wildlife trusts partnership of 47 wildlife trusts in the united kingdom . 
it is often useful to embed topological spaces in compact spaces ,  because of the special properties compact spaces have . 
an embedding of a topological space `` x '' as a dense subset of a compact space is called a compactification of `` x '' . 
the one-point compactification of `` x '' is hausdorff if and only if `` x '' is hausdorff and locally compact . 
embeddings into compact hausdorff spaces may be of particular interest . 
of particular interest are hausdorff compactifications ,  i . e .  ,  compactifications in which the compact space is hausdorff . 
in mathematics ,  in general topology ,  compactification is the process or result of making a topological space into a compact space . 
for any topological space `` x '' the  -lrb-  alexandroff  -rrb-  one-point compactification α ''x '' of `` x '' is obtained by adding one extra point ∞  -lrb-  often called a `` point at infinity ''  -rrb-  and defining the open sets of the new space to be the open sets of `` x '' together with the sets of the form `` g '' ∪ {∞} ,  where `` g '' is an open subset of `` x '' such that `` x '' \ `` g '' is compact . 
let `` m '' be a smooth manifold and let `` x '' be a point in `` m '' . 
let `` m '' be a smooth manifold and let `` x '' be a point in `` m '' . 
then `` i '' and `` i '' are real vector spaces and the cotangent space is defined as the quotient space `` t '' ''m '' = `` i '' / `` i '' . 
let `` m '' be a smooth manifold and let `` f '' ∈ c -lrb-  `` m ''  -rrb-  be a smooth function . 
in differential geometry ,  one can attach to every point `` x '' of a smooth  -lrb-  or differentiable  -rrb-  manifold a vector space called the cotangent space at `` x '' . 
the tangent space and the cotangent space at a point are both real vector spaces of the same dimension and therefore isomorphic to each other via many possible isomorphisms . 
cnidaria are diploblastic animals; in other words ,  they have two main cell layers ,  while more complex animals are triploblasts having three main layers . 
in medusae the only supporting structure is the mesoglea . 
like sponges and ctenophores ,  cnidarians have two main layers of cells that sandwich a middle layer of jelly-like material ,  which is called the mesoglea in cnidarians; more complex animals have three main cell layers and no intermediate jelly-like layer . 
the mesoglea contains small numbers of amoeba-like cells ,  and muscle cells in some species . 
their bodies consist of mesoglea ,  a non-living jelly-like substance ,  sandwiched between two layers of epithelium that are mostly one cell thick . 
some colonial sea anemones stiffen the mesoglea with sediment particles . 
cnidarians form an animal phylum that are more complex than sponges ,  about as complex as ctenophores  -lrb-  comb jellies  -rrb-  ,  and less complex than bilaterians ,  which include almost all other animals . 
conservative judaism  -lrb-  known as masorti judaism outside north america  -rrb-  is a major jewish denomination which views jewish law ,  or `` halakha '' ,  as both binding and subject to historical development . 
the women’s league for conservative judaism is also active in north america . 
rather than a force within american judaism ,  the jts-centered movement emerged as a third denomination . 
rabbi louis ginzberg ,  summarizing his movement's position ,  wrote:
the boundaries between orthodox and conservative judaism in america were institutionalized only in the aftermath of world war ii . 
in israel ,  the masorti movement is led by rabbis mauricio balter and dubi haiyun ,  and chaired by yizhar hess . 
while spearheaded by radical and principled reformers like rabbi kaufmann kohler ,  the uahc was also home to more conservative elements . 
the term `` conservative judaism '' was used ,  still generically and not yet as a specific label ,  already in the 1887 dedication speech of the jewish theological seminary of america by rabbi alexander kohut . 
the tension between `` tradition and change '' – which were also the motto adopted by the movement since the 1950s – and the need to balance them were always a topic of intense debate within conservative judaism . 
the leadership council of conservative judaism stated in 1995: `` we want to encourage the jewish partner to maintain his/her jewish identity ,  and raise their children as jews . `` 
in the very same year ,  the reconstructionist also seceded fully ,  joining the world union for progressive judaism under observer status . 
while some 41 per cent of american jews identified with it in the 1970s ,  it had shrunk to an estimated 18 per cent  -lrb-  and 11 per cent among those under 30 -rrb- in 2013.
in 2016, the rabbis passed a resolution supporting transgender rights . 
these included sabato morais and rabbi henry pereira mendes of the elitist sephardi congregations ,  along with rabbis bernard drachman  -lrb-  ordained at breslau ,  though he regarded himself as orthodox  -rrb-  and henry schneeberger . 
another tendency prevalent among the movement's rabbis ,  yet again not particular to it ,  is the adoption of the more lenient positions on the matters at question — though this is not universal ,  and responsa also took stringent ones not infrequently . 
in 1854, frankel was appointed chancellor in the new jewish theological seminary of breslau ,  the first modern rabbinical seminary in germany . 
ra converts were denied ablution in orthodox ritual baths ,  and rabbis from one denomination would gradually cease serving in the other's communities . 
conservative judaism regards itself as the authentic inheritor of a flexible legalistic tradition ,  charging the orthodox with petrifying the process and reform with abandoning it . 
the new branches were all united within the world council of synagogues ,  later to be named masorti olami . 
the neolog budapest university of jewish studies also maintains connections with the denomination . 
tensions within the jts and ra grew . 
red hat linux was the only linux distribution that proprietary cde was ported to . 
each development group contributed its own technology to cde:
the common desktop environment  -lrb-  cde  -rrb-  is a desktop environment for unix and openvms ,  based on the motif widget toolkit . 
children of dune is a 1976 science fiction novel by frank herbert ,  the third in his `` dune '' series of six novels . 
leto declares himself emperor and asserts control over the fremen . 
at the end of `` dune messiah '' ,  paul atreides walks into the desert ,  a blind man ,  leaving his twin children leto and ghanima in the care of the fremen ,  while his sister alia rules the universe as regent . 
the novels `` dune messiah '' and `` children of dune '' were published in one volume by the science fiction book club in 2002 and the two were adapted into a well-received television miniseries entitled `` frank herbert's children of dune '' by the sci-fi channel in 2003.
reviewing `` children of dune '' ,  david pringle gave the novel a rating of two stars out of four and described the novel as `` dark and convoluted stuff . `` 
herbert chose in the books that followed to undermine paul's triumph with a string of failures and philosophical paradoxes; `` dune '' was a heroic melody ,  and `` dune messiah '' was its inversion . 
 ''candide '' has enjoyed both great success and great scandal . 
voltaire concludes with candide ,  if not rejecting leibnizian optimism outright ,  advocating a deeply practical precept ,  `` we must cultivate our garden '' ,  in lieu of the leibnizian mantra of pangloss ,  `` all is for the best '' in the `` best of all possible worlds '' . 
this genre ,  of which voltaire was one of the founders ,  included previous works of his such as `` zadig '' and `` micromegas '' . 
the british poet and literary critic martin seymour-smith listed `` candide '' as one of the 100 most influential books ever written . 
murbella's ascension to leadership is not accepted as victory by all the bene gesserit . 
lampadas ,  a center for bene gesserit education ,  has been destroyed by the honored matres . 
odrade next calls a meeting of all the bene gesserit ,  announcing her plan to attack the honored matres . 
in the midst of this battle ,  the jews  -lrb-  including rebecca with her precious memories  -rrb-  take refuge with the bene gesserit fleet . 
chapterhouse: dune is a 1985 science fiction novel by frank herbert ,  the last in his `` dune '' series of six novels . 
still ,  devices interrupted the cpu by signaling on separate cpu pins . 
for instance ,  a disk drive controller would signal the cpu that new data was ready to be read ,  at which point the cpu would move the data by reading the `` memory location '' that corresponded to the disk drive . 
the bus connecting the cpu and memory is one of the defining characteristics of the system ,  and often referred to simply as the system bus . 
buses can be parallel buses ,  which carry data words in parallel on multiple wires ,  or serial buses ,  which carry data in bit-serial form . 
in modern systems the performance difference between the cpu and main memory has grown so great that increasing amounts of high-speed memory is built directly into the cpu ,  known as a cache . 
most modern systems combine both solutions ,  where appropriate . 
increasing the speed of the cpu becomes harder ,  because the speed of all the devices must increase as well . 
later computer programs began to share memory common to several cpus . 
the internal bus ,  also known as internal data bus ,  memory bus ,  system bus or front-side-bus ,  connects all the internal components of a computer ,  such as cpu and memory ,  to the motherboard . 
computer systems generally consist of three main parts: the central processing unit  -lrb-  cpu  -rrb-  that processes data ,  memory that holds the programs and data to be processed ,  and i/o  -lrb-  input/output  -rrb-  devices as peripherals that communicate with the outside world . 
in this case ,  a single mechanical and electrical system can be used to connect together many of the system components ,  or in some cases ,  all of them . 
one of the first complications was the use of interrupts . 
the game is a modern and simplified variant of the american game halma . 
despite its name ,  the game is not a variation of checkers ,  nor did it originate in china or any part of asia  -lrb-  whereas the game 象棋 `` xiangqi '' ,  or `` chinese chess '' ,  is from china  -rrb-  . 
in 1991, howard lutnick was named president and ceo of cantor fitzgerald; he became chairman of cantor fitzgerald ,  l . p .  ,  in 1996.
cantor fitzgerald was formed in 1945 by bernard gerald cantor and john fitzgerald as an investment bank and brokerage business . 
cantor fitzgerald is an american financial services firm that was founded in 1945.
in december 2013, cantor fitzgerald settled its lawsuit against american airlines for $135 million . 
together with its affiliates ,  cantor fitzgerald operates in more than 60 offices in 20 countries and has more than 8,500 employees . 
the cane toad is an old species . 
cane toads are particularly dangerous to dogs . 
the cane toad  -lrb-  `` rhinella marina ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the giant neotropical toad or marine toad ,  is a large ,  terrestrial true toad native to south and mainland central america ,  but which has been introduced to various islands throughout oceania and the caribbean ,  as well as northern australia . 
association croquet is the name of an advanced game of croquet ,  played at international level . 
other clubs also use garden croquet as an introduction to the game ,  notably the hampstead heath croquet club and the watford croquet club . 
croquet was an event at the 1900 summer olympics . 
in golf croquet ,  a hoop is won by the first ball to go through each hoop . 
garden croquet is widely played in the uk . 
nine-wicket croquet ,  sometimes called `` backyard croquet '' ,  is played mainly in canada and the united states ,  and is the game most recreational players in those countries call simply `` croquet '' . 
unlike association croquet ,  there are no additional turns for hitting other balls . 
about 200 croquet clubs across the united states are members of the united states croquet association . 
croquet is popularly believed to be viciously competitive . 
in england and wales ,  there are around 170 clubs affiliated with the croquet association . 
the governing body in england is the croquet association ,  which has been the driving force of the development of the game . 
golf croquet is the fastest-growing version of the game ,  owing largely to its simplicity and competitiveness . 
croquet became highly popular as a social pastime in england during the 1860s . 
in the book `` queen of games: the history of croquet '' ,  nicky smith presents two theories of the origin of the modern game of croquet ,  which took england by storm in the 1860s and then spread overseas . 
in 1868, the first croquet all-comers meet was held at moreton-in-marsh ,  gloucestershire and in the same year the all england croquet club was formed at wimbledon ,  london . 
at championship-standard association croquet ,  players can often make all 26 points  -lrb-  13 for each ball  -rrb-  in two turns . 
a further difference is the more restrictive boundary-line rules of american croquet . 
in comparison with association croquet ,  play is faster and balls are more likely to be lifted off the ground . 
kilsyth curling club claims to be the first club in the world ,  having been formally constituted in 1716; it is still in existence today . 
scotland is home to the international governing body for curling ,  the world curling federation in perth ,  which originated as a committee of the royal caledonian curling club ,  the mother club of curling . 
the international olympic committee recognises the royal caledonian curling club  -lrb-  founded as the grand caledonian curling club in 1838 -rrb- as developing the first official rules for the sport . 
the first world championship for curling was limited to men and was known as the `` scotch cup '' ,  held in falkirk and edinburgh ,  scotland ,  in 1959.
the stand is now better known as the riverside stand . 
craven cottage is a football stadium located in fulham ,  london . 
the hammersmith end  -lrb-  or hammy  -rrb-  is the northernmost stand in the ground ,  the closest to hammersmith . 
the end of the riverside stand towards the 'smithy' end' indicates the end of the 'fulham wall' ,  a landmark in the boat race . 
although fulham was relegated ,  the development of craven cottage continued . 
the current stadium was one of the premiership's smallest grounds at the time of fulham's relegation at the end of the 2013–14 season  -lrb-  it was third-smallest ,  after the kc stadium and the liberty stadium  -rrb-  . 
between 1980 and 1984, fulham rugby league played their home games at the cottage . 
it wasn't until after fulham first reached the top division ,  in 1949, that further improvements were made to the stadium . 
the riverside stand backs onto the river thames and is elevated uniquely above the pitch unlike the other 3 stands . 
on 27 july 2012, fulham fc were granted permission to redevelop the riverside stand ,  increasing the capacity of craven cottage to 30,000 seats . 
on 8 october 1938, 49,335 spectators watched fulham play millwall . 
it has the hammersmith end to its left ,  the putney end to its right and is opposite the johnny haynes stand . 
cedar falls is located at  -lrb-  42.523520, −92.446402 -rrb- . 
cedar falls was founded in 1845 by william sturgis . 
the cleveland indians are an american professional baseball team based in cleveland ,  ohio . 
they now needed a winning team . 
the team would not reach the heights of 1920 again for 28 years . 
the team was unable to move out of the cellar ,  with losing seasons between 1969 and 1975.
since 1997, the two teams have played each other as part of the regular season ,  with the exception of 2002.
the indians struggled during the 2008 season . 
cleveland went without major league baseball for two seasons until gaining a team in the american association  -lrb-  aa  -rrb-  in 1887.
in 1997 cleveland started slow but finished with an 86–75 record . 
in 2015, after struggling through the first half of the season ,  the indians finished 81-80 for their third consecutive winning season ,  which the team had not done since 1999–2001.
by the end of the 1993 season ,  the team was in transition ,  leaving cleveland stadium and fielding a talented nucleus of young players . 
cleveland blues merged with the st .  louis maroons ua team in 1885.
1915 brought significant changes to the team . 
the next season ,  he would be dealt to the boston red sox where he won 20 games in 1978 and another 17 in 1979.
also ,  the team's mascot is named `` slider . `` 
the team hit bottom in 1914 and 1915, finishing in the cellar both years . 
cleveland became the first team to lose the world series after carrying the lead into the ninth inning of the seventh game . 
having contended for the division in the aborted 1994 season ,  cleveland sprinted to a 100–44 record  -lrb-  the season was shortened by 18 games due to player/owner negotiations  -rrb-  in 1995, winning its first ever divisional title . 
the cleveland infants were in the players' league . 
cleveland entered 1941 with a young team and a new manager; roger peckinpaugh had replaced the despised vitt; but the team regressed ,  finishing in fourth . 
the indians were a middling team by the 1930s ,  finishing third or fourth most years . 
they also play `` cleveland rocks '' at the end of the game for indians wins . 
the disastrous 1899 season would actually be a step toward a new future for cleveland fans the next year . 
the bluebirds suffered from financial problems in their first two seasons . 
from august 24 through september 15 during the 2017 season ,  the indians set a new american league record by winning 22 games in a row . 
a highlight of the season was a 22–0 victory over the new york yankees on august 31, one of the worst defeats suffered by the yankees in team history . 
the indians had their second consecutive winning season  -lrb-  not done since 2000–2001 -rrb- in 2014 finishing 85–77.
cleveland played their full schedule to july 19 followed by two games versus boston in mid-august and disbanded at the end of the season . 
 -lrb-  ojeda missed most of the season ,  and would retire the following year  -rrb-  . 
soon afterward ,  he was named team captain ,  and in 1903 the team was renamed the cleveland napoleons  -lrb-  soon shortened to naps  -rrb-  after a newspaper conducted a write-in contest . 
 '' ''in 1857 baseball games were a daily spectacle in cleveland's public squares . 
prospects for the season dimmed early when the indians ended may with a record of 22–30.
after defeating the wild-card boston red sox 3–1 in the division series ,  cleveland lost the 1998 alcs in six games to the new york yankees ,  who had come into the postseason with a then-al record 114 wins in the regular season . 
later in 1949, veeck's first wife  -lrb-  who had a half-stake in veeck's share of the team  -rrb-  divorced him . 
seattle and cleveland met in the first round of the postseason ,  however the mariners won the series 3–2.
for all games ,  the team uses a navy blue batting helmet with a red block `` c '' on the front . 
their home games were played at brotherhood park . 
they finished the regular season at 94–67, marking their fourth straight winning season ,  a feat not accomplished since the 1990s and early 2000s . 
the name referenced the nickname `` indians '' that was applied to the cleveland spiders baseball club during the time when louis sockalexis ,  a native american ,  played in cleveland  -lrb-  1897–99 -rrb- . 
despite the loss ,  cleveland players took home a number of awards . 
in the newspapers before and after 1870, the team was often called the forest citys ,  in the same generic way that the team from chicago was sometimes called the chicagos . 
cape town has had olympic aspirations . 
cape town's local government is the city of cape town ,  which is a metropolitan municipality . 
the parliament of south africa sits in cape town . 
much of the produce is handled through the port of cape town or cape town international airport . 
in cricket ,  the cape cobras represent cape town at the newlands cricket ground . 
the city of cape town works closely with cape town tourism to promote the city both locally and internationally . 
cape town has many local community newspapers . 
cape town is located at latitude 33.55° s  -lrb-  approx . 
public primary and secondary schools in cape town are run by the western cape education department . 
cape town has a well-developed higher system of public universities . 
with a gini coefficient of 0.67, cape town has the highest rate of equality in south africa . 
cape town is not only a popular international tourist destination in south africa ,  but africa as a whole . 
it forms part of the city of cape town metropolitan municipality . 
cape town was home to many leaders of the anti-apartheid movement . 
cape town receives 3,100 hours of sunshine per year . 
both the university of cape town and stellenbosch university are leading universities in south africa . 
there are also many private schools ,  both religious and secular ,  in cape town . 
cape town tourism receives a portion of its funding from the city of cape town while the remainder is made up of membership fees and own-generated funds . 
cape town became the legislative capital of the union ,  and later of the republic of south africa . 
since then the flats have been home to much of the population of greater cape town . 
cape town international airport serves both domestic and international flights . 
cape town has four major commercial nodes ,  with cape town central business district containing the majority of job opportunities and office space . 
until the witwatersrand gold rush and the development of johannesburg ,  cape town was the largest city in south africa . 
cape town has direct flights to most cities in south africa as well as a number of international destinations . 
the university of cape town also runs its own radio station ,  uct radio  -lrb-  104.5 mhz fm  -rrb-  . 
cape town is the economic hub of the western cape province ,  south africa's second main economic centre and africa's third main economic hub city . 
 ''vukani '' ,  based in the cape flats ,  is published in xhosa . 
cape town's transport system links it to the rest of south africa; it serves as the gateway to other destinations within the province . 
the team maintained first place in their division for much of the season . 
in two seasons as skipper ,  sveum finished with a record of 127–197.
the 2013 season resulted in much as the same the year before . 
following the 1969 season ,  the club posted winning records for the next few seasons ,  but no playoff action . 
in the nlcs ,  the cubs easily won the first two games at wrigley field against the san diego padres . 
the cubs have played their home games at wrigley field ,  also known as ``  ''the friendly confines '' '' since 1916.
wrigley died in 1977.
the 1985 season brought high hopes . 
after losing a dismal 103 games in 1966, the cubs brought home consecutive winning records in '67 and '68, marking the first time a cub team had accomplished that feat in over two decades . 
sosa had perhaps his finest season and jon lieber led the staff with a 20-win season . 
the project began at the conclusion of the 2014 season . 
in the 1983 world series the baltimore orioles of the al had home field advantage . 
the chicago cubs are an american professional baseball team based in chicago ,  illinois . 
the cubs ,  first known as the white stockings ,  were a founding member of the nl in 1876, becoming the chicago cubs in 1903.
chicago halted st .  louis' run to the playoffs by taking four of five games from the cardinals at wrigley field in early september ,  after which they won their first division title in 14 years . 
morrow also faced two injuries before the team ruled him out for the season in september . 
no one would catch them . 
again ,  the cubs' unusually high number of day games is often pointed to as one reason for the team's inconsistent late season play . 
however ,  they were swept in four games by the mets and were unable to make it to their first world series since 1945.
the bear cub itself was used in the clubs since the early 1900s and was the inspiration of the chicago staleys changing their team's name to the chicago bears ,  because the cubs allowed the football team to play at wrigley field in the 1930s . 
after the bench-clearing fight the cubs won the second game ,  and the sweep put the cubs at 68–45.
spalding won forty-seven games and barnes led the league in hitting at  . 429 as chicago won the first ever national league pennant ,  which at the time was the game's top prize . 
since 1984, the song started being played from time to time at wrigley field; since 2007, the song has been played over the loudspeakers following each cubs home victory . 
the `` steve bartman incident '' was seen as the `` first domino '' in the turning point of the era ,  and the cubs did not win a playoff game for the next eleven seasons . 
the wrigley family sold the team to the chicago tribune in 1981, ending a 65-year family relationship with the cubs . 
the confusion may stem from the fact that major league baseball did decide that ,  should the cubs make it to the world series ,  the american league winner would have home field advantage unless the cubs hosted home games at an alternate site since the cubs home field of wrigley field did not yet have lights . 
after finishing last in the nl central with 66 wins in 2006, the cubs re-tooled and went from `` worst to first '' in 2007.
since the nl east winners had had home field advantage in 1983, the nl west winners were entitled to it . 
the cubs are known as `` the north siders '' ,  a reference to the location of wrigley field within the city of chicago ,  and in contrast to the white sox ,  whose home field  -lrb-  guaranteed rate field  -rrb-  is located on the south side . 
in 2006, bottom fell out as the cubs finished 66–96, last in the nl central . 
despite trading for pitcher matt garza and signing free-agent slugger carlos peña ,  the cubs finished the 2011 season 20 games under  . 500 with a record of 71–91.
the album `` let us play ! `` 
coldcut are an english electronic music duo composed of matt black and jonathan more . 
the name coldcut stayed with arista so there were no official coldcut releases for the next three years . 
in 1999, `` let us replay ! `` 
after their success with lisa stansfield ,  coldcut signed with her label ,  arista . 
in 1988, coldcut released `` out to lunch with ahead of our time '' ,  a double lp of coldcut productions and re-cuts ,  and the various aliases under which the duo had recorded . 
according to `` spin '' ,  `` in '87 coldcut pioneered the british fad for 'dj records' '' . 
this continued coldcut and hex's pioneering of the use of microcomputers to synthesize electronic music visuals . 
coldcut's first mainstream success came when julian palmer from island records asked them to remix eric b . 
the video for coldcut's 'christmas break' in 1989 is arguably one of the first pop promos produced entirely on microcomputers . 
coldcut and hex presented this multimedia project as an example of the forthcoming convergence of pop music and computer-game characters . 
in 1994 coldcut and hex contributed an installation to the glasgow gallery of modern art . 
the cuisines of the americas are found across north and south america ,  and are based on the cuisines of the countries from which the immigrant people came ,  primarily europe . 
the regional cuisines are north american cuisine ,  mexican cuisine ,  central american cuisine ,  south american cuisine ,  and caribbean cuisine . 
the trade among different countries also largely affects a region's cuisine . 
from india to indonesia ,  the extenive use of spices is characteristic; coconuts and seafood are also used throughout the region both as foodstuffs and as seasonings . 
those curry dishes with origins in india and other south asian countries usually have a yogurt base while southeastern and eastern curries generally use coconut milk as their foundation . 
asian cuisines are many and varied . 
a video codec accomplishes the same task for video signals . 
many multimedia data streams contain both audio and video ,  and often some metadata that permit synchronization of audio and video . 
audio video interleave  -lrb-  avi  -rrb-  is sometimes erroneously described as a codec ,  but avi is actually a container format ,  while a codec is a software or hardware tool that encodes or decodes audio or video into or from some audio or video format . 
compression codecs are classified primarily into `` lossy '' codecs and `` lossless '' codecs . 
there are thousands of audio and video codecs ,  ranging in cost from free to hundreds of dollars or more . 
an audio codec converts analog audio signals into digital signals for transmission or encodes them for storage . 
tombaugh worked there from 1929 to 1945.
clyde tombaugh had five siblings . 
the asteroid 1604 tombaugh ,  discovered in 1931, is named after him . 
the object executed the same maneuvers as in tombaugh's first sighting . 
tombaugh died on january 17, 1997, when he was in las cruces ,  new mexico ,  at the age of 90.
both lapaz and tombaugh were to issue public denials that anything had been found . 
following the passage on july 14, 2015 of pluto by the `` new horizons '' spacecraft the `` cold heart of pluto '' was named tombaugh regio . 
tombaugh was born in streator ,  illinois ,  son of muron dealvo tombaugh ,  a farmer ,  and his wife adella pearl chritton . 
clyde william tombaugh  -lrb-  ; february 4, 1906january 17, 1997 -rrb- was an american astronomer . 
tombaugh was survived by his wife ,  patricia  -lrb-  1912–2012 -rrb- ,  and their children ,  annette and alden . 
after the death of john sigismund ,  the diet of transylvania elected christopher's younger brother ,  stephen báthory ,  voivode  -lrb-  or ruler  -rrb-  on 25 may 1571.
christopher's youngest son ,  sigismund ,  was born in 1573.
christopher's brother ,  stephen báthory ,  who succeeded john sigismund in 1571, made christopher captain of várad  -lrb-  now oradea in romania  -rrb-  . 
he was one of the commanders of john sigismund's army in the early 1560s . 
christopher báthory  -lrb-  ; 1530 – 27 may 1581 -rrb- was voivode of transylvania from 1576 to 1581.
experienced perl programmers often comment that half of perl's power is in the cpan . 
cpan is also used to distribute new versions of perl ,  as well as related projects ,  such as parrot and perl 6.
given its importance to the perl developer community ,  the cpan both shapes and is shaped by perl's culture . 
cpan testers are a group of volunteers ,  who will download and test distributions as they are uploaded to cpan . 
files on the cpan are referred to as `` distributions '' . 
some of the distributions on the cpan are distributed as jokes . 
several search engines have been written to help perl programmers sort through the cpan . 
there is also a perl core module named cpan; it is usually differentiated from the repository itself by using the name cpan . pm . 
authors can upload new distributions to the cpan through the `` perl authors upload server ''  -lrb-  pause  -rrb-  . 
the colorado rockies are an american professional baseball team based in denver ,  colorado . 
denver had long been a hotbed of denver bears/zephyrs minor league baseball and many in the area desired a major league team . 
portland silica fume cement . 
in 2010, the world production of hydraulic cement was  . 
carbon concentration in cement spans from ≈5% in cement structures to ≈8% in the case of roads in cement . 
portland cement may be grey or white . 
portland cement is by far the most common type of cement in general use around the world . 
roman cement quickly became popular but was largely replaced by portland cement in the 1850s . 
other standards  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  astm  -rrb-  don't allow pigments in portland cement ,  and colored cements are sold as `` blended hydraulic cements '' . 
in 2006, it was estimated that china manufactured 1.235 billion tonnes of cement ,  which was 44% of the world total cement production . 
hydraulic cements  -lrb-  such as portland cement  -rrb-  are made of a mixture of silicates and oxides ,  the four main components being:
portland pozzolan cement includes fly ash cement ,  since fly ash is a pozzolan ,  but also includes cements made from other natural or artificial pozzolans . 
 ''pozzolan-lime cements '' are mixtures of ground pozzolan and lime . 
modern hydraulic development began with the start of the industrial revolution  -lrb-  around 1800 -rrb- ,  driven by three main needs: modern cements are often portland cement or portland cement blends ,  but industry also uses other cements . 
in 2010, 3.3 billion tonnes of cement was consumed globally . 
the hydration products that produce strength are essentially the same as those in portland cement . 
used as an economic alternative to portland sulfate-resisting and low-heat cements . 
non-hydraulic cement does not set in wet conditions or under water . 
polymer cements are made from organic chemicals that polymerise . 
hydraulic cements  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  portland cement  -rrb-  set and become adhesive due to a chemical reaction between the dry ingredients and water . 
setting time and `` early strength '' are important characteristics of cements . 
the majority of carbon dioxide emissions in the manufacture of portland cement  -lrb-  approximately 60%  -rrb-  are produced from the chemical decomposition of limestone to lime ,  an ingredient in portland cement clinker . 
 ''calcium sulfoaluminate cements '' are made from clinkers that include ye'elimite  -lrb-  ca -lrb-  alo  -rrb- so or ca in cement chemist's notation  -rrb-  as a primary phase . 
sorel cement was patented in 1867 by frenchman stanislas sorel . 
cement ,  chemically speaking ,  is a product that includes lime as the primary curing ingredient ,  but is far from the first material used for cement ''ation '' . 
very finely ground cements are cement mixed with sand or with slag or other pozzolan type minerals that are extremely finely ground together . 
as with any natural material ,  such cements have highly variable properties . 
bags of cement routinely have health and safety warnings printed on them because not only is cement highly alkaline ,  but the setting process is exothermic . 
