if one uses the less-stringent 1000 casualties total criterion ,  there were over 90 civil wars between 1945 and 2007, with 20 ongoing civil wars as of 2007.
this includes civil wars; however ,  no specific definition of civil war is provided in the text of the conventions . 
based on the 1000-casualties-per-year criterion ,  there were 213 civil wars from 1816 to 1997, 104 of which occurred from 1944 to 1997.
the most obvious commonality to civil wars are that they occur in fragile states . 
a civil war ,  also known as an intrastate war in polemology ,  is a war between organized groups within the same state or country . 
on average ,  a civil war with interstate intervention was 300% longer than those without . 
according to barbara f .  walter ,  `` post-2003 civil wars are different from previous civil wars in three striking ways . 
civil wars in the 19th century and in the early 20th century tended to be short; civil wars between 1900 and 1944 lasted on average one and half years . 
there were several exceptions from the general rule of quick civil wars during this period . 
there has been an enormous amount of international intervention in civil wars since 1945 that some have argued served to extend wars . 
if one of the intervening states was a superpower ,  a civil war is a further 72% longer; a conflict such as the angolan civil war ,  in which there is two-sided foreign intervention ,  including by a superpower  -lrb-  actually ,  two superpowers in the case of angola  -rrb-  ,  would be 538% longer on average than a civil war without any international intervention . 
the risk of a civil war rises approximately proportionately with the size of a country's population . 
the more time that has elapsed since the last civil war ,  the less likely it is that a conflict will recur . 
civil wars have further resulted in economic collapse; somalia ,  burma  -lrb-  myanmar  -rrb-  ,  uganda and angola are examples of nations that were considered to have had promising futures before being engulfed in civil wars . 
the two major global ideologies ,  monarchism and democracy ,  led to several civil wars . 
the term is a calque of the latin `` bellum civile '' which was used to refer to the various civil wars of the roman republic in the 1st century bc . 
a `` cocoa product '' is defined as a food product that is sourced from cocoa beans and contains `` cocoa nibs ,  cocoa liquor ,  cocoa mass ,  unsweetened chocolate ,  bitter chocolate ,  chocolate liquor ,  cocoa ,  low-fat cocoa ,  cocoa powder ,  or low-fat cocoa powder '' . 
the liquor can be further processed into two components: cocoa solids and cocoa butter . 
white chocolate contains cocoa butter ,  sugar ,  and milk ,  but no cocoa solids . 
 ''white chocolate '' contains cocoa butter ,  sugar ,  and milk ,  but no cocoa solids . 
production costs can be decreased by reducing cocoa solids content or by substituting cocoa butter with another fat . 
high-quality white chocolate couvertures contain only about 35% cocoa butter . 
the fats in cocoa butter can crystallize in six different forms  -lrb-  polymorphous crystallization  -rrb-  . 
although cocoa originated in the americas ,  west african countries ,  particularly côte d'ivoire and ghana ,  are the leading producers of cocoa in the 21st century ,  accounting for some 60% of the world cocoa supply . 
white chocolate ,  although similar in texture to that of milk and dark chocolate ,  does not contain any cocoa solids . 
chocolate liquor is blended with the cocoa butter in varying quantities to make different types of chocolate or couvertures . 
raw chocolate ,  often referred to as raw cacao ,  is always dark and a minimum of 75% cacao . 
cacao trees cannot tolerate a temperature lower than  . 
representing only 5% of all cocoa beans grown  ,  criollo is the rarest and most expensive cocoa on the market ,  and is native to central america ,  the caribbean islands and the northern tier of south american states . 
milk chocolate is sweet chocolate that also contains milk powder or condensed milk . 
the maya grew cacao trees in their backyards ,  and used the cacao seeds the trees produced to make a frothy ,  bitter drink . 
as a solid piece of chocolate ,  the cocoa butter fat particles are in a crystalline rigid structure that gives the chocolate its solid appearance . 
dark chocolate is produced by adding fat and sugar to the cacao mixture . 
when the heat is removed ,  the cocoa butter crystals become rigid again and come closer together ,  allowing the chocolate to solidify . 
chocolate is made from cocoa beans ,  the dried and fermented seeds of the cacao tree  -lrb-  `` theobroma cacao ''  -rrb-  ,  a small ,  4–8 m tall  -lrb-  15–26 ft tall  -rrb-  evergreen tree native to the deep tropical region of the americas . 
the standard instrumentation includes both the cornet and the trumpet; however ,  in recent decades ,  the cornet has largely been replaced by the trumpet . 
the cornet mouthpiece has a shorter and narrower shank than that of a trumpet so it can fit the cornet's smaller mouthpiece receiver . 
the echo cornet has been called an obsolete variant . 
the most common cornet is a transposing instrument in b ,  though there is also a soprano cornet in e and a cornet in c .  all are unrelated to the renaissance and early baroque cornett . 
the modern trumpet has valves that allow it to play the same notes and fingerings as the cornet . 
legendary jazz pioneer buddy bolden played the cornet ,  and louis armstrong started off on the cornet but his switch to the trumpet is often credited with beginning of the trumpet's dominance in jazz . 
the cornet  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a brass instrument similar to the trumpet but distinguished from it by its conical bore ,  more compact shape ,  and mellower tone quality . 
mather's relationship with his father increase mather is thought by some to have been strained and difficult . 
in 1706, mather's slave ,  onesimus ,  explained to mather how he had been inoculated as a child in africa . 
the boston ephemeris was an almanac written by mather in 1686.
cotton mather  -lrb-  february 12, 1663 – february 13, 1728; a . b . 
1971 `` the admirable cotton mather '' by james playsted wood . 
mather was born in boston ,  massachusetts bay colony ,  the son of maria  -lrb-  née cotton  -rrb-  and increase mather ,  and grandson of both john cotton and richard mather ,  all also prominent puritan ministers . 
mather did not sign his name or support his father's book initially:
mather was influential in the construction of the court for the trials from the beginning . 
robert boyle was a huge influence throughout mather's career . 
bancroft quotes mather's reaction to stoughton's appointment as follows:
mather's short treatise on the lord's supper was later translated by his nephew josiah cotton . 
 ''magnalia christi americana '' ,  considered mather's greatest work ,  was published in 1702, when he was 39.
throughout his career mather was also keen to minister to convicted pirates . 
for several years after the trials ,  cotton mather continued to defend them and seemed to hold out a hope for their return . 
in 1721, mather published `` the christian philosopher '' ,  the first systematic book on science published in america . 
he was subsequently denied the presidency of harvard college which his father ,  increase mather ,  had held . 
boylston and mather's inoculation crusade `` raised a horrid clamour '' among the people of boston . 
on august 19, 1692, mather attended the execution of george burroughs  -lrb-  and four others who were executed after mather spoke  -rrb-  and robert calef presents him as playing a direct and influential role:
holmes' work also includes cotton mather’s october 20, 1692 letter  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  to his uncle opposing an end to the trials . 
one of the most public displays of their strained relationship emerged during the witch trials ,  which increase mather reportedly did not support . 
at the extreme ,  in november 1721, someone hurled a lighted grenade into mather's home . 
in 1869, william frederick poole quoted from various school textbooks of the time demonstrating they were in agreement on cotton mather's role in the witch trials:
bancroft notes that mather considered witches `` among the poor ,  and vile ,  and ragged beggars upon earth '' ,  and bancroft asserts that mather considered the people against the witch trials to be witch advocates . 
it was selected for `` the science fiction hall of fame volume one ,  1929-1964 '' . 
by the end of the war ,  he had risen to the rank of major . 
smith's stories describe a long future history of earth . 
smith's works consist of: one novel ,  originally published in two volumes in edited form as `` the planet buyer '' ,  also known as `` the boy who bought old earth ''  -lrb-  1964 -rrb- and `` the underpeople ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- ,  and later restored to its original form as `` norstrilia ''  -lrb-  1975 -rrb-; and 32 short stories  -lrb-  collected in `` the rediscovery of man ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  including two versions of the short story `` war no . 
smith's next story did not appear for several years ,  but readers began recognizing the name on stories and novelettes ,  often published through `` galaxy science fiction '' . 
the total volume of his science fiction output is relatively small ,  because of his time-consuming profession and his early death . 
cordwainer smith  -lrb-     -rrb-  was the pen-name used by american author paul myron anthony linebarger  -lrb-  july 11, 1913 – august 6, 1966 -rrb- for his science fiction works . 
most of smith's stories are set in an era starting some 14,000 years in the future . 
smith's most celebrated short story is his first-published ,  `` scanners live in vain '' ,  which led many of its earliest readers to assume that `` cordwainer smith '' was a new pen name for one of the established giants of the genre . 
charles laughton played kidd twice on film ,  first in 1945 in `` captain kidd '' ,  then in 1952 in `` abbott and costello meet captain kidd '' . 
on 1 april 1698, kidd reached madagascar . 
john crawford played kidd in the 1953 columbia film serial `` the great adventures of captain kidd '' . 
kidd killed one of his own crewmen on 30 october 1697.
kidd had two lawyers to assist in his defence . 
kidd's whig backers were embarrassed by his trial . 
william kidd ,  also captain william kidd or simply captain kidd  -lrb-  c .  1654 – 23 may 1701 -rrb- ,  was a scottish sailor who was tried and executed for piracy after returning from a voyage to the indian ocean . 
both accounts agree that most of kidd's men now abandoned him for culliford . 
kidd also had to sell his ship `` antigua '' to raise funds . 
after over a year ,  kidd was sent to england for questioning by the parliament of england . 
in new york city ,  kidd was active in the building of trinity church ,  new york . 
by 1689, kidd was a member of a french-english pirate crew sailing the caribbean under captain jean fantin . 
because of kidd's refusal to salute ,  the navy vessel's captain retaliated by pressing much of kidd's crew into naval service ,  despite rampant protests . 
kidd kept the french sea passes of the `` quedagh merchant '' ,  as well as the vessel itself . 
among kidd's officers was his quartermaster hendrick van der heul . 
calreticulin and calnexin are also integral proteins in the production of mhc class i proteins . 
the term `` mobilferrin '' is considered to be the same as calreticulin by some sources . 
calreticulin binds to misfolded proteins and prevents them from being exported from the endoplasmic reticulum to the golgi apparatus . 
calreticulin also known as calregulin ,  crp55, cabp3, calsequestrin-like protein ,  and endoplasmic reticulum resident protein 60  -lrb-  erp60 -rrb- is a protein that in humans is encoded by the `` calr '' gene . 
crannogs are widespread in ireland ,  with an estimated 1,200 examples ,  while scotland has 347 sites officially listed as such . 
in some instances ,  more than one structure was built on crannogs . 
a strict definition of a crannog ,  which has long been debated ,  requires the use of timber . 
reconstructed irish crannógs are located in craggaunowen ,  county clare ,  ireland; the irish national heritage park ,  in wexford ,  ireland; and in scotland at the `` scottish crannog centre '' at loch tay ,  perthshire . 
a crannog  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is typically a partially or entirely artificial island ,  usually built in lakes ,  rivers and estuarine waters of scotland ,  wales ,  and ireland . 
the current date in the gregorian calendar is  . 
a calendar date is a reference to a particular day represented within a calendar system . 
there is a large variety of formats for dates in use ,  which differ in the order of date components  -lrb-  e . g . 
the date  -lrb-  unix  -rrb-  command—internally using the c date and time functions—can be used to convert that internal representation of a point in time to most of the date representations shown here . 
a group is abelian if and only if  . 
the center is a normal subgroup ,   . 
barebone's parliament was over . 
the long parliament dissolved itself on 16 march . 
commonwealth government under the barebones was officially by a council of state and parliament . 
after seven months the grandees in the new model army removed him and ,  on 6 may 1659, they reinstalled the rump parliament . 
in 1653, after the forcible dissolution of the rump parliament ,  the army council adopted the instrument of government which made oliver cromwell lord protector of a united `` commonwealth of england ,  scotland and ireland '' ,  inaugurating the period now usually known as the protectorate . 
for the first two years of the commonwealth ,  the rump faced economic depression and the risk of invasion from scotland and ireland . 
there were many disagreements amongst factions of the rump . 
the rump was created by pride's purge of those members of the long parliament who did not support the political position of the grandees in the new model army . 
the rump had not agreed to its own dissolution; their legal ,  constitutional view it was unlawful was based on charles' concessionary act prohibiting the dissolution of parliament without its own consent  -lrb-  on 11 may 1641, leading to the entire commonwealth being the latter years of the long parliament in their majority view  -rrb-  . 
on 12 april 1654, under the terms of the tender of union ,  the `` ordinance for uniting scotland into one commonwealth with england '' was issued by the lord protector and proclaimed in scotland by the military governor of scotland ,  general george monck ,  1st duke of albemarle . 
in 1983, evers ran as an independent for governor of mississippi but lost to the democrat bill allain . 
his brother medgar continued to be involved in civil rights ,  becoming field secretary and head of the naacp in mississippi . 
in mississippi about 1951, brothers charles and medgar evers grew interested in african freedom movements . 
evers graduated from alcorn state university in lorman ,  mississippi . 
on june 12, 1963, byron de la beckwith ,  a democrat and a member of a kkk chapter ,  fatally shot evers' brother ,  medgar ,  in mississippi as he arrived home from work . 
evers criticized the naacp and other organizations for opposing pickering ,  as he said the candidate had a record of supporting the civil rights movement in mississippi . 
in 1969, following passage of the federal voting rights act of 1965, which authorized federal enforcement of the right to vote ,  evers was elected mayor of fayette ,  mississippi . 
over the opposition of more establishment figures in the national association for the advancement of colored people  -lrb-  naacp  -rrb-  such as roy wilkins ,  evers took over his brother's post as head of the naacp in mississippi . 
before and after the war ,  evers participated in bootlegging operations ,  prostitution ,  and numbers in mississippi and chicago . 
because signal0 and signal1 are transmitted at the same time into the air ,  they add to produce the raw signal
each user in a cdma system uses a different code to modulate their signal . 
each user in synchronous cdma uses a code orthogonal to the others' codes to modulate their signal . 
in other words ,  unlike synchronous cdma ,  the signals of other users will appear as noise to the signal of interest and interfere slightly with the desired signal in proportion to number of users . 
cdma is a spread-spectrum multiple-access technique . 
signals encoded with the specified pn sequence  -lrb-  code  -rrb-  are received ,  while signals with different codes  -lrb-  or the same code but a different timing offset  -rrb-  appear as wideband noise reduced by the process gain . 
the jammer can either spread its energy over the entire bandwidth of the signal or jam only part of the entire signal . 
this raw signal is called an interference pattern . 
in contrast ,  cdma systems use the soft hand-off ,  which is undetectable and provides a more reliable and higher-quality signal . 
if sender0 has code  -lrb-  1, −1 -rrb- and data  -lrb-  1, 0, 1, 1 -rrb- ,  and sender1 has code  -lrb-  1, 1 -rrb- and data  -lrb-  0, 0, 1, 1 -rrb- ,  and both senders transmit simultaneously ,  then this table describes the coding steps:
since each user generates mai ,  controlling the signal strength is an important issue with cdma transmitters . 
assume signal0 =  -lrb-  1, −1, −1, 1, 1, −1, 1, −1 -rrb- is transmitted alone . 
all forms of cdma use spread-spectrum process gain to allow receivers to partially discriminate against unwanted signals . 
content-control software ,  commonly referred to as an internet filter ,  is software that restricts or controls the content an internet user is capable to access ,  especially when utilised to restrict material delivered over the internet via the web ,  e-mail ,  or other means . 
the term `` content control '' is used on occasion by cnn ,  `` playboy '' magazine ,  the `` san francisco chronicle '' ,  and `` the new york times '' . 
in general ,  outside of editorial pages as described above ,  traditional newspapers do not use the term `` censorware '' in their reporting ,  preferring instead to use less overtly controversial terms such as `` content filter '' ,  `` content control '' ,  or `` web filtering ''; `` the new york times '' and the `` wall street journal '' both appear to follow this practice . 
content-control software determines what content will be available or be blocked . 
huntersquoy cairn on eday is a bookan type cairn with an upper and lower storey . 
the grey cairns of camster in caithness are examples of this type from mainland scotland . 
they often have a polygonal chamber and a short passage to one end of the cairn . 
blackhammer cairn on rousay is another example dating from the 3rd millennium bc . 
these include quanterness chambered cairn  -lrb-  3250 bc  -rrb-  in which the remains of 157 individuals were found when excavated in the 1970s ,  cuween hill near finstown which was found to contain the bones of men ,  dogs and oxen and wideford hill cairn ,  which dates from 2000 bc . 
the largest of three is the north-east cairn ,  which was partially reconstructed in the 19th century and the central cairn may have been used as a funeral pyre . 
a chambered cairn is a burial monument ,  usually constructed during the neolithic ,  consisting of a sizeable  -lrb-  usually stone  -rrb-  chamber around and over which a cairn of stones was constructed . 
the central chamber of holm of papa westray south cairn is over 20 metres long . 
canadian whisky is a type of whisky produced in canada . 
with assistance from the valleyfield distillery ,  they also produce seagram's vo and canadian 83.
later ,  the sazerac company would purchase the brands seagram's vo ,  canadian 83 and five star from diageo in 2018.
while the distillery exports much of its whisky for bottling in other countries ,  they also produce the brands alberta premium ,  alberta springs ,  windsor canadian and tangle ridge . 
today ,  as for the past two centuries ,  the terms `` rye whisky '' and `` canadian whisky '' are used interchangeably in canada and  -lrb-  as defined in canadian law  -rrb-  refer to exactly the same product ,  which generally is made with only a small amount of rye grain . 
most of its capacity is used for contract production of the beam suntory brand  -lrb-  and former hiram walker brand  -rrb-  canadian club ,  in addition to generic canadian whisky that is exported in bulk and bottled under various labels in other countries . 
the regulations under canada's `` food and drugs act '' stipulate the minimum conditions that must be met in order to label a product as `` canadian whisky '' or `` canadian rye whisky ''  -lrb-  or `` rye whisky ''  -rrb-  — these are also upheld internationally through geographical indication agreements . 
canadian whisky featured prominently in rum-running into the u . s .  during prohibition . 
both `` team '' and `` government '' are count nouns  -lrb-  consider: `` one team '' ,  `` two teams '' ,  `` most teams ''; `` one government '' ,  `` two governments '' ,  `` many governments ''  -rrb-  . 
in american english ,  collective nouns almost always take singular verb forms  -lrb-  formal agreement  -rrb-  . 
in british english ,  it is generally accepted that collective nouns can take either singular or plural verb forms depending on the context and the metonymic shift that it implies . 
different forms of english handle verb agreement with collective count nouns differently; in particular ,  users of british english generally accept that collective nouns take either singular or plural verb forms depending on context and the metonymic shift that it implies . 
such phrases might look plural ,  but they are not . 
in terms of diamonds ,  a paragon is a flawless stone of at least 100 carats  -lrb-  20 g  -rrb-  . 
the european conference of postal and telecommunications administrations  -lrb-  cept  -rrb-  was established on june 26, 1959, as a coordinating body for european state telecommunications and postal organizations . 
london trams ,  previously tramlink and croydon tramlink ,  is a light rail tram system serving croydon and surrounding areas in south london ,  england . 
when tramlink first opened it had three routes: line 1  -lrb-  yellow  -rrb-  from wimbledon to elmers end ,  line 2  -lrb-  red  -rrb-  from croydon to beckenham junction ,  and line 3  -lrb-  green  -rrb-  from croydon to new addington . 
the only tramlink extension actively being pursued by the mayor of london and tfl ,  as of 2018, is a new line between sutton and wimbledon . 
 ''this tram is for wimbledon ,  the next stop will be merton park . `` 
tramlink follows the former west croydon to wimbledon line ,  which was first opened in 1855 and closed on 31 may 1997 to allow for conversion into tramlink . 
to support developments in croydon ,  construction of a diverting loop in east croydon has been proposed at dingwall road . 
additionally ,  the first two trams from new addington will run to wimbledon . 
to the south of croydon ,  the proposal is for the new route to diverge from the central croydon loop and use a highway alignment ,  probably south end and brighton road ,  to purley . 
to the north of croydon ,  it is proposed to use a highway alignment based on london road . 
tramlink uses some former main-line stations on the wimbledon–west croydon and elmers end–coombe lane stretches of line . 
in 1990 croydon council with london regional transport  -lrb-  lrt  -rrb-  put the project to parliament and the croydon tramlink act 1994 resulted ,  which gave lrt the power to build and run tramlink . 
she is believed to have been running to catch the tram outside east croydon station when she tripped and fell . 
the first ,  principally between wimbledon and sutton ,  was in view even before tramlink opened: the trams were delivered with this as `` line 4 '' on their destination blinds . 
the tram stops have low platforms ,  above rail level . 
it is owned by london trams ,  an arm of transport for london  -lrb-  tfl  -rrb-  ,  and operated by tram operations ltd .  a subsidiary of firstgroup . 
the network's lines coincide in central croydon ,  with eastbound termini at beckenham junction ,  elmers end and new addington ,  and a westbound terminus at wimbledon ,  where there is an interchange for london underground . 
in january 2011, tramtrack croydon opened a tender for the supply of ten new or second-hand trams from the end of summer 2011.
to the north and south of croydon are some busy bus corridors ,  which derive from earlier tram routes . 
one of the factors leading to its creation was that the london borough of croydon has no london underground service . 
a victorian footbridge beside waddon new road was dismantled to make way for the flyover over the west croydon to sutton railway line . 
its shape corresponds to the shape that a weighted chain ,  having lighter links in the middle ,  would form . 
in free-hanging chains ,  the force exerted is uniform with respect to length of the chain ,  and so the chain follows the catenary curve . 
the catenary curve has a u-like shape ,  superficially similar in appearance to a parabolic arch ,  but it is not a parabola . 
the word `` catenary '' is derived from the latin word `` catēna '' ,  which means `` chain '' . 
it is often said that galileo thought the curve of a hanging chain was parabolic . 
some much older arches approximate catenaries ,  an example of which is the arch of taq-i kisra in ctesiphon . 
the symmetric modes consisting of two evanescent waves would form a catenary shape . 
color temperatures over 5000 k are called `` cool colors ''  -lrb-  bluish  -rrb-  ,  while lower color temperatures  -lrb-  2700–3000 k  -rrb-  are called `` warm colors ''  -lrb-  yellowish  -rrb-  . 
the color temperature of a light source is the temperature of an ideal black-body radiator that radiates light of a color comparable to that of the light source . 
filters on a camera lens ,  or color gels over the light source -lrb-  s  -rrb-  may be used to correct color balance . 
when viewing a color slide at a light table ,  it is important that the light be balanced properly so that the colors are not shifted towards the red or blue . 
both of the cited standards specify a 6500 k color temperature . 
color transparency film ,  being the final artefact in the process ,  has to be matched to the light source or filters must be used to correct color . 
lighting designers sometimes select filters by color temperature ,  commonly to match light that is theoretically white . 
here feedback loop systems are used ,  for example with color sensors ,  to actively monitor and control the color output of multiple color mixing leds . 
if there is more than one light source with varied color temperatures ,  one way to balance the color is to use daylight film and place color-correcting gel filters over each light source . 
the blue color of the sky is caused by rayleigh scattering of the sunlight by the atmosphere ,  which tends to scatter blue light more than red light . 
color temperature may also be a factor when selecting lamps ,  since each is likely to have a different color temperature . 
photographers sometimes use color temperature meters . 
cartoons can be divided into gag cartoons ,  which include editorial cartoons ,  and comic strips . 
because of the stylistic similarities between comic strips and early animated movies ,  `` cartoon '' came to refer to animation ,  and the word `` cartoon '' is currently used in reference to both animated cartoons and gag cartoons . 
books with cartoons are usually magazine-format `` comic books , ``  or occasionally reprints of newspaper cartoons . 
the book's design juxtaposed each cartoon alongside a photograph of the cartoon's creator . 
 ''comic strips '' ,  also known as `` cartoon strips '' in the united kingdom ,  are found daily in newspapers worldwide ,  and are usually a short series of cartoon illustrations in sequence . 
in the 1980s ,  `` cartoon '' was shortened to `` toon '' ,  referring to characters in animated productions . 
cartoons such as `` xkcd '' have also found their place in the world of science ,  mathematics ,  and technology . 
in the early 20th century ,  it began to refer to animated films which resembled print cartoons . 
he is the first chief minister to have been born in the northern territory . 
the chief minister of the northern territory is the head of government of the northern territory . 
in 2001, clare martin became the first labor and female chief minister of the northern territory . 
for this reason the effect on the cell is dose dependent; the fraction of cells that die is directly proportional to the dose of drug . 
anti-metabolites are a group of molecules that impede dna and rna synthesis . 
bleomycin ,  a glycopeptide isolated from `` streptomyces verticillus '' ,  also intercalates dna ,  but produces free radicals that damage dna . 
actinomycin is a complex molecule that intercalates dna and prevents rna synthesis . 
oncologists are already individualizing dosing of some cancer drugs based on exposure . 
the cytotoxic antibiotics are a varied group of drugs that have various mechanisms of action . 
the mechanisms of anthracyclines include dna intercalation  -lrb-  molecules insert between the two strands of dna  -rrb-  ,  generation of highly reactive free radicals that damage intercellular molecules and topoisomerase inhibition . 
traditional chemotherapeutic agents are cytotoxic by means of interfering with cell division  -lrb-  mitosis  -rrb-  but cancer cells vary widely in their susceptibility to these agents . 
current chemotherapy regimens apply drug treatment in cycles ,  with the frequency and duration of treatments limited by toxicity . 
there has been controversy over the use of bsa to calculate chemotherapy doses for people who are obese . 
in many cases ,  this can result in sub-optimal treatment . 
taxanes are natural and semi-synthetic drugs . 
alkylating agents are the oldest group of chemotherapeutics in use today . 
recent western scholarship of china has been heavily influenced by postmodernism ,  and has questioned modernist narratives of china's backwardness and lack of development . 
the period established social and political patterns which shaped china's history from that point on . 
the japanese scholar tanigawa michio ,  writing in the 1970s and 1980s ,  set out to revise the generally marxist views of china prevalent in post-war japan . 
in a different view of modernization ,  the japanese historian naito torajiro argued that china reached modernity during its mid-imperial period ,  centuries before europe . 
by the mid-20th century ,  it was increasingly clear to historians that the notion of `` changeless china '' was untenable . 
most chinese history that is published in the people's republic of china is based on a marxist interpretation of history . 
in the 1980s ,  paul cohen ,  a student of fairbank's ,  issued a call for a more `` china-centered history of china '' . 
nationalist and communist china both held the view that chinese history should include all the ethnic groups of the lands held by the qing empire  -lrb-  zhonghua minzu  -rrb-  ,  and not just the history of the han chinese in so-called china proper ,  the han chauvinism of the qing-era tongmenghui . 
the official historical view within the people's republic of china associates each of these stages with a particular era in chinese history . 
long abandoned as a research focus among most western scholars due to postmodernism's influence ,  this remains the primary interest for most historians inside china . 
morse ,  who wrote chronicles of china's international relations such as `` trade and relations of the chinese empire '' . 
nonetheless ,  studies seeing china's interaction with europe as the driving force behind its recent history are still common . 
chinese historiography is the study of the techniques and sources used by historians to develop the recorded history of china . 
while wittfogel's theories were not popular among marxist historians in china ,  the economist chi ch'ao-ting used them in his influential 1936 book ,  `` key economic areas in chinese history ,  as revealed in the development of public works for water-control '' . 
the acceptance of this view by ethnic minorities sometimes depends on their views on present-day issues . 
from 1945 until 1949, the war had been reduced to two parties; the cpc and the kmt . 
while discussions do take place ,  they are all supervised by the cpc . 
yet ,  by 1943, the cpc was again actively expanding its territory at the expense of the kmt . 
the founding national congress of the cpc was held on 23–31 july 1921.
the second sino-japanese war caused a pause in the conflict between the cpc and the kmt . 
the cpc continued supporting the wuhan kmt government ,  but on 15 july 1927 the wuhan government expelled all communists from the kmt . 
in between congresses the ccdi is under the authority of the central committee . 
the conflict with the kmt led to the reorganization of the red army ,  with power now centralized in the leadership through the creation of cpc political departments charged with supervising the army . 
collective leadership ,  the idea that decisions will be taken through consensus ,  is the ideal in the cpc . 
in 1997, deng's beliefs  -lrb-  deng xiaoping theory  -rrb-  ,  were embedded in the cpc constitution . 
this is a logical dividing line ,  since the normal boiling points of the so-called permanent gases  -lrb-  such as helium ,  hydrogen ,  neon ,  nitrogen ,  oxygen ,  and normal air  -rrb-  lie below −180 °c while the freon refrigerants ,  hydrocarbons ,  and other common refrigerants have boiling points above −180 °c . 
the term `` high temperature cryogenic '' describes temperatures ranging from above the boiling point of liquid nitrogen ,   ,  up to  ,  the generally defined upper limit of study referred to as cryogenics . 
he discussed this in an interview while he was filming the 2005 cbs television film `` pope john paul ii '' ,  in which he played the young priest karol wojtyła . 
in 2010 he returned to the `` saw '' franchise in `` saw 3d ''  -lrb-  2010 -rrb- ,  the seventh film in the series ,  as dr .  lawrence gordon . 
the film is based on interviews and recordings with lambert made by journalist jon lindsay ,  and is being produced by orian williams . 
in 2010 he reprised his role in `` saw 3d '' . 
the film ,  which starred michael shannon and kevin spacey ,  was bought by amazon as their first theatrical feature and was released on 22 april 2016.
the tv film was highly successful not only in north america but also in europe ,  where it broke box office records in the late pope's native poland and became the first film ever to break $1 million  -lrb-  gbp 739,075.00 current  -rrb-  in three days . 
since being released on home video and television ,  however ,  the film has become a cult classic . 
the book debuted on `` the new york times best seller list '' . 
elwes' voice-over work includes the narrator in james patterson's audiobook `` the jester '' ,  as well as characters in film and television animations such as `` quest for camelot '' ,  `` pinky and the brain '' ,  `` batman beyond '' ,  and the english versions of the studio ghibli films ,  `` porco rosso '' ,  `` whisper of the heart '' and `` the cat returns '' . 
sarandon has been married three times; he was first married to actress susan sarandon from 1967 to 1979.
christopher sarandon jr .   -lrb-  ; born july 24, 1942 -rrb- is an american actor . 
sarandon was born and raised in beckley ,  west virginia ,  the son of restaurateurs christopher `` chris '' sarandon and cliffie  -lrb-  née cardullias  -rrb-  . 
sarandon graduated from woodrow wilson high school in beckley . 
he also had roles in the thriller movie `` lipstick ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- and as a demon in the movie `` the sentinel ''  -lrb-  1977 -rrb- . 
the current heir presumptive to the barony is guest's younger brother ,  actor nicholas guest . 
guest had a guest voice-over role in the animated comedy series `` spongebob squarepants '' as spongebob's cousin ,  stanley . 
guest is married to actress and author jamie lee curtis . 
guest later began performing with bluegrass bands until he took up rock and roll . 
guest became the 5th baron haden-guest ,  of great saling ,  in the county of essex ,  when his father died in 1996.
as a co-writer and director ,  guest made the hollywood satire `` the big picture '' . 
guest made his first appearance as tufnel on the 1978 sketch comedy program `` the tv show '' . 
guest spent parts of his childhood in his father's native united kingdom . 
kane made her `` wicked '' debut on the 1st national tour ,  playing the role from march 9 through december 19, 2005.
kane was born in cleveland ,  ohio ,  the daughter of joy ,  a jazz singer ,  teacher ,  dancer ,  and pianist ,  and michael kane . 
carolyn laurie kane  -lrb-  born june 18, 1952 -rrb- is an american actress and comedian . 
kane was nominated for an academy award for best actress for her role in the film `` hester street '' . 
in may 2012, kane appeared on broadway as betty chumley in a revival of the play `` harvey '' . 
we begin with the abstract characterization of c*-algebras given in the 1943 paper by gelfand and naimark . 
a c*-algebra is a complex algebra `` a '' of continuous linear operators on a complex hilbert space with two additional properties:
the london borough of croydon  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a london borough in south london ,  england and is part of outer london . 
the london borough of croydon was formed in 1965 from the coulsdon and purley urban district and the county borough of croydon . 
croydon is currently going through a vigorous regeneration plan ,  called croydon vision 2020.
it was aimed at business and residents in the london borough of croydon ,  to demonstrate the £3.5bn development projects the council wishes to see in croydon in the next ten years . 
there are different definitions used in group theory and ring theory . 
a cairn is a human-made pile  -lrb-  or stack  -rrb-  of stones . 
the word `` cairn '' comes from the  -lrb-  plural   -rrb-  . 
different types of cairns exist from rough piles of stones to interlocking dry stone round cylinders . 
in portugal a cairn is called a  . 
in scandinavia ,  cairns have been used for centuries as trail and sea marks ,  among other purposes . 
the building of cairns for recreational purposes along trails ,  to mark one's personal passage through the area ,  can result in an overabundance of rock piles . 
every group has itself  -lrb-  the improper subgroup  -rrb-  and the trivial subgroup as two of its fully characteristic subgroups . 
the commutator subgroup of a group is always a fully characteristic subgroup . 
examples of characteristic subgroups include the commutator subgroup and the center of a group . 
chile approved class actions in 2004.
there are several criticisms of class actions . 
italy has class action legislation . 
class members often receive little or no benefit from class actions . 
where both the plaintiffs and the defendants have been organized into court-approved classes ,  the action is called a bilateral class action . 
although normally plaintiffs are the class ,  defendant class actions are also possible . 
provincial laws in canada allow class actions . 
swiss law does not allow for any form of class action . 
for the case to proceed as a class action and bind absent class members ,  the court must certify the class under rule 23 on a motion from the party wishing to proceed on a class basis . 
the class representative must be able to represent the interests of all the members of the class ,  by being typical of the class members and not having conflicts with them . 
although the class representative is named as a party to the litigation ,  the court must approve the class representative when it certifies the lawsuit as a class action . 
the class action fairness act of 2005 addresses these concerns . 
1986 -rrb-  -lrb-  granting certification of a class action involving asbestos  -rrb-  . 
however ,  rule 23 also provides for defendant class actions . 
class actions were recognized in `` halabi '' leading case  -lrb-  supreme court ,  2009 -rrb- . 
other cases ,  however ,  may be more conducive to class treatment . 
some states ,  such as virginia ,  do not provide for any class actions ,  while others ,  such as new york ,  limit the types of claims that may be brought as class actions . 
class action cases present significant ethical challenges . 
in a typical class action ,  a plaintiff sues a defendant or a number of defendants on behalf of a group ,  or class ,  of absent parties . 
for example ,  in the united states ,  class lawsuits sometimes bind all class members with a low settlement . 
this is currently the closest mechanism to a class action in england and wales . 
businesses targeted by class actions for inflicting massive aggregate harm have sought ways to avoid class actions altogether . 
a class action ,  class suit ,  or representative action is a type of lawsuit where one of the parties is a group of people who are represented collectively by a member of that group . 
due process requires in most cases that notice describing the class action be sent ,  published ,  or broadcast to class members . 
yawning in some cases can be considered contempt of court . 
contempt of court and contempt of parliament are the only remaining common law offences in canada . 
contempt of court is essentially seen as a form of disturbance that may impede the functioning of the court . 
when a court decides that an action constitutes contempt of court ,  it can issue a court order that in the context of a court trial or hearing declares a person or organization to have disobeyed or been disrespectful of the court's authority ,  called `` found '' or `` held '' in contempt . 
if one person says ,  “this is what i meant by what i said , ” and his friend agrees that was their understanding of what was meant by their friend . 
if one person says ,  “this is what i intended by the action i took , ” and his friend agrees that his actions could have looked like what their friend intended . 
first person walks in turns and looks back the way they had come; this allows a person to say i had a clear view of another person that enters later . 
think of this like backing up your mate in the playground no matter what they did or said . 
similarly ,  courts in england ,  south africa ,  australia ,  and canada allow a cross-examiner to exceed the scope of direct examination . 
though the closing argument is often considered the deciding moment of a trial ,  effective cross-examination wins trials . 
he compared the p-40 favorably with the p-38:
the p-40 was retired by the raaf in 1947.
the 99th continued to score with p-40s until february 1944, when they were assigned p-39s and p-51 mustangs . 
these were assigned to squadrons of the 4th air group . 
the 8th ,  15th ,  18th ,  24th ,  49th ,  343rd and 347th pgs/fgs ,  flew p-40s in the pacific theaters between 1941 and 1945, with most units converting to p-38s from 1943–44.
the p-40 kittyhawks were obtained in lieu of 144 p-39 airacobras originally allocated to canada but reassigned to the raf . 
other raaf pilots served with raf or saaf p-40 squadrons in the theater . 
the p-40 was the main usaaf fighter aircraft in the south west pacific and pacific ocean theaters during 1941–42.
the curtiss p-40 warhawk is an american single-engined ,  single-seat ,  all-metal fighter and ground-attack aircraft that first flew in 1938.
many raaf pilots achieved high scores in the p-40.
it was the third most-produced american fighter of world war ii ,  after the p-51 and p-47; by november 1944, when production of the p-40 ceased ,  13,738 had been built ,  all at curtiss-wright corporation's main production facilities at buffalo ,  new york . 
units arriving in the cbi after the avg in the 10th and 14th air forces continued to perform well with the p-40, claiming 973 kills in the theater ,  or 64.8 percent of all enemy aircraft shot down . 
the 49th fighter group was in action in the pacific from the beginning of the war . 
a total of 13 royal canadian air force units operated the p-40 in the north west european or alaskan theaters . 
at least 40 u . s .  pilots reached ace status while flying the p-40 in the cbi . 
the p-40s were considered superior to the hurricane ,  which they replaced as the primary fighter of the desert air force . 
in all ,  18 royal air force  -lrb-  raf  -rrb-  squadrons ,  four royal canadian air force  -lrb-  rcaf  -rrb-  ,  three south african air force  -lrb-  saaf  -rrb-  and two royal australian air force  -lrb-  raaf  -rrb-  squadrons serving with raf formations ,  used p-40s . 
p-40 warhawk was the name the united states army air corps and after june 1941, usaaf-adopted name for all models ,  making it the official name in the u . s .  for all p-40s . 
the p-40 offered the additional advantage of low cost ,  which kept it in production as a ground-attack aircraft long after it was obsolete as a fighter . 
however ,  before any home units received the p-40, three rcaf article xv squadrons operated tomahawk aircraft from bases in the united kingdom . 
p-40s first saw combat with the british commonwealth squadrons of the desert air force in the middle east and north african campaigns ,  during june 1941.
one of the most widely used creeds in christianity is the nicene creed ,  first formulated in ad 325 at the first council of nicaea . 
some christian denominations and other groups have rejected the authority of those creeds . 
a creed is sometimes referred to as a `` symbol '' in a specialized meaning of that word  -lrb-  which was first introduced to late middle english in this sense  -rrb-  ,  after latin `` symbolum '' `` creed ''  -lrb-  as in `` symbolum apostolorum '' = `` apostles' creed ''  -rrb-  ,  after greek `` symbolon '' `` token ,  watchword '' . 
he spoke greek so perfectly that he was called `` honey-tongued ''  -lrb-  μελίγλωσσος `` meliglossos ''  -rrb- ; roman-born ,  he preferred greek authors ,  and wrote in a slightly archaizing greek himself . 
callisto was then turned into a bear ,  as hesiod described:
callisto's story was sometimes depicted in classical art ,  where the moment of transformation into a bear was the most popular . 
the fourth galilean moon of jupiter is named after callisto . 
titian's `` diana and callisto ''  -lrb-  1556-1559 -rrb- ,  was the greatest  -lrb-  though not the first  -rrb-  of these ,  quickly disseminated by a print by cornelius cort . 
a cookie is a baked or cooked food that is small ,  flat and sweet . 
cookies or biscuits may be mass-produced in factories ,  made in small bakeries or homemade . 
each web server runs http server software ,  which responds to requests from web browsers . 
the cgi was a program executed by the server that provided a common `` gateway '' between the web server and the database . 
a web server allows its owner to configure which urls shall be handled by which cgi scripts . 
the name cgi comes from the early days of the web ,  where users wanted to connect databases to their web servers . 
if the `` action '' specifies a cgi script then the cgi script would be executed and it then produces an html page . 
http provides ways for browsers to pass such information to the web server ,  e . g . 
some ,  but not all ,  of these variables are defined by the cgi standard . 
webpage generating programs invoked by server software that operate according to the cgi standard are known as `` cgi scripts '' . 
under the indian reorganization act ,  the mississippi choctaws re-organized on april 20, 1945 as the mississippi band of choctaw indians . 
by 1907, the mississippi choctaw were in danger of becoming extinct . 
the choctaw paid $60,000 in fees to abramoff . 
martin was elected as chief of the mississippi band of choctaw indians . 
the choctaw in oklahoma struggled to build a nation . 
for the choctaw who remained in or returned to mississippi after 1855, the situation deteriorated . 
he learned there were eight choctaw men in the battalion . 
the mississippi choctaw would lay the foundations of business ventures . 
the choctaw are the third-largest federally recognized tribe . 
the confederacy's loss was also the choctaw nation's loss . 
in march 1917, federal representatives held hearings ,  attended by around 100 choctaws ,  to examine the needs of the mississippi choctaws . 
the choctaw allied with french colonists as a defense against the english ,  who had been taking choctaws as captives for the indian slave trade . 
after the civil war ,  the mississippi ,  alabama ,  and louisiana choctaw fell into obscurity for some time . 
during world war i ,  choctaw soldiers served in the u . s .  military as the first native american codetalkers ,  using the choctaw language . 
the choctaw nation of oklahoma developed gaming operations and a related resort: the choctaw casino resort and choctaw casino bingo are their popular gaming destinations in durant . 
the first mississippi band of choctaw indians regular tribal council meeting was held on july 10, 1945.
during the american civil war ,  the choctaw in both oklahoma and mississippi mostly sided with the confederate states of america . 
from that period ,  the us appointed chiefs of the choctaw and other tribes in the former indian territory . 
pierce's 1st choctaw battalion was disbanded on may 9, 1863.
at the same time ,  a significant number of choctaw aided spain . 
approximately 4,000–6,000 choctaw remained in mississippi in 1831 after the initial removal efforts . 
pierce's 1st choctaw battalion was established in february 1863.
john w .  pierce and samuel g .  spann organized the choctaw indians in mississippi between 1862 and 1863.
the choctaw were non-white ,  landless ,  and had minimal legal protection . 
spann lived in meridian ,  mississippi at the time he wrote about the deeds of the choctaw during the civil war . 
some choctaw identified with the southern cause and a few owned slaves . 
martin served as chairperson in various choctaw committees up until 1977.
the choctaw  -lrb-  in the choctaw language ,  chahta  -rrb-  are a native american people originally occupying what is now the southeastern united states  -lrb-  modern-day alabama ,  florida ,  mississippi and louisiana  -rrb-  . 
after cato h .  sells investigated the choctaws' condition ,  the u .  s .  bureau of indian affairs established the choctaw agency on october 8 of 1918.
they appointed a choctaw delegate to represent them to the us government in washington ,  dc . 
the treaty required choctaws to return escaped slaves to colonists ,  to turn over any choctaw convicted of crimes by the u . s .  ,  establish borderlines between the u . s .  and choctaw nation ,  and the return any property captured from colonists during the revolutionary war . 
the mississippi band of choctaw indians is one of the state's largest employers ,  running 19 businesses and employing 7,800 people . 
in 2006, the state legislature passed a bill to return `` nanih waiya '' to the choctaw . 
leflore ,  in defense of his heritage ,  spoke in the choctaw language and asked the senate floor which was better understood ,  latin or choctaw . 
choctaw scouts served under washington ,  morgan ,  wayne and sullivan . `` 
a mississippi choctaw veteran stated ,  `` indians were not supposed to go in the military back then  .  .  .  the military was mainly for whites . 
in may 1853, choctaws sailed out of mobile ,  alabama for boston and new york . 
during the american revolution ,  the choctaw divided over whether to support britain or spain . 
from about 1865 to 1914, mississippi choctaws were largely ignored by governmental ,  health ,  and educational services and fell into obscurity . 
early 19th century and contemporary choctaw storytellers describe that the choctaw people emerged from either nanih waiya mound or cave . 
the mississippi choctaws' improvements may have continued if it wasn't dramatically interrupted by world events . 
the us army again used choctaw speakers for coded language during world war ii . 
article 14 in the 1830 treaty with the choctaw stated choctaws may wish to become citizens of the united states under the 14th article of the treaty of dancing rabbit creek on all of the combined lands which were consolidated under article i from all previous treaties between the united states and the choctaw . 
after the revolutionary war ,  the choctaw were reluctant to ally themselves with countries hostile to the united states . 
the improved transportation afforded by the railroads increased the pressure on the choctaw nation . 
with the tribe's adoption of government ,  in 1944 the secretary of the interior declared that would be held in trust for the choctaw of mississippi . 
the choctaw formed several regiments and battalions for service with the confederate states army ,  both in indian territory and later in mississippi , 
according to prigogine ,  the term was introduced and developed by théophile de donder . 
according to chemistry historian henry leicester ,  the influential 1923 textbook `` thermodynamics and the free energy of chemical reactions '' by gilbert n .  lewis and merle randall led to the replacement of the term `` affinity '' by the term `` free energy '' in much of the english-speaking world . 
accordingly ,  hale–bopp was dubbed the great comet of 1997.
it further confirms that the dust grains in the coma of comet hale–bopp were smaller than inferred in any other comet . 
comet kohoutek in 1973 had been touted as a 'comet of the century' and turned out to be unspectacular . 
hale–bopp was the first comet where the noble gas argon was detected . 
hale–bopp has about a 15% chance of eventually becoming a sungrazing comet through this process . 
hale–bopp showed the highest ever linear polarization detected for any comet . 
the comet was visible well before the sky got fully dark each night ,  and while many great comets are very close to the sun as they pass perihelion ,  comet hale–bopp was visible all night to northern hemisphere observers . 
as it passed perihelion on april 1, 1997, the comet developed into a spectacular sight . 
one of the most remarkable discoveries was that the comet had a third type of tail . 
while the comet's dust tail roughly followed the path of the comet's orbit and the gas tail pointed almost directly away from the sun ,  the sodium tail appeared to lie between the two . 
after its perihelion passage ,  the comet moved into the southern celestial hemisphere . 
deuterium was also detected in many other hydrogen compounds in the comet . 
comet hale–bopp  -lrb-  formally designated c/1995 o1 -rrb- is a comet that was perhaps the most widely observed of the 20th century ,  and one of the brightest seen for many decades . 
the abundance of deuterium in comet hale–bopp in the form of heavy water was found to be about twice that of earth's oceans . 
carolyn shoemaker and her husband gene ,  both famous for co-discovering comet shoemaker–levy 9, were involved in a car crash after photographing the comet . 
a conspiracy is an agreement between persons  -lrb-  called conspirers or conspirators  -rrb-  who intend to gain some collective advantage while keeping their agreement secret from the public or from other people affected by it . 
the term generally implies wrongdoing or illegality on the part of the conspirators ,  as people would not need to conspire to engage in activities that were lawful and ethical ,  or to which no one would object . 
the desert also hosts an annual jeep rally ,  known as cholistan desert jeep rally . 
the cholistan desert  -lrb-  ; saraki:   -rrb-  ,  also locally known as rohi  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  sprawls from bahawalpur ,  punjab ,  pakistan and covers an area of  . 
the word cholistan is derived from the turkic word `` chol '' ,  meaning `` desert '' . 
the estimated number of livestock in the desert areas is 1.6 million . 
cholistan produces very superior type of carpet wool as compared to that produced in other parts of pakistan . 
amlaíb disappears from irish annals after his return to ireland in 871.
causantín's son domnall and his descendants represented the main line of the kings of alba and later scotland . 
viking activity in northern britain appears to have reached a peak during causantín's reign . 
' or '  -lrb-  in modern gaelic: '; died 877 -rrb- was a king of the picts . 
her death is recorded in 913.
constantine ii  -lrb-  ; january/february 316 – 340 -rrb- was roman emperor from 337 to 340.
the eldest son of constantine the great and fausta ,  constantine ii was born in arles in february 316 and raised as a christian . 
for constantine's last years as king there is only the meagre record of the `` chronicle of the kings of alba '' . 
constantine succeeded him as king . 
according to the king lists ,  he was counted the 70th and last king of the picts in later times . 
in this period the `` chronicle of the kings of alba '' reports the death of cormac mac cuilennáin ,  king of munster ,  in the eighth year of constantine's reign . 
in 900 it was probably ruled by king dyfnwal . 
the next event reported by the `` chronicle of the kings of alba '' is dated to 906.
this change of title ,  from king of the picts to king of alba ,  is part of a broader transformation of pictland and the origins of the kingdom of alba are traced to constantine's lifetime . 
æthelstan followed up his advances in the north by securing the recognition of the welsh kings . 
the second death ,  entered with that of æthelstan ,  is that of eochaid mac ailpín ,  who may ,  from his name ,  have been a kinsman of constantín . 
the same style is used of kenneth's brother donald i  -lrb-  domnall mac ailpín  -rrb-  and sons constantine i  -lrb-  constantín mac cináeda  -rrb-  and áed  -lrb-  áed mac cináeda  -rrb-  . 
the situation of the gaelic kingdoms of dál riata in western scotland is uncertain . 
constantine ,  son of áed  -lrb-  medieval gaelic: `` constantín mac áeda ''; modern gaelic: `` còiseam mac aoidh '' ,  known in most modern regnal lists as constantine ii; born no later than 879; died 952 -rrb- was an early king of scotland ,  known then by the gaelic name `` alba '' . 
the `` annals of ulster '' record the defeat of an irish fleet from the kingdom of ulaid by vikings `` on the coast of england '' at about this time . 
the dominant kingdom in eastern scotland before the viking age was the northern pictish kingdom of fortriu on the shores of the moray firth . 
after áed's death ,  there is a two-decade gap until the death of donald ii  -lrb-  domnall mac constantín  -rrb-  in 900 during which nothing is reported in the irish annals . 
the report of the battle in the `` annals of ulster '' says that none of the kings or mormaers among the men of alba were killed . 
the earliest event recorded in the `` chronicle of the kings of alba '' in constantine's reign is an attack by vikings and the plundering of dunkeld `` and all albania '' in his third year . 
constantine was the first roman emperor to convert to christianity . 
constantine the great  -lrb-  ; ; 27 february 272 ad – 22 may 337 ad  -rrb-  ,  also known as constantine i ,  was a roman emperor who ruled between 306 and 337 ad . 
in july 310 ad ,  maximian hanged himself . 
constantine was the first emperor to stop the persecution of christians and to legalize christianity ,  along with all other religions and cults in the roman empire . 
on 1 may 305 ad ,  diocletian ,  as a result of a debilitating sickness taken in the winter of 304–305 ad ,  announced his resignation . 
they had their son constantine ,  who succeeded his father as king of britain before becoming roman emperor . 
diocletian divided the empire again in 293 ad ,  appointing two caesars  -lrb-  junior emperors  -rrb-  to rule over further subdivisions of east and west . 
constantine had returned to nicomedia from the eastern front by the spring of 303 ad ,  in time to witness the beginnings of diocletian's `` great persecution '' ,  the most severe persecution of christians in roman history . 
this new roman imperial fashion lasted until the reign of phocas . 
by the spring of 310 ad ,  galerius was referring to both men as augusti . 
thus constantine became the sole emperor of the roman empire . 
constantine joined his father in gaul ,  at bononia  -lrb-  boulogne  -rrb-  before the summer of 305 ad . 
in 310 ad ,  a dispossessed maximian rebelled against constantine while constantine was away campaigning against the franks . 
he also had two daughters ,  constantina and helena ,  wife of emperor julian . 
constantine had known death would soon come . 
from then on ,  the solar julian calendar was given precedence over the lunisolar hebrew calendar among the christian churches of the roman empire . 
he emerged victorious in a series of civil wars against emperors maxentius and licinius to become sole ruler of both west and east by 324 ad . 
constantine might not have patronized christianity alone . 
these later accounts were more willing to present constantine as a genuine convert to christianity . 
by late 305 ad ,  he had become a tribune of the first order ,  a `` tribunus ordinis primi '' . 
the capital would often be compared to the 'old' rome as `` nova roma constantinopolitana '' ,  the `` new rome of constantinople '' . 
the reign of constantine established a precedent for the emperor to have great influence and authority in the early christian councils ,  most notably the dispute over arianism . 
in early 308 ad ,  after a failed attempt to usurp maxentius' title ,  maximian returned to constantine's court . 
he fortified northern italy ,  and strengthened his support in the christian community by allowing it to elect a new bishop of rome ,  eusebius . 
he decreed a formal end to persecution and returned to christians all that they had lost during them . 
constantine rested his army in milan until mid-summer 312 ad ,  when he moved on to brixia  -lrb-  brescia  -rrb-  . 
on the other hand ,  jewish clergy were given the same exemptions as christian clergy . 
constantine was presented as an ideal ruler during the middle ages ,  the standard against which any king or emperor could be measured . 
in the cultural sphere ,  constantine revived the clean-shaven face fashion of the roman emperors from augustus to trajan ,  which was originally introduced among the romans by scipio africanus . 
microsoft and its partners hold patents for cli . 
in august 2000, microsoft ,  hewlett-packard ,  intel ,  and others worked to standardize cli . 
the  . net framework ,   . net core ,  mono ,  dotgnu and portable . net are implementations of the cli . 
australia and new zealand jointly hosted the 2015 cricket world cup . 
the icc cricket world cup is the international championship of one day international  -lrb-  odi  -rrb-  cricket . 
india ,  sri lanka and bangladesh together hosted the 2011 cricket world cup . 
south africa ,  zimbabwe and kenya hosted the 2003 world cup . 
the name `` icc trophy '' has been changed to `` icc world cup qualifier '' . 
the first world cup was organised in england in june 1975, with the first odi cricket match having been played only four years earlier . 
australia won the championship by defeating england by 7 runs in the final ,  the closest margin in world cup final history . 
under the current qualifying process ,  the world cricket league ,  all associate and affiliate members of the icc are able to qualify for the world cup . 
the 1979 world cup saw the introduction of the icc trophy competition to select non-test playing teams for the world cup ,  with sri lanka and canada qualifying . 
the tournament is one of the world's most viewed sporting events and is considered the `` flagship event of the international cricket calendar '' by the icc . 
the 1960s saw an overhaul of the commonwealth . 
the commonwealth heads of government meeting  -lrb-  chogm; or  -rrb-  is a biennial summit meeting of the heads of government from all commonwealth nations . 
the first chogm was held in 1971 in singapore ,  and there have been 25 held in total: the most recent was held in london ,  england . 
they are held around the commonwealth ,  rotating by invitation amongst its members . 
as the convocation of heads of governments and permanent commonwealth staff and experts ,  chogms are the highest institution of action in the commonwealth ,  and rare occasions on which commonwealth leaders all come together . 
the queen to attended the latest chogms held in europe and was present at the 2015 summit in malta and the 2018 chogm held in london . 
it is often difficult or impossible to precisely date pre-qin works beyond their being `` pre-qin '' ,  a period of 1000 years . 
all three canons are collectively known as the classics  -lrb-    ,    ,  `` jīng '' ,   `` warp ''  -rrb-  . 
there are sub-categories within each branch ,  but due to the small number of pre-qin works in the classics ,  history and poetry branches ,  the sub-categories are only reproduced for the philosophy branch . 
