because of the proofs and algorithm ,  she is considered the first computer programmer . 
the first electronic computing devices were instead rewired in order to `` reprogram '' them . 
an outline  -lrb-  algorithm  -rrb-  for what would have been the first piece of software was written by ada lovelace in the 19th century ,  for the planned analytical engine . 
it is usually easier to code in `` high-level '' languages than in `` low-level '' ones . 
techniques like code refactoring can enhance readability . 
related programming tasks include testing ,  debugging ,  maintaining a program's source code ,  implementation of build systems ,  and management of derived artifacts such as machine code of computer programs . 
machine code was the language of early programs ,  written in the instruction set of the particular machine ,  often in binary notation . 
readability is important because programmers spend the majority of their time reading ,  trying to understand and modifying existing source code ,  rather than writing new source code . 
following a consistent programming style often helps readability . 
various visual programming languages have also been developed with the intent to resolve readability concerns by adopting non-traditional approaches to code structure and display . 
different programming languages support different styles of programming  -lrb-  called `` programming paradigms ''  -rrb-  . 
programs were mostly still entered using punched cards or paper tape . 
chaucer translated the work in his `` boece '' . 
tom shippey in `` the road to middle-earth '' says how “boethian” much of the treatment of evil is in tolkien's `` the lord of the rings '' . 
it has often been said boethius was the “last of the romans and the first of the scholastics” . 
it has been described as the single most important and influential work in the west on medieval and early renaissance christianity ,  as well as the last great western work of the classical period . 
shippey says that tolkien knew well the translation of boethius that was made by king alfred and he quotes some “boethian” remarks from frodo ,  treebeard and elrond . 
the consolation of philosophy  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a philosophical work by boethius ,  written around the year 524.
the italian composer luigi dallapiccola used some of the text in his choral work `` canti di prigionia ''  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- . 
a sequel to the film ,  ``  '' ,  was released in 2016.
in 2010, the independent film & television alliance selected the film as one of the 30 most significant independent films of the last 30 years . 
poison is also a significant theme in the film . 
in 2016, it was voted the 35th-best film of the 21st century as picked by 177 film critics from around the world . 
crouching tiger ,  hidden dragon  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a 2000 wuxia film ,  conceived and directed by ang lee . 
a multinational venture ,  the film was made on a us$17 million budget ,  and was produced by asian union film & entertainment ,  china film co-productions corporation ,  columbia pictures film production asia ,  edko films ,  good machine international ,  and zoom hunt productions . 
the music for the entire film was produced in two weeks . 
unlike the original film ,  the sequel was filmed in english for international release and dubbed to mandarin for chinese releases . 
wu and chan  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- look at `` crouching tiger ,  hidden dragon '' as somewhat of an example of `` counter-flow '' ,  a film that has challenged hollywood's grip on the film market . 
the film is set in 18th century qing dynasty china . 
the film received ten academy award nominations ,  which was the highest ever for a non-english language film ,  up until it was tied by `` roma ''  -lrb-  2018 -rrb- . 
the film led to a boost in popularity of chinese wuxia films in the western world ,  where they were previously little known ,  and led to films such as `` house of flying daggers '' and `` hero '' marketed towards western audiences . 
the film is loosely adapted from the storyline of the fourth book in the series ,  `` crouching tiger ,  hidden dragon '' . 
carloman was 17.
einhard states:
charlemagne died in 814, having ruled as emperor for almost 14 years and as king for almost 46 years . 
charlemagne  -lrb-    -rrb-  or charles the great  -lrb-   ,  ; 2 april 742 – 28 january 814 -rrb- ,  numbered charles i ,  was king of the franks from 768, king of the lombards from 774, and holy roman emperor from 800.
pepin died in 810 and charles in 811.
after 737, charles governed the franks in lieu of a king and declined to call himself `` king '' . 
the carolingian king exercised the `` bannum '' ,  the right to rule and command . 
he reached the height of his power in 800 when he was crowned `` emperor of the romans '' by pope leo iii on christmas day at rome's old st .  peter's basilica . 
he was also a tutor to the king and his sons ,  teaching them liberal arts ,  theology and astrology . 
for both the pope and charlemagne ,  the roman empire remained a significant power in european politics at this time . 
the language ,  in either case ,  suggests that there were not two inheritances ,  which would have created distinct kings ruling over distinct kingdoms ,  but a single joint inheritance and a joint kingship tenanted by two equal kings ,  charles and his brother carloman . 
the sons fought many wars on behalf of their father . 
the first event of the brothers' reign was the uprising of the aquitainians and gascons ,  in 769, in that territory split between the two kings . 
on the death of pepin ,  24 september 768, the kingship passed jointly to his sons ,  `` with divine assent ''  -lrb-  `` divino nutu ''  -rrb-  . 
in 750, pepin was elected by an assembly of the franks ,  anointed by the archbishop ,  and then raised to the office of king . 
the conflict lasted until 810 when the pro-byzantine party in venice gave their city back to the byzantine emperor ,  and the two emperors of europe made peace: charlemagne received the istrian peninsula and in 812 the emperor michael i rangabe recognised his status as emperor ,  although not necessarily as `` emperor of the romans '' . 
he left italy with a garrison in pavia and a few frankish counts in place the same year . 
in 687, pepin of herstal ,  mayor of the palace of austrasia ,  ended the strife between various kings and their mayors with his victory at tertry . 
after the conquest of nordalbingia ,  the frankish frontier was brought into contact with scandinavia . 
bavaria was subdivided into frankish counties ,  as had been done with saxony . 
before he was elected king in 750, pepin was initially a mayor ,  a high office he held `` as though hereditary ''  -lrb-  `` velut hereditario fungebatur ''  -rrb-  . 
the most powerful officers of the frankish people ,  the mayor of the palace  -lrb-  `` maior domus ''  -rrb-  and one or more kings  -lrb-  `` rex '' ,  `` reges ''  -rrb-  ,  were appointed by the election of the people . 
in 799, pope leo iii had been assaulted by some of the romans ,  who tried to put out his eyes and tear out his tongue . 
charles' sitting in judgment of the pope could be seen as usurping the prerogatives of the emperor in constantinople:
in 813, charlemagne called louis the pious ,  king of aquitaine ,  his only surviving legitimate son ,  to his court . 
godfred invaded frisia ,  joked of visiting aachen ,  but was murdered before he could do any more ,  either by a frankish assassin or by one of his own men . 
charlemagne was the eldest son of pepin the short and bertrada of laon ,  born before their canonical marriage . 
under the carolingians ,  the frankish kingdom spread to encompass an area including most of western europe; the east-west division of the kingdom formed the basis for modern france and germany . 
charlemagne has been called the `` father of europe ''  -lrb-  `` pater europae ''  -rrb-  ,  as he united most of western europe for the first time since the classical era of the roman empire and united parts of europe that had never been under frankish or roman rule . 
odo's price for salvation from the saracens was incorporation into the frankish kingdom ,  a decision that was repugnant to him and also to his heirs . 
he married at least four times and had three legitimate sons ,  but only his son louis the pious survived to succeed him . 
after the death of his father ,  hunald i allied himself with free lombardy . 
among the contingents of the frankish army were bavarians under tassilo iii ,  duke of bavaria ,  an agilofing ,  the hereditary bavarian ducal family . 
he took barcelona in a great siege in 797.
in 806, charlemagne first made provision for the traditional division of the empire on his death . 
this implies both independence from rome and a frankish  -lrb-  non-roman  -rrb-  understanding of empire . 
according to ohnsorge ,  for a long time ,  it had been the custom of byzantium to designate the german princes as spiritual `` sons '' of the romans . 
carloman's widow gerberga fled to desiderius' court in lombardy with her sons for protection . 
pepin of herstal was eventually succeeded by his illegitimate son charles ,  later known as charles martel  -lrb-  charles the hammer  -rrb-  . 
the title of emperor remained in the carolingian family for years to come ,  but divisions of territory and in-fighting over supremacy of the frankish state weakened its significance . 
the destructive war led by pepin in aquitaine ,  although brought to a satisfactory conclusion for the franks ,  proved the frankish power structure south of the loire was feeble and unreliable . 
the siege lasted until the spring of 774 when charlemagne visited the pope in rome . 
charlemagne engaged in many reforms of frankish governance while continuing many traditional practices ,  such as the division of the kingdom among sons . 
these people were subdued by the lombards and bavarii and made tributaries ,  but were never fully incorporated into the frankish state . 
by bestowing the imperial crown upon charlemagne ,  the pope arrogated to himself `` the right to appoint  .  .  .  the emperor of the romans ,   .  .  .  establishing the imperial crown as his own personal gift but simultaneously granting himself implicit superiority over the emperor whom he had created . `` 
were to prove it ephemeral upon charlemagne's death . 
the largely fictional account of charlemagne's iberian campaigns by pseudo-turpin ,  written some three centuries after his death ,  gave rise to the legend that the king also spoke arabic . 
records name only carloman ,  gisela ,  and three short-lived children named pepin ,  chrothais and adelais as his younger siblings . 
charlemagne wore the traditional costume of the frankish people ,  described by einhard thus:
in 754, pepin accepted the pope's invitation to visit italy on behalf of st .  peter's rights ,  dealing successfully with the lombards . 
eric was among those killed which was a great blow for the carolingian empire . 
html  -lrb-  hypertext markup language  -rrb-  has been in use since 1991, but html 4.0  -lrb-  december 1997 -rrb- was the first standardized version where international characters were given reasonably complete treatment . 
carbon nanotubes  -lrb-  cnts  -rrb-  are allotropes of carbon with a cylindrical nanostructure . 
these bonds ,  which are similar to those of graphite and stronger than those found in alkanes and diamond  -lrb-  which employ `` sp ''-hybrid carbon atoms  -rrb-  ,  provide nanotubes their unique strength . 
the czech lion is the highest czech award for film achievement . 
the czech republic includes the historical territories of bohemia ,  moravia ,  and czech silesia . 
in a strict sense ,  czech literature is the literature written in the czech language . 
the czech landscape is exceedingly varied . 
the czech armed forces consist of the czech land forces ,  the czech air force and of specialized support units . 
czech beer has a long and important history . 
there are four national parks in the czech republic . 
the czech republic joined nato in 1999 and the eu in 2004.
newspapers are quite popular in the czech republic . 
the road network in the czech republic is long . 
bible translations played an important role in the development of czech literature and the standard czech language . 
the czech republic ranks as the 7th safest or most peaceful country . 
the tradition of czech cinematography started in the second half of the 1890s . 
the czech lands have a long and rich scientific tradition . 
a number of other scientists are also connected in some way with the czech lands . 
the czech republic has the densest network of libraries in europe . 
the czech economy gets a substantial income from tourism . 
miloš zeman was the first directly elected czech president . 
the czech republic boasts 12 unesco world heritage sites . 
the most famous czech drama is karel čapek's play `` r . u . r . 
since 2000, the czech republic has been divided into thirteen regions  -lrb-  czech: `` kraje '' ,  singular `` kraj ''  -rrb-  and the capital city of prague . 
an estimated 1.4 million czech soldiers fought in world war i ,  of whom some 150,000 died . 
the us visa waiver program applies to czech nationals . 
the czech republic became a member of the world trade organization on 1 january 1995.
between 1948 and 1989 about 250,000 czechs and slovaks were sent to prison for political reasons ,  and over 400,000 emigrated . 
healthcare in the czech republic is similar in quality to other developed nations . 
famous scientists who were born on the territory of the current czech republic:
czech cuisine is marked by a strong emphasis on meat dishes . 
the czech ministry of foreign affairs recommended the english name `` czechia '' in 1993, and the czech government approved `` czechia '' as the official short name in 2016.
according to preliminary results of the 2011 census ,  the majority of the inhabitants of the czech republic are czechs  -lrb-  63.7%  -rrb-  ,  followed by moravians  -lrb-  4.9%  -rrb-  ,  slovaks  -lrb-  1.4%  -rrb-  ,  poles  -lrb-  0.4%  -rrb-  ,  germans  -lrb-  0.2%  -rrb-  and silesians  -lrb-  0.1%  -rrb-  . 
czech literature and culture played a major role on at least two occasions when czechs lived under oppression and political activity was suppressed . 
after czechoslovakia dissolved in 1992, the czech part lacked a common english short name . 
jaroslav seifert was the only czech writer awarded the nobel prize in literature . 
the former czech prime minister ,  jan fischer ,  is of jewish ethnicity and faith . 
the czech republic ranks as the 27th most environmentally conscious country in the world in environmental performance index . 
the czech republic has a highly diverse economy that ranks 7th in the 2016 economic complexity index . 
according to the 2010 us census ,  there are 1,533,826 americans of full or partial czech descent . 
the government of the czech republic's exercise of executive power derives from the constitution . 
cyril and methodius laid the foundations of education and the czech theological thinking in the 9th century . 
within the czech republic ,  temperatures vary greatly ,  depending on the elevation . 
czech officials have supported dissenters in belarus ,  moldova ,  myanmar and cuba . 
the remaining czech territory was occupied by germany ,  which transformed it into the so-called protectorate of bohemia and moravia . 
at the turn of the 20th century ,  chicago was the city with the third largest czech population ,  after prague and vienna . 
in the 1960s ,  so called czech new wave  -lrb-  also czechoslovak new wave  -rrb-  received international acclaim . 
the three historical lands of the czech republic  -lrb-  formerly the core countries of the bohemian crown  -rrb-  correspond almost perfectly with the river basins of the elbe  -lrb-    -rrb-  and the vltava basin for bohemia ,  the morava one for moravia ,  and the oder river basin for czech silesia  -lrb-  in terms of the czech territory  -rrb-  . 
the musical tradition of the czech lands arose from first church hymns ,  whose first evidence is suggested at the break of 10th and 11th century . 
production of czech electricity exceeds consumption by about 10 twh per year ,  which are exported . 
the international literary award the franz kafka prize is awarded in the czech republic . 
the most significant czech architects of this era were adolf loos ,  pavel janák and josef gočár . 
from 1991, the czech republic ,  originally as part of czechoslovakia and since 1993 in its own right ,  has been a member of the visegrád group and from 1995, the oecd . 
the czech people have been historically characterized as `` tolerant and even indifferent towards religion '' . 
apart from these and other major brands ,  the czech republic also has a growing number of small breweries and mini-breweries . 
in 1993, czechoslovakia split into the two sovereign states of the czech republic and slovakia . 
wilhelm schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.
computer science is the study of processes that interact with data and that can be represented as data in the form of programs . 
despite its short history as a formal academic discipline ,  computer science has made a number of fundamental contributions to science and society—in fact ,  along with electronics ,  it is a founding science of the current epoch of human history called the information age and a driver of the information revolution ,  seen as the third major leap in human technological progress after the industrial revolution  -lrb-  1750–1850 ce  -rrb-  and the agricultural revolution  -lrb-  8000–5000 bc  -rrb-  . 
the christian organizations institute for creation research  -lrb-  icr  -rrb-  and the creation research society  -lrb-  crs  -rrb-  both promote young earth creationism in the us . 
there are also non-christian forms of creationism ,  notably islamic creationism and hindu creationism . 
old earth creationism holds that the physical universe was created by god ,  but that the creation event described in the book of genesis is to be taken figuratively . 
chad  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of chad ,  is a landlocked country in west africa . 
debt relief was accorded to chad in may 2001.
in 2003, chad began receiving refugees from the darfur region of western sudan . 
déby has blamed sudan for the current unrest in chad . 
after the war ended ,  local parties started to develop in chad . 
chad insists that both rebel groups are supported by the sudanese government . 
the kanem empire originated in the 9th century ad to the northeast of lake chad . 
rebel commando groups  -lrb-  codos  -rrb-  in southern chad were broken up by government massacres in 1984.
the french first penetrated chad in 1891, establishing their authority through military expeditions primarily against the muslim kingdoms . 
during world war ii ,  chad was the first french colony to rejoin the allies  -lrb-  august 26, 1940 -rrb- ,  after the defeat of france by germany . 
in the french scale of priorities ,  the colony of chad ranked near the bottom ,  and the french came to perceive chad primarily as a source of raw cotton and untrained labour to be used in the more productive colonies to the south . 
the territory now known as chad possesses some of the richest archaeological sites in africa . 
what was even worse was his constant discrimination against the central and northern regions of chad ,  where the southern chadian administrators came to be perceived as arrogant and incompetent . 
this attack was the final straw that led to the declaration of war by chad and the alleged deployment of the chadian airforce into sudanese airspace ,  which the chadian government denies . 
in 1905, administrative responsibility for chad was placed under a governor-general stationed at brazzaville ,  capital of french equatorial africa  -lrb-  aef  -rrb-  . 
the ouaddai opposed french domination until well into the 20th century . 
libya did not honor the withdrawal accord ,  and its forces continued to occupy the northern third of chad . 
throughout the colonial period ,  large areas of chad were never governed effectively: in the huge bet prefecture ,  the handful of french military administrators usually left the people alone ,  and in central chad ,  french rule was only slightly more substantive . 
chad's major rivers are the chari and the logone and their tributaries ,  which flow from the southeast into lake chad . 
the only other lakes of importance in chad are lake fitri ,  in batha prefecture ,  and lake iro ,  in the marshy southeast . 
chad has four bioclimatic zones . 
chad is also next to niger . 
lake chad is the second largest lake in west africa and is one of the most important wetlands on the continent . 
lake chad also changes greatly in size from one year to another . 
south of the chadian border ,  the koros divide the lake chad basin from the ubangi-zaire river system . 
the seventh largest lake in the world  -lrb-  and the fourth largest in africa  -rrb-  ,  lake chad is located in the sahelian zone ,  a region just south of the sahara desert . 
permanent streams do not exist in northern or central chad . 
southeast of lake chad ,  the regular contours of the terrain are broken by the guéra massif ,  which divides the basin into its northern and southern parts . 
the lake chad basin embraces a great range of tropical climates from north to south ,  although most of these climates tend to be dry . 
northern chad averages over 3500 hours of sunlight per year ,  the south somewhat less . 
nonetheless ,  ethnic identity was a significant component of life in chad . 
not only do the social aspects of ethnic identity change but the biological composition  -lrb-  or gene pool  -rrb-  also may change over time . 
anthropologists view ethnicity as being more than genetics . 
the people of chad speak more than 100 different languages and divide themselves into many ethnic groups . 
chad is one of the most corrupt countries in the world . 
politics of chad takes place in a framework of a presidential republic ,  whereby the president of chad is both head of state and head of government . 
gdp: purchasing power parity - $28.62 billion  -lrb-  2017 est .   -rrb- 
telecommunications in chad include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
as of 2011 chad had no railways . 
both flow northwards ,  from the south of chad ,  into lake chad . 
chad has a total of 33,400 km of roads of which approximately 500 km are paved . 
cameroon and chad are developing excellent relations '' . 
the cia world factbook estimates the military budget of chad to be 4.2% of gdp as of 2006. . 
the current conflict ,  in which the chadian military is involved ,  is the civil war against sudanese-backed rebels . 
the military of chad was dominated by members of toubou ,  zaghawa ,  kanembou ,  hadjerai ,  and massa ethnic groups during the presidency of hissène habré . 
in 1988, chad recognized the state of palestine ,  which maintains a mission in n'djamena . 
delimitation of international boundaries in the vicinity of lake chad ,  the lack of which led to border incidents in the past ,  has been completed and awaits ratification by cameroon ,  chad ,  niger ,  and nigeria . 
during the 1980s ,  arab opinion on the chadian-libyan conflict over the aozou strip was divided . 
colloidal suspensions are the subject of interface and colloid science . 
other colloids may be opaque or have a slight color . 
some colloids are translucent because of the tyndall effect ,  which is the scattering of light by particles in the colloid . 
calling shotgun does not apply to bi-directional trips ,  shotgun must be called before each journey . 
riding shotgun was used to describe the guard who rode alongside a stagecoach driver ,  ready to use his shotgun to ward off bandits or hostile native americans . 
the guard was called a shotgun messenger and they were issued a coach gun ,  typically a 10-gauge or 12-gauge ,  short ,  double-barreled shotgun . 
food safety depends on the safe preparation ,  handling ,  and storage of food . 
proponents of raw foodism argue that cooking food increases the risk of some of the detrimental effects on food or health . 
this makes it unsafe to reheat cooked food more than once . 
preparing food with heat or fire is an activity unique to humans . 
in 1979, a guide called `` food '' addressed the link between too much of certain foods and chronic diseases ,  but added `` fats ,  oils ,  and sweets '' to the four basic food groups . 
 ''home-cooking '' may be associated with comfort food ,  and some commercially produced foods are presented through advertising or packaging as having been `` home-cooked '' ,  regardless of their actual origin . 
fats are used to add flavor to food  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  butter or bacon fat  -rrb-  ,  prevent food from sticking to pans and create a desirable texture . 
cooking increases the digestibility of many foods which are inedible or poisonous when raw . 
in the 1920s ,  freezing methods ,  cafeterias and fast food restaurants emerged . 
the industrial revolution brought mass-production ,  mass-marketing and standardization of food . 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries ,  food was a classic marker of identity in europe . 
cooking can prevent many foodborne illnesses that would otherwise occur if the food is eaten raw . 
along with changes in food ,  starting early in the 20th century ,  governments have issued nutrition guidelines ,  leading to the food pyramid  -lrb-  introduced in sweden in 1974 -rrb- . 
many foods ,  such as beef steak and broccoli ,  contain low concentrations of both carcinogens and anticarcinogens . 
collectible card games  -lrb-  ccg  -rrb-  are proprietary playing card games . 
are well-known collectible card games . 
a card game is any game using playing cards as the primary device with which the game is played ,  be they traditional or game-specific . 
some card games are designed specifically to be played as drinking games . 
a card game is played with a `` deck '' or `` pack '' of playing cards which are identical in size and shape . 
in a shedding game ,  players start with a hand of cards ,  and the object of the game is to be the first player to discard all cards from one's hand . 
the object of an accumulating game is to acquire all cards in the deck . 
in fishing games ,  cards from the hand are played against cards in a layout on the table ,  capturing table cards if they match . 
drinking card games are drinking games using cards ,  in which the object in playing the game is either to drink or to force others to drink . 
if there is a sense in which a card game can have an `` official '' set of rules ,  it is when that card game has an `` official '' governing body . 
uno ,  phase 10, set ,  and 1000 blank white cards are popular dedicated-deck card games; 1000 blank white cards is unique in that the cards for the game are designed by the players of the game while playing it; there is no commercially available deck advertised as such . 
any specific card game imposes restrictions on the number of players . 
in card games for two players ,  usually not all cards are distributed to the players ,  as they would otherwise have perfect information about the game state . 
many games that are not generally placed in the family of card games do in fact use cards for some aspect of their gameplay . 
the trump cards and `` knight '' cards from the french playing tarot are not included . 
most games have some form of asymmetry between players . 
many card games borrow elements from more than one type . 
based on the association of card games and gambling ,  pope benedict xiv banned card games on october 17, 1750.
solitaire games are designed to be played by one player . 
the players of a card game normally form a circle around a table or other space that can hold cards . 
as seen ,  nearly all of these games are designed as gambling games . 
most of these games however typically use a specially made deck of cards designed specifically for the game  -lrb-  or variations of it  -rrb-  . 
cross-stitch is also executed on easily countable fabric called aida cloth but the threads are not actually counted . 
cross-stitch is the oldest form of embroidery and can be found all over the world . 
fabrics used in cross-stitch include linen ,  aida ,  and mixed-content fabrics called 'evenweave' such as jobelan . 
cross-stitch is a form of sewing and a popular form of counted-thread embroidery in which x-shaped stitches in a tiled ,  raster-like pattern are used to form a picture . 
games available in most casinos are commonly called casino games . 
see video game controversies for more . 
video game culture is a worldwide new media subculture formed around video games and game playing . 
video game laws vary from country to country . 
in the 2010s ,  the commercial importance of the video game industry is increasing . 
the electronic systems used to play video games are called platforms . 
in the 2010s ,  video games and discussions of video game trends and topics can be seen in social media ,  politics ,  television ,  film and music . 
a video game ,  like most other forms of media ,  may be categorized into genres . 
these factors can be measured to determine the effect video games can have on people . 
video games have also been proven to raise self-esteem and build confidence . 
the input device used for games ,  the game controller ,  varies across platforms . 
the museum of modern art has added a total of 20 video games and one video game console to its permanent architecture and design collection since 2012.
in 2018, the world health organization declared `` gaming disorder '' a mental disorder for people who are addicted to video games . 
computer games are also popular in china . 
a number of video game developers emerged in britain in the late 1970s and early 1980s . 
students are found to be `` learning by doing '' while playing video games while fostering creative thinking . 
online gaming being on the rise allows for video game players to communicate and work together in order to accomplish a certain task . 
while many games rely on emergent principles ,  video games commonly present simulated story worlds where emergent behavior occurs within the context of the game . 
there have been a number of societal and scientific arguments about whether the content of video games change the behavior and attitudes of a player ,  and whether this is reflected in video game culture overall . 
in the 1990s and 2000s ,  a number of handheld games used cartridges ,  which enabled them to be used to play many different games . 
some research suggests video games may even increase players' attention capacities . 
serious games are games that are designed primarily to convey information or a learning experience to the player . 
this means that rightsholders often must define what they will allow a consumer to do with the video game . 
an emulator is a program that replicates the behavior of a video game console ,  allowing games to run on a different platform from the original hardware . 
expansions are added to the base game to help prolong the life of the game itself until the company is able to produce a sequel or a new game altogether . 
mobile games also led into the development of microtransactions as a valid revenue model for casual games . 
studies have shown video games can negatively effect health and mental state for some players . 
many games produced for the pc are designed such that technically oriented consumers can modify the game . 
creators will nearly always copyright their games . 
it is considered a felony to supply these games to a child . 
gaming conventions are an important showcase of the industry . 
video game can use several types of input devices to translate human actions to a game ,  the most common game controllers are keyboard and mouse for `` pc games ,  consoles usually come with specific gamepads ,  handheld consoles have built in buttons . 
easter eggs are hidden messages or jokes left in games by developers that are not part of the main game . 
the cambrian period followed the ediacaran period and was followed by the ordovician period . 
the cambrian period  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  was the first geological period of the paleozoic era ,  and of the phanerozoic eon . 
as a result ,  our understanding of the cambrian biology surpasses that of some later periods . 
plotinus called these `` the hearth of reality '' deriving from them not only the three categories of quantity ,  motion and quality but also what came to be known as `` the three moments of the neoplatonic world process '':
the headings used were the three objective categories of abstract relation ,  space  -lrb-  including motion  -rrb-  and matter and the three subjective categories of intellect ,  feeling and volition ,  and he found that under these six headings all the words of the english language ,  and hence any possible predicate ,  could be assembled . 
he realised that predicates could be simple or complex . 
he concluded that such transcendental categories and even the categories of aristotle were in some way posterior to the three eleatic categories first recorded in plato's dialogue `` parmenides '' and which comprised the following three coupled terms:
one of peirce's contributions was to call the three primary categories firstness ,  secondness and thirdness which both emphasises their general nature ,  and avoids the confusion of having the same name for both the category itself and for a concept within that category . 
portland cement is the most common type of cement in general usage . 
a cement ,  most commonly portland cement ,  is the most prevalent kind of concrete binder . 
concrete ,  usually portland cement concrete ,  is a composite material composed of fine and coarse aggregate bonded together with a fluid cement  -lrb-  cement paste  -rrb-  that hardens over time—most frequently a lime-based cement binder ,  such as portland cement ,  but sometimes with other hydraulic cements ,  such as a calcium aluminate cement . 
a method for producing portland cement was developed in england and patented by joseph aspdin in 1824.
mineral admixtures can be pre-blended with the cement during its production for sale and use as a blended cement ,  or mixed directly with other components when the concrete is produced . 
his son william continued developments into the 1840s ,  earning him recognition for the development of `` modern '' portland cement . 
structures employing portland cement concrete usually include steel reinforcement . 
combining water with a cementitious material forms a cement paste by the process of hydration . 
when aggregate is mixed together with dry portland cement and water ,  the mixture forms a fluid slurry that is easily poured and molded into shape . 
in modern cement kilns many advanced features are used to lower the fuel consumption per ton of clinker produced . 
other materials can also be used as a concrete binder ,  the most prevalent alternative is asphalt ,  which is used as the binder in asphalt concrete . 
 -lrb-  see comparison of birth control methods .   -rrb- 
a rate of 0.6% ,  and the condom a rate of 2% . 
in 2002, only 2.5% were using withdrawal as their primary method of contraception . 
this method of contraception ,  widely used for at least two millennia ,  is still in use today . 
like many methods of birth control ,  reliable effect is achieved only by correct and consistent use . 
only models that assume all couples practice perfect use of the method find cost savings associated with the choice of withdrawal as a birth control method . 
female use of condoms was not similarly affected . 
these campaigns increased condom use significantly . 
as mentioned above ,  most condoms are made of latex ,  but polyurethane and lambskin condoms also exist . 
polyurethane condoms tend to be the same width and thickness as latex condoms ,  with most polyurethane condoms between 0.04 mm and 0.07 mm thick . 
producers claim that condom use depresses sales . 
unlike polyurethane condoms ,  they cannot be used with an oil-based lubricant . 
the prevalence of condom use varies greatly between countries . 
additionally ,  condoms may be referred to using the manufacturer's name . 
cases of such condom sabotage have occurred . 
condoms are also used during fellatio to reduce the likelihood of contracting stis . 
worldwide ,  condom sales doubled in the 1920s . 
the primary effectiveness issue with using condoms to prevent stds ,  however ,  is inconsistent use . 
condoms may also be useful in treating potentially precancerous cervical changes . 
advocates of condom use also cite their advantages of being inexpensive ,  easy to use ,  and having few side effects . 
the most common non-latex condoms are made from polyurethane . 
the limited studies that have been done found that the simultaneous use of multiple condoms decreases the risk of condom breakage . 
 ,  nine condom manufacturers have stopped manufacturing condoms with nonoxynol-9 and planned parenthood has discontinued the distribution of condoms so lubricated . 
these condoms are designed to maximize sperm life . 
collection condoms may also be used where semen is produced at a sperm bank or fertility clinic . 
an allergen-free condom made of synthetic latex  -lrb-  polyisoprene  -rrb-  is also available . 
in the 1960s and 1970s quality regulations tightened ,  and more legal barriers to condom use were removed . 
while the advantages of latex have made it the most popular condom material ,  it does have some drawbacks . 
a collection condom is used to collect semen for fertility treatments or sperm analysis . 
the use of latex condoms by people with an allergy to latex can cause allergic symptoms ,  such as skin irritation . 
also developed in 2005 is a condom treated with an erectogenic compound . 
 ,  the invisible condom is in the clinical trial phase ,  and has not yet been approved for use . 
medtech products produces a female condom made of latex . 
whether condoms were used in ancient civilizations is debated by archaeologists and historians . 
it is recommended for condoms manufacturers to avoid very thick or very thin condoms ,  because they are both considered less effective . 
although a condom is effective in limiting exposure ,  some disease transmission may occur even with a condom . 
textured condoms include studded and ribbed condoms which can provide extra sensations to both partners . 
in much of the western world ,  the introduction of the pill in the 1960s was associated with a decline in condom use . 
among people who intend condoms to be their form of birth control ,  pregnancy may occur when the user has sex without a condom . 
while biodegradable ,  latex condoms damage the environment when disposed of improperly . 
the 2000 nih review concluded that condom use significantly reduces the risk of gonorrhea for men . 
cladistics  -lrb-   ,  from greek  ,  `` cládos '' ,  `` branch ''  -rrb-  is an approach to biological classification in which organisms are categorized in groups  -lrb-  `` clades ''  -rrb-  based on the most recent common ancestor . 
there have been a number of modern proposals for reform of the calendar ,  such as the world calendar ,  international fixed calendar ,  holocene calendar ,  and ,  recently ,  the hanke-henry permanent calendar . 
a full calendar system has a different calendar date for every day . 
a calendar can be on paper or electronic device . 
a large number of ancient near east calendar systems based on the babylonian calendar date from the iron age ,  among them the calendar system of the persian empire ,  which in turn gave rise to the zoroastrian calendar and the hebrew calendar . 
this created a dissociation of the calendar month from the lunation . 
this does not include all of the big bang cosmology ,  which is presented in `` timeline of the big bang . `` 
it is frequently referred to as the standard model of big bang cosmology . 
the λcdm  -lrb-  lambda cold dark matter  -rrb-  or lambda-cdm model is a parametrization of the big bang cosmological model in which the universe contains a cosmological constant ,  denoted by lambda  -lrb-  greek λ  -rrb-  ,  associated with dark energy ,  and cold dark matter  -lrb-  abbreviated cdm  -rrb-  . 
the standard cosmological model is known as the lambda-cdm model . 
evidence from big bang nucleosynthesis ,  the cosmic microwave background ,  structure formation ,  and galaxy rotation curves suggests that about 23% of the mass of the universe consists of non-baryonic dark matter ,  whereas only 4% consists of visible ,  baryonic matter . 
in this model ,  the universe is roughly the same at any point in time . 
this model requires the universe to contain large amounts of dark matter and dark energy whose nature is currently not well understood ,  but the model gives detailed predictions that are in excellent agreement with many diverse observations . 
big bang nucleosynthesis is the theory of the formation of the elements in the early universe . 
as the universe expands ,  both matter and radiation in it become diluted . 
the nature of dark energy is one of the most challenging problems in cosmology . 
alternatives to the dark matter hypothesis include a modification of gravity at small accelerations  -lrb-  mond  -rrb-  or an effect from brane cosmology . 
the lightest chemical elements ,  primarily hydrogen and helium ,  were created during the big bang through the process of nucleosynthesis . 
some cosmologists have proposed that big bang nucleosynthesis suggests there is a fourth `` sterile '' species of neutrino . 
an alternative view to extend the big bang model ,  suggesting the universe had no beginning or singularity and the age of the universe is infinite ,  has been presented . 
if the universe is flat ,  there must be an additional component making up 73%  -lrb-  in addition to the 23% dark matter and 4% baryons  -rrb-  of the energy density of the universe . 
in any one causal patch it is likely that only one bubble would nucleate . 
in guth's early proposal ,  it was thought that the inflaton was the higgs field ,  the field that explains the mass of the elementary particles . 
the flatness problem is sometimes called one of the dicke coincidences  -lrb-  along with the cosmological constant problem  -rrb-  . 
the hypothetical field thought to be responsible for inflation is called the inflaton . 
inflation resolves several problems in big bang cosmology that were discovered in the 1970s . 
another problem that has occasionally been mentioned is the trans-planckian problem or trans-planckian effects . 
as the inflationary field slowly relaxes to the vacuum ,  the cosmological constant goes to zero and space begins to expand normally . 
it introduces additional scalar fields ,  so that while one of the scalar fields is responsible for normal slow roll inflation ,  another triggers the end of inflation: when inflation has continued for sufficiently long ,  it becomes favorable to the second field to decay into a much lower energy state . 
other models explain some of the observations explained by inflation . 
if this field did not exist ,  scientists would have to propose a different explanation for all the observations that strongly suggest a metric expansion of space has occurred ,  and is still occurring  -lrb-  much more slowly  -rrb-  today . 
the horizon problem is the problem of determining why the universe appears statistically homogeneous and isotropic in accordance with the cosmological principle . 
no physical field has yet been discovered that is responsible for this inflation . 
in the early 1970s zeldovich noticed the flatness and horizon problems of big bang cosmology; before his work ,  cosmology was presumed to be symmetrical on purely philosophical grounds . 
this exponentially expanding spacetime is called a de sitter space ,  and to sustain it there must be a cosmological constant ,  a vacuum energy density that is constant in space and time and proportional to λ in the above metric . 
inflation theory largely resolves these problems as well ,  thus making a universe like ours much more likely in the context of big bang theory . 
the modern explanation for the metric expansion of space was proposed by physicist alan guth in 1979, while investigating the problem of why no magnetic monopoles are seen today . 
once the other object has fallen through this horizon it can never return ,  and even light signals it sends will never reach the first object  -lrb-  at least so long as the space continues to expand exponentially  -rrb-  . 
supporters admit that their model `` does not solve the entropy and flatness problems of standard cosmology  .  .  .  and we can provide no explanation for why the current universe is so close to being spatially flat '' . 
paul steinhardt ,  who first introduced the eternal inflationary model ,  later became one of its most vocal critics for this reason . 
this is not usually considered to be a critical problem ,  however ,  because the scale of inflation corresponds naturally to the scale of gauge unification . 
paul steinhardt ,  one of the original architects of the inflationary model ,  introduced the first example of eternal inflation in 1983.
the simplest inflation models ,  those without fine-tuning ,  predict a tensor to scalar ratio near 0.1.
the bubble collision problem was solved by linde and independently by andreas albrecht and paul steinhardt in a model named `` new inflation '' or `` slow-roll inflation ''  -lrb-  guth's model then became known as `` old inflation ''  -rrb-  . 
this problem is exacerbated by recent observations of the cosmic microwave background that have demonstrated that the universe is flat to within a few percent . 
inflation attempts to resolve these problems by providing a dynamical mechanism that drives the universe to this special state ,  thus making a universe like ours much more likely in the context of the big bang theory . 
for example ,  classically scale invariant field theories ,  where scale invariance is broken by quantum effects ,  provide an explanation of the flatness of inflationary potentials ,  as long as the theory can be studied through perturbation theory . 
when investigating the effects the theory of loop quantum gravity would have on cosmology ,  a loop quantum cosmology model has evolved that provides a possible mechanism for cosmological inflation . 
in 1978, zeldovich noted the monopole problem ,  which was an unambiguous quantitative version of the horizon problem ,  this time in a subfield of particle physics ,  which led to several speculative attempts to resolve it . 
the candela  -lrb-   or ; symbol: cd  -rrb-  is the base unit of luminous intensity in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb- ; that is ,  luminous power per unit solid angle emitted by a point light source in a particular direction . 
theoretical condensed matter physics involves the use of theoretical models to understand properties of states of matter . 
the sommerfeld model and spin models for ferromagnetism illustrated the successful application of quantum mechanics to condensed matter problems in the 1930s . 
condensed matter physics is the field of physics that deals with the macroscopic and microscopic physical properties of matter . 
in quantum computation ,  information is represented by quantum bits ,  or qubits . 
one of the first studies of condensed states of matter was by english chemist humphry davy ,  in the first decades of the nineteenth century . 
magnetism as a property of matter has been known in china since 4000 bc . 
in experimental condensed matter physics ,  external magnetic fields act as thermodynamic variables that control the state ,  phase transitions and properties of material systems . 
the bell telephone laboratories was one of the first institutes to conduct a research program in condensed matter physics . 
the diversity of systems and phenomena available for study makes condensed matter physics the most active field of contemporary physics: one third of all american physicists self-identify as condensed matter physicists ,  and the division of condensed matter physics is the largest division at the american physical society . 
paul drude in 1900 proposed the first theoretical model for a classical electron moving through a metallic solid . 
some states of matter exhibit symmetry breaking ,  where the relevant laws of physics possess some symmetry that is broken . 
as a matter of fact ,  it would be more correct to unify them under the title of 'condensed bodies' '' . 
phase transition refers to the change of phase of a system ,  which is brought about by change in an external parameter such as temperature . 
morgan ,  like other 19th century social evolutionists ,  believed there was a more or less orderly progression from the primitive to the civilized . 
accordingly ,  most of these anthropologists showed less interest in comparing cultures ,  generalizing about human nature ,  or discovering universal laws of cultural development ,  than in understanding particular cultures in those cultures' own terms . 
the umbrella term socio-cultural anthropology draws upon both cultural and social anthropology traditions . 
the term `` civilization '' later gave way to definitions given by v .  gordon childe ,  with culture forming an umbrella term and civilization becoming a particular kind of culture . 
much of anthropological theory has originated in an appreciation of and interest in the tension between the local  -lrb-  particular cultures  -rrb-  and the global  -lrb-  a universal human nature ,  or the web of connections between people in distinct places/circumstances  -rrb-  . 
20th-century anthropologists largely reject the notion that all human societies must pass through the same stages in the same order ,  on the grounds that such a notion does not fit the empirical facts . 
the following example demonstrates how the unity bracket method is used to convert the rate 5 kilometers per second to meters per second . 
engineering judgment may include such factors as:
some conversions from one system of units to another need to be exact ,  without increasing or decreasing the precision of the first measurement . 
urban society is typically stratified . 
urbanization is the process of migration from rural into urban areas ,  driven by various political ,  economic ,  and cultural factors . 
landless urban workers ,  contrasted with peasants and known as the proletariat ,  form a growing stratum of society in the age of urbanization . 
later cultures such as the aztec drew on these earlier urban traditions . 
in the ancient americas ,  early urban traditions developed in the andes and mesoamerica . 
urban geography deals both with cities in their larger context and with their internal structure . 
factories and slums emerged as regular features of the urban landscape . 
however ,  severe traffic jams still occur regularly in cities around the world ,  as private car ownership and urbanization continue to increase ,  overwhelming existing urban street networks . 
the urban bus system ,  the world's most common form of public transport ,  uses a network of scheduled routes to move people through the city ,  alongside cars ,  on the roads . 
new urban dwellers may increasingly not simply as immigrants but as transmigrants ,  keeping one foot each  -lrb-  through telecommunications if not travel  -rrb-  in their old and their new homes . 
some cities are now part of a continuous urban landscape called urban agglomeration ,  conurbation ,  or megalopolis  -lrb-  exemplified by the boswash corridor of the northeastern united states .   -rrb- 
the growth of modern industry from the late 18th century onward led to massive urbanization and the rise of new great cities ,  first in europe and then in other regions ,  as new opportunities brought huge numbers of migrants from rural communities into urban areas . 
urban infrastructure involves various physical networks and spaces necessary for transportation ,  water use ,  energy ,  recreation ,  and public functions . 
urbanization rapidly spread across the europe and the americas and since the 1950s has taken hold in asia and africa as well . 
urban areas as a rule cannot produce their own food and therefore must develop some relationship with a hinterland which sustains them . 
techniques such as road space rationing and road use charges have been introduced to limit urban car traffic . 
however ,  in a world of intensifying globalization ,  all cities are in different degree also connected globally beyond these regions . 
for example ,  within the urban microclimate ,  less-vegetated poor neighborhoods bear more of the heat  -lrb-  but have fewer means of coping with it  -rrb-  . 
un-habitat coordinates the un urban agenda ,  working with the un environmental programme ,  the un development programme ,  the office of the high commissioner for human rights ,  the world health organization ,  and the world bank . 
urban ecosystems ,  influenced as they are by the density of human buildings and activities differ considerably from those of their rural surroundings . 
in the age of rapid communication and transportation ,  commentators have described urban culture as nearly ubiquitous or as no longer meaningful . 
writers ,  painters ,  and filmmakers have produced innumerable works of art concerning the urban experience . 
in the 20th century ,  department stores using new techniques of advertising ,  public relations ,  decoration ,  and design ,  transformed urban shopping areas into fantasy worlds encouraging self-expression and escape through consumerism . 
a global city ,  also known as a world city ,  is a prominent centre of trade ,  banking ,  finance ,  innovation ,  and markets . 
urban structure generally follows one or more basic patterns: geomorphic ,  radial ,  concentric ,  rectilinear ,  and curvilinear . 
the biggest investors and real estate developers act as the city's de facto urban planners . 
the united nations system has been involved in a series of events and declarations dealing with the development of cities during this period of rapid urbanization . 
historically ,  city-dwellers have been a small proportion of humanity overall ,  but following two centuries of unprecedented and rapid urbanization ,  roughly half of the world population now lives in cities ,  which has had profound consequences for global sustainability . 
cities ,  characterized by population density ,  symbolic function ,  and urban planning ,  have existed for thousands of years . 
on the whole ,  urban ecosystems are less complex and productive than others ,  due to the diminished absolute amount of biological interactions . 
urban economics tends to analyze larger agglomerations ,  stretching beyond city limits ,  in order to reach a more complete understanding of the local labor market . 
access to water has long been a major factor in city placement and growth ,  and despite exceptions enabled by the advent of rail transport in the nineteenth century ,  through the present most of the world's urban population lives near the coast or on a river . 
the term can also refer either to the physical streets and buildings of the city or to the collection of people who dwell there ,  and can be used in a general sense to mean urban rather than rural territory . 
the global urban proletariat of today ,  however ,  generally lacks the status as factory workers which in the nineteenth century provided access to the means of production . 
urban planning ,  the application of forethought to city design ,  involves optimizing land use ,  transportation ,  utilities ,  and other basic systems ,  in order to achieve certain objectives . 
urban infrastructure ideally serves all residents equally but in practice may prove uneven—with ,  in some cities ,  clear first-class and second-class alternatives . 
under the great leap forward and subsequent five-year plans continuing today ,  the people's republic of china has undergone concomitant urbanization and industrialization and to become the world's leading manufacturer . 
thus ,  urban areas experience unique climates ,  with earlier flowering and later leaf dropping than in nearby country . 
chervil  -lrb-  ; anthriscus cerefolium  -rrb-  ,  sometimes called french parsley or garden chervil  -lrb-  to distinguish it from similar plants also called chervil  -rrb-  ,  is a delicate annual herb related to parsley . 
transplanting chervil can be difficult ,  due to the long taproot . 
chervil has had various uses in folk medicine . 
it has 2 known subspecies; `` allium schoenoprasum '' subsp . 
chives ,  scientific name allium schoenoprasum ,  are an edible species of the genus `` allium '' . 
 ''a .  schoenoprasum '' is the only species of `` allium '' native to both the new and the old worlds . 
chives are the only species of `` allium '' native to both the new and the old worlds . 
from 1997 to 1999 morris created `` blue jam '' for bbc radio 1, a surreal taboo-breaking radio show set to an ambient soundtrack . 
he has won two bafta awards: the bafta award for best short film in 2002 for `` my wrongs#8245–8249 & 117 '' ,  and the bafta award for outstanding debut by a british director ,  writer or producer in 2011 for `` four lions '' . 
in december 2014, it was announced that a short radio collaboration with noel fielding and richard ayoade would be broadcast on bbc radio 6.
in july 1987, he moved on to bbc radio bristol to present his own show `` no known cure '' ,  broadcast on saturday and sunday mornings . 
meanwhile ,  morris' postmodern sketch and ambient music radio show `` blue jam '' helped him to gain a cult following . 
in 1994, a bbc 2 television series based on `` on the hour '' was broadcast under the name `` the day today '' . 
in november 2014, a three-hour retrospective of morris' radio career was broadcast on bbc radio 4 extra under the title 'raw meat radio' ,  presented by mary anne hobbs and featuring interviews with armando iannucci ,  peter baynham ,  paul garner ,  and others . 
in 1991, morris joined armando iannucci's spoof news project `` on the hour '' . 
morris won the best tv comedy newcomer award from the british comedy awards in 1998 for his performance in `` the day today '' . 
he presented `` the chris morris show '' on glr until 1993, when one show got suspended after a sketch was broadcast involving a child `` outing '' celebrities . 
in the early 1990s ,  morris teamed up with his radio producer ,  armando iannucci ,  to create `` on the hour '' ,  a satire of news programmes . 
in 2010, morris directed his first feature-length film ,  `` four lions '' ,  which satirised islamic terrorism through a group of inept british pakistanis . 
there were a total of 70,331 births in colorado in 2006.
denver is the capital and most populous city of colorado . 
colorado is part of the western and southwestern united states ,  and is one of the mountain states . 
the climate of colorado is more complex than states outside of the mountain states region . 
there is one native coloradan language still spoken in colorado ,  colorado river numic  -lrb-  ute  -rrb-  . 
according to the 2010 united states census ,  colorado had a population of 5,029,196.
grand junction ,  colorado is the largest city on the western slope . 
the western slope of colorado is drained by the colorado river and its tributaries  -lrb-  primarily the gunnison river ,  green river ,  and the san juan river  -rrb-  ,  or by evaporation in its arid areas . 
the state was named for the colorado river ,  which early spanish explorers named the `` río colorado '' for the ruddy silt the river carried from the mountains . 
the south park of colorado is the region of the headwaters of the south platte river . 
spanish is the second-most spoken language in colorado ,  after english . 
the region that is today the state of colorado has been inhabited by native americans for more than 13,000 years . 
spoken english in colorado has many spanish idioms . 
southwest and southern colorado are a complex mixture of desert and mountain areas . 
the macomb party designated the confluence as the source of the colorado river . 
the southwest corner of colorado is the four corners monument at 36°59'56 ''n ,  109°2'43 ''w .  this is the only place in the united states where four states meet: colorado ,  new mexico ,  arizona ,  and utah . 
the four corners monument in the southwest corner of colorado marks the common boundary of colorado ,  new mexico ,  arizona ,  and utah; the only such place in the united states . 
the western slope area of colorado includes the western face of the rocky mountains and all of the state to the western border . 
three warships of the u . s .  navy have been named the uss `` colorado '' . 
colorado  -lrb-   ,  other variants  -rrb-  is a state of the western united states encompassing most of the southern rocky mountains as well as the northeastern portion of the colorado plateau and the western edge of the great plains . 
while colorado has a strong western identity ,  it tends to be more socially liberal than neighboring states . 
only small parts of the colorado rockies are snow-covered year round . 
to the west of the great plains of colorado rises the eastern slope of the rocky mountains . 
colorado is nicknamed the `` centennial state '' because it became a state one century after the signing of the united states declaration of independence . 
the carboniferous is a geologic period and system that spans 60 million years from the end of the devonian period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  ,  to the beginning of the permian period ,  mya . 
in the united states the carboniferous is usually broken into mississippian  -lrb-  earlier  -rrb-  and pennsylvanian  -lrb-  later  -rrb-  subperiods . 
the mississippian is about twice as long as the pennsylvanian ,  but due to the large thickness of coal-bearing deposits with pennsylvanian ages in europe and north america ,  the two subperiods were long thought to have been more or less equal in duration . 
