downing and sreberny-mohammadi state: `` imperialism is the conquest and control of one country by a more powerful one . 
instead ,  these efforts ,  it is argued ,  were made in order to advance western development and reinforce western hegemony . 
in `` can the subaltern speak ? `` 
the policy also made attempts to forcefully conform the aborigines to western ideas of dress and education . 
throughout `` can the subaltern speak ? 
the work of french philosopher and social theorist michel foucault has heavily influenced use of the term `` cultural imperialism , ``  particularly his philosophical interpretation of power and his concept of governmentality . 
foucault's interpretation of governance is also very important in constructing theories of transnational power structure . 
although the term was popularized in the 1960s ,  and was used by its original proponents to refer to cultural hegemonies in a post-colonial world ,  cultural imperialism has also been used to refer to times further in the past . 
ogan saw `` media imperialism often described as a process whereby the united states and western europe produce most of the media products ,  make the first profits from domestic sales ,  and then market the products in third world countries at costs considerably lower than those the countries would have to bear to produce similar products at home . `` 
following an interpretation of power similar to that of machiavelli ,  foucault defines power as immaterial ,  as a `` certain type of relation between individuals '' that has to do with complex strategic social positions that relate to the subject's ability to control its environment and influence those around itself . 
in `` a critique of postcolonial reason '' ,  spivak argues that western philosophy has a history of not only exclusion of the subaltern from discourse ,  but also does not allow them to occupy the space of a fully human subject . 
spivak says that cultural imperialism has the power to disqualify or erase the knowledge and mode of education of certain populations that are low on the social hierarchy . 
other major critiques are that the term is not defined well ,  and employs further terms that are not defined well ,  and therefore lacks explanatory power ,  that `` cultural imperialism '' is hard to measure ,  and that the theory of a legacy of colonialism is not always true . 
the speed at which reactions takes place is studied by reaction kinetics . 
the shift in reaction direction tendency occurs at  . 
the elementary reaction is the smallest division into which a chemical reaction can be decomposed ,  it has no intermediate products . 
chemical reactions happen at a characteristic reaction rate at a given temperature and chemical concentration . 
dissociation plays an important role in triggering chain reactions ,  such as hydrogen–oxygen or polymerization reactions . 
most chemical reactions are reversible ,  that is they can and do run in both directions . 
chemical reactions are determined by the laws of thermodynamics . 
a special arrow  -lrb-  ⇒  -rrb-  is used in retro reactions . 
the general concept of a chemical reaction has been extended to reactions between entities smaller than atoms ,  including nuclear reactions ,  radioactive decays ,  and reactions between elementary particles ,  as described by quantum field theory . 
for bimolecular reactions ,  two molecules collide and react with each other . 
essentially the river divide is a west-flowing ,  upriver section of venezuela's orinoco river with an outflow to the south into the amazon basin . 
the casiquiare canal connects the upper orinoco ,  below the mission of esmeraldas ,  with the rio negro affluent of the amazon river near the town of san carlos . 
the casiquiare river is a distributary of the upper orinoco flowing southward into the rio negro ,  in venezuela ,  south america . 
its mouth at the rio negro ,  an affluent of the amazon river ,  is near the town of san carlos and is above sea level . 
the casiquiare canal – orinoco river hydrographic divide is a representation of the hydrographic water divide that delineates the separation between the orinoco basin and the amazon basin . 
the name of the dynasty derives from its founder ,  hugh ,  who was known as `` hugh capet '' . 
this list of cadet branches shows most of the capetian cadet lines and designating their royal french progenitor ,  although some sub-branches are not shown . 
thus the french crown passed from the house of capet after the death of charles iv to philip vi of france of the house of valois ,  a cadet branch of the capetian dynasty , 
that line was succeeded by cadet branches ,  the houses of valois and then bourbon ,  which ruled until the french revolution . 
the sons of robert the strong were odo and robert ,  who both ruled as king of western francia . 
the capetian dynasty  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the house of france ,  is a dynasty of frankish origin ,  founded by hugh capet . 
the carolingian dynasty ceased to rule france upon the death of louis v .  after the death of louis v ,  the son of hugh the great ,  hugh capet ,  was elected by the nobility as king of france . 
in geometry ,  a cuboctahedron is a polyhedron with 8 triangular faces and 6 square faces . 
the cube is the only regular hexahedron and is one of the five platonic solids . 
most commuter  -lrb-  or suburban  -rrb-  trains are built to main line rail standards ,  differing from light rail or rapid transit  -lrb-  metro rail  -rrb-  systems by:
hong kong mtr's east rail line and west rail line were built to commuter rail standards but are operated as a metro system . 
in india ,  commuter rail systems are present in major cities . 
regional rail usually provides rail services between towns and cities ,  rather than purely linking major population hubs in the way inter-city rail does . 
regional rail does not exist in this sense in the united states ,  so the term `` regional rail '' has become synonymous with commuter rail there ,  although the two are more clearly defined in europe . 
currently there are not many examples of commuter rail in africa . 
major metropolitan areas in most european countries are usually served by extensive commuter/suburban rail systems . 
the five major cities in australia have suburban railway systems in their metropolitan areas . 
in poland ,  commuter rail systems exist in tricity ,  warsaw ,  krakow and katowice . 
compared to rapid transit  -lrb-  or metro rail  -rrb-  ,  commuter/suburban rail has lower frequency ,  following a schedule rather than fixed intervals ,  and fewer stations spaced further apart . 
sometimes high-speed rail can serve daily use of commuters . 
in japan ,  commuter rail systems have extensive network and frequent service and are heavily used . 
other commuter railways in india include hyderabad mmts ,  delhi suburban railway ,  pune suburban railway and lucknow-kanpur suburban railway . 
in iran ,  systra has done a `` tehran long term urban rail study '' . 
in taiwan ,  western line in taipei-taoyuan metropolitan area ,  taichung metropolitan area ,  tainan-kaohsiung metropolitan area as well as neiwan-liujia line in hsinchu area is considered commuter rail . 
under the county council ,  there are five district councils ,  cambridge city council ,  south cambridgeshire district council ,  east cambridgeshire district council ,  huntingdonshire district council and fenland district council . 
local government is divided between cambridgeshire county council and peterborough city council ,  which ,  since 1998, forms a separate unitary authority . 
other prominent hills are little trees hill and wandlebury hill  -lrb-  both at   -rrb-  in the gog magog hills ,  rivey hill above linton ,  rowley's hill and the madingley hills . 
the cambridgeshire regiment  -lrb-  nicknamed the fen tigers  -rrb-  ,  the county-based army unit ,  fought in the boer war in south africa ,  the first world war and second world war . 
it contains most of the region known as silicon fen . 
christian goldbach was multilingual – he wrote a diary in german and latin ,  his letters were written in german ,  latin ,  french ,  and italian and for official documents he used russian ,  german and latin . 
christian goldbach  -lrb-  ; ; march 18, 1690 – november 20, 1764 -rrb- was a german mathematician who also studied law . 
in 131 bc ,  for the first time ,  both censors were plebeians . 
the censors' regulation of public morality is the origin of the modern meaning of the words `` censor '' and `` censorship '' . 
from then on ,  if one of the censors died ,  his colleague resigned ,  and two new censors were chosen to replace them . 
the princeps himself had to be a former censor . 
the censorship continued in existence for 421 years ,  from 443 bc to 22 bc ,  but during this period ,  many `` lustra '' passed by without any censor being chosen at all . 
the repairs of the public works and the keeping of them in proper condition were let out by the censors by public auction to the lowest bidder ,  just as the `` vectigalia '' were let out to the highest bidder . 
in one important department the censors were entrusted with the expenditure of the public money ,  though the actual payments were no doubt made by the quaestors . 
the administration of the state's finances was another part of the censors' office . 
the tax was usually one per thousand upon the property entered in the books of the censors ,  but on one occasion the censors compelled a person to pay eight per thousand as a punishment . 
they also had the superintendence of all the other revenues of the state ,  the `` vectigalia '' ,  such as the tithes paid for the public lands ,  the salt works ,  the mines ,  the customs ,  etc . 
keeping the public morals  -lrb-  `` regimen morum '' ,  or in the empire `` cura morum '' or `` praefectura morum ''  -rrb-  was the second most important branch of the censors' duties ,  and the one which caused their office to be one of the most revered and the most dreaded in the roman state; hence they were also known as `` castigatores ''  -lrb-  `` chastisers ''  -rrb-  . 
a person who had been branded with a `` nota censoria '' ,  might ,  if he considered himself wronged ,  endeavour to prove his innocence to the censors ,  and if he did not succeed ,  he might try to gain the protection of one of the censors ,  that he might intercede on his behalf . 
it was ordinary for censors to expend large amounts of money  -lrb-  “by far the largest and most extensive” of the state  -rrb-  in their public works . 
the censors also possessed the right ,  though probably not without the assent of the senate ,  of imposing new `` vectigalia '' ,  and even of selling the land belonging to the state . 
the power of the censors was absolute: no magistrate could oppose their decisions ,  only another censor who succeeded them could cancel it . 
after a citizen had stated his name ,  age ,  family ,  etc .  ,  he then had to give an account of all his property ,  so far as it was subject to the census . 
the magistracy continued to be controlled by patricians until 351 bc ,  when gaius marcius rutilus was appointed the first plebeian censor . 
the reason for having two censors was that the two consuls had previously taken the census together . 
the boundary of a convex set is always a convex curve . 
in convex geometry ,  a convex set is a subset of an affine space that is closed under convex combinations . 
cairo  -lrb-   ; ``  '' ,  ; is the capital of egypt . 
6th of october city ,  west of cairo ,  and new cairo ,  east of cairo ,  are major urban developments which have been built to accommodate additional growth and development of the cairo area . 
the greater cairo is the largest metropolitan area in africa . 
with a population of over 9 million spread over  ,  cairo is by far the largest city in egypt . 
between 1882 and 1937, the population of cairo more than tripled—from 347,000 to 1.3 million—and its area increased from  . 
however ,  with that being said ,  cairo is still one of the most influential cities in all of egypt . 
for nearly 200 years after cairo was established ,  the administrative centre of egypt remained in fustat . 
greater cairo has long been the hub of education and educational services for egypt and the region . 
the land on which cairo was established in 969  -lrb-  present-day islamic cairo  -rrb-  was located underwater just over three hundred years earlier ,  when fustat was first built . 
under the ottomans ,  cairo expanded south and west from its nucleus around the citadel . 
although the cairo metropolis extends away from the nile in all directions ,  the city of cairo resides only on the east bank of the river and two islands within it on a total area of  . 
in march 2015, plans were announced for a yet-unnamed planned city to be built east of cairo ,  in an undeveloped area of the cairo governorate ,  which would serve as the administrative and financial capital of egypt . 
many of cairo's oldest coptic churches ,  including the hanging church ,  are located along the fortress walls in a section of the city known as coptic cairo . 
since 1860s ,  cairo expanded west as far as what is called now  -lrb-  midan opera  -rrb- 
finite-dimensional linear systems are never chaotic; for a dynamical system to display chaotic behavior ,  it must be either nonlinear or infinite-dimensional . 
chaotic behavior exists in many natural systems ,  such as weather and climate . 
a positive mle is usually taken as an indication that the system is chaotic . 
while the poincaré–bendixson theorem shows that a continuous dynamical system on the euclidean plane cannot be chaotic ,  two-dimensional continuous systems with non-euclidean geometry can exhibit chaotic behavior . 
discrete chaotic systems ,  such as the logistic map ,  can exhibit strange attractors whatever their dimensionality . 
where kernel formula_22 is propagator derived as green function of a relevant physical system ,   formula_23 might be logistic map alike formula_24 or complex map . 
some dynamical systems ,  like the one-dimensional logistic map defined by `` x '' → 4 `` x ''  -lrb-  1 – `` x ''  -rrb-  ,  are chaotic everywhere ,  but in many cases chaotic behavior is found only in a subset of phase space . 
unlike fixed-point attractors and limit cycles ,  the attractors that arise from chaotic systems ,  known as strange attractors ,  have great detail and complexity . 
the gradual increase of formula_10 at interval formula_12 changes dynamics from regular to chaotic one with qualitatively the same bifurcation diagram as those for logistic map . 
when meaningful predictions cannot be made ,  the system appears random . 
for a chaotic system to have dense periodic orbits means that every point in the space is approached arbitrarily closely by periodic orbits . 
cupolas often appear as small buildings in their own right . 
barns often have cupolas for ventilation . 
there are reports of stray mexican hairless dogs being mistaken for chupacabras . 
the chupacabra or chupacabras  -lrb-   ,  literally `` goat-sucker ''; from `` chupar '' ,  `` to suck '' ,  and `` cabra '' ,  `` goat ''  -rrb-  is a legendary creature in the folklore of parts of the americas ,  with its first purported sightings reported in puerto rico . 
 ''chupacabras '' can be literally translated as `` goat-sucker '' ,  from `` chupar ''  -lrb-  `` to suck ''  -rrb-  and `` cabra ''  -lrb-  `` goat ''  -rrb-  . 
the popularity of the chupacabra has resulted in its being featured in many types of media . 
an analysis by a veterinarian of 300 reported victims of the chupacabra found that they had not been bled dry . 
puerto rican comedian and entrepreneur silverio pérez is credited with coining the term `` chupacabras '' soon after the first incidents were reported in the press . 
according to biologists and wildlife management officials ,  the chupacabra is an urban legend . 
the only other island in any of the finger lakes is squaw island in canandaigua lake . 
the lake has two small islands . 
cayuga lake is located at ; above sea level . 
the lake is the subject of local folklore . 
serling and his family had a summer home at cayuga lake . 
cayuga lake is very popular among recreational boaters . 
 ''columbia magazine '' is the alumni magazine of columbia ,  serving all 340,000+ of the university's alumni . 
columbia university  -lrb-  columbia; officially columbia university in the city of new york  -rrb-  is a private ivy league research university in upper manhattan ,  new york city . 
undergraduate student composers at columbia may choose to become involved with columbia new music ,  which sponsors concerts of music written by undergraduate students from all of columbia's schools . 
columbia is a top supplier of young engineering entrepreneurs for new york city . 
columbia is home to numerous undergraduate academic publications . 
according to `` new york '' ,  columbia university is the second largest landowner in new york city ,  after the catholic church . 
the columbia international relations council and association  -lrb-  circa  -rrb-  ,  oversees columbia's model united nations activities . 
columbia was the first north american site where the uranium atom was split . 
all columbia undergraduates and graduates as well as students of barnard college and other columbia affiliated schools can register to participate in the world leaders forum using their student ids . 
in 2015, columbia university was ranked the first in the state by average professor salaries . 
barnard college still remains affiliated with columbia ,  and all barnard graduates are issued diplomas authorized by both columbia university and barnard college . 
in 1919, columbia established a student application process characterized by the new york times as `` the first modern college application . `` 
the columbia university organization of rising entrepreneurs  -lrb-  core  -rrb-  was founded in 1999.
newyork-presbyterian hospital is affiliated with the medical schools of both columbia university and cornell university . 
founded in 1961 under the auspices of columbia university's graduate school of journalism ,  the `` columbia journalism review ''  -lrb-  cjr  -rrb-  examines day-to-day press performance as well as the forces that affect that performance . 
it maintains research centers outside of the united states known as columbia global centers . 
alumni of columbia have occupied top positions in wall street and the rest of the business world . 
the columbia university school of general studies ,  barnard college and graduate schools have their own apartment-style housing in the surrounding neighborhood . 
in 2011, the ranked columbia 3rd best university for forming ceos in the us and 12th worldwide . 
on may 17, 1939, fledgling nbc broadcast a doubleheader between the columbia lions and the princeton tigers at columbia's baker field ,  making it the first televised regular athletic event in history . 
columbia university is an independent ,  privately supported ,  nonsectarian institution of higher education . 
the varsity show is an annual musical written by and for students and was established in 1894, making it one of columbia's oldest traditions . 
in november 1813, the college agreed to incorporate its medical school with the college of physicians and surgeons ,  a new school created by the regents of new york ,  forming columbia university college of physicians and surgeons . 
columbia university athletics has a long history ,  with many accomplishments in athletic fields . 
columbia university is home to many fraternities ,  sororities ,  and co-educational greek organizations . 
columbia is home to two pioneers in undergraduate campus radio broadcasting ,  wkcr-fm and ctv . 
barnard students are also eligible to cross-register classes that are available through the barnard catalogue and alumnae can join the columbia alumni association . 
columbia owns many unique research facilities ,  such as the columbia institute for tele-information dedicated to telecommunications and the goddard institute for space studies ,  which is an astronomical observatory affiliated with nasa . 
a leading first amendment scholar ,  he is widely published on freedom of speech and press ,  and serves on the faculty of columbia law school . 
columbia law school was ranked tied for 4th ,  the mailman school of public health 5th ,  the school of social work 5th ,  teachers college 7th ,  columbia business school 8th ,  the college of physicians and surgeons tied for 6th for research  -lrb-  and tied for 51st for primary care  -rrb-  ,  the graduate school of arts 6th ,  the school of nursing tied for 8th ,  and the fu foundation school of engineering and applied science  -lrb-  graduate  -rrb-  was ranked 13th . 
 ''the steps '' ,  alternatively known as `` low steps '' or the `` urban beach '' ,  are a popular meeting area for columbia students . 
teachers college came under the aegis of columbia university in 1893 and is currently affiliated as the university's graduate school of education . 
in addition ,  22 nobel prize winners in physiology and medicine have been affiliated with columbia ,  the third most of any american institution . 
the columbia prison divest campaign was the first campaign to successfully get a u . s .  university to divest from the private prison industry . 
columbia has been rated `` b+ '' by the 2011 college sustainability report card for its environmental and sustainability initiatives . 
a cell wall is a structural layer surrounding some types of cells ,  just outside the cell membrane . 
the apparent rigidity of the cell wall thus results from inflation of the cell contained within . 
the composition of cell walls varies between species and may depend on cell type and developmental stage . 
plant cell walls vary from 0.1 to several µm in thickness . 
cell walls serve similar purposes in those organisms that possess them . 
before ,  it had been thought that cells shared walls and that fluid passed between them this way . 
in the pali literature ,  the `` mahabhuta ''  -lrb-  `` great elements ''  -rrb-  or `` catudhatu ''  -lrb-  `` four elements ''  -rrb-  are earth ,  water ,  fire and air . 
in classical thought ,  the four elements earth ,  water ,  air ,  and fire as proposed by empedocles frequently occur; aristotle added a fifth element ,  aether; it has been called akasha in india and quintessence in europe . 
the system of five elements are found in vedas ,  especially ayurveda ,  the `` pancha mahabhuta '' ,  or `` five great elements '' ,  of hinduism are `` bhūmi ''  -lrb-  earth  -rrb-  ,  `` ap '' or `` jala ''  -lrb-  water  -rrb-  ,  `` tejas '' or `` agni ''  -lrb-  fire  -rrb-  ,  `` marut '' ,  `` vayu '' or `` pavan ''  -lrb-  air or wind  -rrb-  and `` vyom '' or `` shunya ''  -lrb-  space or zero  -rrb-  or `` akash ''  -lrb-  aether or void  -rrb-  . 
the five elements are associated with the five senses ,  and act as the gross medium for the experience of sensations . 
classical elements typically refer to the concepts in ancient greece of earth ,  water ,  air ,  fire ,  and  -lrb-  later  -rrb-  aether ,  which were proposed to explain the nature and complexity of all matter in terms of simpler substances . 
the concept of the five elements formed a basis of analysis in both hinduism and buddhism . 
the chinese wu xing system lists wood  -lrb-  木 `` mù ''  -rrb-  ,  fire  -lrb-  火 `` huǒ ''  -rrb-  ,  earth  -lrb-  土 `` tǔ ''  -rrb-  ,  metal  -lrb-  金 `` jīn ''  -rrb-  ,  and water  -lrb-  水 `` shuǐ ''  -rrb-  ,  though these are described more as energies or transitions rather than as types of material . 
fire in tarot symbolizes conversion or passion . 
agni has three forms: fire ,  lightning and the sun . 
fire is one of the four classical elements in ancient greek philosophy and science . 
fire and the other greek classical elements were incorporated into the golden dawn system . 
this also makes fire the element with the smallest number of sides ,  and plato regarded it as appropriate for the heat of fire ,  which he felt is sharp and stabbing ,   -lrb-  like one of the points of a tetrahedron  -rrb-  . 
in alchemy the chemical element of sulfur was often associated with fire and its alchemical symbol and its symbol was an upward-pointing triangle . 
enlil was the god of air in ancient sumer . 
air is not one of the traditional five chinese classical elements . 
air is one of the four classical elements in ancient greek philosophy and in western alchemy . 
the element air also appears as a concept in the buddhist philosophy which has an ancient history in china . 
according to plato ,  it is associated with the octahedron; air is considered to be both hot and wet . 
the term is from pie `` hap '' water . 
water and the other greek classical elements were incorporated into the golden dawn system . 
water is one of the five elements that appear in most wiccan traditions . 
in hindu philosophy ,  the term refers to  water as an element ,  one of the `` panchamahabhuta , ``  or `` five great elements '' . 
earth and the other greek classical elements were incorporated into the golden dawn system . 
prithvi  -lrb-  sanskrit: ' ,  also '  -rrb-  is the hindu `` earth '' and mother goddess . 
earth is one of the four classical elements in ancient greek philosophy and science . 
according to one such tradition ,  she is the personification of the earth itself; according to another ,  its actual mother ,  being `` prithvi tattwa '' ,  the essence of the element earth . 
earth is one of the five elements that appear in most wiccan and pagan traditions . 
most of the sketches on the cd were remade for `` jam '' . 
a cd of a number of `` blue jam '' sketches was released on 23 october 2000 by record label warp . 
blue jam is an ambient dark comedy and horror radio programme created and directed by chris morris . 
the first five episodes of series 1 of `` blue jam '' were repeated by bbc radio 4 extra in february and march 2014, and series 2 was rebroadcast in december . 
it aired on bbc radio 1 in the early hours of the morning from 1997 to 1999.
all episodes of `` blue jam '' are currently available for streaming and download on the internet archive . 
the future of the channel was again being looked into by the government ,  with analysts suggesting several options for the channel's future . 
under the leadership of freeview founder andy duncan ,  2005 saw a change of direction for channel 4's digital channels . 
with the conversion of the wenvoe transmitter group in wales to digital on 31 march 2010, channel 4 became a uk-wide tv channel for the first time . 
the result was that channel 4 as seen by the rest of the united kingdom would be replaced in wales by `` sianel pedwar cymru  -lrb-  s4c  -rrb- ``   -lrb-  `` channel four wales ''  -rrb-  . 
channel 4 is a british public-service television broadcaster that began transmission on 2 november 1982.
after control of the station passed from the channel four television company to the channel four television corporation in 1993, a shift in broadcasting style took place . 
before channel 4 and s4c ,  britain had three terrestrial television services: bbc1, bbc2, and itv . 
on its first day ,  channel 4 also broadcast controversial soap opera `` brookside '' ,  which ran until 2003.
on its launch ,  channel 4 committed itself to providing an alternative to the existing channels ,  an agenda in part set out by its remit which required the provision of programming to minority groups . 
on 28 march 2007, channel 4 announced plans to launch a music channel `` 4music '' as a joint venture with british media company emap which would include carriage on the freeview platform . 
the carolina parakeet had the northern-most range of any known parrot . 
young carolina parakeets differed slightly in coloration from adults . 
the carolina parakeet was a small green parrot very similar in size and coloration to the extant jenday and sun conures . 
according to a study of mitochondrial dna recovered from museum specimens ,  their closest living relatives include some of the south american `` aratinga '' parakeets: the nanday parakeet ,  the sun parakeet ,  and the golden-capped parakeet . 
the evidence is indicative that humans had at least a contributory role in the extinction of the carolina parakeet ,  through a variety of means . 
incas ,  the last captive carolina parakeet died at the cincinnati zoo on february 21, 1918, in the same cage as martha ,  the last passenger pigeon ,  which died in 1914.
the carolina parakeet  -lrb-  `` conuropsis carolinensis ''  -rrb-  or carolina conure was a small green neotropical parrot with a bright yellow head ,  reddish orange face and pale beak native to the eastern ,  midwest and plains states of the united states and was the only indigenous parrot within its range ,  as well as one of only two parrots native to the united states  -lrb-  the other being the thick-billed parrot  -rrb-  . 
the appalachian mountains separated these birds from the eastern `` c .  c .  carolinensis '' . 
the bird lived in huge ,  noisy flocks of as many as 200–300 birds . 
during the algerian war ,  frantz omar fanon found his practice of treatment of native algerians ineffective due to the continuation of the horror of a colonial war . 
later ,  us naval policy was changed so that after events of such psychological trauma ,  the crew would be dispersed to new assignments . 
the earliest identified christian church building was a house church founded between 233 and 256.
a conventual church  -lrb-  or monastery church ,  minster ,  `` katholikon ''  -rrb-  is the main church building in a christian monastery or abbey . 
a church building or church house ,  often simply called a church ,  is a building used for christian religious activities ,  particularly for worship services . 
according to the new testament ,  the earliest christians did not build church buildings . 
many gothic churches contain features from the romanesque era . 
a church that has the function of cathedral is not necessarily a large building . 
the church could be used as a place to thresh and store grain . 
a collegiate church is a church where the daily office of worship is maintained by a college of canons ,  which may be presided over by a dean or provost . 
modern church buildings have a variety of architectural styles and layouts; many buildings that were designed for other purposes have now been converted for church use ,  and conversely many original church buildings have been put to other uses . 
the term is sometimes  -lrb-  improperly  -rrb-  used to refer to any church of great size . 
childe's tomb is a granite cross on dartmoor ,  devon ,  england . 
after a race between the monks of tavistock abbey and the men of plymstock ,  the abbey won . 
the replacement base and cross were made in holne in 1885.
childe's tomb is a reconstructed granite cross on the south-east edge of foxtor mires ,  about 500 metres north of fox tor on dartmoor ,  devon ,  england at  . 
crossing rediscovered the original site of the tomb in 1882 and said that all that remained was a small mound and some half buried stones . 
according to legend ,  the cross was erected over the kistvaen  -lrb-  'chest-stone' i . e . 
all of them come from proto-indo-european `` milk '' . 
such word sets can also be called etymological twins ,  and they may come in groups of higher numbers ,  as with ,  for example ,  the words `` wain ''  -lrb-  native  -rrb-  ,  `` waggon/wagon ''  -lrb-  dutch  -rrb-  ,  and `` vehicle ''  -lrb-  latin  -rrb-  in english . 
some words sound similar ,  but don't come from the same root; these are called false cognates . 
cognates also do not need to have similar forms: english `` father '' ,  french `` père '' ,  and armenian հայր  -lrb-  `` hayr ''  -rrb-  all descend directly from proto-indo-european `` *ph₂tḗr '' . 
it is forward phase chromatography ,  and if it is non-polar  -lrb-  c-18 -rrb- it is reverse phase . 
methods in which the stationary phase is more polar than the mobile phase  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  toluene as the mobile phase ,  silica as the stationary phase  -rrb-  are termed normal phase liquid chromatography  -lrb-  nplc  -rrb-  and the opposite  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  water-methanol mixture as the mobile phase and c18  -lrb-  octadecylsilyl  -rrb-  as the stationary phase  -rrb-  is termed reversed phase liquid chromatography  -lrb-  rplc  -rrb-  . 
liquid chromatography  -lrb-  lc  -rrb-  is a separation technique in which the mobile phase is a liquid . 
in expanded bed adsorption ,  a fluidized bed is used ,  rather than a solid phase made by a packed bed . 
in hplc the sample is forced by a liquid at high pressure  -lrb-  the mobile phase  -rrb-  through a column that is packed with a stationary phase composed of irregularly or spherically shaped particles ,  a porous monolithic layer ,  or a porous membrane . 
 ''planar chromatography '' is a separation technique in which the stationary phase is present as or on a plane . 
stainless steel and glass are the usual materials for packed columns and quartz or fused silica for capillary columns . 
clement doke was also interested in ethnology . 
at first ,  clement doke was frustrated by his inability to communicate with the lamba . 
doke served the university of the witwatersrand until his retirement in 1953.
clement martyn doke  -lrb-  16 may 1893 in bristol ,  united kingdom – 24 february 1980 in east london ,  south africa  -rrb-  was a south african linguist working mainly on african languages . 
doke took up his appointment in the new department of bantu studies at the university of witwatersrand in 1923.
in 1919 doke married hilda lehmann ,  who accompanied him back to lambaland . 
in 1902, meinhof made recordings of east african music . 
meinhof developed a comprehensive classification scheme for african languages . 
in his work ,  meinhof looked at the common bantu languages such as swahili and zulu to determine similarities and differences . 
it has a leaf pattern similar to the members of the genera `` kedrostis '' ,  `` melothria '' and `` zehneria '' . 
the plants in this family are grown around the tropics and in temperate areas ,  where those with edible fruits were among the earliest cultivated plants in both the old and new worlds . 
like many other chorded keyboards ,  it can be used with one hand . 
the ekapad is a 12-key chorded keyboard operated with the four fingers of one hand . 
joy2chord is a chorded keyboard driver for gnu/linux . 
a keyset or chorded keyboard  -lrb-  also called a chorded keyset ,  `` chord keyboard '' or `` chording keyboard ''  -rrb-  is a computer input device that allows the user to enter characters or commands formed by pressing several keys together ,  like playing a `` chord '' on a piano . 
as a result ,  most newer chorded keyboards for braille input include at least nine keys . 
as a crude example ,  each finger might control one key which corresponds to one bit in a byte ,  so that using seven keys and seven fingers ,  one could enter any character in the ascii set—if the user could remember the binary codes . 
a chorded keyboard minus the board ,  typically designed to be used while held in the hand ,  is called a keyer . 
in 1874, the five-bit baudot telegraph code and a matching 5-key chord keyboard was designed to be used with the operator forming the codes manually . 
the first widespread use of a chord keyboard was in the stenotype machine used by court reporters ,  which was invented in 1868 and is still in use . 
the gkos is a 6-key keyboard with a different signs and commands allocation of the 63 different chords in order to provide all pc keyboard functions and to make entering letters and numbers lighter by having to press fewer keys simultaneously . 
historically ,  the baudot and braille keyboards were standardized to some extent ,  but they are unable to replicate the full character set of a modern keyboard . 
modern examples of chorded keyboards include tiptapspeech  -lrb-  using engelbart's original mapping  -rrb-  ,  the gkos keyboard ,  the frogpad ,  the in10did method ,  the ekapad ,  textfaster and hottyper . 
touch screen chordic keyboards are available to smartphone users as an optional way of entering text . 
beug was a latter-day saint . 
beug lived in a tudor-style home in the north 25th street neighborhood . 
the growth process of the cell does not refer to the size of the cell ,  but instead the density of the number of cells present in the organism at a given time . 
cells contains specialized sub-cellular compartments including cell membrane ,  cytoplasm , mitochondria ,  and ribosomes . 
there are two fundamental classifications of cells: prokaryotes and eukaryotes . 
standard canadian english is socially defined . 
canadian english contains major elements of both british english and american english ,  as well as many uniquely canadian characteristics . 
british columbia english shares dialect features with both standard canadian english and the american pacific northwest english . 
canadian spelling of the english language combines british and american conventions . 
while ,  broadly speaking ,  canadian english tends to be closest to american english in terms of linguistic distance ,  the precise influence of american english ,  british english and other sources on canadian english varieties has been the ongoing focus of systematic studies since the 1950s . 
canadian english  -lrb-  cane ,  ce ,  en-ca  -rrb-  is the set of varieties of the english language native to canada . 
the first canadian dictionaries of canadian english were edited by walter spencer avis and published by gage ltd . 
the term `` canadian english '' is first attested in a speech by the reverend a .  constable geikie in an address to the canadian institute in 1857  -lrb-  see dchp-1 online ,  s . v `` canadian english '' ,  avis et al . 
canadian english is the product of five waves of immigration and settlement over a period of more than two centuries . 
phonologically ,  canadian and american english are classified together as north american english ,  emphasizing the fact that the vast majority of outsiders ,  even other native english speakers ,  cannot distinguish the typical accents of the two countries by sound alone . 
many canadian editors ,  though ,  use the `` canadian oxford dictionary '' ,  often along with the chapter on spelling in `` editing canadian english '' ,  and ,  where necessary  -lrb-  depending on context  -rrb-  ,  one or more other references . 
there are minor disagreements over the degree to which even canadians and americans themselves can differentiate their own two accents ,  and there is even evidence that some western american english  -lrb-  pacific northwest and california english ,  for example  -rrb-  is undergoing a vowel shift partially coinciding with the one first reported in mainland canadian english in the early 1990s . 
in 2005 and 2007, czech was spoken by about 10 million residents of the czech republic . 
there was no standardization distinguishing between czech and slovak prior to the 15th century . 
this period is known as the czech national revival  -lrb-  or renaissance  -rrb-  . 
czech speakers in slovakia primarily live in cities . 
the term `` old czech '' is applied to the period predating the 16th century ,  with the earliest records of the high medieval period also classified as `` early old czech '' ,  but the term `` medieval czech '' is also used . 
the modern standard czech language originates in standardization efforts of the 18th century . 
czech uses a simple orthography which phonologists have used as a model . 
the five countries with the greatest use of czech were the czech republic  -lrb-  98.77 percent  -rrb-  ,  slovakia  -lrb-  24.86 percent  -rrb-  ,  portugal  -lrb-  1.93 percent  -rrb-  ,  poland  -lrb-  0.98 percent  -rrb-  and germany  -lrb-  0.47 percent  -rrb-  . 
czech ,  the official language of the czech republic  -lrb-  a member of the european union since 2004 -rrb- ,  is one of the eu's official languages and the 2012 eurobarometer survey found that czech was the foreign language most often used in slovakia . 
a capsid is the protein shell of a virus . 
through this portal ,  viral dna is translocated into the capsid . 
as a result ,  some capsid proteins are widespread in viruses infecting distantly related organisms  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  capsid proteins with the jelly-roll fold  -rrb-  ,  whereas others are restricted to a particular group of viruses  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  capsid proteins of alphaviruses  -rrb-  . 
the capsid encloses the genetic material of the virus . 
capsids are broadly classified according to their structure . 
the most serious side effect of chloramphenicol treatment is aplastic anaemia . 
chloramphenicol is an antibiotic useful for the treatment of a number of bacterial infections . 
chloramphenicol may cause bone marrow suppression during treatment; this is a direct toxic effect of the drug on human mitochondria . 
chloramphenicol resistance may be carried on a plasmid that also codes for resistance to other drugs . 
as of 2014 some `` enterococcus faecium '' and '' pseudomonas aeruginosa '' strains are resistant to chloramphenicol . 
studies in mice have suggested existing marrow damage may compound any marrow damage resulting from the toxic effects of chloramphenicol . 
the cut-up technique  -lrb-  or `` découpé '' in french  -rrb-  is an aleatory literary technique in which a written text is cut up and rearranged to create a new text . 
poor length growth is apparent as early as the first year of life . 
ovulation is impeded ,  and infertility is common . 
if untreated ,  it results in mild to severe impairment of both physical and mental growth and development . 
dwarfism may also be caused by malnutrition or other hormonal deficiencies ,  such as insufficient growth hormone secretion ,  hypopituitarism ,  decreased secretion of growth hormone-releasing hormone ,  deficient growth hormone receptor activity and downstream causes ,  such as insulin-like growth factor 1  -lrb-  igf-1 -rrb- deficiency . 
the etymology of `` cretin '' is uncertain . 
around the world ,  the most common cause of congenital hypothyroidism is iodine deficiency . 
the council of trent  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  held between 1545 and 1563 in trent  -lrb-  or trento ,  in northern italy  -rrb-  ,  was the 19th ecumenical council of the catholic church . 
more than three hundred years passed until the next ecumenical council ,  the first vatican council ,  was convened in 1869.
the greatest weight in the council's decrees is given to the sacraments . 
much more than the second council of nicaea  -lrb-  787 -rrb- the council fathers of trent stressed the pedagogical purpose of christian images . 
the history of the council is thus divided into three distinct periods: 1545–1549, 1551–1552 and 1562–1563.
the consequences of the council were also significant in regards to the church's liturgy and practices . 
pope clement vii  -lrb-  1523–1534 -rrb- was vehemently against the idea of a council ,  agreeing with francis i of france ,  after pope pius ii ,  in his bull `` execrabilis ''  -lrb-  1460 -rrb- and his reply to the university of cologne  -lrb-  1463 -rrb- ,  set aside the theory of the supremacy of general councils laid down by the council of constance . 
pope paul iii ,  who convoked the council ,  oversaw the first eight sessions  -lrb-  1545–47 -rrb- ,  while the twelfth to sixteenth sessions  -lrb-  1551–52 -rrb- were overseen by pope julius iii and the seventeenth to twenty-fifth sessions  -lrb-  1562–63 -rrb- by pope pius iv . 
german catholics ,  diminished in number ,  hoped for a council to clarify matters . 
the main objectives of the council were twofold ,  although there were other issues that were also discussed:
chloroplasts cannot be made by the plant cell and must be inherited by each daughter cell during cell division . 
cyanobacteria are considered the ancestors of chloroplasts . 
chloroplasts are one of many types of organelles in the plant cell . 
rhodophyte chloroplasts are also called `` rhodoplasts '' ,  literally `` red chloroplasts '' . 
the chloroplastidan chloroplasts ,  or green chloroplasts ,  are another large ,  highly diverse primary chloroplast lineage . 
chloroplasts are believed to have arisen after mitochondria ,  since all eukaryotes contain mitochondria ,  but not all have chloroplasts . 
chloroplasts are only found in plants ,  algae ,  and the amoeboid `` paulinella chromatophora '' . 
camp david is the country retreat for the president of the united states . 
camp david received its present name from dwight d .  eisenhower ,  in honor of his father and grandson ,  both named david . 
there are several dimmer stars within the borders of crux . 
crux is a constellation located in the southern sky in a bright portion of the milky way . 
15 of the 23 brightest stars are blue-white b-type stars . 
crux is sometimes confused with the nearby false cross by stargazers . 
crux is easily visible from the southern hemisphere at practically any time of year . 
in tropical regions crux can be seen in the sky from april to june . 
aa ceti is a triple star system; the brightest member has a magnitude of 6.2.
it is a yellow-hued main-sequence star of magnitude 3.5.
mira  -lrb-  `` the wonderful ''  -rrb-  ,  designated omicron ceti ,  was the first variable star to be discovered and the prototype of its class . 
ic 1613  -lrb-  caldwell 51 -rrb- is an irregular dwarf galaxy near the star 26 ceti and is a member of the local group . 
α ceti ,  traditionally called menkar  -lrb-  `` the nose ''  -rrb-  ,  is a red-hued giant star of magnitude 2.5, 220 light-years from earth . 
among some amateur astronomers ,  ngc 246 has garnered the nickname `` pac-man nebula '' because of the arrangement of its central stars and the surrounding star field . 
two bright mira variable stars are in carina: r carinae and s carinae; both stars are red giants . 
there are several other stars above magnitude 3 in carina . 
carina  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a constellation in the southern sky . 
carina is home to several double stars and binary stars . 
the false cross consists of two stars in carina ,  iota carinae and epsilon carinae ,  and two stars in vela ,  kappa velorum and delta velorum . 
epsilon carinae and upsilon carinae are double stars visible in small telescopes . 
two asterisms are prominent in carina . 
ru camelopardalis is one of the brighter type ii cepheids visible in the night sky . 
first attested in english in 1785, the word `` camelopardalis '' comes from latin ,  and it is the romanization of the greek `` καμηλοπάρδαλις '' meaning `` giraffe '' ,  from `` κάμηλος ''  -lrb-  `` kamēlos ''  -rrb-  ,  `` camel '' + `` πάρδαλις ''  -lrb-  `` pardalis ''  -rrb-  ,  `` leopard '' ,  because it has a long neck like a camel and spots like a leopard . 
in 1846, an official american expedition led by commodore james biddle arrived in japan asking for ports to be opened for trade ,  but was sent away . 
on march 31, 1854, the or was the first treaty between the united states and the tokugawa shogunate . 
the second objective was fear that foreign trade and the wealth developed would lead to the rise of a `` daimyō '' powerful enough to overthrow the ruling tokugawa clan . 
the convention was negotiated and then signed in a purpose-built house in yokohama ,  japan ,  the site of which is now the yokohama archives of history . 
signed under threat of force ,  it effectively meant the end of japan's 220-year-old policy of national seclusion  -lrb-  `` sakoku ''  -rrb-  by opening the ports of shimoda and hakodate to american vessels . 
canis major contains sirius ,  the brightest star in the night sky ,  known as the `` dog star '' . 
the star marked the great dog's mouth on bayer's star atlas . 
seven star systems have been found to have planets . 
sirius is the brightest star in the night sky at apparent magnitude −1.46 and one of the closest stars to earth at a distance of 8.6 light-years . 
canis major is a prominent constellation because of its many bright stars . 
between these stars and sirius lie omicron ,  omicron ,  and pi canis majoris . 
hd 43197 is a sunlike star around 183 light-years distant that has a jupiter-size planet with an eccentric orbit . 
these stars are thought to be significant contributors to interstellar dust . 
it is a remote blue-white supergiant star of spectral type b3ib ,  around 46,000 times as luminous as the sun and ,  at 2500 light-years distant ,  300 times further away than sirius . 
in 2003, an overdensity of stars in the region was announced to be the canis major dwarf ,  the closest satellite galaxy to earth . 
an s-type star ,  it has a period of 337.8 days . 
canis minor contains only two stars brighter than fourth magnitude . 
near procyon ,  three stars share the name delta canis minoris . 
the stars of canis minor were incorporated along with some stars of orion and gemini into an asterism associated with the day called `` water '' . 
located 4 arcseconds from the primary ,  the companion star is actually around 440 au from the main star and takes around 5000 years to orbit it . 
johann bayer used the greek letters alpha to eta to label the most prominent eight stars in the constellation ,  designating two stars as delta  -lrb-  named delta and delta  -rrb-  . 
a blue-white bright giant of spectral type b8ii ,  zeta lies around away from the solar system . 
at least three red giants are mira variables in canis minor . 
a red giant of spectral type m4iii ,  bc canis minoris lies around distant from the solar system . 
alpha centauri is a triple star system that contains proxima centauri ,  the nearest star to the sun . 
however ,  most of the brightest stars of centaurus ,  including α centauri ,  θ centauri  -lrb-  or menkent  -rrb-  ,  ε centauri and η centauri ,  can be seen in the chinese sky . 
in addition to alpha centauri  -lrb-  the third-brightest star in the sky  -rrb-  ,  a second first magnitude star ,  beta centauri ,  is part of centaurus . 
v810 centauri is a semiregular variable . 
the constellation also contains omega centauri ,  the brightest globular cluster as visible from earth and one of the largest known . 
alpha centauri ,  the closest star system to the sun ,  has a high proper motion; it will be a mere half-degree from beta centauri in approximately 4000 years . 
centaurus also has many dimmer double stars and binary stars . 
centaurus is also home to open clusters . 
one of the closest galaxy clusters to earth is the centaurus cluster ,  located at a distance of 160 million light-years  -lrb-  redshift 0.0114 -rrb- . 
on earth impact craters have resulted in useful minerals . 
see the earth impact database ,  a website concerned with 190  -lrb-  as of november 2017 -rrb- scientifically-confirmed impact craters on earth . 
this describes impacts on solid surfaces . 
the median impact velocity on earth is about 20 km/s . 
although meteor crater is perhaps the best-known example of a small impact crater on earth ,  impact craters range from small ,  simple ,  bowl-shaped depressions to large ,  complex ,  multi-ringed impact basins . 
some of the types of craters that have special shapes due to impact into ice-rich ground are pedestal craters ,  rampart craters ,  expanded craters ,  and larle craters . 
although earth's active surface processes quickly destroy the impact record ,  about 190 terrestrial impact craters have been identified . 
impacts produce distinctive shock-metamorphic effects that allow impact sites to be distinctively identified . 
impacts at these high speeds produce shock waves in solid materials ,  and both impactor and the material impacted are rapidly compressed to high density . 
grove karl gilbert suggested in 1893 that the moon's craters were formed by large asteroid impacts . 
note that the rate of impact cratering in the outer solar system could be different from the inner solar system . 
as well as being heated ,  the target near the impact is accelerated by the shock wave ,  and it continues moving away from the impact behind the decaying shock wave . 
an impact crater is an approximately circular depression in the surface of a planet ,  moon ,  or other solid body in the solar system or elsewhere ,  formed by the hypervelocity impact of a smaller body . 
the brightest star is the magnitude 2.2 alpha coronae borealis . 
a be star ,  it is surrounded by a debris disk . 
corona borealis is home to two remarkable variable stars . 
the seven stars that make up the constellation's distinctive crown-shaped pattern are all 4th-magnitude stars except for the brightest of them ,  alpha coronae borealis . 
the skidi people of native americans saw the stars of corona borealis representing a council of stars whose chief was polaris . 
roughly the size of jupiter ,  it completes an orbit around its star every three days . 
the beat period of 5.5 days indicates the time the accretion disk—which is asymmetrical—takes to precess around the star . 
extrasolar planets have been confirmed in five star systems ,  four of which were found by the radial velocity method . 
there are several bright stars in cygnus . 
less than one degree from the blinking planetary is the double star 16 cygni . 
it is an orange-hued giant star of magnitude 2.5, 72 light-years from earth . 
cygnus is also home to several variable stars . 
some open clusters can be difficult to make out from a rich background of stars . 
cygnus contains the binary star system kic 9832227.
also of note is the crescent nebula  -lrb-  ngc 6888 -rrb- ,  located between gamma and eta cygni ,  which was formed by the wolf–rayet star hd 192163.
the other stars ,  approximately 3700 light-years from earth ,  are mostly blue-white and very hot . 
illuminated by a hot embedded star of magnitude 6, ngc 7000 is 1500 light-years from earth . 
61 cygni is significant because friedrich wilhelm bessel determined its parallax in 1838, the first star to have a known parallax . 
the gamma cygni nebula  -lrb-  ic 1318 -rrb- includes both bright and dark nebulae in an area of over 4 degrees . 
there are several other dimmer double and binary stars in cygnus . 
alcohol in a food contains seven calories per gram . 
in a nutritional context ,  the kilojoule   -lrb-  kj  -rrb-  is the si unit of food energy ,  although the kilocalorie is still in common use . 
it is equal to small calories . 
the temperature increase can be expressed as one kelvin ,  which means the same as an increment of one degree celsius . 
in spite of its non-official status ,  the large calorie is still widely used as a unit of food energy . 
the variable stars r and ty coronae australis light up parts of the nebula ,  which varies in brightness accordingly . 
r coronae australis is an irregular variable star ranging from magnitudes 9.7 to 13.9.
near epsilon and gamma coronae australis is bernes 157, a dark nebula and star forming region . 
some of the more prominent double stars include gamma coronae australis—a pair of yellowish white stars 58 light years away from earth ,  which orbit each other every 122 years . 
corona australis is a constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere . 
as a part of the southern sky ,  ma . gur was one of the fifteen `` stars of ea '' . 
it was once suspected to be a strange star ,  but this has been discounted . 
these stars have been dimmed by up to 8 magnitudes by its dust clouds . 
zeta coronae australis is a rapidly rotating main sequence star with an apparent magnitude of 4.8, 221.7 light years from earth . 
the most popular attraction of corcovado mountain is the statue and viewing platform at its peak ,  drawing over 300,000 visitors per year . 
corcovado  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  means `` hunchback '' in portuguese ,  is a mountain in central rio de janeiro ,  brazil . 
among the most popular year-round tourist attractions in rio ,  the corcovado railway ,  access roads ,  and statue platform are commonly crowded . 
cheddar is recognised as a village . 
tourism of the cheddar gorge and caves began with the opening of the cheddar valley railway in 1869.
the first school in cheddar was set up by hannah more during the 18th century ,  however now cheddar has three schools belonging to the cheddar valley group of schools ,  twelve schools that provide cheddar valley's three-tier education system . 
it was on the cheddar valley line ,  a railway line that was opened in 1869 and closed in 1963.
the village is in the 'cheddar and shipham' electoral ward . 
there is evidence of occupation from the neolithic period in cheddar . 
cheddar running club organised an annual half marathon until 2009.
several notable people have been born or lived in cheddar . 
cheddar has a number of active service clubs including cheddar vale lions club ,  mendip rotary and mendip inner wheel club . 
cheddar reservoir is a near-circular artificial reservoir operated by bristol water . 
in 2010 a skatepark was built in the village ,  funded by the cheddar local action team . 
cheddar also has a friendship link with ocho rios in saint ann parish ,  jamaica . 
cheddar is a large village and civil parish in the sedgemoor district of the english county of somerset . 
cheddar ,  its surrounding villages and specifically the gorge has been subject to flooding . 
cheddar cricket club was formed in the late 19th century and moved to sharpham road playing fields in 1964.
cheddar gorge ,  which is located on the edge of the village ,  is the largest gorge in the united kingdom . 
the recordable audio cd is designed to be used in a consumer audio cd recorder . 
compact disc + graphics is a special audio compact disc that contains graphics data in addition to the audio data on the disc . 
video cd  -lrb-  vcd ,  view cd ,  and compact disc digital video  -rrb-  is a standard digital format for storing video media on a cd . 
the rewritable audio cd is designed to be used in a consumer audio cd recorder ,  which will not  -lrb-  without modification  -rrb-  accept standard cd-rw discs . 
vinyldisc is the hybrid of a standard audio cd and the vinyl record . 
this format was supposed to be more compatible with older audio cd players . 
high-capacity recordable cd is a higher-density recording format that can hold 90 or 99 minutes of audio on a disc  -lrb-  compared to about 80 minutes for `` red book '' audio  -rrb-  or 30 minutes of audio on an disc  -lrb-  compared to about 24 minutes for `` red book '' audio  -rrb-  . 
super video cd  -lrb-  super video compact disc or svcd  -rrb-  is a format used for storing video media on standard compact discs . 
enhanced music cd ,  also known as cd extra or cd plus ,  is a format which combines audio tracks and data tracks on the same disc by putting audio tracks in a first session and data in a second session . 
standard cds have a diameter of and can hold up to about 80 minutes of uncompressed audio or about 700 mib of data . 
super audio cd  -lrb-  sacd  -rrb-  is a high-resolution read-only optical audio disc format that was designed to provide higher fidelity digital audio reproduction than the `` red book '' . 
titles in the sacd format can be issued as hybrid discs; these discs contain the sacd audio stream as well as a standard audio cd layer which is playable in standard cd players ,  thus making them backward compatible . 
for the first few years of its existence ,  the cd was a medium used purely for audio . 
compact disc  -lrb-  cd  -rrb-  is a digital optical disc data storage format that was co-developed by philips and sony and released in 1982.
the logical format of an audio cd  -lrb-  officially compact disc digital audio or cd-da  -rrb-  is described in a document produced in 1980 by the format's joint creators ,  sony and philips . 
very few ,  if any ,  cd+eg discs have been published . 
by 2007, 200 billion cds had been sold worldwide . 
these encoding techniques  -lrb-  defined in the `` red book ''  -rrb-  were originally designed for cd digital audio ,  but they later became a standard for almost all cd formats  -lrb-  such as cd-rom  -rrb-  . 
photo cd is a system designed by kodak for digitizing and storing photos on a cd . 
the 80 mm diameter discs  -lrb-  `` mini cds ''  -rrb-  can hold up to 24 minutes of music or 210 mib . 
other newer video formats such as dvd and blu-ray use the same physical geometry as cd ,  and most dvd and blu-ray players are backward compatible with audio cd . 
ward met mark twain when ward performed in virginia city ,  nevada and the two became friends . 
browne recommended twain to the editors of the new york press and urged him to journey to new york . 
in 1863, browne came as artemus ward to san francisco to perform . 
charles farrar browne  -lrb-  april 26, 1834 – march 6, 1867 -rrb- was an american humor writer ,  better known under his `` nom de plume '' ,  artemus ward . 
one of the nearest stars in caelum is the eclipsing binary star rr caeli ,  at a distance of  . 
caelum is a faint constellation: it has no star brighter than magnitude 4 and only two stars brighter than magnitude 5.
the other twelve naked-eye stars in caelum are not referred to by bode's bayer designations anymore ,  including rv caeli . 
the only other variable star in caelum visible to the naked eye is rv caeli ,  a pulsating red giant of spectral type m1iii ,  which varies between magnitudes 6.44 and 6.56.
other notable objects in caelum are rr caeli ,  a binary star with one known planet approximately away; x caeli ,  a delta scuti variable that forms an optical double with γ caeli; and he0450-2958, a seyfert galaxy that at first appeared as just a jet ,  with no host galaxy visible . 
