the terms `` formula one race '' and `` world championship race '' are effectively synonymous; since 1984, every formula one race has counted towards an official fia world championship ,  and every world championship race has been held to formula one regulations . 
in 1952 and 1953, when the world championship was run to formula two regulations ,  non-championship events were the only formula one races that took place . 
a formula one grand prix event spans a weekend . 
the format of the race has changed little through formula one's history . 
ferrari is the oldest formula one team ,  the only still-active team which competed in 1950.
the formula one series originated with the european grand prix motor racing  -lrb-  `` q . v . `` 
during the season of formula one ,  the sport was gripped in a governance crisis . 
some drivers have moved from f1 to racing in disciplines with fewer races during the season . 
in the calendar peaked at twenty-one events ,  the highest number of world championship races in one season . 
south africa's flourishing domestic formula one championship ran from 1960 through to 1975.
formula one  -lrb-  also formula 1 or f1 -rrb- is the highest class of single-seater auto racing sanctioned by the fédération internationale de l'automobile  -lrb-  fia  -rrb-  and owned by the formula one group . 
american open-wheel car racing has also contributed to the formula one grid with mixed results . 
fangio ,  however ,  is remembered for dominating formula one's first decade and has long been considered the `` grand master '' of formula one . 
the dfv helped make the uk domestic formula one championship possible between 1978 and 1980.
every team in formula one must run two cars in every session in a grand prix weekend ,  and every team may use up to four drivers in a season . 
all grands prix have traditionally been run during the day ,  until the inaugural hosted the first formula one night race ,  which was followed in 2009 by the day–night abu dhabi grand prix and then the bahrain grand prix which converted to a night race in 2014.
a formula one season consists of a series of races ,  known as `` grands prix ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which take place worldwide on purpose-built circuits and on public roads . 
entering a new team in the formula one world championship requires a £25 million  -lrb-  about us$47 million  -rrb-  up-front payment to the fia ,  which is then repaid to the team over the course of the season . 
the number of grands prix held in a season has varied over the years . 
in the 1950s ,  race distances varied from to  . 
the results of each race are evaluated using a points system to determine two annual world championships: one for drivers ,  the other for constructors . 
it also effectively prohibits privateers ,  which were common even in formula one well into the 1970s . 
drivers may overtake one another for position over the course of the race and are `` classified '' in the order they finished 90% of the race distance . 
in 2008 and 2009, honda ,  bmw ,  and toyota all withdrew from formula one racing within the space of a year ,  blaming the economic recession . 
the monaco grand prix ,  first held in 1929 and run continuously since 1955, is widely considered to be one of the most important and prestigious automobile races in the world . 
most f1 drivers start in kart racing competitions ,  and then come up through traditional european single seater series like formula ford and formula renault to formula 3, and finally the gp2 series . 
in the early years of formula one ,  before the world championship was established ,  there were around twenty races held from late spring to early autumn in europe ,  although not all of these were considered significant . 
under capello ,  milan and baresi were able to capture another serie a title during 1995–96 season ,  baresi's sixth . 
milan also reached the coppa italia final during the 1989–90 season . 
baresi retired at the end of the 1996–97 serie a season ,  at age 37.
baresi went on to win four more serie a titles with milan under fabio capello ,  including three consecutive titles in 1991–92, 1992–93 and the 1993–94 seasons . 
franco baresi is the younger brother of internazionale legendary defender giuseppe baresi . 
during this bleak period for milan ,  baresi did manage to win a mitropa cup in 1982 and reached the coppa italia final during 1984–85 season ,  although the team failed to dominate in serie a . 
originally a milan youth product ,  baresi went on to spend his entire 20-year professional career with milan ,  making his serie a debut at age 17 during the 1977–78 season on 23 april 1978.
baresi is regarded as one of the greatest defenders of all-time . 
a given stage of rock and the corresponding age of time will by convention have the same name ,  and the same boundaries . 
rock series are divided into stages ,  just as geological epochs are divided into ages . 
microscopic analysis of the rock  -lrb-  petrology  -rrb-  is also sometimes useful in confirming that a given segment of rock is from a particular age . 
in chronostratigraphy ,  a stage is a succession of rock strata laid down in a single age on the geologic timescale ,  which usually represents millions of years of deposition . 
kafka never married . 
the dominating figure of kafka's father had a significant influence on kafka's writing . 
a week after the meeting at brod's home ,  kafka wrote in his diary:
in 1920 kafka began an intense relationship with milena jesenská ,  a czech journalist and writer . 
on 1 november 1907, kafka was hired at the  ,  an insurance company ,  where he worked for nearly a year . 
the kafka family had a servant girl living with them in a cramped apartment . 
pérez-álvarez has claimed that kafka may have possessed a schizoid personality disorder . 
kafka feared that people would find him mentally and physically repulsive . 
kafka never enjoyed attending the synagogue and went with his father only on four high holidays a year . 
in all ,  sixty people have been awarded the fields medal . 
other major awards in mathematics ,  such as the abel prize and the chern medal ,  have larger monetary prizes compared to the fields medal . 
the medal was first awarded in 1936 to finnish mathematician lars ahlfors and american mathematician jesse douglas ,  and it has been awarded every four years since 1950.
the fields medal is a prize awarded to two ,  three ,  or four mathematicians under 40 years of age at the international congress of the international mathematical union  -lrb-  imu  -rrb-  ,  a meeting that takes place every four years . 
the fields medal is often described as the `` nobel prize of mathematics '' and for a long time has been regarded as the most prestigious award in the field of mathematics . 
k .  then returns home . 
k .  is surprised by one of his bank clients ,  who tells k .  that he is aware that k .  is dealing with a trial . 
k .  is visited by his uncle ,  who was k . 's guardian . 
for josef k .  ,  the court is an anonymous and unfamiliar power . 
k .  visits the lawyer several times . 
for k .  ,  the court remains mysterious and not really explicable . 
later ,  in a store room at his own bank ,  k .  discovers the two agents who arrested him being whipped by a flogger for asking k .  for bribes and as a result of complaints k .  made at court . 
josef k .  has to confront a cold world that puts him off . 
k .  later goes to visit the court again ,  although he has not been summoned ,  and finds that it is not in session . 
it is ,  for example ,  a work order that leads to k . ’s encounter with the priest . 
the priest tells k .  that the parable is an ancient text of the court ,  and many generations of court officials have interpreted it differently . 
gregor ,  exhausted ,  falls asleep . 
offended by gregor's delayed response in opening the door ,  the clerk warns him of the consequences of missing work . 
francisco goya was born in fuendetodos ,  aragón ,  spain ,  on 30 march 1746 to josé benito de goya y franque and gracia de lucientes y salvador . 
francisco josé de goya y lucientes  -lrb-  ; ; 30 march 1746 – 16 april 1828 -rrb- was a spanish romantic painter and printmaker . 
goya's physical and mental breakdown seems to have happened a few weeks after the french declaration of war on spain . 
goya was guarded ,  and although letters and writings survive ,  little is known about his thoughts . 
in 1783, the count of floridablanca ,  favorite of king charles iii ,  commissioned goya to paint his portrait . 
at age 14 goya studied under the painter josé luzán ,  where he copied stamps for 4 years until he decided to work on his own ,  as he wrote later on `` paint from my invention '' . 
leocadia weiss  -lrb-  née zorrilla ,  1790–1856 -rrb- the artist's maid ,  younger by 35 years ,  and a distant relative ,  lived with and cared for goya after bayeu's death . 
at school he formed a close and lifelong friendship with fellow pupil martin zapater; the 131 letters goya wrote to him from 1775 until zapater's death in 1801 give valuable insight into goya's early years at the court in madrid . 
the marriage and francisco bayeu's 1765 membership of the real academia de bellas artes de san fernando and directorship of the tapestry works from 1777 helped goya earn a commission for a series of tapestry cartoons for the royal tapestry factory . 
there has been much speculation that goya and weiss were romantically linked; however ,  it is more likely the affection between them was sentimental . 
this is the core conception of probability in the frequentist interpretation . 
the frequentist view may have been foreshadowed by aristotle ,  in `` rhetoric '' ,  when he wrote:
the frequentist interpretation is a philosophical approach to the definition and use of probabilities; it is one of several such approaches . 
a claim of the frequentist approach is that in the `` long run , ``  as the number of trials approaches infinity ,  the relative frequency will converge `` exactly '' to the true probability:
in the frequentist interpretation ,  probabilities are discussed only when dealing with well-defined random experiments  -lrb-  or random samples  -rrb-  . 
the development of the frequentist account was motivated by the problems and paradoxes of the previously dominant viewpoint ,  the classical interpretation . 
frequentist probability or frequentism is an interpretation of probability; it defines an event's probability as the limit of its relative frequency in a large number of trials . 
in the mid-1970s f . m . 
fm-2030 was born fereidoun m .  esfandiary  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
fm-2030 was survived by four sisters and one brother . 
west flemish has a phonology that differs significantly from that of standard dutch . 
the diphthong `` ui ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  does not exist in west flemish and is replaced by a long `` u ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  or a long `` ie ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
west flemish  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a dialect of the dutch language spoken in western belgium and adjoining parts of the netherlands and france . 
the short `` o ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  can also be pronounced as a short `` u ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
leiber published further books in the 1960s . 
fritz leiber was born december 24, 1910, in chicago ,  illinois ,  to the actors fritz leiber and virginia bronson leiber . 
in 1951, leiber was guest of honor at the world science fiction convention in new orleans . 
leiber married jonquil stephens on january 16, 1936; their only child ,  the philosopher and science fiction writer justin leiber ,  was born in 1938.
 ''the only other component , ``  merril writes ,  `` was the leiber instinct for theatre . `` 
leiber also did the 1966 novelization of the clair huffaker screenplay of `` tarzan and the valley of gold '' . 
leiber received the hugo award for best novella in 1970 and 1971 for `` ship of shadows ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- and `` ill met in lankhmar ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- . 
leiber's first professional sale was `` two sought adventure ''  -lrb-  `` unknown '' ,  august 1939 -rrb- ,  which introduced his most famous characters ,  fafhrd and the gray mouser . 
fritz reuter leiber jr .   -lrb-  december 24, 1910 – september 5, 1992 -rrb- was an american writer of fantasy ,  horror ,  and science fiction . 
many of leiber's most-acclaimed works are short stories ,  especially in the horror genre . 
further novels followed during the 1950s ,  and in 1958 `` the big time '' won the hugo award for best novel . 
leiber was heavily influenced by h .  p .  lovecraft and robert graves in the first two decades of his career . 
leiber liked cats ,  which feature prominently in many of his stories . 
leiber introduced fafhrd and the gray mouser in `` two sought adventure '' ,  his first professionally published short story in the august 1939 edition of `` unknown '' ,  edited by john w .  campbell . 
flanders  -lrb-    ,   ,    -rrb-  is the dutch-speaking northern portion of belgium and one of the communities ,  regions and language areas of belgium . 
these entities were merged ,  although geographically the flemish community ,  which has a broader cultural mandate ,  covers brussels ,  whereas the flemish region does not . 
however the alternative vote system was rejected 2-1 by british voters in a referendum held on 5 may 2011.
examples include the commonly used two-round system of runoffs and instant runoff voting ,  along with less tested systems such as approval voting ,  score voting and condorcet methods . 
duverger's law is a theory that constituencies that use first-past-the-post systems will have a two-party system ,  given enough time . 
plurality voting is an electoral system in which each voter is allowed to vote for only one candidate ,  and the candidate who polls the most among their counterparts  -lrb-  a plurality  -rrb-  is elected . 
the rules may allow the voter to vote for one candidate ,  or for up to `` n '' candidates ,  or maybe some other number . 
in an election for a single seat ,  such as for president in a presidential system ,  the same style of ballot is used and the winner is the candidate who receives the largest number of votes . 
plurality voting is distinguished from a majoritarian electoral system ,  in which ,  to win ,  a candidate must receive an absolute majority of votes ,  i . e .  ,  more votes than all other candidates combined . 
wasted votes are votes cast for losing candidates or votes cast for winning candidates in excess of the number required for victory . 
if there are more than two candidates standing ,  then a plurality vote may decide the result . 
alternative electoral systems attempt to ensure that almost all votes are effective in influencing the result and the number of wasted votes is consequently minimised . 
new zealand soon developed a more complex party system . 
in the two-round system ,  usually the two highest polling candidates in the first ballot progress to the second round run-off ballot . 
in single winner plurality voting ,  each voter is allowed to vote for only one candidate ,  and the winner of the election is whichever candidate represents a plurality of voters ,  that is ,  whoever received the largest number of votes . 
the difficulty is sometimes summed up ,  in an extreme form ,  as `` all votes for anyone other than the second place are votes for the winner '' ,  because by voting for other candidates ,  they have denied those votes to the second place candidate who could have won had they received them . 
a free-trade area is the region encompassing a trade bloc whose member countries have signed a free-trade agreement  -lrb-  fta  -rrb-  . 
every customs union ,  trade common market ,  economic union ,  customs and monetary union and economic and monetary union also has a free-trade area ,  but these are each listed in their own articles only . 
only goods that meet these minimum requirements are entitled to the special treatment envisioned by the free trade area provisions . 
it is unlikely that `` french fried '' refers to `` frenching '' or `` french cut '' in the sense of `` julienning '' ,  which is not attested until after `` french fried potatoes '' . 
french fries come in multiple variations . 
experts have criticized french fries for being very unhealthy . 
starting in the 1960s ,  more fast food restaurants have been using frozen french fries . 
the united states is also known for supplying china with most of their french fries as 70% of china's french fries are imported . 
it is also one of the world's largest manufacturers of frozen french fries and other potato specialties . 
canada is also responsible for providing 22% of china's french fries . 
most french fries are produced from frozen potatoes which have been blanched or at least air-dried industrially . 
a popular dish in france is steak-frites ,  which is steak accompanied by thin french fries . 
thomas jefferson had `` potatoes served in the french manner '' at a white house dinner in 1802.
french fries migrated to the german-speaking countries during the 19th century . 
previously ,  `` frenching '' referred only to trimming meat off the shanks of chops . 
field players may only play the ball with the face of the stick . 
field hockey ,  known in most countries just as hockey ,  is a team game of the hockey family . 
each team may also play with:
field players may not play the ball with their feet ,  but if the ball accidentally hits the feet ,  and the player gains no benefit from the contact ,  then the contact is not penalized . 
during play ,  goal keepers are the only players who are allowed to touch the ball with any part of their body  -lrb-  the player's hand is considered part of the stick if on the stick  -rrb-  ,  while field players play the ball with the flat side of their stick . 
when the ball is outside the circle they are defending ,  goalkeepers or players with goalkeeping privileges are only permitted to play the ball with their stick . 
the game of field hockey is also very present in the united states . 
a popular variant of field hockey is indoor field hockey ,  which differs in a number of respects while embodying the primary principles of hockey . 
players are permitted to play the ball with the flat of the 'face side' and with the edges of the head and handle of the field hockey stick with the exception that ,  for reasons of safety ,  the ball may not be struck 'hard' with a forehand edge stroke ,  because of the difficulty of controlling the height and direction of the ball from that stroke . 
men's hockey united under the fih in 1970.
women's field hockey was first played at british universities and schools . 
for the purposes of the rules ,  all players on the team in possession of the ball are attackers ,  and those on the team without the ball are defenders ,  yet throughout the game being played you are always `` defending '' your goal and `` attacking '' the opposite goal . 
further ,  the player with the ball may not deliberately use his body to push a defender out of the way . 
a free hit must be taken from within playing distance of the place of the offence for which it was awarded and the ball must be stationary when the free hit is taken . 
with many of the rules remaining the same ,  including obstruction and feet ,  there are several key variations: players may not raise the ball unless shooting on goal ,  players may not hit the ball  -lrb-  instead using pushes to transfer the ball  -rrb-  ,  and the sidelines are replaced with solid barriers which the ball will rebound off . 
the word `` hockey '' itself has no clear origin . 
the game is played between two teams of whom eleven ,  10 field players and one goal keeper ,  are permitted to be on the pitch at any one time . 
there are no set plays unless your team has them . 
 ''finagle's law '' can also be the related belief `` inanimate objects are out to get us '' ,  also known as resistentialism . 
finagle's law of dynamic negatives  -lrb-  also known as melody's law or finagle's corollary to murphy's law  -rrb-  is usually rendered as `` anything that can go wrong ,  will—at the worst possible moment . `` 
one variant  -lrb-  known as o'toole's corollary of finagle's law  -rrb-  favored among hackers is a takeoff on the second law of thermodynamics  -lrb-  related to the augmentation of entropy  -rrb- : in the `` star trek '' episode `` the ultimate computer '' ,  dr .  mccoy refers to an alcoholic drink known as the `` finagle's folly '' ,  apparently a reference to `` finagle's law '' . 
beyond the standard model ,  some theorists work to unite the electroweak and strong interactions within a grand unified theory  -lrb-  gut  -rrb-  . 
the other three are discrete quantum fields ,  and their interactions are mediated by elementary particles described by the standard model of particle physics . 
merging general relativity and quantum mechanics  -lrb-  or quantum field theory  -rrb-  into a more general theory of quantum gravity is an area of active research . 
electromagnetism's qft is quantum electrodynamics  -lrb-  qed  -rrb-  . 
some theories ,  notably string theory ,  seek both qg and gut within one framework ,  unifying all four fundamental interactions along with mass generation within a theory of everything  -lrb-  toe  -rrb-  . 
each of the known fundamental interactions can be described mathematically as a `` field '' . 
within the standard model ,  the strong interaction is carried by a particle called the gluon ,  and is responsible for quarks binding together to form hadrons ,  such as protons and neutrons . 
the electromagnetic interaction was modelled with the weak interaction ,  whose force carriers are w and z bosons ,  traversing the minuscule distance ,  in electroweak theory  -lrb-  ewt  -rrb-  . 
according to the present understanding ,  there are four fundamental interactions or forces: gravitation ,  electromagnetism ,  the weak interaction ,  and the strong interaction . 
by the end of the 1980s ,  -inch disks had been superseded by -inch disks . 
floppy disks are read and written by a floppy disk drive  -lrb-  fdd  -rrb-  . 
all -inch disks have a rectangular hole in one corner which ,  if obstructed ,  write-enabled the disk . 
before a disk can be accessed ,  the drive needs to synchronize its head position with the disk tracks . 
typical -inch disk magnetic coating materials are:
different sizes of floppy disks are mechanically incompatible ,  and disks can fit only one size of drive . 
a small notch disk identifies that it is writable ,  detected by a mechanical switch or phototransistor above it; if it is not present ,  the disk can be written; in the 8-inch disk the notch is covered to enable writing while in the -inch disk the notch is open to enable writing . 
it is possible to make a -inch floppy disk drive be recognized by a system as a ‑inch 360 kb or 1200 kb drive ,  and to read and write disks with the same number of tracks and sectors as those disks; this had some application in data exchange with obsolete cp/m systems . 
punch devices were sold to convert read-only disks to writable ones and enable writing on the unused side of single sided disks; such modified disks became known as flippy disks . 
dmf was introduced permitting 1.68 mb to fit onto an otherwise standard -inch disk; utilities then appeared allowing disks to be formatted as such . 
the family of 8-inch disks and drives increased over time and later versions could store up to 1.2  mb; many microcomputer applications did not need that much capacity on one disk ,  so a smaller size disk with lower-cost media and drives was feasible . 
single sided disks were coated on both sides ,  despite the availability of more expensive double sided disks . 
generally the term floppy disk persisted ,  even though later style floppy disks have a hard case around an internal floppy disk . 
disks written on a 40‑track drive and then updated on an 80 track drive become unreadable on any 40‑track drives due to track width incompatibility . 
what became the most common format ,  the double-sided ,  high-density  -lrb-  hd  -rrb-  1.44 mb disk drive ,  shipped in 1986.
for example ,  the ls-240 drive supports a 32 mb capacity on standard -inch hd disks ,  but it is ,  however ,  a write-once technique ,  and requires its own drive . 
in the mid 1990s ,  mechanically incompatible higher-density floppy disks were introduced ,  like the iomega zip disk . 
the first macintosh computers use single-sided -inch floppy disks ,  but with 400 kb formatted capacity . 
the 8-inch and -inch floppy disks contain a magnetically coated round plastic medium with a large circular hole in the center for a drive's spindle . 
failure of this mechanical switch is a common source of disk corruption if a disk is changed and the drive  -lrb-  and hence the operating system  -rrb-  fails to notice . 
there are three weapons in modern fencing: foil ,  épée ,  and sabre . 
the foil is a light thrusting weapon with a maximum weight of 500 grams . 
the épée is a thrusting weapon like the foil ,  but heavier ,  with a maximum total weight of 775 grams . 
in the case of both fencers landing a scoring touch ,  the referee determines which fencer receives the point for the action ,  again through the use of `` right of way '' . 
the sabre is a light cutting and thrusting weapon that targets the entire body above the waist ,  except the weapon hand . 
the spanish school of fencing stagnated and was replaced by the italian and french schools . 
sabre events have been held at every summer olympics; foil events have been held at every summer olympics except 1908; épée events have been held at every summer olympics except in the summer of 1896 because of unknown reasons . 
the free software definition written by richard stallman and published by free software foundation  -lrb-  fsf  -rrb-  ,  defines free software as being software that ensures that the end users have freedom in using ,  studying ,  sharing and modifying that software . 
bloch was born in zürich ,  switzerland to jewish parents gustav and agnes bloch . 
they had four children ,  twins george jacob bloch and daniel arthur bloch  -lrb-  born january 15, 1941 -rrb- ,  son frank samuel bloch  -lrb-  born january 16, 1945 -rrb- ,  and daughter ruth hedy bloch alexander  -lrb-  born september 15, 1949 -rrb- . 
in 1934, the chairman of stanford physics invited bloch to join the faculty . 
during wwii ,  bloch briefly worked on the atomic bomb project at los alamos . 
when there is no entrance of the subject and answer material ,  the composer can develop the subject by altering the subject . 
each voice then responds with its own subject or answer ,  and further countersubjects or free counterpoint may be heard . 
a simple fugue has only one subject ,  and does not utilize invertible counterpoint . 
at any point in the fugue there may be `` false entries '' of the subject ,  which include the start of the subject but are not completed . 
a double fugue has two subjects that are often developed simultaneously . 
a fugue begins with the exposition of its subject in one of the voices alone in the tonic key . 
while the answer is being stated ,  the voice in which the subject was previously heard continues with new material . 
it employs a double fugue with two distinct subjects ,  the first beginning in c and the second in e .  techniques such as `` stretto '' ,  sequencing ,  and the use of subject incipits are frequently heard in the movement . 
a tonal answer is usually called for when the subject begins with a prominent dominant note ,  or where there is a prominent dominant note very close to the beginning of the subject . 
the exposition usually concludes when all voices have given a statement of the subject or answer . 
a counter-fugue is a fugue in which the first answer is presented as the subject in inversion  -lrb-  upside down  -rrb-  ,  and the inverted subject continues to feature prominently throughout the fugue . 
in any of the entries within a fugue ,  the subject may be altered ,  by inversion ,  retrograde  -lrb-  a less common form where the entire subject is heard back-to-front  -rrb-  and diminution  -lrb-  the reduction of the subject's rhythmic values by a certain factor  -rrb-  ,  augmentation  -lrb-  the increase of the subject's rhythmic values by a certain factor  -rrb-  or any combination of them . 
further entries of the subject ,  or middle entries ,  occur throughout the fugue . 
when the answer is an exact copy of the subject to the new key ,  with identical intervals to the first statement ,  it is classified as a `` real answer ''; if the intervals are altered to maintain the key it is a `` tonal answer '' . 
palestrina's imitative motets differed from fugues in that each phrase of the text had a different subject which was introduced and worked out separately ,  whereas a fugue continued working with the same subject or subjects throughout the entire length of the piece . 
the first answer must occur as soon after the initial statement of the subject as possible; therefore the first codetta is often extremely short ,  or not needed . 
bach's work . 
the distinction is made between the use of free counterpoint and regular countersubjects accompanying the fugue subject/answer ,  because in order for a countersubject to be heard accompanying the subject in more than one instance ,  it must be capable of sounding correctly above or below the subject ,  and must be conceived ,  therefore ,  in invertible  -lrb-  double  -rrb-  counterpoint . 
haydn's second fugal period occurred after he heard ,  and was greatly inspired by ,  the oratorios of handel during his visits to london  -lrb-  1791–1793, 1794–1795 -rrb- . 
most fugues open with a short main theme ,  the subject ,  which then sounds successively in each voice  -lrb-  after the first voice is finished stating the subject ,  a second voice repeats the subject at a different pitch ,  and other voices repeat in the same way  -rrb- ; when each voice has entered ,  the `` exposition '' is complete . 
the excerpt below ,  bars 7–12 of j . s . 
bach's fugue in c major for organ ,  bwv 547 -rrb- . 
bach's mass in b minor  -rrb-  . 
the cause of the fugue state is related to dissociative amnesia ,   -lrb-  `` dsm-iv codes 300.12 ''  -rrb-  which has several other subtypes: selective amnesia ,  generalised amnesia ,  continuous amnesia ,  and systematised amnesia ,  in addition to the subtype `` dissociative fugue '' . 
unlike retrograde amnesia  -lrb-  which is popularly referred to simply as `` amnesia '' ,  the state where someone forgets events before brain damage  -rrb-  ,  dissociative amnesia is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  a drug of abuse ,  a medication ,  `` dsm-iv codes 291.1 & 292.83 ''  -rrb-  or a neurological or other general medical condition  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  amnestic disorder due to a head trauma ,  `` dsm-iv codes 294.0 ''  -rrb-  . 
functional amnesia can also be situation specific ,  varying from all forms and variations of traumas or generally violent experiences ,  with the person experiencing severe memory loss for a particular trauma . 
it is a facet of dissociative amnesia ,  according to the fifth edition of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders  -lrb-  dsm-5 -rrb- . 
objects that are at rest have zero net force acting on them . 
if the mass of the object is constant ,  this law implies that the acceleration of an object is directly proportional to the net force acting on the object ,  is in the direction of the net force ,  and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object . 
by the definition of momentum ,  where `` m '' is the mass and formula_5 is the velocity . 
a modern statement of newton's second law is a vector equation: where formula_2 is the momentum of the system ,  and formula_3 is the net  -lrb-  vector sum  -rrb-  force . 
but for relativistic momentum to be conserved ,  it must be redefined as: where formula_19 is the rest mass and formula_20 the speed of light . 
if formula_28 is very small compared to formula_20, then formula_30 is very close to 1 and is a close approximation . 
this relation is correct in relativity when formula_33 is the four-force ,  formula_21 is the invariant mass ,  and formula_35 is the four-acceleration . 
in contrast ,  the second law states that if there is an `` unbalanced '' force acting on an object it will result in the object's momentum changing over time . 
there are two kinds of equilibrium: static equilibrium and dynamic equilibrium . 
if newton's second law is applied to a system of constant mass ,  `` m '' may be moved outside the derivative operator . 
inertia therefore applies equally well to constant velocity motion as it does to rest . 
newton's first law of motion states that objects continue to move in a state of constant velocity unless acted upon by an external net force  -lrb-  resultant force  -rrb-  . 
pushing against an object that rests on a frictional surface can result in a situation where the object does not move because the applied force is opposed by static friction ,  generated between the object and the table surface . 
in vector form ,  if formula_8 is the force of body 1 on body 2 and formula_9 that of body 2 on body 1, then this law is sometimes referred to as the `` action-reaction law '' ,  with formula_11 called the `` action '' and formula_12 the `` reaction '' . 
moreover ,  any object traveling at a constant velocity must be subject to zero net force  -lrb-  resultant force  -rrb-  . 
in physics ,  a force is any interaction that ,  when unopposed ,  will change the motion of an object . 
the original form of newton's second law states that the net force acting upon an object is equal to the rate at which its momentum changes with time . 
during the early 1980s ,  after the releasing of their first and only f1 supercomputer ,  foonly built and sold some f2, f4 and f5 low cost dec pdp-10 compatibles machines . 
this project was named ``  ''super-foonly '' '' ,  and was developed by a team led by phil petit ,  jack holloway ,  and dave poole . <br> in 1974, the darpa cut the funding ,  and a large part of the team went to dec to develop the `` pdp-10 model kl10 '' ,  based on the `` super-foonly project '' . 
functional groups ,  called hydrocarbyl ,  that contain only carbon and hydrogen ,  but vary in the number and order of double bonds . 
functional groups are groups of one or more atoms of distinctive chemical properties no matter what they are attached to . 
suffixes can be combined ,  as in methylidyne  -lrb-  triple bond  -rrb-  vs .  methylylidene  -lrb-  single bond and double bond  -rrb-  vs .  methanetriyl  -lrb-  three double bonds  -rrb-  . 
the following is a list of common functional groups . 
images of fractals can be created by fractal generating programs . 
this power is called the fractal dimension of the fractal ,  and it usually exceeds the fractal's topological dimension . 
the fact that the koch curve has a non-integer fractal dimension is what makes it a fractal . 
cognitive neuroscientists have shown that pollock's fractals induce the same stress-reduction in observers as computer-generated fractals and nature's fractals . 
phenomena known to have fractal features include:
fractals are of particular relevance in the field of chaos theory ,  since the graphs of most chaotic processes are fractals . 
the difference for fractals is that the pattern reproduced must be detailed . 
as mathematical equations ,  fractals are usually nowhere differentiable . 
there is some disagreement amongst mathematicians about how the concept of a fractal should be formally defined . 
the word `` fractal '' often has different connotations for laymen as opposed to mathematicians ,  where the layman is more likely to be familiar with fractal art than the mathematical concept . 
in a solid ,  shear stress is a function of strain ,  but in a fluid ,  shear stress is a function of strain rate . 
the study of fluids is fluid mechanics ,  which is subdivided into fluid dynamics and fluid statics depending on whether the fluid is in motion . 
depending on the relationship between shear stress ,  and the rate of strain and its derivatives ,  fluids can be characterized as one of the following:
fluids display properties such as: these properties are typically a function of their inability to support a shear stress in static equilibrium . 
 ''faq '' is pronounced as either an initialism  -lrb-  f-a-q  -rrb-  or an acronym . 
while the name may be recent ,  the faq format itself is quite old . 
eugene miya experimented with the first daily faq . 
originally the term `` faq '' referred to the frequently asked question itself ,  and the compilation of questions and answers was known as a `` faq list '' or some similar expression . 
this is the `` n ''th fibonacci number . 
one has  . 
fibonacci numbers are named after italian mathematician leonardo of pisa ,  later known as fibonacci . 
fibonacci numbers are strongly related to the golden ratio: binet's formula expresses the th fibonacci number in terms of and the golden ratio ,  and implies that the ratio of two consecutive fibonacci numbers tends to the golden ratio as increases . 
outside india ,  the fibonacci sequence first appears in the book `` liber abaci ''  -lrb-  1202 -rrb- by fibonacci . 
in mathematics ,  the fibonacci numbers ,  commonly denoted form a sequence ,  called the fibonacci sequence ,  such that each number is the sum of the two preceding ones ,  starting from 0 and 1.
field daisies most often have petals in counts of fibonacci numbers . 
fibonacci posed the puzzle: how many pairs will there be in one year ? 
fibonacci numbers are also closely related to lucas numbers formula_4 in that they form a complementary pair of lucas sequences formula_5 and formula_6.
fontainebleau  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a commune in the metropolitan area of paris ,  france . 
this urban area is a satellite of paris . 
a fighter aircraft is a military aircraft designed primarily for air-to-air combat against other aircraft ,  as opposed to bombers and attack aircraft ,  whose main mission is to attack ground targets . 
although the term `` fighter '' specifies aircraft designed to shoot down other aircraft ,  such designs are often also useful as multirole fighter-bombers ,  strike fighters ,  and sometimes lighter ,  fighter-sized tactical ground-attack aircraft . 
the word `` fighter '' did not become the official english-language term for such aircraft until after world war i . 
the hallmarks of a fighter are its speed ,  maneuverability ,  and small size relative to other combat aircraft . 
the aircraft is intended to enter service in 2035.
fighter technology advanced rapidly during the second world war . 
world war ii featured fighter combat on a larger scale than any other conflict to date . 
fighter design varied widely among combatants . 
fighters were developed in world war i to deny enemy aircraft and dirigibles the ability to gather information by reconnaissance over the battlefield . 
the first generation of jet fighters comprised the initial ,  subsonic jet fighter designs introduced late in world war ii and in the early post-war period . 
the aesa radar offers unique capabilities for fighters  -lrb-  and it is also quickly becoming essential for generation 4.5 aircraft designs ,  as well as being retrofitted onto some fourth-generation aircraft  -rrb-  . 
throughout the war ,  fighters performed their conventional role in establishing air superiority through combat with other fighters and through bomber interception ,  and also often performed roles such as tactical air support and reconnaissance . 
apart from these fighter jets ,  most of the 4.5 generation aircraft are actually modified variants of existing airframes from the earlier fourth generation fighter jets . 
a fighter's main purpose is to establish air superiority over a battlefield . 
many fighters have secondary ground-attack capabilities ,  and some are designed as dual-purpose fighter-bombers; often aircraft that do not fulfill the standard definition are called fighters . 
the spanish civil war also provided an opportunity for updating fighter tactics . 
with the luftwaffe largely cleared from the skies ,  allied fighters increasingly served as attack aircraft . 
a key attribute of fifth-generation fighters is a small radar cross-section . 
in combat ,  they proved vulnerable to more agile single-engine fighters . 
the world's navies also transitioned to jets during this period ,  despite the need for catapult-launching of the new aircraft . 
the word `` fighter '' was first used to describe a two-seater aircraft with sufficient lift to carry a machine gun and its operator as well as the pilot . 
these timeframes also encompass the peak period of service entry for such aircraft . 
another type of military aircraft was to form the basis for an effective `` fighter '' in the modern sense of the word . 
a typical us air force fighter wing of the period might contain a mix of one air superiority squadron  -lrb-  f-15c  -rrb-  ,  one strike fighter squadron  -lrb-  f-15e  -rrb-  ,  and two multirole fighter squadrons  -lrb-  f-16c  -rrb-  . 
the first rocket-powered aircraft was the lippisch ente ,  which made a successful maiden flight in march 1928.
it was not considered unreasonable to use world war i-style armament to counter enemy fighters as there was insufficient air-to-air combat during most of the period to disprove this notion . 
more than 50,000 airmen from both sides died during the war . 
by world war ii ,  most fighters were all-metal monoplanes armed with batteries of machine guns or cannons and some were capable of speeds approaching  . 
in practice ,  while light ,  highly maneuverable aircraft did possess some advantages in fighter-versus-fighter combat ,  those could usually be overcome by sound tactical doctrine ,  and the design approach of the italians and japanese made their fighters ill-suited as interceptors or attack aircraft . 
as a part of military nomenclature ,  a letter is often assigned to various types of aircraft to indicate their use ,  along with a number to indicate the specific aircraft . 
fighter development stagnated between the wars ,  especially in the united states and the united kingdom ,  where budgets were small . 
in this fsm ,  the only accepting state is state 7.
 ''s ''  -lrb-  which is also the start state  -rrb-  indicates the state at which an even number of 0s has been input . 
the start state can also be an accepting state ,  in which case the automaton accepts the empty string . 
considered as a state machine ,  the turnstile has two possible states: locked and unlocked . 
the turnstile state machine can be represented by a state transition table ,  showing for each possible state ,  the transitions between them  -lrb-  based upon the inputs given to the machine  -rrb-  and the outputs resulting from each input: the turnstile state machine can also be represented by a directed graph called a state diagram ``  -lrb-  above  -rrb- ``  . 
several state transition table types are used . 
a `` state '' is a description of the status of a system that is waiting to execute a `` transition '' . 
a classifier is a generalization of a finite state machine that ,  similar to an acceptor ,  produces a single output on termination but has more than two terminal states . 
programming in a functional style can also be accomplished in languages that are not specifically designed for functional programming . 
backus's paper popularized research into functional programming ,  though it emphasized function-level programming rather than the lambda-calculus style now associated with functional programming . 
functional programming has its origins in lambda calculus ,  a formal system developed in the 1930s to investigate computability ,  the entscheidungsproblem ,  function definition ,  function application ,  and recursion . 
eliminating side effects ,  i . e .  ,  changes in state that do not depend on the function inputs ,  can make it much easier to understand and predict the behavior of a program ,  which is one of the key motivations for the development of functional programming . 
an interesting case is that of scala – it is frequently written in a functional style ,  but the presence of side effects and mutable state place it in a grey area between imperative and functional languages . 
lambda calculus provides a theoretical framework for describing functions and their evaluation . 
this means that the years 1600, 2000, and 2400 are leap years ,  while the years 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100, 2200, 2300, and 2500 are common years . 
in the gregorian calendar ,  years that are divisible by 100, but not by 400, do not contain a leap day . 
february 29, also known as leap day or leap year day ,  is a date added to most years that are divisible by 4, such as 2012, 2016, 2020, 2024, and 2028.
key was a devout episcopalian . 
key ,  in his final address to the jury said:
during the war of 1812, key observed the british bombardment of fort mchenry in maryland in 1814.
francis scott key's father ,  john ross key was a lawyer ,  a commissioned officer in the continental army and a judge . 
key purchased his first slave in 1800 or 1801 and owned six slaves in 1820.
key used his position as u . s .  attorney to suppress abolitionists . 
francis key's father was english settler philip key  -lrb-  scott key's great-grandfather  -rrb-  who resided near leonardtown around 1726, he married susannah gardiner and had seven children . 
at dawn ,  key was able to see an american flag still waving . 
here are some examples of formal languages:
a formal language `` l '' over an alphabet σ is a subset of σ ,  that is ,  a set of words over that alphabet . 
by an abuse of the definition ,  a particular formal language is often thought of as being equipped with a formal grammar that describes it . 
a formal language is often defined by means of a formal grammar such as a regular grammar or context-free grammar ,  which consists of its formation rules . 
the following rules describe a formal language  over the alphabet σ = { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, + ,  = }: under these rules ,  the string `` 23+4=555 '' is in  ,  but the string `` =234=+ '' is not . 
free to choose: a personal statement  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- is a book and a ten-part television series broadcast on public television by economists milton and rose d .  friedman that advocates free market principles . 
milton friedman won the nobel memorial prize in economics in 1976.
the current contract for the grand prix at the circuit concludes in 2023.
the melbourne grand prix circuit is a street circuit around albert park lake ,  only a few kilometres south of central melbourne . 
largest field of level 1 race cars in australia ,  35 gt3 high end exotic cars compete in the fastest car race other than formula 1 at albert park . 
there has never been a night race at albert park ,  however ,  the 2009 and 2010 events both started at 5:00 p . m .  local time . 
dale wood won the first three races . 
turn 9 is also a car park and traffic is directed down another escape road . 
albert park has the distinction of being the only venue to host the australian grand prix in both world championship and non-world championship formats with an earlier configuration of the current circuit used for the race on two occasions during the 1950s . 
the monaco grand prix  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a formula one motor race held each year on the circuit de monaco . 
like many european races ,  the monaco grand prix predates the current world championship . 
the monaco grand prix was part of the pre-second world war european championship and was included in the first world championship of drivers in 1950.
thus ,  it is the only grand prix that does not adhere to the fia's mandated minimum race distance for f1 races . 
a monaco grand prix was run to this formula in 1948, won by the future world champion nino farina in a maserati 4clt . 
the intuitive statement of the four color theorem ,  i . e . 
in mathematics ,  the four color theorem ,  or the four color map theorem ,  states that ,  given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions ,  producing a figure called a `` map '' ,  no more than four colors are required to color the regions of the map so that no two adjacent regions have the same color . 
unlike the five color theorem ,  a theorem that states that five colors are enough to color a map ,  which was proved in the 1800s ,  the four color theorem was proved in 1976 by kenneth appel and wolfgang haken ,  but only after many false proofs and counterexamples . 
if there is a graph requiring 5 colors ,  then there is a `` minimal '' such graph ,  where removing any vertex makes it four-colorable . 
so it suffices to prove the four color theorem for triangulated graphs to prove it for all planar graphs ,  and without loss of generality we assume the graph is triangulated . 
in graph-theoretic terminology ,  the four-color theorem states that the vertices of every planar graph can be colored with at most four colors so that no two adjacent vertices receive the same color ,  or for short ,  `` every planar graph is four-colorable '' . 
a simpler statement of the theorem uses graph theory . 
in 2001, the same authors announced an alternative proof ,  by proving the snark theorem . 
in this map ,  the two regions labeled `` a '' belong to the same country ,  and must be the same color . 
in 1890, in addition to exposing the flaw in kempe's proof ,  heawood proved the five color theorem and generalized the four color conjecture to surfaces of arbitrary genus . 
 ''that given any separation of a plane into contiguous regions ,  called a map ,  the regions can be colored using at most four colors so that no two adjacent regions have the same color '' ,  needs to be interpreted appropriately to be correct . 
in 2005, benjamin werner and georges gonthier formalized a proof of the theorem inside the coq proof assistant . 
the following discussion is a summary based on the introduction to `` every planar map is four colorable ''  . 
the encounter leaves montag shaken . 
guy montag is a `` fireman '' employed to burn the possessions of those who read outlawed books . 
montag hides his books in the backyard before returning to the firehouse late at night with just the stolen bible . 
montag awakens ill the next morning . 
in june 2009, a graphic novel edition of the book was published . 
montag concedes that mildred is a lost cause and he will need help to understand the books . 
montag and mildred discuss the stolen books ,  and mildred refuses to go along with it ,  questioning why she or anyone else should care about books . 
if they do not ,  he promises the books will be burned and all will return to normal . 
in the late 1970s bradbury adapted his book into a play . 
the title page of the book explains the title as follows: `` fahrenheit 451—the temperature at which book paper catches fire and burns .  .  . ``  . 
we think it's only scraps of his name but what is important is that `` he wrote about book burning '' '' ,  thus referencing `` fahrenheit 451 '' . 
fahrenheit 451 is a dystopian novel by american writer ray bradbury ,  first published in 1953.
montag runs through the city streets towards faber's house . 
they drive recklessly in the fire truck to the destination: montag's house . 
the introduction in the novel is written by bradbury . 
montag and the group are injured and dirtied ,  but manage to survive the shockwave . 
in the following days ,  while at work with the other firemen ransacking the book-filled house of an old woman before the inevitable burning ,  montag steals a book before any of his coworkers notice . 
if students are unable to read then ,  they will be unable to read `` fahrenheit 451 '' . 
 ''fahrenheit 451 '' would later echo this theme of an authoritarian society distracted by broadcast media . 
the novel has been the subject of interpretations focusing on the historical role of book burning in suppressing dissenting ideas . 
in later years ,  he described the book as a commentary on how mass media reduces interest in reading literature . 
bradbury's lifelong passion for books began at an early age . 
francis xavier ,  s . j . 
the role of francis xavier in the goa inquisition is controversial . 
and at st .  francis xavier chapel ,  portais ,  panjim . 
xavier was first buried on a beach at shangchuan island ,  taishan ,  guangdong . 
francis xavier was born in the royal castle of xavier ,  in the kingdom of navarre ,  on 7 april 1506 according to a family register . 
many churches all over the world ,  often founded by jesuits ,  have been named in honour of xavier . 
xavier was about to extend his missionary preaching to china when he died on shangchuan island . 
he later helped xavier as a mediator and interpreter for the mission to japan that now seemed much more possible . 
hence ,  he believes that xavier was aware of the brutality of the inquisition . 
thus ,  francis xavier began his life as the first jesuit missionary almost accidentally . 
in malacca in december 1547, francis xavier met a japanese man named anjirō . 
relics of saint francis xavier are also found in the espirito santo  -lrb-  holy spirit  -rrb-  church ,  margão ,  in sanv fransiku xavierachi igorz  -lrb-  church of st .  francis xavier  -rrb-  ,  batpal ,  canacona ,  goa . 
saint francis xavier is a major venerated saint in both sonora and the neighbouring u . s .  state of arizona . 
francis was the first jesuit to go to japan as a missionary . 
francis xavier devoted much of his life to missions in asia ,  mainly in four centres: malacca ,  amboina and ternate ,  japan ,  and china . 
another of xavier's arm bones was brought to macau where it was kept in a silver reliquary . 
rubens painted `` st francis xavier raising the dead '' for a jesuit church in antwerp ,  in which he depicted one of st francis's many miracles . 
the novena of grace is a popular devotion to francis xavier ,  typically prayed either on the nine days before 3 december ,  or on 4 march through 12 march  -lrb-  the anniversary of pope gregory xv's canonisation of xavier in 1622 -rrb- . 
modern scholars place the number of people converted to christianity by francis xavier at around 30,000.
a small chapel designed by achille-antoine hermitte was completed in 1869 over xavier's death place on shangchuan island ,  canton . 
the day of navarre in navarre ,  spain ,  marks nowadays the anniversary of saint francis xavier's death ,  on 3 december 1552.
the totality of fossils is known as the `` fossil record '' . 
fossil wood is wood that is preserved in the fossil record . 
 ''fossil trading '' is the practice of buying and selling fossils . 
index fossils  -lrb-  also known as guide fossils ,  indicator fossils or zone fossils  -rrb-  are fossils used to define and identify geologic periods  -lrb-  or faunal stages  -rrb-  . 
bioimmuration is known in the fossil record from the ordovician to the recent . 
these is some medicinal and preventive use for some fossils . 
a `` derived '' ,  `` reworked '' or `` remanié fossil '' is a fossil found in rock that accumulated significantly later than when the fossilized animal or plant died . 
 ''fossil collecting ''  -lrb-  sometimes ,  in a non-scientific sense ,  fossil hunting  -rrb-  is the collection of fossils for scientific study ,  hobby ,  or profit . 
organisms are only rarely preserved as fossils in the best of circumstances ,  and only a fraction of such fossils have been discovered . 
since darwin's time ,  the fossil record has been extended to between 2.3 and 3.5 billion years . 
more scientific views of fossils emerged during the renaissance . 
robert hooke  -lrb-  1635-1703 -rrb- included micrographs of fossils in his `` micrographia '' and was among the first to observe fossil forams . 
permineralization is a process of fossilization that occurs when an organism is buried . 
the fossil record and faunal succession form the basis of the science of biostratigraphy or determining the age of rocks based on embedded fossils . 
some fossils are biochemical and are called `` chemofossils '' or biosignatures . 
gathering fossils dates at least to the beginning of recorded history . 
stromatolites provide some of the most ancient fossil records of life on earth ,  dating back more than 3.5 billion years ago . 
a `` transitional fossil '' is any fossilized remains of a life form that exhibits traits common to both an ancestral group and its derived descendant group . 
stromatolites are a major constituent of the fossil record for life's first 3.5 billion years ,  peaking about 1.25 billion years ago . 
the specific fossil to use to alleviate or cure an illness is often based on its resemblance of the fossils and the symptoms or affected organ . 
consequently ,  palaeontologists rely on stratigraphy to date fossils . 
the greek scholar aristotle realized that fossil seashells from rocks were similar to those found on the beach ,  indicating the fossils were once living animals . 
trace fossils consist mainly of tracks and burrows ,  but also include coprolites  -lrb-  fossil feces  -rrb-  and marks left by feeding . 
ferpa specifically excludes employees of an educational institution if they are not students . 
examples of situations affected by ferpa include school employees divulging information to anyone other than the student about the student's grades or behavior ,  and school work posted on a bulletin board with a grade . 
generally ,  schools must have written permission from the parent or eligible student in order to release any information from a student's education record . 
ferpa also permits a school to disclose personally identifiable information from education records of an `` eligible student ''  -lrb-  a student age 18 or older or enrolled in a postsecondary institution at any age  -rrb-  to his or her parents if the student is a `` dependent student '' as that term is defined in section 152 of the internal revenue code . 
forgetting functions  -lrb-  amount remembered as a function of time since an event was first experienced  -rrb-  have been extensively analyzed . 
one of the first to study the mechanisms of forgetting was the german psychologist hermann ebbinghaus  -lrb-  1885 -rrb- . 
the second being that the amount of forgetting eventually levels off . 
wray was never a mormon herself . 
in 1989, wray was awarded the women in film crystal award . 
 ''the most dangerous game '' was followed by wray's most memorable film ,  `` king kong '' . 
after leaving paramount ,  wray signed to various film companies . 
wray stayed with paramount to make more than a dozen films and made the transition from silent films to `` talkies '' . 
after the success of `` king kong '' ,  wray made numerous appearances in both film and television ,  before retiring in 1980.
in 1923, wray appeared in her first film at the age of 16, when she landed a role in a short historical film sponsored by a local newspaper . 
wray's role would become the one with which she would be most associated . 
evidence suggests waiting 10-20% of the time towards when the information will be needed is the optimum time for a single review . 
where formula_2 is retrievability  -lrb-  a measure of how easy it is to retrieve a piece of information from memory  -rrb-  ,  formula_3 is stability of memory  -lrb-  determines how fast formula_2 falls over time in the absence of training ,  testing or other recall  -rrb-  ,  and formula_5 is time . 
the forgetting curve hypothesizes the decline of memory retention in time . 
spending time each day to remember information ,  such as that for exams ,  will greatly decrease the effects of the forgetting curve . 
however ,  programmable logic was hard-wired between logic gates . 
by 2013, altera  -lrb-  31 percent  -rrb-  ,  actel  -lrb-  10 percent  -rrb-  and xilinx  -lrb-  36 percent  -rrb-  together represented approximately 77 percent of the fpga market . 
an alternate approach to using hard-macro processors is to make use of soft processor ip cores that are implemented within the fpga logic . 
contemporary field-programmable gate arrays  -lrb-  fpgas  -rrb-  have large resources of logic gates and ram blocks to implement complex digital computations . 
fpgas contain an array of programmable logic blocks ,  and a hierarchy of reconfigurable interconnects that allow the blocks to be `` wired together '' ,  like many logic gates that can be inter-wired in different configurations . 
examples of such hybrid technologies can be found in the xilinx zynq-7000 all programmable soc ,  which includes a 1.0 ghz dual-core arm cortex-a9 mpcore processor embedded within the fpga's logic fabric or in the altera arria v fpga ,  which includes an 800 mhz dual-core arm cortex-a9 mpcore . 
free-running sleep is a sleep pattern that is not adjusted  -lrb-  entrained  -rrb-  to the 24-hour cycle in nature nor to any artificial cycle . 
in recent studies funded by the u . s .  space industry ,  it has been shown that most humans can be entrained to a 23.5-hour day and to a 24.65-hour day . 
non-24-hour sleep–wake disorder ,  also referred to as `` free-running disorder ''  -lrb-  frd  -rrb-  or `` non-24 '' ,  is one of the circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans . 
in this context ,  free-running sleep means that a person chooses to sleep when sleepy and to awaken spontaneously  -lrb-  specifically without an alarm clock or reference to the time of day  -rrb-  . 
fenrir responded:
fenrir allowed them to place the fetter . 
further into the poem the völva foretells that odin will be consumed by fenrir at ragnarök:
fenrir has been the subject of artistic depictions ,  and he appears in literature . 
the æsir said fenrir would quickly tear apart a thin silken strip ,  noting that fenrir earlier broke great iron binds ,  and added that if fenrir wasn't able to break slender gleipnir then fenrir is nothing for the gods to fear ,  and as a result would be freed . 
fenrir is mentioned in three stanzas of the poem `` völuspá '' and in two stanzas of the poem `` vafþrúðnismál '' . 
in the `` prose edda '' ,  fenrir is mentioned in three books: `` gylfaginning '' ,  `` skáldskaparmál '' and `` háttatal '' . 
in the `` prose edda '' ,  additional information is given about fenrir ,  including that ,  due to the gods' knowledge of prophecies foretelling great trouble from fenrir and his rapid growth ,  the gods bound him ,  and as a result fenrir bit off the right hand of the god týr . 
additionally ,  the name `` fenrir '' can be found among a list of jötnar in chapter 75 of `` skáldskaparmál '' . 
the suggested parallels with fenrir myths are the binding of an evil being by a ruler figure and the subsequent swallowing of the ruler figure by the evil being  -lrb-  odin and fenrir  -rrb-  ,  trickery involving the thrusting of a hand into a monster's orifice and the affliction of the inserted limb  -lrb-  týr and fenrir  -rrb-  . 
in chapter 13 of the `` prose edda '' book `` gylfaginning '' ,  fenrir is first mentioned in a stanza quoted from `` völuspá '' . 
