by the 1970s the museum was again expanding . 
in 1953, the museum celebrated its bicentenary . 
in 1923, the british museum welcomed over one million visitors . 
although today principally a museum of cultural art objects and antiquities ,  the british museum was founded as a `` universal museum '' . 
it is the first national public museum in the world . 
the natural history collections were an integral part of the british museum until their removal to the new british museum of natural history in 1887, nowadays the natural history museum . 
today ,  the british museum has grown to become one of the largest museums in the world ,  covering an area of over 92,000 m  -lrb-  990,000 sq . 
sir thomas grenville  -lrb-  1755–1846 -rrb- ,  a trustee of the british museum from 1830, assembled a library of 20,240 volumes ,  which he left to the museum in his will . 
in 1973, the british library act 1972 detached the library department from the british museum ,  but it continued to host the now separated british library in the same reading room and building as the museum until 1997.
the original 1753 collection has grown to over thirteen million objects at the british museum ,  70 million at the natural history museum and 150 million at the british library . 
the british museum houses the world's largest and most comprehensive collection of egyptian antiquities  -lrb-  with over 100,000 pieces  -rrb-  outside the egyptian museum in cairo . 
the british museum was the first of a new kind of museum – national ,  belonging to neither church nor king ,  freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything . 
a board of 25 trustees  -lrb-  with the director as their accounting officer for the purposes of reporting to government  -rrb-  is responsible for the general management and control of the museum ,  in accordance with the british museum act 1963 and the museums and galleries act 1992.
most of the antiquities salt collected were purchased by the british museum and the musée du louvre . 
the william burges collection of armoury was bequeathed to the museum in 1881.
the addition of the cotton and harley manuscripts introduced a literary and antiquarian element and meant that the british museum now became both national museum and library . 
the british museum was run from its inception by a 'principal librarian'  -lrb-  when the book collections were still part of the museum  -rrb-  ,  a role that was renamed 'director and principal librarian' in 1898, and 'director' in 1973  -lrb-  on the separation of the british library  -rrb-  . 
the ethnography collections ,  which had been housed in the short-lived museum of mankind at 6 burlington gardens from 1970, were returned to new purpose-built galleries in the museum in 2000.
the government suggested a site at st pancras for the new british library but the books did not leave the museum until 1997.
on 7 june 1753, king george ii gave his royal assent to the act of parliament which established the british museum . 
in this form ,  the formula reads or equivalently
the coefficient in the term of is known as the binomial coefficient formula_2 or formula_3  -lrb-  the two have the same value  -rrb-  . 
the most basic example of the binomial theorem is the formula for the square of :
therefore formula_2 is often pronounced as ``  ''n '' choose `` b '' '' . 
in calculus ,  this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative formula_19 if one sets formula_20 and formula_21 interpreting `` b '' as an infinitesimal change in `` a , ``  then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an `` n ''-dimensional hypercube ,  formula_22 where the coefficient of the linear term  -lrb-  in formula_23 -rrb- is formula_24 the area of the `` n '' faces ,  each of dimension formula_25 substituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms ,  formula_27 and higher ,  become negligible ,  and yields the formula formula_28 interpreted as if one integrates this picture ,  which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus ,  one obtains cavalieri's quadrature formula ,  the integral formula_30 – see proof of cavalieri's quadrature formula for details . 
in 1544, michael stifel introduced the term `` binomial coefficient '' and showed how to use them to express formula_7 in terms of formula_8, via `` pascal's triangle '' . 
boxing day is a secular holiday celebrated the day after christmas day . 
boxing day is a secular holiday that is traditionally celebrated on 26 december ,  the day after christmas day . 
in australia ,  boxing day is a public holiday in all jurisdictions except the australian state of south australia where a public holiday known as proclamation day is celebrated on the first weekday after christmas day or the christmas day holiday . 
boxing day is on 26 december ,  although the attached bank holiday or public holiday may take place either on that day or two days later . 
in canada ,  boxing day is a federal statutory holiday . 
26 december is also saint stephen's day ,  a religious holiday . 
balochistan  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-   is one of the four provinces of pakistan . 
balochistan is situated in the southwest of pakistan and covers an area of  . 
during the caliphate of ali ,  revolt broke out in southern balochistan's makran region . 
two devastating earthquakes occurred in balochistan during british colonial rule: the 1935 quetta earthquake ,  which devastated quetta ,  and the 1945 balochistan earthquake with its epicentre in the makran region . 
during the period of the british raj from the fall of the durrani empire in 1823, four princely states were recognised and reinforced in balochistan: makran ,  kharan ,  las bela and kalat . 
balochistan contained a chief commissioner's province and four princely states under the british raj . 
in the 15th century ,  mir chakar khan rind became the first sirdar of afghan and pakistani balochistan . 
tweed's downfall began in 1871.
after the election of 1869, tweed took control of the new york city government . 
the following day ,  they had tweed arrested . 
tweed was a member of the new york state senate  -lrb-  4th d .   -rrb-  from 1868 to 1873, sitting in the 91st ,  92nd ,  93rd and 94th new york state legislatures ,  but not taking his seat in the 95th and 96th new york state legislatures . 
tweed himself wanted no particular recognition of his achievements ,  such as they were . 
according to tweed biographer kenneth d .  ackerman:it's hard not to admire the skill behind tweed's system  .  .  . 
henry smith was another republican that was a part of the tweed ring . 
the old nation brewing company in williamston ,  michigan ,  produced a new england style double ipa named after tweed ,  `` boss tweed new england dipa '' . 
in the 1948 film version ,  tweed is played by vincent price . 
tweed had for months been under attack from `` the new york times '' and thomas nast ,  the cartoonist from `` harper's weekly '' – regarding nast's cartoons ,  tweed reportedly said ,  `` stop them damned pictures . 
on the 1963–1964 cbs tv series `` the great adventure '' ,  which presented one-hour dramatizations of the lives of historical figures ,  edward andrews portrayed tweed in the episode `` the man who stole new york city '' ,  about the campaign by `` the new york times '' to bring down tweed . 
according to leo hershkowitz in `` tweed's new york: another look '' ,  there is no evidence of any personal financial gain on tweed's part ,  despite the implications of thomas nast in `` harper's weekly '' and the editors of `` the new york times '' ,  which both had ties to the republican party . 
tweed was born april 3, 1823, at 1 cherry street ,  on the lower east side of manhattan . 
tweed was played by philip bosco in the 1986 tv movie `` liberty '' . 
tweed was elected to the united states house of representatives in 1852 and the new york county board of supervisors in 1858, the year he became the head of the tammany hall political machine . 
the confusion derives from a nast cartoon with a picture of tweed ,  supplemented with a quote from william l .  marcy ,  the former governor of new york . 
balsall heath is a working class ,  inner-city area of birmingham ,  west midlands ,  england . 
balsall heath was agricultural land between moseley village and the city of birmingham until the 1850s when expansion along moseley road joined the two . 
street prostitution first appeared in balsall heath during the 1950s . 
the area has enjoyed a slow revival . 
in july 2005, balsall heath was hit by a tornado ,  which devastated many buildings around church road and ladypool road . 
in 1900, the city's college of art was also opened on moseley road . 
the company was converted into the bermuda-registered bunge international in 1994, retaining the bunge y born name only in argentina . 
bunge & born was founded in 1884 by ernesto bunge ,  a german argentine whose uncle ,  carl bunge ,  had been consul general in argentina for both the netherlands and prussia ,  and his brother-in-law ,  jorge born ,  who had recently arrived from antwerp . 
beset by the rift between jorge born and his brother ,  juan ,  the prior unity between the shareholders disintegrated as caraballo struggled to modernize the company . 
bunge & born's near-monopoly on cereal and flour exports ended with populist president juan perón's 1946 establishment of the iapi ,  a state agricultural purchasing and export agent . 
 ''big apple '' is a nickname for new york city . 
 ''the big apple '' was popularized as a name for new york city by john j .  fitz gerald in a number of horse-racing articles for the `` new york morning telegraph '' in the 1920s . 
by the late 1920s ,  new york writers other than fitz gerald were starting to use `` big apple '' and were using it in contexts other than horse-racing . 
fitz gerald referred to the `` big apple '' frequently thereafter . 
the earliest known usage of 'big apple' appears in the book `` the wayfarer in new york ''  -lrb-  1909 -rrb- ,  in which author edward s .  martin writes: kansas is apt to see in new york a greedy city .  .  . 
fitz gerald reportedly first heard `` the big apple '' used to describe new york's racetracks by two african american stable hands at the famed new orleans fair grounds . 
corbett told the crowd:
eyewitnesses to booth's shooting contradicted corbett's version of events and expressed doubts that corbett was responsible for shooting booth . 
corbett also declined an offer for one of booth's pistols as he did not want a reminder of shooting booth . 
when corbett left ,  he told thatcher he was going to mexico . 
after working as a hatter in troy ,  corbett returned to new york city . 
on april 24, 1865, corbett's regiment was sent to apprehend john wilkes booth ,  the assassin of president abraham lincoln ,  whom booth fatally shot on april 14, 1865.
corbett was born in london and immigrated with his family to new york city in 1840.
in 1857, corbett began working at a hat manufacturer's shop on washington street in downtown boston . 
the berber latin alphabet was also used by most european and berber linguists during the 19th and 20th centuries . 
the name `` tamaziɣt '' is currently being used increasingly by educated berbers to refer to the written berber language ,  and even to berber as a whole ,  including tuareg . 
some other berber writers ,  especially in morocco ,  prefer to refer to berber with `` amazigh '' when writing about it in french or english . 
there are now three writing systems in use for berber languages: tifinagh ,  the arabic script ,  and the berber latin alphabet . 
a modernised form of the tifinagh alphabet ,  called neo-tifinagh ,  was adopted in morocco in 2003 for writing berber ,  but many moroccan berber publications still use the berber latin alphabet . 
berber is a branch of the afroasiatic language family . 
it is not clear ,  however ,  whether he means `` speakers of berber languages '' or `` people of berber descent '' . 
the berber languages ,  also known as berber or the amazigh languages  -lrb-  berber name:  ,  ; neo-tifinagh: ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ,  tuareg tifinagh: ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵗⵜ ,  ⵝⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵗⵝ ,   ,    -rrb-  ,  are a branch of the afroasiatic language family . 
in 2001, berber became a constitutional national language of algeria ,  and in 2011 berber became a constitutionally official language of morocco . 
various orthographies have been used to transcribe the berber languages . 
moroccan linguist mohamed chafik claims that 80 percent of moroccans are berbers . 
algeria recognized berber as a `` national language '' in 2002, though not as an official one . 
the bulk of the populations of the maghreb countries are considered to have berber ancestors . 
berber languages have two types of number: singular and plural ,  of which only the latter is marked . 
the bankrupt must pay income contributions if their income is above a certain threshold . 
bankruptcy is a legal status of a person or other entity who cannot repay debts to creditors . 
after the bankruptcy is annulled or the bankrupt has been automatically discharged ,  the bankrupt's credit report status is shown as `` discharged bankrupt '' for some years . 
bankruptcy is filed when a person or a company becomes insolvent and cannot pay their debts as they become due and if they have at least $1,000 in debt . 
to declare bankruptcy or for a creditor to lodge a petition ,  the debt must be at least $5,000.
the realisation of funds usually comes from two main sources: the bankrupt's assets and the bankrupt's wages . 
however ,  it may still work against the filer . 
for private households ,  some argue that it is insufficient to merely dismiss debts after a certain period  . 
student loan borrowers may benefit from restructuring their payments through a chapter 13 bankruptcy repayment plan ,  but few qualify for discharge of part or all of their student loan debt . 
for the duration of their bankruptcy ,  all bankrupts have certain restrictions placed upon them . 
all assets must be disclosed in bankruptcy schedules whether or not the debtor believes the asset has a net value . 
all bankrupts must lodge a statement of affairs document with afsa ,  which includes important information about their assets and liabilities . 
these symbols may be placed above any other symbol ,  turning it respectively into a “thing” ,  an “action” ,  and an “evaluation”:
 -lrb-  1965, p .  89–90 -rrb- . 
bliss then adopted the name `` blissymbolics '' in order that no researcher could plagiarize his system of symbols . 
nevertheless ,  in 1977 bliss claimed that this agreement was violated so that he was deprived of effective control of his symbol system . 
bliss devised blissymbols while a refugee at the shanghai ghetto and sydney ,  from 1942 to 1949.
bliss stated that his own work was an attempt to take up the thread of leibniz's project . 
bliss finally brought his lawyers back to the occc ,  and both parts reached a settlement:
in his work `` semantography '' bliss had not provided a systematic set of definitions for his symbols  -lrb-  there was a provisional vocabulary index instead  -lrb-  1965, pp . 
according to okrent  -lrb-  2009, p .  190 -rrb- ,  there was a final period of conflict ,  as bliss would make continuous criticisms to mcnaughton often followed by apologies . 
bessel functions of the second kind and the spherical bessel functions of the second kind are sometimes denoted by and respectively ,  rather than and  . 
bessel functions ,  first defined by the mathematician daniel bernoulli and then generalized by friedrich bessel ,  are the canonical solutions of bessel's differential equation for an arbitrary complex number  ,  the `` order '' of the bessel function . 
although and produce the same differential equation for real  ,  it is conventional to define different bessel functions for these two values in such a way that the bessel functions are mostly smooth functions of  . 
in this case ,  the second linearly independent solution is then found to be the bessel function of the second kind ,  as discussed below . 
brahui is also spoken in sindh ,  mostly in larkana and nawabshah divisions . 
brahui  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a dravidian language spoken primarily by the brahui people in the central part of baluchistan province in pakistan ,  and in scattered parts of afghanistan ,  iran ,  and turkmenistan ,  and by expatriate brahui communities in qatar ,  united arab emirates ,  and iraq . 
brahui has been influenced by the iranian languages spoken in the area ,  including persian ,  balochi ,  and pashto . 
berkeley db is not a relational database . 
berkeley db originated at the university of california ,  berkeley as part of bsd ,  berkeley's version of the unix operating system . 
different versions of berkeley db  -lrb-  db ,  je ,  xml  -rrb-  may have different licensing terms . 
since its initial release ,  berkeley db has gone through various versions . 
see algorithms for solving sat below . 
when all literals of a one-in-three 3-sat formula are positive ,  the satisfiability problem is called one-in-three positive 3-sat . 
sat is easier if the number of literals in a clause is limited to at most 2, in which case the problem is called 2-sat . 
as a consequence ,  for each cnf formula ,  it is possible to solve the xor-3-sat problem defined by the formula ,  and based on the result infer either that the 3-sat problem is solvable or that the 1-in-3-sat problem is unsolvable . 
a variant of the 3-satisfiability problem is the one-in-three 3-sat  -lrb-  also known variously as 1-in-3-sat and exactly-1 3-sat  -rrb-  . 
sat is the first problem that was proven to be np-complete; see cook–levin theorem . 
3-sat is one of karp's 21 np-complete problems ,  and it is used as a starting point for proving that other problems are also np-hard . 
for some versions of the sat problem ,  it is useful to define the notion of a `` generalized conjunctive normal form '' formula ,  viz . 
the sat problem is self-reducible ,  that is ,  each algorithm which correctly answers if an instance of sat is solvable can be used to find a satisfying assignment . 
since the sat problem is np-complete ,  only algorithms with exponential worst-case complexity are known for it . 
in computer science ,  the boolean satisfiability problem  -lrb-  sometimes called propositional satisfiability problem and abbreviated satisfiability or sat  -rrb-  is the problem of determining if there exists an interpretation that satisfies a given boolean formula . 
ordinary sat asks if there is at least one variable assignment that makes the formula true . 
however ,  since for any `` k ''≥3, this problem can neither be easier than 3-sat nor harder than sat ,  and the latter two are np-complete ,  so must be k-sat . 
like the satisfiability problem for arbitrary formulas ,  determining the satisfiability of a formula in conjunctive normal form where each clause is limited to at most three literals is np-complete also; this problem is called 3-sat ,  3cnfsat ,  or 3-satisfiability . 
sat is trivial if the formulas are restricted to those in disjunctive normal form ,  that is ,  they are disjunction of conjunctions of literals . 
indeed ,  one such clause ¬ ''x '' ∨  .  .  .  ∨ ¬ ''x '' ∨ `` y '' can be rewritten as `` x '' ∧  .  .  .  ∧ `` x '' → `` y '' ,  that is ,  if `` x '' .  .  .  , `` x '' are all true ,  then `` y '' needs to be true as well . 
 -lrb-  see bohemianism  -rrb-  . 
a bohemian  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a resident of bohemia ,  a region of the czech republic or the former kingdom of bohemia ,  a region of the former crown of bohemia  -lrb-  lands of the bohemian crown  -rrb-  . 
in english ,  the word `` bohemian '' was used to denote the czech people as well as the czech language before the word `` czech '' became prevalent in the early 20th century . 
strict rules govern student life at bju . 
in 2005, 120 of the finalists from previous years returned to bju as freshmen . 
religion is a major aspect of life and curriculum at bju . 
in 2015 bju reemerged as campaign stop of significance for conservative republicans . 
in 2017, us news ranked bju as #61  -lrb-  tie  -rrb-  in regional universities south and #7 in best value schools . 
bju press originated from the need for textbooks for the burgeoning christian school movement ,  and today it is the largest book publisher in south carolina . 
after the death of bob jones ,  jr .  ,  erin jones ,  the wife of bju president stephen jones ,  became director . 
more than a million pre-college students around the world use bju textbooks ,  and the press has about 2,500 titles in print . 
however ,  in may of that year ,  bju expanded rules against interracial dating and marriage . 
bob jones university  -lrb-  bju  -rrb-  is a private ,  non-denominational evangelical university in greenville ,  south carolina ,  known for its conservative cultural and religious positions . 
in 2005, stephen jones ,  great-grandson of the founder ,  became bju's president on the same day that he received his ph . d .  from the school . 
the bju engineering program was accredited by the accreditation board for engineering and technology  -lrb-  abet  -rrb-  . 
in 2018, the museum announced that a new home would be built at a yet undetermined located off the bju campus . 
with about 1500 students ,  it is the largest k–12 private school in the carolinas and one of the largest in the southeast . 
in his first meeting with the university cabinet in 2014, the fifth president steve pettit said he believed it was appropriate for bju to regain its tax-exempt status because bju no longer held its earlier positions about race . 
although bju had admitted asians and other ethnic groups from its inception ,  it did not enroll africans or african-american students until 1971.
bju press also offers distance learning courses online ,  via dvd ,  and via hard drive . 
nevertheless ,  unlike bju's earlier periods of political involvement ,  pettit did not endorse a candidate . 
one bju alumnus ,  asa hutchinson ,  serves as the governor of arkansas and also served in the u . s .  congress; his brother tim hutchinson served in the us senate . 
both bob jones ,  sr .  and bob jones ,  jr .  believed that film could be an excellent medium for mass evangelism ,  and in 1950, the university established `` unusual films '' within the school of fine arts . 
in 2014, the educate to career college ranking index listed bju as 15th in the nation by economic value . 
although the march 2007 issue of `` foreign policy '' listed bju as one of `` the world's most controversial religious sites '' because of its past influence on american politics ,  bju has seen little political controversy since stephen jones became president . 
the conference typically attracts fundamentalist preachers and laymen from around the country ,  and some bju class reunions are held during the week . 
the british government compensated slave-owners . 
britain retains sovereignty over 14 territories outside the british isles ,  which were renamed the british overseas territories in 2002.
the british withdrew from aden in 1967, bahrain in 1971, and the maldives in 1976.
britain's fears of war with germany were realised in 1914 with the outbreak of the first world war . 
the east india company drove the expansion of the british empire in asia . 
the issue of the empire's security was a serious concern in britain ,  as it was vital to the british economy . 
in 1839, britain moved to pre-empt this by invading afghanistan ,  but the first anglo-afghan war was a disaster for britain . 
the demographics of britain itself were changed after the second world war owing to immigration to britain from its former colonies . 
in 1922, egypt ,  which had been declared a british protectorate at the outbreak of the first world war ,  was granted formal independence ,  though it continued to be a british client state until 1954.
the british mandate in palestine ,  where an arab majority lived alongside a jewish minority ,  presented the british with a similar problem to that of india . 
fourteen overseas territories remain under british sovereignty . 
the british and french struggles in india became but one theatre of the global seven years' war  -lrb-  1756–1763 -rrb- involving france ,  britain and the other major european powers . 
while the suez crisis caused british power in the middle east to weaken ,  it did not collapse . 
the foundations of the british empire were laid when england and scotland were separate kingdoms . 
along with its victory over france in india ,  the seven years' war therefore left britain as the world's most powerful maritime power . 
british colonial architecture ,  such as in churches ,  railway stations and government buildings ,  can be seen in many cities that were once part of the british empire . 
the war to the south influenced british policy in canada ,  where between 40,000 and 100,000 defeated loyalists had migrated from the new united states following independence . 
the irish free state distanced itself further from the british state with the introduction of a new constitution in 1937, making it a republic in all but name . 
this occurred in 1707 with the treaty of union ,  establishing the kingdom of great britain . 
sudan was nominally made an anglo-egyptian condominium ,  but a british colony in reality . 
between 1815 and 1914, a period referred to as britain's `` imperial century '' by some historians ,  around of territory and roughly 400 million people were added to the british empire . 
britain's declaration of war against nazi germany in september 1939 included the crown colonies and india but did not automatically commit the dominions of australia ,  canada ,  new zealand ,  newfoundland and south africa . 
british gains in southern and east africa prompted cecil rhodes ,  pioneer of british expansion in southern africa ,  to urge a `` cape to cairo '' railway linking the strategically important suez canal to the mineral-rich south of the continent . 
british territories in the pacific acquired independence in the 1970s beginning with fiji in 1970 and ending with vanuatu in 1980.
tensions between britain and the united states escalated again during the napoleonic wars ,  as britain tried to cut off american trade with france and boarded american ships to impress men into the royal navy . 
though britain and the empire emerged victorious from the second world war ,  the effects of the conflict were profound ,  both at home and abroad . 
margaret thatcher later described the mindset she believed had befallen britain's political leaders after suez where they `` went from believing that britain could do anything to an almost neurotic belief that britain could do nothing '' ,  from which britain did not recover until the successful recapture of the falkland islands from argentina in 1982.
in 1951, the conservative party returned to power in britain ,  under the leadership of winston churchill . 
the destruction of the russian navy by the japanese at the battle of port arthur during the russo-japanese war of 1904–05 also limited its threat to the british . 
it was not only britain's position on the world stage that was at risk: napoleon threatened to invade britain itself ,  just as his armies had overrun many countries of continental europe . 
in the late 1970s ,  batman's popularity was waning . 
three sequels ,  `` batman returns '' ,  `` batman forever '' and `` batman & robin '' ,  were released on june 19, 1992, june 16, 1995, and june 20, 1997, respectively . 
 ''batman '' initiated the original `` batman '' film series and spawned three sequels: `` batman returns ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  `` batman forever ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- and `` batman & robin ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb-; the latter two of which were directed by joel schumacher instead of burton ,  and replaced keaton as batman with val kilmer and george clooney ,  respectively . 
the success of `` batman '' prompted warner bros . 
batman escapes and napier is presumed dead . 
a disappointed uslan then wrote a script titled `` return of the batman '' to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film . 
the film was also included in `` the tim burton collection '' dvd and blu-ray set in 2012, alongside its first sequel ,  `` batman returns '' . 
the filmmakers considered filming `` batman '' entirely on the warner bros .  backlot in burbank ,  california ,  but media interest in the film made them change the location . 
warner bros .  ,  the studio behind the successful superman film franchise ,  decided to also accept and produce `` batman '' . 
originally in the climax ,  the joker was to kill vicki vale ,  sending batman into a vengeful fury . 
batman is a 1989 american superhero film directed by tim burton and produced by jon peters and peter guber ,  based on the dc comics character of the same name . 
tom mankiewicz completed a script titled `` the batman '' in june 1983, focusing on batman and dick grayson's origins ,  with the joker and rupert thorne as villains ,  and silver st . 
batman ,  who survived the crash ,  fends off the joker's remaining men despite his injuries ,  and confronts the joker . 
 ''batman '' was a critical and financial success ,  earning over $400 million in box office totals . 
when discussing the central theme of `` batman '' ,  director tim burton explained ,  `` the whole film and mythology of the character is a complete duel of the freaks . 
despite initial negative reactions from comics fans prior to the film's release ,  keaton's portrayal of batman was generally praised . 
many observed that burton was more interested in the joker and the art and set production design than batman or anything else in terms of characterization and screentime . 
after the financial success of `` pee-wee's big adventure ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- ,  warner bros .  hired tim burton to direct `` batman '' . 
 ''batman '' was criticized by some for being too dark ,  but nonetheless received positive reviews from critics . 
kim newman theorized that `` burton and the writers saw batman and the joker as a dramatic antithesis ,  and the film deals with their intertwined origins and fates to an even greater extent '' . 
batman  -lrb-  often promoted as batman: the movie  -rrb-  is a 1966 american superhero film based on the `` batman '' television series ,  and the first full-length theatrical adaptation of the dc comics character batman . 
the film includes most members of the original tv cast: the actors for batman ,  robin ,  alfred ,  gordon ,  o'hara ,  aunt harriet ,  the joker ,  the penguin ,  and the riddler all reprised their roles . 
ultimately ,  batman and robin are unable to prevent the kidnapping of the dehydrated united world organization's security council . 
certain elements verge into direct parody of the history of batman . 
when batman and robin get a tip that commodore schmidlapp is in danger aboard his yacht ,  they launch a rescue mission using the batcopter . 
the film was ,  they remind us ,  made at a time when `` the batman of the golden age comics was already essentially neutered . `` 
 ''batman returns '' would be the last film in the warner bros .  `` batman '' film series that featured burton and michael keaton as director and leading actor . 
batman returns is a 1992 american superhero film directed by tim burton ,  based on the dc comics character batman . 
 ''batman returns '' was released on june 19, 1992.
batman foils the kidnappings and heads for the penguin's lair . 
a sequel ,  `` batman forever '' ,  was released in 1995, with val kilmer replacing keaton as batman . 
the film is recognized by american film institute in these lists: it was part of empire's 500 greatest films in 2008 at number 401.
after the success of `` batman '' ,  warner bros .  was hoping for a sequel to start filming in may 1990 at pinewood studios . 
no wonder some people felt burned by `` batman returns '': tim burton just may have created the first blockbuster art film . `` 
 ''batman returns '' was the third highest-grossing film in america of 1992, and sixth highest in worldwide totals . 
hamm's script had the penguin and catwoman going after hidden treasure . 
batman intervenes and meets catwoman as she attempts to sabotage one of shreck's businesses; she escapes ,  but is injured and swears revenge on batman by allying with the penguin to frame him for an undiscussed crime . 
warner bros .  devoted a large amount of secrecy for `` batman returns '' . 
in early 1991, two of hollywood's largest sound stages  -lrb-  stage 16 at warner bros .  and stage 12 at universal studios  -rrb-  were being prepared for the filming of `` batman returns '' . 
meanwhile batman and mr . 
batman ,  robin and batgirl decide to go after mr . 
batman & robin is a 1997 american superhero film based on the dc comics characters batman and robin . 
mr . 
warner bros .  fast-tracked development for `` batman & robin '' following the box office success of the previous film ,  `` batman forever '' . 
the `` batman & robin '' film trailer debuted on the february 19, 1997 episode of `` entertainment tonight '' . 
while chris o'donnell reprises the role of robin ,  val kilmer decided not to reprise the role of batman from `` batman forever '' . 
ultimately ,  out of 11 nominations ,  `` batman & robin '' garnered only one razzie award . 
in gotham ,  one year after the defeat of two-face and the riddler ,  batman and robin attempt to thwart mr . 
christopher nolan was eventually hired to helm the next `` batman '' film in january 2003, resulting in the rebooted `` batman begins ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- . 
during the filming of `` batman & robin '' ,  warner bros .  was impressed with the dailies ,  prompting them to immediately hire joel schumacher to return as director for a fifth film . 
like `` batman forever '' ,  the original score for the film was written by elliot goldenthal . 
the film was followed by `` batman & robin '' in 1997, with schumacher returning as the director and george clooney replacing kilmer as batman . 
bruce resumes his crusade as batman with robin as his partner to protect gotham from crime . 
filming started in september 1994.
the film earned more money than its predecessor `` batman returns '' ,  and was the second-highest-grossing film  -lrb-  behind `` toy story ''  -rrb-  of 1995, in the u . s . 
batman forever is a 1995 american superhero film directed by joel schumacher and produced by tim burton ,  based on the dc comics character batman . 
 ''batman forever '' went through a few major edits before its release . 
bruce meets chase meridian ,  a psychiatrist who is obsessed with batman ,  and invites her to come with him to a circus event . 
the riddler is taken to arkham asylum and imprisoned ,  but he claims he knows who batman is . 
the film's promotional teaser trailer used the main title theme from elfman's score of 1989's `` batman '' . 
the soundtrack was commercially successful ,  selling almost as many copies as prince's soundtrack to the 1989 `` batman '' film . 
 ''batman forever ''s tone is significantly different from the previous installments ,  becoming more family-friendly since warner bros .  believed that the previous `` batman '' film ,  `` batman returns ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  failed to outgross its predecessor due to parent complaints about the film's violence and dark overtones . 
 ''year ones characterization ,  particularly that of batman and gordon ,  has been praised . 
dc released a hardcover `` deluxe edition '' of `` batman: year one ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  to coincide with the release of `` batman begins '' in april 2005.
 ''year one '' ,  later referred to as `` batman: year one '' ,  is an american comic book story arc published by dc comics which recounts the superhero batman's first year as a crime-fighter . 
in november 2016, dc released a 288-page dc comics absolute edition of `` batman: year one '' . 
one of the earliest collections of `` year one '' was released in `` the complete frank miller batman '' ,  published by longmeadow press in 1989.
essen holds batman at gunpoint while gordon is momentarily dazed ,  but batman disarms her and flees to an abandoned building . 
thus ,  the four `` year one '' issues bear no continuity to past issues of `` batman '' . 
the `` los angeles times '' wrote that `` year one '' offered an interesting and entertaining update to the origin of batman . 
gordon has a brief affair with essen ,  while batman intimidates a mob drug dealer for information . 
miller has said he kept kane and finger's basic story for `` year one '' but expanded it . 
after bringing barbara with him to interview bruce wayne ,  investigating his connection to batman ,  gordon confesses the affair to her . 
bi-directional text is text containing text in both text directionalities ,  both right-to-left  -lrb-  rtl or dextrosinistral  -rrb-  and left-to-right  -lrb-  ltr or sinistrodextral  -rrb-  . 
strong characters are those with definite directionality . 
weak characters are those with vague directionality . 
it generally involves text containing different types of alphabets ,  but may also refer to boustrophedon ,  which is changing text directionality in each row . 
bidirectional script support is the capability of a computer system to correctly display bi-directional text . 
the weak directionality only applies to the placement of the number in its entirety . 
 ''note: some web browsers may display the hebrew text in this article in the opposite direction . `` 
for example ,  to correctly display the for an english name brand  -lrb-  ltr  -rrb-  in an arabic  -lrb-  rtl  -rrb-  passage ,  an lrm mark is inserted after the trademark symbol if the symbol is not followed by ltr text  -lrb-  e . g . 
many computer programs fail to display bi-directional text correctly . 
in real analysis ,  bernoulli's inequality  -lrb-  named after jacob bernoulli  -rrb-  is an inequality that approximates exponentiations of 1 + `` x '' . 
this class and the `` james madison '' class are combined with the `` lafayette ''s in some references . 
uss `` kamehameha '' was decommissioned on 2 april 2002, the last ship of the `` benjamin franklin '' class to be decommissioned . 
due to the loss of in april 1963, this class was designed to subsafe standards and its equipment was similar to the fast attack submarines  -lrb-  ssns  -rrb-  . 
in 2000  -lrb-  bofh 2k  -rrb-  ,  the bofh and his pimply-faced youth  -lrb-  pfy  -rrb-  assistant moved to a new company . 
several other people have written stories about bofhs ,  but those by simon travaglia are considered canonical . 
happy traum ,  a former guitar student of mcghee's ,  edited a blues guitar instruction guide and songbook ,  `` guitar styles of brownie mcghee '' ,  published in 1971, in which mcghee ,  between lessons ,  talked about his life and the blues . 
mcghee died of stomach cancer in february 1996 in oakland ,  california ,  at age 80.
mcghee was born in knoxville ,  tennessee ,  and grew up in kingsport ,  tennessee . 
following consultation ,  a draft version of the bipm work programme is presented at each meeting of the general conference for consideration with the bipm dotation . 
the bipm was created on 20 may 1875, following the signing of the metre convention ,  a treaty among 59 member states  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
bayonne was ,  in 2014, a commune with over 45,000 inhabitants ,  the heart of the urban area of bayonne and of the `` agglomeration côte basque-adour '' which includes anglet and biarritz . 
in 1023 bayonne was the capital of labourd and ,  in the 12th century ,  extended to and beyond the nive . 
it is located at the confluence of the nive and adour rivers in the northern part of the cultural region of the basque country ,  as well as the southern part of gascony where the aquitaine basin joins the beginning of the pre-pyrenees . 
in north america ,  animeigo first released `` bubblegum crisis '' to vhs and laserdisc in 1991 in japanese with english subtitles . 
hayashi said that mackey is `` sort of '' the original model for tenchi . 
obari would also go on to direct episode 5 and 6.
masaki kajishima and hiroki hayashi ,  who both worked on the `` bubblegum crisis '' oavs ,  cite the show as being the inspiration for their harem series `` tenchi muyo ! 
suzuki explained in a 1993 `` animerica '' interview the meaning behind the cryptic title: `` we originally named the series 'bubblegum' to reflect a world in crisis ,  like a chewing-gum bubble that's about to burst . `` 
my blackness is tending to reddish '' . 
according to the office for national statistics ,  at the 2001 census there were over a million black people in the united kingdom; 1% of the total population described themselves as `` black caribbean '' ,  0.8% as `` black african '' ,  and 0.2% as `` black other '' . 
each time he uses `` black '' it is in parallel construction with `` white ''; for example ,  `` black men and white men '' . 
some surveys suggest that the majority of black americans have no preference for `` african american '' or `` black '' ,  although they have a slight preference for `` black '' in personal settings and `` african american '' in more formal settings . 
also the black inheritance is present in the gastronomy . 
black canadians is a designation used for people of black african descent ,  who are citizens or permanent residents of canada . 
afro-iranians are people of black african descent residing in iran . 
obama chose to identify as black and african-american . 
afro-dutch are residents of the netherlands who are of black african or afro-caribbean ancestry . 
 ''in isidore's day ,  moors were black by definition .  .  . `` 
black canadians often draw a distinction between those of afro-caribbean ancestry and those of other african roots . 
aside from `` black american '' ,  these include `` afro-american ''  -lrb-  in use from the late 1960s to 1990 -rrb- and `` african american ''  -lrb-  used in the united states to refer to black americans ,  people often referred to in the past as `` american negroes ''  -rrb-  . 
about 150,000 east african and black people live in israel ,  amounting to just over 2% of the nation's population . 
other than by appearance ,  `` coloureds '' can usually be distinguished from `` blacks '' by language . 
the majority of black canadians are of caribbean origin ,  though the population also consists of african american immigrants and their descendants  -lrb-  including black nova scotians  -rrb-  ,  as well as many african immigrants . 
 ''coloured '' south africans are known to discuss their dilemma by saying ,  `` we were not white enough under apartheid ,  and we are not black enough under the anc  -lrb-  african national congress  -rrb- ``  . 
due to the often political and cultural contours of blackness in the united states ,  the notion of blackness can also be extended to non-black people . 
the preferred official umbrella term is `` black and minority ethnic ''  -lrb-  bme  -rrb-  ,  but sometimes the term `` black '' is used on its own ,  to express unified opposition to racism ,  as in the southall black sisters ,  which started with a mainly british asian constituency ,  and the national black police association ,  which has a membership of `` african ,  african-caribbean and asian origin '' . 
blackness can be contrasted with `` acting white '' ,  where black americans are said to behave with assumed characteristics of stereotypical white americans with regard to fashion ,  dialect ,  taste in music ,  and possibly ,  from the perspective of a significant number of black youth ,  academic achievement . 
by that time ,  the majority of black people in the united states were native-born ,  so the use of the term `` african '' became problematic . 
african americans popularly used the terms `` negro '' or `` colored '' for themselves until the late 1960s . 
because of the acceptance of miscegenation ,  brazil has avoided the binary polarization of society into black and white . 
distinctive and self-identified black communities have been reported in countries such as iraq ,  with a reported 1.2 million black people ,  and they attest to a history of discrimination . 
this has hindered the development of a common identity among black brazilians . 
from the late 19th century ,  the south used a colloquial term ,  the `` one-drop rule '' ,  to classify as black a person of any known african ancestry . 
in the u . s .  census race definitions ,  black and african americans are citizens and residents of the united states with origins in sub-saharan africa . 
there was a brief `` black power '' movement in sindh in the 1960s and many siddi are proud of and celebrate their african ancestry . 
the term `` black '' was used throughout but not frequently since it carried a certain stigma . 
the government required that blacks and coloureds live in areas separate from whites ,  creating large townships located away from the cities as areas for blacks . 
john caesar ,  nicknamed `` black caesar '' ,  a convict and bushranger with parents born in an unknown area in africa ,  was one of the first people of recent black african ancestry to arrive in australia . 
medieval and early modern europeans applied the name to muslim arabs ,  berbers ,  black africans and europeans alike . 
there are also certain cultural traits associated with being `` african american '' ,  a term used effectively as a synonym for `` black person '' within the united states . 
in the 18th century ,  the moroccan sultan moulay ismail `` the warrior king ''  -lrb-  1672–1727 -rrb- raised a corps of 150,000 black soldiers ,  called his black guard . 
others cited that the number of black people in jail increased during his administration . 
when a flea bites a human and contaminates the wound with regurgitated blood ,  the plague carrying bacteria are passed into the tissue . 
lymphatics ultimately drain into the bloodstream ,  so the plague bacteria may enter the blood and travel to almost any part of the body . 
people who die from this form of plague often die on the same day symptoms first appear . 
it has historically occurred in large outbreaks ,  with the most well known being the black death in the 14th century ,  which resulted in greater than 50 million dead . 
it has historically occurred in large outbreaks ,  with the most well known being the black death in the 14th century which resulted in greater than 50 million dead . 
this event might have led to the transfer of the plague  -lrb-  black death  -rrb-  via their ships into the south of europe ,  possibly explaining its rapid spread . 
the plague bacterium could develop drug-resistance and again become a major health threat . 
baudot invented his original code in 1870 and patented it in 1874.
baudot's code became known as the international telegraph alphabet no . 
in 1901, baudot's code was modified by donald murray  -lrb-  1865–1945 -rrb- ,  prompted by his development of a typewriter-like keyboard . 
the murray code also introduced what became known as `` format effectors '' or `` control characters '' the cr  -lrb-  carriage return  -rrb-  and lf  -lrb-  line feed  -rrb-  codes . 
blu tack is also used for sculpture . 
as of 2015, bostik was manufacturing around 100 tonnes of blu tack weekly at its leicester factory . 
a small amount of blu tack can be placed on the head of a screw to hold it onto a screwdriver . 
blu tack can also be used to clean in-ear headphones by gently pressing putty into mesh of headphones . 
blu tack can be regarded as a comfortable alternative to over-the-counter ear plugs for the attenuation of everyday sound . 
one clade ,  formed by `` b .  anthracis '' ,  `` b .  cereus '' ,  `` b .  mycoides '' ,  `` b .  pseudomycoides '' ,  `` b .  thuringiensis '' ,  and `` b .  weihenstephanensis '' under the 2011 classification standards ,  should be a single species  -lrb-  within 97% 16s identity  -rrb-  ,  but due to medical reasons ,  they are considered separate species  -lrb-  an issue also present for four species of `` shigella '' and `` escherichia coli ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''b .  subtilis '' is a valuable model for bacterial research . 
these two `` bacillus '' species are medically significant: `` b .  anthracis '' causes anthrax; and `` b .  cereus '' causes food poisoning . 
the cell wall of `` bacillus '' is a structure on the outside of the cell that forms the second barrier between the bacterium and the environment ,  and at the same time maintains the rod shape and withstands the pressure generated by the cell's turgor . 
under the microscope ,  the `` bacillus '' cells appear as rods ,  and a substantial portion of the cells usually contain oval endospores at one end ,  making them bulge . 
the population of brasília was 52.2% female and 47.8% male . 
brasília  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the federal capital of brazil and seat of government of the federal district . 
from 1763 until 1960, rio de janeiro was brazil's capital . 
brasília's accession as the new capital and its designation for the development of an extensive interior region inspired the symbolism of the plan . 
brasília was built in 41 months ,  from 1956 to april 21, 1960, when it was officially inaugurated . 
this is where the first construction workers of brasília used to live . 
from the beginning ,  the growth of brasília was greater than original estimates . 
brasília was planned and developed by lúcio costa ,  oscar niemeyer and joaquim cardozo in 1956 to move the capital from rio de janeiro to a more central location . 
brasília has one of the highest population growth rates in brazil ,  with annual growth of 2.82% ,  mostly due to internal migration . 
costa's plan is seen as a plan with a sectoral tendency ,  segregating all the banks ,  the office buildings ,  and the amusement center . 
in 2010, brasília was ranked the fourth most-populous city in brazil after são paulo ,  rio de janeiro ,  and salvador . 
the blue streak first stage was successfully tested three times at the woomera test range in australia as part of the eldo programme . 
blue streak would have become the first stage of a projected all british satellite launcher known as `` black prince '': the second stage was derived from the `` black knight '' test vehicle ,  and the orbital injection stage was a small hydrogen peroxide/kerosene motor . 
this led to the formation of the european launcher development organisation  -lrb-  eldo  -rrb-  ,  with blue streak used as the first stage of a carrier rocket named europa . 
in 1959, a year before the cancellation of the blue streak as a missile ,  the government requested that the rae and saunders-roe design a carrier rocket based on blue streak and black knight . 
the de havilland propellers blue streak was a british medium-range ballistic missile  -lrb-  mrbm  -rrb-  ,  and later the first stage of the europa satellite launch vehicle . 
blue streak was cancelled without entering full production . 
some considered the cancellation of blue streak to be not only a blow to british military-industrial efforts ,  but also to commonwealth ally australia ,  which had its own vested interest in the project . 
bakassi is a peninsula on the gulf of guinea . 
after southern cameroons voted in 1961 to leave nigeria and became a part of cameroon ,  bakassi remained under calabar administration in nigeria until icj judgement of 2002.
despite the formal handover of bakassi by nigeria to cameroon in 2006, the territory of bakassi is still reflected as part of the 774 local governments in nigeria as embodied in the first schedule ,  part i of the 1999 constitution of the federal republic of nigeria ,  1999.
nigeria and cameroon have disputed the possession of bakassi for some years ,  leading to considerable tension between the two countries . 
the verdict caused consternation in nigeria . 
however ,  nigeria never ratified the agreement ,  while cameroon regarded it as being in force . 
on 22 november 2007, the nigerian senate passed a resolution declaring that the withdrawal from the bakassi peninsula was illegal . 
two illuminated psalters ,  the queen mary psalter  -lrb-  british library ms .  royal 2b ,  vii  -rrb-  and the isabella psalter  -lrb-  state library ,  munich  -rrb-  ,  contain full bestiary cycles . 
a bestiary ,  or bestiarum vocabulum ,  is a compendium of beasts . 
the aberdeen bestiary is one of the best known of over 50 manuscript bestiaries surviving today . 
the song was the no . 
the song was written by then staff sgt . 
's included their version of the song on their album `` this is boston ,  not l . a . `` 
the song appears in the films `` more american graffiti '' and `` canadian bacon '' . 
 ''the ballad of the green berets '' is a patriotic song in the ballad style about the united states army special forces . 
the standard modern introduction is hilton . 
the style of dance is commonly known to modern scholars as the `` french noble style '' or `` belle danse ''  -lrb-  french ,  literally `` beautiful dance ''  -rrb-  ,  however it is often referred to casually as `` baroque dance '' in spite of the existence of other theatrical and social dance styles during the baroque era . 
the borzoi is an athletic and independent breed of dog . 
however ,  the borzoi club of america and the borzoi club uk both prefer `` borzoi '' as the form for both singular and plural forms . 
borzoi males frequently weigh more than  . 
like its native relative the hortaya borzaya ,  the borzoi is basically a very sound breed . 
borzois are large russian sighthounds that resemble some central asian breeds such as the afghan hound ,  saluki ,  and the kyrgyz taigan . 
the borzoi  -lrb-   ,  literally `` fast ''  -rrb-  ,  also called the russian wolfhound  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a breed of domestic dog  -lrb-  `` canis lupus familiaris ''  -rrb-  . 
exports of borzois to other countries were extremely rare during the soviet era . 
other russian sighthound breeds are  -lrb-  from the steppe  -rrb-  ,  called ; and  -lrb-  from the crimea  -rrb-  ,  called  . 
as with other very deep-chested breeds ,  gastric dilatation volvulus  -lrb-  also known as bloat  -rrb-  is the most common serious health problem in the borzoi . 
borzois adapt well to suburban life ,  provided they have a spacious yard and regular opportunities for free exercise . 
however ,  like any intelligent dog ,  borzois respond extremely well to the guidance ,  support ,  and clear communication of a benevolent human leadership . 
the basenji is a breed of hunting dog . 
europeans first described the type of dog the basenji breed derives from in 1895—in the congo . 
this trait also gives the basenji the nickname `` barkless dog '' . 
basenjis are also registered with the united kennel club . 
there is only one completed health survey of dog breeds ,  including the basenji ,  that was conducted by the uk kennel club in 2004.
basenjis share many unique traits with pariah dog types . 
according to the book `` the intelligence of dogs '' ,  they are the second least trainable dog . 
the `` brit milah '' is followed by a celebratory meal  -lrb-  `` seudat mitzvah ''  -rrb-  . 
a mohel is a jew trained in the practice of `` brit milah '' ,  the `` covenant of circumcision . `` 
it is customary for the brit to be held in a synagogue ,  but it can also be held at home or any other suitable location . 
if the child is born prematurely or has other serious medical problems ,  the brit milah will be postponed until the doctors and mohel deem the child strong enough . 
as found in genesis 17:1–14, `` brit milah '' is considered to be so important that should the eighth day fall on the sabbath ,  actions that would normally be forbidden because of the sanctity of the day are permitted in order to fulfill the requirement to circumcise . 
the brit milah  -lrb-   ,  ; ashkenazi pronunciation:  ,  `` covenant of circumcision ''; yiddish pronunciation: `` bris ''   -rrb-  is a jewish religious male circumcision ceremony performed by a mohel  -lrb-  `` circumciser ''  -rrb-  on the eighth day of the infant's life . 
a brit is traditionally performed in the morning ,  but it may be performed any time during daylight hours . 
the question we address is whether it also creates social benefits commensurate with these social costs . `` 
very often it is held that business is not bound by any ethics other than abiding by the law . 
statutes and regulations passed by legislative bodies and administrative boards set forth the “law . ” slavery once was legal in the us ,  but one certainly wouldn’t say enslaving another was an “ethical” act . 
“laws” are the written statutes ,  codes ,  and opinions of government organizations by which citizens ,  businesses ,  and persons present within a jurisdiction are expected to govern themselves or face legal sanction . 
the 'corporate persons' are legally entitled to the rights and liabilities due to citizens as persons . 
as mentioned ,  initiatives in sustainability encompass “green” topics ,  as well as social sustainability . 
in common parlance property rights involve a 'bundle of rights' including occupancy ,  use and enjoyment ,  and the right to sell ,  devise ,  give ,  or lease all or part of these rights . 
davis claims that common law theory generally favors the view that `` property is not essentially a 'right to a thing' ,  but rather a separable bundle of rights subsisting between persons which may vary according to the context and the object which is at stake '' . 
fifco has also led successfully led water-management initiatives . 
neoliberals hold that private property rights are a non-negotiable natural right . 
the claim that deregulation and the opening up of economies would reduce corruption was also contested . 
fundamentally ,  finance is a social science discipline . 
one attack on ipr is moral rather than utilitarian ,  claiming that inventions are mostly a collective ,  cumulative ,  path dependent ,  social creation and therefore ,  no one person or firm should be able to monopolize them even for a limited period . 
financial accounting helps the management to report and also ,  control the business performance . 
the rights paradigm tended to stabilize the distribution of property holdings on the presumption that title had been lawfully acquired . 
trade unions for example ,  may push employers to establish due process for workers ,  but may also cause job loss by demanding unsustainable compensation and work rules . 
finance ethics is overlooked for another reason—issues in finance are often addressed as matters of law rather than ethics . 
an increasing number of companies also require employees to attend seminars regarding business conduct ,  which often include discussion of the company's policies ,  specific case studies ,  and legal requirements . 
supply chain management: establishing requirements for not only internal operations but also first-tier suppliers as well as second-tier suppliers to help drive environmental and social expectations further down the supply chain . 
the philosophy of economics also deals with questions such as what ,  if any ,  are the social responsibilities of a business; business management theory; theories of individualism vs .  collectivism; free will among participants in the marketplace; the role of self interest; invisible hand theories; the requirements of social justice; and natural rights ,  especially property rights ,  in relation to the business enterprise . 
property does not exist in isolation ,  and so property rights too . 
in the us ,  ip other than copyrights is regulated by the united states patent and trademark office . 
though the liberal premises of law is necessary to protect individuals from being persecuted by government ,  it is not a sufficient mechanism to make firms morally accountable . 
these companies often advertise this and are growing in popularity among the younger generations . 
one of the greatest ways employees participate in the misuse of company's time and resources is by using the company computer for personal use . 
not everyone supports corporate policies that govern ethical conduct . 
in 1802 utilitarian jeremy bentham stated ,  `` property and law are born together and die together '' . 
interest in business ethics accelerated dramatically during the 1980s and 1990s ,  both within major corporations and within academia . 
the term 'business ethics' came into common use in the united states in the early 1970s . 
foreign countries often use dumping as a competitive threat ,  selling products at prices lower than their normal value . 
for example ,  most major corporations today promote their commitment to non-economic values under headings such as ethics codes and social responsibility charters . 
the company's policy is the 'umbrella' of ethics that play a major role in the personal development and decision-making processes that people make in respects to ethical behavior . 
in sharia law ,  followed by many muslims ,  banking specifically prohibits charging interest on loans . 
should a lawsuit occur ,  the company can claim that the problem would not have arisen if the employee had only followed the code properly . 
a common approach to remedying discrimination is affirmative action . 
for instance ,  john locke justified property rights saying that god had made `` the earth ,  and all inferior creatures ,  in common to all men '' . 
ethical issues often arise in business settings ,  whether through business transactions or forming new business relationships . 
the bsi group as a whole does not produce british standards ,  as standards work within the bsi is decentralized . 
the standards produced are titled british standard xxxx-p:yyyy where xxxx is the number of the standard ,  p is the number of the part of the standard  -lrb-  where the standard is split into multiple parts  -rrb-  and yyyy is the year in which the standard came into effect . 
british standards  -lrb-  bs  -rrb-  are the standards produced by the bsi group which is incorporated under a royal charter  -lrb-  and which is formally designated as the national standards body  -lrb-  nsb  -rrb-  for the uk  -rrb-  . 
five of these societies became joint stock banks  -lrb-  plc  -rrb-  ,  one merged with another and the other four were taken over by plcs  -lrb-  in two cases after the mutual had previously converted to a plc  -rrb-  . 
 -lrb-  tayler 2003 -rrb-
further ,  in australia ,  building societies also compete with retail banks and offer the full range of banking services to consumers . 
in the 1980s ,  changes to british banking laws allowed building societies to offer banking services equivalent to normal banks . 
managements promoting demutualisation also thereby met managerial objectives because the end of mutuality brought joint stock company  -lrb-  plc  -rrb-  style remuneration committee pay standards and share options . 
avro proposed that blue steel would evolve over time ,  subsequent versions increasing speed  -lrb-  to mach 4.5 -rrb- and range . 
over the target the engine would cut out and the missile would free-fall before detonating its warhead as an air burst . 
blue steel required up to seven hours of launch preparation ,  and was highly unreliable . 
the large girth of blue steel was determined by the implosion sphere diameter of green bamboo . 
the avro blue steel was a british air-launched ,  rocket-propelled nuclear armed standoff missile ,  built to arm the v bomber force . 
as of july 2007, all branch davidians had been released from prison . 
the branch davidians  -lrb-  also known as the branch  -rrb-  are a religious group that originated in 1955 from a schism among the shepherd's rod/davidians . 
branch davidians are most associated with the waco siege of 1993, which involved david koresh . 
like the branch davidians under koresh ,  this incarnation is waiting for the end of times . 
in the late 1980s ,  koresh and his followers abandoned many branch davidian teachings . 
the seventh-day adventist church issued warnings about the branch davidian views to its members on a regular basis . 
it is claimed that howell was never authorized to use the name `` branch davidians '' for his breakaway sect ,  and that the church of that name continues to represent that part of the branch church which did not follow him . 
branch davidians are considered a splinter group from that dissenting group  -lrb-  the davidians/shephard's rod  -rrb-  and came out from a schism among the davidians/shepherd's rod initiated by benjamin roden . 
one modern incarnation of the branch davidians exists under the leadership of charles pace ,  a follower of ben and lois roden ,  who was a member of the branch davidians since the mid-1970s . 
gate house is one of the four upper houses of the burwash hall residence . 
each upper house consists of three floors . 
gate house ,  with the rest of upper burwash ,  opened in 1913 and has held students every year since then except 1995, when it was renovated . 
gate house has three floors which house 28 students ,  as well as a don and the victoria college residence life co-ordinator . 
the only exception is the view from gate house's tower that looks down st .  mary's street . 
the gate house emblem is the phoenix ,  visible in the bottom-right corner of the victoria college insignia . 
benzodiazepines can be useful for short-term treatment of insomnia . 
older adults should not use benzodiazepines to treat insomnia unless other treatments have failed . 
chlordiazepoxide is the most commonly used benzodiazepine for alcohol detoxification ,  but diazepam may be used as an alternative . 
because of their effectiveness ,  tolerability ,  and rapid onset of anxiolytic action ,  benzodiazepines are frequently used for the treatment of anxiety associated with panic disorder . 
benzodiazepines are usually administered orally; however ,  very occasionally lorazepam or diazepam may be given intravenously for the treatment of panic attacks . 
benzodiazepines are sometimes used in the treatment of acute anxiety ,  as they bring about rapid and marked or moderate relief of symptoms in most individuals; however ,  they are not recommended beyond 2–4 weeks of use due to risks of tolerance and dependence and a lack of long-term effectiveness . 
the list of benzodiazepines approved for the treatment of insomnia is fairly similar among most countries ,  but which benzodiazepines are officially designated as first-line hypnotics prescribed for the treatment of insomnia varies between countries . 
however ,  in some cases ,  a prolonged treatment with benzodiazepines as the add-on to an antidepressant may be justified . 
bmi is used differently for children . 
bmi is proportional to the mass and inversely proportional to the square of the height . 
children with a bmi between the 85th and 95th percentile are considered to be overweight . 
the body mass index  -lrb-  bmi  -rrb-  or quetelet index is a value derived from the mass  -lrb-  weight  -rrb-  and height of an individual . 
the bmi is universally expressed in kg/m ,  resulting from mass in kilograms and height in metres . 
these ranges of bmi values are valid only as statistical categories . 
grotefend had deciphered ten of the 37 symbols of old persian by 1802, after realizing that unlike the semitic cuneiform scripts ,  old persian text is alphabetic and each word is separated by a vertical slanted symbol . 
with the persian text ,  and with about a third of the syllabary made available to him by the work of georg friedrich grotefend ,  rawlinson set to work on deciphering the text . 
after the fall of the persian empire's achaemenid dynasty and its successors ,  and the lapse of old persian cuneiform writing into disuse ,  the nature of the inscription was forgotten ,  and fanciful explanations became the norm . 
the old persian text was copied and deciphered before recovery and copying of the elamite and babylonian inscriptions had even been attempted ,  which proved to be a good deciphering strategy ,  since old persian script was easier to study due to its alphabetic nature and because the language it represents had naturally evolved via middle persian to the living modern persian language dialects ,  and was also related to the avestan language ,  used in the zoroastrian book the `` avesta '' . 
a legend began around mount behistun  -lrb-  bisotun  -rrb-  ,  as written about by the persian poet and writer ferdowsi in his `` shahnameh ''  -lrb-  `` book of kings ''  -rrb-   ,  about a man named farhad ,  who was a lover of king khosrow's wife ,  shirin . 
the translation of the old persian sections of the behistun inscription paved the way to the subsequent ability to decipher the elamite and babylonian parts of the text ,  which greatly promoted the development of modern assyriology . 
the behistun inscription  -lrb-  also bisotun ,  bistun or bisutun;  ,  old persian: bagastana ,  meaning `` the place of god ''  -rrb-  is a multilingual inscription and large rock relief on a cliff at mount behistun in the kermanshah province of iran ,  near the city of kermanshah in western iran ,  established by darius the great  -lrb-  550–486 bc  -rrb-  . 
