gold is unaffected by most acids . 
some free halogens react with gold . 
gold is similarly unaffected by most bases . 
gold is a good conductor of heat and electricity . 
most drugs based on gold are au -lrb-  i  -rrb-  derivatives . 
less commonly ,  it occurs in minerals as gold compounds ,  often with tellurium  -lrb-  gold tellurides  -rrb-  . 
a total of 186,700 tonnes of gold exists above ground ,   . 
gold has a density of 19.3 g/cm ,  almost identical to that of tungsten at 19.25 g/cm; as such ,  tungsten has been used in counterfeiting of gold bars ,  such as by plating a tungsten bar with gold ,  or taking an existing gold bar ,  drilling holes ,  and replacing the removed gold with tungsten rods . 
all of gold's radioisotopes with atomic masses above 197 decay by β decay . 
no other isomer or isotope of gold has three decay paths . 
strong acids dissolve gallium ,  forming gallium -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  salts such as  -lrb-  gallium sulfate  -rrb-  and  -lrb-  gallium nitrate  -rrb-  . 
it disproportionates at 800 °c back to gallium and  . 
gallium reacts with ammonia at 1050 °c to form gallium nitride ,  gan . 
gallium is predominantly used in electronics . 
gallium is also used in the production of artificial gadolinium gallium garnet for jewelry . 
gallium attacks most other metals by diffusing into the metal lattice . 
gallium is found primarily in the +3 oxidation state . 
the melting point of gallium is used as a temperature reference point . 
gallium has no known natural role in biology . 
germanium is a semiconductor . 
two oxides of germanium are known: germanium dioxide  -lrb-   ,  germania  -rrb-  and germanium monoxide ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 2007 35% of the demand was met by recycled germanium . 
germanium occurs in 5 natural isotopes:  ,   ,   ,   ,  and  . 
solar panels are a major use of germanium . 
elemental germanium oxidizes slowly to geo at 250 °c . 
germanium is not thought to be an essential element for any living organism . 
germanium is a chemical element with symbol ge and atomic number 32.
in the united states ,  germanium is not used for polymerization catalysts . 
elemental germanium is used as a semiconductor in transistors and various other electronic devices . 
under standard conditions ,  germanium is a brittle ,  silvery-white ,  semi-metallic element . 
germanium is not considered essential to the health of plants or animals . 
germanium's abundance in the earth's crust is approximately 1.6 ppm . 
germanium has been detected in some of the most distant stars and in the atmosphere of jupiter . 
because germanium and gallium arsenide have very similar lattice constants ,  germanium substrates can be used to make gallium arsenide solar cells . 
a tarnish-proof silver alloy trademarked argentium contains 1.2% germanium . 
germanium supplements ,  made from both organic and inorganic germanium ,  have been marketed as an alternative medicine capable of treating leukemia and lung cancer . 
some reactive intermediate compounds of germanium are poisonous  -lrb-  see precautions ,  below  -rrb-  . 
gadolinium combines with most elements to form gd -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  derivatives . 
gadolinium is a silvery-white malleable and ductile rare earth metal . 
gadolinium is a chemical element with symbol gd and atomic number 64.
gadolinium is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water and quite quickly with hot water to form gadolinium hydroxide:
unlike the other rare-earth elements ,  metallic gadolinium is relatively stable in dry air . 
the day of german unity  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the national day of germany ,  celebrated on 3 october as a public holiday . 
the day of german unity on 3 october has been the german national holiday since 1990, when the reunification was formally completed . 
in the year 1990, the `` day of german unity '' was celebrated twice ,  on this date and on october 3.
at the 1999 day of german unity celebration in wiesbaden the  -lrb-  compass confederation  -rrb-  was formalised . 
in east germany ,  the founding day in 1949 was celebrated on 7 october as day of the republic ,  until the 40th anniversary in 1989.
the day of german unity is celebrated each year with a ceremonial act and a citizens' festival  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  . 
emperor wilhelm i declined this: `` this was also the day of the first prussian coronation of the king ,  which should not fall into the shadow of a united german holiday . `` 
most of them merged with the greens in 1980.
in 2011, the greens were represented in the parliament of all german states ,  which is however not the case anymore  -lrb-  as of october 2018 -rrb- . 
in 1993 it renamed to alliance 90/the greens berlin after the merger with east berlin's greens and alliance 90.
alliance 90/the greens ,  often simply greens  -lrb-   or ``  '';   -rrb-  ,  is a green political party in germany that formed in 1993 from the merger of the german green party  -lrb-  founded in west germany in 1980 and merged with the east greens in 1990 -rrb- and alliance 90  -lrb-  founded during the revolution of 1989–1990 in east germany  -rrb-  . 
in 1984 it became the official hamburg branch of the greens . 
by 2016, the greens have joined 11 out of 16 state governments in a variety of coalitions . 
the green party was initially founded in west germany as `` die grünen ''  -lrb-  the greens  -rrb-  in january 1980.
in the 2017 federal elections the greens came sixth with 8.9% of the votes and 67 out of 709 seats in the bundestag . 
the greens were the target of attempts by the east german secret police to enlist the cooperation of members who were willing to align the party with the agenda of the german democratic republic . 
it was at this congress ,  that the greens lay their ideological foundations ,  proclaiming the famous four pillars of the green party:
for almost two years after the federal election in 2005, the greens were not part of any government at the state or federal level . 
furthermore ,  the greens support research on the drug and the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes . 
the hamburg state branch of the green party was called `` grün-alternative liste hamburg ''  -lrb-  gal; green-alternative list  -rrb-  from its foundation in 1982 until 2012.
in early 2005, the greens were the target of the german visa affair 2005, instigated in the media by the christian democratic union  -lrb-  cdu  -rrb-  . 
in june 2007, the greens in bremen entered into a coalition with the social democratic party  -lrb-  spd  -rrb-  following the 2007 bremen state election . 
after some success at state-level elections ,  the party won 27 seats with 5.7% of the vote in the bundestag ,  the lower house of the german parliament ,  in the 1983 federal election . 
below are charts of the results that alliance90/the greens have secured in each election to the federal bundestag . 
they also continue to support a bill for an anti-discrimination law  -lrb-    -rrb-  in the bundestag . 
the greens founded the first international chapter of a german political party in the u . s .  on 13 april 2008 at the goethe-institut in washington d . c .  its main goal is `` to provide a platform for politically active and green-oriented german citizens ,  in and beyond washington d . c .  ,  to discuss and actively participate in german green politics . 
gheorghe zamfir  -lrb-  ; born april 6, 1941 -rrb- is a romanian pan flute  -lrb-  nai  -rrb-  musician . 
von wright was of both finnish and 17th-century scottish ancestry . 
the other vein in von wright's writings is moralist and pessimist . 
harriet asks her old friend wimsey to investigate . 
the book was adapted as a three-part series for bbc television in 1987, starring edward petherbridge as wimsey and harriet walter as harriet . 
at the end of the book ,  harriet finally accepts wimsey's proposal of marriage . 
gaudy night  -lrb-  1935 -rrb- is a mystery novel by dorothy l .  sayers ,  the tenth featuring lord peter wimsey ,  and the third including harriet vane . 
in 2005 a dramatisation of the novel was released on cd by the bbc radio collection ,  with joanna david as harriet and ian carmichael as wimsey . 
susan haack has an essay on `` gaudy night '' as a philosophical novel . 
gamma  -lrb-  uppercase  ,  lowercase ; `` gámma ''  -rrb-  is the third letter of the greek alphabet . 
the greek letter gamma γ was derived from the phoenician letter for the /g/ phoneme  -lrb-   `` gīml ''  -rrb-  ,  and as such is cognate with hebrew `` gimel '' ג . 
in modern greek ,  this letter represents either a voiced velar fricative or a voiced palatal fricative . 
in the international phonetic alphabet the minuscule letter is used to represent a voiced velar fricative and the superscript modifier letter is used to represent velarization . 
a goitre may be classified either as nodular or diffuse . 
nodular goitres are either of one nodule  -lrb-  uninodular  -rrb-  or of multiple nodules  -lrb-  multinodular  -rrb-  . 
dna can be manipulated in the laboratory . 
the molecular basis for genes is deoxyribonucleic acid  -lrb-  dna  -rrb-  . 
although the structure of dna showed how inheritance works ,  it was still not known how dna influences the behavior of cells . 
this property is what gives dna its semi-conservative nature where one strand of new dna is from an original parent strand . 
because it can amplify from extremely small amounts of dna ,  pcr is also often used to detect the presence of specific dna sequences . 
genes are arranged linearly along long chains of dna base-pair sequences . 
during the process of dna replication ,  errors occasionally occur in the polymerization of the second strand . 
a single nucleotide difference within dna can cause a change in the amino acid sequence of a protein . 
although genes were known to exist on chromosomes ,  chromosomes are composed of both protein and dna ,  and scientists did not know which of the two is responsible for inheritance . 
the use of ligation enzymes allows dna fragments to be connected . 
dna sequencing ,  one of the most fundamental technologies developed to study genetics ,  allows researchers to determine the sequence of nucleotides in dna fragments . 
this process begins with the production of an rna molecule with a sequence matching the gene's dna sequence ,  a process called transcription . 
this structure of dna is the physical basis for inheritance: dna replication duplicates the genetic information by splitting the strands and using each strand as a template for synthesis of a new partner strand . 
the hershey–chase experiment in 1952 confirmed that dna  -lrb-  rather than protein  -rrb-  is the genetic material of the viruses that infect bacteria ,  providing further evidence that dna is the molecule responsible for inheritance . 
some dna sequences are transcribed into rna but are not translated into protein products—such rna molecules are called non-coding rna . 
within eukaryotes ,  there exist structural features of chromatin that influence the transcription of genes ,  often in the form of modifications to dna and chromatin that are stably inherited by daughter cells . 
dna can also be amplified using a procedure called the polymerase chain reaction  -lrb-  pcr  -rrb-  . 
this interaction between genes is called epistasis ,  with the second gene epistatic to the first . 
in april 2015, chinese researchers reported results of basic research to edit the dna of non-viable human embryos using crispr . 
in organisms that use chromosomal crossover to exchange dna and recombine genes ,  errors in alignment during meiosis can also cause mutations . 
often different genes can interact in a way that influences the same trait . 
dna normally exists as a double-stranded molecule ,  coiled into the shape of a double helix . 
dna fragments can be visualized through use of gel electrophoresis ,  which separates fragments according to their length . 
diploid organisms with two copies of the same allele of a given gene are called homozygous at that gene locus ,  while organisms with two different alleles of a given gene are called heterozygous . 
the genome of a given organism contains thousands of genes ,  but not all these genes need to be active at any given moment . 
james watson and francis crick determined the structure of dna in 1953, using the x-ray crystallography work of rosalind franklin and maurice wilkins that indicated dna has a helical structure  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  shaped like a corkscrew  -rrb-  . 
he is of greek and english origin . 
he devoted his spare time to writing novels and short stories . 
this was maupassant's first piece of short fiction set during the franco-prussian war ,  and was followed by short stories such as `` deux amis '' ,  `` mother savage '' ,  and `` mademoiselle fifi '' . 
maupassant is considered a father of the modern short story . 
his first published story ,  `` boule de suif ''  -lrb-  `` ball of suet '' ,  1880 -rrb- ,  is often considered his masterpiece . 
he wrote and played himself in a comedy in 1875  -lrb-  with the benediction of flaubert  -rrb-  ,  ``  '' . 
in 1880 he published what is considered his first masterpiece ,  `` boule de suif '' ,  which met with instant and tremendous success . 
after the separation ,  laure le poittevin kept her two sons . 
in 1881 he published his first volume of short stories under the title of `` la maison tellier ''; it reached its twelfth edition within two years . 
in 2009, hagi founded romanian club viitorul constanța . 
after the 1990 fifa world cup ,  hagi was signed by real madrid . 
after two years at `` barça '' ,  hagi signed for turkish club galatasaray . 
he was part of the romanian team until 2000.
hagi retired from professional football in 2001, age 36, in a game called `` gala hagi '' on 24 april . 
as a result ,  hagi won his second romania coach of the year award . 
after performing memorably during the 1994 world cup ,  hagi was signed by barcelona . 
hagi played two seasons with madrid ,  then was sold to brescia . 
when he retired in 2001, hagi remained one of the most beloved players in the turkish and romanian championships . 
hagi began the 1992–93 season with brescia ,  but after his first season ,  the club was relegated to serie b . 
england played just two games at the tournament ,  losing 1–0 to yugoslavia ,  and then beating the soviets 2–0 in the third-place play-off . 
banks also played in two of england's three games at the `` little world cup '' in brazil in the summer of 1964, a 1–1 draw with portugal and a 1–0 defeat to argentina . 
he was stoke's goalkeeper in the 1972 league cup win – the club's only major honour . 
brazil still won the game 1–0 – jairzinho guided a shot past banks in the second half . 
in the 1963 fa cup final banks and the rest of the team underperformed ,  and lost the game 3–1 to manchester united . 
city ended the 1963–64 season in 11th place ,  having been inconsistent all season . 
banks broke his nose at craven cottage on the opening day of the 1962–63 season ,  in a 2–1 defeat by fulham . 
england came close to qualifying ,  but lost 3–1 to west germany in the final round of qualifying . 
stoke began to compete for honours in the 1970–71 season ,  though despite impressive victories against the top two clubs – arsenal and leeds united – city ended the season in mid-table obscurity . 
facing arsenal at hillsborough in the semi-finals ,  they lost a two-goal lead to draw 2–2, and were then beaten 2–0 in the replay at villa park . 
he replaced john farmer as the club's number one ,  and kept goal in the last four games of the 1966–67 season ,  making his home debut at the victoria ground in a 3–1 win over his former club leicester . 
back at filbert street ,  goals from mike stringfellow ,  dave gibson and howard riley won the game for leicester 3–2 and settled the tie at 4–3.
england's opponents in the final were west germany . 
a 2–0 win over france then took england through the group stage without banks conceding a goal . 
he joined chesterfield in march 1953, and played for their youth team in the 1956 fa youth cup final . 
there they were beaten 4–3 on aggregate by manchester united's famous `` busby babes '' – a team that included both wilf mcguinness and bobby charlton . 
banks started the 1964–65 season on wages of £40 a week ,  and the club only agreed to pay £60 a week in december . 
a ganglion is a nerve cell cluster or a group of nerve cell bodies located in the autonomic nervous system and sensory system . 
leibniz never married . 
as an adult ,  leibniz often introduced himself as `` gottfried von leibniz '' . 
leibniz subsequently left leipzig . 
thus leibniz went to paris in 1672.
leibniz's proof of god can be summarized in the `` théodicée '' . 
in philosophy ,  leibniz is most noted for his optimism ,  i . e . 
leibniz concluded that there must be the ``  ''monas monadum '' '' or god . 
there is no complete gathering of the writings of leibniz translated into english . 
the population of hanover was only about 10,000, and its provinciality eventually grated on leibniz . 
leibniz remained committed to trinitarian christianity throughout his life . 
historians of mathematics writing since 1900 or so have tended to acquit leibniz ,  pointing to important differences between leibniz's and newton's versions of calculus . 
gottfried leibniz was born on 1 july 1646, toward the end of the thirty years' war ,  in leipzig ,  saxony ,  to friedrich leibniz and catharina schmuck . 
leibniz's first position was as a salaried secretary to an alchemical society in nuremberg . 
unlike descartes and spinoza ,  leibniz had a thorough university education in philosophy . 
leibniz variously invoked one or another of seven fundamental philosophical principles:
the 5th version of `` gamma world '' was a supplement for the science-fiction game `` alternity '' . 
this version of `` gamma world '' is unique as the only one not to have accessories or supplements . 
tsr also produced four packs of `` gamma world '' miniatures . 
ronald pehr reviewed `` gamma world '' in `` the space gamer '' no . 
the post-apocalyptic inhabitants of earth now refer to their planet as `` gamma world ''  -lrb-  or `` gamma terra '' in later editions  -rrb-  . 
this allows gamma world and d&d characters to potentially cross over genres . 
several critics and fans considered tweet's `` omega world '' to be a superior d20 system treatment of the `` gamma world '' concept . 
sword & sorcery studios also published three paperback supplements for the d20 version of `` gamma world '':
in september 2002, `` omega world '' ,  a `` d20 system '' mini-game based on `` gamma world '' and written by jonathan tweet ,  was published in `` dungeon '' 94/ ''polyhedron '' 153.
gamma world is a chaotic ,  dangerous environment that little resembles pre-apocalyptic earth . 
despite these differences ,  it is possible to use characters and monsters from a `` d&d '' game in `` gamma world '' and vice versa . 
the game mechanics used for resolving character actions ,  on the other hand ,  greatly varied between `` gamma world '' editions . 
tsr dropped the 3rd edition of `` gamma world '' from its product line before the multi-module storyline could be completed . 
in this manner ,  while all `` books on magic '' could be thought of as grimoires ,  not all `` magical books '' should be thought of as grimoires . 
in christianised europe ,  the church divided books of magic into two kinds: those that dealt with `` natural magic '' and those that dealt in `` demonic magic '' . 
the ancient greeks and romans believed that books on magic were invented by the persians . 
a later book also claiming to have been written by solomon was originally written in greek during the 15th century ,  where it was known as the `` magical treatise of solomon '' or the `` little key of the whole art of hygromancy ,  found by several craftsmen and by the holy prophet solomon '' . 
when christianity became the dominant faith of the roman empire ,  the early church frowned upon the propagation of books on magic ,  connecting it with paganism ,  and burned books of magic . 
israelite king solomon was a biblical figure associated with magic and sorcery in the ancient world . 
in germany ,  with the increased interest in folklore during the 19th century ,  many historians took an interest in magic and in grimoires . 
the earliest known written magical incantations come from ancient mesopotamia  -lrb-  modern iraq  -rrb-  ,  where they have been found inscribed on cuneiform clay tablets that archaeologists excavated from the city of uruk and dated to between the 5th and 4th centuries bc . 
around this time the legendary figure of hermes trismegistus developed as a conflation of the egyptian god thoth and the greek hermes; this figure was associated with writing and magic and ,  therefore ,  of books on magic . 
in possible connection with the `` book of enoch '' ,  the idea of enoch and his great-grandson noah having some involvement with books of magic given to them by angels continued through to the medieval period . 
in the 19th century ,  with the increasing interest in occultism amongst the british following the publication of francis barrett's `` the magus ''  -lrb-  1801 -rrb- ,  the term entered the english language in reference to books of magic . 
a grimoire  -lrb-     -rrb-   -lrb-  also known as a “book of spells”  -rrb-  is a textbook of magic ,  typically including instructions on how to create magical objects like talismans and amulets ,  how to perform magical spells ,  charms and divination ,  and how to summon or invoke supernatural entities such as angels ,  spirits ,  deities and demons . 
in the late 19th century ,  several of these texts  -lrb-  including `` the book of abramelin '' and the `` key of solomon ''  -rrb-  were reclaimed by para-masonic magical organisations ,  such as the hermetic order of the golden dawn and the ordo templi orientis . 
the ancient jewish people were often viewed as being knowledgeable in magic ,  which ,  according to legend ,  they had learned from moses ,  who had learned it in egypt . 
in the 16th century ,  this work had been translated into latin and italian ,  being renamed the `` clavicula salomonis '' ,  or the `` key of solomon '' . 
oscar méténier was the grand guignol's founder and original director . 
max maurey served as director from 1898 to 1914.
frequently ,  the “special effects” would be too realistic and often an audience member would faint or vomit during performances . 
le théâtre du grand-guignol  -lrb-  : `` the theatre of the great puppet ''  -rrb-  – known as the grand guignol – was a theatre in the pigalle area of paris  -lrb-  at 20 bis ,    -rrb-  . 
according to the bills of mortality ,  there were in total 68,596 deaths in london from the plague in 1665.
by july 1665, plague was rampant in the city of london . 
londoners had a greater sense of community after they had overcome the great adversities of 1665 and 1666.
although concentrated in london ,  the outbreak affected other areas of the country as well . 
as a proportion of the population who died ,  the london death toll was less severe than in a number of other towns . 
in the last week of july ,  the london bill of mortality showed 3,014 deaths ,  of which 2,020 had died from the plague . 
the great plague killed an estimated 100,000 people—almost a quarter of london's population—in 18 months . 
rebuilding took over ten years and was supervised by robert hooke as surveyor of london . 
records state that plague deaths in london and the suburbs crept up over the summer from 2,000 people per week to over 7,000 per week in september . 
by the end of april ,  only four plague deaths had been recorded ,  two in the parish of st .  giles ,  but total deaths per week had risen from around 290 to 398.
administration of the city of london was organised by the lord mayor ,  aldermen and common councillors ,  but not all of the inhabited area generally comprising london was legally part of the city . 
as in other european cities of the period ,  the plague was endemic in 17th century london . 
there were 30,000 deaths due to the plague in 1603, 35,000 in 1625, and 10,000 in 1636, as well as smaller numbers in other years . 
in fact ,  most of the later cases of plague were found in the suburbs ,  and it was the city of london itself that was destroyed by the fire . 
tobacco was thought to be a prophylactic and it was later said that no london tobacconist had died from the plague during the epidemic . 
good user interface design relates to users more ,  and to system architecture less . 
most modern general-purpose guis are derived from this system . 
a gui may be designed for the requirements of a vertical market as application-specific graphical user interfaces . 
guis were a hot topic in the early 1980s . 
designing programs this way also allows users to run the program in a shell script . 
there are also actions performed by programs that affect the gui . 
most modern operating systems provide both a gui and some level of a cli ,  although the guis usually receive more attention . 
the graphical user interface  -lrb-  gui   -rrb-  is a form of user interface that allows users to interact with electronic devices through graphical icons and visual indicators such as secondary notation ,  instead of text-based user interfaces ,  typed command labels or text navigation . 
interfaces for the x window system have also implemented advanced three-dimensional user interfaces through compositing window managers such as beryl ,  compiz and kwin using the aiglx or xgl architectures ,  allowing use of opengl to animate user interactions with the desktop . 
the gui is usually wimp-based ,  although occasionally other metaphors surface ,  such as those used in microsoft bob ,  3dwm ,  or file system visualizer . 
thus most current guis have largely common idioms . 
newer automobiles use guis in their navigation systems and multimedia centers ,  or navigation multimedia center combinations . 
a gui uses a combination of technologies and devices to provide a platform that users can interact with ,  for the tasks of gathering and producing information . 
as of 2011, some touchscreen-based operating systems such as apple's ios  -lrb-  iphone  -rrb-  and android use the class of guis named post-wimp . 
the haploid pollen then produces sperm by mitosis and releases them for fertilization . 
in humans ,  a normal ovum can carry only an x chromosome  -lrb-  of the x and y chromosomes  -rrb-  ,  whereas a sperm may carry either an x or a y  -lrb-  a non-normal ovum can end up carrying two or no x chromosomes ,  as a result of an irregularity at either of the two stages of meiosis ,  while a non-normal sperm cell can end up carrying either no sex-defining chromosomes ,  an xy pair ,  or xx pair as a result of the forementioned reason  -rrb- ; ergo the male sperm can play a role in determining the sex of any resulting zygote ,  if the zygote has two x chromosomes it may develop into a female ,  if it has an x and a y chromosome ,  it may develop into a male . 
in contrast to a gamete ,  the diploid somatic cells of an individual contain one copy of the chromosome set from the sperm and one copy of the chromosome set from the egg cell; that is ,  the cells of the offspring have genes expressing characteristics of both the `` father '' and the `` mother '' . 
in 1970, martin earned a b . s . 
in 1991, martin briefly returned to writing novels . 
martin is a fan of the new york jets and the new york mets . 
martin began selling science fiction short stories professionally in 1970, at age 21.
george raymond martin  -lrb-  he adopted the confirmation name richard at 13 years old  -rrb-  was born on september 20, 1948, in bayonne ,  new jersey ,  the son of longshoreman raymond collins martin and his wife margaret brady martin . 
the family first lived in a house on broadway ,  belonging to martin's great-grandmother . 
in 1987, martin published a collection of short horror stories in `` portraits of his children '' . 
martin is known for his regular attendance at science fiction conventions and comics conventions ,  and his accessibility to fans . 
from 1976 to 1978, martin was an english and journalism instructor at clarke ,  and he became writer in residence at the college from 1978 to 1979.
according to casey bloys ,  martin is co-writing two of the four announced scripts . 
george raymond richard martin  -lrb-  born george raymond martin; september 20, 1948 -rrb- ,  also known as grrm ,  is an american novelist and short story writer in the fantasy ,  horror ,  and science fiction genres ,  screenwriter ,  and television producer . 
martin attended mary jane donohoe school and later marist high school . 
martin actively contributes to his blog ,  `` not a blog ''; in april 2018 he moved his blog from livejournal to his own website . 
in 2005, lev grossman of `` time '' called martin `` the american tolkien '' ,  and in 2011, he was included on the annual `` time '' 100 list of the most influential people in the world . 
in 1982, martin published a vampire novel titled `` fevre dream '' set in the 19th century on the mississippi river . 
growing up ,  martin avoided the draft to the vietnam war by being a conscientious objector and did two years of alternative service . 
in the mid-1970s ,  martin met english professor george guthridge from dubuque ,  iowa ,  at a science fiction convention in milwaukee . 
martin their author of the year 2011.
martin has written several prequel novellas . 
martin set the `` a song of ice and fire '' story in a secondary world inspired by tolkien's writing . 
martin did not intend to separate the characters geographically again . 
martin was several months late turning in the third book ,  `` a storm of swords '' . 
after `` a game of thrones '' ,  `` a clash of kings '' ,  and `` a storm of swords '' ,  martin originally intended to write three more books . 
martin does not consider `` a song of ice and fire '' a `` series '' but a single story published in several volumes . 
martin believes the last two volumes of the series will be big books of 1500 manuscript pages each . 
their founders and other longtime members are among martin's good friends . 
george r .  r .  martin was already a successful fantasy and sci-fi author and tv writer before writing his `` a song of ice and fire '' book series . 
the series gained martin's old writings new attention ,  and martin's american publisher bantam spectra was to reprint his out-of-print solo novels . 
a song of ice and fire is a series of epic fantasy novels by the american novelist and screenwriter george r .  r .  martin . 
in april 2018, martin announced in a blog post that `` the winds of winter '' would not be published in 2018.
 ''fire & blood '' is martin's complete history of house targaryen ,  to be released in two volumes . 
martin said in march 2012 that the final two novels will take readers farther north than any of the previous books ,  and that the others will appear in the book . 
martin does not intend to publish his private notes after the series is finished . 
martin is firm about ending the series with the seventh novel `` until i decide not to be firm '' . 
 ''forbes '' estimated that martin was the 12th highest-earning author worldwide in 2011 at $15 million . 
during the guadalajara international book fair in mexico in early december 2016, martin offered the following hint as to the tone of this book:
setting out to write something on an epic scale ,  martin projected to write three books of 800 manuscript pages in the very early stages of the series . 
martin offered the following hint as to how the series would conclude during a q&a at the guadalajara international book fair . 
after the success of `` the lord of the rings '' films ,  martin received his first inquiries to the rights of the `` a song of ice and fire '' series from various producers and filmmakers . 
being already late with the book ,  martin had not even started writing all characters' stories and also objected to ending the first book without any resolution for its many viewpoint characters as in previous books . 
in 2001, martin was still optimistic that the fourth installment might be released in the last quarter of 2002.
when martin was between hollywood projects in the summer of 1991, he started writing a new science fiction novel called `` avalon '' . 
these expanded storylines and the resulting story interactions complicated the plot for martin . 
regarding `` a song of ice and fire '' as his magnum opus ,  martin is certain never to write anything on this scale again and would only return to this fictional universe in the context of stand-alone novels . 
 ''science fiction weekly '' stated in 2000 that `` few would dispute that martin's most monumental achievement to date has been the groundbreaking `` a song of ice and fire '' historical fantasy series '' ,  for which reviews have been `` orders of magnitude better '' than for his previous works ,  as martin described to `` the new yorker '' . 
on the seaward side ,  there is a drop below the wall into the sea . 
the wall is a huge structure of stone ,  ice and magic on the northern border of the seven kingdoms . 
the children of the forest and the first men jointly repelled the others and then built a massive wall barring passage from the far north . 
this won them the enmity of most of the seven kingdoms ,  especially in the riverlands and north . 
the valley of thenn is one such location beyond the wall ,  and north of that is the lands of always winter ,  where the others come from . 
illegitimate children born in the iron islands are given the surname pyke . 
the stormlands are the westerosi areas between king's landing and the sea of dorne . 
 ''a clash of kings '' takes the story to the lands beyond the wall ,  although the first five books do not explore `` what lies really north  .  .  .  but we will in the last two books '' . 
aegon's progeny reigned as kings of the seven kingdoms for centuries . 
illegitimate children born in the vale are given the surname stone . 
the area is known in the books as slaver's bay . 
the seven kingdoms were constantly at war with one another ,  and no kingdom remained dominant for long . 
dorne is bordered by the sea of dorne to the north ,  the islands known as the stepstones to the east ,  and stretches from the high mountains of the dornish marches ,  the red mountains ,  separating dorne from the remainder of the seven kingdoms by land . 
the north consists of the northern half of the seven kingdoms and is ruled by house stark from their castle at winterfell . 
the fictional world in which the `` a song of ice and fire '' novels by george r .  r .  martin take place is divided into several continents ,  known collectively as the known world . 
king's landing is the royal capital of westeros and the seven kingdoms . 
old wyk is the smallest and holiest island in the iron islands . 
illegitimate children born of a noble parent in the north are given the surname snow . 
the westerlands are the westerosi lands to the west of the riverlands and north of the reach . 
 ''a game of thrones '' ,  the first installment of the `` a song of ice and fire '' series ,  has two maps of westeros . 
during the first season ,  the hbo team used places that they could decorate with artificial snow for the north of the wall ,  but a bigger landscape was chosen for season 2.
oldtown is one of the largest cities in westeros and is by far the oldest ,  built by the first men before the andal invasion . 
the stench of the city's waste can be smelled far beyond its walls . 
daylight enters down through high narrow arched windows along the eastern wall ,  and there are some fifty high iron sconces where torches may be lit . 
illegitimate children born in the reach are given the surname flowers . 
illegitimate children born in the stormlands are given the surname storm . 
storm's end is the seat of house baratheon and ,  before them ,  the ancestral seat of the storm kings extending back many thousands of years . 
across the narrow sea on the western side of essos lie the nine free cities ,  independent city-states that are mostly on islands or along the coast . 
the continent is home to the seven kingdoms and lands beyond the great wall ,  which makes up a large chunk of westeros ,  being roughly the size of canada ,  with most of it largely unmapped and unexplored . 
to the south ,  across the summer sea ,  lies the uncharted jungle continent of sothoryos . 
george r .  r .  martin set the `` ice and fire '' story in an alternative world of earth ,  a `` secondary world '' ,  such as j .  r .  r .  tolkien pioneered with middle-earth . 
the red keep interior are filmed at belfast's studio the paint hall . 
those gods later became known in westeros as the old gods . 
it is where kingsmoots are held ,  and where the grey king slew nagga ,  a sea dragon ,  and made a court of his bones . 
grandmaster  -lrb-  gm  -rrb-  is a title awarded to chess players by the world chess organization fide . 
these players were:
the higher the tournament category ,  the stronger the tournament . 
the modern system for awarding fide titles evolved from the `` dorazil '' proposals ,  presented to the 1970 siegen chess olympiad fide congress . 
current regulations can be found in the fide handbook . 
the categories of tournaments are: since fide titles are for life ,  a gm or im does not count for the purposes of this requirement if he had not had a gm or im result in the five years prior to the tournament . 
the `` fédération internationale des échecs ''  -lrb-  fide ,  or world chess federation  -rrb-  was formed in paris in 1924, but at that time did not award formal titles . 
in addition ,  no more than 50 percent plus one of the players can be from the same country for tournaments of 10 to 12 players ,  or no more than 50 percent plus two for larger tournaments . 
from 1977 until 2003, fide awarded honorary grandmaster titles to 31 players based on their past performances or other contributions to chess . 
these players were described as grandmasters for the purposes of the tournament . 
in hamburg he tried with others to set up the german national theatre . 
the one of the neuberin  -rrb-  . 
it was here that his relationship with karoline neuber ,  a famous german actress ,  began . 
in 1776 he married eva könig ,  who was then a widow ,  in jork  -lrb-  near hamburg  -rrb-  . 
in 1765 lessing returned to berlin ,  leaving in 1767 to work for three years at the hamburg national theatre . 
it was during this time that he wrote his famous  . 
he is widely considered by theatre historians to be the first dramaturg in his role at abel seyler's hamburg national theatre . 
the idea of freedom  -lrb-  for the theatre against the dominance of its french model; for religion from the church's dogma  -rrb-  is his central theme throughout his life . 
slope stability is the potential of soil covered slopes to withstand and undergo movement . 
for `` reinforced-soil gravity walls '' ,  the soil reinforcement is placed in horizontal layers throughout the height of the wall . 
gravity walls usually must be a minimum of 30 to 40 percent as deep  -lrb-  thick  -rrb-  as the height of the wall ,  and may have to be larger if there is a slope or surcharge on the wall . 
tie-backs are steel tendons drilled into the face of the wall which extend beyond the soil which is applying pressure to the wall ,  to provide additional lateral resistance to the wall . 
basements are a form of cantilever walls ,  but the forces on the basement walls are greater than on conventional walls because the basement wall is not free to move . 
cantilever walls resist lateral pressures by friction at the base of the wall and/or `` passive earth pressure '' ,  the tendency of the soil to resist lateral movement . 
gravity walls depend on the size and weight of the wall mass to resist pressures from behind . 
slab-on-grade foundations must be designed to allow for potential ground movement due to changing soil conditions . 
prior to the introduction of modern reinforced-soil gravity walls ,  cantilevered walls were the most common type of taller retaining wall . 
this type of wall uses much less material than a traditional gravity wall . 
critical state soil mechanics is the basis for many contemporary advanced constitutive models describing the behavior of soil . 
a rudimentary soil classification system was also developed based on a material's unit weight ,  which is no longer considered a good indication of soil type . 
ground improvement is a technique that improves the engineering properties of the treated soil mass . 
in areas of shallow bedrock ,  most foundations may bear directly on bedrock; in other areas ,  the soil may provide sufficient strength for the support of structures . 
the voids of a soil ,  the spaces in between mineral particles ,  contain the water and air . 
a retaining wall is a structure that holds back earth . 
stability analysis is needed for the design of engineered slopes and for estimating the risk of slope failure in natural or designed slopes . 
today ,  taller retaining walls are increasingly built as composite gravity walls such as: geosynthetic or steel-reinforced backfill soil with precast facing; gabions  -lrb-  stacked steel wire baskets filled with rocks  -rrb-  ,  crib walls  -lrb-  cells built up log cabin style from precast concrete or timber and filled with soil or free draining gravel  -rrb-  or soil-nailed walls  -lrb-  soil reinforced in place with steel and concrete rods  -rrb-  . 
atterberg limits tests ,  water content measurements ,  and grain size analysis ,  for example ,  may be performed on disturbed samples obtained from thick walled soil samplers . 
the primary geotechnical concern in design and installation of retaining walls is that the weight of the retained material is creates lateral earth pressure behind the wall ,  which can cause the wall to deform or fail . 
the 1870s were a difficult time for flaubert . 
flaubert never married and never had children . 
in 1850, after returning from egypt ,  flaubert began work on `` madame bovary '' . 
gustave flaubert  -lrb-  ; 12 december 1821 – 8 may 1880 -rrb- was a french novelist . 
the greatest literary influence upon kafka was flaubert's . 
in 1858, flaubert travelled to carthage to gather material for his next novel ,  `` salammbô '' . 
walter pater famously called flaubert the `` martyr of style . `` 
from 1846 to 1854, flaubert had a relationship with the poet louise colet; his letters to her have survived . 
in september 1849, flaubert completed the first version of a novel ,  `` the temptation of saint anthony . `` 
the novel was completed in 1862 after four years of work . 
chaitin is also the originator of using graph coloring to do register allocation in compiling ,  a process known as chaitin's algorithm . 
chaitin's early work on algorithmic information theory followed after the work of solomonoff ,  kolmogorov ,  and martin-löf . 
the logician torkel franzén criticized chaitin’s interpretation of gödel's incompleteness theorem and the alleged explanation for it that chaitin’s work represents . 
gregory john chaitin  -lrb-   ; born 25 june 1947 -rrb- is an argentine-american mathematician and computer scientist . 
bregović has described himself as yugonostalgic . 
goran played violin in a music school . 
goran bregović  -lrb-   ,   ,  born 22 march 1950 -rrb- is a recording artist from bosnia and herzegovina . 
goran ,  their first child ,  was born in 1950 in sarajevo . 
in the same year ,  bregović recorded an album called `` kayah i bregović ''  -lrb-  kayah and bregović  -rrb-  with popular polish singer kayah which sold over 700,000 copies in poland  -lrb-  seven times platinum record  -rrb-  . 
the next year's golden palm award  went to `` underground '' ,  for which goran bregović composed the music . 
at the time bijelo dugme was falling apart ,  goran entered the world of film music . 
on 12 june 2008, bregović injured his spine ,  falling from a tree . 
upon entering high school ,  teenage bregović joined the school band izohipse where he began on bass guitar . 
in 2005, bregović took part in three large farewell concerts of bijelo dugme . 
a number of works created by bregović can be heard on the soundtrack to the 2006 film  ,  most notably `` đurđevdan . `` 
from the 9th week of pregnancy  -lrb-  11th week of gestational age  -rrb-  ,  the embryo is called a fetus . 
ovoviviparous animals develop within eggs that remain within the mother's body up until they hatch or are about to hatch . 
this is approximately the duration since the woman's last menstrual period  -lrb-  lmp  -rrb-  began . 
the time interval of a gestation is called the `` gestation period '' . 
a good solution to this is the gamma function . 
in fact the gamma function corresponds to the mellin transform of the negative exponential function:
this integral function is extended by analytic continuation to all complex numbers except the non-positive integers  -lrb-  where the function has simple poles  -rrb-  ,  yielding the meromorphic function we call the gamma function . 
the gamma function can be seen as a solution to the following interpolation problem:
beginning in 1909, braque began to work closely with pablo picasso who had been developing a similar proto-cubist style of painting . 
in may 1907, he successfully exhibited works of the fauve style in the salon des indépendants . 
although braque began his career painting landscapes ,  during 1908 he ,  alongside picasso ,  discovered the advantages of painting still lifes instead . 
the cubist style spread quickly throughout paris and then europe . 
during the period between the wars ,  braque exhibited a freer style of cubism ,  intensifying his color use and a looser rendering of objects . 
braque's earliest works were impressionistic ,  but after seeing the work exhibited by the artistic group known as the `` fauves ''  -lrb-  beasts  -rrb-  in 1905, he adopted a fauvist style . 
the term 'cubism' ,  first pronounced in 1911 with reference to artists exhibiting at the salon des indépendants ,  quickly gained wide use but picasso and braque did not adopt it initially . 
he first came into wide public acclaim with the release of `` notre prison est un royaume ''  -lrb-  ``  ''our prison is a kingdom '' ''  -rrb-  in 1948, and `` il est minuit ,  docteur schweitzer ''  -lrb-  ``  ''it is midnight ,  doctor schweitzer '' ''  -rrb-  in 1950.
gcc was written primarily in c except for parts of the ada front end . 
none of the pastel compiler code ended up in gcc ,  though stallman did use the c front end he had written . 
a subset ,  called `` gimple '' ,  is targeted by all the front ends of gcc . 
in august 2012, the gcc steering committee announced that gcc now uses c++ as its implementation language . 
in may 2010, the gcc steering committee decided to allow use of a c++ compiler to compile gcc . 
when it was first released in 1987, gcc 1.0 was named the gnu c compiler since it only handled the c programming language . 
this means that to build gcc from sources ,  a c++ compiler is required that understands iso/iec c++03 standard . 
in particular ,  this was decided so that gcc's developers could use the destructors and generics features of c++ . 
with the release of gcc 2.95 in july 1999 the two projects were once again united . 
the meaning of a tree was somewhat different for different language front ends ,  and front ends could provide their own tree codes . 
it also provides experimental support for c++17 and later . 
versions are also available for microsoft windows and other operating systems; gcc can compile code for android and ios . 
galen saw himself as both a physician and a philosopher ,  as he wrote in his treatise entitled `` that the best physician is also a philosopher '' . 
aelius galenus or claudius galenus  -lrb-  ; september 129 ad – /  -rrb-  ,  often anglicized as galen and better known as galen of pergamon  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a greek physician ,  surgeon and philosopher in the roman empire . 
galen's understanding of anatomy and medicine was principally influenced by the then-current theory of humorism  -lrb-  also known as the four humors – black bile ,  yellow bile ,  blood ,  and phlegm  -rrb-  ,  as advanced by ancient greek physicians such as hippocrates . 
glossolalia or speaking in tongues is a phenomenon in which people speak in languages unknown to them . 
frederic farrar first used the word `` glossolalia '' in 1879.
practitioners of glossolalia may disagree with linguistic researchers and claim that they are speaking human languages  -lrb-  xenoglossia  -rrb-  . 
samarin found that the resemblance to human language was merely on the surface and so concluded that glossolalia is `` only a facade of language '' . 
as part of his attack on early christianity ,  the greek philosopher celsus includes an account of christian glossolalia . 
samarin found that glossolalic speech does resemble human language in some respects . 
gustav kirchhoff was born in königsberg ,  prussia ,  the son of friedrich kirchhoff ,  a lawyer ,  and johanna henriette wittke . 
kirchhoff did not know about the existence of energy levels in atoms . 
in 1875 kirchhoff accepted the first chair specifically dedicated to theoretical physics at berlin . 
kirchhoff's first law is that the algebraic sum of currents in a network of conductors meeting at a point  -lrb-  or node  -rrb-  is zero . 
chesterton was a large man ,  standing and weighing around  . 
chesterton and shaw were famous friends and enjoyed their arguments and discussions . 
chesterton was born in campden hill in kensington ,  london ,  the son of marie louise ,  née grosjean ,  and edward chesterton . 
early on chesterton showed a great interest in and talent for art . 
chesterton faced accusations of anti-semitism during his lifetime ,  as well as posthumously . 
in 1931, the bbc invited chesterton to give a series of radio talks . 
chesterton's writings consistently displayed wit and a sense of humour . 
chesterton is well known for his fictional priest-detective father brown ,  and for his reasoned apologetics . 
chesterton married frances blogg in 1901; the marriage lasted the rest of his life . 
chesterton is often associated with his close friend ,  the poet and essayist hilaire belloc . 
the quotation is from chesterton's 1929 book ,  `` the thing: why i am a catholic '' ,  in the chapter ,  `` the drift from domesticity '':
in september 1895 chesterton began working for the london publisher redway ,  where he remained for just over a year . 
chesterton's style and thinking were all his own ,  however ,  and his conclusions were often opposed to those of oscar wilde and george bernard shaw . 
 ''g .  k . 's weekly '' ,  which occupied much of chesterton's energy in the last 15 years of his life ,  was the successor to belloc's `` new witness '' ,  taken over from cecil chesterton ,  gilbert's brother ,  who died in world war i . 
he not only is not ,  but never was ,  of the same race . `` 
chesterton's estate was probated at £28,389, approximately equivalent in 2012 terms to £1.3 million . 
<poem>god save great george our king god save our noble king ,  god save the king ! 
in northern ireland ,  `` god save the queen '' is still used as the official anthem . 
 ''god save the queen ''  -lrb-  alternatively `` god save the king '' ,  depending on the sex of the reigning monarch  -rrb-  is the national or royal anthem in a number of commonwealth realms ,  their territories ,  and the british crown dependencies . 
 ''god save the queen '' is the national anthem of the united kingdom and one of two national anthems used by new zealand since 1977, as well as for several of the uk's territories that have their own additional local anthem . 
the phrase `` god save the king '' is much older than the song ,  appearing ,  for instance ,  several times in the king james bible . 
an amendment  -lrb-  edm 1319a3 -rrb- was proposed by evan harris that the song `` should have a bit more oomph than `` god save the queen '' and should also not involve god . `` 
beyond its first verse ,  which is consistent ,  `` god save the queen/king '' has many historic and extant versions . 
england has no official national anthem of its own; `` god save the queen '' is treated as the english national anthem when england is represented at sporting events  -lrb-  though there are some exceptions to this rule ,  such as cricket where `` jerusalem '' is used  -rrb-  . 
since 2003, `` god save the queen '' ,  considered an all inclusive anthem for great britain and northern ireland ,  as well as other countries within the commonwealth ,  has been dropped from the commonwealth games . 
send him victorious happy and glorious long to reign over us god save the king ! </poem>
there is no definitive version of the lyrics . 
in 1745, `` the gentleman's magazine '' published `` god save our lord the king: a new song set for two voices '' ,  describing it `` as sung at both playhouses ''  -lrb-  the theatres royal at drury lane and covent garden  -rrb-  . 
william hickson's alternative  -lrb-  1836 -rrb- version includes the following verses ,  of which the first ,  third ,  and fourth have some currency as they are appended to the national anthem in the english hymnal . 
the first three lines  -lrb-  six bars of music  -rrb-  are soft ,  ending with a short `` crescendo '' into `` send her victorious '' ,  and then is another `` crescendo '' at `` over us: '' into the final words `` god save the queen '' . 
some roman reenactors attempt to recreate roman gladiator troupes . 
in late republican `` munera '' ,  between 10 and 13 matches could have been fought on one day; this assumes one match at a time in the course of an afternoon . 
the punic wars of the late 3rd century bc – in particular the near-catastrophic defeat of roman arms at cannae – had long-lasting effects on the republic ,  its citizen armies ,  and the development of the gladiatorial `` munera '' . 
roman writing as a whole demonstrates a deep ambivalence towards the `` gladiatoria munera '' . 
ten years later ,  he banned the gladiator `` munera '':
the earliest known roman amphitheatre was built at pompeii by sullan colonists ,  around 70 bc . 
one gladiator was even granted `` citizenship '' to several greek cities of the eastern roman world . 
the contract between `` editor '' and his `` lanista '' could include compensation for unexpected deaths; this could be `` some fifty times higher than the lease price '' of the gladiator . 
the gladiators may have held informal warm-up matches ,  using blunted or dummy weapons – some `` munera '' ,  however ,  may have used blunted weapons throughout . 
in 393, theodosius i  -lrb-  r .  379–395 -rrb- adopted nicene christianity as the state religion of the roman empire and banned pagan festivals . 
in the later imperial era ,  servius maurus honoratus uses the same disparaging term as cicero – `` bustuarius '' – for gladiators . 
some may even have become `` proper '' gladiators . 
the event may also have been used to drum up more publicity for the imminent game . 
not all `` editors '' chose to go with the crowd ,  and not all those condemned to death for putting on a poor show chose to submit:
in 365, valentinian i  -lrb-  r .  364–375 -rrb- threatened to fine a judge who sentenced christians to the arena and in 384 attempted ,  like most of his predecessors ,  to limit the expenses of `` munera '' . 
images of gladiators could be found throughout the republic and empire ,  among all classes . 
hopkins and beard tentatively estimate a total of 400 arenas throughout the roman empire at its greatest extent ,  with a combined total of 8,000 deaths per annum from executions ,  combats and accidents . 
a gladiator  -lrb-   ,  `` swordsman '' ,  from  ,  `` sword ''  -rrb-  was an armed combatant who entertained audiences in the roman republic and roman empire in violent confrontations with other gladiators ,  wild animals ,  and condemned criminals . 
a gladiator could acknowledge defeat by raising a finger  -lrb-  `` ad digitum ''  -rrb-  ,  in appeal to the referee to stop the combat and refer to the `` editor '' ,  whose decision would usually rest on the crowd's response . 
where traditional `` ludi '' had been dedicated to a deity ,  such as jupiter ,  the `` munera '' could be dedicated to an aristocratic sponsor's divine or heroic ancestor . 
whether the corpse of such a gladiator could be redeemed from further ignominy by friends or `` familia '' is not known . 
some mosaics show defeated gladiators kneeling in preparation for the moment of death . 
most were despised as slaves ,  schooled under harsh conditions ,  socially marginalized ,  and segregated even in death . 
livy places the first roman gladiator games  -lrb-  264 bc  -rrb-  in the early stage of rome's first punic war against carthage ,  when decimus iunius brutus scaeva had three gladiator pairs fight to the death in rome's `` cattle market '' forum  -lrb-  `` forum boarium ''  -rrb-  to honor his dead father ,  brutus pera . 
some regarded female gladiators of any type or class as a symptom of corrupted roman appetites ,  morals and womanhood . 
they were celebrated in high and low art ,  and their value as entertainers was commemorated in precious and commonplace objects throughout the roman world . 
among the most admired and skilled `` auctorati '' were those who ,  having been granted manumission ,  volunteered to fight in the arena . 
two wall `` graffiti '' in pompeii describe celadus the thraex as `` the sigh of the girls '' and `` the glory of the girls '' – which may or may not have been celadus' own wishful thinking . 
the earliest `` munera '' took place at or near the tomb of the deceased and these were organised by their `` munerator ''  -lrb-  who made the offering  -rrb-  . 
in 2018 it gained its first approvals for use as food . 
for over a century bacteria have been used in agriculture . 
fungi can be used for many of the same processes as bacteria . 
gene therapy ,  uses genetically modified viruses to deliver genes which can cure disease in humans . 
new genes can be introduced ,  or endogenous genes can be enhanced ,  altered or knocked out . 
paintings have also been produced using bacteria transformed with fluorescent proteins . 
in research ,  plants are engineered to help discover the functions of certain genes . 
in 2015, crispr was used to edit the dna of non-viable human embryos . 
gm fish are widely used in basic research in genetics and development . 
genetically modified bacteria are used to produce large amounts of proteins for industrial use . 
one of the key issues concerning regulators is whether gm food should be labeled and the status of gene edited organisms . 
no reports of ill effects have been proven in the human population from ingesting gm food . 
it obtained regulatory approval in 2015, the first non-plant gmo food to be commerialised . 
genetically modified fish are used for scientific research ,  as pets and as a food source . 
there is a scientific consensus that currently available food derived from gm crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food ,  but that each gm food needs to be tested on a case-by-case basis before introduction . 
bacteria have been used in the production of food for a long time ,  and specific strains have been developed and selected for that work on an industrial scale . 
most countries that do not allow gmo cultivation do permit research using gmos . 
bacteria are the easiest organisms to engineer and have been used for research ,  food production ,  industrial protein purification  -lrb-  including drugs  -rrb-  ,  agriculture ,  and art . 
the first genetically modified animal to be commercialised was the glofish  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- and the first genetically modified animal to be approved for food use was the aquadvantage salmon in 2015.
further testing using pcr ,  southern hybridization ,  and dna sequencing is conducted to confirm that an organism contains the new gene . 
gene flow between gm crops and compatible plants ,  along with increased use of broad-spectrum herbicides ,  can increase the risk of herbicide resistant weed populations . 
in contrast the usda has ruled that gene edited organisms are not considered gmos . 
fish can also be used to detect aquatic pollution or function as bioreactors . 
a number of techniques are available for inserting the isolated gene into the host genome . 
although human gene therapy is still relatively new ,  it has been used to treat genetic disorders such as severe combined immunodeficiency ,  and leber's congenital amaurosis . 
their ease of use has made them great tools for scientists looking to study gene function and evolution . 
in plants the dna is often inserted using `` agrobacterium ''-mediated recombination ,  biolistics or electroporation . 
the first genetically modified crop ,  an antibiotic-resistant tobacco plant ,  was produced in 1982.
other strategies include attaching the gene to a strong promoter and see what happens when it is over expressed ,  forcing a gene to be expressed in a different location or at different developmental stages . 
bacteria were the first organisms to be genetically modified in the laboratory ,  due to the relative ease of modifying their chromosomes . 
in the 18th and 19th centuries ,  the textile industry flourished again in ghent . 
ghent  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is a city and a municipality in the flemish region of belgium . 
during the middle ages ghent was the leading city for cloth . 
ghent was occupied by the germans in both world wars but escaped severe destruction . 
around 650, saint amand founded two abbeys in ghent: st .  peter's  -lrb-  blandinium  -rrb-  and saint bavo's abbey . 
in this period ,  ghent established its own university  -lrb-  1816 -rrb- and a new connection to the sea  -lrb-  1824–27 -rrb- . 
there are no written records of the roman period ,  but archaeological research confirms that the region of ghent was further inhabited . 
the late 16th and the 17th centuries brought devastation because of the eighty years' war . 
