angular momentum formula_4 is proportional to moment of inertia formula_5 and angular speed formula_6,
angular momentum is additive; the total angular momentum of a system is the  -lrb-  pseudo  -rrb- vector sum of the angular momenta . 
in physics ,  angular momentum  -lrb-  rarely ,  moment of momentum or rotational momentum  -rrb-  is the rotational equivalent of linear momentum . 
expanding ,  formula_19 rearranging ,  formula_20 and reducing ,  angular momentum can also be expressed , 
because formula_9 for a single particle and formula_10 for circular motion ,  angular momentum can be expanded ,  formula_11 and reduced to , 
the plum pudding model is one of several scientific models of the atom . 
as thomson's model guided rutherford's experiments ,  bohr's model guided moseley's research . 
in this model ,  atoms were known to consist of negatively charged electrons . 
as well ,  thomson's model  -lrb-  along with a similar saturnian ring model for atomic electrons put forward in 1904 by nagaoka after james clerk maxwell's model of saturn's rings  -rrb-  ,  were useful predecessors of the more correct solar-system-like bohr model of the atom . 
the thomson problem is a natural consequence of the plum pudding model in the absence of its uniform positive background charge . 
the planetary model of the atom had two significant shortcomings . 
bohr's model was not perfect . 
dalton estimated the atomic weights according to the mass ratios in which they combined ,  with the hydrogen atom taken as unity . 
for example ,  in the case of proust's tin oxides ,  one tin atom will combine with either one or two oxygen atoms to form either the first or the second oxide of tin . 
rutherford concluded that the hydrogen nuclei emerged from the nuclei of the nitrogen atoms themselves  -lrb-  in effect ,  he had split a nitrogen  -rrb-  . 
others at this time had already concluded that the oxygen atom must weigh 8 relative to hydrogen equals 1, if one assumes dalton's formula for the water molecule  -lrb-  ho  -rrb-  ,  or 16 if one assumes the modern water formula  -lrb-  ho  -rrb-  . 
from his own work and the work of his students bohr and henry moseley ,  rutherford knew that the positive charge of any atom could always be equated to that of an integer number of hydrogen nuclei . 
thus ,  avogadro was able to offer more accurate estimates of the atomic mass of oxygen and various other elements ,  and made a clear distinction between molecules and atoms . 
in 1916, arnold sommerfeld added elliptical orbits to the bohr model to explain the extra emission lines ,  but this made the model very difficult to use ,  and it still couldn't explain more complex atoms . 
in 1917 rutherford bombarded nitrogen gas with alpha particles and observed hydrogen nuclei being emitted from the gas  -lrb-  rutherford recognized these ,  because he had previously obtained them bombarding hydrogen with alpha particles ,  and observing hydrogen nuclei in the products  -rrb-  . 
thomson's plum pudding model was disproved in 1909 by one of his former students ,  ernest rutherford ,  who discovered that most of the mass and positive charge of an atom is concentrated in a very small fraction of its volume ,  which he assumed to be at the very center . 
the burmese refer to her as daw aung san suu kyi . 
aung san suu kyi was awarded the nobel peace prize in 1991.
if it's not related to aung san suu kyi ,  you can have deeper discussions with myanmar . `` 
suu kyi has met with many heads of state ,  and opened a dialog with the minister of labor aung kyi  -lrb-  not to be confused with aung san suu kyi  -rrb-  . 
on the evening of 13 november 2010, aung san suu kyi was released from house arrest . 
aung san suu kyi was born on 19 june 1945 in rangoon  -lrb-  now yangon  -rrb-  ,  british burma . 
the youngest daughter of aung san ,  father of the nation of modern-day myanmar ,  and khin kyi ,  aung san suu kyi was born in rangoon ,  british burma . 
it was announced prior to the 2010 burmese general election that aung san suu kyi may be released `` so she can organize her party '' ,  however ,  aung san suu kyi was not allowed to run . 
the united nations  -lrb-  un  -rrb-  has attempted to facilitate dialogue between the junta and aung san suu kyi . 
on 21 december 2011, thai prime minister yingluck shinawatra met aung san suu kyi in yangoon ,  marking aung san suu kyi's `` first-ever meeting with the leader of a foreign country '' . 
burmese sometimes address her as daw suu or amay suu  -lrb-  `` mother suu ''  -rrb-  . 
suu kyi was released from house arrest on 13 november 2010.
in 2016, aung san suu kyi was accused of failing to protect myanmar's rohingya muslims during the 2016–17 persecution . 
 ''aung san suu kyi '' ,  like other burmese names ,  includes no surname ,  but is only a personal name ,  in her case derived from three relatives: `` aung san '' from her father ,  `` suu '' from her paternal grandmother ,  and `` kyi '' from her mother khin kyi . 
in the john boorman's 1995 film `` beyond rangoon '' ,  aung san suu kyi was played by adelle lutz . 
in 1995 aung san suu kyi delivered the keynote address at the fourth world conference on women in beijing . 
the role that aung san suu kyi will play in the future of democracy in burma remains a subject of much debate . 
in 1988, aung san suu kyi returned to burma ,  at first to tend for her ailing mother but later to lead the pro-democracy movement . 
on 5 january 2012, british foreign minister william hague met aung san suu kyi and his burmese counterpart . 
on 1 december 2011, aung san suu kyi met with hillary clinton at the residence of the top-ranking us diplomat in yangon . 
in december 2011, there was speculation that aung san suu kyi would run in the 2012 national by-elections to fill vacant seats . 
during her time under house arrest ,  aung san suu kyi devoted herself to buddhist meditation practices and to studying buddhist thought . 
this was aung san suu kyi's first appearance in state media in the four years since her current detention began . 
in may 2018, aung san suu kyi was considered complicit in the crimes against rohingyas in a report by britain's international development committee . 
aung san suu kyi  -lrb-  ; ; born 19 june 1945 -rrb- is a burmese politician ,  diplomat ,  author ,  and nobel peace prize laureate  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
the results from the un facilitation have been mixed; razali ismail ,  un special envoy to burma ,  met with aung san suu kyi . 
in 2017, critics have called for aung san suu kyi's nobel prize to be revoked ,  citing her silence over the persecution of rohingya people in myanmar . 
on 9 november 1996, the motorcade that aung san suu kyi was traveling in with other national league for democracy leaders tin oo and kyi maung ,  was attacked in yangon . 
heschel is a widely read jewish theologian whose most influential works include `` man is not alone '' ,  `` god in search of man '' ,  `` the sabbath , ``  and `` the prophets '' . 
heschel ,  a professor of jewish mysticism at the jewish theological seminary of america ,  authored a number of widely read books on jewish philosophy and was active in the civil rights movement . 
 ''man is not alone: a philosophy of religion '' offers heschel's views on how people can comprehend god . 
abraham joshua heschel  -lrb-  january 11, 1907 – december 23, 1972 -rrb- was a polish-born american rabbi and one of the leading jewish theologians and jewish philosophers of the 20th century . 
heschel explicated many facets of jewish thought ,  including studies on medieval jewish philosophy ,  kabbalah ,  and hasidic philosophy . 
heschel arrived in new york city in march 1940.
heschel's sister esther was killed in a german bombing . 
in his book `` the prophets '' ,  abraham joshua heschel describes the unique aspect of the jewish prophets as compared to other similar figures . 
the aberdeen bestiary  -lrb-  aberdeen university library ,  univ lib . 
the latin american integration association / asociación latinoamericana de integración / associação latino-americana de integração  -lrb-  laia / aladi  -rrb-  is an international and regional scope organization . 
aircraft spotting or plane spotting is a hobby of tracking the movement of aircraft ,  which is often accomplished by photography . 
the hobbyist might travel long distances to visit different airports ,  to see an unusual aircraft ,  or to view the remains of aircraft withdrawn from use . 
in general ,  most spotters attempt to see as many aircraft of a given type ,  a particular airline ,  or a particular subset of aircraft such as business jets ,  commercial airliners ,  military and/or general aviation aircraft . 
some aircraft may be placed in the care of museums  -lrb-  see aviation archaeology  -rrb-  – or perhaps be cannibalized in order to repair a similar aircraft already preserved . 
when spotting aircraft ,  observers generally notice the key attributes of an aircraft ,  such as a distinctive noise from its engine or the number of vapour trails it is leaving . 
in 2009, a similar airport watch group was organized between airport security and local aircraft spotters at montreal-pierre trudeau international airport . 
the actual presentation of the message in a medium is referred to as an advertisement ,  or `` ad '' or advert for short . 
commercial ads often seek to generate increased consumption of their products or services through `` branding '' ,  which associates a product name or image with certain qualities in the minds of consumers . 
the term was coined by fanya montalvo by analogy with np-complete and np-hard in complexity theory ,  which formally describes the most famous class of difficult problems . 
early uses of the term are in erik mueller's 1987 ph . d .  dissertation and in eric raymond's 1991 jargon file . 
while the stars are fixed to their declinations the sun is not . 
one famous site where historical records have been used to interpret sites is chichen itza . 
ethnographies also caution against over-interpretation of sites . 
the animation below shows two sunsets at a hypothetical site ,  one the day before the summer solstice and one at the summer solstice ,  which has a double sunset . 
there is no one way to do archaeoastronomy . 
in the modern period a person born on the same date would have the sun in sagittarius due to the precession of the equinoxes . 
other peculiar calendars include ancient greek calendars . 
art and inscriptions may not be confined to artefacts ,  but also appear painted or inscribed on an archaeological site . 
the length of the corridor down which sunlight would travel would have limited illumination at other times of the year . 
the observation of lunar cycles is also evident . 
once the researcher has data to test ,  it is often necessary to attempt to recreate ancient sky conditions to place the data in its historical environment . 
research methods can be classified as falling into one of two approaches ,  though more recent projects often use techniques from both categories . 
other events noted by ancients include aurorae ,  sun dogs and rainbows all of which are as impossible to predict as the ancient weather ,  but nevertheless may have been considered important phenomena . 
numerous buildings and interbuilding alignments of the great houses of chaco canyon and outlying areas are oriented to the same solar and lunar directions that are marked at the sun dagger site . 
archaeoastronomy  -lrb-  also spelled archeoastronomy  -rrb-  is the study of how people in the past `` have understood the phenomena in the sky ,  how they used these phenomena and what role the sky played in their cultures '' . 
solsticial alignments also can be seen as displays of power . 
as well as solar alignments ,  there are proposed lunar alignments . 
the moon's appearance is considerably more complex . 
more problematic are those cases where the movement of the sun at different times and seasons causes light and shadow interactions with petroglyphs . 
in one season it will bisect the sky and in another bisect it in a perpendicular fashion . 
the importance of observing cosmological factors is also seen on the other side of the world . 
see moon for more details . 
ethnoastronomy is also an important field outside of the americas . 
a theodolite can be considerably more accurate if used correctly ,  but it is also considerably more difficult to use correctly . 
in chaco canyon ,  the center of the ancient pueblo culture in the american southwest ,  numerous solar and lunar light markings and architectural and road alignments have been documented . 
in a later period the serapeum in alexandria was also said to have contained a solar alignment so that ,  on a specific sunrise ,  a shaft of light would pass across the lips of the statue of serapis thus symbolising the sun saluting the god . 
el castillo ,  also known as kukulcán's pyramid ,  is a mesoamerican step-pyramid built in the centre of mayan center of chichen itza in mexico . 
in recent years ,  new research has suggested that the lascaux cave paintings in france may incorporate prehistoric star charts . 
clive ruggles and michel cotte recently edited a book on heritage sites of astronomy and archaeoastronomy that provides a list of the main sites around the world . 
there is also much information about how the universe was thought to work stored in the mythology of the constellations . 
the two dates are separated by 65 and 300 days ,  and it has been shown that the solar orientations in mesoamerica regularly correspond to dates separated by calendrically significant intervals  -lrb-  multiples of 13 and 20 days  -rrb-  . 
sapkowski is a recipient of numerous awards from polish fandom . 
andrzej sapkowski  -lrb-  ; born 21 june 1948 -rrb- is a polish fantasy writer . 
the english translation of sapkowski's novel `` blood of elves '' won the david gemmell legend award in 2009.
the polish game developer ,  cd projekt red ,  created a role-playing game series based on `` the witcher '' universe . 
an ammeter  -lrb-  from ampere meter  -rrb-  is a measuring instrument used to measure the current in a circuit . 
basic meter movements can have full-scale deflection for currents from about 25 microamperes to 10 milliamperes . 
because the magnetic field is polarised ,  the meter needle acts in opposite directions for each direction of current . 
it must be a make-before-break switch to avoid damaging current surges through the meter movement when switching ranges . 
ordinary weston-type meter movements can measure only milliamperes at most ,  because the springs and practical coils can carry only limited currents . 
moving iron ammeters are commonly used to measure current in industrial frequency ac circuits . 
in a hot-wire ammeter ,  a current passes through a wire which expands as it heats . 
amanda hesser  -lrb-  born 1971 -rrb- is an american food writer ,  editor ,  cookbook author and entrepreneur . 
after finishing her first book ,  in 1997, hesser was hired as a food reporter for `` the new york times '' where she wrote more than 750 stories . 
most notably ,  she was the food editor of `` the new york times magazine '' ,  the editor of `` t living '' ,  a quarterly publication of `` the new york times '' ,  author of the essential new york times cookbook which was a `` new york times '' bestseller ,  and co-founder and ceo of food52.
light therapy and other interventions have also been found to have an anxiolytic effect . 
snris are as effective as ssris in the treatment of anxiety disorders . 
anxiolytics are also known as minor tranquilizers . 
the drug is used in canada ,  the uk and australia . 
although not officially approved for this purpose ,  beta blockers also can have an antianxiety effect . 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors  -lrb-  maois  -rrb-  are effective for anxiety ,  but their dietary restrictions ,  side effects and availability of newer effective drugs ,  have limited their use . 
tricyclic antidepressants  -lrb-  tcas  -rrb-  have anxiolytic effects; however ,  side effects are often more troubling or severe and overdose is dangerous . 
there are concerns that some gabaergics ,  such as benzodiazepines and barbiturates ,  may have an anxiogenic effect if used over long periods of time . 
they are not recommended for dementia or insomnia unless other treatments have not worked . 
they are not recommended in children unless other treatments are not effective or unless the child has psychosis . 
there is ,  however ,  a greater risk of side effects with their use . 
low dose antipsychotics may also be used in treatment of impulse-behavioural and cognitive-perceptual symptoms of borderline personality disorder . 
applications of antipsychotic drugs in the treatment of schizophrenia include prophylaxis in those showing symptoms that suggest that they are at high risk of developing psychosis ,  treatment of first episode psychosis ,  maintenance therapy ,  and treatment of recurrent episodes of acute psychosis . 
evidence that early treatment has a favorable effect on long term outcomes is equivocal . 
a number of atypical antipsychotics have some benefits when used in addition to other treatments in major depressive disorder . 
risperidone has been approved by the us fda for the treatment of irritability in autistic children and adolescents . 
antipsychotic drug treatment is a key component of schizophrenia treatment algorithms recommended by the national institute of health and care excellence  -lrb-  nice  -rrb-  ,  the american psychiatric association ,  and the british society for psychopharmacology . 
austrians nevertheless remember charles as a hero of the french revolutionary and napoleonic wars . 
after wagram ,  charles saw no more significant action in the napoleonic wars . 
charles died at vienna on 30 april 1847.
in 1795 he served on the rhine ,  and in the following year ,  he was entrusted with chief control of all the austrian forces on that river . 
in 1806 francis ii  -lrb-  now francis i of austria  -rrb-  named the archduke charles ,  already a field marshal ,  as commander in chief of the austrian army and head of the council of war . 
in the campaign of 1799 he once more opposed jourdan ,  whom he defeated in the battles of ostrach and stockach ,  following up his success by invading switzerland and defeating masséna in the first battle of zurich ,  after which he re-entered germany and drove the french once more over the rhine . 
an equestrian statue was erected to his memory on the heldenplatz in vienna in 1860.
frederick william was the eldest surviving son of karl christian of nassau-weilburg and princess wilhelmine carolina of orange-nassau . 
in 595, gregory chose augustine ,  who was the prior of the abbey of st andrew's in rome ,  to head the mission to kent . 
augustine was the prior of a monastery in rome when pope gregory the great chose him in 595 to lead a mission ,  usually known as the gregorian mission ,  to britain to christianize king æthelberht and his kingdom of kent from anglo-saxon paganism . 
one other effect of the king's conversion by augustine's mission was that the frankish influence on the southern kingdoms of britain was decreased . 
augustine's shrine was re-established in march 2012 at the church of st .  augustine in ramsgate ,  kent ,  very close to the mission's landing site . 
it was against this background that pope gregory i decided to send a mission ,  often called the gregorian mission ,  to convert the anglo-saxons to christianity in 595.
further missionaries were sent from rome in 601.
he is considered the `` apostle to the english '' and a founder of the english church . 
the mission may have been an outgrowth of the missionary efforts against the lombards who ,  as pagans and arian christians ,  were not on good relations with the catholic church in rome . 
sources make no mention of why pope gregory chose a monk to head the mission . 
at the beginning of 1236, he entered the franciscan order  -lrb-  he was at least 50 -rrb- and was the first franciscan to hold a chair at the university of paris . 
though he also continued the tradition of aristotle- and augustine-focused thought in the franciscan school ,  he did so through an anselm-directed lens . 
alexander's `` quodlibetal questions '' also remain unedited . 
one of his more famous works ,  the `` summa '' ,  is important because of its system for determining if a war is just . 
in 1236 or 1237, aged about 50, alexander made the surprising step of entering the franciscan order ,  thus becoming the first franciscan friar to hold a university chair . 
as the first franciscan to hold a chair at the university of paris ,  alexander had many significant disciples . 
alexander is also known for rejecting the idea that there are many things in god's mind ,  instead claiming that it is more perfect to know just one thing . 
active server pages  -lrb-  asp  -rrb-  ,  later known as classic asp or asp classic ,  is microsoft's first server-side script engine for dynamically generated web pages . 
amoxicillin is an antibiotic often used for the treatment of a number of bacterial infections . 
a nonallergic amoxicillin rash may also be an indicator of infectious mononucleosis . 
amoxicillin is occasionally used for the treatment of skin infections ,  such as acne vulgaris . 
between 3 and 10% of children taking amoxicillin  -lrb-  or ampicillin  -rrb-  show a late-developing  -lrb-  >72 hours after beginning medication and having never taken penicillin-like medication previously  -rrb-  rash ,  which is sometimes referred to as the `` amoxicillin rash '' . 
amoxicillin is effective for treatment of early cutaneous lyme borreliosis; the effectiveness and safety of oral amoxicillin is neither better nor worse than common alternatively-used antibiotics . 
when there is an adequate response to ampicillin ,  the course of antibiotic therapy may often be completed with oral amoxicillin . 
amoxicillin attaches to the cell wall of susceptible bacteria and results in their death . 
there is poor reporting of adverse effects of amoxicillin from clinical trials . 
amoxicillin is susceptible to degradation by β-lactamase-producing bacteria ,  which are resistant to most β-lactam antibiotics ,  such as penicillin . 
other types of amorphous solids include gels ,  thin films ,  and nanostructured materials such as glass doors and windows . 
amorphous phases are important constituents of thin films ,  which are solid layers of a few nanometres to some tens of micrometres thickness deposited upon a substrate . 
in condensed matter physics and materials science ,  an amorphous  -lrb-  from the greek `` a '' ,  without ,  `` morphé '' ,  shape ,  form  -rrb-  or non-crystalline solid is a solid that lacks the long-range order that is characteristic of a crystal . 
 ''a wizard of earthsea '' won or contributed to several notable awards for le guin . 
an omnibus edition of all of le guin's earthsea works was released on the 50th anniversary of the publication of `` a wizard of earthsea '' in 2018.
earthsea itself is an archipelago or group of islands . 
le guin said that she had never read jung before writing the earthsea novels . 
 ''a wizard of earthsea '' and other novels of the earthsea cycle differ notably from le guin's early hainish cycle works ,  although they were written at a similar time . 
the nature of human evil forms a significant related theme through `` a wizard of earthsea '' as well as the other earthsea novels . 
commenting in 1993, le guin wrote that she could not continue earthsea after 1972 until she had `` wrestled with the angels of the feminist consciousness '' . 
 ''a wizard of earthsea '' focuses on ged's adolescence and coming of age ,  and along with the other two works of the original earthsea trilogy forms a part of le guin's dynamic portrayal of the process of growing old . 
the short stories published in 1964 introduced the world of earthsea and important concepts in it ,  such as le guin's treatment of magic . 
 ''a wizard of earthsea '' was first published in 1968 by parnassus press in berkeley ,  a year before `` the left hand of darkness '' ,  le guin's watershed work . 
a wizard of earthsea is a fantasy novel written by american author ursula k .  le guin and first published by the small press parnassus in 1968.
the influence of taoist thought on le guin's writing is also visible in the idea of a cosmic `` balance '' in the universe of earthsea . 
le guin originally intended for `` a wizard of earthsea '' to be a standalone novel ,  but decided to write a sequel after considering the loose ends in the first book ,  and `` the tombs of atuan '' was released in 1971.
novelist david mitchell ,  author of books such as `` cloud atlas '' ,  described `` a wizard of earthsea '' as having a strong influence on him ,  and said that he felt a desire to `` wield words with the same power as ursula le guin '' . 
in le guin's fictional universe ,  to know the true name of an object or a person is to have power over it . 
the bulk of lifeson's work in music has been with rush ,  although lifeson has contributed to a body of work outside the band as well . 
with rush ,  lifeson plays electric and acoustic guitars ,  as well as other string instruments such as mandola ,  mandolin ,  and bouzouki . 
alexandar zivojinovich ,   -lrb-  born 27 august 1953 -rrb- ,  better known by his stage name alex lifeson ,  is a canadian musician ,  singer ,  songwriter ,  and record producer ,  best known as the guitarist of the progressive rock band rush . 
for example ,  archiving a collection of files with `` tar '' and then compressing the resulting archive file with `` gzip '' results a file with codice_1 extension . 
a file archiver is a computer program that combines a number of files together into one archive file ,  or a series of archive files ,  for easier transportation or storage . 
aeneas was helped by artemis ,  leto ,  and apollo . 
artemis is the daughter of zeus and leto ,  and the twin sister of apollo . 
as locheia ,  she was the goddess of childbirth and midwives . 
the goddess diana is her roman equivalent . 
as apanchomene ,  she was worshipped as a hanged goddess . 
the myths also differ as to whether artemis was born first ,  or apollo . 
hera was angry with her husband zeus because he had impregnated leto but the island of delos disobeyed hera and leto gave birth there . 
as agrotera ,  she was especially associated as the patron goddess of hunters . 
in ancient cretan history leto was worshipped at phaistos and ,  in cretan mythology ,  leto gave birth to apollo and artemis on the islands known today as paximadia . 
artemis was worship as one of the primary goddesses of childbirth and midwifery along with eileithyia . 
artemis  -lrb-  ; artemis ,    -rrb-  ,  in the ancient greek religion and myth ,  is the goddess of the hunt ,  the wilderness ,  wild animals and chastity . 
in yet another version ,  apollo sends the scorpion . 
she demanded that young girls `` act the bear '' at her sanctuary in atonement for the bear's death . 
the ancient spartans used to sacrifice to her as one of their patron goddesses before starting a new military campaign . 
however ,  in terms of parentage ,  all accounts agree that she was the daughter of zeus and leto and that she was the twin sister of apollo . 
according to the homeric hymn to artemis the island where leto gave birth was ortygia . 
callisto was the daughter of lycaon ,  king of arcadia and also was one of artemis's hunting attendants . 
however ,  some versions of this myth say apollo and hermes protected her from artemis' wrath . 
an account by callimachus has it that hera forbade leto to give birth on either terra firma  -lrb-  the mainland  -rrb-  or on an island . 
pre-pubescent and adolescent athenian girls were sent to the sanctuary of artemis at brauron to serve the goddess for one year . 
artemis ,  the goddess of forests and hills ,  was worshipped throughout ancient greece . 
on 2 november 2014, the sign over the dachau gate was stolen . 
the sign over the auschwitz i gate was stolen in december 2009 and later recovered by authorities in three pieces . 
the slogan's use was implemented by ss officer theodor eicke at dachau concentration camp and then copied by rudolf höss at auschwitz . 
the slogan was placed at the entrances to a number of nazi concentration camps . 
he was a successor of moctezuma and his brothers were emperors tizoc and ahuitzotl and his sister was the queen chalchiuhnenetzin . 
axayacatl was a son of the princess atotoztli ii and her cousin ,  prince tezozomoc . 
he was an uncle of the emperor cuauhtémoc and father of emperors moctezuma ii and cuitláhuac . 
ahuizotl died in the year 10 rabbit  -lrb-  1502 -rrb- and was succeeded by his nephew ,  moctezuma ii . 
he took power as tlatoani in the year 7 rabbit  -lrb-  1486 -rrb- ,  after the death of his predecessor and brother ,  tizoc . 
because individuals with albinism have skin that entirely lacks the dark pigment melanin ,  which helps protect the skin from the sun's ultraviolet radiation ,  their skin can burn more easily from overexposure . 
there are two principal types of albinism: oculocutaneous ,  affecting the eyes ,  skin and hair ,  and ocular affecting the eyes only . 
the human eye normally produces enough pigment to color the iris blue ,  green or brown and lend opacity to the eye . 
diab is known as the father of mediterranean music . 
diab released his first album entitled `` ya tareeq '' in 1983.
amr diab  -lrb-  ; born october 11, 1961 -rrb- is an egyptian vocalist and writer . 
today ,  the belgian hip hop scene is growing . 
to find out more about today's belgian hip hop scene ,  check out the belgian hip hop channel and vlaamserap . be
the belgian hip hop scene started in the late 1980s with a u . s . -based techno/hip hop group called technotronic . 
dutch hip hop or nederhop ,  is hip hop music created by musicians in the netherlands and flanders . 
in 1992, osdorp posse released their debut album `` osdorp stijl '' ,  which was the first-ever hip hop in dutch language . they started out translating n . w . a songs to dutch ,  though later wrote their own rhymes in dutch . 
all star fresh . 
opgezwolle ,  a group from zwolle's latest album ,  `` eigen wereld ''  -lrb-  own world  -rrb-  appeared in the 'album top 100' at number 4; the highest notation of a dutch rap album ever . 
between 1980 and 1985 a few dutch hip hop records had already been released ,  but in 1986 dutch rap duo mc miker g & dj sven  -lrb-  lucien witteveen and sven van veen  -rrb-  had a major top 10 hit  -lrb-  often #1 -rrb- across europe with their `` holiday rap '' ,  which sampled madonna's `` holiday '' . 
with at least 8 top 100 album/ep projects brainpower is one of the most successful dutch mc's ever and remains a prolific bilingual lyricist  -lrb-  in dutch & in english  -rrb-  to this day . 
nin was diagnosed with cervical cancer in 1974.
nin referred to her simultaneous marriages as her `` bicoastal trapeze '' . 
previously unpublished works are coming to light in `` a café in space ,  the anaïs nin literary journal '' ,  which includes `` anaïs nin and joaquín nin y castellanos: prelude to a symphony—letters between a father and daughter . `` 
philip kaufman directed the 1990 film `` henry & june '' based on nin's diaries published as `` henry and june: from the unexpurgated diary of anaïs nin '' . 
nin is hailed by many critics as one of the finest writers of female erotica . 
in her later life ,  nin worked as a tutor at the international college in los angeles . 
nin gave june money ,  jewelry ,  clothes ,  often leaving herself broke . 
the explosion of the feminist movement in the 1960s gave feminist perspectives on nin's writings of the past twenty years ,  which made nin a popular lecturer at various universities; contrarily ,  nin disassociated herself from the political activism of the movement . 
anaïs nin's most studied works are her diaries or journals ,  which she began writing in her adolescence . 
nin spent her later life in los angeles ,  california ,  where she died of cervical cancer in 1977.
nin was raised a roman catholic but left the church when she was 16 years old . 
guiler remained in new york city and was unaware of nin's second marriage until after her death in 1977, though biographer deirdre bair alleges that guiler knew what was happening while nin was in california ,  but consciously `` chose not to know '' . 
beginning at age eleven ,  nin wrote journals prolifically for six decades and even up until her death . 
on october 1, 2009, aol released aim 2.0 for mac . 
aim was different from other clients ,  such as yahoo ! 
aim pages was discontinued in late 2007.
for the application to work users must have aim 6.8 or higher ,  as it is not compatible with older versions of aim software ,  aim for mac or ichat . 
the aim call out service was shut down on march 25, 2009.
aim accounts are available only for people over the age of 13; children younger than that were not permitted access to aim . 
the issue of aim's security was called into question . 
the company discontinued aim as a service on december 15, 2017.
aim express ran in a pop-up browser window . 
aim call out is a discontinued voice over ip pc-pc ,  pc-phone and phone-to-pc service provided by aol via its aim application that replaced the defunct aim phoneline service in november 2007.
aim pages was released in may 2006, allowing the 63 million aim users to create an online ,  dynamic profile . 
aim phoneline was a voice over ip pc-pc ,  pc-phone and phone-to-pc service provided via the aim application . 
aol were not happy about this and started blocking msn messenger from being able to access aim . 
aol released an all-new aim for the macintosh on september 29, 2008 and the final build on december 15, 2008.
for privacy regulations ,  aim had strict age restrictions . 
under the aim privacy policy ,  aol had no rights to read or monitor any private communications between users . 
the function formula_22 defined in this way agrees with the ackermann function formula_23 defined above: formula_24.
the péter-ackermann function can also be expressed in terms of various other versions of the ackermann function:
all primitive recursive functions are total and computable ,  but the ackermann function illustrates that not all total computable functions are primitive recursive . 
in computability theory ,  the ackermann function ,  named after wilhelm ackermann ,  is one of the simplest and earliest-discovered examples of a total computable function that is not primitive recursive . 
computing the ackermann function can be restated in terms of an infinite table . 
a single-argument version that increases both `` m '' and `` n '' at the same time dwarfs every primitive recursive function ,  including very fast-growing functions such as the exponential function ,  the factorial function ,  multi- and superfactorial functions ,  and even functions defined using knuth's up-arrow notation  -lrb-  except when the indexed up-arrow is used  -rrb-  . 
the treaty area covers the continent itself and its immediately adjacent islands ,  as well as the archipelagos of the south orkney islands ,  south shetland islands ,  peter i island ,  scott island and balleny islands . 
however ,  the region is visited by more than 40,000 tourists annually ,  the most popular destinations being the antarctic peninsula area  -lrb-  especially the south shetland islands  -rrb-  and south georgia island . 
the antarctic hosts the world's largest protected area comprising 1.07 million km ,  the south georgia and the south sandwich islands marine protection area created in 2012.
because antarctica surrounds the south pole ,  it is theoretically located in all time zones . 
the first antarctic land discovered was the island of south georgia ,  visited by the english merchant anthony de la roché in 1675.
culturally ,  albanians in kosovo are very closely related to albanians in albania . 
a smaller number of albanians have also settled in norway and denmark with more than 11,000 and 8,000 albanians respecitvely . 
in the 14th century a number of albanian principalities were created . 
the albanians  -lrb-    -rrb-  and their country albania  -lrb-    -rrb-  have been identified by many ethnonyms . 
nowadays ,  albanians in kosovo constitute the majority with 1,616,869 million . 
between 2015 and 2016, the number of albanians regularly residing in italy was numbered to be around 480,000 and 500,000.
in 2016, canada was home to approximately 36,185 albanians from albania and 2,870 albanians from kosovo predominantly distributed in toronto ,  montreal ,  ottawa and vancouver . 
there are small albanian populations dating to migrations from the 18th century . 
the first reference to the albanian language dates to the latter 13th century  -lrb-  around 1285 -rrb- . 
by the 13th century ,  albanian merchants were trading directly with the peoples of the republic of ragusa which increased familiarity between albanians and ragusans . 
the majority of the albanian people speak the albanian language which comprise an independent branch within the indo-european languages . 
according to the 2013 american community survey ,  there are 194,028 albanian americans  -lrb-  american citizens of full or partial albanian descent  -rrb-  . 
the albanians  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  are an ethnic group native to the balkan peninsula and are identified by a common albanian ancestry ,  culture ,  history and language . 
albanian folk music displays a variety of influences . 
in croatia ,  the albanian language is one of the officially recognized minority languages of the country and is primarily spoken by the albanians and arbanasis . 
albanian immigration to australia took place in the late 19th century and much of the 20th century . 
albanian migrants live in all parts of the uk especially in england . 
in the united kingdom ,  the number of albanian nationals living in the uk increased from around 2,000 in 2004 to around 14,600 in 2015.
from these ethnonyms ,  names for albanians were also derived in other languages ,  that were or still are in use . 
the first immigration of albanians to canada began already in the 19th and 20th centuries though the largest wave of migration from the balkan peninsula to canada was in 1999, when 7,000 people mostly albanians from kosovo ,  arrived in that country . 
in the 1990s ,  the estimated number of albanians outside the territory of albania was approximately 500,000 of whom 90% was settling in neighbouring greece . 
the albanians in italy are either albanian immigrants from the 1990s ,  who came in italy following the breakdown of the communist regime in albania in 1990 and speak standard albanian and the italian language ,  or the arbëreshë people ,  albanian refugees who fled from albania for southern italy between the fourteenth and eighteenth centuries in consequence of the ottoman invasion of the balkans ,  who nowadays speak the arbëresh language ,  a variety of albanian that derives from tosk spoken in southern albania and follows a similar divergence pattern to arvanitika . 
ottoman control over the albanian territories was secured in 1571 when ulcinj ,  presently in montenegro ,  was captured . 
the albanians first appear in the historical record in byzantine sources of the late 11th century . 
the most widespread religion among albanians in kosovo is islam ,  mostly sunni ,  and roman catholicism . 
the acm portal is an online service of the acm . 
other publications of the acm include:
also in 2006, acm began recognizing senior members . 
acm was a `` green '' publisher before the term was invented . 
its core are two main sections: acm digital library and the acm guide to computing literature . 
acm publishes over 50 journals including the prestigious `` journal of the acm '' ,  and two general magazines for computer professionals ,  `` communications of the acm ''  -lrb-  also known as `` communications '' or `` cacm ''  -rrb-  and `` queue '' . 
the acm digital library is the full-text collection of all articles published by the acm in its articles ,  magazines and conference proceedings . 
acm adopted a hybrid open access  -lrb-  oa  -rrb-  publishing model in 2013.
the waldensians also represent a faith similar to the anabaptists . 
the name anabaptist means `` one who baptizes again '' . 
the movement is generally seen as an offshoot of protestantism ,  although this view has been challenged by some anabaptists . 
schwarzenau brethren ,  bruderhof ,  and the apostolic christian church are considered later developments among the anabaptists . 
southeast alaska ,  sometimes referred to as the alaska panhandle ,  is the southeastern portion of the u . s .  state of alaska ,  bordered to the east by the northern half of the canadian province of british columbia . 
interior alaska is the central region of alaska's territory ,  roughly bounded by the alaska range to the south and the brooks range to the north . 
the interior region has an estimated population of 113,154.
interior alaska experiences extreme seasonal temperature variability . 
thus the poem merely implies that there may have been a divine visit ,  when there was briefly heaven in england . 
it is not to be confused with another poem ,  much longer and larger in scope ,  but also by blake ,  called `` jerusalem the emanation of the giant albion '' . 
most parts of alaska that are off the road or ferry system can be reached by small bush airplanes . 
geographically ,  the bush comprises the alaska north slope; northwest arctic; west ,  including the baldwin and seward peninsulas; the yukon-kuskokwim delta; southwest alaska; bristol bay; alaska peninsula; and remote areas of the alaska panhandle and interior . 
madame armfeldt offers advice to young fredrika . 
fredrik finally confesses his love for desiree ,  acknowledging that fredrika is his daughter ,  and the two promise to start a new life together  -lrb-  `` send in the clowns '' - reprise  -rrb-  . 
that night ,  as fredrik remembers his past with desiree ,  he sneaks out to see her; the two have a happy but strained reunion as they `` remember '' . 
charlotte visits anne and describes fredrik's tryst with desiree . 
after the count and countess leave ,  fredrika and madame armfeldt discuss the chaos of the recent turns-of-events . 
dual wielding is using two weapons ,  one in each hand ,  during combat . 
the other pistol was used as a back-up weapon . 
all the above-mentioned examples ,  involve either one long and one short weapon ,  or two short weapons . 
sharon was born on 26 february 1928 in kfar malal ,  an agricultural moshav ,  then in mandatory palestine ,  to shmuel scheinerman  -lrb-  1896–1956 -rrb- of brest-litovsk and vera  -lrb-  née schneirov  -rrb-  scheinerman  -lrb-  1900–1988 -rrb- of mogilev . 
sharon was a commander in the israeli army from its creation in 1948.
from the 1970s through to the 1990s ,  sharon championed construction of israeli settlements in the west bank and gaza strip . 
people may or may not engage in purely emotional romantic relationships . 
the antonym of aromanticism is alloromanticism ,  the state of experiencing romantic love or romantic attraction to others ,  while such a person is called an alloromantic . 
with regard to asexuality ,  while asexuals usually do not experience sexual attraction  -lrb-  see gray asexuality  -rrb-  ,  they may still experience romantic attraction . 
the mountain anoa  -lrb-  `` bubalus quarlesi ''  -rrb-  is also known as quarle's anoa ,  `` anoa de montana '' ,  `` anoa de quarle '' ,  `` anoa des montagnes '' and `` anoa pegunungan '' . 
both the lowland anoa  -lrb-  `` bubalus depressicornis ''  -rrb-  and the mountain anoa  -lrb-  `` bubalus quarlesi ''  -rrb-  are endemic to the islands of sulawesi in indonesia . 
diet composition of anoa  -lrb-  `` bubalus '' sp .   -rrb- 
all anoa vary in appearance ,  but have the same standard characters . 
anoa ,  also known as midget buffalo and sapiutan ,  are a subgenus of `` bubalus '' comprising two species endemic to the island of sulawesi in indonesia: the mountain anoa  -lrb-  `` bubalus quarlesi ''  -rrb-  and the lowland anoa  -lrb-  `` bubalus depressicornis ''  -rrb-  . 
after a study of the skulls of many anoa ,  it was shown that there was hybridizing and interbreeding between the two . 
erlang was born at lønborg ,  near tarm ,  in jutland . 
erlang worked for the ctc  -lrb-  ktas  -rrb-  from 1908 for almost 20 years ,  until his death in copenhagen after an abdominal operation . 
act three begins with cora at her house with her council . 
the ravinia festival ,  highland park ,  illinois ,  presented a staged concert on august 26 and 27, 2005, with audra mcdonald  -lrb-  fay  -rrb-  ,  michael cerveris  -lrb-  hapgood  -rrb-  and patti lupone  -lrb-  cora  -rrb-  . 
the director is tom littler ,  with musical director tom attwood ,  and a cast that includes issy van randwyck  -lrb-  mayoress  -rrb-  ,  rosalie craig  -lrb-  nurse fay apple  -rrb-  and david ricardo-pearce  -lrb-  hapgood  -rrb-  . 
as act two opens ,  the two groups are now in bitter rivalry over who is the normal group  -lrb-  “a-1 march”  -rrb-  another stranger ,  a french woman in a feathered coat appears . 
as she does ,  the cookies appear and begin to dance  -lrb-  “everybody says don't”  -rrb-  . 
new york city center encores ! 
two revivals were staged that year ,  one in london ,  at the bridewell theatre ,  and one in los angeles ,  at the matrix theatre . 
an alcopop  -lrb-  or cooler ,  spirit cooler in south african english ,  or malternative in american slang  -rrb-  is a term describing certain flavored alcoholic beverages with relatively low alcohol content  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  3–7% alcohol by volume  -rrb-  ,  including:
bacardi rum island iced tea  -rrb-  ,  often containing about 12.5% alcohol by volume ,  that can be sold only where hard liquor is available . 
plant potash lent the name to the element potassium ,  which was first derived from caustic potash ,  and also gave potassium its chemical symbol k  -lrb-  from the german name kalium  -rrb-  ,  which ultimately derived from alkali . 
this broad use of the term is likely to have come about because alkalis were the first bases known to obey the arrhenius definition of a base ,  and they are still among the most common bases . 
further ,  she argues that the stereotypes that were set during slavery still affect black women today . 
she suggests this explains the low numbers of black women who participated in the feminist movement in the 1970s ,  pointing to louis harris' virginia slims poll done in 1972 for philip morris that she says showed 62 percent of black women supported `` efforts to change women's status '' and 67 percent `` sympathized with the women's rights movement '' ,  compared with 45 and 35 percent of white women  -lrb-  also steinem ,  1972 -rrb- . 
amos basic is a dialect of the basic programming language implemented on the amiga computer . 
amos is a descendant of stos basic for the atari st .  amos basic was first produced in 1990.
in 1982, the bandai arcadia ,  a variant of the emerson arcadia 2001, was released in japan by bandai . 
over 30 arcadia 2001 clones exist . 
arcadia corporation then changed its name to starpath . 
for instance ,  the arcadia 2001 game `` space raiders '' is a clone of `` defender '' ,  and `` breakaway '' is a clone of `` breakout '' . 
in geometry ,  a convex uniform honeycomb is a uniform tessellation which fills three-dimensional euclidean space with non-overlapping convex uniform polyhedral cells . 
a number of additional examples from world war ii show how assassination was used as a tool:
in the old testament ,  king joash of judah was recorded as being assassinated by his own servants; joab assassinated absalom ,  king david's son; and king sennacherib of assyria was assassinated by his own sons . 
liaquat ali khan ,  the first prime minister of pakistan ,  was assassinated by saad akbar ,  a lone assassin ,  in 1951.
assassination is one of the oldest tools of power politics . 
the reigns of king przemysł ii of poland  -lrb-  1296 -rrb- ,  william the silent of the netherlands  -lrb-  1584 -rrb- ,  and the french kings henry iii  -lrb-  1589 -rrb- and henry iv  -lrb-  1610 -rrb- were all ended by assassins . 
in pakistan ,  former prime minister and opposition leader benazir bhutto was assassinated in 2007, while running for re-election . 
the crash is widely considered – in pakistan – to be an act of political assassination . 
in 1192, conrad of montferrat ,  the `` de facto '' king of jerusalem ,  was killed by an assassin . 
in israel ,  prime minister yitzhak rabin was assassinated on november 4, 1995.
assassination for military purposes has long been espoused – sun tzu ,  writing around 500 bc ,  argued in favor of using assassination in his book `` the art of war '' . 
chanakya  -lrb-  c .  350–283 bc  -rrb-  wrote about assassinations in detail in his political treatise `` arthashastra '' . 
in the united kingdom ,  only one prime minister has ever been assassinated—spencer perceval on may 11, 1812.
with regard to alcoholism ,  bac is useful to judge alcohol tolerance ,  which in turn is a sign of alcoholism . 
in professional and research contexts ,  the term `` alcoholism '' sometimes encompasses both alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence ,  and sometimes is considered equivalent to alcohol dependence . 
alcohol detoxification or 'detox' for alcoholics is an abrupt stop of alcohol drinking coupled with the substitution of drugs ,  such as benzodiazepines ,  that have similar effects to prevent alcohol withdrawal . 
the dsm-iv diagnosis of alcohol dependence represents one approach to the definition of alcoholism . 
alcoholism ,  also known as alcohol use disorder  -lrb-  aud  -rrb-  ,  is a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results in mental or physical health problems . 
there are reliable tests for the actual use of alcohol ,  one common test being that of blood alcohol content  -lrb-  bac  -rrb-  . 
alcoholism is characterised by an increased tolerance to alcohol – which means that an individual can consume more alcohol – and physical dependence on alcohol ,  which makes it hard for an individual to control their consumption . 
treatments are varied because there are multiple perspectives of alcoholism . 
certain blood tests may also indicate possible alcoholism . 
misuse ,  problem use ,  abuse ,  and heavy use of alcohol refer to improper use of alcohol ,  which may cause physical ,  social ,  or moral harm to the drinker . 
mesh has had an entry for `` alcoholism '' since 1999, and references the 1992 definition . 
trauma have been proposed to explain the higher rates of alcoholism among native americans compared to alcoholism levels in caucasians . 
serious social problems arise from alcoholism; these dilemmas are caused by the pathological changes in the brain and the intoxicating effects of alcohol . 
women develop long-term complications of alcohol dependence more rapidly than do men . 
typically ,  `` abstraction '' is used in the arts as a synonym for abstract art in general . 
perhaps confusingly ,  some philosophies refer to `` tropes ''  -lrb-  instances of properties  -rrb-  as `` abstract particulars ''—e . g .  ,  the particular redness of a particular apple is an `` abstract particular '' . 
non-existent things in any particular place and time are often seen as abstract . 
these physical marks ,  in other words ,  acted as material abstractions of a materially abstract process of accounting ,  using conceptual abstractions  -lrb-  numbers  -rrb-  to communicate its meaning . 
abstraction in its secondary use is a material process ,  discussed in the themes below . 
in philosophical terminology ,  `` abstraction '' is the thought process wherein ideas are distanced from objects . 
a physical object  -lrb-  a possible referent of a concept or word  -rrb-  is considered `` concrete ''  -lrb-  not abstract  -rrb-  if it is a `` particular individual '' that occupies a particular place and time . 
chains of abstractions can be construed ,  moving from neural impulses arising from sensory perception to basic abstractions such as color or shape ,  to experiential abstractions such as a specific cat ,  to semantic abstractions such as the `` idea '' of a cat ,  to classes of objects such as `` mammals '' and even categories such as `` object '' as opposed to `` action '' . 
although the description `` sitting-on ''  -lrb-  graph 1 -rrb- is more abstract than the graphic image of a cat sitting on a mat  -lrb-  picture 1 -rrb- ,  the delineation of abstract things from concrete things is somewhat ambiguous; this ambiguity or vagueness is characteristic of abstraction . 
abstractions and levels of abstraction play an important role in the theory of general semantics originated by alfred korzybski . 
the state  -lrb-  polity  -rrb-  as both concept and material practice exemplifies the two sides of this process of abstraction . 
an abstraction can be seen as a compression process ,  mapping multiple different pieces of constituent data to a single piece of abstract data; based on similarities in the constituent data ,  for example ,  many different physical cats map to the abstraction `` cat '' . 
theorems about abelian groups  -lrb-  i . e . 
this is true since if the group is abelian ,  then  . 
a group in which the group operation is not commutative is called a `` non-abelian group '' or `` non-commutative group '' . 
if the quotient group `` g ''/ ''z '' -lrb-  `` g ''  -rrb-  of a group by its center is cyclic then `` g '' is abelian . 
any group of prime order is isomorphic to a cyclic group and therefore abelian . 
if are two group homomorphisms between abelian groups ,  then their sum  ,  defined by  ,  is again a homomorphism . 
in fact ,  the modules over z can be identified with the abelian groups . 
in abstract algebra ,  an abelian group ,  also called a commutative group ,  is a group in which the result of applying the group operation to two group elements does not depend on the order in which they are written . 
the construction of a missile defense system was also feared to enable the us to attack with a nuclear first strike . 
by the early 1950s ,  us research on the nike zeus missile system had developed to the point where small improvements would allow it to be used as the basis of an operational abm system . 
this was achieved with the operational deployment of the a-35 abm system and its successors ,  which remain operational to this day . 
the anti-ballistic missile treaty  -lrb-  abm treaty or abmt  -rrb-   -lrb-  1972—2002 -rrb- was an arms control treaty between the united states and the soviet union on the limitation of the anti-ballistic missile  -lrb-  abm  -rrb-  systems used in defending areas against ballistic missile-delivered nuclear weapons . 
although the soviet union ceased to exist in december 1991, in the view of the u . s .  department of state ,  the treaty continued in force . 
putin responded to the withdrawal by ordering a build-up of russia's nuclear capabilities ,  designed to counterbalance u . s .  capabilities . 
regardless of the opposition ,  reagan gave every indication that sdi would not be used as a bargaining chip and that the united states would do all in its power to build the system . 
austria-hungary was one of the central powers in world war i which started when it declared war on the kingdom of serbia on july 28, 1914.
the union was a result of the austro-hungarian compromise of 1867 and came into existence on 30 march 1867.
the word is now commonly used as an incantation in the performance of magic . 
the puritan minister increase mather dismissed the word as bereft of power . 
abracadabra is an incantation used as a magic word in stage magic tricks ,  and historically was believed to have healing powers when inscribed on an amulet . 
the acts of union were two acts of parliament: the union with scotland act 1706 passed by the parliament of england ,  and the union with england act passed in 1707 by the parliament of scotland . 
it also created a customs union and monetary union . 
in scotland ,  the duke of queensberry was largely responsible for the successful passage of the union act by the scottish parliament . 
the treaty of union ,  agreed between representatives of the parliament of england and the parliament of scotland in 1706, consisted of 25 articles ,  15 of which were economic in nature . 
the treaty was hated in scotland at the time . 
the english purpose was to ensure that scotland would not choose a monarch different from the one on the english throne . 
while it referred repeatedly to 'union' between england ,  scotland ,  and ireland ,  it did not explicitly commit to political union which had little support even among their english supporters . 
under the aegis of the queen and her ministers in both kingdoms ,  the parliaments of england and scotland agreed to participate in fresh negotiations for a union treaty in 1705.
the scottish parliament also passed the protestant religion and presbyterian church act 1707 guaranteeing the status of the presbyterian church of scotland . 
not one petition in favour of an incorporating union was received by parliament . 
in scotland ,  some claimed that union would enable scotland to recover from the financial disaster wrought by the darien scheme through english assistance and the lifting of measures put in place through the alien act to force the scottish parliament into compliance with the act of settlement . 
the english parliament passed a similar act ,  6 anne c . 8.
the 1639–1640 bishops' wars confirmed the primacy of the presbyterian church of scotland or kirk and established a covenanter government in scotland . 
scotland benefited ,  says historian g . n . 
the two acts incorporated provisions for scotland to send representative peers from the peerage of scotland to sit in the house of lords . 
soon after the union ,  the act 6 anne c . 40later named the union with scotland  -lrb-  amendment  -rrb-  act 1707united the english and scottish privy councils and decentralised scottish administration by appointing justices of the peace in each shire to carry out administration . 
