an example would occur if a cow were defined as a legless quadruped . 
a straightforward example would be to define `` jew '' as `` a person believing in judaism '' ,  and `` judaism '' as `` the religion of the jewish people '' ,  which would make `` judaism '' `` the religion of the people believing in judaism . `` 
if a cow were defined as an animal with horns ,  this would be overly broad  -lrb-  including goats ,  for example  -rrb-  ,  while if a cow were defined as a black-and-white quadruped ,  this would be both overly narrow  -lrb-  excluding all-black or all-white cows ,  for example  -rrb-  and overly broad  -lrb-  including dalmatians ,  for example  -rrb-  . 
if one concept is defined by another ,  and the other is defined by the first ,  this is known as a circular definition ,  akin to circular reasoning: neither offers enlightenment about what one wanted to know . 
fredericton  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the capital of the canadian province of new brunswick . 
architecturally ,  fredericton spans more than two centuries . 
there are 12 national historic sites of canada in fredericton . 
federally ,  the city forms most of the riding of fredericton . 
the highest temperature ever recorded in fredericton was on 18 august 1935.
thus ,  in a period of less than three years ,  the area of fredericton went from being a sparsely populated region to being the capital of the new colony of new brunswick . 
today the city of fredericton comprises fredericton proper ,  and the boroughs of silverwood ,  nashwaaksis ,  barker's point and marysville ,  which were incorporated into the city in 1973.
at an altitude of about above sea level ,  fredericton is nestled in the pennsylvanian basin . 
the area of the present-day city of fredericton was first used for seasonal farming by the maliseet peoples . 
the saint john river runs through fredericton ,  with most of the city's post-war suburban development occurring on the gently sloping hills on either side of the river  -lrb-  although the downtown core is flat and lies low to the river  -rrb-  . 
one of the communities amalgamated into fredericton in 1973, marysville ,  has a unique and distinctive history of its own . 
their townsite was on the south side of the river ,  approximately a mile upriver from fort nashwaak . 
computer programs are deemed free insofar as they give users  -lrb-  not just the developer  -rrb-  ultimate control over the first ,  thereby allowing them to control what their devices are programmed to do . 
members of the free software movement advocate that works which serve a practical purpose should also be free . 
members of the free software movement believe that all users of software should have the freedoms listed in the free software definition . 
stallman later established the free software foundation in 1985 to support the movement . 
the core work of the free software movement focused on software development . 
regarding the meaning and misunderstandings of the word `` free '' ,  those who work within the free software camp have searched for less ambiguous terms and analogies like `` free beer vs free speech '' in efforts to convey the intended semantics ,  so that there is no confusion concerning the profitability of free software . 
this is seen as important since people who receive free software ,  but who are not aware that it is free software ,  will later accept a non-free replacement or will add software that is not free software . 
in india ,  where free software has gained a lot of ground ,  the unambiguous term `` swatantra '' and its variants are widely used instead of `` free '' . 
the switch from the free software movement to the open-source movement has had negative effects on the progression of community ,  according to christopher kelty who dedicates a scholarly chapter to the free software movements in `` theorizing media and practice '' . 
the venezuelan government implemented a free software law in january 2006.
on the other hand ,  the free software movement views free software as a moral imperative: that proprietary software should be rejected for selfish and social reasons ,  and that only free software should be developed and taught to cope with the task of making computing technology beneficial to humanity . 
some free software advocates use the term free and open-source software  -lrb-  foss  -rrb-  as an inclusive compromise ,  drawing on both philosophies to bring both free software advocates and open-source software advocates together to work on projects with more cohesion . 
the debate over the morality of both sides to the free software movement is a difficult topic to compromise respective opposition . 
fresh food is food which has not been preserved and has not spoiled yet . 
foods considered street foods are frequently ,  though not exclusively ,  finger foods . 
food safety and food security are monitored by agencies like the international association for food protection ,  world resources institute ,  world food programme ,  food and agriculture organization ,  and international food information council . 
many plants and plant parts are eaten as food and around 2,000 plant species are cultivated for food . 
finger food is food meant to be eaten directly using the hands ,  in contrast to food eaten with a knife and fork ,  spoon ,  chopsticks ,  or other utensils . 
many campers use a combination of these foods . 
these products may be sold in health food stores or in the health food or organic sections of grocery stores . 
medical foods ,  called `` food for special medical purposes '' in europe ,  are distinct from the broader category of foods for special dietary use ,  from traditional foods that bear a health claim ,  and from dietary supplements . 
camping food includes ingredients used to prepare food suitable for backcountry camping and backpacking . 
the food standards agency was reported as supporting the change ,  providing the food had been stored correctly up to that time . 
freezing food preserves it from the time it is prepared to the time it is eaten . 
health food is food marketed to provide human health effects beyond a normal healthy diet required for human nutrition . 
today ,  the majority of the food energy required by the ever increasing population of the world is supplied by the food industry . 
in europe the european food safety authority established definitions for `` foods for special medical purposes ''  -lrb-  fsmps  -rrb-  in 2015.
diet food  -lrb-  or `` dietetic food ''  -rrb-  refers to any food or beverage whose recipe is altered to reduce fat ,  carbohydrates ,  abhor/adhore sugar in order to make it part of a weight loss program or diet . 
the term was first used in japan in the 1980s where there is a government approval process for functional foods called foods for specified health use  -lrb-  foshu  -rrb-  . 
vegetables are a second type of plant matter that is commonly eaten as food . 
in autumn 2008, the montana lottery ,  one of only four u . s .  states to legalize sports betting at the time ,  began offering fantasy  sports wagering for the first time . 
at around the same time a league from glassboro state college also formed a similar baseball league and had its first draft in 1976.
the hobby continued to grow with 1 million to 3 million playing from 1991 to 1994.
rotonews . com also launched in january 1997 and published its first player note on february 16, 1997.
one exception is the state of nevada ,  which has an exemption in paspa to allow for sports betting . 
according to the fantasy sports trade association ,  fantasy sports is a $7.22 billion industry with 59.3 million fantasy sports players in the united states and canada as of 2016.
in the event that fantasy sports are not deemed to be a form of sports wagering ,  then states may have a role in determining their legality . 
later that year benson developed the first draft-simulation program ,  software that he still sells today . 
 ''it would be strange law that a person would not have a first amendment right to use information that is available to everyone , ``  a three-judge panel said in its ruling . 
in 1988, usa today estimated that there were thousands of leagues in the us ,  typically 8 to 12 players . 
however ,  since initial legal challenges ,  19 states have since enacted laws confirming that dfs contests are legal games of skill . 
fantasy football also saw new businesses and growth . 
an early survey of the fantasy sports market in the u . s .  in 1999 showed 29.6 million people age 18 and older played fantasy  games . 
dfs providers have cited the uigea's exemptions of fantasy sports as being a general exception for their legality; their legality is subject to how individual states classify a game of chance . 
the company would re-emerge as rotowire . com . 
the first reported fantasy baseball league began in boston in 1960.
as of december 2017, 18 states have followed maryland to clarify that dfs and paid fantasy sports are legal contests of skill . 
the growth in fantasy sports revenue attracted larger media players . 
there were also different business models . 
several states have clarified that paid fantasy sports contests are games of skill and exempt from gambling laws ,  beginning with maryland in 2012.
daily fantasy sports have not historically offered in 5 states iowa ,  arizona ,  louisiana ,  montana ,  washington that have laws stating a game that involves any chance is gambling . 
because the uigea exempted fantasy sports from its definition of a bet or wager ,  there is a misconception that fantasy sports were made legal by the uigea . 
whether state laws can regulate fantasy sports depends on whether fantasy sports are a form of sports wagering under federal law . 
 ''iowa did attempt two basketball-style forward passes . `` 
the forward pass was not officially allowed in canadian football until 1929.
the person passing the ball must be a member of the offensive team ,  and the recipient of the forward pass must be an eligible receiver and must touch the passed ball before any ineligible player . 
the university of north carolina used the forward pass in an 1895 game against the university of georgia . 
the first forward pass in a professional football game may have been thrown in an ohio league game played on october 25, 1906.
if a forward pass is caught near a sideline or endline it is a complete pass  -lrb-  or an interception  -rrb-  only if a receiver catches the ball `` in bounds '' . 
the forward pass had been attempted at least 30 years before the play was actually made legal . 
some publications credit yale all-american paul veeder with the `` first forward pass in a major game . `` 
if an eligible receiver on the passing team legally catches the ball ,  the pass is completed and the receiver may attempt to advance the ball . 
in the two codes of rugby  -lrb-  union and league  -rrb-  ,  a forward pass is against the rules . 
before that rule change ,  a forward pass had to be made from 5 or more yards behind the line of scrimmage . 
the garryowen ,  as well as the cross-field kick ,  while not as reliable as the forward pass and more difficult to execute successfully ,  can provide some of the function that a forward pass does in american and canadian football . 
yost disciple dan mcgugin coached vanderbilt and was one of the first emphasize the forward pass . 
after it was used against a major school on a national stage in this game ,  the forward pass rapidly gained popularity . 
the development of the forward pass in american football shows how the game has evolved from its rugby roots into the distinctive game it is today . 
the primary pass thrower is the quarterback ,  and statistical analysis is used to determine a quarterback's success rate at passing in various situations ,  as well as a team's overall success at the `` passing game . `` 
state-owned fiji broadcasting corporation operates fijian-language radio fiji one ,  hindi-language radio fiji two ,  music-based bula fm ,  hindi station mirchi fm ,  and music-based 2day fm . 
telecommunications in fiji include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
a code of ethics contained in the media decree requires that all stories run by the media be balanced ,  with comment obtained from both sides where there is any disagreement on the facts . 
under the military government's media decree ,  the directors and 90 percent of the shareholders of locally based media must be citizens of ,  and permanently resident in ,  the country . 
a series of decrees have been issued ,  including the public order amendment decree  -lrb-  poad  -rrb-  ,  the media decree ,  and the crime decree . 
modes of transport in fiji include rail ,  road ,  water ,  and air . 
the republic of fiji military forces  -lrb-  rfmf  -rrb-  is the military force of the pacific island nation of fiji . 
reciprocally ,  fiji has an embassy in tokyo . 
on 3 november 2009, fiji ordered the diplomatic envoys of new zealand to leave fiji within 24 hours . 
on 3 november 2009 fiji ordered the diplomatic envoys of australia to leave fiji within 24 hours . 
fiji has experienced many coups recently ,  in 1987, 2000, and 2006.
china has invested in a number of major projects in fiji . 
he reaffirmed fiji's support for the one china policy . 
new zealand's top diplomat in fiji at the time was todd cleaver . 
fiji announced its withdrawal of their high commissioner from australia . 
helen clark has said in the `` nz herald '' that she would consider sanctions against fiji . 
australia and new zealand responded on 4 november 2009, expelling fiji's diplomats from both those countries . 
the fiji village news service reported on 11 october that vanuatu's trade minister ,  james bule ,  would visit fiji on 25 october . 
diplomatic relations between japan and fiji were established in october 1970.
the purpose of the visit would be to deliver his government's decision to lift the ban on fijian biscuits ,  in return for fiji lifting its ban on vanuatu kava . 
his visit to fiji will be the first by a senior chinese government official . 
fiji's foreign affairs chief executive officer ,  isikeli mataitoga ,  said that fiji's policy of pursuing diplomatic channels in dealing with such disputes had been vindicated . 
on 13 april 2005, fiji's prime minister ,  laisenia qarase ,  rejected criticism from australia and some other countries over the prosecution and imprisonment of two foreigners charged with committing homosexual acts ,  which are illegal in fiji ,  and said that other countries needed to respect fiji's independence . 
in the event of a kick recovered in one's own end zone ,  the entirety of the ball must pass the goal line in order for the ball to be considered a touchback ,  and to not be in the field of play . 
it is the line that must be crossed in order to score a touchdown . 
when a player who does not have the ball is taken down ,  it is generally referred to as a block . 
if a player has not had prior opportunity to dispose of the ball and a tackler knocks the ball free during a tackle then no free kick is paid and the game continues . 
a tackled player must immediately dispose of the ball legally ,  by kicking or handballing ,  but not by throwing or dropping the ball . 
for this reason ,  the sport allows players to shepherd and bump their opponents within 5 metres of the ball ,  to protect the ball carrier . 
tacklers are not required to wrap their arms around the ball carrier before bringing him to the ground; in fact ,  the ball carrier is often `` tackled '' by the defender taking a running start and hitting the ball carrier to knock them to the ground . 
players not in possession of the ball are not allowed to be tackled ,  and will receive a holding the man free kick if tackled . 
almost all tackles where the tackler's legs make contact with the opponent before the ball are considered illegal ,  and heavy contact after initially touching the ball may also be penalised . 
it is also illegal to tackle a player who has thrown a forward pass  -lrb-  generally a quarterback  -rrb-  after he has released the ball; doing so is called `` roughing the passer '' and incurs a 15-yard penalty and a fresh set of downs for the team with the ball . 
in any such case ,  the ball becomes dead ,  the down is over ,  and play ceases until the beginning of the next play . 
this will be the offensive play . 
a play from scrimmage is the activity of the games of canadian football and american football during which one team tries to advance the ball ,  get a first down ,  or to score ,  and the other team tries to stop them or take the ball away . 
the best players of those clubs can earn up to $70 million per year . 
american football players are prone to head injuries such as concussion . 
a 1983 study of rugby players found that the life expectancy of all blacks is the same as for the general population . 
one explanation is that `` life expectancy '' is ambiguous: it may in some contexts refer to the expected age of death of a player ,  and in other contexts to the expected remaining number of life years . 
the average life expectancy or lifespan of an american football nfl player has been reported to be extremely low ,  only 53 to 59 years depending on playing position . 
as for association football ,  a 2011 german study found that german national team players live 1.9 years less than the general male population . 
the rate of suicide among nfl vets has been found to be 59% lower than in the general population . 
for example ,  players in the national women's soccer league  -lrb-  nwsl  -rrb-   -lrb-  which started in 2012 -rrb- earn $15,000 to $40,000 per year as of january 2017.
the `` good man '' of master morality is precisely the `` evil man '' of slave morality ,  while the `` bad man '' is recast as the `` good man '' . 
that year he also met lou andreas-salomé ,  through malwida von meysenbug and paul rée . 
nietzsche had already met richard wagner in leipzig in 1868 and later wagner's wife ,  cosima . 
poisoning by mercury ,  a treatment for syphilis at the time of nietzsche's death ,  has also been suggested . 
beginning with `` human ,  all too human '' in 1878, nietzsche published one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year ,  he completed five . 
consequently ,  nietzsche turned his attention to his studies again ,  completing them in 1868 and meeting with richard wagner for the first time later that year . 
in this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees ,  whatever wills is seen swelled ,  taut ,  strong ,  overloaded with strength . 
the russian painter lena hades created the oil painting cycle `` also sprach zarathustra '' dedicated to the book `` thus spoke zarathustra '' . 
to the end of his life ,  gast and overbeck remained consistently faithful friends . 
nietzsche approaches the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one ,  stating that this problem of the modern world is a problem that has `` become conscious '' in him . 
zarathustra contrasts the overman with the last man of egalitarian modernity  -lrb-  most obvious example being democracy  -rrb-  ,  an alternative goal humanity might set for itself . 
this concept appears only in `` thus spoke zarathustra '' ,  and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of the overman impossible . 
while interpretations of nietzsche's overman vary wildly ,  here is one of his quotations from `` thus spoke zarathustra ''  -lrb-  prologue ,  §§3–4 -rrb-:
related to his theory of the will to power is his speculation ,  which he did not deem final ,  regarding the reality of the physical world ,  including inorganic matter—that ,  like man's affections and impulses ,  the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power . 
 ''eternal return ''  -lrb-  also known as `` eternal recurrence ''  -rrb-  is a hypothetical concept that posits that the universe has been recurring ,  and will continue to recur ,  in a self-similar form for an infinite number of times across infinite time or space . 
nietzsche believed his ancestors were polish ,  at least toward the end of his life . 
the statement `` god is dead '' ,  occurring in several of nietzsche's works  -lrb-  notably in `` the gay science ''  -rrb-  ,  has become one of his best-known remarks . 
adorno summed up nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the `` humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham . `` 
it is not known why nietzsche wanted to be thought of as polish nobility . 
in the beginning of 1888, brandes delivered in copenhagen one of the first lectures on nietzsche's philosophy . 
for nietzsche ,  a fundamental shift took place during human history from thinking in terms of `` good and bad '' toward `` good and evil '' . 
nietzsche wrote of the affair in 1883, that he now felt `` genuine hatred for my sister . `` 
both of these principles are meant to represent cognitive states that appear through art as the power of nature in man . 
in 1867, nietzsche signed up for one year of voluntary service with the prussian artillery division in naumburg . 
salomé's mother took her to rome when salomé was 21.
in 1887, nietzsche wrote the polemic `` on the genealogy of morality '' . 
yet ,  they bring other examples in which nietzsche expressed his affections to other women ,  including wagner's wife cosima wagner . 
with the publication in 1878 of `` human ,  all too human ''  -lrb-  a book of aphorisms ranging from metaphysics to morality to religion to gender studies  -rrb-  ,  a new style of nietzsche's work became clear ,  highly influenced by afrikan spir's `` thought and reality '' and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of wagner and schopenhauer . 
according to heidegger ,  it is the burden imposed by the `` question '' of eternal recurrence—whether or not such a thing could possibly be true—that is so significant in modern thought: `` the way nietzsche here patterns the first communication of the thought of the 'greatest burden' of eternal recurrence makes it clear that this 'thought of thoughts' is at the same time 'the most burdensome thought . ' ''
this 1887 letter to fritsch ended by: `` and finally ,  how do you think i feel when the name zarathustra is mouthed by anti-semites ? `` 
amidst renewed bouts of illness ,  living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding salomé ,  nietzsche fled to rapallo ,  where he wrote the first part of `` thus spoke zarathustra '' in only ten days . 
he owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading schopenhauer's `` the world as will and representation '' and later admitted that schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected ,  dedicating the essay ``  '' in the `` untimely meditations '' to him . 
as heidegger put the problem ,  `` if god as the suprasensory ground and goal of all reality is dead ,  if the suprasensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalizing and upbuilding power ,  then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself . `` 
another concept important to an understanding of nietzsche's thought is the `` übermensch '' developing the idea of nihilism ,  nietzsche wrote `` thus spoke zarathustra '' ,  therein introducing the concept of a value-creating übermensch ,  not as a project ,  but as an anti-project ,  the absence of any project . 
nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation . 
zappa was an atheist . 
in late 1969, zappa broke up the band . 
zappa was married to kathryn j . 
following zappa's death ,  his widow gail created the zappa family trust ,  which owns the rights to zappa's music and other creative output: more than 60 albums were released during zappa's lifetime and 40 posthumously . 
in 1967 and 1968, zappa made two appearances with the monkees . 
in 1970 zappa met conductor zubin mehta . 
in 1990, zappa was diagnosed with terminal prostate cancer . 
zappa was born on december 21, 1940 in baltimore ,  maryland . 
in 1989, zappa considered his idea a `` miserable flop '' . 
 ''francesco zappa '' ,  a synclavier rendition of works by 18th-century composer francesco zappa was also released in 1984.
zappa managed to recover some of his possessions before the studio was torn down in 1966.
zappa later expanded on his television appearances in a non-musical role . 
on december 4, 1971, zappa suffered his first of two serious setbacks . 
zappa felt that audiences failed to appreciate his `` electrical chamber music '' . 
zappa is widely recognized as one of the most significant electric guitar soloists . 
during the late 1960s ,  zappa continued to develop the business sides of his career . 
they married in 1967, had four children and remained together until zappa's death . 
zappa's relationship with long-time manager herb cohen ended in 1976.
on december 21, 1979, zappa's movie `` baby snakes '' premiered in new york . 
zappa's albums make extensive use of segued tracks ,  breaklessly joining the elements of his albums . 
later in 1970, zappa formed a new version of the mothers  -lrb-  from then on ,  he mostly dropped the `` of invention ''  -rrb-  . 
they later became estranged for a period of years ,  but were in contact at the end of zappa's life . 
in new york ,  zappa increasingly used tape editing as a compositional tool . 
the album is also notable for the presence of guitarist steve vai ,  who joined zappa's touring band in late 1980.
zappa's interest in composing and arranging flourished in his last high-school years . 
reflecting zappa's eclectic approach to music ,  the next album ,  `` cruising with ruben & the jets ''  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- ,  was very different . 
the album contains one of zappa's most famous guitar `` signature pieces '' ,  `` watermelon in easter hay '' . 
the albums focus exclusively on frank zappa as a guitar soloist ,  and the tracks are predominantly live recordings from 1979 to 1980; they highlight zappa's improvisational skills with `` beautiful performances from the backing group as well '' . 
conceptual continuity clues are found throughout zappa's entire œuvre . 
zappa's last tour in a rock and jazz band format took place in 1988 with a 12-piece group which had a repertoire of over 100  -lrb-  mostly zappa  -rrb-  compositions ,  but which split under acrimonious circumstances before the tour was completed . 
after spending much of 1980 on the road ,  zappa released `` tinsel town rebellion '' in 1981.
the fabales are an order of flowering plants included in the rosid group of the eudicots in the angiosperm phylogeny group ii classification system . 
the deck is retrieved ,  and each player is dealt in turn from the deck the same number of cards they discarded so that each player again has five cards . 
alice deals five cards to each player and places the deck aside . 
in this case ,  if a player wishes to replace all five of their cards ,  that player is given four of them in turn ,  the other players are given their draws ,  and then the dealer returns to that player to give the fifth replacement card; if no other player draws it is necessary to deal a burn card first . 
if more than one player remains after the first round ,  the `` draw '' phase begins . 
for example ,  if the last player to draw wants three replacements but there are only two cards remaining in the deck ,  the dealer gives the player the one top card he can give ,  then shuffles together the bottom card of the deck ,  the burn card ,  and the earlier players' discards  -lrb-  but not the player's own discards  -rrb-  ,  and finally deals two more replacements to the last player . 
flame battles can have a lasting impact on some internet communities where even once a flame war has concluded a division or even dissolution may occur . 
a mental model may be correct in structure and assumptions but ,  even so ,  the human mind—either individually or as a group consensus—is apt to draw the wrong implications for the future . 
the literature suggests that ,  compared to face-to-face ,  the increased incidence of flaming when using computer-mediated communication is due to reductions in the transfer of social cues ,  which decrease individuals' concern for social evaluation and fear of social sanctions or reprisals . 
many social researchers have investigated flaming ,  coming up with several different theories about the phenomenon . 
flaming is the online act of posting insults ,  often laced with profanity or other offensive language on social networking sites . 
wright and olgivanna married in 1928.
in 1922, kitty wright finally granted wright a divorce . 
wright also designed some of his own clothing . 
wright aspired for more progressive work . 
in 1887, wright arrived in chicago in search of employment . 
soon after wright turned 14, his parents separated . 
wright and miriam noel's divorce was finalized in 1927, wright was again required to wait for one year before remarrying . 
taliesin west ,  wright's winter home and studio complex in scottsdale ,  arizona ,  was a laboratory for wright from 1937 to his death in 1959.
by 1890, wright had an office next to sullivan's that he shared with friend and draftsman george elmslie ,  who had been hired by sullivan at wright's request . 
frank lloyd wright was born frank lincoln wright in the farming town of richland center ,  wisconsin ,  united states ,  in 1867.
wright's projects during this period followed two basic models . 
the work contained more than 100 lithographs of wright's designs ,  and was commonly known as the `` wasmuth portfolio '' . 
wright attended madison high school; it is unknown if he graduated . 
in 1932, wright and his wife olgivanna put out a call for students to come to taliesin to study and work under wright while they learned architecture and spiritual development . 
wright rebuilt the living quarters ,  naming the home `` taliesin iii '' . 
it is the world's largest single-site collection of frank lloyd wright architecture . 
wright soon befriended corwin ,  with whom he lived until he found a permanent home . 
although this plan was never realized ,  wright published the design in the `` wasmuth portfolio '' in 1910.
wright's mother ,  anna lloyd jones  -lrb-  1838/39–1923 -rrb- ,  met william cary wright while working as a county school teacher when william was the superintendent of schools for richland county . 
frank lloyd wright was interested in site and community planning throughout his career . 
wright relocated his practice to his home in 1898 to bring his work and family lives closer . 
 -lrb-  see also below .   -rrb- 
a wide range is available of flying disc variants . 
manufacturers are producing discs with recycled plastic and recycled rubber for both casual play and competitive disc golf in recent years ,  due to the environmental problems caused by plastic pollution . 
a frisbee  -lrb-  pronounced  ,  also called a flying disc or simply a disc  -rrb-  is a gliding toy or sporting item that is generally plastic and roughly in diameter with a pronounced lip . 
modern discs are made of wood surrounded by a protective metal band ,  and weighed several pounds . 
when the world sea level was lower in the ice age ,  the falkland islands may have been joined to the mainland of south america . 
the falklands comprise two main islands ,  west falkland and east falkland ,  and about 776 small islands . 
west falkland has an area of  ,  making it smaller than east falkland . 
the islands to the north west of west falkland include pebble island  -lrb-  103 km  -rrb-  ,  keppel island  -lrb-  36 km  -rrb-  ,  saunders island  -lrb-  131 km  -rrb-  ,  carcass island ,  west point island and the jason group of islands  -lrb-  33 km  -rrb-  that lie some from west falkland . 
west falkland is more hilly on the side closest to east falkland . 
the principal islands to the south west of west falkland include new island  -lrb-  22 km  -rrb-  ,  weddell island  -lrb-  265 km  -rrb-  ,  beaver island  -lrb-  48 km  -rrb-  and staats island . 
in addition to the two main islands ,  the falkland islands have over 700 further islands ,  many no more than a few hectares in area . 
from the supreme court ,  appeals are sent to the falkland islands court of appeal ,  which is based on the court of appeal of england and wales . 
the judicial branch consists of the supreme court ,  the court of appeal ,  the summary court and the magistrates' court . 
the sm also hears appeals from the summary court . 
the cj also hears appeals from the magistrates' court . 
the falkland islands does not have its own bar or law society ,  but has a `` falkland islands legal community '' . 
the court system of the falklands is set out by and closely resembles the system in england and wales . 
appeals from the court of appeal are sent to the judicial committee of the privy council . 
only the chief justice of the falkland islands can prohibit a legal practitioner from practising . 
the attorney general  -lrb-  ag  -rrb-  ,  appointed by the governor ,  is the main legal adviser to the falkland islands government . 
the falkland islands have a gdp of $164.5 million ,  and a per capita gdp of $55,400  -lrb-  2002 estimate  -rrb-  compared with the united kingdom gdp per capita of $35,200  -lrb-  2009 estimate  -rrb-  . 
in the 2009/10 financial year ,  the government revenue was £42.4 million of which £14.5 million came from fishery licences and services and £10.5 million from taxes . 
during the same period the government expenditure was £47.6 million . 
there are two seaports in the falkland islands ,  stanley  -lrb-  east falkland  -rrb-  and fox bay  -lrb-  west falkland  -rrb-  . 
in 1982, the falkland islands had no roads outside stanley ,  only tracks . 
the falkland islands have two airports with paved runways . 
the falkland islands do not have a merchant navy . 
the falkland islands currently has three primary means of transport - road ,  sea and air . 
the falkland islands patrol ship is a river class patrol vessel ,  which replaced the previous castle class patrol vessel . 
argentina invaded and took control of the falklands on 2 april 1982.
the british army maintains a garrison on the falkland islands based at mount pleasant . 
the falkland islands are a british overseas territory and ,  as such ,  rely on the uk for the guarantee of their security . 
the falkland islands maintains its own part-time volunteer force ,  the falkland islands defence force  -lrb-  fidf  -rrb-  ,  previously known as the falkland islands volunteer corps . 
in february 2012, a `` trafalgar '' -class nuclear submarine may have been deployed to the falkland islands . 
the joint communications unit falkland islands  -lrb-  jcufi  -rrb-  provides the electronic warfare and command and control systems for the royal navy ,  army and raf stationed there . 
the faroese flag was also officially recognised by danish authorities . 
it was during this period that many faroese  -lrb-  6%  -rrb-  decided to emigrate ,  mainly to denmark . 
the british presence also left a lasting popularity for british chocolate and sweets ,  which is readily available in faroese shops but uncommon in denmark . 
the 1980s saw an increase in support for faroese independence . 
in 1816 the løgting  -lrb-  the faroese parliament  -rrb-  was officially abolished and replaced by a danish judiciary . 
norwegian rule on the islands continued until 1380, when the islands became part of the dual denmark–norway kingdom ,  under king olaf ii of denmark . 
the main historical source for this period is the 13th-century work `` færeyinga saga ''  -lrb-  `` saga of the faroese ''  -rrb-  ,  though it is disputed as to how much of this work is historical fact . 
following the liberation of denmark and the end of world war ii ,  the last british troops left in september 1945.
the faroes became a part of the kingdom of norway in 1035.
a slightly different account is found in the version of `` færeyinga saga '' in ólafs saga tryggvasonar:
faroese became a standardised written language in 1890, but it was not allowed to be used in the faroese public schools until 1938, and in the church  -lrb-  fólkakirkjan  -rrb-  until 1939.
king sverre of norway was brought up in the faroes ,  being stepson of a faroese man ,  and relative to roe ,  bishop of the islands . 
faroese fishing boats also provided a large amount of fish to the uk ,  which was crucial given food rationing . 
during the second world war denmark was invaded and occupied by nazi germany . 
on average ,  sandur experiences 41 days of frost a year . 
the faroe islands are an island group consisting of eighteen islands between the norwegian sea and the north atlantic ,  about half-way between iceland and norway . 
according to the 2011 census ,  45 361 faroese people  -lrb-  people living in the faroes  -rrb-  spoke faroese as their first language and 1546 spoke danish as their first language . 
of the approximately 48,000 inhabitants of the faroe islands  -lrb-  16,921 private households  -lrb-  2004 -rrb-  -rrb-  ,  98% are danish realm citizens ,  meaning faroese ,  danish ,  or greenlandic . 
faroese is spoken in the entire country as a first language . 
the faroese parliament  -lrb-  `` løgtingið in faroese ''  -rrb-  has 33 mps  -lrb-  members of parliament  -rrb-  ,  elected for a four-year term by proportional representation . 
the high commissioner is appointed by the queen of denmark . 
election of 2 seats to the danish parliament was last held on june 18, 2015: social democrats 1, republic 1.
in 2014 the faroe islands had a trade surplus of 401 million dkk ,  a figure that rose to 1.43 billion dkk in 2016.
total annual production: 305.4 gwh  -lrb-  2014 -rrb- of which the production of thermal ,  hydropower and wind power was:
also important are the annual subsidy from denmark ,  which amounts to about 3% of the gdp . 
in 2014 50.8% of the electricity production of sev in the faroe islands came from green energy like hydro and wind ,  while 49.2% was produced by the thermal power plants ,  which was 12.4% less than in 2013.
sandoyartunnilin will be 10,6 km long . 
the newest developments of the faroese transportation network are the sub-sea tunnels . 
in early 2014 all political parties of the løgting agreed to the construction of two tunnels: `` eysturoyartunnilin '' a tunnel connecting eysturoy and streymoy will be completed by 2019 and `` sandoyartunnilin '' ,  a tunnel connecting streymoy and sandoy ,  will be completed by 2021.
there have been talks about a possible tunnel between sandoy and suðuroy . 
the fourth period saw the emergence of a `` mainland '' thanks to tunnels and bridges . 
the british granted fiji independence in 1970.
fiji was re-admitted to the commonwealth of nations . 
fiji was only peripherally involved in world war i . 
fiji  -lrb-   ; ; fiji hindi: फ़िजी  -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of fiji  -lrb-  ; fiji hindi: फ़िजी गणराज्य  -rrb-  ,  is an island country in melanesia ,  part of oceania in the south pacific ocean about northeast of new zealand's north island . 
with this compromise ,  fiji became independent on 10 october 1970.
by the 1820s ,  levuka was established as the first european-style town in fiji ,  on the island of ovalau . 
fiji's main island is known as viti levu and it is from this that the name `` fiji '' is derived ,  though the common english pronunciation is based on that of their island neighbours in tonga . 
thus the colony of fiji was founded; 96 years of british rule followed . 
pots made in fiji have been found in samoa and even the marquesas islands . 
in april 2009, the fiji court of appeal ruled that the 2006 coup had been illegal . 
bligh water ,  the strait between the two main islands ,  is named after him ,  and for a time ,  the fiji islands were known as the `` bligh islands . `` 
whether this is the case or not ,  the decision ,  which was one of the first acts of british control in fiji ,  was at the very least grossly negligent . 
across from east to west ,  fiji has been a nation of many languages . 
the queensland act ,  which regulated indentured labour in queensland ,  was made law in fiji also . 
because of its central location ,  fiji was selected as a training base for the allies . 
repatriation of indentured indians from fiji began on 3 may 1892, when the `` british peer '' brought 464 repatriated indians to calcutta . 
the 1840s was a time of conflict where various fiji clans attempted to assert dominance over each other . 
to celebrate the annexation of fiji ,  hercules robinson ,  who was governor of new south wales at the time ,  took cakobau and his two sons to sydney . 
the majority of fiji's islands formed through volcanic activity starting around 150 million years ago . 
sir hercules robinson was replaced as governor of fiji in june 1875 by sir arthur hamilton gordon . 
in southern finland 150 to 160 m ,  in central finland about 200 m and in eastern finland up to 220 m . 
finland's total area is  . 
latitude is the principal influence on finland's climate . 
about one third of finland lies below 100 m ,  and about two thirds lies under 200 m .  finland can be divided into three topographical areas; the coastal landscapes ,  the interior lake plateau also known as finnish lake district and upland finland . 
except a few rivers along the coasts most rivers in finland drain at some stage into one or more lakes . 
the ice sheet that covered finland intermittently during the quaternary grew out from the scandinavian mountains . 
from the 13th to the early 19th century finland was a part of sweden . 
data according to statistics finland ,  which collects the official statistics for finland . 
the total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman . 
there is no constitutional court in finland – the constitutionality of a law can be contested only as applied to an individual court case . 
because the constitution of finland vests power to both the president and government ,  the president has veto power over parliamentary decisions ,  although this power can be overruled by a majority vote in the parliament . 
finland joined the european union in 1995.
finland is one of the most fiscally responsible eu countries . 
primary production is 2.9 percent . 
acquisitions and mergers have internationalized business in finland . 
finland's wet climate and rocky soils are ideal for forests . 
in addition ,  finland also produces train rolling stock . 
according to the oecd ,  finland's job market is the least flexible of the nordic countries . 
finnish officials believed that such growth was necessary if finland was to maintain its share in world markets for wood and paper products . 
essentially self-sufficient ,  finland engaged in very limited agricultural trade . 
agriculture in finland is the most productive compared to industry and services . 
as an economic environment ,  finland's judiciary is efficient and effective . 
finland is highly integrated in the global economy ,  and international trade is a third of gdp . 
in a 2004 oecd comparison ,  high-technology manufacturing in finland ranked second largest after ireland . 
finland's export-dependent economy continuously adapted to the world market; in doing so ,  it changed finnish society as well . 
finland's income is generated by the approximately 1.8 million private sector workers ,  who make an average 25.1 euro per hour  -lrb-  before the median 60% tax wedge  -rrb-  in 2007.
the chemical industry is one of the finland's largest industrial sectors with its roots in tar making in the 17th century . 
the most important factor determining social mobility in finland was education . 
indeed ,  industry demand was so great that finland needed to import 5 million to 6 million cubic meters of wood each year . 
finland was one of the 11 countries joining the third phase of the economic and monetary union of the european union ,  adopting the euro as the country's currency ,  on 1 january 1999.
the growth rate has since been one of the highest of oecd countries and finland has topped many indicators of national performance . 
finland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge . 
tax is collected mainly from municipal income tax ,  state income tax ,  state value added tax ,  customs fees ,  corporate taxes and special taxes . 
finland has excellent communications ,  and is considered one of the most advanced information societies in the world . 
the main road network comprises over of road . 
64% of all traffic on public roads takes place on main roads ,  which are divided into class i  -lrb-  `` / ''  -rrb-  and class ii  -lrb-  `` / ''  -rrb-  main roads . 
helsinki has an urban rail network . 
in war time the finnish border guard  -lrb-  which is its own military unit in peacetime  -rrb-  will become part of the finnish defence forces . 
the finnish defence forces  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  are responsible for the defence of finland . 
the finnish military ranks follow the western usage in the officer ranks . 
in an all-out confrontation between the two major blocs ,  finnish objective would have been to prevent any military incursions to finnish territory and thereby keep finland outside the war . 
the finnish military doctrine is based on the concept of total defence . 
finland fought in the continuation war alongside germany from 1941 to 1944.
finland has taken part in peacekeeping operations since 1956  -lrb-  the number of finnish peacekeepers who have served since 1956 amounts to 43,000 -rrb- . 
the finnish defence forces is based on universal male conscription . 
since 1956, 39 finnish soldiers have died while serving in peacekeeping operations
during the war the finns lost 25,904 men ,  while soviet losses were 167,976 dead . 
finland will be participating to two european union battlegroups in 2011.
after winning the civil war ,  the finnish peacetime army was organized as three divisions and a brigade by professional german officers . 
fighting between the white guards  -lrb-  as the civic guards were commonly known  -rrb-  and the red guards had already broken out about a week before around viipuri ,  in what became known as the finnish civil war . 
the peace settlement in 1944 with the soviet union led to the lapland war in 1945, where finland fought germans in northern finland
the foreign relations of finland are the responsibility of the president of finland ,  who leads foreign policy in cooperation with the government . 
in the european union ,  finland is a member of the eurozone ,  and in addition ,  the schengen treaty abolishing passport controls . 
however ,  halonen allowed finland to join european union battlegroups in 2006 and the nato response force in 2008.
finland became a full member of the eu in january 1995, at the same time acquiring observer status in the eu's defence arm ,  the western european union . 
cooperation with the other scandinavian countries also is important to finland ,  and it has been a member of the nordic council since 1955.
as of march 2011 finland maintains diplomatic relations with all un member states . 
telephones - mobile cellular: 60.95 million; 59.543 million  -lrb-  metropolitan france  -rrb-   -lrb-  2009 -rrb-
telephones - main lines in use: 36.441 million; 35.5 million  -lrb-  metropolitan france  -rrb-   -lrb-  2009 -rrb-
transportation in france relies on one of the densest networks in the world with 146 km of road and 6.2 km of rail lines per 100 km . 
metro and tramway services are not thought of as trains and usually follow road traffic in driving on the right  -lrb-  except the lyon metro  -rrb-  . 
the tgv has set many world speed records ,  the most recent on 3 april 2007, when a new version of the tgv dubbed the v150 with larger wheels than the usual tgv ,  and a stronger engine ,  broke the world speed record for conventional rail trains ,  reaching 574.8 km/h  -lrb-  357.2 mph  -rrb-  . 
rail ,  road ,  air and water are all widely developed forms of transportation in france . 
the french armed forces  -lrb-    -rrb-  encompass the army ,  the navy ,  the air force ,  the national guard and the gendarmerie of the french republic . 
as of 2017 the french armed forces have total menpower of 426,265, and has an active personnel of 368,962  -lrb-  with the gendarmerie national  -rrb-  . 
following defeat in the franco-prussian war ,  franco-german rivalry erupted again in the first world war . 
the head of the french armed forces is the president of the republic ,  in his role as `` chef des armées '' . 
resurgent french armies secured victories in dynastic conflicts against the spanish ,  polish ,  and austrian crowns . 
other major wars were fought against russia in the crimea ,  austria in italy ,  and prussia within france itself . 
de gaulle also imagined that these allies would look up to the more powerful french nation ,  and would look to it in leadership in matters of foreign policy . 
france also pursued close relations with the semi-autonomous egypt . 
the end of the war brought an immediate thaw to franco-egyptian relations ,  egypt ended the trial of four french officers accused of espionage ,  and france ended its trade embargo against egypt . 
this all changed with the coming of charles de gaulle to power . 
another hindrance to france's relations with the arab middle east was its close alliance with israel during the 1950s . 
de gaulle had hoped that by taking a moderate path and not strongly supporting either side france could take part in the middle east peace process between israel and the arab nations . 
the end of the algerian conflict in 1962 accomplished much in this regard . 
in 1967 de gaulle completely overturned france's israel policy . 
the algerian fighters received much of their supplies and funding from egypt and other arab powers ,  much to france's displeasure . 
a rivalry emerged between france and britain for control of egypt ,  and eventually britain emerged victorious by buying out the egyptian shares of the company before the french had time to act . 
france is also a founding member of the union for the mediterranean and the la francophonie and plays a key role ,  both in regional and in international affairs . 
french guinea  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a french colonial possession in west africa . 
french guinea became the modern-day country of guinea ,  keeping french as its official language . 
french polynesians vote in the french presidential elections . 
french polynesia also sends two senators to the french senate . 
in 1842, the french took over the islands and established a french protectorate they called ``  ''  -lrb-  french establishments/settlements in oceania  -rrb-  . 
french polynesia  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is an overseas collectivity of the french republic and the only overseas country of france . 
between 1946 and 2003, french polynesia had the status of an overseas territory  -lrb-  ' ,  or `` tom ''  -rrb-  . 
french polynesia became a full overseas collectivity of france in 2003.
under the terms of article 74 of the french constitution and the organic law 2014-192 on the statute of autonomy of french polynesia ,  politics of french polynesia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic french overseas collectivity ,  whereby the president of french polynesia is the head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
french polynesia was one of the last places on earth to be settled by humans . 
in 1940, the administration of french polynesia recognised the free french forces and many polynesians served in world war ii . 
the islands of french polynesia make up a total land area of  ,  scattered over more than of ocean . 
between 1946 and 2003, french polynesia had the status of an overseas territory  -lrb-  french: `` territoire d'outre-mer '' ,  or `` tom ''  -rrb-  . 
french polynesia has 5 administrative subdivisions  -lrb-    -rrb- : `` note: '' clipperton island  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  just off the coast of mexico ,  was administered by france from french polynesia . 
legislative power is vested in both the government and the assembly of french polynesia . 
farmers of asian origin tends to produce european and asian vegetables for the local market . 
other companies also operate ,  like air france and air new zealand . 
french polynesia's electricity production in 2004 was 477 gwh . 
before french colonisation ,  the polynesian islands that constitute nowadays french polynesia ,  relied on a subsistence economy . 
vanilla and pearls are its main exports . 
the moorea island developed pineapple production for local market and supplying the juice factory . 
tahiti produces a small quantity of fresh milk ,  mostly for the local yogurt factory ,  as most of the population is used to drinking uht and powdered milk from france and new zealand . 
french polynesia's economy is one of a developed country with a service sector accounting for 75% . 
the french southern and antarctic lands  -lrb-   ,  taaf  -rrb-  is an overseas territory  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  of france . 
the territory is sometimes referred to as the french southern lands  -lrb-    -rrb-  or french southern territories ,  usually to emphasize non-recognition of french sovereignty over adélie land as part of the antarctic treaty system . 
in 1794, after the death of robespierre ,  193 of his followers were sent to french guiana . 
the history of french guiana spans many centuries . 
the territory of inini ,  consisting of most of the interior of french guiana ,  was created in 1930.
the french returned once more in 1664, and founded a second settlement at sinnamary  -lrb-  this was attacked by the dutch in 1665 -rrb- . 
in 1498 french guiana was first visited by europeans when christopher columbus sailed to the region on his third voyage and named it the `` land of pariahs '' . 
in 1809 an anglo-portuguese naval squadron took french guiana  -lrb-  ousting governor victor hugues  -rrb-  and gave it to the portuguese in brazil . 
northern south america and part of caribbean south america ,  bordering the north atlantic ocean ,  between brazil and suriname . 
french and guianese creole french are the most widely spoken languages . 
it is largely responsible for the high population growth of french guiana . 
according to insee the population of french guiana was 239,450 of january 1, 2012.
the age distribution is a reflection of the high fertility rates of french guiana . 
the total fertility rate in french guiana has remained high and is today considerably higher than in metropolitan france ,  and also higher than the average of the french overseas departments . 
it is led by the president of the general council of french guiana . 
guiana elects two senators to the french senate . 
guiana also elects two deputies to the french national assembly . 
french guiana is not a separate territory but is both an overseas région and overseas department of france ,  with the same government institutions as areas on the french mainland . 
the economy of french guiana is tied closely to that of france through subsidies and imports . 
