father thomas carroll ,  who founded the carroll centre for the blind ,  wrote `` blindness: what it is ,  what it does and how to live with it '' in 1961.
 ''the country of the blind '' ,  a short story by h .  g .  wells ,  is one of the most well-known stories featuring blind characters . 
blind people had ,  in her opinion ,  grown so accustomed to waiting on others as to be passive and 'whiney . '
there are seven major rivers in the republic of bosnia and herzegovina:
eastern bosnia is heavily forested along the river drina ,  and overall close to 50% of bosnia and herzegovina is forested . 
bosnia and herzegovina is located in southeastern europe ,  in the western balkans . 
the south part of bosnia has mediterranean climate and a great deal of agriculture . 
the country's name comes from the two regions bosnia and herzegovina ,  which have a very vaguely defined border between them . 
this article is about the demographic features of the population of bosnia and herzegovina ,  including population density ,  ethnicity ,  education level ,  health of the populace ,  economic status ,  religious affiliations and other aspects of the population . 
the politics of bosnia and herzegovina takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democracy ,  whereby executive power is exercised by the council of ministers of bosnia and herzegovina . 
due to the dayton agreement ,  signed on 14 december 1995, bosnia and herzegovina forms an undeclared protectorate with elements of hegemony by neighboring croatia and serbia as co-signatories to the agreement ,  where highest power is given to the high representative for bosnia and herzegovina . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated bosnia and herzegovina as `` hybrid regime '' in 2016.
bosnia and herzegovina is divided into two `` entities '' – the federation of bosnia and herzegovina and the republika srpska ,  which are politically autonomous to an extent ,  as well as the district of brčko ,  which is jointly administered by both . 
the chair of the presidency of bosnia and herzegovina rotates amongst three members  -lrb-  a bosniak ,  a serb ,  and a croat  -rrb-  every 8 months within their 4-year term . 
the war in bosnia and herzegovina caused production to plummet by 80% from 1992 to 1995 and unemployment to soar . 
under president tito ,  metal industries were pushed in the republic; bosnia hosted a large share of yugoslavia metal industry - bosnia was in the center of metal industry in former yugoslavia . 
this page discusses the economy of bosnia and herzegovina since bosnia and herzegovina's declaration of sovereignty in october 1991 and the declaration of independence from the former yugoslavia on 3 march 1992.
support for eastern european democracy  -lrb-  seed  -rrb-  assistance accounts for 20%-25% of economic growth in bosnia . 
a central bank of bosnia and herzegovina was established in late 1997, debt negotiations were held with the london club in december 1997 and with the paris club in october 1998, and a new currency ,  the bosnia and herzegovina convertible mark ,  was introduced in mid-1998.
during the bosnian civil war  -lrb-  1992–1995 -rrb- much of the economy and infrastructure in bosnia was damaged or destroyed ,  causing unemployment to soar . 
bosnia and herzegovina has facilities for road ,  rail ,  and air transport . 
the ministry of defense of bosnia and herzegovina ,  founded in 2004, is in charge of the armed forces of bosnia and herzegovina . 
conscription was completely abolished in bosnia and herzegovina effective on and from 1 january 2006.
the restructuring of the three armies into the armed forces of bosnia and herzegovina represents part of a wider process of 'thickening' the central state institutions in bosnia and herzegovina . 
in accordance with the bih constitution  -lrb-  article 5.5a  -rrb-  ,  bih law of defense and bih law of service the supreme civilian commander of the armed forces bosnia and herzegovina is the collective presidency of bosnia and herzegovina . 
the army of the republic of bosnia and herzegovina was created on 15 april 1992 during the early days of the bosnian war . 
the military units are commanded by the armed forces of bosnia and herzegovina joint staff in sarajevo . 
there are three regiments that are each formed by soldiers from the three ethnic groups of bosnia and herzegovina: bosniaks ,  croats and serbs and trace their roots to the armies that were created during the war in bih . 
relations with its neighbors of croatia ,  montenegro and serbia have been fairly stable since the signing of the dayton agreement in 1995.
there were 2 broad waves of immigration to south africa; nguni and sotho-tswana . 
the election of the national party government in 1948, which instituted apartheid ,  and south africa's withdrawal from the commonwealth in 1961, ended any prospect of incorporation of the territories into south africa . 
sometime between 200-500 ad ,  the bantu-speaking people who were living in the katanga area  -lrb-  today part of the drc and zambia  -rrb-  crossed the limpopo river ,  entering the area today known as south africa as part of the bantu expansion . 
the former settled in the eastern coastal regions ,  while the latter settled primarily in the area known today as the highveld — the large ,  relatively high central plateau of south africa . 
botswana is semi-arid ,  due to the short rain season . 
botswana is a landlocked country located in southern africa ,  north of south africa . 
this is a list of the extreme points of botswana ,  the points that are farther north ,  south ,  east or west than any other location . 
the seven censuses of botswana before its independence happened irregularly . 
there have been five censuses after the independence of botswana ,  each occurring every ten years in the year ending in 1  -lrb-  i . e . 
politics of botswana takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of botswana is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
botswana is formally a multiparty constitutional democracy . 
the main export of botswana is diamonds . 
most  -lrb-  70%  -rrb-  of botswana's electricity is imported from south africa's eskom . 
foreign investment and management have been welcomed in botswana . 
botswana is part of the southern african customs union  -lrb-  sacu  -rrb-  with south africa ,  lesotho ,  swaziland ,  and namibia . 
external investment in botswana has grown fitfully . 
trade unions represent a minority of workers in the botswana economy . 
due to its history and geography ,  botswana has long had deep ties to the economy of south africa . 
hyundai operated a car assembly plant in botswana from 1994 to 2000.
one of botswana's biggest challenges is its low level of economic diversification . 
tourism is an increasingly important industry in botswana ,  accounting for almost 12% of gdp . 
botswana was the setting for the 1980 movie `` the gods must be crazy '' ,  although the movie was mostly filmed in south africa . 
based on the revised trade factor methodology ,  botswana's trade policy score is unchanged . 
botswana's central kalahari game reserve also offers good game viewing and some of the most remote and unspoiled wilderness in southern africa . 
botswana is known to have vast coal deposits making it possibly one of the most coal-rich countries in the world . 
botswana include newspapers ,  radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
in botswana ,  the  -lrb-  botswana railways  -rrb-  `` br express '' has a commuter train between lobatse and gaborone . 
the passenger train is termed the `` br express ''  -lrb-  botswana railways  -rrb-  . 
the largest river in brazil ,  the second longest in the world ,  is the amazon . 
on brazil's east coast ,  the atlantic coastline extends  . 
brazil has one of the world's most extensive river systems ,  with eight major drainage basins ,  all of which drain into the atlantic ocean . 
the major river system in the northeast is the rio são francisco ,  which flows northeast from the south-central region . 
the country of brazil occupies roughly half of south america ,  bordering the atlantic ocean . 
the municipalities are minor federal units of the federative republic of brazil . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated brazil as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
brazil has the second-largest manufacturing sector in the americas . 
in 2016 forbes ranked brazil as having the 12th largest number of billionaires in the world . 
the gdp per capita in 2011 was us$12,906.
brazil has the largest cattle herd in the world ,  with 198 million heads ,  responsible for exports of more than us$1 billion/year . 
as of late 2010, brazil's economy is the largest of latin america and the second largest in the americas . 
in the space of fifty five years  -lrb-  1950 to 2005 -rrb- ,  the population of brazil grew from 51 million to approximately 187 million inhabitants ,  an increase of over 2 percent per year . 
the economy of brazil is the world's eighth largest economy by nominal gdp and eighth largest by purchasing power parity . 
the brazilian labor force is estimated at 100.77 million of which 10 percent is occupied in agriculture ,  19 percent in the industry sector and 71 percent in the service sector . 
brazil is a country with extreme income inequality . 
in 2007, with a population of over 209 million and abundant natural resources ,  brazil is one of the ten largest markets in the world ,  producing tens of millions of tons of steel ,  26 million tons of cement ,  3.5  million television sets ,  and 3  million refrigerators . 
in brazil's case ,  statistics showed that 4.5  million people emigrated to the country between 1882 and 1934.
brazil's transparency rank in the international world is 75th according to transparency international . 
according to the report of the international monetary fund of 2017, brazil is the 65th country in the world in the ranking of gdp per capita ,  with a value of us$ 10,019 per inhabitant . 
brazil has a diverse and sophisticated services industry as well . 
 ''national: '' extensive microwave radio relay system and a national satellite system with 64 earth stations . 
brazil has both modern technologies in the center-south portion ,  counting with lte ,  3g hspa ,  dsl isdb based digital tv . 
brazil has 1,751,868 kilometers of roads ,  96,353 km of them paved and 1,655,515 km unpaved . 
international rail links exist between brazil and argentina ,  bolivia and uruguay . 
the brazilian armed forces  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is the unified military organization comprising the brazilian army  -lrb-  including the brazilian army aviation  -rrb-  ,  the brazilian navy  -lrb-  including the brazilian marine corps and brazilian naval aviation  -rrb-  and the brazilian air force . 
the ministry of foreign affairs is responsible for managing the foreign relations of brazil . 
brazil's foreign policy is a by-product of the country's unique position as a regional power in latin america ,  a leader among developing countries ,  and an emerging world power . 
over the past decade ,  brazil has firmly established itself as a regional power . 
foreign policy priorities are established by the president . 
brazil regularly extends export credits and university scholarships to its latin american neighbors . 
the british virgin islands are located in the caribbean ,  between the caribbean sea and the north atlantic ocean ,  east of puerto rico . its geographic coordinates are  . 
in 2009, the infant mortality rate in the british virgin islands was 14.65/1000 births  -lrb-  16.61/1000 for females and 12.58/1000 for males  -rrb-  . 
by 2014 public debt had been reduced to us$106 million and the annual deficit reduced to us$25 million  -lrb-  including budgeted capital expenditure  -rrb-  . 
by 2016, the government had returned to a primary budget surplus ,  but public debt had increased to approximately us$141 million and debt service accounted for over us$12 million of the primary surplus . 
cash in the consolidated fund fell below us$7 million  -lrb-  with average monthly expenditure at nearly us$30 million  -rrb-  ,  and government accrued over us$13 million in due but unpaid invoices . 
the budget calls for it to increase again ,  but only by 2.6% in 2017.
the most recent national budget to be delivered was the 2017 budget  -lrb-  the territory's fiscal year runs from 1 april to 31 march  -rrb-  . 
brunei is a country in southeast asia ,  bordering the south china sea and east malaysia . 
brunei's oil production peaked in 1979 at over  . 
brunei is the third-largest oil producer in southeast asia ,  averaging about  . 
a new company ,  government-owned brunei wafirah holdings sdn bhd ,  has been established as the owner of the brunei halal brand . 
the brunei government actively encourages more foreign investment . 
brunei's oil exports to the united states accounted for 17% of the total exported . 
brunei darussalam in july 2009 launched its national halal branding scheme brunei halal which allows manufacturers in brunei and in other countries to use the premium brunei halal trademark to help them penetrate lucrative markets in countries with significant numbers of muslim consumers . 
brunei's substantial foreign reserves are managed by the brunei investment agency  -lrb-  bia  -rrb-  ,  an arm of the ministry of finance . 
such participation helps when tendering for contracts with the government or brunei shell petroleum . 
at least half of the directors in a company must be residents of brunei . 
the french oil company elf aquitaine became active in petroleum exploration in brunei in the 1980s . 
brunei is ,  along with lesotho ,  malaysia ,  swaziland ,  and tonga ,  a monarchy with its own monarch ,  the sultan of brunei . 
brunei has a high commission in canberra ,  and australia has a high commission in bandar seri begawan . 
australia and brunei darussalam enjoy a warm ,  and increasingly diverse bilateral relationship . 
the borders of bulgaria have a total length of 1,867 km; of them 1,181 km are land boundary and 686 km are formed by rivers . 
the northern border with romania is 609 km . 
the southern border is 752 km long ,  of them 259 km are with turkey and 493 km are with greece . 
the western border is 506 km long ,  of them 165 km are with the republic of macedonia and 341 km are with serbia . 
the coastline is 378 km . 
bulgarian entered the european union in 2007.
bulgarian entered nato in 2004.
his cabinet was supported by the bsp and the dps ,  opposed by gerb ,  while ataka was absent . 
in 1992 zhelev won bulgaria's first presidential elections and served as president until 1997.
in 2001, the former monarch of bulgaria simeon saxe-coburg-gotha returned to power ,  this time as prime minister with his national movement simeon ii  -lrb-  in bulgarian abbreviated: ndsv  -rrb-  ,  having won half  -lrb-  120 -rrb- of the seats . 
the bulgarian judicial system consists of regional ,  district and appeal courts ,  as well as a supreme court of cassation and one specialized criminal court . 
the president of bulgaria is directly elected for a 5-year term with the right to one re-election . 
the politics of bulgaria was aimed at joining the european union and the nato fold ,  as the alliances were recognised to have political agendas similar to the goals of the new bulgarian democracy . 
the territory of the republic of bulgaria is divided into provinces and municipalities . 
on 1 january 2007 bulgaria entered the european union . 
in december 1996, bulgaria joined the world trade organization . 
after joining the european union in 2007, bulgaria registered a peak in foreign investment of about 6 bln euro . 
sofia is the capital and economic heart of bulgaria and home to most major bulgarian and international companies operating in the country ,  as well as the bulgarian national bank and the bulgarian stock exchange . 
varna is the third largest city in bulgaria and the largest city and seaside resort on the bulgarian black sea coast . 
bulgaria also has the lowest personal and corporate income tax rates in the eu ,  as well as the second lowest public debt of all european union member states at 16.2% of gdp in 2010.
plovdiv is the second-largest city and has one of the largest economies in bulgaria . 
the bulgarian economy has developed significantly in the last 26 years ,  despite all difficulties after the disband of comecon in 1991.
at the same time ,  the focus of bulgarian international trade shifted from central europe to eastern europe and the ussr . 
from the end of world war ii until the widespread change of regime in eastern europe in november 1989, the bulgarian communist party  -lrb-  bcp  -rrb-  exerted complete economic ,  social and political control in bulgaria . 
the economy of bulgaria functions on the principles of the free market ,  having a large private sector and a smaller public one . 
the sofia metro has two lines ,  and a third is being built as of 2016.
after the second terminal of international airport sofia was built the total number of passengers for the country rose and reached 6,595,790 in 2008, and in april 2011 airport sofia serviced 282 694 passengers ,  13% more than the same period of 2009, when the record was 250 000 passengers . 
roads have overtaken the railroads as the chief mode of freight transportation . 
in 1998 the first six kilometres of an often-interrupted 52 km standard gauge subway project  -lrb-  the sofia metro  -rrb-  opened in sofia . 
bulgaria's rail system has not expanded since the 1980s ,  in 2014 there were 4,023 kilometers of main lines . 
in 2004 bulgaria air transported 365,465 passengers to international destinations ,  including all major european cities ,  while in 2014 this number was at 897,422.
in 1919 bulgaria officially left the war with the treaty of neuilly-sur-seine . 
the serbo-bulgarian war was the first armed conflict after bulgaria's liberation . 
the peace settlement of the first balkan war proved unsatisfactory for both serbia and bulgaria . 
the bulgarian army  -lrb-    -rrb-  represents the armed forces of the republic of bulgaria . 
on 8 september 1944 the bulgarian army joined the soviet union in its war against germany . 
on 16 june 1913, just a few months after the end of the first war ,  the bulgarian government ordered an attack on serbian and greek positions in macedonia ,  without declaring war . 
the kingdom of bulgaria participated in world war i on the side of the central powers between 15 october 1915, when the country declared war on serbia ,  and 29 september 1918, when the armistice of thessalonica was signed . 
lured by austria-hungary's promises of territorial gains from bulgaria  -lrb-  in return for concessions in the western balkans  -rrb-  ,  milan iv declared war on bulgaria on 14 november 1885.
with the collapse of the warsaw pact and the end of the cold war ,  bulgaria could no longer support a vast military . 
nevertheless ,  on the eve of world war ii the bulgarian army was still well-trained and well-equipped . 
burkina faso has a total area of 274,200 km ,  of which 273,800 km is land and 400 km water . 
burkina faso has a primarily tropical climate with two very distinct seasons . 
this is a list of the extreme points of burkina faso ,  the points that are farther north ,  south ,  east or west than any other location . 
burkina faso's fauna and flora are protected in two national parks and several reserves: see list of national parks in africa ,  nature reserves of burkina faso . 
burkina faso  -lrb-  formerly upper volta  -rrb-  is a landlocked sahel country that shares borders with six nations . 
about 12,000 europeans reside in burkina faso ,  the majority of whom are french . 
registration of vital events is in burkina faso not complete . 
the president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term and may serve up to two terms . 
the politics of burkina faso takes place in a framework of a semi-presidential republic ,  whereby the prime minister of burkina faso is the head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
each chamber has financial autonomy ,  with the president of the said chamber managing the credits allocated to them for the functioning of the chamber ,  but with a vote of the absolute majority ,  the chamber can dismiss the president for incompetence in managing finances . 
the economist intelligence unit rated burkina faso as a `` hybrid regime '' in 2016.
in 1995, burkina held its first multiparty municipal elections since it gained independence . 
burkina faso has an average income purchasing-power-parity per capita of $1,666 and nominal per capita of $790 in 2014.
a december 2018 report from the world bank indicates that cotton had become the most important cash crop ,  while gold exports were increasing in recent years . 
it has largely recovered from the devaluation of the cfa in january 1994, with a 1996 growth rate of 5.9% . 
however ,  both gold and cotton are listed as goods produced mostly by child labor and forced labor according to a recent u . s .  department of labor report . 
livestock ,  once a major export ,  has declined . 
telecommunications in burkina faso include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  and the internet . 
a march 2013 itu `` study on international internet connectivity in sub-saharan africa '' reports that the burkina faso `` internet market is not sufficiently dynamic and competitive '' and that the high costs for internet capable mobile phones  -lrb-  more than six times the cost of a basic mobile phone  -rrb-  and mobile internet subscriptions  -lrb-  up to seven times the cost for basic mobile  -rrb-  limit the number of internet users . 
the internet penetration rate in africa as a whole was 16 users per 100 inhabitants in 2013.
there are no government restrictions on access to the internet; however ,  the superior council of communication  -lrb-  scc  -rrb-  monitors internet web sites and discussion forums to ensure compliance with existing regulations . 
use of mobile phones has skyrocketed in the last decade ,  growing from 2,700 subscribers in 1998, to 1.0 million in 2006, to 10.0 million in 2012.
radio is the country's most popular communications medium . 
transport in burkina faso consists primarily of road ,  air and rail transportation . 
in 1986, the fabf formed a new unit ,  the `` escadrille de chasse ''  -lrb-  edc  -rrb-   -lrb-  attack unit  -rrb-  . 
in october 1985, the `` force aérienne de burkina faso '' ,  or fabf ,  was officially inaugurated . 
the air force was founded in 1964 as the `` escadrille de la république de haute-volta ''  -lrb-  ehv  -rrb-  or the republic of upper volta air squadron ,  a subordinate unit of the army . 
the ehv was initially formed with two douglas c-47 skytrain and three mh . 1521m broussard aircraft . 
being a landlocked country ,  burkina faso has no navy . 
compaoré came to power in a 1987 coup that led to the death of sankara . 
the six ex-philippine sf . 260wp aircraft were taken out of service in 1993 and returned to their previous owner ,  although the four newly built sf . 260wp aircraft were retained in service ,  and stationed at bobo dioulasso air base . 
burkina faso has good relations with the european union ,  african and certain asian countries . 
burkina faso's relations with its west african neighbors have improved in recent years . 
the table below describes land use in burundi . 
burundi occupies an area equal to in size ,  of which is land . 
the terrain of burundi is hilly and mountainous ,  dropping to a plateau in the east . 
the farthest headwaters of the nile ,  the ruvyironza river ,  has its source in burundi . 
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2015 was 44.8% ,  52.7% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 2.5% was older than 65 years old
politics of burundi takes place in a framework of a transitional presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of burundi is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
the political landscape of burundi has been dominated in recent years by the civil war and a long peace process and move to democracy . 
burundi has 18 provinces: bubanza ,  bujumbura mairie ,  bujumbura rural ,  bururi ,  cankuzo ,  cibitoke ,  gitega ,  karuzi ,  kayanza ,  kirundo ,  makamba ,  muramvya ,  muyinga ,  mwaro ,  ngozi ,  rutana ,  rumonge and ruyigi . 
burundi is a net food importer ,  with food accounting for 17% of imports in 1997.
burundi is a landlocked ,  resource-poor country with an underdeveloped manufacturing sector . 
to protest the 1996 coup by president pierre buyoya ,  neighboring countries imposed an economic embargo on burundi . 
communications in burundi include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile telephones ,  the internet ,  and the postal service in burundi . 
furthermore ,  there are also some airports in burundi . 
burundi does not possess any railway infrastructure ,  although there are proposals to connect burundi to its neighbours via railway . 
additionally ,  burundi has been added to a planned railway project to connect tanzania and rwanda . 
lake tanganyika is used for transport ,  with the major port on the lake being bujumbura . 
another project was launched in the same year ,  which aims to link burundi and rwanda  -lrb-  which also has no railways  -rrb-  to the drc and zambia ,  and therefore to the rest of southern africa . 
a general staff  -lrb-  `` état-major général ''  -rrb-  commands the armed forces ,  consisting of a joint staff  -lrb-  `` état-major inter-armes ''  -rrb- ; a training staff  -lrb-  `` état-major de la formation ''  -rrb-  ,  and a logistics staff  -lrb-  `` état-major de la logistique ''  -rrb-  . 
micombero then became prime minister . 
separately reported were the 22nd commando battalion  -lrb-  gitega  -rrb-  and 124th commando battalion bujumbura  -rrb-  . 
in 1981–82 the iiss estimated that the burundian armed forces were 6,000 strong ,  with 2 infantry battalions ,  1 airborne battalion ,  1 commando battalion ,  and an armoured car company . 
the bosporus  -lrb-    -rrb-  or bosphorus  -lrb-   or ; ancient greek: βόσπορος `` bosporos '' ; also known as the strait of istanbul;   -rrb-  is a narrow ,  natural strait and an internationally significant waterway located in northwestern turkey . 
the brussels-capital region is one of the three federated regions of belgium ,  alongside the walloon region and the flemish region . 
the most notable are: the first two are also the main airports of belgium . 
it has also won the most major european tournaments for a belgian side ,  with 6 european titles . 
despite its name ,  the brussels-capital region is not the capital of belgium . 
the city of brussels is also the capital of both the french community of belgium and the flemish community . 
in 1831, belgium was divided into 2,739 municipalities ,  including the 19 in the brussels-capital region . 
brussels  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the brussels-capital region  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  is a region of belgium comprising 19 municipalities ,  including the city of brussels ,  which is the capital of belgium . 
the planetarium of the royal observatory of belgium is one of the largest in europe . 
the french community commission has also another capacity: some legislative powers of the french community have been devolved to the walloon region  -lrb-  for the french language area of belgium  -rrb-  and to the french community commission  -lrb-  for the bilingual language area  -rrb-  . 
brussels lies in the north-central part of belgium ,  about from the belgian coast and about from the southern tip of belgium . 
the flemish parliament and flemish government have their seats in brussels ,  and so do the parliament of the french community and the government of the french community . 
19 of the 72 french-speaking members of the brussels parliament are also members of the parliament of the french community of belgium ,  and ,  until 2004, this was also the case for six dutch-speaking members ,  who were at the same time members of the flemish parliament . 
the regional parliament can enact ordinances  -lrb-  french:  ,  dutch:   -rrb-  ,  which have equal status as a national legislative act . 
the names of all the municipalities in the brussels-capital region are also of dutch origin ,  except for evere ,  which is celtic . 
before the creation of the brussels-capital region ,  regional competences in the 19 municipalities were performed by the brussels agglomeration . 
the 19 municipalities of the brussels-capital region are divided into six police zones ,  all bilingual  -lrb-  french and dutch  -rrb- :
it covers the 19 municipalities of the brussels-capital region and some surface routes extend to the near suburbs in the other regions . 
it is also a capital of the comic strip . 
it was the deadliest act of terrorism in belgium . 
belgian cuisine is characterised by the combination of french cuisine with the more hearty flemish fare . 
article 194 of the belgian constitution establishes that the capital of belgium is the city of brussels ,  the municipality in the region that is the city's core . 
watermael-boitsfort has the lowest population density in the region ,  with  . 
since the splitting of brabant in 1995, the brussels region does not belong to any of the provinces of belgium ,  nor is it subdivided into provinces itself . 
the brussels-capital region is served by several airports ,  all of which are located outside of the administrative territory of the region . 
a comprehensive bus and tram network covers the region . 
the french community and the flemish community exercise their powers in brussels through two community-specific public authorities: the french community commission  -lrb-  french: or cocof  -rrb-  and the flemish community commission  -lrb-  dutch: or vgc  -rrb-  . 
brussels is known as the birthplace of the belgian endive . 
the brussels-capital region was formed on 18 june 1989, after a constitutional reform in 1988.
a bi-communitarian public authority ,  the common community commission  -lrb-  french:  ,  cocom ,  dutch:  ,  ggc  -rrb-  also exists . 
they also have a board composed of the ministers and secretaries of state of each linguistic group in the government of the brussels-capital region . 
nevertheless ,  about three out of four residents are belgian nationals . 
on the eastern side of the region ,  the r21 or `` greater ring ''  -lrb-  french:  ,  dutch:   -rrb-  is formed by a string of boulevards that curves round from laeken to uccle . 
in french ,  is pronounced  -lrb-  the `` x '' is pronounced  ,  like in english  -rrb-  and in dutch ,  is pronounced  . 
the brussels-capital region has three main train stations: brussels-south ,  central and north ,  which are the busiest of the country . 
brussels is a centre of both media and communications in belgium ,  with many belgian television stations ,  radio stations ,  newspapers and telephone companies having their headquarters in the region . 
the church of our lady of laeken holds the tombs of many members of the belgian royal family ,  including all the former kings of belgium ,  within the royal crypt . 
they run from the centre of brussels to the outer reaches of the brussels-capital region . 
since the founding of the kingdom of belgium in 1830, brussels has transformed from being almost entirely dutch-speaking  -lrb-  brabantian dialect to be exact  -rrb-  ,  to being a multilingual city with french  -lrb-  specifically belgian french  -rrb-  as the majority language and `` lingua franca '' . 
 ,  it has been inscribed as a unesco world heritage site ,  the only belgian component to the multinational inscription 'primeval beech forests of the carpathians and other regions of europe' . 
the neoclassical style of the 18th and 19th centuries is represented in the `` royal quarter/coudenberg '' area ,  around the brussels park and royal square . 
other important institutions in the city of brussels are the constitutional court ,  the council of state ,  the court of audit ,  the royal belgian mint and the national bank of belgium . 
the region is skirted by the european route e19  -lrb-  n-s  -rrb-  and the e40  -lrb-  e-w  -rrb-  ,  while the e411 leads away to the se . 
brussels is also part of a wider diamond-shaped conurbation ,  with ghent ,  antwerp and leuven ,  which has about 4.4 million inhabitants  -lrb-  a little more than 40% of the total population of belgium  -rrb-  . 
this decentralised administrative public body also assumed jurisdiction over areas which ,  elsewhere in belgium ,  were exercised by municipalities or provinces . 
for their french-speaking  ,  it can vary from belgian ,  francophone belgian ,   -lrb-  like the memellanders in interwar ethnic censuses in memel  -rrb-  ,  walloon  -lrb-  for people who migrated from the wallonia region at an adult age  -rrb- ; for flemings living in brussels ,  it is mainly either flemish or  -lrb-  dutch for an inhabitant  -rrb-  ,  and often both . 
regions are one component of belgium's institutions ,  the three communities being the other component: brussels' inhabitants deal with either the french community or the flemish community for matters such as culture and education ,  as well as a common community for competencies which do not belong exclusively to either community ,  such as healthcare and social welfare . 
brussels is home to a large number of immigrants . 
the city also often experiences violent thunderstorms . 
brussels is also home to union saint-gilloise ,  the most successful belgian club before world war ii ,  with 11 titles the club was founded in saint-gilles but is based in nearby forest ,  and currently plays in second division . 
bell labs has its origins in the complex past of the bell system . 
nokia bell labs  -lrb-  formerly named at&t bell laboratories and bell telephone laboratories  -rrb-  is an industrial research and scientific development company ,  owned by finnish company nokia . 
after the invention of the telephone ,  bell maintained a relatively distant role with the bell system as a whole ,  but continued to pursue his own personal research interests . 
the first president of research at bell labs was frank b .  jewett who stayed there until 1940.
nine nobel prizes have been awarded for work completed at bell laboratories . 
stroustrup has written or co-written a number of publications ,  including the books `` a tour of c++ '' ,  `` programming: principles and practice using c++ '' ,  `` the c++ programming language '' ,  `` design and evolution of c++ '' and `` the annotated c++ reference manual '' . 
stroustrup also wrote a textbook for the language ,  `` the c++ programming language '' . 
the most important is brain disease and the effects of brain damage ,  that are covered in the human brain article . 
brains are most simply compared in terms of their size . 
the brains of vertebrates are made of very soft tissue . 
information from the sense organs is collected in the brain . 
the brains of humans and other primates contain the same structures as the brains of other mammals ,  but are generally larger in proportion to body size . 
sleep involves great changes in brain activity . 
it takes up a much larger proportion of the brain for primates than for other species ,  and an especially large fraction of the human brain . 
the descending connections from the brain allow for more sophisticated control . 
the function of the brain is to provide coherent control over the actions of an animal . 
cephalopods such as the octopus and squid have the largest brains of any invertebrates . 
the elaboration of the cerebral cortex carries with it changes to other brain areas . 
the brain develops in an intricately orchestrated sequence of stages . 
the most obvious difference between the brains of mammals and other vertebrates is in terms of size . 
the oldest brain to have been discovered was in armenia in the areni-1 cave complex . 
physiologically ,  the function of the brain is to exert centralized control over the other organs of the body . 
the computational functions of the brain are studied both by computer scientists and neuroscientists . 
in humans and many other mammals ,  new neurons are created mainly before birth ,  and the infant brain contains substantially more neurons than the adult brain . 
in the united states ,  the 1990s were officially designated as the `` decade of the brain '' to commemorate advances made in brain research ,  and to promote funding for such research . 
it is also possible to examine the microstructure of brain tissue using a microscope ,  and to trace the pattern of connections from one brain area to another . 
the brain contains several motor areas that project directly to the spinal cord . 
computational neuroscience encompasses two approaches: first ,  the use of computers to study the brain; second ,  the study of how brains perform computation . 
brain tissue consumes a large amount of energy in proportion to its volume ,  so large brains place severe metabolic demands on animals . 
although the same basic components are present in all vertebrate brains ,  some branches of vertebrate evolution have led to substantial distortions of brain geometry ,  especially in the forebrain area . 
the brain is an organ that serves as the center of the nervous system in all vertebrate and most invertebrate animals . 
reflecting the new understanding ,  in 1942 charles sherrington visualized the workings of the brain waking from sleep:
arousal and alertness are also modulated on a finer time scale by a network of brain areas . 
motor systems are areas of the brain that are involved in initiating body movements ,  that is ,  in activating muscles . 
the field of neuroscience encompasses all approaches that seek to understand the brain and the rest of the nervous system . 
byzantium was colonized by the greeks from megara in 657 bc . 
the form `` byzantium '' is a latinisation of the original name . 
the origins of byzantium are shrouded in legend . 
byzantium was besieged by greek forces during the peloponnesian war . 
much later ,  the name `` byzantium '' became common in the west to refer to the eastern roman empire . 
byzantium later conquered chalcedon ,  across the bosporus on the asiatic side . 
the berlin wall was more than long . 
the barrier was built inside east berlin or east german territory to ensure that it did not encroach on west berlin at any point . 
the 3.5 million east germans who had left by 1961 totalled approximately 20% of the entire east german population . 
on sunday morning ,  u . s .  troops marched from west germany through east germany ,  bound for west berlin . 
before the wall's erection ,  3.5 million east germans circumvented eastern bloc emigration restrictions and defected from the gdr ,  many by crossing over the border from east berlin into west berlin; from there they could then travel to west germany and to other western european countries . 
at midnight ,  the police and units of the east german army began to close the border and ,  by sunday morning ,  13 august ,  the border with west berlin was closed . 
the berlin wall  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  was a guarded concrete barrier that physically and ideologically divided berlin from 1961 to 1989.
most people believed that the wall was mainly a means of preventing the citizens of east germany from entering or fleeing to west berlin . 
in 1955, the soviets gave east germany authority over civilian movement in berlin ,  passing control to a regime not recognized in the west . 
with the closing of the east-west sector boundary in berlin ,  the vast majority of east germans could no longer travel or emigrate to west germany . 
united states and uk sources had expected the soviet sector to be sealed off from west berlin ,  but were surprised by how long the east germans took for such a move . 
the east german government claimed that the wall was an `` anti-fascist protective rampart ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  intended to dissuade aggression from the west . 
the german democratic republic  -lrb-  east germany  -rrb-  was declared on 7 october 1949.
as west germany's economy grew ,  and its standard of living steadily improved ,  many east germans wanted to move to west germany . 
in 1948, following disagreements regarding reconstruction and a new german currency ,  stalin instituted the berlin blockade ,  preventing food ,  materials and supplies from arriving in west berlin . 
this resulted in berlin becoming a magnet for east germans desperate to escape life in the gdr ,  and also a flashpoint for tension between the united states and the soviet union . 
the `` fall of the berlin wall '' paved the way for german reunification ,  which formally took place on 3 october 1990.
in some 20th and 21st century pop genres ,  such as 1980s pop ,  hip hop music and electronic dance music ,  the bass role may be filled with a bass synthesizer . 
the cello is considered a tenor instrument in some orchestral settings ,  but in a string quartet it is the bass instrument . 
in popular music ,  the bass part ,  which is called the `` bassline '' ,  typically provides harmonic and rhythmic support to the band . 
when i say 'uk bass' ,  it's what everyone uk is associated with so it would be a lot easier if it was called that . `` 
bass music  -lrb-  also called uk bass or post-dubstep  -rrb-  is an umbrella term for club music that emerged in the united kingdom during the mid-2000s under the influence of diverse genres such as dubstep ,  uk garage ,  r&b ,  wonky ,  house ,  and grime . 
the technology of the burning glass has been known since antiquity . 
the legend of archimedes gave rise to a considerable amount of research on burning glasses and lenses until the late 17th century . 
burning glasses  -lrb-  often called fire lenses  -rrb-  are still used to light fires in outdoor and primitive settings . 
various researchers worked with burning glasses ,  including anthemius of tralles  -lrb-  6th century ad  -rrb-  ,  proclus  -lrb-  6th century  -rrb-   -lrb-  who by this means purportedly destroyed the fleet of vitalian besieging constantinople  -rrb-  ,  ibn sahl in his `` on burning mirrors and lenses ''  -lrb-  10th century  -rrb-  ,  alhazen in his `` book of optics ''  -lrb-  1021 -rrb- ,  roger bacon  -lrb-  13th century  -rrb-  ,  giambattista della porta and his friends  -lrb-  16th century  -rrb-  ,  athanasius kircher and gaspar schott  -lrb-  17th century  -rrb-  ,  and the comte de buffon in 1740 in paris . 
the great wall of china is also a beacon network . 
in wales ,  the brecon beacons were named for beacons used to warn of approaching english raiders . 
the ancient romans used beacons and beacons figure on several occasions on the column of trajan . 
in scandinavia many hill forts were part of beacon networks to warn against invading pillagers . 
beacons help guide navigators to their destinations . 
punjabi instruments contribute to bhangra . 
punjabi immigrants have encouraged the growth of punjabi folk music in the western hemisphere rather than bhangra music . 
by the end of the 1990s ,  bhangra music had largely declined and been replaced with punjabi folk singers . 
their music is a fusion of bhangra ,  rock and dance . 
using folk instruments and hip-hop samples ,  along with relatively inexpensive folk vocals imported from punjab ,  punjabi folk music was able to cause the decline of bhangra music . 
this era also brought about bhangra art ,  which ,  like the bhangra music it represented was rebellious . 
malkit has been awarded the mbe by the british queen for his services to bhangra music . 
some south asian djs ,  especially in america ,  have mixed punjabi folk music with house ,  reggae ,  and hip-hop to add a different flavor to punjabi folk . 
itunes has catalogs of many punjabi folk singers available . 
the folk instruments were rarely used . 
a pioneering folk singer that was instrumental in bhangra's demise was jazzy b ,  who debuted in 1992.
a recent pepsi commercial launched in britain featured south asian actors and punjabi folk music . 
punjabi folk remixed with hip-hop ,  known as folkhop ,  is most often produced when folk vocals are purchased online to be remixed in a studio . 
a modern and commercial form of bhangra music was said to rise in britain in the 1970s by punjabi immigrants who took their native folk music and began experimenting by altering it using instruments from their host country . 
the album was remastered and re-released in 2009.
the band recorded `` licensed to ill '' throughout 1986 and released the album on november 15, 1986.
this was the first and ,  as of 2008, only time that a band had won awards in both rap and alternative categories . 
 ''ill communication '' ,  released in 1994, saw the beastie boys' return to the top of the charts when the album debuted at number 1 on the `` billboard '' 200 and peaked at number 2 on the r&b/hip hop album chart . 
also in 1994, the band released `` some old bullshit '' ,  featuring the band's early independent material ,  made number 46 on the `` billboard '' independent charts . 
the one new song ,  the single `` alive '' ,  reached number 11 on the billboard's modern rock chart . 
another song from the album ,  `` no sleep till brooklyn '' ,  peaked at number 14 on the uk singles chart . 
prior to forming the beastie boys ,  michael diamond was part of a number of bands such as the walden jazz band ,  ban ,  and the young aborigines . 
the beastie boys were an american hip hop group from new york city formed in 1981.
the band took the `` licensed to ill '' tour around the world the following year . 
also in 1993, the band contributed the track `` it's the new style ''  -lrb-  with dj hurricane  -rrb-  to the aids benefit album `` no alternative '' ,  produced by the red hot organization . 
there are two sovereign states in the isles: ireland and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland . 
the northern ireland peace process has led to a number of unusual arrangements between the republic of ireland ,  northern ireland and the united kingdom . 
few species of reptiles or amphibians are found in great britain or ireland . 
there are about 136 permanently inhabited islands in the group ,  the largest two being great britain and ireland . 
the british monarch is the head of state of the united kingdom ,  while in the republic of ireland the head of state is the president of ireland . 
ireland and the united kingdom are both part of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  . 
the kingdoms of england and scotland were unified in 1707 creating the kingdom of great britain . 
as with most of europe ,  prehistoric britain and ireland were covered with forest and swamp . 
great britain became an island by 5600 bc . 
most of ireland seceded from the united kingdom after the irish war of independence and the subsequent anglo-irish treaty  -lrb-  1919–1922 -rrb- ,  with six counties remaining in the uk as northern ireland . 
the united kingdom and ireland have separate media ,  although british television ,  newspapers and magazines are widely available in ireland ,  giving people in ireland a high level of familiarity with cultural matters in the united kingdom . 
by the late middle ages ,  great britain was separated into the kingdoms of england and scotland . 
the term `` british isles '' is controversial in ireland ,  where there are nationalist objections to its usage . 
the islands are at relatively low altitudes ,  with central ireland and southern great britain particularly low-lying: the lowest point in the islands is the north slob in county wexford ,  ireland ,  with an elevation of  . 
ireland ,  which had been held by the king of england as lord of ireland ,  but which strictly speaking had been a feudal possession of the pope since the norman invasion was declared a separate kingdom in personal union with england . 
the river severn at is the longest in great britain . 
in both spain and france ,  the use of basque for education varies from region to region and from school to school . 
by contrast ,  most of álava ,  the western part of biscay and central and southern areas of navarre are predominantly populated by native speakers of spanish ,  either because basque was replaced by spanish over the centuries ,  in some areas  -lrb-  most of álava and central navarre  -rrb-  ,  or because it was possibly never spoken there ,  in other areas  -lrb-  parts of the enkarterri and southeastern navarre  -rrb-  . 
 -lrb-  based on abba songs  -rrb-  . 
björn kristian ulvaeus  -lrb-  credited as björn ulvæus ; born 25 april 1945 -rrb- is a swedish songwriter ,  producer ,  a member of the swedish musical group abba ,  and co-composer of the musicals `` chess '' ,  `` kristina från duvemåla '' ,  and `` mamma mia ! ``  . 
the song was performed for the first time in the final on 18 may . 
with fellow abba member and close friend benny andersson . 
after abba ,  ulvaeus and andersson created the musicals `` chess '' ,  a collaboration with lyricist tim rice ,  `` kristina från duvemåla ''  -lrb-  based on `` the emigrants '' novels by swedish writer vilhelm moberg  -rrb-  ,  and `` mamma mia ! `` 
on 15 april 2013, it was officially announced by the ebu and the svt that ulvaeus and andersson ,  with the swedish dj and record producer avicii ,  had composed the anthem for the 2013 eurovision song contest . 
together with andersson ,  ulvaeus was nominated for the drama desk award in the category `` outstanding music ''  -lrb-  for the musical `` chess ''  -rrb-  ,  and for a tony award in a category `` best orchestrations ''  -lrb-  for the musical `` mamma mia ! ``   -rrb-  . 
in 1990, andersson scored a swedish no . 
andersson won the swedish `` guldbaggen '' award in 2012 as composer of the music for the film `` palme '' . 
andersson's next project was `` mamma mia ! 
and the swedish version of `` chess '' . 
after abba ,  andersson continued writing music with ulvaeus . 
andersson worked on the film adaptation of `` mamma mia ! ``  . 
andersson was engaged to christina grönvall . 
the album includes songs in swedish and english from a range of andersson's projects ,  such as `` chess '' ,  `` kristina '' and bao . 
he also wrote the theme for roy andersson's next film ,  `` you ,  the living '' ,  from 2007.
a film version of `` mamma mia ! `` 
göran bror benny andersson  -lrb-  ; born 16 december 1946 -rrb- is a swedish musician ,  composer ,  member of the swedish music group abba ,  and co-composer of the musicals `` chess '' ,  `` kristina från duvemåla '' ,  and `` mamma mia ! ``  . 
in 2000, he wrote the music for fellow swede  -lrb-  no relation  -rrb-  roy andersson's film `` songs from the second floor ''  -lrb-  the music later re-recorded ,  featuring new lyrics ,  with bao ! 
1 hits . 
3 hit . 
a personal computer that does not have embedded bluetooth can use a bluetooth adapter that enables the pc to communicate with bluetooth devices . 
the implication is that bluetooth unites communication protocols . 
bluetooth is a packet-based protocol with a master/slave architecture . 
see the table `` ranges of bluetooth devices by class '' . 
wi-fi and bluetooth are to some extent complementary in their applications and usage . 
linux has two popular bluetooth stacks ,  bluez and affix . 
bluetooth low energy uses 2mhz spacing ,  which accommodates 40 channels . 
bluetooth is commonly used to transfer sound data with telephones  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  with a bluetooth headset  -rrb-  or byte data with hand-held computers  -lrb-  transferring files  -rrb-  . 
bluetooth is managed by the bluetooth special interest group  -lrb-  sig  -rrb-  ,  which has more than 30,000 member companies in the areas of telecommunication ,  computing ,  networking ,  and consumer electronics . 
bluetooth protocols simplify the discovery and setup of services between devices . 
to use bluetooth wireless technology ,  a device must be able to interpret certain bluetooth profiles ,  which are definitions of possible applications and specify general behaviors that bluetooth-enabled devices use to communicate with other bluetooth devices . 
the bluetooth special interest group  -lrb-  bluetooth sig  -rrb-  is the standards organisation that oversees the development of bluetooth standards and the licensing of the bluetooth technologies and trademarks to manufacturers . 
boney m . 's first album ,  `` take the heat off me '' ,  was released in 1976.
boney m .  is a euro-caribbean vocal group created by german record producer frank farian . 
1992 saw a renewed interest in boney m . 's music with the `` boney m .  megamix '' single returning the group to the uk top 10 for the first time since 1980, and a subsequent greatest hits album reaching the uk top 20 in 1993.
in 1980, boney m .  released a greatest hits album ,  `` the magic of boney m .  – 20 golden hits '' ,  which also contained two new songs ,  `` my friend jack '' and `` i see a boat on the river '' . 
1978 was the group's biggest year . 
1979 saw boney m .  release a brand new single ,  `` hooray ! 
in the uk ,  a new album of their greatest hits ,  entitled `` the magic of boney m . ``  was released via bmg on 27 november 2006.
in 1977, boney m .  released their second album ,  `` love for sale '' ,  which contained the hits `` ma baker '' and `` belfast '' . 
liz mitchell was touring the world with her line-up of boney m .  ,  which is the only line-up officially supported by farian  -lrb-  the court ruling of 1990 stated that all four members are entitled to perform their own boney m .  shows  -rrb-  . 
following this ,  the group released a `` christmas album '' . 
both singles from the album reached no . 1 in germany and the uk top 10.
boney m . 's fifth album had been scheduled for release in november 1980 but the recording sessions dragged on all through 1981.
singer marcia barrett  -lrb-  from jamaica  -rrb-  joined the group ,  who brought in liz mitchell ,  former member of the les humphries singers and boney m was finalised . 
boney m .  was hugely popular in the soviet union in the 1970s ,  although the song `` rasputin '' was banned by the soviet authorities during the group's concert in moscow in december 1978.
in january 2009, frank farian released a brand new single called `` felicidad america  -lrb-  obama obama  -rrb- ``  under the name-check `` boney m .  feat . 
in october 1988, the classic boney m .  line-up reunited without producer frank farian for the album `` greatest hits of all times – remix '88 '' but tensions ran high between the members ,  and liz mitchell left in the spring of 1989 to be replaced by madeleine davis . 
in 1992, ford revealed ,  ``  ''blade runner '' is not one of my favorite films . 
a sequel ,  `` blade runner 2049 '' ,  was released in october 2017.
 ''blade runner '' was released in 1,290 theaters on june 25, 1982.
ridley scott has stated that in his vision ,  deckard is a replicant . 
casting the film proved troublesome ,  particularly for the lead role of deckard . 
deckard and rachael leave the apartment block . 
denis villeneuve ,  who directed the sequel ,  `` blade runner 2049 '' ,  cites the film as a huge influence for him and many others . 
pauline kael praised `` blade runner '' as worthy of a place in film history for its distinctive sci-fi vision ,  yet criticized the film's lack of development in `` human terms '' . 
deckard is later told by bryant that sebastian was found dead . 
in the film ,  it takes more than a hundred questions to determine that rachael is a replicant . 
blade runner is a 1982 science fiction film directed by ridley scott ,  written by hampton fancher and david peoples ,  and starring harrison ford ,  rutger hauer ,  sean young ,  and edward james olmos . 
the film has influenced many science fiction films ,  video games ,  anime ,  and television series . 
principal photography of `` blade runner '' began on march 9, 1981, and ended four months later . 
ridley scott also used `` memories of green '' from the vangelis album `` see you later ,  `` an orchestral version of which scott would later use in his film `` someone to watch over me '' . 
the question of whether deckard is intended to be a human or a replicant has been an ongoing controversy since the film's release . 
initial reactions among film critics were mixed . 
microsoft launched its first retail version of microsoft windows on november 20, 1985.
ibm approached microsoft in july 1980 in reference to an operating system for its upcoming personal computer ,  the ibm pc . 
gates oversaw microsoft's company restructuring on june 25, 1981, which re-incorporated the company in washington state and made gates the president of microsoft and its board chairman . 
after adapting the operating system for the pc ,  microsoft delivered it to ibm as pc dos in exchange for a one-time fee of $50,000.
in 2008, gates appeared in a series of ads to promote microsoft . 
bill and melinda gates have said that they intend to leave their three children $10 million each as their inheritance . 
gates was an executive who met regularly with microsoft's senior managers and program managers . 
during microsoft's early years ,  all employees had broad responsibility for the company's business . 
in 1975, gates and paul allen launched microsoft ,  which became the world's largest pc software company . 
during his career at microsoft ,  gates held the positions of chairman ,  ceo and chief software architect ,  while also being the largest individual shareholder until may 2014.
while microsoft had previously given financial support to the institution ,  this was the first personal donation received from gates . 
later in his career and since leaving microsoft ,  gates pursued a number of philanthropic endeavors . 
since leaving day-to-day operations at microsoft ,  gates has continued his philanthropy and works on other projects . 
from microsoft's founding in 1975 until 2006, gates had primary responsibility for the company's product strategy . 
he also pledged an additional $50 million to start-up ventures working in alzheimer's research . 
he stepped down as chairman of microsoft in february 2014 and assumed a new post as technology adviser to support the newly appointed ceo satya nadella . 
gates was number one on `` forbes ''' 400 richest americans list from 1993 through to 2007, 2009, and 2014 through 2017.
in 2002, bill and melinda gates received the jefferson award for greatest public service benefiting the disadvantaged . 
the belgian blue  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a breed of beef cattle from belgium . 
the belgian blue has a natural mutation in the myostatin gene which codes for the protein ,  myostatin  -lrb-  `` myo '' meaning muscle and `` statin '' meaning stop  -rrb-  . 
conversely ,  the belgian blue's meat tenderness has been argued to be just as tender because a large number of smaller muscle fibers are present . 
the economics of breeding and raising belgian blue cattle are inconclusive because of complications experienced during parturition and metabolic demand for more concentrated feeds . 
