the first open-source crm system was developed by sugarcrm in 2004.
inquiry ,  activity management  -rrb-  as crm features in their erp . 
strategic crm is concentrated upon the development of a customer-centric business culture . 
customer-relationship management  -lrb-  crm  -rrb-  is an approach to manage a company's interaction with current and potential customers . 
through the crm approach and the systems used to facilitate it ,  businesses learn more about their target audiences and how to best cater to their needs . 
chuck-a-luck is a game of chance . 
chuck-a-luck ,  also known as birdcage ,  is a game of chance played with three dice . 
the casino's advantage  -lrb-  house advantage or house edge  -rrb-  is greater than most other casino games and can be much greater . 
the eastern chipmunk hibernates in the winter ,  while western chipmunks do not ,  relying on the stores in their burrows . 
chipmunks are found in north america ,  with the exception of the siberian chipmunk which is found primarily in asia . 
chipmunks are small ,  striped rodents of the family sciuridae . 
chipmunks have also been referred to as `` striped squirrels '' ,  `` timber tigers '' ,  and `` ground squirrels ''  -lrb-  although the name `` ground squirrel '' usually refers to other squirrels ,  such as those of the genus `` spermophilus ''  -rrb-  . 
computer-generated music is music composed by ,  or with the extensive aid of ,  a computer . 
computer music is the application of computing technology in music composition ,  to help human composers create new music or to have computers independently create music ,  such as with algorithmic composition programs . 
the music was never recorded ,  but it has been accurately reconstructed . 
we can distinguish two groups of computer-generated music: music in which a computer generated the score ,  which could be performed by humans ,  and music which is both composed and performed by computers . 
the `` omax brothers ''  -rrb-  in the ircam music representations group . 
machine improvisation encourages musical creativity by providing automatic modeling and transformation structures for existing music . 
this is different from other improvisation methods with computers that use algorithmic composition to generate new music without performing analysis of existing music examples  . 
although any music which uses computers in its composition or realisation is computer-generated to some extent ,  the use of computers is now so widespread  -lrb-  in the editing of pop songs ,  for instance  -rrb-  that the phrase computer-generated music is generally used to mean a kind of music which could not have been created `` without '' the use of computers . 
there is a large genre of music that is organized ,  synthesized ,  and created on computers . 
much of the work on computer music has drawn on the relationship between music and mathematics ,  a relationship which has been noted since the ancient greeks described the `` harmony of the spheres '' . 
computers have also been used in an attempt to imitate the music of great composers of the past ,  such as mozart . 
the field of computer music can trace its roots back to the origins of electronic music ,  and the very first experiments and innovations with electronic instruments at the turn of the 20th century . 
many systems for generating musical scores actually existed well before the time of computers . 
a central question in the study of concepts is the question of what concepts `` are '' . 
there are two main views of the ontology of concepts:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- concepts are abstract objects ,  and  -lrb-  2 -rrb- concepts are mental representations . 
within the framework of the representational theory of mind ,  the structural position of concepts can be understood as follows: concepts serve as the building blocks of what are called `` mental representations ''  -lrb-  colloquially understood as `` ideas in the mind ''  -rrb-  . 
cell cycle is a peer-reviewed scientific journal covering a range of cell biology related contents . 
various categories of manuscripts are published within the journal ,  ranging from research papers and reports ,  journal review articles and follow-ups of important cell cycle published articles . 
at times ,  infighting among the powell-led state department ,  the rumsfeld-led defense department ,  and cheney's office had the effect of polarizing the administration on crucial issues ,  such as what actions to take regarding iran and north korea . 
powell has been very vocal on the state of the republican party . 
he was also the first republican since 1984 to receive electoral votes from washington in a presidential election ,  as well as the first republican black person to do so . 
i've never said i didn't support a decision to go to war . `` 
he was the 65th united states secretary of state ,  serving under u . s .  president george w .  bush from 2001 to 2005, the first black person to serve in that position . 
after his departure from the state department ,  powell repeatedly emphasized his continued support for american involvement in the iraq war . 
in a 2008 interview on cnn ,  powell reiterated his support for the 2003 decision to invade iraq in the context of his endorsement of barack obama ,  stating: `` my role has been very ,  very straightforward . 
bush eventually won ,  and powell was appointed secretary of state . 
later that year ,  president george h .  w .  bush selected him as chairman of the joint chiefs of staff . 
after being unanimously confirmed by the u . s .  senate ,  he was sworn in as the 65th secretary of state on january 20, 2001.
during 1975–1976 he attended the national war college ,  washington ,  d . c . 
in september 2009, powell advised president obama against surging us forces in afghanistan . 
powell's position on the iraq war troop surge of 2007 has been less consistent . 
he appeared on the networks that were broadcasting new year's eve specials and talked about this honor ,  as well as being a native of new york city . 
as secretary of state in the bush administration ,  powell was perceived as moderate . 
in his autobiography ,  powell said he is haunted by the nightmare of the vietnam war and felt that the leadership was very ineffective . 
despite not standing in the race ,  powell won the republican new hampshire vice-presidential primary on write-in votes . 
powell was born in new york city in 1937 and was raised in the south bronx . 
powell is the recipient of numerous u . s .  and foreign military awards and decorations . 
powell was also the first jcs chair who received his commission through rotc . 
a liberal republican ,  powell is well known for his willingness to support liberal or centrist causes . 
colin luther powell  -lrb-  ; born april 5, 1937 -rrb- is an american statesman and a retired four-star general in the united states army . 
on january 5, 2006, he participated in a meeting at the white house of former secretaries of defense and state to discuss united states foreign policy with bush administration officials . 
after saddam hussein had been deposed ,  powell's new role was to once again establish a working international coalition ,  this time to assist in the rebuilding of post-war iraq . 
in another interview ,  however ,  he also simply stated `` with respect to your earlier comment about chile in the 1970s and what happened with mr .  allende ,  it is not a part of american history that we're proud of . `` 
additionally ,  powell has been critical of other instances of u . s .  foreign policy in the past ,  such as its support for the 1973 chilean coup d'état . 
on december 31, 2004, powell rang in the new year by pressing a button in times square with new york city mayor michael bloomberg to initiate the ball drop and 60 second countdown ,  ushering in the year 2005.
powell also serves on the council on foreign relations board of directors . 
during this discussion ,  he insisted that the u . s .  appeal to the united nations first ,  but if diplomacy failed ,  he would support the invasion: `` i also had to say to him that you are the president ,  you will have to make the ultimate judgment ,  and if the judgment is this isn't working and we don't think it is going to solve the problem ,  then if military action is undertaken i'm with you ,  i support you . `` 
he also formulated the powell doctrine . 
the function of the reaction center of chlorophyll is to absorb light energy and transfer it to other parts of the photosystem . 
electron transfer reactions in the thylakoid membranes are complex ,  however ,  and the source of electrons used to reduce p700 can vary . 
two types of chlorophyll exist in the photosystems of green plants: chlorophyll a and b . 
chlorophylls absorb light most strongly in the blue portion of the electromagnetic spectrum as well as the red portion . 
carotenes are carotenoids containing no oxygen . 
they also protect plant tissues by helping to absorb the energy from singlet oxygen ,  an excited form of the oxygen molecule o which is formed during photosynthesis . 
specifically ,  the group of nine carbon atoms at each end form a β-ring . 
the following foods are particularly rich in carotenes  -lrb-  also see vitamin a article for amounts  -rrb- :
carotenoids containing some oxygen are known as xanthophylls . 
this is equivalent to 3⅓ iu of vitamin a . 
they are both symmetrical; the basf synthesis is c20 + c20, and the hoffman-la roche synthesis is c19 + c2 + c19.
they absorb ultraviolet ,  violet ,  and blue light and scatter orange or red light ,  and  -lrb-  in low concentrations  -rrb-  yellow light . 
carotenes are also found in some species of termites ,  where they apparently have been picked up from the diet of the insects . 
carotenes are also found in palm oil ,  corn ,  and in the milk of dairy cows ,  causing cow's milk to be light yellow ,  depending on the feed of the cattle ,  and the amount of fat in the milk  -lrb-  high-fat milks ,  such as those produced by guernsey cows ,  tend to be yellower because their fat content causes them to contain more carotene  -rrb-  . 
β-carotene is composed of two retinyl groups ,  and is broken down in the mucosa of the human small intestine by β-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase to retinal ,  a form of vitamin a .  β-carotene can be stored in the liver and body fat and converted to retinal as needed ,  thus making it a form of vitamin a for humans and some other mammals . 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate  -lrb-  camp ,  cyclic amp ,  or 3' , 5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate  -rrb-  is a second messenger important in many biological processes . 
cimabue  -lrb-  ; ; 1240 – 1302 -rrb- ,  also known as cenni di pepo or cenni di pepi ,  was an italian painter and designer of mosaics from florence . 
cimabue spent the last period of his life ,  1301 to 1302, in pisa . 
italian art historian pietro toesca attributed the `` crucifixion '' in the church of san domenico in arezzo to cimabue ,  dating around 1270, making it the earliest known attributed work that departs from the byzantine style . 
the `` maestà of santa trinita '' ,  dated to c .  1290–1300, which was originally painted for the church of santa trinita in florence ,  is now in the uffizi gallery . 
during the pontificate of pope nicholas iv ,  the first franciscan pope ,  cimabue worked in assisi . 
some five percent of u . s .  gdp was approximately $850 billion in 2013.
the top 5 u . s .  banks had approximately 30% of the u . s .  banking assets in 1998; this rose to 45% by 2008 and to 48% by 2010, before falling to 47% in 2011.
corporate power can also increase income inequality . 
six more also planned to do so in 2015.
in the 12 months to march 31, 2014, s&p 500 companies increased their stock buyback payouts by 29% year on year ,  to $534.9 billion . 
the primary effects of corporatization are the consolidation of economic power and wealth ,  with the end results being the attrition of entrepreneurial and free market dynamism . 
one indication of increasing corporate power was the removal of restrictions on their ability to buy back stock ,  contributing to increased income inequality . 
it is such decision making power as well as the power to impose deregulation over the past 30 years ,  resulting in changes to national constitutions ,  and to national and international legislation which has created the environment for corporate crime and impunity . `` 
canadian humour is an integral part of the canadian identity . 
by the mid-20th century ,  canadian writers were exploring national themes for canadian readers . 
canadian values are the commonly shared ethical and human values of canada . 
in general ,  canadian nationalists are highly concerned about the protection of canadian sovereignty and loyalty to the canadian state ,  placing them in the civic nationalist category . 
the canadian comedy awards were founded in 1999 by the canadian comedy foundation for excellence ,  a not-for-profit organization . 
official symbols of canada include the maple leaf ,  beaver ,  and the canadian horse . 
the culture of canada embodies the artistic ,  culinary ,  literary ,  humour ,  musical ,  political and social elements that are representative of canada and canadians . 
established in 1975, the great canadian theatre company specializes in the production of canadian plays at a local level . 
the national film board of canada is 'a public agency that produces and distributes films and other audiovisual works which reflect canada to canadians and the rest of the world' . 
canadian literature is often categorized by region or province; by the socio-cultural origins of the author  -lrb-  for example ,  acadians ,  indigenous peoples ,  lgbt ,  and irish canadians  -rrb- ; and by literary period ,  such as `` canadian postmoderns '' or `` canadian poets between the wars '' . 
there are numerous other sports halls of fame in canada . 
canadian television ,  especially supported by the canadian broadcasting corporation ,  is the home of a variety of locally produced shows . 
canadian cuisine varies widely depending on the region . 
all but curling and soccer are considered domestic sports as they were either invented by canadians or trace their roots to canada . 
canadian authors have accumulated numerous international awards . 
sports in canada consists of a variety of games . 
as a result ,  the issue of canadian identity remains under scrutiny . 
over the years ,  many canadians have made enormous contributions to the american entertainment industry ,  although they are frequently not recognized as canadians . 
canadian football is canada's second most popular spectator sport ,  and the canadian football league's annual championship ,  the grey cup ,  is the country's largest annual sports event . 
it has also tried to protect canadian culture by setting legal minimums on canadian content in many media using bodies like the canadian radio-television and telecommunications commission  -lrb-  crtc  -rrb-  . 
the crtc's canadian content regulations dictate that a certain percentage of a domestic broadcaster's transmission time must include content that is produced by canadians ,  or covers canadian subjects . 
the works of most early canadian painters followed european trends . 
canada is a country in the northern part of north america . 
furthermore ,  the toronto stock exchange is the seventh-largest stock exchange in the world by market capitalization ,  listing over 1,500 companies with a combined market capitalization of over us$2 trillion  . 
the cauchy distribution has no moment generating function . 
functions with the form of the density function of the cauchy distribution were studied by mathematicians in the 17th century ,  but in a different context and under the title of the witch of agnesi . 
in most cases ,  control engineers utilize feedback when designing control systems . 
control engineering or control systems engineering is an engineering discipline that applies automatic control theory to design systems with desired behaviors in control environments . 
originally ,  control engineering was all about continuous systems . 
although feedback is an important aspect of control engineering ,  control engineers may also work on the control of systems without feedback . 
today ,  many of the control systems are computer controlled and they consist of both digital and analog components . 
digital control and nonlinear control courses require z transformation and algebra respectively ,  and could be said to complete a basic control education . 
cautod can be applied not just to tuning a predefined control scheme ,  but also to controller structure optimisation ,  system identification and invention of novel control systems ,  based purely upon a performance requirement ,  independent of any specific control scheme . 
there are two major divisions in control theory ,  namely ,  classical and modern ,  which have direct implications for the control engineering applications . 
 ''t .  cruzi '' can also be transmitted through blood transfusions . 
 -lrb-  see also:   -rrb- 
it is unclear whether `` t .  cruzi '' can be transmitted through frozen-thawed blood components . 
the symptomatic  -lrb-  determinate  -rrb-  chronic stage affects the nervous system ,  digestive system and heart . 
in the chronic stage ,  treatment involves managing the clinical manifestations of the disease . 
chagas disease ,  also known as american trypanosomiasis ,  is a tropical parasitic disease caused by the protist `` trypanosoma cruzi '' . 
the presence of `` t .  cruzi '' is diagnostic of chagas disease . 
hopefully ,  new drug targets may be revealed following the sequencing of the `` t .  cruzi '' genome . 
screening of donated blood ,  blood components ,  and solid organ donors ,  as well as donors of cells ,  tissues ,  and cell and tissue products for `` t .  cruzi '' is mandated in all chagas-endemic countries and has been implemented . 
the human disease occurs in two stages: an acute stage ,  which occurs shortly after an initial infection ,  and a chronic stage that develops over many years . 
the acute phase also can be severe in people with weakened immune systems . 
20–50% of individuals with intestinal involvement also exhibit cardiac involvement . 
triatomines pass `` t .  cruzi '' parasites  -lrb-  called trypomastigotes  -rrb-  in feces left near the site of the bite wound . 
blood transfusion was formerly the second-most common mode of transmission for chagas disease ,  but the development and implementation of blood bank screening tests has dramatically reduced this risk in the 21st century . 
while the rate of cure declines the longer an adult has been infected with chagas ,  treatment with benznidazole has been shown to slow the onset of heart disease in adults with chronic chagas infections . 
both agents are limited in their capacity to completely eliminate `` t .  cruzi '' from the body  -lrb-  parasitologic cure  -rrb-  ,  especially in chronically infected patients ,  and resistance to these drugs has been reported . 
barnard performed the first such heterotopic heart transplant in 1974.
christiaan barnard wrote two autobiographies . 
barnard and his patient received worldwide publicity . 
barnard grew up in beaufort west ,  cape province ,  union of south africa . 
between december 1967 and november 1974 at groote schuur hospital in cape town ,  south africa ,  ten heart transplants were performed ,  as well as a heart and lung transplant in 1971.
in addition ,  barnard analyzed 259 cases of tubercular meningitis . 
christiaan neethling barnard  -lrb-  8 november 1922 – 2 september 2001 -rrb- was a south african cardiac surgeon who performed the world's first human-to-human heart transplant on 3 december 1967 at groote schuur hospital in cape town ,  south africa . 
upon returning to south africa in 1958, barnard was appointed head of the department of experimental surgery at the groote schuur hospital ,  cape town . 
christiaan barnard died on 2 september 2001, while on holiday in paphos ,  cyprus . 
barnard did his internship and residency at the groote schuur hospital in cape town ,  after which he worked as a general practitioner in ceres ,  a rural town in the cape province . 
barnard performed the world's first human-to-human heart transplant operation in the early morning hours of sunday 3 december 1967.
barnard described the two years he spent in the united states as `` the most fascinating time in my life . `` 
barnard stated to washkansky and his wife ann washkansky that the transplant had an 80% chance of success . 
on 3 december 1967, barnard transplanted the heart of denise darvall ,  who had just died from a head injury ,  into the chest of a 54-year-old louis washkansky . 
the woman or man in such a relationship is referred to as a concubine  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the term concubine did not necessarily refer to women after the first wife . 
in premodern china it was illegal and socially disreputable for a man to have more than one wife at a time ,  but it was acceptable to have concubines . 
children of concubines often had lower value in account of marriage . 
in some cases ,  men had long-term relationships with enslaved women ,  giving them and their mixed-race children freedom and providing their children with apprenticeships ,  education and transfer of capital . 
the position of the concubine was generally inferior to that of the wife . 
a `` concubinus '' was a young male slave sexually exploited by his master as a sexual partner  -lrb-  see homosexuality in ancient rome  -rrb-  . 
concubinage  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an interpersonal and sexual relationship in which the couple are not or cannot be married . 
kameko ,  as the child of the formal wife ,  married a noble man and matrilineally carried on the family name . 
concubinage was an institution practiced in ancient rome that allowed a man to enter into an informal but recognized relationship with a woman  -lrb-  `` concubina '' ,  plural `` concubinae ''  -rrb-  who was not his wife ,  most often a woman whose lower social status was an obstacle to marriage . 
children of concubines had lower rights in account to inheritance ,  which was regulated by the dishu system . 
some interpretations of `` hetaera '' have held they were concubines when they had a permanent relationship with a single man . 
children of former concubines were generally declared as legitimate as they were born in wedlock ,  and the mother of a free child was considered free upon the death of the male partner . 
a concubine's treatment and situation was variable and was influenced by the social status of the male to whom she was attached ,  as well as the attitude of his wife . 
it means that if a woman marries a man in this way and has sex ,  she has to wait for a number of months before marrying again and therefore ,  a woman cannot marry more than 3 or 4 times in a year . 
central plaza surpassed the bank of china tower as the tallest building in hong kong until the completion of 2 ifc . 
central plaza is a 78-storey ,  skyscraper completed in august 1992 at 18 harbour road ,  in wan chai on hong kong island in hong kong . 
the tower is made up of three sections: a tower base forming the main entrance and public circulation spaces; a tower body containing 57 office floors ,  a sky lobby and five mechanical plant floors; and the tower top consist of six mechanical plant floors and a tower mast . 
in order to reduce large shear reversals in the core walls in the basement ,  and at the top of the tower base level ,  the ground floor ,  basement levels 1 and 2 and the 5th and 6th floors ,  the floor slabs and beams are separated horizontally from the core walls . 
central plaza was also the tallest reinforced concrete building in the world ,  until it was surpassed by citic plaza ,  guangzhou . 
central plaza was designed by the hong kong architectural firm ng chun man and associates and engineered by arup . 
the land upon which central plaza sits was reclaimed from victoria harbour in the 1970s . 
caravaggio led a tumultuous life . 
caravaggio ,  outlawed ,  fled to naples . 
caravaggio `` put the oscuro  -lrb-  shadows  -rrb-  into chiaroscuro . `` 
caravaggio trained as a painter in milan before moving in his twenties to rome . 
caravaggio displayed bizarre behaviour from very early in his career . 
caravaggio hoped borghese could mediate a pardon ,  in exchange for works by the artist . 
cecco stayed with caravaggio even after he was obliged to leave rome in 1606, and the two may have been lovers . 
caravaggio had a fever at the time of his death ,  and what killed him has been a matter of historical debate and study . 
already evident was the intense realism or naturalism for which caravaggio is now famous . 
caravaggio denied knowing any young boy of that name ,  and the allegation was not followed up . 
caravaggio left cesari ,  determined to make his own way after a heated argument . 
after only nine months in sicily ,  caravaggio returned to naples in the late summer of 1609.
caravaggio's first paintings on religious themes returned to realism ,  and the emergence of remarkable spirituality . 
it is assumed that the artist grew up in caravaggio ,  but his family kept up connections with the sforzas and with the powerful colonna family ,  who were allied by marriage with the sforzas and destined to play a major role later in caravaggio's life . 
despite his success in naples ,  after only a few months in the city caravaggio left for malta ,  the headquarters of the knights of malta . 
baglione's painting of `` divine love '' has also been seen as a visual accusation of sodomy against caravaggio . 
baglione says caravaggio was being `` chased by his enemy '' ,  but like bellori does not say who this enemy was . 
caravaggio himself appears in several paintings ,  his final self-portrait being as the witness on the far right to the `` martyrdom of saint ursula '' . 
aside from the paintings ,  evidence also comes from the libel trial brought against caravaggio by giovanni baglione in 1603.
caravaggio  -lrb-  michelangelo merisi or amerighi  -rrb-  was born in milan ,  where his father ,  fermo  -lrb-  fermo merixio  -rrb-  ,  was a household administrator and architect-decorator to the marchese of caravaggio ,  a town not far from the city of bergamo . 
in 1756 chardin returned to the subject of the still life . 
beginning in 1737 chardin exhibited regularly at the salon . 
a child playing was a favourite subject of chardin . 
in 1752 chardin was granted a pension of 500 livres by louis xv . 
in 1772 chardin's son ,  also a painter ,  drowned in venice ,  a probable suicide . 
jean-baptiste-siméon chardin  -lrb-  ; november 2, 1699 – december 6, 1779 -rrb- was an 18th-century french painter . 
chardin worked very slowly and painted only slightly more than 200 pictures  -lrb-  about four a year  -rrb-  in total . 
the radiometer is made from a glass bulb from which much of the air has been removed to form a partial vacuum . 
the crookes radiometer ,  also known as a light mill ,  consists of an airtight glass bulb ,  containing a partial vacuum . 
1 rock band in australia . `` 
cold chisel were one of the first australian acts to have become the subject of a major tribute album . 
in december moss confirmed that cold chisel were working on new material for an album . 
8 of the all-time best australian songs . 
cold chisel reunited in october 1997, with the line-up of barnes ,  moss ,  prestwich ,  small and walker . 
the youth in asia tour performances were used for cold chisel's double live album ,  `` swingshift ''  -lrb-  march 1981 -rrb- . 
cold chisel are an australian pub rock band ,  which formed in adelaide in 1973 by mainstay members ian moss on guitar and vocals ,  steve prestwich on drums and don walker on piano and keyboards . 
4 in the book ,  `` 100 best australian albums '' ,  by music journalists ,  creswell ,  craig mathieson and john o'donnell . 
in august 1981 cold chisel began work on a fourth studio album ,  `` circus animals ''  -lrb-  march 1982 -rrb- ,  again with opitz producing . 
in the early months of 1978 cold chisel recorded their self-titled debut album with their manager and producer ,  peter walker  -lrb-  ex-bakery  -rrb-  . 
moss ,  small and walker took extended breaks from music . 
the group changed its name several times before settling on cold chisel in 1974 after walker's song of that title . 
cold chisel's songs were about distinctly australian experiences ,  a factor often cited as a major reason for the band's lack of international appeal . 
his other solo albums met with less chart or award success . 
 ''forever now '' was covered ,  as a country waltz ,  by australian band ,  the reels . 
developments in south carolina started a chain of events . 
following south carolina's unanimous 1860 secession vote ,  no other southern states considered the question until 1861, and when they did none had a unanimous vote . 
four of the upper south states initially rejected secession until after the clash at ft .  sumter  -lrb-  virginia ,  arkansas ,  tennessee ,  and north carolina  -rrb-  . 
four of the seceding states ,  the deep south states of south carolina ,  mississippi ,  georgia ,  and texas ,  issued formal declarations of causes ,  each of which identified the threat to slaveholders' rights as the cause of ,  or a major cause of ,  secession . 
virginia's ordinance stated a kinship with the slave-holding states of the lower south ,  but did not name the institution itself as a primary reason for its course . 
the restored government later recognized the new state of west virginia ,  which was admitted to the union during the war on june 20, 1863, and re-located to alexandria for the rest of the war . 
many southern whites had considered themselves more southern than american and were prepared to fight for their state and their region to be independent of the larger nation . 
by 1860, sectional disagreements between north and south relate primarily to the maintenance or expansion of slavery in the united states . 
once hostilities began ,  many of these who voted to remain in the union ,  particularly in the deep south ,  accepted the majority decision ,  and supported the confederacy . 
four additional slave-holding states – virginia ,  arkansas ,  tennessee ,  and north carolina – declared their secession and joined the confederacy following a call by u . s .  president abraham lincoln for troops from each state to recapture sumter and other seized federal properties in the south . 
on february 22, 1862, the confederate constitution of seven state signatories – mississippi ,  south carolina ,  florida ,  alabama ,  georgia ,  louisiana ,  and texas – replaced the provisional constitution of february 8, 1861, with one stating in its preamble a desire for a `` permanent federal government '' . 
the initial confederacy was established in the montgomery convention in february 1861 by seven states  -lrb-  south carolina ,  mississippi ,  alabama ,  florida ,  georgia ,  louisiana ,  adding texas in march before lincoln's inauguration  -rrb-  ,  expanded in may–july 1861  -lrb-  with virginia ,  arkansas ,  tennessee ,  north carolina  -rrb-  ,  and was disintegrated in april–may 1865.
they can be found in acidic bogs throughout the cooler regions of the northern hemisphere . 
cranberries are a group of evergreen dwarf shrubs or trailing vines in the subgenus oxycoccus of the genus `` vaccinium '' . 
test coverage was among the first methods invented for systematic software testing . 
in computer science ,  test coverage is a measure used to describe the degree to which the source code of a program is executed when a particular test suite runs . 
she returned to pittsburgh to teach theater at the university of pittsburgh and at the pittsburgh musical theater's rauh conservatory as well as to perform in pittsburgh theatre until her death on september 9, 2004.
caitlin clarke  -lrb-  may 3, 1952 – september 9, 2004 -rrb- was an american theater and film actress best known for her role as valerian in the 1981 fantasy film `` dragonslayer '' and for her role as charlotte cardoza in the 1998–1999 broadway musical `` titanic '' . 
one of the cruisers was the preserved  . 
a cruiser is a type of warship . 
the us built cruisers in quantity through the end of the war ,  notably 14 heavy cruisers and 27 `` cleveland ''-class light cruisers ,  along with eight `` atlanta ''-class anti-aircraft cruisers . 
also ,  until 1943–44 the light anti-aircraft armament of most cruisers was weak . 
losing 20 cruisers in 1940–42, the british completed no heavy cruisers ,  thirteen light cruisers  -lrb-   and classes  -rrb-  ,  and sixteen anti-aircraft cruisers  -lrb-  `` dido '' class  -rrb-  during the war . 
cruisers were one of the workhorse types of warship during world war i . 
the line between u . s .  navy cruisers and destroyers blurred with the  . 
the london naval treaty in 1930 then formalised the distinction between these `` heavy '' cruisers and light cruisers: a `` heavy '' cruiser was one with guns of more than 6.1-inch  -lrb-  155 mm  -rrb-  calibre . 
the first purpose built anti-aircraft cruiser was the british  ,  completed in 1940–42.
a precursor to the anti-aircraft cruiser was the romanian british-built protected cruiser `` elisabeta '' . 
today's equivalent of the anti-aircraft cruiser is the guided missile cruiser  -lrb-  cag/clg/cg/cgn  -rrb-  . 
outside the us and soviet navies ,  new cruisers were rare following world war ii . 
the most recent soviet/russian rocket cruisers ,  the four s ,  were built in the 1970s and 1980s . 
most post-world war ii cruisers were tasked with air defense roles . 
the heavy cruiser's immediate precursors were the light cruiser designs of the 1910s and 1920s; the us lightly armored 8-inch `` treaty cruisers '' of the 1920s  -lrb-  built under the washington naval treaty  -rrb-  were originally classed as light cruisers until the london treaty forced their redesignation . 
few cruisers are still operational in the world navies . 
since all post-1930 japanese cruisers had 8-inch guns by 1941, almost all of the us navy's cruisers in the south pacific in 1942 were the 8-inch-gunned  -lrb-  203 mm  -rrb-  `` treaty cruisers ''; most of the 6-inch-gunned  -lrb-  152 mm  -rrb-  cruisers were deployed in the atlantic . 
the type 93 was also fitted to japanese post-1930 light cruisers and the majority of their world war ii destroyers . 
from this point on ,  us cruisers primarily served as anti-aircraft escorts for carriers and in shore bombardment . 
the american represented the supersized cruiser design . 
steel also affected the construction and role of armored cruisers . 
the torpedo cruiser  -lrb-  known in the royal navy as the torpedo gunboat  -rrb-  was a smaller unarmored cruiser ,  which emerged in the 1880s–1890s . 
the heavy cruiser was a type of cruiser designed for long range ,  high speed and an armament of naval guns around 203 mm  -lrb-  8 in  -rrb-  in calibre . 
russia also operates three s and one `` admiral kuznetsov ''-class carrier which is officially designated as a cruiser . 
some light cruisers were built specifically to act as the leaders of flotillas of destroyers . 
on the night of 14–15 november a japanese force of `` kirishima '' ,  two heavy and two light cruisers ,  and nine destroyers approached guadalcanal . 
however ,  dawn  -lrb-  and us aircraft ,  us artillery ,  and a us destroyer  -rrb-  found them still beached ,  and they were destroyed . 
a number of navies commissioned classes of cruisers at the top end of this limit ,  known as `` treaty cruisers '' . 
because of their similarity ,  the lines between battleships and armored cruisers became blurred . 
cruisers participated in a number of surface engagements in the early part of world war ii ,  along with escorting carrier and battleship groups throughout the war . 
it should be noted that savo was the first surface action of the war for almost all the us ships and personnel; few us cruisers and destroyers were targeted or hit at coral sea or midway . 
the auxiliary cruiser was a merchant ship hastily armed with small guns on the outbreak of war . 
in both world wars the germans also used small merchant ships armed with cruiser guns to surprise allied merchant ships . 
heavy cruisers continued in use until after world war ii ,  with some converted to guided missile cruisers for air defense or strategic attack and some used for shore bombardment by the united states in the korean war and the vietnam war . 
from time to time ,  some navies have experimented with aircraft-carrying cruisers . 
the development of the anti-aircraft cruiser began in 1935 when the royal navy re-armed and  . 
guidelines recommend all women attending for emergency contraceptive are offered chlamydia testing ,  with studies showing up to 9% of women aged <25 years had chlamydia . 
chlamydia infection ,  often simply known as chlamydia ,  is a sexually transmitted infection caused by the bacterium `` chlamydia trachomatis '' . 
it can occur in both sexes ,  though is more common in men . 
 ''chlamydiae '' have the ability to establish long-term associations with host cells . 
the word `` chlamydia '' is from the greek ,  χλαμύδα meaning `` cloak '' . 
chlamydia is known as the `` silent epidemic '' ,  as in women it may not cause any symptoms in 70–80% of cases ,  and can linger for months or years before being discovered . 
chlamydia can also be passed from an infected mother to her baby during vaginal childbirth . 
candidiasis is a fungal infection due to any type of `` candida ''  -lrb-  a type of yeast  -rrb-  . 
in extreme cases ,  superficial infections of the skin or mucous membranes may enter into the bloodstream and cause systemic `` candida '' infections . 
the koh dissolves the skin cells ,  but leaves the `` candida '' cells intact ,  permitting visualization of pseudohyphae and budding yeast cells typical of many `` candida '' species . 
male genital yeast infections are less common ,  but a yeast infection on the penis caused from direct contact via sexual intercourse with an infected partner is not uncommon . 
diabetes mellitus and the use of antibiotics are also linked to increased rates of yeast infections . 
 ''candida '' yeasts are generally present in healthy humans ,  frequently part of the human body's normal oral and intestinal flora ,  and particularly on the skin; however ,  their growth is normally limited by the human immune system and by competition of other microorganisms ,  such as bacteria occupying the same locations in the human body . 
the objective is to develop a control model for controlling such systems using a control action in an optimum manner without `` delay or overshoot '' and ensuring control stability . 
control theory in control systems engineering is a subfield of mathematics that deals with the control of continuously operating dynamical systems in engineered processes and machines . 
to do this ,  a `` controller '' with the requisite corrective behaviour is required . 
there were several theories to explain the cracking of joints . 
the act of cracking joints means bending a person's joints to produce a distinct cracking or popping sound ,  often followed by a feeling of satisfaction or relaxation to the person . 
in 2015, research showed that bubbles remained in the fluid after cracking ,  suggesting that the cracking sound was produced when the bubble within the joint was formed ,  not when it collapsed . 
the following example formulae are written using the hill system ,  and listed in hill order:
when the formula contains no carbon ,  all the elements ,  including hydrogen ,  are listed alphabetically . 
the hill system  -lrb-  or hill notation  -rrb-  is a system of writing empirical chemical formulas ,  molecular chemical formulas and components of a condensed formula such that the number of carbon atoms in a molecule is indicated first ,  the number of hydrogen atoms next ,  and then the number of all other chemical elements subsequently ,  in alphabetical order of the chemical symbols . 
chemical formulas most often use integers for each element . 
however ,  all these nomenclature systems go beyond the standards of chemical formulas ,  and technically are chemical naming systems ,  not formula systems . 
a chemical formula used for a series of compounds that differ from each other by a constant unit is called a `` general formula '' . 
if the number of repeating units is unknown or variable ,  the letter `` n '' may be used to indicate this formula: ch -lrb-  ch  -rrb- ch . 
the same number of atoms of each element  -lrb-  10 hydrogens and 4 carbons ,  or ch  -rrb-  may be used to make a straight chain molecule ,  `` n ''-butane: chchchch . 
for ions ,  the charge on a particular atom may be denoted with a right-hand superscript . 
beetles typically have a particularly hard exoskeleton including the elytra ,  though some such as the rove beetles have very short elytra while blister beetles have softer elytra . 
the forewings of beetles are not used for flight ,  but form elytra which cover the hind part of the body and protect the hindwings . 
beetles are the most widely eaten insects ,  with about 344 species used as food ,  usually at the larval stage . 
living beetles have been used as cyborgs . 
this species can stridulate to communicate  ,  but others may use sound to defend themselves when attacked  . 
cooperative brood care is also found in the bess beetles  -lrb-  passalidae  -rrb-  where the larvae feed on the semi-digested faeces of the adults . 
about 75% of beetle species are phytophagous in both the larval and adult stages . 
adult crawling water beetles use both their elytra and their hind coxae  -lrb-  the basal segment of the back legs  -rrb-  in air retention ,  while whirligig beetles simply carry an air bubble down with them whenever they dive . 
beetles' flight wings are crossed with veins and are folded after landing ,  often along these veins ,  and stored below the elytra . 
before mating ,  males and females may stridulate ,  or vibrate the objects they are on . 
the elytra allow beetles to both fly and move through confined spaces ,  doing so by folding the delicate wings under the elytra while not flying ,  and folding their wings out just before take off . 
larvae feed on and remove cartilage along with other soft tissue . 
the larva is usually the principal feeding stage of the beetle life cycle . 
the larval period can vary widely . 
aquatic beetles use several techniques for retaining air beneath the water's surface . 
after their eggs hatch ,  the parents keep the larvae clean of fungus and bacteria and help the larvae feed by regurgitating food for them . 
many beetles have beautiful and durable elytra that have been used as material in arts ,  with beetlewing the best example . 
many rove beetles have greatly reduced elytra ,  and while they are capable of flight ,  they most often move on the ground: their soft bodies and strong abdominal muscles make them flexible ,  easily able to wriggle into small cracks . 
fighting beetles are used for entertainment and gambling . 
beetles are a group of insects that form the order coleoptera ,  in the superorder endopterygota . 
some dung beetles provide parental care ,  collecting herbivore dung and laying eggs within that food supply ,  an instance of mass provisioning . 
ocelli are found in the adult carpet beetle  -lrb-  dermestidae  -rrb-  ,  some rove beetles  -lrb-  omaliinae  -rrb-  ,  and the derodontidae . 
the oldest known fossil insect that unequivocally resembles a coleopteran is from the lower permian period about  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  ,  though these members of the family tshekardocoleidae have 13-segmented antennae ,  elytra with more fully developed venation and more irregular longitudinal ribbing ,  and abdomen and ovipositor extending beyond the apex of the elytra . 
the first discoveries from north america made in the wellington formation of oklahoma were published in 2005 and 2008.
the dermestidae are often used in taxidermy and in the preparation of scientific specimens ,  to clean soft tissue from bones . 
adult elephant beetles ,  `` megasoma elephas '' and `` megasoma actaeon '' often reach and  . 
like most insects ,  beetles inhale air ,  for the oxygen it contains ,  and exhale carbon dioxide ,  via a tracheal system . 
camouflage is common and widespread among beetle families ,  especially those that feed on wood or vegetation ,  such as leaf beetles  -lrb-  chrysomelidae ,  which are often green  -rrb-  and weevils . 
the consistency of beetle morphology ,  in particular their possession of elytra ,  has long suggested that coleoptera is monophyletic ,  though there have been doubts about the arrangement of the suborders ,  namely the adephaga ,  archostemata ,  myxophaga and polyphaga within that clade . 
the thorax is segmented into the two discernible parts ,  the pro- and pterothorax . 
in north america there are only a few sites with fossil records of insects from the jurassic ,  namely the shell limestone deposits in the hartford basin ,  the deerfield basin and the newark basin . 
beetle fossils are abundant in the cenozoic; by the quaternary  -lrb-  up to 1.6 mya  -rrb-  ,  fossil species are identical to living ones ,  while from the late miocene  -lrb-  5.7 mya  -rrb-  the fossils are still so close to modern forms that they are most likely the ancestors of living species . 
for example ,  the genus `` zygogramma '' is native to north america but has been used to control `` parthenium hysterophorus '' in india and `` ambrosia artemisiifolia '' in russia . 
this further segmentation is usually best seen on the abdomen . 
all beetle larvae go through several instars ,  which are the developmental stages between each moult . 
there are more than 150 important fossil sites from the jurassic ,  the majority in eastern europe and north asia . 
this aircraft would ultimately demonstrate safe control at speeds as low as  ,  about that of the f-104 starfighter . 
morgan strongly suggested that the us was already involved in a similar project ,  and that if the uk failed to respond it would be locked out of an airliner market that he believed would be dominated by sst aircraft . 
concorde also acquired an unusual nomenclature for an aircraft . 
bristol's original type 198 was a small design with an almost pure slender delta wing ,  but evolved into the larger type 223.
while the wing planform was evolving ,  so was the basic sst concept . 
the group met for the first time in february 1954 and delivered their first report in april 1955.
the design work was supported by a preceding research programme studying the flight characteristics of low ratio delta wings . 
stac stated that an sst would have economic performance similar to existing subsonic types . 
the advertisement predicted a market for 350 aircraft by 1980 and boasted of concorde's head start over the united states' sst project . 
at the time of the first flight the options list contained 74 options from 16 airlines:
this would remain economically advantageous as long as fuel represented a small percentage of operational costs ,  as it did at the time . 
at the time it was known that the drag at supersonic speeds was strongly related to the span of the wing . 
of the three ,  the sud aviation super-caravelle won the design contest with a medium-range design deliberately sized to avoid competition with transatlantic us designs they assumed were already on the drawing board . 
in 1959, a study contract was awarded to hawker siddeley and bristol for preliminary designs based on the slender delta concept ,  which developed as the hsa . 1000 and bristol 198.
british airways and air france were able to operate concorde at a profit ,  in spite of very high maintenance costs ,  because the aircraft was able to sustain a high ticket price . 
this was called `` spiking the cannon '' . 
a cannon  -lrb-  plural: `` cannon '' or `` cannons ''  -rrb-  is a type of gun classified as artillery that launches a projectile using propellant . 
the other cannon are dated using contextual evidence . 
by the 1350s the cannon was used extensively in chinese warfare . 
when referring to cannon ,  the term `` gun '' is often used incorrectly . 
 ''cannons '' is more common in north america and australia ,  while `` cannon '' as plural is more common in the united kingdom . 
cannon appeared in đại việt by 1390 at the latest . 
while there is evidence of cannon in iran as early as 1405 they were not widespread . 
it was not until 1475 when ivan iii established the first russian cannon foundry in moscow that they began to produce cannon natively . 
cannon have been used extensively in fighter aircraft since world war ii . 
to pack a muzzle-loading cannon ,  first gunpowder is poured down the bore . 
when a cannon had to be abandoned such as in a retreat or surrender ,  the touch hole of the cannon would be plugged flush with an iron spike ,  disabling the cannon  -lrb-  at least until metal boring tools could be used to remove the plug  -rrb-  . 
in the 1770s ,  cannon operation worked as follows: each cannon would be manned by two gunners ,  six soldiers ,  and four officers of artillery . 
references to cannon proliferated throughout china in the following centuries . 
ottoman cannon also proved effective at stopping crusaders at varna in 1444 and kosovo in 1448 despite the presence of european cannon in the former case . 
cannon sounds have sometimes been used in classical pieces with a military theme . 
solid documentary evidence of cannon appeared in the middle east around the 1360s ,  however some historians consider the arrival of the cannon there to be far earlier . 
the ottoman empire in particular made good use of cannon as siege artillery . 
in england cannon were being used to besiege various fortified buildings during the english civil war . 
documentary evidence of cannon in russia does not appear until 1382 and they were used only in sieges ,  often by the defenders . 
by the end of the 15th century ,  several technological advancements made cannon more mobile . 
these smaller cannon would eventually give way to larger ,  wall breaching guns by the end of the 1300s . 
needham believes ibn khaldun was speaking of fire lances rather than hand cannon . 
most nations use rapid-fire cannon on light vehicles ,  replacing a more powerful ,  but heavier ,  tank gun . 
the hard rock band ac/dc also used cannon in their song `` for those about to rock  -lrb-  we salute you  -rrb- ``  ,  and in live shows replica napoleonic cannon and pyrotechnics were used to perform the piece . 
the plural for the small rodent is always `` mice '' in modern usage . 
a mouse typically controls the motion of a pointer in two dimensions in a graphical user interface  -lrb-  gui  -rrb-  . 
the xerox alto was one of the first computers designed for individual use in 1973 and is regarded as the first modern computer to utilize a mouse . 
although ,  the plural of mouse  -lrb-  small rodent  -rrb-  is mice ,  the two words have undergone a differentiation through usage . 
mice often also feature other elements ,  such as touch surfaces and `` wheels '' ,  which enable additional control and dimensional input . 
users can also employ mice `` gesturally ''; meaning that a stylized motion of the mouse cursor itself ,  called a `` gesture '' ,  can issue a command or map to a specific action . 
datar was similar in concept to benjamin's display . 
in 1964, bill english joined arc ,  where he helped engelbart build the first mouse prototype . 
civil defence or civil protection is an effort to protect the citizens of a state  -lrb-  generally non-combatants  -rrb-  from military attacks and natural disasters . 
its neighbors ,  however ,  remained committed to civil defence ,  namely the isle of man civil defence corps and civil defence ireland  -lrb-  republic of ireland  -rrb-  . 
the name and logo ,  however ,  continue to be used by hawaii state civil defense and guam homeland security/office of civil defense . 
when the air force was created ,  in 1947, the civil air patrol became the auxiliary of the air force . 
the advent of civil defence was stimulated by the experience of the bombing of civilian areas during the first world war . 
the new concept is described by a number of terms ,  each of which has its own specific shade of meaning ,  such as crisis management ,  emergency management ,  emergency preparedness ,  contingency planning ,  civil contingency ,  civil aid and civil protection . 
many countries still maintain a national civil defence corps ,  usually having a wide brief for assisting in large scale civil emergencies such as flood ,  earthquake ,  invasion ,  or civil disorder . 
in the united kingdom ,  the civil defence service was disbanded in 1945, followed by the arp in 1946.
in some countries ,  civil defence is seen as a key part of `` total defence '' . 
in australia ,  civil defence is the responsibility of the volunteer-based state emergency service . 
in the united states ,  the federal civil defense program was authorised by statute and ran from 1951 to 1994.
in the united states a federal civil defense program existed under public law 920 of the 81st congress ,  as amended ,  from 1951-1994.
respectively ,  some countries  -lrb-  notably the soviet union  -rrb-  may have or have had military-organized civil defense units  -lrb-  civil defense troops  -rrb-  as part of their armed forces or as a paramilitary service . 
since the end of the cold war ,  the focus of civil defence has largely shifted from military attack to emergencies and disasters in general . 
in the united states ,  the office of civil defense was established in may 1941 to coordinate civilian defense efforts . 
a special government department ,  the civil defence service ,  was established by the home office in 1935.
after the war ,  attention was turned toward civil defence in the event of war ,  and the air raid precautions committee  -lrb-  arp  -rrb-  was established in 1924 to investigate ways for ensuring the protection of civilians from the danger of air-raids . 
chymotrypsin is synthesized in the pancreas by protein biosynthesis as a precursor called chymotrypsinogen that is enzymatically inactive . 
the reaction of chymotrypsin with its substrate was found to take place in two stages ,  an initial “burst” phase at the beginning of the reaction and a steady-state phase following michaelis-menten kinetics . 
later the romans used ballista catapults on their warships . 
the romans started to use catapults as arms for their wars against syracuse ,  macedon ,  sparta and aetolia  -lrb-  3rd and 2nd centuries bc  -rrb-  . 
a third greek author ,  biton  -lrb-  fl . 
catapults were invented by the ancient greeks and in ancient india where they were used by the magadhan emperor ajatshatru around the early to mid 5th century bce . 
cinquain is a class of poetic forms that employ a 5-line pattern . 
there is a larger population of cook islanders in new zealand itself; in the 2013 census ,  61,839 people said they were cook islanders ,  or of cook islands descent . 
although cook islanders are citizens of new zealand ,  they have the status of cook islands nationals ,  which is not given to other new zealand citizens . 
new zealand is responsible for the cook islands' defence and foreign affairs ,  but they are exercised in consultation with the cook islands . 
the cook islands consist of 15 islands and two reefs . 
the head of state is the queen of new zealand ,  who is represented in the cook islands by the queen's representative . 
the cook islands  -lrb-  cook islands māori: `` kūki 'āirani ''  -rrb-  is a self-governing island country in the south pacific ocean in free association with new zealand . 
when the british nationality and new zealand citizenship act 1948 came into effect on 1january 1949, cook islanders who were british subjects gained new zealand citizenship . 
the cook islands are in the south pacific ocean ,  northeast of new zealand ,  between french polynesia and american samoa . 
the cook islands are named after captain james cook ,  who visited the islands in 1773 and 1777.
the cook islands became a british protectorate in 1888.
british navigator captain james cook arrived in 1773 and 1777.
after achieving autonomy in 1965, the cook islands elected albert henry of the cook islands party as their first prime minister . 
the cook islands ,  niue ,  new zealand  -lrb-  and its territories: tokelau and the ross dependency  -rrb-  make up the realm of new zealand . 
1773 — captain james cook explored the islands and named them the hervey islands . 
in 1990 the cook islands signed a treaty with france which delimited the maritime boundary between the cook islands and french polynesia . 
it is thought that the cook islands may have been settled between the years 900 - 1200 ad . 
the new zealand high commissioner is appointed by the new zealand government . 
the constitution of the cook islands took effect on august 4, 1965, when the cook islands became a self-governing territory in free association with new zealand . 
the cabinet is chosen by the prime minister and collectively responsible to parliament . 
he would later become a cabinet minister  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- and high commissioner for the cook islands  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- . 
the parliament of the cook islands has 24 members ,  elected for a five-year term in single-seat constituencies . 
this `` home rule '' banking confuses new zealanders on vacation in the cooks . 
telecom cook islands ltd  -lrb-  tci  -rrb-  is the sole provider of telecommunications in the cook islands . 
cook islanders are nz citizens . 
in march 2017 4g+ launch in rarotonga with lte700  -lrb-  b28a  -rrb-  and lte1800  -lrb-  b3 -rrb-  . 
mobile service covers aitutaki gsm/gprs mobile data service system in gsm 900 from 2006 to 2013 while in 2014 3g umts 900 was introduce with hspa+ stand system . 
just as words can be written to paper ,  so can information be written to a computer file . 
typically ,  files are organised in a file system ,  which keeps track of where the files are located on disk and enables user access . 
doppler was born in salzburg  -lrb-  today austria  -rrb-  in 1803.
some confusion exists about doppler's full name . 
doppler's research was interrupted by the revolutionary incidents of 1848.
a clerihew  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a whimsical ,  four-line biographical poem invented by edmund clerihew bentley . 
