the reds did not have another winning season until 2010.
the cincinnati reds are an american professional baseball team based in cincinnati ,  ohio . 
in 2016, the reds broke the record for home runs allowed during a single season . 
by  ,  the reds were a shell of the original red machine; they lost 101 games that year . 
those uniforms were scrapped after the 1966 season . 
the reds had winning teams during the rest of the 1960s ,  but did not produce any championships . 
the cincinnati reds play their home games at great american ball park ,  located at 100 joe nuxhall way ,  in downtown cincinnati . 
in the reds won 96 games ,  led by manager jack mckeon ,  but lost to the new york mets in a one game playoff . 
the reds did not recover from this trade until the rise of the `` big red machine '' of the 1970s . 
the reds failed to post winning records in both 2008 and 2009.
the reds lost in a 3-game sweep of the nlds to philadelphia . 
the reds' final game at crosley field ,  home to more than 4,500 baseball games ,  was played on june 24, 1970, a 5–4 victory over the san francisco giants . 
the reds also added former cincinnati first baseman sean casey – known as `` the mayor '' by reds fans – to do color commentary for approximately 15 games in 2011.
under bergesch ,  from –89 the reds finished second four times . 
the reds' rules also included conservative uniforms . 
the reds won 98 games in but they finished second to the 102-win los angeles dodgers . 
the reds have not lost a world series game since carlton fisk's home run ,  a span of 9 straight wins . 
so far in mlb history ,  the 1975 and '76 reds were the last nl team to repeat as champions . 
nbc affiliate wlwt carried reds games from 1948 to 1995.
thus ,  in 2003, the reds began a new era with the opening of the current stadium . 
during this time ,  the team never finished above third place  -lrb-  1897 -rrb- and never closer than 10 games  -lrb-  1890 -rrb- . 
in the 1990s the more traditional ,  early logos of reds came back with the current logo reflecting more of what the team's logo was when they were first founded . 
the reds finished ahead of john mcgraw's new york giants ,  and then won the world championship in eight games over the chicago white sox . 
the origins of the modern cincinnati reds can be traced to the expulsion of an earlier team bearing that name . 
by 1920, the `` black sox '' scandal had brought a taint to the reds' first championship . 
joining him for years on color was former reds pitcher joe nuxhall ,  who worked in the radio booth from 1967  -lrb-  the year after his retirement as an active player  -rrb-  until 2004, plus three more seasons doing select home games until his death ,  in 2007.
also ,  the reds would replace their `` big red machine '' era uniforms in favor of a pinstriped uniform with no sleeves . 
the reds played in the nl west division from 1969 to 1993, before joining the central division in 1994.
therefore ,  it can be argued that the connection between the idea of the caribbean being the ultimate paradise and caribbean food being exotic is based on inaccurate information . 
over time ,  food from the caribbean has evolved into a narrative technique through which their culture has been accentuated and promoted . 
finland ,  azerbaijan ,  and lithuania joined them in 1918 before the war ended and after the russian empire collapsed . 
social change is generally regarded as suspect . 
conservatism is a political and social philosophy promoting traditional social institutions in the context of culture and civilization . 
it contrasted itself with classical liberalism ,  which supported freedom for the individual in both the economic and social spheres . 
in cultural and social affairs ,  putin has collaborated closely with the russian orthodox church . 
in continental europe ,  this is sometimes also translated into english as social conservatism . 
social conservatism is distinct from cultural conservatism ,  although there are some overlaps . 
more broadly ,  `` the new york times '' reports in september 2016 how that church's policy prescriptions support the kremlin's appeal to social conservatives:
most conservatives in the united states support the death penalty . 
brazilian labour renewal party ,  patriota ,  progressistas ,  social christian party and social liberal party are the conservative parties in brazil . 
many continental or traditionalist conservatives do not support separation of church and state ,  with most supporting state recognition of and cooperation with the catholic church ,  such as had existed in france before the revolution . 
a second meaning of the term social conservatism developed in the nordic countries and continental europe ,  where it refers to liberal conservatives supporting modern european welfare states . 
the second largest party in the country is the australian labor party and its dominant faction is labor right ,  a socially conservative element . 
luxembourg's major christian democratic conservative party ,  the christian social people's party  -lrb-  csv or pcs  -rrb-  ,  was formed as the party of the right in 1914 and adopted its present name in 1945.
while the party advocates economic liberalism ,  it is committed to the social market economy . 
after the financial crisis in 2008, the party has sunk to a lower support level around 20–25% . 
major priorities within american conservatism include support for the traditional family ,  law and order ,  the right to bear arms . 
the liberal party of australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism . 
a secondary meaning for the term liberal conservatism that has developed in europe is a combination of more modern conservative  -lrb-  less traditionalist  -rrb-  views with those of social liberalism . 
with the rise of nazism in 1933, agrarian movements faded and was supplanted by a more command-based economy and forced social integration . 
american conservatives consider individual liberty as long as it conforms to conservative values ,  small government ,  deregulation of the government ,  economic liberalism and free trade ,  as the fundamental traits of democracy ,  which contrasts with modern american liberals ,  who generally place a greater value on social equality and social justice . 
in most democracies ,  political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values . 
paternal conservatives support neither the individual nor the state in principle ,  but are instead prepared to support either or recommend a balance between the two depending on what is most practical . 
the founding declaration of the independent greeks strongly emphasises in the preservation of the greek state and its sovereignty ,  the greek people and the greek orthodox church . 
having a hierarchical view of society ,  many traditionalist conservatives ,  including a few americans ,  defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement . 
edmund burke ,  an 18th-century politician who opposed the french revolution but supported the american revolution ,  is credited as one of the main theorists of conservatism in great britain in the 1790s . 
the independent greeks ,  a newly formed political party in greece ,  has also supported conservatism ,  particularly national and religious conservatism . 
it stresses the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty ,  support of limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation to regulate markets in the interests of both consumers and producers . 
the major conservative party in the united states is the republican party ,  also known as the gop  -lrb-  grand old party  -rrb-  . 
national conservatism is heavily oriented towards the traditional family and social stability as well as in favour of limiting immigration . 
bismarck also enacted universal male suffrage in the new german empire in 1871.
conservatism in france focused on the rejection of the secularism of the french revolution ,  support for the role of the catholic church and the restoration of the monarchy . 
although conservatives opposed attempts to allow greater representation of the middle class in parliament ,  they conceded that electoral reform could not be reversed and promised to support further reforms so long as they did not erode the institutions of church and state . 
hayek also rejected the label `` laissez-faire '' as originating from the french tradition and alien to the beliefs of hume and smith . 
in a free market ,  both labor and capital would receive the greatest possible reward while production would be organized efficiently to meet consumer demand . 
they asserted that rights are of a negative nature ,  and therefore stipulate that other individuals  -lrb-  and governments  -rrb-  are to refrain from interfering with the free market ,  opposing social liberals who assert that individuals have positive rights ,  such as the right to vote ,  the right to an education ,  the right to health care and the right to a living wage . 
the changing economic and social conditions of the 19th century led to a division between neo-classical and social  -lrb-  or welfare  -rrb-  liberals ,  who while agreeing on the importance of individual liberty differed on the role of the state . 
classical liberals argued that individuals should be free to obtain work from the highest-paying employers while the profit motive would ensure that products that people desired were produced at prices they would pay . 
they opposed any income or wealth redistribution ,  which they believed would be dissipated by the lowest orders . 
friedrich hayek identified two different traditions within classical liberalism: the `` british tradition '' and the `` french tradition '' . 
drawing on ideas of adam smith ,  classical liberals believed that it is in the common interest that all individuals be able to secure their own economic self-interest . 
about 60 cat breeds are recognized by various cat registries . 
feral cats are domestic cats that were born in or have reverted to a wild state . 
cats ,  like dogs ,  are digitigrades . 
the cat or domestic cat  -lrb-  `` felis catus ''  -rrb-  is a small carnivorous mammal . 
cats do eat grass occasionally . 
in the us ,  about 80% of household cats are neutered . 
the term may also be used to mean a hatred of cats . 
a cat café is a theme café whose attraction is cats that can be watched and played with . 
however ,  some pet cats are poorly socialized . 
a cat show is a judged event in which the owners of cats compete to win titles in various cat registering organizations by entering their cats to be judged after a breed standard . 
cats also communicate by secreting and perceiving pheromones . 
cats may bite humans when provoked ,  during play or when aggressive . 
ailurophobia  -lrb-  greek αἴλουρος  -lrb-  ailouros  -rrb-  ,  'cat' and φόβος  -lrb-  phóbos  -rrb-  ,  'fear'  -rrb-  is a fear of cats . 
though cats usually prey on animals less than half their size ,  a feral cat in australia has been photographed killing an adult pademelon of around the cat's weight at  . 
despite widespread concern about the welfare of free-roaming cats ,  the lifespans of neutered feral cats in managed colonies compare favorably with those of pet cats . 
the domestic cat is a significant predator of birds . 
on islands ,  birds can contribute as much as 60% of a cat's diet . 
 ''  -rrb-  ,  the siamese cat ,  the ocicat ,  and the oriental shorthair . 
many cultures have negative superstitions about cats . 
some cats have been reported as surviving into their 30s ,  with the oldest known cat ,  creme puff ,  dying at a verified age of 38.
hybridisation between domestic and other small wild cat species is also possible . 
it was long thought that cat domestication was initiated in egypt ,  because cats in ancient egypt were venerated since around 3100 bc . 
domestic cats' scent rubbing behavior towards humans or other cats is thought to be a feline means for social bonding . 
among domestic cats ,  males are more likely to fight than females . 
domestic cats still show similar adaptations and behaviors . 
nonetheless ,  cats can still be injured or killed by a high fall . 
 ''felis daemon '' proposed by satunin in 1904 was a black cat specimen from the transcaucasus ,  later identified as a domestic cat . 
perhaps the best known element of cats' hunting behavior ,  which is commonly misunderstood and often appalls cat owners because it looks like torture ,  is that cats often appear to `` play '' with prey by releasing it after capture . 
owing to the risks posed by cats eating string ,  it is sometimes replaced with a laser pointer's dot ,  which cats may chase . 
in 2017, the iucn cat classification taskforce followed the recommendation of the iczn in regarding the domestic cat as a distinct species . 
a cat falling from heights of up to 3 meters can right itself and land on its paws . 
domestic cats are smaller than wildcats in both skull and limb measurements . 
the average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades . 
preformed vitamin a is required in the cat for retinal and reproductive health . 
according to a myth in many cultures ,  cats have multiple lives . 
life in proximity to humans and other domestic animals has led to a symbiotic social adaptation in cats ,  and cats may express great affection toward humans or other animals . 
domestic cats ,  especially young kittens ,  are known for their love of play . 
the etymology of this word is unknown ,  but it may have simply arisen from a sound used to attract a cat . 
the ancestor can be known or unknown; any and all members of a clade can be extant or extinct . 
the clade `` rodent '' is in turn included in the mammal ,  vertebrate and animal clades . 
clades are termed monophyletic  -lrb-  greek: `` one clan ''  -rrb-  groups . 
a clade  -lrb-  from  ,  `` klados '' ,  `` branch ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as monophyletic group ,  is a group of organisms that consists of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants ,  and represents a single `` branch '' on the `` tree of life '' . 
many commonly named groups ,  rodents and insects for example ,  are clades because ,  in each case ,  the group consists of a common ancestor with all its descendant branches . 
internet in afghanistan is also at the peak with over 5 million users as of 2016.
afghanistan post has been reorganizing the postal service in 2000s with assistance from pakistan post . 
afghanistan uses its own space satellite called afghansat 1.
selected foreign channels are also shown to the public in afghanistan ,  but with the use of the internet ,  over 3,500 international tv channels may be accessed in afghanistan . 
there are about 32 million gsm mobile phone subscribers in afghanistan as of 2016, with over 114,192 fixed-telephone-lines and over 264,000 cdma subscribers . 
afghanistan was given legal control of the ``  . af '' domain in 2003, and the afghanistan network information center  -lrb-  afgnic  -rrb-  was established to administer domain names . 
christian of oliva  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also christian of prussia  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  died 4 december -lrb-   ?   -rrb- 
1245 -rrb- was the first missionary bishop of prussia . 
at least christian was able to establish the diocese of chełmno east of the vistula ,  adopting the episcopal rights from the masovian bishop of płock ,  confirmed by both duke konrad and the pope . 
coca-cola ,  or coke ,  is a carbonated soft drink manufactured by the coca-cola company . 
in april 2007, in canada ,  the name `` coca-cola classic '' was changed back to `` coca-cola '' . 
coca-cola was introduced to china in 1927, and was very popular until 1949.
it supplied 1.65 liters each of coca-cola and diet coke . 
the rights for this spanish drink were bought by coca-cola in 1953.
in december 1991, coca-cola enterprises merged with the johnston coca-cola bottling group ,  inc . 
the coca-cola company produces concentrate ,  which is then sold to licensed coca-cola bottlers throughout the world . 
the word `` classic '' was removed from all coca-cola products by 2011.
selena was a spokesperson for coca-cola from 1989 until the time of her death . 
not all musical references to coca-cola went well . 
thereafter ,  coca-cola regained its leadership in the market . 
the coca-cola company owns minority shares in some of its largest franchises ,  such as coca-cola enterprises ,  coca-cola amatil ,  coca-cola hellenic bottling company ,  and coca-cola femsa ,  but fully independent bottlers produce almost half of the volume sold in the world . 
the drink is also often a metonym for the coca-cola company . 
this is a list of variants of coca-cola introduced around the world . 
in australia in 2011, coca-cola began the `` share a coke '' campaign ,  where the coca-cola logo was replaced on the bottles and replaced with first names . 
between 1992 and 1998, coca-cola was the title sponsor of the football league cup  -lrb-  coca-cola cup  -rrb-  ,  the secondary cup tournament of england . 
the coca-cola company has on occasion introduced other cola drinks under the coke name . 
in 2011, coca-cola launched a campaign for the indian holiday diwali . 
coca-cola has been a point of legal discussion in the middle east . 
coca-cola is sometimes used for the treatment of gastric phytobezoars . 
between 1994 and 1997, coca-cola was also the title sponsor of the scottish league cup ,  renaming it the coca-cola cup like its english counterpart . 
a documentary on the controversy ,  titled `` the coca-cola case '' ,  was released in 2010.
coca-cola is the official soft drink of many collegiate football teams throughout the nation ,  partly due to coca-cola providing those schools with upgraded athletic facilities in exchange for coca-cola's sponsorship . 
kola nuts act as a flavoring and the source of caffeine in coca-cola . 
when launched ,  coca-cola's two key ingredients were cocaine and caffeine . 
the actual production and distribution of coca-cola follows a franchising model . 
the same campaign was introduced to coca-cola ,  diet coke & coke zero bottles and cans in the uk in 2013.
coca-cola has been prominently featured in many films and television programs . 
in 1914, margaret dozier ,  as co-owner of the original coca-cola company in 1888, came forward to claim that her signature on the 1888 coca-cola company bill of sale had been forged . 
pepsi ,  the flagship product of pepsico ,  the coca-cola company's main rival in the soft drink industry ,  is usually second to coke in sales ,  and outsells coca-cola in some markets . 
since 1978, coca-cola has sponsored the fifa world cup ,  and other competitions organized by fifa . 
robinson also played a significant role in early coca-cola advertising . 
on april 23, 1985, coca-cola ,  amid much publicity ,  attempted to change the formula of the drink with `` new coke '' . 
on september 12, 1919, coca-cola co .  was purchased by a group of investors for $25 million and reincorporated . 
coca-cola was one of the official sponsors of the 1996 cricket world cup held on the indian subcontinent . 
in 2006, coca-cola introduced my coke rewards ,  a customer loyalty campaign where consumers earn points by entering codes from specially marked packages of coca-cola products into a website . 
from 1886 to 1959, the price of coca-cola was fixed at five cents ,  in part due to an advertising campaign . 
in 1892, candler set out to incorporate a second company; `` the coca-cola company ''  -lrb-  the current corporation  -rrb-  . 
in this case ,  the ordinals 0, 1, formula_2, formula_3, and formula_4 are regular ,  whereas 2, 3, formula_5, and ω are initial ordinals which are not regular . 
the cofinality of a set of ordinals or any other well-ordered set is the cofinality of the order type of that set . 
the cofinality of any ordinal `` α '' is a regular ordinal ,  i . e . 
a singular ordinal is any ordinal which is not regular . 
a citadel is the core fortified area of a town or city . 
ancient sparta had a citadel as did many other greek cities and towns . 
some of the oldest known structures which have served as citadels were built by the indus valley civilisation ,  where the citadel represented a centralised authority . 
the citadelle of québec  -lrb-  construction started 1673, completed 1820 -rrb- still survives as the largest citadel still in official military operation in north america . 
in time of war the citadel in many cases afforded retreat to the people living in the areas around the town . 
however ,  citadels were often used also to protect a garrison or political power from the inhabitants of the town where it was located ,  being designed to ensure loyalty from the town that they defended . 
rebels who took power in the city but with the citadel still held by the former rulers could by no means regard their tenure of power as secure . 
persian mail and ottoman mail were often quite similar in appearance . 
butted link mail was also used by the moros of the philippines in their mail and plate armors . 
by the 14th century ,  plate armour was commonly used to supplement mail . 
in japan mail is called ``  '' which means chain . 
the origins of the word `` mail '' are not fully known . 
thus mail armour proved to be sufficient protection in most situations . 
the ottoman empire used mail armour as well as mail and plate armour ,  and it was used in their armies until the 18th century by heavy cavalry and elite units such as the janissaries . 
japanese mail  -lrb-  `` kusari ''  -rrb-  is one of the few historically correct examples of mail being constructed with such `` butted links '' . 
indeed ,  mail armour is mentioned in the quran as being a gift revealed by allah to david:
the first attestations of the word `` mail '' are in old french and anglo-norman: `` maille '' ,  `` maile '' ,  or `` male '' or other variants ,  which became `` mailye '' ,  `` maille '' ,  `` maile '' ,  `` male '' ,  or `` meile '' in middle english . 
mail was introduced to china when its allies in central asia paid tribute to the tang emperor in 718 by giving him a coat of `` link armour '' assumed to be mail . 
mail is used as protective clothing for butchers against meat-packing equipment . 
the more correct term is `` plate armour '' . 
when the mail was not riveted ,  a thrust from most sharp weapons could penetrate it . 
civilizations that used mail invented specific terms for each garment made from it . 
mail spread to korea slightly later where it was imported as the armour of imperial guards and generals . 
mail and plate armour was commonly used in india until the battle of plassey and the subsequent british conquest of the sub-continent . 
pindar  -lrb-  c .  522 – c .  443 bc  -rrb-  apparently gave cerberus one hundred heads . 
in the earliest description of cerberus ,  hesiod's `` theogony ''  -lrb-  c .  8th – 7th century bc  -rrb-  ,  cerberus has fifty heads ,  while pindar  -lrb-  c .  522 – c .  443 bc  -rrb-  gave him one hundred heads . 
in addition ,  a limestone relief fragment from taranto  -lrb-  c .  320–300 bc  -rrb-  shows cerberus with three lion-like heads . 
the mid-sixth-century bc cup from laconia gives cerberus three heads and a snake tail ,  which eventually becomes the standard representation . 
apollodorus' cerberus has three dog-heads ,  a serpent for a tail ,  and the heads of many snakes on his back . 
two attic amphoras from vulci ,  one  -lrb-  c .  530–515 bc  -rrb-  by the bucci painter  -lrb-  munich 1493 -rrb- ,  the other  -lrb-  c .  525–510 bc  -rrb-  by the andokides painter  -lrb-  louvre f204 -rrb- ,  in addition to the usual two heads and snake tail ,  show cerberus with a mane down his necks and back ,  another typical cerberian feature of attic vase painting . 
the earliest mentions of cerberus  -lrb-  c .  8th – 7th century bc  -rrb-  occur in homer's `` iliad '' and `` odyssey '' ,  and hesiod's `` theogony '' . 
the other earliest depiction ,  a relief `` pithos '' fragment from crete  -lrb-  c .  590–570 bc  -rrb-  ,  is thought to show a single lion-headed cerberus with a snake  -lrb-  open-mouthed  -rrb-  over his back being led to the right . 
in art cerberus is most commonly depicted with two dog heads  -lrb-  visible  -rrb-  ,  never more than three ,  but occasionally with only one . 
there were several locations which were said to be the place where heracles brought up cerberus from the underworld . 
stesichorus  -lrb-  c .  630 – 555 bc  -rrb-  apparently wrote a poem called `` cerberus '' ,  of which virtually nothing remains . 
the first appearance of a three-headed cerberus occurs on a mid-sixth-century bc laconian cup  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
heraclea ,  founded c .  560 bc ,  perhaps took its name from the association of its site with heracles' cerberian exploit . 
consistent with the no iron requirement ,  on an early-sixth-century bc lost corinthian cup ,  heracles is shown attacking hades with a stone ,  while the iconographic tradition ,  from c .  560 bc ,  often shows heracles using his wooden club against cerberus . 
andokides' amphora also has a small snake curling up from each of cerberus' two heads . 
a mid-sixth-century bc laconian cup by the hunt painter adds several new features to the scene which also become common in later works: three heads ,  a snake tail ,  cerberus' chain and heracles' club . 
virgil has snakes writhe around cerberus' neck ,  ovid's cerberus has a venomous mouth ,  necks `` vile with snakes '' ,  and `` hair inwoven with the threatening snake '' ,  while seneca gives cerberus a mane consisting of snakes ,  and a single snake tail . 
ovid  -lrb-  43 bc – ad 17/18 -rrb- has cerberus' mouth produce venom ,  and like euphorion ,  makes cerberus the cause of the poisonous plant aconite . 
 ''pascal case '' means only upper camel case . 
by omitting spaces ,  camel case does not have this problem . 
some wikis that do not use camel case linking may still use the camel case as a naming convention ,  such as aboutus . 
camel case is often used for variable names in computer programming . 
the niem registry requires that xml data elements use upper camel case and xml attributes use lower camel case . 
a 2009 study comparing snake case to camel case found that camel case identifiers could be recognised with higher accuracy among both programmers and non-programmers ,  and that programmers already trained in camel case were able to recognise those identifiers faster than underscored snake-case identifiers . 
camel case is used in some wiki markup languages for terms that should be automatically linked to other wiki pages . 
in french ,  camel case acronyms such as oulipo  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- were favored for a time as alternatives to initialisms . 
the original hungarian notation for programming ,  for example ,  specifies that a lowercase abbreviation for the `` usage type ''  -lrb-  not data type  -rrb-  should prefix all variable names ,  with the remainder of the name in upper camel case; as such it is a form of lower camel case . 
camel case is distinct from title case ,  which capitalises all words but retains the spaces between them ,  and from tall man lettering ,  which uses capitals to emphasize the differences between similar-looking words such as `` prednisone '' and `` prednisolone '' . 
camel case has been criticised as negatively impacting readability due to the removal of spaces and uppercasing of every word . 
therefore ,  users of those systems often resort to camel case  -lrb-  or underscores ,  hyphens and other `` safe '' characters  -rrb-  for compound file names like myjobresume . pdf . 
in addition ,  niklaus wirth ,  the inventor of pascal ,  came to appreciate camel case during a sabbatical at parc and used it in modula ,  his next programming language . 
camel case  -lrb-  stylized as camelcase; also known as camel caps or more formally as medial capitals  -rrb-  is the practice of writing phrases such that each word or abbreviation in the middle of the phrase begins with a capital letter ,  with no intervening spaces or punctuation . 
camel case then became fashionable for corporate trade names ,  initially in technical fields; mainstream usage was well established by 1990:
spring cereals typically require more irrigation and yield less than winter cereals . 
the first cereal grains were domesticated by early primitive humans . 
the amount of crude protein measured in grains is expressed as grain crude protein concentration . 
some grains are deficient in the essential amino acid ,  lysine . 
once the cereal plants have grown their seeds ,  they have completed their life cycle . 
cool-season cereals are well-adapted to temperate climates . 
if a crop is harvested during humid weather ,  the grain may not dry adequately in the field to prevent spoilage during its storage . 
for the past few decades ,  there has also been increasing interest in perennial grain plants . 
in north america ,  farmers commonly deliver their newly harvested grain to a grain elevator ,  a large storage facility that consolidates the crops of many farmers . 
christian literature is writing that deals with christian themes and incorporates the christian world view . 
many christians not only live under ,  but also have an official status in ,  a state religion of the following nations: armenia  -lrb-  armenian apostolic church  -rrb-  ,  costa rica  -lrb-  roman catholic church  -rrb-  ,  denmark  -lrb-  church of denmark  -rrb-  ,  el salvador  -lrb-  roman catholic church  -rrb-  ,  england  -lrb-  church of england  -rrb-  ,  georgia  -lrb-  georgian orthodox church  -rrb-  ,  greece  -lrb-  church of greece  -rrb-  ,  iceland  -lrb-  church of iceland  -rrb-  ,  liechtenstein  -lrb-  roman catholic church  -rrb-  ,  malta  -lrb-  roman catholic church  -rrb-  ,  monaco  -lrb-  roman catholic church  -rrb-  ,  romania  -lrb-  romanian orthodox church  -rrb-  ,  norway  -lrb-  church of norway  -rrb-  ,  vatican city  -lrb-  roman catholic church  -rrb-  ,  switzerland  -lrb-  roman catholic church ,  swiss reformed church and christian catholic church of switzerland  -rrb-  . 
the word `` christendom '' is also used with its other meaning to frame-true christianity . 
the `` christian world '' is also collectively known as the corpus christianum ,  translated as `` the christian body '' ,  meaning the community of all christians . 
british church historian diarmaid macculloch described  -lrb-  2010 -rrb- christendom as `` the union between christianity and secular power . `` 
 ''christendom '' has referred to the medieval and renaissance notion of the `` christian world '' as a sociopolitical polity . 
the largest christian denomination is the catholic church ,  with an estimated 1.2 billion adherents . 
emperor theodosius i made nicene christianity the state church of the roman empire with the edict of thessalonica of 380.
christendom has several meanings . 
from the 11th to 13th centuries ,  latin christendom rose to the central role of the western world . 
in the beginning of christendom ,  early christianity was a religion spread in the greek/roman world and beyond as a 1st-century jewish sect ,  which historians refer to as jewish christianity . 
the notion of `` europe '' and the `` western world '' has been intimately connected with the concept of `` christianity and christendom ''; many even attribute christianity for being the link that created a unified european identity . 
as the western roman empire disintegrated into feudal kingdoms and principalities ,  the concept of christendom changed as the western church became one of five patriarchates of the pentarchy and the christians of the eastern roman empire developed . 
with the breakup of the byzantine empire into individual nations with nationalist orthodox churches ,  the term christendom described western europe ,  catholicism ,  orthodox byzantines ,  and other eastern rites of the church . 
according to malcolm muggeridge  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- ,  christ founded christianity ,  but constantine founded christendom . 
christian symbolism invests objects or actions with an inner meaning expressing christian ideas . 
christian art is art produced in an attempt to illustrate ,  supplement and portray in tangible form the principles of christianity . 
the estimated number of christians in the world ranges from 2.2 billion to 2.4 billion people . 
christian philosophy is a term to describe the fusion of various fields of philosophy with the theological doctrines of christianity . 
in one contemporary sense ,  as used in a secular or protestant context ,  it may refer to the `` christian world '': christian-majority countries and the countries in which christianity dominates or prevails ,  or ,  in the historic ,  catholic sense of the word ,  the nations in which catholic christianity is the established religion ,  having a catholic christian polity . 
christian art began ,  about two centuries after christ ,  by borrowing motifs from roman imperial imagery ,  classical greek and roman religion and popular art . 
also ,  coyote scat tends to be smaller than wolf scat . 
the red wolf may have originated during a time of declining wolf populations in the southeastern united states ,  forcing a wolf-coyote hybridization as well as backcrossing with local parent coyote populations to the extent that about 75–80% of the modern red wolf's genome is of coyote derivation . 
in these respects ,  the coyote resembles the fox-like progenitors of the genus more so than the wolf . 
the coyote is typically smaller than the gray wolf ,  but has longer ears and a relatively larger braincase ,  as well as a thinner frame ,  face ,  and muzzle . 
the coyote also carries its tail downwards when running or walking ,  rather than horizontally as the wolf does . 
coyotes are often attracted to dog food and animals that are small enough to appear as prey . 
coyotes may compete with cougars in some areas . 
eastern coyotes tend to reach sexual maturity at two years of age ,  much later than in western coyotes . 
in southern california ,  coyotes frequently kill gray foxes ,  and these smaller canids tend to avoid areas with high coyote densities . 
coyotes rarely kill healthy adult red foxes ,  and have been observed to feed or den alongside them ,  though they often kill foxes caught in traps . 
coyotes may occasionally form mutualistic hunting relationships with american badgers ,  assisting each other in digging up rodent prey . 
eastern and red wolves are also products of varying degrees of wolf-coyote hybridization . 
when hunting large prey ,  the coyote often works in pairs or small groups . 
it is enlarging its range ,  with coyotes moving into urban areas in the eastern u . s .  ,  and was sighted in eastern panama  -lrb-  across the panama canal from their home range  -rrb-  for the first time in 2013.
the coyote has been described as `` the most vocal of all wild north american mammals '' . 
the coyote is roughly the north american equivalent to the eurasian golden jackal . 
with the extermination of the wolf ,  the coyote's range expanded to encompass broken forests from the tropics of guatemala and the northern slope of alaska . 
non-rabid coyotes in these areas sometimes target small children ,  mostly under the age of 10, though some adults have been bitten . 
unlike the gray wolf ,  which has undergone a radical improvement of its public image ,  anglo-american cultural attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative . 
it fills much of the same ecological niche as the golden jackal does in eurasia ,  though it is larger and more predatory ,  and is sometimes called the `` american jackal '' by zoologists . 
geographic variation in coyotes is not great ,  though taken as a whole ,  the eastern subspecies  -lrb-  `` c .  l .  thamnos '' and `` c .  l .  frustor ''  -rrb-  are large ,  dark-colored animals ,  with a gradual paling in color and reduction in size westward and northward  -lrb-  `` c .  l .  texensis '' ,  `` c .  l .  latrans '' ,  `` c .  l .  lestes '' ,  and `` c .  l .  incolatus ''  -rrb-  ,  a brightening of ochraceous tones–deep orange or brown–towards the pacific coast  -lrb-  `` c .  l .  ochropus '' ,  `` c .  l .  umpquensis ''  -rrb-  ,  a reduction in size in the southwestern united states  -lrb-  `` c .  l .  microdon '' ,  `` c .  l .  mearnsi ''  -rrb-  and a general trend towards dark reddish colors and short muzzles in mexican and central american populations . 
although media reports of such attacks generally identify the animals in question as simply `` coyotes '' ,  research into the genetics of the eastern coyote indicates those involved in attacks in northeast north america ,  including pennsylvania ,  new york ,  new england ,  and eastern canada ,  may have actually been coywolves ,  hybrids of `` canis latrans '' and `` c .  lupus , ``  not fully coyotes . 
conan is a cimmerian . 
some howard scholars believe this conan to be a forerunner of the more famous character . 
a conspicuous element of conan's character is his chivalry . 
following howard's death ,  the copyright of the conan stories passed through several hands . 
conan himself says in `` beyond the black river '' that he had ``  .  .  . not yet seen 15 snows '' . 
conan the barbarian was created by robert e .  howard in a series of fantasy stories published in `` weird tales '' in 1932.
however ,  the conan stories were so dynamic that they were never destined to be too long out of print . 
the publication and success of `` the tower of the elephant '' spurred howard to write many more conan stories for `` weird tales '' . 
marker had been working on a film about chile with iskra since 1973.
the film was re-released in the us in 2002.
marker is usually credited as director or co-director of all of the films made by slon . 
in 1959 marker made the animated film `` les astronautes '' with walerian borowczyk . 
many of marker's earliest films were produced by anatole dauman . 
in january 1961, marker traveled to cuba and shot the film `` ¡cuba sí ! `` 
the film won the golden bear for best documentary at the 1961 berlin film festival . 
it was the last film in which marker included `` travel footage '' for many years . 
marker became known internationally for the short film `` la jetée ''  -lrb-  `` the pier ''  -rrb-  in 1962.
when asked about his secretive nature ,  marker has said `` my films are enough for them the audience . `` 
in 1967 marker published his second volume of collected film essays ,  `` commentaires ii '' . 
marker then began work on one of his most ambitious films ,  `` a grin without a cat '' ,  released in 1977.
chris marker  -lrb-  ; 29 july 1921 – 29 july 2012 -rrb- was a french writer ,  photographer ,  documentary film director ,  multimedia artist and film essayist . 
cardinal vowels are not vowels of any particular language ,  but a measuring system . 
it has been cited as a language with a vowel system that has 8 vowels which are rather similar to the 8 primary cardinal vowels  -lrb-  ladefoged 1971:67 -rrb- . 
these eight vowels are known as the eight 'primary cardinal vowels' ,  and vowels like these are common in the world's languages . 
other vowel sounds are also recognised on the vowel chart of the international phonetic alphabet . 
in 1963, university of missouri system and the columbia college system established their headquarters in columbia . 
columbia and much of the surrounding area lies within the columbia public school district . 
columbia is a city in missouri and the county seat of boone county . 
there are also a large number of medical-related industries in columbia . 
the city has three institutions of higher education: the university of missouri ,  stephens college ,  and columbia college ,  all of which surround downtown columbia . 
the city has two daily newspapers: the `` columbia missourian '' and the `` columbia daily tribune '' ,  both morning deliveries . 
downtown columbia is an area of approximately one square mile surrounded by the university of missouri on the south ,  stephens college to the east ,  and columbia college on the north . 
the university of missouri health care operates three hospitals in columbia: the university of missouri hospital ,  the university of missouri women's and children's hospital  -lrb-  formerly columbia regional hospital  -rrb-  ,  and the ellis fischel cancer center . 
columbia is the thirteenth most-highly educated municipality in the united states . 
the missouri theatre center for the arts and jesse auditorium are columbia's largest fine arts venues . 
columbia also hosts the show-me state games ,  a non-profit program of the missouri governor's council on physical fitness and health . 
the columbia regional airport and the missouri river port of rocheport connect the region with trade and transportation . 
libraries include the columbia public library ,  the university of missouri libraries ,  with over three million volumes in ellis library ,  and the state historical society of missouri . 
columbia's infrastructure was relatively untouched by the civil war . 
columbia also operates several greenbelts with trails and parks throughout town . 
the economy of columbia's metro area is slightly larger than the bahamas . 
i-70  -lrb-  concurrent with us 40 -rrb- and us 63 are the two main freeways used for travel to and from columbia . 
the university of missouri school of music attracts hundreds of musicians to columbia ,  student performances are held in whitmore recital hall . 
in 2008, filmmaker todd sklar completed `` box elder '' ,  which was filmed entirely in and around columbia and the university of missouri . 
columbia has large areas of forested and open land and many of these areas are home to wildlife . 
columbia's most significant and well-known architecture is in buildings downtown and within the university campuses . 
soon other educational institutions were founded in columbia ,  such as christian female college ,  the first college for women west of the mississippi ,  which later became columbia college . 
there was a tragedy at the club late in the 1992–93 season . 
charlton athletic f . c . 
charlton athletic football club is an english professional association football club based in charlton ,  south-east london . 
however ,  after this move collapsed in 1924 charlton returned to the valley . 
charlton's most common nickname is the addicks . 
charlton finally returned to the valley in december 1992, celebrating with a 1–0 victory against portsmouth . 
with the exception of one season ,  charlton have always played in red and white . 
it is now once again the official nickname of the club . 
on 14 november 2016, with the club in 15th place of league one ,  the club announced that it had `` parted company '' with russell slade ,  with charlton having won four of the 16 games of the season . 
charlton reached the 1946 fa cup final ,  but lost 4–1 to derby county at wembley . 
the club play at the valley in charlton ,  where they have played since 1919, apart from one year in catford ,  during 1923–24, and seven years at crystal palace and west ham united between 1985 and 1992.
charlton turned professional in 1920 and first entered the football league in 1921.
in the first season back in the championship ,  the 2012–13 season saw charlton finish ninth place with 65 points ,  just three points short of the play-off places to the premier league . 
after the club's return ,  curbishley proved an astute spender and by 2003 he had succeeded in establishing charlton in the top flight . 
in 1984 financial matters came to a head and the club went into administration ,  to be reformed as charlton athletic . 
in the long-running bbc sitcom `` only fools and horses '' ,  rodney charlton trotter is named after the club . 
the valley club was one of the most popular club venues in south london at this time ,  featuring named entertainers popular today . 
modern cross-country skiing is similar to the original form of skiing ,  from which all skiing disciplines evolved ,  including alpine skiing ,  ski jumping and telemark skiing . 
while the noun `` ski '' originates from the norwegian language ,  unlike the english `` skiing '' there is no corresponding verb in norwegian . 
skis up to 280 cm have been produced in finland ,  and the longest recorded ski in norway is 373 cm . 
in modern norwegian ,  a variety of terms refer to cross-country skiing ,  including:
copacabana has the 11th highest human development index in rio; the 2000 census put the hdi of copacabana at 0.902.
when rio was the capital of brazil ,  copacabana was considered one of the best neighborhoods in the country . 
according to riotur ,  the tourism secretariat of rio de janeiro ,  there are 63 hotels and 10 hostels in copacabana . 
copacabana  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a `` bairro ''  -lrb-  neighbourhood  -rrb-  located in the south zone of the city of rio de janeiro ,  brazil . 
the copacabana promenade was designed by roberto burle marx . 
in 1974, mike marshall won the award ,  becoming the first relief pitcher to win the award . 
only four teams have never had a pitcher win the cy young award . 
clayton kershaw is the youngest pitcher to win a third cy young award . 
there have been 17 players who unanimously won the cy young award ,  for a total of 23 wins . 
antisemitism in christianity is the hostility of christian churches ,  christian groups ,  and by christians in general to judaism and the jewish people . 
the confessing church was ,  in 1934, the first christian opposition group . 
if christianity had come from judaism and jesus was a jew ,  how and why did the jews reject such core elements of christianity ? 
most of this reconciliation has occurred between the jewish community and the catholic church . 
as late as the 4th century church father john chrysostom complained that some christians were still attending jewish synagogues . 
christian antisemitism has been attributed to numerous factors including theological differences ,  competition between church and synagogue ,  the christian drive for converts ,  decreed by the great commission ,  misunderstanding of jewish beliefs and practices ,  and a perceived jewish hostility toward christians . 
these groups are often rejected and they are not even considered christian groups by either mainstream christian denominations or the vast majority of christians around the world . 
“i have been attacked because of my handling of the jewish question . 
the holocaust has driven many within christianity to reflect on the relationship between christian theology ,  practices ,  and that genocide . 
in combating marcion ,  orthodox apologists conceded that judaism was an incomplete and inferior religion to christianity ,  while also defending the jewish scriptures as canonical . 
many christians do not consider anti-judaism to be antisemitism . 
jesus is rejected in judaism as a failed jewish messiah claimant and a false prophet . 
from the reign of nero onwards ,  who is said by tacitus to have blamed the great fire of rome on christians ,  christianity was considered to be illegal and christians were frequently subjected to persecution ,  differing regionally . 
after paul's death ,  christianity emerged as a separate religion ,  and pauline christianity emerged as the dominant form of christianity ,  especially after paul ,  james and the other apostles agreed on a compromise set of requirements . 
on many occasions ,  jews were accused of a blood libel ,  the supposed drinking of blood of christian children in mockery of the christian eucharist . 
when his call to convert to his version of christianity was unsuccessful ,  he became hostile to them . 
like john chrysostom ,  his objective was to dissuade christians from reverting to judaism by emphasizing what he saw as the wickedness of the jews and their religion . 
the position that `` christian theological anti-judaism is a phenomenon distinct from modern antisemitism ,  which is rooted in economic and racial thought ,  so that christian teachings should not be held responsible for antisemitism '' has been articulated ,  among other places ,  by pope john paul ii in 'we remember: a reflection on the shoah , ' and the jewish declaration on christianity ,  dabru emet . 
martin luther at first made overtures towards the jews ,  believing that the `` evils '' of catholicism had prevented their conversion to christianity . 
although some christians in the past did consider anti-judaism to be contrary to christian teaching ,  this view was not widely expressed by leaders and lay people . 
other church fathers ,  such as john chrysostom ,  went further in their condemnation . 
antisemitism in popular european christian culture escalated beginning in the 13th century . 
the presbyterian church  -lrb-  usa  -rrb-  ,  the united methodist church ,  and the united church of canada have ended their efforts to convert jews . 
christianity however was not restricted to one people ,  and as jewish christians were excluded from the synagogue  -lrb-  see council of jamnia  -rrb-  ,  they also lost the protection of the status of judaism ,  though said `` protection '' did have its limits  -lrb-  see for example titus flavius clemens  -lrb-  consul  -rrb-  ,  rabbi akiva ,  and ten martyrs  -rrb-  . 
christianity and judaism differed in their legal status in the roman empire: judaism ,  restricted to the jewish people and jewish proselytes ,  was generally exempt from obligation to the roman imperial cult and since the reign of julius caesar enjoyed the status of a `` licit religion '' ,  though there were also occasional persecutions ,  for example in 19 tiberius expelled the jews from rome ,  as claudius did again in 49.
but it would not have been possible without the almost two thousand years' pre-history of 'christian' anti-judaism .  .  . `` 
the c-17 is long and has a wingspan of  . 
the raf declared itself delighted with the c-17.
in raf service ,  the c-17 has not been given an official service name and designation  -lrb-  for example ,  c-130j referred to as hercules c4 or c5 -rrb- ,  but is referred to simply as the c-17 or `` c-17a globemaster '' . 
this was the first combat insertion of paratroopers using the c-17.
the first c-17 squadron was declared operational by the usaf in january 1995.
it was designed to replace the lockheed c-141 starlifter ,  and also fulfill some of the duties of the lockheed c-5 galaxy ,  freeing the c-5 fleet for outsize cargo . 
this would allow it to perform the work done by the c-141, and to fulfill some of the duties of the lockheed c-5 galaxy ,  freeing the c-5 fleet for outsize cargo . 
the boeing c-17 globemaster iii is a large military transport aircraft . 
on 23 july 2007, the first canadian c-17 made its initial flight . 
another c-17 was ordered in august 2006, and delivered on 22 february 2008.
the air force had formed a requirement for 210 aircraft . 
in the 1970s ,  the u . s .  air force began looking for a replacement for its lockheed c-130 hercules tactical cargo aircraft . 
the usaf eventually decided to cap its c-17 fleet at 223 aircraft; its final delivery was on 12 september 2013.
the c-17 is designed to operate from runways as short as and as narrow as  . 
on 19 june 2012, the usaf ordered its 224th and final c-17, as a replacement for an aircraft that crashed in alaska in july 2010.
in may 2011, the first c-17 was handed over and the last of the six was received in june 2012.
the sac c-17s are based at pápa air base ,  hungary . 
the raf showed interest in buying a ninth c-17 in november 2013.
that is: in a non-deterministic gc system ,  if a resource or a resource-like object requires manual resource management  -lrb-  release/close  -rrb-  ,  and this object is used as `` part of '' another object ,  then the composed object will also become a resource-like object that itself requires manual resource management  -lrb-  release/close  -rrb-  . 
when the count reaches zero ,  the object's memory is reclaimed . 
the basic principles of garbage collection are to find data objects in a program that cannot be accessed in the future ,  and to reclaim the resources used by those objects . 
reference counting garbage collection is where each object has a count of the number of references to it . 
some languages ,  like ada ,  modula-3, and c++/cli ,  allow both garbage collection and manual memory management to co-exist in the same application by using separate heaps for collected and manually managed objects; others ,  like d ,  are garbage-collected but allow the user to manually delete objects and also entirely disable garbage collection when speed is required . 
other dynamic languages ,  such as ruby and julia  -lrb-  but not perl 5 or php before version 5.3, which both use reference counting  -rrb-  ,  javascript and ecmascript also tend to use gc . 
in some languages that do not have built in garbage collection ,  it can be added through a library ,  as with the boehm garbage collector for c and c++ . 
in such a case the object may be allocated directly on the thread stack and released when the function returns ,  reducing its potential garbage collection overhead . 
the need for explicit manual resource management  -lrb-  release/close  -rrb-  for non-gced resources in an object oriented language becomes transitive to composition . 
the eastern wolf has two proposals over its origin . 
for eurasia ,  in 1995 mammalogist robert nowak recognized five subspecies based on skull morphology ,  these being: `` c .  l .  lupus '' ,  `` c .  l .  albus '' ,  `` c .  l .  pallipes '' ,  `` c .  l .  cubanensis '' and `` c .  l .  communis '' . 
the red wolf is an enigmatic taxon ,  of which there are two proposals over its origin . 
the indian plains wolf is a proposed clade within the indian wolf  -lrb-  `` canis lupus pallipes ''  -rrb-  that is distinguished by its mitochondrial dna ,  which is basal to all other wolves except for the himalayan wolf . 
the apennine wolf  -lrb-  italian wolf  -rrb-  was first recognised as a distinct subspecies `` canis lupus italicus '' in 1921 by zoologist giuseppe altobello . 
the himalayan wolf is a proposed clade within the tibetan wolf  -lrb-  `` canis lupus filchneri ''  -rrb-  that is distinguished by its mitochondrial dna ,  which is basal to all other wolves . 
in 2017, a study of mitochondrial dna ,  x-chromosome  -lrb-  maternal lineage  -rrb-  markers and y-chromosome  -lrb-  male lineage  -rrb-  markers found that the himalayan wolf was genetically basal to the holarctic grey wolf and has an association with the african golden wolf . 
/1e6 round 0 million  -rrb-  ,  which is a part of south asia ,  is also sometimes included in central asia . 
central asia is sometimes referred to as turkestan . 
since then ,  this has become the most common definition of central asia . 
central asia has a population of about /1e6 round 0 million ,  consisting of five republics: kazakhstan  -lrb-  pop . 
much of the land of central asia is too dry or too rugged for farming . 
couscous is distinct from pasta ,  even pasta such as orzo and risoni of similar size ,  in that it is made from crushed durum wheat semolina ,  while pasta is made from ground wheat . 
couscous is a staple food throughout the north african cuisines of algeria ,  morocco ,  tunisia ,  mauritania ,  libya ,  and egypt . 
in some regions couscous is made from farina or coarsely ground barley or pearl millet . 
couscous  -lrb-   ' ; '  -rrb-  is a maghrebi dish of small  -lrb-  about diameter  -rrb-  steamed balls of crushed durum wheat semolina that is traditionally served with a stew spooned on top . 
ibn battuta  -lrb-  b .  morocco ,  1304-1368?
in western supermarkets ,  it is sometimes sold in instant form with a flavor packet ,  and may be served as a side or on its own as a main dish . 
constantius soon sent julian off to gaul . 
constantius ii  -lrb-  ; ; 7 august 317 – 3 november 361 -rrb- was roman emperor from 337 to 361.
in the meantime ,  julian had won some victories against the alamanni ,  who had once again invaded roman gaul . 
the second son of constantine i and fausta ,  constantius was made `` caesar '' by his father in 324.
constantius ii died of fever on 3 november 361.
constantius then hurried east to antioch to resume the war with persia . 
however ,  when constantius requested reinforcements from julian's army for the eastern campaign ,  the gallic legions revolted and proclaimed julian `` augustus '' . 
again ,  magnentius withdrew ,  this time to southern gaul . 
shortly thereafter ,  in 355, constantius promoted his last surviving cousin ,  gallus' younger half-brother julian ,  to the rank of `` caesar '' . 
the massacre left constantius ,  his older brother constantine ii ,  his younger brother constans ,  and three cousins gallus ,  julian and nepotianus as the only surviving male relatives of constantine the great . 
constantius repeatedly defended the eastern border against invasions by the aggressive sassanid empire under shapur . 
when constantius learned of shapur's withdrawal from roman territory ,  he prepared his army for a counter-attack . 
constans  -lrb-  ; ; c .  323 – 350 -rrb- or constans i was roman emperor from 337 to 350.
constantine ii soon complained that he had not received the amount of territory that was his due as the eldest son . 
constantine was eventually trapped at aquileia ,  where he died ,  leaving constans to inherit all of his brother’s former territories – hispania ,  britannia and gaul . 
he defeated his brother constantine ii in 340, but anger in the army over his personal life  -lrb-  homosexuality  -rrb-  and favouritism towards his barbarian bodyguards led the general magnentius to rebel ,  resulting in the assassination of constans in 350.
they estimated that the number of high school cheerleaders from public high schools is around 394,700.
the cheerleading worlds are only for teams that are level 5 and up . 
most american middle schools ,  high schools ,  and colleges have organized cheerleading squads . 
in high school ,  there are usually two squads per school: varsity and a junior varsity . 
middle school cheerleading evolved shortly after high school squads were created . 
the advantages to a school squad versus an all-star squad is cheering at various sporting events . 
their first year as a national team was in 2009 when they represented canada at the international cheer union world cheerleading championships international cheer union  -lrb-  icu  -rrb-  . 
cheer was shouted out by student fans . 
these students would cheer for the team also at football practices ,  and special cheering sections were designated in the stands for the games themselves for both the home and visiting teams . 
this brought about american sports ,  beginning first with collegiate teams . 
there are two world championship competitions that canada participates in . 
canada has multiple teams across their country that compete in the usasf cheerleading worlds championship . 
varsity: partnered with the uca ,  varsity created the national high school cheerleading championship in 1980.
if a team places high enough at selected usasf/iasf sanctioned national competitions ,  they could be included in the cheerleading worlds and compete against teams from all over the world ,  as well as receive money for placing . 
organizations that sponsor youth cheer teams usually sponsor either youth league football or basketball teams as well . 
of the united states' 2.9 million female high school athletes ,  only 3% are cheerleaders ,  yet cheerleading accounts for nearly 65% of all catastrophic injuries in girls' high school athletics . 
icu world championships: the international cheer union currently encompasses 105 national federations from countries across the globe . 
the first junior cheerleading team that was selected to become the junior national team was eastside middle school ,  located in mount washington kentucky and will represent the united states in the inaugural junior division at the world championships . 
they also host the nca/nda collegiate cheer & dance championship in daytona beach ,  florida . 
at the atci ,  many teams from all over thailand compete ,  joining them are many invited neighbouring nations who also send cheer squads . 
in the early 2000s ,  cheerleading was considered one of the most dangerous school activities . 
cheerleading world championships  -lrb-  cwc  -rrb- : organised by the ifc . 
most american universities have a cheerleading squad to cheer for football ,  basketball ,  volleyball ,  and soccer . 
countries assemble and send only one team to represent them . 
teams must receive a bid from a partner company to attend . 
cheerleading is an activity wherein the participants  -lrb-  referred to as `` cheerleaders ''  -rrb-  cheer for their team as a form of encouragement . 
nlcc final destination: nation's leading cheer companies is a multi brand company ,  partnered with other companies such as: americheer/ameridance ,  american cheer & dance academy ,  eastern cheer & dance association ,  and spirit unlimited . 
tryouts often take place during the spring ,  so that the coach has the squad chosen in time to attend summer camp as a team . 
the television series `` glee ''  -lrb-  2009-2015 -rrb- featured dianna agron as quinn fabray ,  the captain of her high school cheerleading squad ,  the cheerios . 
international cheer union  -lrb-  icu  -rrb- : established on april 26, 2004, the icu is recognized by the sportaccord as the world governing body of cheerleading and the authority on all matters with relation to it . 
in the 1860s ,  students from great britain began to cheer and chant in unison for their favorite athletes at sporting events . 
during the early 1980s ,  cheerleading squads not associated with a school or sports leagues ,  whose main objective was competition ,  began to emerge . 
canada's national program has grown to be one of the most successful programs . 
gardner made a final visit to cottingley in august 1921.
the photographs and two of the cameras used are on display in the national science and media museum in bradford ,  england . 
gardner and doyle sought a second expert opinion from the photographic company kodak . 
the cottingley fairies appear in a series of five photographs taken by elsie wright  -lrb-  1901–1988 -rrb- and frances griffiths  -lrb-  1907–1986 -rrb- ,  two young cousins who lived in cottingley ,  near bradford in england . 
gardner and doyle ,  perhaps rather optimistically ,  interpreted the results of the three expert evaluations as two in favour of the photographs' authenticity and one against . 
both frances and elsie claimed to have taken the fifth photograph . 
doyle wrote back:
gardner described his briefing in his 1945 `` fairies: a book of real fairies '':
two days later the girls took the last picture ,  `` fairies and their sun-bath '' . 
on october 4, 2018 the first two of the photographs ,  `` alice and the fairies '' and `` iris and the gnome , ``  were to be sold by dominic winter auctioneers ,  in gloucestershire . 
elsie's father ,  arthur ,  was a keen amateur photographer ,  and had set up his own darkroom . 
a member of cheka was called a `` chekist '' . 
in the soviet republic ,  there were 38 gubernatorial chekas  -lrb-  gubcheks  -rrb-  by this time . 
in addition ,  border security chekas were included in the system of local cheka bodies . 
in the first months of its existence ,  vcheka consisted of only 40 officials . 
in november 1920 the soviet of labor and defense created a special section of vcheka for the security of the state border . 
on august 3, a vcheka section for combating counterrevolution ,  speculation and sabotage on railways was created . 
on december 8, 1917, some of the original members of the vcheka were replaced . 
estimates on cheka executions vary widely . 
and in the same day ,  vcheka offered shchukin to conduct arrests of counterfeiters . 
the gubernatorial and oblast-type chekas retained in relationship to the transportation sections only control and investigative functions . 
the cheka was also used against the armed anarchist black army of nestor makhno in the ukraine . 
in may 1919, two cheka agents sent to assassinate makhno were caught and executed . 
note that orthography is not always a good guide for distinguishing clitics from affixes: clitics may be written as separate words ,  but sometimes they are joined to the word they depend on  -lrb-  like the latin clitic `` -que '' ,  meaning `` and ''  -rrb-  ,  or separated by special characters such as hyphens or apostrophes  -lrb-  like the english clitic `` ’s '' in `` it's '' for `` it has '' or `` it is ''  -rrb-  . 
clitics fall into various categories depending on their position in relation to the word they connect to . 
in formal language theory ,  a context-free grammar  -lrb-  cfg  -rrb-  is a certain type of formal grammar: a set of production rules that describe all possible strings in a given formal language . 
some patients opt to have only their brain cryopreserved ,  rather than their whole body . 
while preservation of both structure and function has been possible for brain slices using vitrification ,  this goal remains elusive for whole brains . 
the cryonics' argument that death does not occur as long as brain structure remains intact and theoretically repairable has received some mainstream medical discussion in the context of the ethical concept of brain death and organ donation . 
in absence of a revived brain ,  or brain simulation from somehow scanning a preserved brain ,  the adequacy of present vitrification technology  -lrb-  with or without fixation  -rrb-  for preserving the anatomical and molecular basis of long-term memory as required by cryonics is still unproven . 
even using the best methods ,  cryopreservation of whole bodies or brains is very damaging and irreversible with current technology . 
cryonics procedures can only begin after clinical death ,  and cryonics `` patients '' are legally dead . 
the first body to be frozen with the hope of future revival was james bedford's ,  a few hours after his cancer-caused death in 1967.
cryonics uses temperatures below −130 °c ,  called cryopreservation ,  in an attempt to preserve enough brain information to permit future revival of the cryopreserved person . 
cryonic proponents go further than the mainstream consensus in asserting that the brain does not have to be continuously active to survive or retain memory . 
the method is fatal ,  performed as euthanasia under general anethesia ,  but the hope is that future technology would allow the brain to be physically scanned into a computer simulation ,  neuron by neuron . 
cryopreservation was applied to human cells beginning in 1954 with frozen sperm ,  which was thawed and used to inseminate three women . 
in 2018, a y-combinator startup called nectome was recognized for developing a method of preserving brains with chemicals rather than by freezing . 
the proposed unitary patent will be a particular type of european patent ,  granted under the european patent convention . 
european patents are granted in accordance with the provisions of the european patent convention ,  via a unified procedure before the european patent office . 
the abandonment ,  revocation or limitation of the european patent in one state does not affect the european patent in other states . 
some administrative tasks relating to the european patents with unitary effect will be performed by the european patent office . 
the agreement on a unified patent court provides the legal basis for the unified patent court: a patent court for european patents  -lrb-  with and without unitary effect  -rrb-  ,  with jurisdiction in those countries where the agreement is in effect . 
in 2009, three draft documents were published regarding a community patent: a european patent in which the european community was designated:
translation requirements as well as the requirement to pay yearly patent fees in all countries in which a european patent is designated ,  presently renders the european patent system costly in the european union . 
according to the agreed plan ,  the eu would accede to the european patent convention as a contracting state ,  and patents granted by the european patent office will ,  when validated for the eu ,  have unitary effect in the territory of the european union . 
at different times ,  the project ,  or very similar projects ,  have been referred to as the `` european union patent ''  -lrb-  the name used in the eu treaties ,  which serve as the legal basis for eu competency  -rrb-  ,  `` eu patent '' ,  `` community patent '' ,  `` european community patent '' ,  `` ec patent '' and `` compat '' . 
any `` national '' european patents applying outside the `` unitary effect '' zone will co-exist with the unitary patent . 
the european patent with unitary effect  -lrb-  epue  -rrb-  ,  more commonly known as the unitary patent ,  is a new type of european patent in advanced stage of adoption which would be valid in participating member states of the european union . 
decisions of the european patent office regarding the unitary patent are open to appeal to the unified patent court ,  rather than to the epo boards of appeal . 
the system is based on eu law as well as the european patent convention  -lrb-  epc  -rrb-  . 
meanwhile ,  european commissioner for enterprise and industry günter verheugen declared at the european patent forum in may 2008 that there was an `` urgent need '' for a community patent . 
in october 2007, the portuguese presidency of the council of the european union proposed an eu patent jurisdiction ,  `` borrowing heavily from the rejected draft european patent litigation agreement  -lrb-  epla  -rrb- ``  . 
the unified patent court will have exclusive jurisdiction in infringement and revocation proceedings involving european patents with unitary effect ,  and during a transition period non-exclusive jurisdiction  -lrb-  that the patent holder can be opt out from  -rrb-  regarding european patents without unitary effect in the states where the agreement applies . 
in view of the difficulties in reaching an agreement on the community patent ,  other legal agreements have been proposed outside the european union legal framework to reduce the cost of translation  -lrb-  of patents when granted  -rrb-  and litigation ,  namely the london agreement ,  which entered into force on 1 may 2008—and which has reduced the number of countries requiring translation of european patents granted nowadays under the european patent convention ,  and the corresponding costs to obtain a european patent—and the european patent litigation agreement  -lrb-  epla  -rrb-  ,  a proposal that has now lapsed . 
work on a community patent started in the 1970s ,  but the resulting community patent convention  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  was a failure . 
there is support for the community patent from various quarters . 
the `` luxembourg conference on the community patent '' took place in 1975 and the convention for the european patent for the common market ,  or  -lrb-  luxembourg  -rrb-  community patent convention  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  ,  was signed at luxembourg on 15 december 1975, by the 9 member states of the european economic community at that time . 
on 17 december 2012, agreement was reached between the european council and european parliament on the two eu regulations that made the unitary patent possible through enhanced cooperation at eu level . 
in addition to the territories above ,  the european patent convention has been extended by three member states participating in the enhanced cooperation for a unitary patent to cover some of their dependent territories outside the european union:
a cistron is an alternative term to a gene . 
when instead the wild type trait is expressed ,  the positions are said to belong to distinct cistrons / genes . 
between 1838 and 1847, liberia was officially known as the `` commonwealth of liberia '' . 
so ,  in an australian context ,  the term `` commonwealth ''  -lrb-  capitalized  -rrb-  refers to the federal government ,  and `` commonwealth of australia '' is the official name of the country . 
in a british context ,  it is sometimes referred to as the `` old commonwealth '' . 
commonwealth is a traditional english term for a political community founded for the common good . 
it is also often referred as `` nobles' commonwealth ''  -lrb-  1505–1795, i . e .  ,  before the union  -rrb-  . 
the drive's built-in disk operating system is cbm dos 2.6.
1541 drives at power up always default to device #8.
the screws are then tightened and the drive is put back into its case . 
if multiple drives in a chain are used ,  then the startup procedure is to power on the first drive in the chain ,  alter its device number via a software command to the highest number in the chain  -lrb-  if three drives were used ,  then the first drive in the chain would be set to device #10 -rrb- ,  then power on the next drive ,  alter its device number to the next lowest ,  and repeat the procedure until the final drive at the end of the chain was powered on and left as device #8.
it was also possible to change the drive number via a software command ,  which was temporary and would be erased as soon as the drive was powered off . 
the early  -lrb-  1982 to 1983 -rrb- 1541s have a spring-eject mechanism  -lrb-  alps drive  -rrb-  ,  and the disks often fail to release . 
then ,  to match the look of the c64, cbm changed the drive's color to brown-beige and the name to `` commodore 1541 '' . 
the 1541's numerous shortcomings opened a market for a number of third-party clones of the disk drive ,  a situation that continued for the lifetime of the c64.
the disk header is on 40/0, and the bam  -lrb-  block availability map  -rrb-  resides on 40/1 and 40/2.
unlike the cases of the 1541 and 1571, the low-level disk format used by the 1581 is similar enough to the ms-dos format as the 1581 is built around a wd1770 fm/mfm floppy controller chip . 
the commodore 1581 is a 3½-inch double-sided double-density floppy disk drive that was released by commodore business machines  -lrb-  cbm  -rrb-  in 1987, primarily for its c64 and c128 home/personal computers . 
