moral nihilists maintain that any talk of an objective morality is incoherent and better off using other terms . 
some forms of moral realism are compatible with some degree of meta-ethical relativism . 
this ,  harris contends ,  is part of what it means to practice a science of morality . 
harris adds that we do not demand absolute certainty from predictions in physics so we should not demand that of a science studying morality  -lrb-  see `` the moral landscape ''  -rrb-  . 
presley left her nothing in his will . 
presley's divorce was finalized on october 9, 1973.
in 1994, the presley autopsy report was reopened . 
presley's earliest musical influence came from gospel . 
presley took to the stage without introduction . 
on january 10, 1956, presley made his first recordings for rca in nashville . 
in august 1953, presley checked into the offices of sun records . 
presley would record gospel periodically for the rest of his life . 
larry geller became presley's hairdresser in 1964.
since 1977, there have been numerous alleged sightings of presley . 
presley's condition declined precipitously in september . 
it was to be presley's last public performance for seven years . 
it proved to be presley's last u . s .  number one pop album during his lifetime . 
presley's funeral was held at graceland on thursday ,  august 18.
presley is one of the most celebrated and influential musicians of the 20th century . 
presley was keen to resume regular live performing . 
if presley's sin was his lifelessness ,  it was his sinfulness that brought him to life '' . 
while in friedberg ,  presley met 14-year-old priscilla beaulieu . 
in november 1956, presley made his film debut in `` love me tender '' . 
rca released presley's self-titled debut album on march 23.
on april 3, presley made the first of two appearances on nbc's `` milton berle show '' . 
indications of the harm presley did just in la crosse were the two high school girls  .  .  .  whose abdomen and thigh had presley's autograph . `` 
allen's show with presley had ,  for the first time ,  beaten cbs's `` ed sullivan show '' in the ratings . 
presley would receive top billing on every subsequent film he made . 
of presley's films in the 1960s ,  15 were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another 5 by soundtrack eps . 
however ,  presley's stepbrother ,  david stanley ,  claimed that the bodyguards were fired because they were becoming more outspoken about presley's drug dependency . 
presley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly ,  according to music historians . 
parker arguably exercised tightest control over presley's film career . 
the audience response at presley's live shows became increasingly fevered . 
presley was devastated; their relationship had remained extremely close—even into his adulthood ,  they would use baby talk with each other and presley would address her with pet names . 
elvis presley was born on january 8, 1935, in tupelo ,  mississippi ,  to gladys love presley  -lrb-  `` née '' smith  -rrb-  in the two-room shotgun house built by his father ,  vernon elvis presley ,  in preparation for the birth . 
by 1967, parker's contracts gave him 50 percent of most of presley's earnings from recordings ,  films ,  and merchandise . 
neal's contract was terminated ,  and ,  on march 2, parker became presley's manager . 
on his mother's side presley's ancestry was scots-irish ,  with some french norman . 
presley returned to the international early in 1970 for the first of the year's two month-long engagements ,  performing two shows a night . 
presley's physical attractiveness and sexual appeal were widely acknowledged . 
presley commenced basic training at fort hood ,  texas . 
presley was overcome by stage fright the first time ,  but succeeded in performing the following week . 
 ''way down '' ,  presley's last single issued during his career ,  was released on june 6.
by the time he graduated from high school in june 1953, presley had already singled out music as his future . 
following an attempt to steal presley's body in late august ,  the remains of both presley and his mother were reburied in graceland's meditation garden on october 2.
these were both dramatic numbers ,  but most of what presley recorded for his many film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein . 
presley never grew comfortable with the hollywood scene ,  and most of these relationships were insubstantial . 
it was produced for $1,600, but for `` the evil dead '' ,  raimi needed over $100,000.
the film's high-definition debut was in a 2010 blu-ray . 
the film's release was met with controversy . 
the low-budget horror film attracted the interest of producer irvin shapiro ,  who helped screen the film at the 1982 cannes film festival . 
 ''evil dead ii '' was filmed and released in 1987, and was also a box-office success . 
british press for the film was positive; kim newman of `` monthly film bulletin '' ,  richard cook of `` nme '' ,  and julian petley of `` film and filming '' all gave the film good reviews during its early release . 
because of the crew's inexperience ,  filming was a `` comedy of errors '' . 
with the film completed ,  raimi and the crew decided to celebrate with a `` big premiere '' . 
the film's press attracted the attention of british film distribution agent stephen woolley . 
after the film was released ,  many people began to trespass onto the filming location in morristown . 
 ''the evil dead '' and its sequels have become one of the largest cult film trilogies in history . 
after the extensive filming process ,  raimi had a `` mountain of footage '' that he had to put together . 
woolley was impressed by raimi ,  whom he called `` charming '' ,  and was an admirer of the film ,  which led to his taking more risks with the film's promotion than he normally would have . 
raimi showed the film to anyone willing to watch it ,  booking meetings with distribution agents and anyone with experience in the film industry . 
the relatively large budget made this a much simpler process with `` the evil dead '' than it had been with the short film . 
 ''the evil dead '' launched the careers of campbell and raimi ,  who would collaborate on several films together throughout the years ,  including raimi's `` spider-man '' trilogy . 
 ''fangoria '' started covering the film in late 1982, writing several articles about the film's long production history . 
in addition ,  the film has inspired a stage musical ,  ``  '' ,  which was produced with the permission of raimi and campbell . 
lange and lerner also admitted that socialism would lack any simulation of financial markets ,  and that this would cause problems in planning capital investment . 
therefore ,  hayek argues ,  individuals must acquire data through prices in real markets . 
joan robinson argued that in a steady state economy there would be an effective abundance of means of production ,  and so markets would not be needed . 
if the market can find an equilibrium in polynomial time ,  then the equivalence above can be used to prove that p=ppad . 
hayek responded by arguing that the simulation of markets in socialism would fail due to a lack of genuine competition and entrepreneurship . 
he cited the sheer complexity of the problem ,  as well as  the difficulty of negotiating between preferences as being the central problems with such a system . 
as for socialism ,  mises  -lrb-  1944 -rrb- and hayek  -lrb-  1937 -rrb- insisted that bureaucrats in individual ministries could not coordinate their plans without a price system . 
in market exchanges ,  prices reflect the supply and demand of resources ,  labor ,  and products . 
they adamantly oppose any distortion of market structure by the introduction of government influence ,  asserting that such interference would be a form of central planning or state capitalism ,  insofar as it would redirect decision making from the private to the public sector . 
it has also been argued that the contention that finding a true economic equilibrium is not just hard but impossible for a central planner applies equally well to a market system . 
prices in futures markets play a special role in economic calculation . 
if this happens to all industries however ,  everyone would be worse off than if they had been subject to the rigours of market competition . 
mises and hayek saw centralization as inevitable in socialism . 
generally speaking the problem of economic calculation is solved in financial markets . 
some writers have argued that with detailed use of real unit accounting and demand surveys a planned economy could operate without a capital market ,  in a situation of abundance . 
hayek  -lrb-  1935, 1937, 1940, 1945 -rrb- stressed the knowledge problem of central planning ,  partly because decentralized socialism seemed indefensible . 
capitalists plan production for profit . 
the first mrs .  darwin died in 1770.
erasmus darwin  -lrb-  12 december 173118 april 1802 -rrb- was an english physician . 
darwin was born in 1731 at elston hall ,  nottinghamshire near newark-on-trent ,  england ,  the youngest of seven children of robert darwin of elston  -lrb-  12 august 1682 – 20 november 1754 -rrb- ,  a lawyer and physician ,  and his wife elizabeth hill  -lrb-  1702–97 -rrb- . 
in 1775 darwin met elizabeth pole ,  daughter of charles colyear ,  2nd earl of portmore ,  and wife of colonel edward pole  -lrb-  1718–1780 -rrb-; but as she was married ,  darwin could only make his feelings known for her through poetry . 
darwin may have fathered another child ,  this time with a married woman . 
darwin married twice and had 14 children ,  including two illegitimate daughters by an employee ,  and ,  possibly ,  at least one further illegitimate daughter . 
the ediacaran period  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  spans 94 million years from the end of the cryogenian period 635 million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  ,  to the beginning of the cambrian period 541 mya . 
a few english language documentaries have featured the ediacaran period and biota:
the age of the top is the same as the widely recognised age for the base of the cambrian period 542± 0.3 mya ,  producing a misalignment ,  as the end of the edicarian period should mark the start of the cambrian period . 
the dating of the rock type section of the ediacaran period in south australia has proven uncertain . 
the ediacaran period overlaps ,  but is shorter than the vendian period ,  a name that was earlier ,  in 1952, proposed by russian geologist and paleontologist boris sokolov . 
although the ediacaran period does contain soft-bodied fossils ,  it is unusual in comparison to later periods because its beginning is not defined by a change in the fossil record . 
the fossil record from the ediacaran period is sparse ,  as more easily fossilized hard-shelled animals had yet to evolve . 
the ediacaran period's status as an official geological period was ratified in 2004 by the international union of geological sciences  -lrb-  iugs  -rrb-  ,  making it the first new geological period declared in 120 years . 
in the antiquarian book trade ,  pornographic works are often listed under `` curiosa '' ,  `` erotica '' or `` facetiae '' . 
feminist writer gloria steinem distinguishes erotica from pornography ,  writing: `` erotica is as different from pornography as love is from rape ,  as dignity is from humiliation ,  as partnership is from slavery ,  as pleasure is from pain . `` 
— `` on what there is '' ,  1948 -rrb- . 
for example ,  `` god loves humanity '' ,  really means `` god is a lover of humanity '' ,  `` god exists '' means `` god is a thing '' . 
the medieval philosopher thomas aquinas argued that god is pure being ,  and that in god essence and existence are the same . 
the two terms are joined by the verb `` is ''  -lrb-  or `` is not '' ,  if the predicate is denied of the subject  -rrb-  . 
some taught that existence was a snare and a delusion ,  that the world ,  the flesh ,  and the devil existed only to tempt weak humankind away from god . 
indeed ,  his famous discussion of the subject is merely a restatement of arnauld's doctrine that in the proposition `` god is omnipotent '' ,  the verb `` is '' signifies the joining or separating of two concepts such as `` god '' and `` omnipotence '' . 
david hume argued that the claim that a thing exists ,  when added to our notion of a thing ,  does not add anything to the concept . 
this increase in price is called inflation . 
demand-pull inflation is in contrast with cost-push inflation ,  when price and wage increases are being transmitted from one sector to another . 
some economists argue that such a change in the price level can raise the inflation rate over longer periods ,  due to adaptive expectations and the price/wage spiral ,  so that a supply shock can have persistent effects . 
an formula_1 -extractor is a bipartite graph with formula_2 nodes on the left and formula_3 nodes on the right such that each node on the left has formula_4 neighbors  -lrb-  on the right  -rrb-  ,  which has the added property that for any subset formula_5 of the left vertices of size at least formula_6, the distribution on right vertices obtained by choosing a random node in formula_5 and then following a random edge to get a node x on the right side is formula_8-close to the uniform distribution in terms of total variation distance . 
 ''erp ii '' was coined in 2000 in an article by gartner publications entitled `` erp is dead—long live erp ii '' . 
erp systems experienced rapid growth in the 1990s . 
though early erp systems focused on large enterprises ,  smaller enterprises increasingly use erp systems . 
governments and non–profit organizations also began to use erp systems . 
hormones have many different functions and modes of action; one hormone may have several effects on different target organs ,  and ,  conversely ,  one target organ may be affected by more than one hormone . 
other educational organizations that focus on one or more endocrine-related conditions include the american diabetes association ,  human growth foundation ,  american menopause foundation ,  inc .  ,  and thyroid foundation of america . 
endocrinology is the study of the endocrine system in the human body . 
endocrinology also involves study of the diseases of the endocrine system . 
neurohormones were first identified by otto loewi in 1921.
the endocrine system consists of several glands ,  all in different parts of the body ,  that secrete hormones directly into the blood rather than into a duct system . 
in the original 1902 definition by bayliss and starling  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  ,  they specified that ,  to be classified as a hormone ,  a chemical must be produced by an organ ,  be released  -lrb-  in small amounts  -rrb-  into the blood ,  and be transported by the blood to a distant organ to exert its specific function . 
diagnostic imaging of endocrine organs may reveal incidental findings called incidentalomas ,  which may or may not represent disease . 
these organs include the pituitary ,  thyroid ,  adrenals ,  ovaries ,  testes ,  and pancreas . 
in north america the principal professional organizations of endocrinologists include the endocrine society ,  the american association of clinical endocrinologists ,  the american diabetes association ,  the lawson wilkins pediatric endocrine society ,  and the american thyroid association . 
the human endocrine system consists of several systems that operate via feedback loops . 
the endocrine system is in contrast to the exocrine system ,  which secretes its hormones to the outside of the body using ducts . 
several important feedback systems are mediated via the hypothalamus and pituitary . 
because `` g '' is regular ,  the uniform distribution formula_14 with formula_15 for all `` i '' = 1,  .  .  .  ,  `` n '' is the stationary distribution of `` g '' . 
the `` vertex isoperimetric number '' formula_8 of a graph `` g '' is defined as where formula_10 is the `` inner boundary '' of `` s '' ,  i . e .  ,  the set of vertices in `` s '' with at least one neighbor in formula_6.
the `` spectral gap '' of `` g '' is defined to be `` d '' − λ ,  and it measures the spectral expansion of the graph `` g '' . 
the `` vertex isoperimetric number '' formula_3  -lrb-  also `` vertex expansion '' or `` magnification ''  -rrb-  of a graph `` g '' is defined as where formula_5 is the `` outer boundary '' of `` s '' ,  i . e .  ,  the set of vertices in formula_6 with at least one neighbor in `` s '' . 
it is known that λ = − ''d '' if and only if `` g '' is bipartite . 
england is a country that is part of the united kingdom . 
an alternative name for england is albion . 
as well as english ,  england has two other indigenous languages ,  cornish and welsh . 
england's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains ,  especially in central and southern england . 
the english people are a british people . 
england's national day is 23 april which is st george's day: st george is the patron saint of england . 
there are many museums in england ,  but perhaps the most notable is london's british museum . 
the name `` england '' is derived from the old english name `` englaland '' ,  which means `` land of the angles '' . 
below the regional level ,  all of england is divided into 48 ceremonial counties . 
the patron saint of england is saint george; his symbolic cross is included in the flag of england ,  as well as in the union flag as part of a combination . 
england has extensive domestic and international aviation links . 
there are 50 settlements which have been designated city status in england ,  while the wider united kingdom has 66.
england also has shores on the irish sea ,  north sea and atlantic ocean . 
according to the 2011 uk census ,  there are roughly 53,172 people who identify as pagan in england ,  and 3,448 in wales ,  including 11,026 wiccans in england and 740 in wales . 
the greater london built-up area is by far the largest urban area in england and one of the busiest cities in the world . 
another romantic name for england is loegria ,  related to the welsh word for england ,  `` lloegr '' ,  and made popular by its use in arthurian legend . 
the st george's cross has been the national flag of england since the 13th century . 
england began to develop naval skills ,  and exploration to the west intensified . 
major film studios in england include pinewood ,  elstree and shepperton . 
as part of the united kingdom ,  the basic political system in england is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary system . 
the economy of england is the largest part of the uk's economy ,  which has the 18th highest gdp ppp per capita in the world . 
most of the uk's £30 billion aerospace industry is primarily based in england . 
english heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites ,  artefacts and environments of england . 
the department for transport is the government body responsible for overseeing transport in england . 
england has a strong sporting heritage ,  and during the 19th century codified many sports that are now played around the world . 
the industrial revolution began in 18th-century england ,  transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation . 
there are many lakes in england; the largest is windermere ,  within the aptly named lake district . 
with over 53 million inhabitants ,  england is by far the most populous country of the united kingdom ,  accounting for 84% of the combined total . 
golf has been prominent in england; due in part to its cultural and geographical ties to scotland ,  the home of golf . 
when the modern border between wales and england was established by the laws in wales acts 1535 and 1542, many welsh-speaking communities found themselves on the english side of the border . 
combined ,  these changes prompted the reform of local government in england in the mid-20th century . 
originating in 17th and 18th-century england ,  the thoroughbred is a horse breed best known for its use in horse racing . 
as the birthplace of the industrial revolution ,  england was home to many significant inventors during the late 18th and early 19th centuries . 
most of england's landscape consists of low hills and plains ,  with upland and mountainous terrain in the north and west of the country . 
there has been one pope from england to date ,  adrian iv; while saints bede and anselm are regarded as doctors of the church . 
as its name suggests ,  the english language ,  today spoken by hundreds of millions of people around the world ,  originated as the language of england ,  where it remains the principal tongue spoken by 98% of the population . 
at club level ,  england is recognised by fifa as the birthplace of club football ,  due to sheffield f . c . 
since the 20th century there has been significant population movement to england ,  mostly from other parts of the british isles ,  but also from the commonwealth ,  particularly the indian subcontinent . 
according to the `` oxford english dictionary '' ,  its modern spelling was first used in 1538.
in scottish gaelic ,  another language which developed on the island of great britain ,  the saxon tribe gave their name to the word for england  -lrb-  `` sasunn ''  -rrb- ; similarly ,  the welsh name for the english language is ``  ''saesneg '' '' . 
england's population of over 55 million comprises 84% of the population of the united kingdom ,  largely concentrated around london ,  the south east ,  and conurbations in the midlands ,  the north west ,  the north east ,  and yorkshire ,  which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century . 
england has a temperate maritime climate: it is mild with temperatures not much lower than in winter and not much higher than in summer . 
however ,  following the 2011 census data released by the office for national statistics ,  figures now show that polish is the main language spoken in england after english . 
thanks in large part to the british empire ,  the english language is the world's unofficial `` lingua franca '' . 
since devolution ,  in which other countries of the united kingdom – scotland ,  wales and northern ireland – each have their own devolved parliament or assemblies for local issues ,  there has been debate about how to counterbalance this in england . 
the european union has seven principal decision making bodies ,  its institutions: the european parliament ,  the european council ,  the council of the european union ,  the european commission ,  the court of justice of the european union ,  the european central bank and the european court of auditors . 
the european parliament forms the other half of the eu's legislature . 
eu member states retain all powers not explicitly handed to the european union . 
the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  is a political and economic union of member states that are located primarily in europe . 
the eu's member states cover an area of  . 
half the trade in the eu is covered by legislation harmonised by the eu . 
according to new polls about religiosity in the european union in 2015 by eurobarometer ,  christianity is the largest religion in the european union ,  accounting for 71.6% of the eu population . 
in 2013, croatia became the 28th eu member . 
in 2007, bulgaria and romania became eu members . 
the vast majority of media in the european union are national-oriented . 
the eu uses foreign relations instruments like the european neighbourhood policy which seeks to tie those countries to the east and south of the european territory of the eu to the union . 
the eu and european citizenship were established when the maastricht treaty came into force in 1993.
 ,  the population of the european union was about 510.1 million people  -lrb-  6.9% of the world population  -rrb-  . 
the eu has no formal connection to any religion . 
the european commission acts as the eu's executive arm and is responsible for initiating legislation and the day-to-day running of the eu . 
in 1986, the european flag began to be used by the eec and the single european act was signed . 
the eu is based on a series of treaties . 
one of the 28 is the president of the european commission  -lrb-  currently jean-claude juncker  -rrb-  appointed by the european council . 
the european parliament and the council of the european union pass legislation jointly in nearly all areas under the ordinary legislative procedure . 
in 1960, the budget of the then european economic community was 0.03% of gdp . 
because of its global influence ,  the european union has been described as an emerging superpower . 
eu policy is in general promulgated by eu directives ,  which are then implemented in the domestic legislation of its member states ,  and eu regulations ,  which are immediately enforceable in all member states . 
the council of the european union  -lrb-  also called the `` council '' and the `` council of ministers '' ,  its former title  -rrb-  forms one half of the eu's legislature . 
the media programme of the european union intends to support the european popular film and audiovisual industries since 1991.
the european council should not be mistaken for the council of europe ,  an international organisation independent of the eu based in strasbourg . 
the european system of financial supervision is an institutional architecture of the eu's framework of financial supervision composed by three authorities: the european banking authority ,  the european insurance and occupational pensions authority and the european securities and markets authority . 
media freedom is a fundamental right that applies to all member states of the european union and its citizens ,  as defined in the eu charter of fundamental rights as well as the european convention on human rights . 
eu research and technological framework programmes sponsor research conducted by consortia from all eu members to work towards a single european research area . 
the western european union ,  a military alliance with a mutual defence clause ,  was disbanded in 2010 as its role had been transferred to the eu . 
tasks for the president of the european council are ensuring the external representation of the eu ,  driving consensus and resolving divergences among member states ,  both during meetings of the european council and over the periods between them . 
the creation of a european single currency became an official objective of the european economic community in 1969.
critics of the concept of the eu as an emerging superpower point to the lack of either a strong european military or of unified eu foreign policy . 
in 1979, the first direct elections to the european parliament were held . 
the european union has established a single market across the territory of all its members representing 512 million citizens . 
the euro ,  and the monetary policies of those who have adopted it in agreement with the eu ,  are under the control of the european central bank  -lrb-  ecb  -rrb-  . 
in 1995, austria ,  finland ,  and sweden joined the eu . 
these men and others are officially credited as the founding fathers of the european union . 
it is at the centre of the european system of central banks ,  which comprehends all eu national central banks and is controlled by its general council ,  consisting of the president of the ecb ,  who is appointed by the european council ,  the vice-president of the ecb ,  and the governors of the national central banks of all 28 eu member states . 
the eu is working to improve cross-border infrastructure within the eu ,  for example through the trans-european networks  -lrb-  ten  -rrb-  . 
the european court of auditors has signed off the european union accounts every year since 2007 and ,  while making it clear that the european commission has more work to do ,  has highlighted that most of the errors take place at national level . 
all eu and many other european countries offer their citizens a free european health insurance card which ,  on a reciprocal basis ,  provides insurance for emergency medical treatment insurance when visiting other participating european countries . 
european policy-makers originally increased the eu's capacity to act on environmental issues by defining it as a trade problem . 
in 2009, the lisbon treaty gave legal effect to the charter of fundamental rights of the european union . 
the uk formally notified the european council of its decision to leave on 29 march 2017 initiating the formal withdrawal procedure for leaving the eu ,  committing the uk to leave the eu on 29 march 2019.
although signing the european convention on human rights  -lrb-  echr  -rrb-  is a condition for eu membership ,  previously ,  the eu itself could not accede to the convention as it is neither a state nor had the competence to accede . 
abolition of the death penalty is a condition for eu membership . 
the average annual net earnings in the european union was around €24,000-lrb- us$30,000 -rrb- in 2015, which was about 70% of that in the united states . 
the four countries forming the european free trade association  -lrb-  efta  -rrb-  are not eu members ,  but have partly committed to the eu's economy and regulations: iceland ,  liechtenstein and norway ,  which are a part of the single market through the european economic area ,  and switzerland ,  which has similar ties through bilateral treaties . 
the eu has had legislative power in the area of energy policy for most of its existence; this has its roots in the original european coal and steel community . 
sport is mainly the responsibility of the member states or other international organisations ,  rather than of the eu . 
ericales are a cosmopolitan order . 
the most commercially used plant in the order is tea  -lrb-  `` camellia sinensis ''  -rrb-  from the theaceae family . 
fusion of the petals as a trait was traditionally used to place the order in the subclass sympetalae . 
through the scholarship sapir supplemented his mother's meager earnings . 
settling in chicago reinvigorated sapir intellectually and personally . 
sapir was born into a family of lithuanian jews in lauenburg in the province of pomerania where his father ,  jacob david sapir ,  worked as a cantor . 
at pennsylvania ,  sapir was urged to work at a quicker pace than he felt comfortable . 
sapir was active in the international auxiliary language movement . 
sapir entered columbia in 1901, still paying with the pulitzer scholarship . 
sapir eventually lost the discussion and powdermaker had to leave yale . 
although noted for his work on american linguistics ,  sapir wrote prolifically in linguistics in general . 
sapir ,  who by then had given up the hope of working at one of the few american research universities ,  accepted the appointment and moved to ottawa . 
during his period in canada ,  sapir came into his own as the leading figure in linguistics in north america . 
sapir's first fieldwork was on the wishram chinook language in the summer of 1905, funded by the bureau of american ethnology . 
in 1915 sapir returned to california ,  where his expertise on the yana language made him urgently needed . 
before departing canada ,  sapir had a short affair with margaret mead ,  benedict's protégé at columbia . 
sapir consulted with alice vanderbilt morris to develop the research program of iala . 
egg rolling is also a traditional easter egg game played with eggs at easter . 
easter eggs ,  also called paschal eggs ,  are decorated eggs that are usually used as gifts on the occasion of easter . 
the plays take place in england during easter . 
some families cook a special meatloaf with eggs in it to be eaten with the easter dinner . 
in hungary ,  eggs are used sliced in potato casseroles around the easter period . 
pysanky are ukrainian easter eggs ,  decorated using a wax-resist  -lrb-  batik  -rrb-  method . 
an egg hunt is a game in which decorated eggs ,  which may be hard-boiled chicken eggs ,  chocolate eggs ,  or artificial eggs containing candies ,  are hidden for children to find . 
in western cultures ,  the giving of chocolate eggs is now commonplace ,  with 80 million easter eggs sold in the uk alone . 
the easter egg tradition may also have merged into the celebration of the end of the privations of lent in the west . 
fry & sons of england introduced the first chocolate easter egg in britain . 
some christians symbolically link the cracking open of easter eggs with the empty tomb of jesus . 
the eggs are hidden in a similar tradition to the american easter egg hunt and when found the children  -lrb-  and adults  -rrb-  break them over each other's heads . 
the christian custom of easter eggs ,  specifically ,  started among the early christians of mesopotamia ,  who stained eggs with red colouring `` in memory of the blood of christ ,  shed at his crucifixion '' . 
in the greek orthodox tradition ,  red eggs are also cracked together when people exchange easter greetings . 
during paschaltide ,  in some traditions the pascal greeting with the easter egg is even extended to the deceased . 
egg dance is a traditional easter game in which eggs are laid on the ground or floor and the goal is to dance among them without damaging any eggs which originated in germany . 
red easter eggs are sometimes served along the centerline of tsoureki  -lrb-  braided loaf of bread  -rrb-  . 
easter is the third sunday in the paschal lunar month ,  or ,  in other words ,  the sunday after the paschal lunar month's 14th day . 
the precise date of easter has at times been a matter of contention . 
easter is determined on the basis of lunisolar cycles . 
easter is linked to the jewish passover by much of its symbolism ,  as well as by its position in the calendar . 
also ,  because the julian `` full moon '' is always several days after the astronomical full moon ,  the eastern easter is often later ,  relative to the visible moon's phases ,  than western easter . 
in the united kingdom ,  the easter act 1928 set out legislation to allow the date of easter to be fixed as the first sunday after the second saturday in april  -lrb-  or ,  in other words ,  the sunday in the period from 9 to 15 april  -rrb-  . 
while martyrs' days  -lrb-  usually the individual dates of martyrdom  -rrb-  were celebrated on fixed dates in the local solar calendar ,  the date of easter was fixed by means of the local jewish lunisolar calendar . 
since 1582, when the catholic church adopted the gregorian calendar while the eastern orthodox and most oriental orthodox churches retained the julian calendar ,  the date on which easter is celebrated has again differed . 
in western christianity ,  using the gregorian calendar ,  easter always falls on a sunday between 22 march and 25 april inclusive ,  within about seven days after the astronomical full moon . 
among the oriental orthodox some churches have changed from the julian to the gregorian calendar and the date for easter as for other fixed and moveable feasts is the same as in the western church . 
easter and the holidays that are related to it are `` moveable feasts '' which do not fall on a fixed date in the gregorian or julian calendars which follow only the cycle of the sun; rather ,  its date is determined on a lunisolar calendar similar to the hebrew calendar . 
the term `` quartodeciman '' refers to the practice of celebrating easter on nisan 14 of the hebrew calendar ,  `` the 's passover ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in 725, bede succinctly wrote ,  `` the sunday following the full moon which falls on or after the equinox will give the lawful easter . `` 
easter and the holidays that are related to it are `` moveable feasts '' ,  in that they do not fall on a fixed date in the gregorian or julian calendars  -lrb-  both of which follow the cycle of the sun and the seasons  -rrb-  . 
their starting point in determining the date of orthodox easter is also 21 march but according to the julian reckoning ,  which in the current century corresponds to 3 april in the gregorian calendar . 
the result of this combination of solar and lunar discrepancies is divergence in the date of easter in most years  -lrb-  see table  -rrb-  . 
euclid  -lrb-  ; – `` eukleídēs '' ,  ; fl . 
in the only other key reference to euclid ,  pappus of alexandria  -lrb-  c .  320 ad  -rrb-  briefly mentioned that apollonius `` spent a very long time with the pupils of euclid at alexandria ,  and it was thus that he acquired such a scientific habit of thought '' c .  247–222 bc . 
euclid's arrival in alexandria came about ten years after its founding by alexander the great ,  which means he arrived c .  322 bc . 
very few original references to euclid survive ,  so little is known about his life . 
in early 2010, a new morris documentary was submitted to several film festivals ,  including toronto international film festival ,  cannes film festival ,  and telluride film festival . 
in the fall of 1976, herzog visited plainfield again ,  this time to shoot part of his film `` stroszek '' . 
in 2002, morris was commissioned to make a short film for the 75th academy awards . 
morris employs the use of narrative elements within his films . 
through grigson ,  morris would meet the subject of his next film ,  36-year-old randall dale adams . 
ensured that his stay at princeton would be short . 
although he had plans to either write a book or make a film  -lrb-  which he would call `` digging up the past ''  -rrb-  ,  morris never completed his ed gein project . 
in 2003, his documentary film `` the fog of war: eleven lessons from the life of robert s .  mcnamara '' won the academy award for best documentary feature . 
the academy cited the film's genre of `` non-fiction '' ,  arguing that it was not actually a documentary . 
morris uses his films not only to portray social issues and non-fiction events but also to comment on the reliability of documentary making itself . 
morris accepted the $2,000 from herzog and used it to take a trip to vernon ,  florida . 
 ''the thin blue line '' ranks among the most critically acclaimed documentaries ever made . 
in 2003, morris won the oscar for best documentary for `` the fog of war '' ,  a film about the career of robert s .  mcnamara ,  the secretary of defense during the vietnam war under presidents john f .  kennedy and lyndon b .  johnson . 
he was the brother of ira allen and the father of frances allen . 
in 1779 allen published the account of his time in captivity ,  `` a narrative of colonel ethan allen's captivity  .  .  . 
allen's death made nationwide headlines . 
allen's brother ira recalled that ,  even at a young age ,  allen was curious and interested in learning . 
by most accounts allen's first marriage was an unhappy one . 
allen's final home ,  on the onion river  -lrb-  now called the winooski river  -rrb-  ,  is a part of the ethan allen homestead and museum . 
the allen brothers sold their interest in the iron works in october of 1765.
allen was first placed aboard  ,  a brig anchored at montreal . 
ethan allen was born in litchfield ,  connecticut ,  the first-born child of joseph and mary baker allen ,  both descended from english puritans . 
in 1782, allen's brother heber died at the relatively young age of 38.
allen was forced to end his studies upon his father's death . 
alexander graydon ,  with whom allen was paroled during his captivity in new york ,  described him like this:
in a private discussion ,  allen and arnold reached an accommodation ,  the essence of which was that arnold and allen would both be at the front of the troops when the attack on the fort was made . 
on february 11, 1789, allen traveled to south hero ,  vermont with one of his workers to visit his cousin ,  ebenezer allen ,  and to collect a load of hay . 
allen ,  likely both stubborn in his determination ,  and envious of arnold ,  persisted . 
the death of heman ,  with whom allen had been quite close ,  hit him quite hard . 
allen's services were never requested ,  and eventually the payments stopped . 
allen and his family moved to burlington in 1787, which was no longer a small frontier settlement but a small town ,  and much more to allen's liking than the larger community that bennington had become . 
the ethan allen express ,  an amtrak train line running from new york city to rutland ,  vermont ,  is also named after him . 
the ethan allen school was added to the national register of historic places in 1988.
allen went to ticonderoga to join schuyler ,  while warner and others raised the regiment . 
it was not until many years later ,  after young's death ,  that allen was able to recover the manuscript . 
although not very much is known about allen's childhood ,  the town of cornwall was frontier territory in the 1740s . 
allen's widow fanny gave birth to a son ,  ethan alphonso ,  on october 24, 1789.
when allen and his men landed above st .  john and scouted the situation ,  they learned that a column of 200 or more regulars was approaching . 
in contrast ,  when the incas made incursions into coastal ecuador and the eastern amazon jungles of ecuador ,  they found both the environment and indigenous people more hostile . 
various peoples had settled in the area of the future ecuador before the arrival of the incas . 
in 1830 ecuador separated from gran colombia and became an independent republic . 
thus ,  the region of highland ecuador became part of the inca empire in 1463 sharing the same language . 
on october 9, 1820, guayaquil became the first city in ecuador to gain its independence from spain . 
what is now ecuador was home to a variety of amerindian groups that were gradually incorporated into the inca empire during the 15th century . 
ecuador  -lrb-    ,    -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of ecuador  -lrb-   ,  which literally translates as `` republic of the equator '';   -rrb-  ,  is a country in northwestern south america ,  bordered by colombia on the north ,  peru on the east and south ,  and the pacific ocean to the west . 
the history of ecuador extends over an 8,000-year period . 
tribes throughout ecuador integrated during this period . 
as the inca civil war raged ,  in 1531 the spanish landed in ecuador . 
father rafael ferrer was the first jesuita de quito  -lrb-  jesuit of quito  -rrb-  to explore and found missions in the upper amazon regions of south america from 1602 to 1610, which at that period belonged to the audiencia of quito ,  that was a part of the viceroyalty of peru until the audiencia of quito was transferred to the newly created viceroyalty of new granada in 1717.
on the same day ,  ecuador's new constitution came into effect . 
at the time when the jesuits were expelled from spanish america in 1767, the jesuits of quito registered 36 missions run by 25 jesuits of quito in the audiencia of quito – 6 jesuits of quito in the napo missions and aguarico missions ,  and 19 jesuits of quito in the pastaza missions and iquitos missions of maynas with a total population of 20,000 inhabitants . 
the struggle for independence in the quito audiencia was part of a movement throughout spanish america led by criollos . 
the existence of the kingdom of quito was formed by the quitus ,  the puruhaes and cañari who inhabited the andean regions of ecuador by that time . 
in 1639, the audiencia of quito organized an expedition to renew its exploration of the amazon river and the quito jesuit  -lrb-  jesuita quiteño  -rrb-  father cristobal de acuña was a part of this expedition . 
much of the century was also dominated by the territorial dispute between peru and ecuador . 
jesuit fathers de la cueva and raimundo de santacruz opened up 2 new routes of communication with quito ,  through the pastaza and napo rivers . 
the la tolita developed in the coastal region of southern colombia and northern ecuador between 600 bc and 200 ad . 
existing in the late formative period the chorrera culture lived in the andes and coastal regions of ecuador between 1000 and 300 bc . 
he remained the dominant political figure during ecuador's first 15 years of independence . 
the pre-columbian era can be divided up into four eras: the pre-ceramic period ,  the formative period ,  the period of regional development and the period of integration and the arrival of the incas . 
the next fifteen years constituted one of the most turbulent periods in ecuador's century and a half as a nation . 
in 1534 sebastián de belalcázar along with diego de almagro established the city of san francisco de quito on top of the ruins of the secondary inca capital ,  naming it in honor of pizzaro . 
between 1852 and 1890, ecuador's exports grew in value from slightly more than us$1 million to nearly us$10 million . 
the treaty of 1829 fixed the border on the line that had divided the quito audiencia and the viceroyalty of peru before independence . 
two months later bolívar ,  the liberator of northern south america ,  entered quito to a hero's welcome . 
the 2007-8 ecuadorian constituent assembly drafted the 2008 constitution of ecuador ,  approved via the ecuadorian constitutional referendum ,  2008.
in 1637, the jesuits of quito ,  gaspar cugia and lucas de la cueva began establishing some jesuit missions in mainas or maynas . 
it was not until december 1540 that quito received its first captain-general in the person of francisco pizarro's brother ,  gonzalo pizarro . 
guayaquil also became the largest shipbuilding center on the west coast of south america before the end of the colonial period . 
the second chapter in ecuador's struggle for emancipation from spanish colonial rule began in guayaquil ,  where independence was proclaimed in october 1820 by a local patriotic junta under the leadership of the poet josé joaquín de olmedo . 
between 1544 and 1563, ecuador was an integral spain's colonies in the new world under the viceroyalty of peru ,  having no administrative status independent of lima . 
the inca civilization expansion northward from modern-day peru during the late 15th century met with fierce resistance by several ecuadorian tribes ,  particularly the cañari ,  in the region around modern-day cuenca; the cara in the sierra north of quito along with the quitu ,  occupants of the site of the modern capital ,  with whom they had formed the kingdom of quito . 
in november 2009, ecuador faced an energy crisis that led to power rationing across the country . 
during this decade and the one that followed ,  urbina and his archrival ,  garcía moreno ,  would define the dichotomy — between liberals from guayaquil and conservatives from quito — that remained the major sphere of political struggle in ecuador until the 1980s . 
almost all of the rivers in ecuador rise in the sierra region and flow east toward the amazon river or west toward the pacific ocean . 
ecuador has land which is rich in petroleum . 
the highland rivers broaden as they enter the more level areas of the costa and the oriente . 
ecuador is located on the west by the pacific ocean ,  and has 2,237 km of coastline . 
it has 2237 km of land boundaries ,  with colombia in the north  -lrb-  708 km border  -rrb-  and peru in the east and south  -lrb-  1,529 km border  -rrb-  . 
ecuador has a total area is  ,  including the galápagos islands . 
the second major costa river system—the esmeraldas—rises in the hoya de quito in the sierra as the guayllabamba river and flows westward to empty into the pacific ocean near the city of esmeraldas . 
ecuador is a country in western south america ,  bordering the pacific ocean at the equator ,  for which the country is named . 
ecuador is divided into three continental regions—the costa  -lrb-  coast  -rrb-  ,  sierra  -lrb-  mountains  -rrb-  ,  and oriente  -lrb-  east  -rrb- —and one insular region ,  the galápagos islands  -lrb-  officially archipiélago de colón  -rrb-  . 
the following table shows the dates the most recent censuses were made ,  and the total population number:
registration of vital events is in ecuador not complete . 
the mixing of two or more of these three groups established other mixed ethnic groups . 
new justices of the supreme court are elected by the sitting members of the court . 
earlier ,  in november 2004, congress replaced the majority of judges on the country's electoral court and constitutional court by a similar process . 
finally it is wise to say that there exist a constitutional court . 
ecuador's legal system is based on the civil law system . 
ecuador recently accepted compulsory international court of justice jurisdiction . 
the politics of ecuador are multi-party . 
second ,  you have the administrative branch of the judicial power ,  which consists of the judiciary council . 
the ocp will double ecuador's oil transport capacity . 
the completion of the second transandean oil pipeline  -lrb-  ocp in spanish  -rrb-  in 2003 enabled ecuador to expand oil exports . 
the overall trade balance for august 2012 was a surplus of almost 390 million dollars for the first six months of 2012, a huge figure compared with that of 2007, which reached only $5.7 million; the surplus had risen by about 425 million compared to 2006.
the public finance of ecuador consists of the central bank of ecuador  -lrb-  bce  -rrb-  ,  the national development bank  -lrb-  bnf  -rrb-  ,  the state bank ,  the national finance corporation ,  the ecuadorian housing bank  -lrb-  bev  -rrb-  and the ecuadorian educational loans and grants . 
the economy of ecuador is based mostly on exports of oil ,  bananas ,  shrimp ,  gold ,  other primary agricultural products and money transfers from nearly a million ecuadorian emigrants employed abroad . 
ecuador's economy is the eighth largest in latin america and experienced an average growth of 4.6% per year between 2000 and 2006.
since the late '60s ,  the exploitation of oil increased production and reserves are estimated at 4.036 million barrels
ecuador has multiple tv networks and many local channels ,  as well as more than 300 radio stations . 
there are three cell phone providers in ecuador: claro  -lrb-  telcel  -rrb-  ,  movistar ,  and cnt . 
ecuador shares a border with peru . 
the military of ecuador is under civilian control . 
in 2009, ecuador was deploying over 90 peacekeepers around the globe . 
the present day ecuadorian navy or  -lrb-  `` armada del ecuador ''  -rrb-  is a compact ,  efficient and well-balanced force . 
the military of ecuador has been involved in border disputes with peru  -lrb-  ecuadorian–peruvian war ,  paquisha war ,  cenepa war  -rrb-  ,  and has provided military observers and troops to the united nations since 1948.
ecuador became a relatively heavy importer of arms in the late 1970s and early 1980s ,  averaging us$150 million annually and reaching a peak of us$280 million in 1982.
ecuador has also been an elective member of the un security council . 
ecuador is a founding member of the un and a member of many of its specialized agencies; it is also a member of the oas . 
egypt has an area of 1,001,449 km  -lrb-  386,662 mi  -rrb-  . 
egypt is predominantly desert . 
egypt has a population of 92 million  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- . 
an estimated 75% of egyptians are under the age of 25, with just 3% over the age of 65, making it one of the most youthful populations in the world . 
the parliament of egypt is the oldest legislative chamber in africa and the middle east . 
the parliament can impeach the president after two-thirds votes in favour for impeachment ,  and then a public referendum is held to whether or not approve the impeachment of the president . 
parliament meets for one eight-month session each year; under special circumstances the president of the republic can call an additional session . 
egypt's trade balance marked us$10.36 billion in fy2005 compared to us$7.5 billion . 
this declined to us$16.4 billion in oct 2015, according to the central bank of egypt . 
based on the current us$ prices ,  gdp per capita increased from us$587 in 1981, to us$869 in 1991, to us$1461 in 2001 and to an estimated us$1518  -lrb-  which translates to less than us$130 per month  -rrb-  in 2006.
in the arab world ,  egypt has the largest non-oil gdp as of 2018.
up until 2007, there have been several favorable conditions that allowed the central bank of egypt to accumulate net international reserves ,  which increased from us$20 billion in fy2005, to us$23 billion in fy2006, and to us$30 billion fy2007 contributing to growth in both reserve money and in broad money  -lrb-  m2 -rrb- . 
credit extended to the private sector in egypt declined significantly reaching about egp 5 billion in fy2005.
on the revenues side ,  total revenues of the government were egp 89.1 billion in fy2002 and are projected to reach egp184.7 bn in fy2008.
in the fiscal year 2004 and over most of the fiscal year 2005, the pound depreciated against the us dollar . 
importantly ,  dramatic increase in domestic debt which is projected to be roughly 62% of gdp in fy2008 up from 58.4% in fy2002; and  -lrb-  3 -rrb- the costs of food and energy subsidies ,  which rose from egp18.0 bn in fy2002 to egp64.5 bn in fy2008.
gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  per capita based on purchasing-power-parity  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  increased fourfold between 1981 and 2006, from us$1355 in 1981, to us$2525 in 1991, to us$3686 in 2001 and to an estimated us$4535 in 2006.
the central bank of egypt is the national reserve bank and controls and regulates the financial market and the egyptian pound . 
based on national currency ,  gdp per capita at constant 1999 prices increased from egp 411 in 1981, to egp 2098 in 1991, to egp 5493 in 2001 and to egp 8708 in 2006.
in 2014, it reached 77% up from 54.3% of gdp in 2001.
egypt has long been the cultural and informational centre of the middle east and north africa ,  and cairo is the region's largest publishing and broadcasting centre . 
as of 2018 the information in the cia world factbook states the following regarding egypt's pipelines: `` condensate 486 km; condensate/gas 74 km; gas 7,986 km; liquid petroleum gas 957 km; oil 5,225 km; oil/gas/water 37 km; refined products 895 km; water 65 km  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ''
there are 3,500 km of waterways in egypt ,  including the nile ,  lake nasser ,  alexandria-cairo waterway ,  and many smaller canals in the nile delta . 
transport in egypt is centered in cairo and largely follows the pattern of settlement along the nile . 
in 2018, the number of egypt's sea vessels ,  according to the cia world factbook is 399 as follows:
the ministry of transportation and other government bodies are responsible for transportation in egypt ,  whether by sea ,  land or air . 
they consist of the egyptian army ,  egyptian navy ,  egyptian air force and egyptian air defense command . 
the egyptian air force  -lrb-  eaf  -rrb-  is the aviation branch of the egyptian armed forces . 
the modern egyptian armed forces have been involved in numerous crises and wars since independence ,  from the 1948 arab–israeli war ,  egyptian revolution of 1952, suez crisis ,  north yemen civil war ,  six-day war ,  nigerian civil war ,  war of attrition ,  yom kippur war ,  egyptian bread riots ,  1986 egyptian conscripts riot ,  libyan–egyptian war ,  gulf war ,  war on terror ,  egyptian crisis ,  second libyan civil war ,  war on isil and the sinai insurgency . 
officers for the army are trained at the egyptian military academy . 
the egyptian armed forces are the state military organisation responsible for the defence of egypt . 
after the war began on 5 june 1967, israel attacked egypt ,  destroyed its air force on the ground ,  and occupied the sinai peninsula . 
the egyptian air defense forces or adf  -lrb-  quwwat el diffaa el gawwi in arabic  -rrb-  is egypt's military command responsible for air defense . 
foreign relations of the arab republic of egypt are the egyptian government's external relations with the outside world . 
el salvador has over 300 rivers ,  the most important of which is the rio lempa . 
the highest point in el salvador is cerro el pital ,  at  ,  on the border with honduras . 
there are a total of water within el salvador's borders . 
el salvador  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of el salvador  -lrb-   ,  literally `` republic of the savior ''  -rrb-  ,  is the smallest and the most densely populated country in central america . 
the first indigenous people to have contact with the spanish were the lenca of eastern el salvador . 
sophisticated civilization in el salvador dates to its settlement by the indigenous lenca people; theirs was the first and the oldest indigenous civilization to settle in el salvador . 
the indigenous peoples of el salvador did not see the spanish as gods ,  but as foreign invaders . 
the santa ana volcano in el salvador is active; the most recent eruptions were in 1904 and 2005.
el salvador has a tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons . 
the san salvador area has been hit by earthquakes in 1576, 1659, 1798, 1839, 1854, 1873, 1880, 1917, 1919, 1965, 1986, 2001 and 2005.
el salvador has a long history of destructive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions . 
the spanish faced much resistance from the pipil and were not able to reach eastern el salvador ,  the area of the lencas . 
the colón ,  the official currency of el salvador since 1892, was replaced by the u . s .  dollar in 2001.
in october 1979, a coup d'état brought the revolutionary government junta of el salvador to power . 
the best time to visit el salvador would be at the beginning or end of the dry season . 
el salvador lies in the isthmus of central america between latitudes 13° and 15°n ,  and longitudes 87° and 91°w . 
pedro de alvarado led the first incursion by spanish forces to extend their dominion to the nation of cuzcatlan  -lrb-  el salvador  -rrb-  ,  in june 1524.
in 1821, el salvador joined costa rica ,  guatemala ,  honduras and nicaragua in a union named the federal republic of central america . 
foremost among these is salvanatura ,  which manages el impossible ,  the country's largest national park under an agreement with el salvador's environmental authorities . 
conquistador pedro de alvarado named the new province for jesus christ – `` el salvador ''  -lrb-  `` the savior ''  -rrb-  . 
el salvador's location in central america also makes it vulnerable to severe storms and hurricanes coming off the caribbean . 
el salvador shares borders with guatemala and honduras ,  the total national boundary length is : with guatemala and with honduras . 
in the summer of 2001 a severe drought destroyed 80% of el salvador's crops ,  causing famine in the countryside . 
el salvador was for centuries inhabited by several mesoamerican nations ,  especially the cuzcatlecs ,  as well as the lenca and maya . 
when the federal republic of central america dissolved in 1841, el salvador maintained its own government until it joined honduras and nicaragua in 1896 to form the greater republic of central america ,  which dissolved in 1898.
el salvador has a coastline of 307 km . 
el salvador has over 300 rivers ,  the most important of which is the rio lempa . 
the total land area of el salvador is 23,041 km² ,  with 20,721 km² of land and 320 km² of water . 
motion along this fault is the source of earthquakes in northernmost el salvador . 
el salvador is the smallest central american country and is the only one without a coastline on the caribbean sea . 
two parallel mountain ranges cross el salvador to the west with a central plateau between them and a narrow coastal plain hugging the pacific . 
el salvador has a tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons . 
el salvador borders the north pacific ocean to the south and southwest ,  with guatemala to the north-northwest and honduras to the north-northeast . 
el salvador's population was in  ,  compared to 2,200,000 in 1950.
el salvador's population numbers 6.1 million . 
out of the 6,408,111 people in el salvador ,  78% are mestizo ,  12% are of full european descent ,  10% indigenous ,  0.8% black ,  and 0.64% other . 
pardo is the term that was used in colonial el salvador to describe a tri-racial afro-mestizo person of indigenous ,  european ,  and african descent . 
this is the reason why el salvador is the only country in central america not to have a caribbeanized culture ,  and instead preserved its classical central america culture . 
el salvador has a multi-party system . 
el salvador elects its head of state – the president of el salvador – directly through a fixed-date general election whose winner is decided by absolute majority . 
el salvador also is a member of the world trade organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated el salvador as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
total u . s .  exports to el salvador reached $2.1 billion in 1999, while el salvador exported $1.6 billion to the united states . 
the largest single-affected sector was el salvador's agriculture . 
el salvador's balance of payments continued to show a net surplus . 
a challenge in el salvador has been developing new growth sectors for a more diversified economy . 
el salvador ,  guatemala ,  honduras ,  and nicaragua also are negotiating a free trade agreement with canada ,  and negotiations started on 2006 for a free trade agreement with colombia . 
compared to other developing countries ,  el salvador has experienced relatively low rates of gdp growth . 
as a result ,  in july 2017, the government of el salvador wanted to take $500 millions from the privatized pension system to cover retired pensioners from the old not privatized system ,  but the supreme court of el salvador declared this move unconstitutional . 
el salvador historically has been the most industrialized nation in central america ,  though a decade of war eroded this position . 
in the 21st century ,  numerous call centers serving north american markets have been developed in el salvador . 
such policies provided the basis of conflicts that would shape the political situation of el salvador in the years to come . 
the president occasionally uses this law to highlight his accomplishments . 
the armed forces of el salvador  -lrb-    -rrb-  are the official governmental military forces of el salvador . 
in 1969, tensions between el salvador and honduras increased . 
the salvadoran civil war was fought between 1979 and 1992.
from 1947 to 1953, el salvador held an agreement with the us whereby an american military aviation mission would be sent to el salvador; el salvador would seek advice from the us preferentially and purchase arms from the us . 
on 14 july 1969, armed hostilities began between el salvador and honduras . 
el salvador's infantry forces invaded honduras and took ocotepeque . 
in the late 19th century ,  el salvador went through a period of internal discord . 
in 1989, the armed forces of el salvador had raised 56,000 fighting men with 63 aeroplanes and 72 helicopters . 
between 1983 and 1987, el salvador's military forces received over 100 million dollars per year from the us . 
in the 19th century ,  soldiers in el salvador may have been nominally employed by the governing body . 
military operations in el salvador continued in a similar way until the early 20th century . 
then ,  on 26 june 1969, el salvador won a play-off game 3 goals to 2 against haiti ,  taking a place in the cup finals . 
el salvador is a member of the united nations and several of its specialized agencies ,  the organization of american states  -lrb-  oas  -rrb-  ,  the central american common market  -lrb-  cacm  -rrb-  ,  the central american parliament  -lrb-  parlacen  -rrb-  ,  and the central american integration system  -lrb-  sica  -rrb-  . 
el salvador also is a member of the world trade organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements . 
