sometimes ,  a different actor than the original actor on set is used during adr . 
the adr process may be used to:  in conventional film production ,  a production sound mixer records dialogue during filming . 
the process usually takes place on a dub stage . 
it is known that there exists a unique delaunay triangulation for p if p is a set of points in `` general position ''; that is ,  the affine hull of p is `` d ''-dimensional and no set of `` d '' + 2 points in p lie on the boundary of a ball whose interior does not intersect p . 
for a set p of points in the  -lrb-  `` d ''-dimensional  -rrb-  euclidean space ,  a delaunay triangulation is a triangulation dt -lrb-  p  -rrb-  such that no point in p is inside the circum-hypersphere of any `` d ''-simplex in dt -lrb-  p  -rrb-  . 
for a set of points on the same line there is no delaunay triangulation  -lrb-  the notion of triangulation is degenerate for this case  -rrb-  . 
a defendant is a person accused of committing a crime in criminal prosecution or a person against whom some type of civil relief is being sought in a civil case . 
the person who starts the civil action through filing a complaint is referred to as the plaintiff . 
most often and familiarly ,  defendants are persons: either natural persons  -lrb-  actual human beings  -rrb-  or juridical persons  -lrb-  `` persona fiction ''  -rrb-  under the legal fiction of treating organizations as persons . 
historically ,  `` defendant '' was a legal term for a person prosecuted for misdemeanour . 
quintilian ,  when a young man ,  heard afer ,  and frequently speaks of him as the most distinguished orator of his age . 
he became praetor in 25 ad ,  and gained the favor of tiberius by accusing claudia pulchra ,  the second cousin of agrippina ,  of adultery and the use of magic arts against the emperor ,  in 26 ad . 
simmons' first novel ,  `` song of kali '' ,  was released in 1985.
dan simmons  -lrb-  born april 4, 1948 -rrb- is an american science fiction and horror writer . 
he was taken to his palace ,  where he died on 27 june . 
denis-auguste affre  -lrb-  27 september 179327 june 1848 -rrb- was archbishop of paris from 1840 to 1848.
he was killed while trying to negotiate peace during the june days uprising of 1848.
affre's episcopate ,  however ,  is chiefly remembered owing to its tragic close during the insurrection of june 1848.
leary has been the narrator for nesn's documentary show about the boston bruins behind the b since the show began in 2013.
he is a fan of the boston bruins and the boston red sox ,  as well as the green bay packers . 
he wrote the american adaptation of `` sirens '' . 
denis colin leary  -lrb-  born august 18, 1957 -rrb- is an american actor ,  comedian ,  writer and producer . 
as a boston red sox fan ,  he narrated the official 2004 world series film  -lrb-  q video/mlb productions ,  2004 -rrb- . 
for many years ,  leary had been friends with fellow comedian bill hicks . 
on march 21, 2009, he began the `` rescue me comedy tour '' in atlantic city ,  new jersey . 
he attended saint peter's high school  -lrb-  now saint peter-marian high school  -rrb-  ,  in worcester and graduated from emerson college ,  in boston . 
leary is an ice hockey fan ,  and has his own backyard hockey rink at his home in roxbury ,  connecticut ,  with piping installed under the ice surface to help the ice stay frozen . 
through marriage ,  leary is a third cousin of talk show host conan o'brien . 
the feud is also mentioned in cynthia true's biography `` american scream: the bill hicks story '': according to the book ,  true said upon hearing a tape of leary's album `` no cure for cancer '' ,  `` bill was furious . 
leary began working as a comedian in the boston comedy scene of the 1980s at the underground club ,  play it again sam's; however ,  his first real gig was at the rascals comedy club as part of the tv show ,  `` the rascals comedy hour '' ,  on october 18, 1990.
dextromethorphan's effects have been divided into four plateaus . 
combining dextromethorphan with other substances can compound risks . 
dextromethorphan's hallucinogenic and dissociative effects can be attributed largely to dextrorphan  -lrb-  dxo  -rrb-  ,  a metabolite produced when dextromethorphan is metabolized by the body . 
there is also a marked difference between dextromethorphan hydrobromide ,  contained in most cough suppressant preparations ,  and dextromethorphan polistirex ,  contained in the brand name preparation delsym . 
both dextrorphan `` and '' dextromethorphan are nmda receptor antagonists ,  like the dissociative hallucinogenic drugs ketamine and phencyclidine  -lrb-  pcp  -rrb-  ,  although dextrorphan is more potent than its `` parent molecule '' dextromethorphan . 
the federal analog act does not apply to dextromethorphan because a new drug application has been filed for it . 
due to these conflicting results ,  the actual effect of dextromethorphan on dopamine levels remains undetermined . 
as nmda receptor antagonists ,  dextrorphan and dextromethorphan inhibit the excitatory amino acid and neurotransmitter glutamate in the brain . 
combining dextromethorphan with other cyp2d6 substrates can cause both drugs to build to dangerous levels in the bloodstream . 
medical doctors use ,  as in english ,  the title `` doctor '' ,  also abbreviated `` dr '' . 
juris doctor and doctor of medicine  -rrb- ; these are not considered doctoral degrees . 
it is unusual for those who hold honorary doctorates to use the title `` doctor '' . 
in germany ,  the most common doctoral degrees are `` dr . 
or `` ph . d . `` 
ph . d . 
the usage of doctor  -lrb-  ดอกเตอร์  -rrb-  or dr  -lrb-  ดร .   -rrb- 
that is not common in post-bologna doctorates . 
 ''dr john smith '' . 
in germany ,  double doctorates are indicated in the title by ``  ''dr .  dr . ``  '' or ``  ''ddr . ``  ''
doctor is abbreviated `` dr '' in british english and `` dr . ``  in north american english . 
dr .  is used in front of the name as the title `` doktor '' for doctorate title ,  the same level as ph . d .  title . 
the title `` dr '' is also used on visiting cards . 
the plural abbreviation is `` drs '' . 
when addressing several people ,  each of whom holds a doctoral title ,  one may use the plural contraction `` drs ''  -lrb-  or `` drs . `` 
in malta ,  the title of doctor is used by academic doctors  -lrb-  with ph . d . s  -rrb-  ,  medical practitioners ,  dentists and lawyers . 
trainee doctors are permitted to use the title doctor once they have started their post-graduation `` foundation programme '' . 
all doctors may be addressed as `` doktor ______ '' ,  and the title is usually contracted to `` dr .  ______ '' . 
the abbreviation is a contraction ,  as in the case for `` doctor '' . 
according to the etiquette guide ,  debrett's ,  holders of doctoral degrees and medical doctors  -lrb-  but not surgeons  -rrb-  should be addressed as `` doctor '' . 
using `` dr . ``  for other medical practitioners remains controversial . 
before their name ,  although this is rarely used . 
in sri lanka the title doctor `` dr . ``  is used for both physicians  -lrb-  including dentists and veterinarians  -rrb-  and ph . d .  holders . 
all those with doctoral degrees continued to use the title professionally and socially . 
in bangladesh ,  use of the title of doctor  -lrb-  dr .   -rrb-  is permitted for ph . d .  degree holders and registered medical practitioners . 
in some circumstances ,  `` doctor '' may be used on its own as a form of address rather than as a title before a name . 
in the european union ,  the title of `` doctor '' refers primarily to holders of post-graduate research doctorates ,  such as the phd . 
the doctor title is abbreviated as dr .  placed before the holders name  -lrb-  note the lowercase  -rrb-  . 
holders of honorary doctorates in the uk have the right ,  in most cases ,  to use the title of doctor ,  although holders are encouraged to refrain from doing so . 
the primary meaning of `` doctor '' in english has historically been with reference to the holder of a doctoral degree . 
all people holding a doctorate from an eu member state are ,  since 2001, entitled to use `` doctor '' or `` dr . ``  in all formal ,  legal and published communications without any further addenda . 
in pakistan ,  the title of doctor  -lrb-  dr .   -rrb-  can be used by ph . d .  degree holders as well as medical ,  dental and veterinary doctors with mbbs ,  bds and dvm degrees respectively . 
doctorates do not meet the international standards of a phd research degree . 
an honorary doctorate is a doctoral degree awarded for service to the institution or the wider community . 
all holders of doctoral degrees are appropriately addressed as `` herr/frau dr .  _____ '' in all social situations . 
this is limited to when the person is being addressed by their job title and so is only used for medical doctors . 
although lawyers in the united states do not customarily use the title ,  the law degree in that country is the juris doctor ,  a professional doctorate . 
domnall mac ailpín  -lrb-  modern gaelic: `` dòmhnall mac ailpein '' ,  anglicised sometimes as donald macalpin ,  known in most modern regnal lists as donald i  -rrb- ;  -lrb-  812 – 13 april 862 -rrb- was king of the picts from 858 to 862.
he followed his brother kenneth i to the pictish throne . 
1460 -rrb- ,  death addresses ,  for example ,  the emperor:
usually ,  a short dialogue is attached to each victim ,  in which death is summoning him  -lrb-  or ,  more rarely ,  her  -rrb-  to dance and the summoned is moaning about impending death . 
at the lower end of the `` totentanz '' ,  death calls ,  for example ,  the peasant to dance ,  who answers:
short verse dialogues between death and each of its victims ,  which could have been performed as plays ,  can be found in the direct aftermath of the black death in germany and in spain  -lrb-  where it was known as the `` totentanz '' and `` la danza de la muerte '' ,  respectively  -rrb-  . 
the `` totentanz '' of metnitz ,  for example ,  shows how a pope crowned with his mitre is being led into hell by the dancing death . 
the famous designs by hans holbein the younger  -lrb-  1497–1543 -rrb- for his dance of death series were drawn in 1526 while he was in basel . 
david abercromby was a 17th-century scottish physician and writer ,  thought to have died in 1702.
his medical reputation was based on his `` tuta ac efficax luis venereae saepe absque mercurio ac semper absque salivatione mercuriali curando methodus ''  -lrb-  1684 -rrb- which was translated into french ,  dutch and german . 
throughout his readings ,  derrida hoped to show deconstruction at work . 
however ,  derrida resisted attempts to label his work as `` post-structuralist '' . 
derrida's original use of the word `` deconstruction '' was a translation of `` destruktion '' ,  a concept from the work of martin heidegger that derrida sought to apply to textual reading . 
in order to understand derrida's motivation ,  one must refer to nietzsche's philosophy . 
according to derrida and taking inspiration from the work of ferdinand de saussure ,  language as a system of signs and words only has meaning because of the contrast between these signs . 
the problem with nietzsche ,  as derrida sees it ,  is that he did not go far enough . 
originated by the philosopher jacques derrida ,  deconstruction is an approach to understanding the relationship between text and meaning . 
examples are the product of sets  -lrb-  see cartesian product  -rrb-  ,  groups  -lrb-  described below  -rrb-  ,  the product of rings and of other algebraic structures . 
formula_19.
some research has looked into genetics when considering `` déjà vu '' . 
 ''déjà vu '' is most strongly associated with temporal lobe epilepsy . 
the first extant grammar of greek ,  `` art of grammar ''  -lrb-   `` tékhnē grammatiké ''  -rrb-  is attributed to him but many scholars today doubt that the work really belongs solely to him due to the difference between the technical approach of most of the work and the more literary approach  -lrb-  similar to the 2nd century's alexandrian tradition  -rrb-  of the first few sections . 
thus dionysius thrax ,  like contemporary alexandrian scholars who edited attic greek and homeric texts ,  was concerned with facilitating the teaching of classic greek literature to an audience who spoke koine greek . 
drug use discrimination is the unequal treatment people experience because of the drugs they use . 
a person with a disability is often found to be socially isolated and work is one way to reduce isolation . 
in addition ,  women are found to experience a sticky floor . 
the united nations had concluded that women often experience a `` glass ceiling '' and that there are no societies in which women enjoy the same opportunities as men . 
nevertheless ,  the problem of gender discrimination does not stop at transgender individuals or with women . 
people who use legal drugs such as tobacco and prescription medications may also face discrimination . 
in human social behavior ,  discrimination is treatment or consideration of ,  or making a distinction towards ,  a person based on the group ,  class ,  or category to which the person is perceived to belong . 
in the latter country ,  even a positive effect of revealing a lesbian sexual orientation is found for women at their fertile ages . 
socially ,  sexual differences have been used to justify different roles for men and women ,  in some cases giving rise to claims of primary and secondary roles . 
discrimination based on a person's name may also occur ,  with research suggesting the presence of discrimination based on name meaning ,  pronunciation ,  uniqueness ,  gender affiliation ,  and racial affiliation . 
in slasher films ,  the message appears to be that sexual women get killed and only the pure women survive ,  thus reinforcing the idea that female sexuality can be costly . 
discrimination exists if there is prejudicial treatment against a person or a group of people who either do or do not speak a particular language or languages . 
though gender discrimination and sexism refer to beliefs and attitudes in relation to the gender of a person ,  such beliefs and attitudes are of a social nature and do not ,  normally ,  carry any legal consequences . 
drug policy reform organizations such as the drug policy alliance ,  the drug equality alliance ,  the transform drug policy foundation ,  and the beckley foundation have highlighted the issue of stigma and discrimination in drug policy . 
intersex persons experience discrimination due to innate ,  atypical sex characteristics . 
a report issued by the global commission on drug policy ,  critical of the global war on drugs ,  states ,  under `` undermining human rights ,  fostering discrimination '':
one's sexual orientation is a `` predilection for homosexuality ,  heterosexuality ,  or bisexuality '' . 
another setting where there is usually gender discrimination is when one is refused to extend their credit ,  refused approval of credit/loan process ,  and if there is a burden of unequal loan terms based on one's gender . 
this differs from the queue abstract data type or `` first in first out '' list  -lrb-  fifo  -rrb-  ,  where elements can only be added to one end and removed from the other . 
double-ended queues can also be implemented as a purely functional data structure . 
a double-ended queue is represented as a sixtuple codice_14 where codice_15 is a linked list which contains the front of the queue of length codice_16.
in this case ,  the lists codice_21 and codice_22 can be removed from the representation of the double-ended queue . 
or ,  if codice_12, they return the empty list and codice_1 respectively . 
it is implemented using a doubly linked list of fixed-length subarrays . 
in computer science ,  a double-ended queue  -lrb-  abbreviated to deque  -rrb-  is an abstract data type that generalizes a queue ,  for which elements can be added to or removed from either the front  -lrb-  head  -rrb-  or back  -lrb-  tail  -rrb-  . 
both the basic and most common list types in computing ,  queues and stacks can be considered specializations of deques ,  and can be implemented using deques . 
compounds that contain more than two double bonds are called polyenes . 
in organic chemistry a diene  -lrb-     -rrb-   -lrb-  diolefin  -lrb-     -rrb-  or alkadiene  -rrb-  is a covalent compound that contains two double bonds ,  usually among carbon atoms . 
at the same time ,  in the churches of the latin west ,  the diatessaron circulated as a supplement to the four gospels ,  especially in the latin translation . 
no christian tradition ,  other than some syriac ones ,  has ever adopted a harmonized gospel text for use in its liturgy . 
the syriac name for this gospel harmony is ``   -lrb-  ewangeliyôn damhalltê  -rrb-  meaning 'gospel of the mixed' while in the other hand we have ``   -lrb-  evangelion de mepharreshe  -rrb-  meaning 'gospel of the separated' . 
how the gospel text that was a standard in syriac christianity for possibly as long as two centuries should have utterly disappeared requires explaining . 
the diatessaron  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  c .  160–175 -rrb- is the most prominent early gospel harmony ,  and was created by tatian ,  an early christian assyrian apologist and ascetic . 
koontz then adopted a new dog ,  elsa ,  on july 11, 2016.
in october 2008, koontz revealed that he had adopted a new dog ,  anna . 
koontz was born on july 9, 1945, in everett ,  pennsylvania ,  the son of florence  -lrb-  née logue  -rrb-  and raymond koontz . 
one of dean koontz's pen names was inspired by his dog ,  trixie koontz ,  a golden retriever ,  shown in many of his book-jacket photos . 
dean ray koontz  -lrb-  born july 9, 1945 -rrb- is an american author . 
it is more properly thought of as a fermi problem rather than as a serious attempt to nail down a precise number . 
the control of damascus reverted to syria either upon the death of herod the great or was part of the lands given to herod philip which were given to syria with his death in 33/34 ad . 
in 572 bc ,  all of syria had been conquered by the neo-babylonians ,  but the status of damascus under babylon is relatively unknown . 
first settled in the second millennium bc ,  it was chosen as the capital of the umayyad caliphate from 661 to 750.
consequently ,  zengi withdrew his army and focused on campaigns against northern syria . 
they lay north of the old city . 
the vast majority of damascenes are syrian arabs . 
the barada river flows through damascus . 
located in south-western syria ,  damascus is the center of a large metropolitan area of 2.7 million people  -lrb-  2004 -rrb- . 
by 1154, damascus was firmly under nur ad-din's control . 
the french made damascus capital of their league of nations mandate for syria . 
from the late 19th century on ,  a modern administrative and commercial center began to spring up to the west of the old city ,  around the barada ,  centered on the area known as `` al-marjeh '' or `` the meadow '' . 
the name of damascus first appeared in the geographical list of thutmose iii as 𓍘𓄟𓊃𓈎𓅱/𓍘𓄟𓈎𓅱𓈉 `` t-m-ś-q '' in the 15th century bc . 
however ,  evidence of settlement in the wider barada basin dating back to 9000 bc exists ,  although no large-scale settlement was present within damascus walls until the second millennium bc . 
by the 8th century bc ,  damascus was practically engulfed by the assyrians and entered a dark age . 
ahmad ibn tulun ,  a dissenting turkish governor appointed by the abbasids ,  conquered syria ,  including damascus ,  from his overlords in 878-79.
the damascus stock exchange formally opened for trade in march 2009, and the exchange is the only stock exchange in syria . 
in 1164, king amalric of jerusalem invaded fatimid egypt ,  which requested help from nur ad-din . 
the shia fatimids gained control in 970, inflaming hostilities between them and the sunni arabs of the city who frequently revolted . 
in the 20th century ,  newer suburbs developed north of the barada ,  and to some extent to the south ,  invading the ghouta oasis . 
damascus used to be surrounded by an oasis ,  the ghouta region  -lrb-  الغوطة `` al-ġūṭä ''  -rrb-  ,  watered by the barada river . 
ayyubid rule  -lrb-  and independence  -rrb-  came to an end with the mongol invasion of syria in 1260, and following the mongol defeat at ain jalut in the same year ,  damascus became a provincial capital of the mamluk empire ,  ruled from egypt ,  following the mongol withdrawal . 
carbon-14 dating at tell ramad ,  on the outskirts of damascus ,  suggests that the site may have been occupied since the second half of the seventh millennium bc ,  possibly around 6300 bc . 
diplomatic agents are not ,  however ,  exempt from the jurisdiction of their home state ,  and hence prosecution may be undertaken by the sending state; for minor violations of the law ,  the sending state may impose administrative procedures specific to the foreign service or diplomatic mission . 
in the united states ,  the diplomatic relations act of 1978  -lrb-   et seq .   -rrb- 
there is an obligation for the receiving state not to `` discriminate as between states ''; in other words ,  any such fees should be payable by all accredited diplomats equally . 
the following chart outlines the immunities afforded to foreign diplomatic personnel residing in the united states . 
formally ,  diplomatic immunity may be limited to officials accredited to a host country ,  or traveling to or from their host country . 
this may allow the diplomatic corps to negotiate as a group with the authorities of the receiving country . 
some countries have made reservations to the vienna convention on diplomatic relations ,  but they are minor . 
currently ,  diplomatic relations ,  including diplomatic immunity ,  are governed internationally by the vienna convention on diplomatic relations ,  which has been ratified by almost every country in the world . 
diplomats and officials involved in drug smuggling have benefited from diplomatic immunity . 
this diplomatic exchange continued during the arab–byzantine wars . 
diplomatic technical and administrative staff also have more limited immunity under the vienna convention; for this reason ,  some countries may accredit a member of technical or administrative staff as an attaché . 
other categories of government officials that may travel frequently to other countries may not have diplomatic passports or diplomatic immunity ,  such as members of the military ,  high-ranking government officials ,  ministers ,  and others . 
crimes committed by members of a diplomat's family can also result in dismissal . 
diplomatic immunity is a form of legal immunity that ensures diplomats are given safe passage and are considered not susceptible to lawsuit or prosecution under the host country's laws ,  but they can still be expelled . 
in 2001, a russian diplomat ,  andrei knyazev ,  hit and killed a woman while driving drunk in ottawa . 
for instance ,  in 2002, a colombian diplomat in london was prosecuted for manslaughter ,  once diplomatic immunity was waived by the colombian government . 
for the upper class of the 17th ,  18th ,  and 19th centuries ,  diplomatic immunity was an easy concept to understand . 
israel refused to allow jordanian authorities to question the agent ,  claiming diplomatic immunity under the vienna convention . 
local citizens and businesses are often at a disadvantage when filing civil claims against a diplomat ,  especially in cases of unpaid rent ,  alimony ,  and child support . 
in the 19th century ,  the congress of vienna reasserted the rights of diplomats; and they have been largely respected since then ,  as the european model has spread throughout the world . 
in march 2013, the supreme court of india restricted italian ambassador daniele mancini from leaving india for breaching an undertaking given to the apex court . 
an international agreement known as the vienna convention codified the rules and agreements ,  providing standards and privileges to all states . 
the singapore government argued that by reason of article 39-lrb- 2 -rrb- of the vienna convention ,  ionescu was no longer protected by diplomatic immunity . 
ddr sdram modules for desktop computers ,  dual in-line memory modules  -lrb-  dimms  -rrb-  ,  have 184 pins  -lrb-  as opposed to 168 pins on sdram ,  or 240 pins on ddr2 sdram  -rrb-  ,  and can be differentiated from sdram dimms by the number of notches  -lrb-  ddr sdram has one ,  sdram has two  -rrb-  . 
the package sizes in which ddr sdram is manufactured are also standardized by jedec . 
none of its successors are forward or backward compatible with ddr1 sdram ,  meaning ddr2, ddr3, and ddr4 memory modules will not work in ddr1-equipped motherboards ,  and vice versa . 
compared to single data rate  -lrb-  sdr  -rrb-  sdram ,  the ddr sdram interface makes higher transfer rates possible by more strict control of the timing of the electrical data and clock signals . 
– don rosa in 1987
rosa created about 90 stories between 1987 and 2006.
rosa suffers from depression . 
rosa created a few more comics for gladstone until 1989.
most of rosa's stories have the letters d . u . c . k . 
don rosa was born keno don hugo rosa on june 29, 1951 in louisville ,  kentucky . 
rosa is very popular with readers in europe . 
in 1980, rosa married ann payne . 
rosa entered the university of kentucky in 1969.
rosa's idol when it comes to comics is carl barks . 
in 1986, rosa discovered a gladstone publishing comic book . 
– don rosa ,  torino comics festival ,  april 2011
rosa's eyesight had been very poor since his childhood . 
in europe ,  rosa is recognized as one of the best disney comics creators . 
don's father was named ugo dante rosa ,  but used the name `` hugo don '' rosa in america . 
rosa's story `` the black knight glorps again ! `` 
 '' ''don rosa has a style that is a little bit different from the disney style . 
during early summer 2002, rosa suddenly laid down work . 
don rosa is very introverted due to being socially isolated as a child . 
don rosa's grandfather ,  gioachino rosa ,  lived in maniago ,  a town at the foot of the alps in northern italy ,  in the province of pordenone . 
vertov's successful career continued into the 1930s . 
the ukraine state studio hired vertov to create `` man with a movie camera '' . 
in the 2012 `` sight & sound '' poll ,  critics voted vertov's `` man with a movie camera ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- the 8th best film ever made . 
she began collaborating with vertov ,  beginning as his editor but becoming assistant and co-director in subsequent films ,  such as `` man with a movie camera ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- ,  and `` three songs about lenin ''  -lrb-  1934 -rrb- . 
 ''lullaby '' ,  perhaps the last film in which vertov was able to maintain his artistic vision ,  was released in 1937.
in 1922, the year that `` nanook of the north '' was released ,  vertov started the `` kino-pravda '' series . 
most of vertov's early work was unpublished ,  and few manuscripts survived after the second world war ,  though some material surfaced in later films and documentaries created by vertov and his brothers ,  boris kaufman and mikhail kaufman . 
vertov surrounded himself with others who were also firm believers in his ideas . 
vertov's younger brothers boris kaufman and mikhail kaufman were also noted filmmakers ,  as was his wife ,  yelizaveta svilova . 
however ,  vertov's two credos ,  often used interchangeably ,  are in fact distinct ,  as yuri tsivian comments in the commentary track on the dvd for `` man with the movie camera: '' for vertov ,  `` life as it is '' means to record life as it would be without the camera present . 
a corporation formed under delaware state law benefits from the relaxed interest rules to the extent it conducts business in delaware ,  but is subject to restrictions of other states' laws if it conducts business in other states . 
over 50% of publicly traded corporations in the united states and 60% of the fortune 500 are incorporated in the state . 
pursuant to the `` internal affairs doctrine '' ,  corporations which act in more than one state are subject only to the laws of their state of incorporation with regard to the regulation of the internal affairs of the corporation . 
while most states require a for-profit corporation to have at least one director and two officers ,  delaware laws do not have this restriction . 
as a result ,  delaware corporations are subject almost exclusively to delaware law ,  even when they do business in other states . 
the delaware general corporation law  -lrb-  title 8, chapter 1 of the delaware code  -rrb-  is the statute governing corporate law in the u . s .  state of delaware . 
the detroit river is only wide . 
the river was known literally as the `` river of the strait '' . 
the detroit river is designated an american heritage river and a canadian heritage river — the only river to have this dual designation . 
the detroit river was designated as an american heritage river in 1998 and a canadian heritage river in 2001 — the only river to have dual designations . 
the detroit river is used for shipping and trading . 
the detroit river flows for from lake st .  clair to lake erie . 
the detroit river was first navigated by non-natives in the 17th century . 
the iconic renaissance center is located on the banks of the detroit river . 
its skull ,  forty to fifty centimetres long ,  bore a low bone crest that ran down from the base of the skull to halfway to the beak . 
 ''dsungaripterus '' was described in 1964 named by yang zhongjian . 
 ''dsungaripterus weii '' had a wing span of 3 to 3.5 metres  -lrb-  9.8-11.5 ft  -rrb-  . 
huffman married casting director phyllis huffman  -lrb-  `` nee '' grennan  -rrb-  in 1967.
beamer saw villanueva prowling around inside his friends' motor home and yelled at him causing villanueva to flee the scene . 
his parents are clarence huffman a western electric shop foreman  -lrb-  retired  -rrb-  and opal huffman  -lrb-  née dippel  -rrb-  . 
dagome iudex is one of the earliest historical documents relating to poland . 
the document's name derives from its opening words . 
finally ,  mieszko i is not referred to as ``  ''dagome '' '' in any other document . 
thus ,  bolesław the brave might have received kraków as his part of his father's legacy before the `` dagome iudex '' was written . 
the following year ,  walcott won an obe from the british government for his work . 
walcott was born and raised in castries ,  saint lucia ,  in the west indies ,  the son of alix  -lrb-  maarlin  -rrb-  and warwick walcott . 
at 14, walcott published his first poem ,  a miltonic ,  religious poem ,  in the newspaper `` the voice of st lucia '' . 
in 2009, walcott was a leading candidate for the position of oxford professor of poetry . 
in 1982 a harvard sophomore accused walcott of sexual harassment in september 1981.
after graduation ,  walcott moved to trinidad in 1953, where he became a critic ,  teacher and journalist . 
methodism and spirituality have played a significant role from the beginning in walcott's work . 
walcott said his writing was influenced by the work of the american poets ,  robert lowell and elizabeth bishop ,  who were also friends . 
walcott was awarded the nobel prize in literature in 1992, the second caribbean writer to receive the honour after saint-john perse ,  who was born in guadeloupe ,  received the award in 1960.
the influential bajan poet frank collymore critically supported walcott's early work . 
as well as transmitting the decca frequencies of 5f ,  6f ,  8f and 9f ,  an 8.2f signal ,  known as orange ,  was also transmitted . 
the beat frequency between the 8.0f  -lrb-  red  -rrb-  and 8.2f  -lrb-  orange  -rrb-  signals allowed a 0.2f signal to be derived and so resulted in a hyperbolic pattern in which one cycle  -lrb-  360°  -rrb-  of phase difference equates to 5 zones . 
the lanes were grouped into `` zones '' ,  with 18 green ,  24 red ,  or 30 purple lanes in each zone . 
the decca system in europe was shut down in the spring of 2000, and the last worldwide chain ,  in japan ,  in 2001.
the lanes were numbered 0 to 23 for red ,  30 to 47 for green and 50 to 79 for purple . 
the nominally continuous wave transmissions were in fact divided into a 20-second cycle ,  with each station in turn simultaneously transmitting all four decca frequencies  -lrb-  5f ,  6f ,  8f and 9f  -rrb-  in a phase-coherent relationship for a brief period of 0.45 seconds each cycle . 
rohrabacher ,  who is of german and english descent ,  was born june 21, 1947, in coronado ,  california ,  the son of doris m .   -lrb-  née haring  -rrb-  and donald tyler rohrabacher . 
in general elections ,  only one time ,  in 2008, did he receive less than 55% of the vote until his defeat . 
he received his master's degree in american studies at the university of southern california . 
all offices report to the darpa director:
darpa has about 220 employees ,  of whom approximately 100 are in management . 
the name of the organization first changed from its founding name arpa to darpa in march 1972, briefly changing back to arpa in february 1993, only to revert to darpa in march 1996.
structured information about some of the darpa's contracts and projects is publicly available . 
darpa is independent of other military research and development and reports directly to senior department of defense management . 
johnson and york were both keen on space projects ,  but when nasa was established later in 1958 all space projects and most of arpa's funding were transferred to it . 
a list of darpa's active and archived projects is available on the agency's website . 
in june 2018, darpa leaders demonstrated a number of new technologies that were developed within the framework of the gxv-t program . 
darpa has six technical offices that manage the agency's research portfolio ,  and two additional support offices that manage special projects and transition efforts . 
the archbishopric was then conferred on dunstan . 
at once edgar's advisers recalled dunstan . 
dunstan was born in baltonsborough ,  somerset . 
within two years of dunstan's appointment ,  in 946, king edmund was assassinated . 
dunstan served as an important minister of state to several english kings . 
in 973, dunstan's statesmanship reached its zenith when he officiated at the coronation of king edgar . 
on dunstan's return ,  archbishop oda consecrated him a bishop and ,  on the death of coenwald of worcester at the end of 957, oda appointed dunstan to the see . 
dunstan worked as a silversmith and in the scriptorium while he was living at glastonbury . 
although dunstan managed to escape ,  he saw that his life was in danger . 
it is at this time ,  according to a late 11th-century legend ,  that the devil is said to have tempted dunstan and to have been held by the face with dunstan's tongs . 
dunstan retired to canterbury ,  to teach at the cathedral school . 
dunstan ,  now abbot of glastonbury ,  went to work at once on the task of reform . 
that year at the synod of winchester ,  st dunstan's feast was ordered to be kept solemnly throughout england . 
books written by deprogrammers and exit counselors say that the most essential part of freeing the mind of a person is to convince the subject that he or she had been under the mental control of others . 
ted patrick ,  one of the pioneers of deprogramming ,  used a confrontational method ,  enlisting psychiatrists and psychologists to assist him in the deprogramming process . 
deprogramming refers to measures that claim to assist a person who holds a controversial belief system in changing those beliefs and abandoning allegiance to the religious ,  political ,  economic ,  or social group associated with the belief system . 
according to carol giambalvo ,  `` exit cousellors are usually former cult members themselves '' . 
the `` planet '' saw its share of rough times during white's tenure . 
at the conclusion of the new 52, following the new 52 superman's death ,  lex luthor buys the `` daily planet '' . 
in the post-crisis comics' canon ,  years before clark or lois began working for the paper ,  lex luthor owned the `` daily planet . `` 
months after superman makes his public debut ,  clark leaves `` the daily star '' on good terms and accepts a position at `` the daily planet '' . 
franklin stern ,  an old friend of white's ,  became the `` daily planet '''s publisher . 
after clark was hired ,  jimmy olsen joined the paper's staff . 
 -lrb-  the real-world newspaper was called the `` evening star '' prior to 1899, the `` toronto daily star '' is now known as the `` toronto star '' .   -rrb- 
after lois lane made a deal with luthor where ,  in exchange for him returning the `` planet '' to perry ,  she would kill one story of his choosing with no questions asked ,  luthor sold the `` daily planet '' to perry white for the token sum of one dollar . 
during clark kent's years in college ,  perry white was promoted to editor-in-chief upon the retirement of the `` daily planet '''s previous editor ,  the earth-one version of george taylor . 
dpnss was originally defined by british telecom . 
for a protocol that began life in the 1980s ,  dpnss is natively a long way from voip . 
the digital private network signalling system  -lrb-  dpnss  -rrb-  is a network protocol used on digital trunk lines for connecting to pabx . 
dpnss is a compelled protocol in that each instruction issued must be met with an appropriate response from the other pbx otherwise the message is re-transmitted  -lrb-  until timer expiry  -rrb-  . 
although still available on request ,  it has been superseded by ets 300 102  -lrb-  `` euroisdn ''  -rrb-  . 
the nagari script has roots in the ancient `` brāhmī '' script family . 
devanagari script has 47 primary characters ,  of which 14 are vowels and 33 are consonants . 
the devanagari script is closely related to the nandinagari script commonly found in numerous ancient manuscripts of south india ,  and it is distantly related to a number of southeast asian scripts . 
devanagari is part of the brahmic family of scripts of india ,  nepal ,  tibet ,  and south-east asia . 
some cities may host more than one mission from the same country . 
all missions to the united nations are known simply as permanent missions ,  while eu member states' missions to the european union are known as permanent representations ,  and the head of such a mission is typically both a permanent representative and an ambassador . 
a permanent diplomatic mission is typically known as an embassy ,  and the head of the mission is known as an ambassador or high commissioner . 
missions between commonwealth countries are known as high commissions ,  and their heads are high commissioners . 
a diplomatic mission or foreign mission is a group of people from one state or an organisation present in another state to represent the sending state/organisation officially in the receiving state . 
a chargé d'affaires ad interim also heads the mission during the interim between the end of one chief of mission's term and the beginning of another . 
as a result ,  the alpha does not have:
the alpha architecture was intended to be a high-performance design . 
in the alpha architecture ,  a `` byte '' was defined as an 8-bit datum  -lrb-  octet  -rrb-  ,  a `` word '' as a 16-bit datum ,  a `` longword '' as a 32-bit datum ,  a `` quadword '' as a 64-bit datum ,  and an `` octaword '' as a 128-bit datum . 
originally ,  the alpha processors were designated the decchip 21x64 series ,  with `` decchip '' replaced in the mid-1990s with `` alpha '' . 
the first few generations of the alpha chips were some of the most innovative of their time . 
alpha ,  originally known as alpha axp ,  is a 64-bit reduced instruction set computing  -lrb-  risc  -rrb-  instruction set architecture  -lrb-  isa  -rrb-  developed by digital equipment corporation  -lrb-  dec  -rrb-  ,  designed to replace their 32-bit vax complex instruction set computer  -lrb-  cisc  -rrb-  isa . 
44 a 8 -rrb- taught fighting with the dagger . 
the middle english `` dagger '' is used from the 1380s . 
iron production did not begin until 1200 bc ,  and iron ore was not found in egypt ,  making the iron dagger rare ,  and the context suggests that the iron dagger was valued on a level equal to that of its ceremonial gold counterpart . 
in ancient egypt ,  daggers were usually made of copper or bronze ,  while royalty had gold weapons . 
copper daggers appeared first in the early bronze age ,  in the 3rd millennium bc ,  and copper daggers of early minoan iii  -lrb-  2400–2000 bc  -rrb-  were recovered at knossos . 
during this time ,  the dagger was often employed in the role of a secondary defense weapon in close combat . 
the dominican order is headed by the master of the order ,  currently bruno cadoré . 
the dominican order was affected by a number of elemental influences . 
the dominican order has influenced the formation of other orders outside of the roman catholic church ,  such as the anglican order of preachers which is a dominican order within the world wide anglican communion . 
in england ,  the dominican province began at the second general chapter of the dominican order in bologna during the spring of 1221.
the dominican emphasis on learning and on charity distinguishes it from other monastic and mendicant orders . 
the expansion of the order produced changes . 
these include the dominican sisters of oakford ,  kwazulunatal  -lrb-  1881 -rrb- ,  the dominican missionary sisters ,  zimbabwe ,   -lrb-  1890 -rrb- and the dominican sisters of newcastle ,  kwazulunatal  -lrb-  1891 -rrb- . 
the friars ,  nuns ,  sisters ,  members of priestly fraternities of saint dominic ,  dominican laity and dominican youths together form the order of preachers . 
women could be professed to the dominican religious life at the age of thirteen . 
st .  dominic founded the dominican order in 1215 at a time when men of god were no longer expected to stay behind the walls of a cloister . 
when the order reached england ,  many of these attributes were kept ,  but the english gave the order additional ,  specialized characteristics . 
the dominican order came into being in the middle ages at a time when men of god were no longer expected to stay behind the walls of a cloister . 
the women of the order also established schools for the children of the local gentry . 
by 1300, the enthusiasm for preaching and conversion within the order lessened . 
a number of other names have been used to refer to both the order and its members . 
women have been part of the dominican order since the beginning ,  but distinct active congregations of dominican sisters in their current form are largely a product of the nineteenth century and afterwards . 
the dominican nuns were founded by saint dominic even before he had established the friars . 
the following people belonging to the order have been proclaimed saints throughout history:
the priestly fraternities of st .  dominic are diocesan priests who are formally affiliated to the order of preachers  -lrb-  dominicans  -rrb-  through a rule of life that they profess ,  and so strive for evangelical perfection under the overall direction of the dominican friars . 
the english dominicans took this to heart ,  and made it the focal point of their mysticism . 
dominic's new order was to be trained to preach in the vernacular languages . 
today ,  there is a growing number of associates who share the dominican charism . 
the first dominican site in england was at oxford ,  in the parishes of st .  edward and st .  adelaide . 
on january 1, 2008, the master of the order declared a year of dedication to the rosary . 
the beginning of the 16th century confronted the order with the upheavals of revolution . 
the order of preachers  -lrb-   ,  postnominal abbreviation op  -rrb-  ,  also known as the dominican order ,  is a mendicant catholic religious order founded by the spanish priest dominic of caleruega in france ,  approved by pope honorius iii via the papal bull `` religiosam vitam '' on 22 december 1216.
another who contributed significantly to the spirituality of the order is albertus magnus ,  influence on the brotherhood permeated nearly every aspect of dominican life . 
when mclean was 15, his father died . 
mclean's grandfather and father ,  both also named donald mclean ,  had roots originating in scotland . 
mclean said ,  `` the last album  -lrb-  `` don mclean ''  -rrb-  was a study in depression whereas the new one  -lrb-  `` playin' favorites ''  -rrb-  is almost the quintessence of optimism . `` 
the tombstone had an inscription with words from the fourth verse of mclean's song:
mclean has continued to record new material ,  including `` river of love '' in 1995 on curb records and ,  more recently ,  the albums `` you've got to share '' ,  `` don mclean sings marty robbins '' and `` the western album '' for his own don mclean music label . 
other songs written by mclean for the album include `` dreidel ''  -lrb-  number 21 on the billboard chart  -rrb-  and `` if we try ''  -lrb-  number 58 -rrb- ,  which was subsequently recorded by olivia newton-john . 
don mclean  -lrb-  born october 2, 1945 -rrb- is an american singer-songwriter who has written and performed such songs as “american pie” ,  “vincent” ,  “castles in the air” ,  “and i love you so” ,  “crossroads” ,  “the grave” and many more . 
 ''american pie '' combines externals with internals and the resultant success of that album makes the third one  -lrb-  `` don mclean ''  -rrb-  entirely introspective . `` 
 ''american pie '''s success made mclean an international star and piqued interest in his first album ,  which charted more than two years after its initial release . 
in 1992, previously unreleased songs became available on `` favorites and rarities '' ,  while `` don mclean classics '' featured new studio recordings of `` vincent '' and `` american pie '' . 
as of november 2016, there are 22 dirkjan albums ,  tentatively named 'dirkjan 1' through 'dirkjan 22' . 
dirkjan is a loser who stumbles through life in mostly three-panel gag-a-day comic strips . 
early dirkjans contained many references to the student life of nijmegen . 
 ''duck hunt '' has three different game modes to choose from . 
 ''duck hunt '' was released as an arcade game in the `` nintendo vs . ``  series in 1984 as `` vs . 
video game developer mastiff referenced the dog in promoting their video game `` remington great american bird hunt '' ,  stating that rockford ,  a dog in the game ,  will never laugh at players for missing the ducks . 
 ''duck hunt '' is a shooter game in which the objective is to shoot moving targets on the television screen in mid-flight . 
if the player shoots the required number of ducks in a single round ,  the player will advance to the next round; otherwise ,  the player will receive a game over . 
when all lives are gone ,  the game ends . 
in `` duck hunt '' ,  players use the nes zapper in combination with a crt television to shoot ducks that appear on the screen . 
today ,  the film is seen as one of the greatest of all german films . 
today ,  the film is seen as one of the greatest of all german films . 
the film was ranked #25 in `` empire '' magazine's `` the 100 best films of world cinema '' in 2010.
production for this film originally began in 1976.
director wolfgang petersen has overseen the creation of several different versions of his film . 
an adaptation of lothar-günther buchheim's 1973 german novel of the same name ,  the film is set during world war ii and follows german u-boat u-96 and its crew ,  as they set out on a hazardous patrol in the battle of the atlantic . 
to this day ,  it holds the record for the most academy award nominations for a german film . 
petersen then supervised the editing of six hours of film ,  from which was distilled a 209-minute version ,  `` das boot: the director's cut '' . 
in late 2007, there was an exhibition about the film `` das boot '' ,  as well as about the real u-boat `` u-96 '' ,  at the haus der geschichte  -lrb-  house of german history  -rrb-  in bonn . 
interestingly ,  the film's german version actually grossed much higher than the english-dubbed version at the united states box office . 
produced with a budget of 32 million dm  -lrb-  about $18.5 million  -rrb-  ,  the film's high production cost ranks it among the most expensive films in the history of german cinema . 
the film features both standard german-speakers and dialect speakers . 
das boot  -lrb-   ,  german: `` the boat ''  -rrb-  is a 1981 german submarine film written and directed by wolfgang petersen ,  produced by günter rohrbach ,  and starring jürgen prochnow ,  herbert grönemeyer ,  and klaus wennemann . 
the film was partly financed by german television broadcasters wdr and the sdr ,  and much more footage had been shot than was shown in the theatrical version . 
wolfgang petersen created the film based on buchheim's novel of the same name with several alterations to the plot and characters . 
however ,  today's director's cut of `` das boot '' amounts to over 200 minutes ,  and the complete tv version of the film is 282 minutes long . 
in the film ,  there is only one ardent nazi in the crew of 40, namely the first watch officer  -lrb-  referred to comically in one scene as `` unser hitlerjugendführer '' or `` our hitler youth leader ''  -rrb-  . 
dhtml is differentiated from ajax by the fact that a dhtml page is still request/reload-based . 
thus the dynamic characteristic of dhtml is the way it functions while a page is viewed ,  not in its ability to generate a unique page with each page load . 
dhtml allows authors to add effects to their pages that are otherwise difficult to achieve ,  by changing the document object model  -lrb-  dom  -rrb-  and page style . 
dhtml support with extensive dom access was introduced with internet explorer 4.0.
there may also be institutional challenges . 
one line of thought was to use radio as a master teacher . 
in synchronous learning ,  all participants are `` present '' at the same time . 
starting in milwaukee in 1907, public schools began opening free vocational programs . 
this also may contribute to the students feeling a greater sense of support ,  since they have ongoing and regular access to their instructors and other students . 
distance education or long-distance learning is the education of students who may not always be physically present at a school . 
distance education graduates ,  who would never have been associated with the school under a traditional system ,  may donate money to the school . 
paced models are a familiar mode as they are used almost exclusively in campus based schools . 
charles wedemeyer of the university of wisconsin–madison also promoted new methods . 
the widespread use of computers and the internet have made distance learning easier and faster ,  and today virtual schools and virtual universities deliver full curricula online . 
not all courses required to complete a degree may be offered online . 
are used roughly synonymously with distance education . 
at the time ,  the total student population of conventional universities in the united kingdom was around 130,000.
another form of synchronous learning that has been entering the classroom over the last couple of years is the use of robot proxies including those that allow sick students to attend classes . 
the rapid spread of film in the 1920s and radio in the 1930s led to proposals to use it for distance education . 
most open universities use distance education technologies as delivery methods ,  though some require attendance at local study centres or at regional `` summer schools '' . 
each delivery model offers both advantages and disadvantages for students ,  teachers and institutions . 
however ,  many of the techniques developed and lessons learned with earlier media are used in internet delivery . 
furthermore ,  it may be more difficult for the instructor to organize and plan a distance learning program ,  especially since many are new programs and their organizational needs are different from a traditional learning program . 
many open universities uses a blend of technologies and a blend of learning modalities  -lrb-  face-to-face ,  distance ,  and hybrid  -rrb-  all under the rubric of `` distance learning '' . 
the first completely online courses for graduate credit were offered by connected education ,  starting in the fall of 1985, leading to the ma in media studies from the new school . 
death of a hero is a world war i novel by richard aldington . 
at the end of the book there is a poem written from the point of view of a veteran comparing world war i to the trojan war . 
he loses faith in the war quickly . 
aldington ,  a veteran of world war i ,  claimed that his novel was accurate in terms of speech and style . 
the second section of the book deals with george's london life . 
the project describes itself as `` an organized sampling of the world '' . 
in addition the visits of certain special geographical locations can also be reported  -lrb-  special visits  -rrb-  - for example:
he later guest-starred in episodes of `` the muppet show '' ,  `` the cosby show '' ,  and in the 1980s revival of `` new twilight zone '' . 
if danny feels like doing kaplan that night he might be off on kaplan for two hours . 
his next venture was a short-lived broadway show with sylvia fine as the pianist ,  lyricist ,  and composer . 
he attended public school 149 in east new york ,  brooklyn; the school eventually was renamed to honor him—where he began entertaining his classmates with songs and jokes . 
he was the first ambassador-at-large of unicef in 1954 and received the french legion of honour in 1986 for his years of work with the organization . 
the act toured the united states ,  then performed in asia with the show `` la vie paree '' . 
his interest in cooking began on the tour . 
david daniel kaminsky was born in brooklyn ,  new york ,  on january 18, 1911  -lrb-  though he would later say 1913 -rrb- ,  to ukrainian jewish immigrants jacob and clara  -lrb-  `` née '' nemerovsky  -rrb-  kaminsky . 
jacob and clara and their older sons larry and mac left dnipropetrovsk two years before danny's birth; he was their only son born in the united states . 
that year he received the screen actors guild annual award . 
kaye entered television in 1956, on the cbs show `` see it now '' with edward r .  murrow . 
in 1953 decca released `` danny at the palace '' ,  a live recording made at the new york palace theater ,  followed by `` knock on wood ''  -lrb-  decca ,  1954 -rrb- a set of songs from the movie of the same name sung by kaye ,  accompanied by victor young and his singing strings . 
in many films ,  as well as on stage ,  kaye proved to be an able actor ,  singer ,  dancer ,  and comedian . 
decarlo died in new rochelle ,  new york ,  of pneumonia . 
dan decarlo was born in new rochelle ,  new york ,  the son of a gardener . 
josie decarlo died in her sleep on march 14, 2012, aged 88.
as well during this period ,  decarlo created and drew standard comics' futuristic teen-humor comic book `` jetta of the 21st century '' . 
decarlo won the national cartoonists society award for best comic book in 2000 for `` betty & veronica '' . 
decarlo was listed as a creator in the end credits of the film `` josie and the pussycats '' . 
she met future husband dan decarlo on a blind date in belgium in 1945, shortly after the battle of the bulge . 
decarlo said he created josie on his own in the late 1950s; his wife ,  named josie ,  said in an interview quoted in a decarlo obituary ,  `` we went on a caribbean cruise ,  and i had a cat costume for the cruise ,  and that's the way it started . `` 
prepaid debit cards that can be reloaded are also called reloadable debit cards . 
a debit card  -lrb-  also known as a bank card ,  plastic card or check card  -rrb-  is a plastic payment card that can be used instead of cash when making purchases . 
there are currently three ways that debit card transactions are eftpos  -lrb-  also known as `` online debit '' or `` pin debit ''  -rrb-  ,  offline debit  -lrb-  also known as `` signature debit ''  -rrb-  ,  and the electronic purse card system . 
debit cards usually also allow instant withdrawal of cash ,  acting as an atm card for this purpose . 
offline debit cards have the logos of major credit cards  -lrb-  for example ,  visa or mastercard  -rrb-  or major debit cards  -lrb-  for example ,  maestro in the united kingdom and other countries ,  but not the united states  -rrb-  and are used at the point of sale like a credit card  -lrb-  with payer's signature  -rrb-  . 
overall ,  the online debit card is generally viewed as superior to the offline debit card because of its more secure authentication system and live status ,  which alleviates problems with processing lag on transactions that may only issue online debit cards . 
online debit cards require electronic authorization of every transaction and the debits are reflected in the user's account immediately . 
