smaller phyla of indo-european found in europe include hellenic  -lrb-  greek ,  c .  10 million  -rrb-  ,  baltic  -lrb-  c .  7 million  -rrb-  ,  albanian  -lrb-  c .  5 million  -rrb-  ,  indo-aryan  -lrb-  romani ,  c .  1.5 million  -rrb-  and celtic  -lrb-  including welsh ,  c .  1 million  -rrb-  . 
an estimated 250 million europeans are native speakers of slavic languages ,  the largest groups being  russian  -lrb-  c .  110 million in european russia and adjacient parts of eastern europe ,  russian forming the largest linguistic community in europe  -rrb-  ,   polish  -lrb-  c .  55 million  -rrb-  ,  ukrainian  -lrb-  c .  40 million  -rrb-  ,   serbo-croatian  -lrb-  c .  21 million  -rrb-  ,  czech  -lrb-  c .  11 million  -rrb-  ,  bulgarian  -lrb-  c .  9 million  -rrb-  ,   slovak  -lrb-  c .  5 million  -rrb-  belarusian and slovene  -lrb-  c .  3 million each  -rrb-  and macedonian  -lrb-  c .  2 million  -rrb-  . 
the eindhoven university of technology  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  abbr . 
the 2019 qs world university rankings place eindhoven 99th in the world ,  34th in europe ,  and 3rd in the netherlands - tu/e has moved up 59 places in this world ranking since 2012  -lrb-  in two other main world rankings it is 167th and 51-75th  -rrb-  . 
the eindhoven university of technology was founded as the `` technische hogeschool eindhoven ''  -lrb-  the  -rrb-  on 23 june 1956 by the dutch government . 
pauling first proposed the concept of electronegativity in 1932 as an explanation of the fact that the covalent bond between two different atoms  -lrb-  a–b  -rrb-  is stronger than would be expected by taking the average of the strengths of the a–a and b–b bonds . 
to calculate pauling electronegativity for an element ,  it is necessary to have data on the dissociation energies of at least two types of covalent bond formed by that element . 
the higher the associated electronegativity number ,  the more an atom or a substituent group attracts electrons towards itself . 
the difference in electronegativity between atoms a and b is given by: where the dissociation energies ,  `` e '' ,  of the a–b ,  a–a and b–b bonds are expressed in electronvolts ,  the factor  -lrb-  ev  -rrb-  being included to ensure a dimensionless result . 
as it is usually calculated ,  electronegativity is not a property of an atom alone ,  but rather a property of an atom in a molecule . 
countries can ratify the charter in respect of its minority languages based on part ii or part iii of the charter ,  which contain varying principles . 
part ii of the charter details eight main principles and objectives upon which states must base their policies and legislation . 
countries that have ratified the charter ,  and languages for which the ratification was made:
in 1645, parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish . 
at the time ,  the parliament of england did not have a large permanent role in the english system of government . 
unlike other civil wars in england ,  which focused on who should rule ,  this war was more concerned with the manner in which the kingdoms of england ,  scotland ,  and ireland were governed . 
during the period of the english civil war ,  the english overseas possessions were highly involved . 
this parliamentarian victory marked the end of the second english civil war . 
virginia's population swelled with cavaliers during and after the english civil war . 
in other words ,  the speaker proclaimed himself a servant of parliament ,  rather than of the king . 
having dissolved parliament and unable to raise money without it ,  the king assembled a new one in 1628.
in the meantime both parliament and the king agreed to an independent investigation into the king's involvement in strafford's plot . 
the parliament of bermuda avoided the parliament of england's fate during the protectorate ,  becoming one of the oldest continuous legislatures in the world . 
the wars left england ,  scotland ,  and ireland among the few countries in europe without a monarch . 
constitutionally ,  the wars established the precedent that an english monarch cannot govern without parliament's consent ,  although the idea of parliament as the ruling power of england was only legally established as part of the glorious revolution in 1688.
from the 1990s ,  a number of historians discarded and replaced the historical title `` english civil war '' with the titles the wars of the three kingdoms and the `` british civil wars '' ,  positing that the civil war in england cannot be understood isolated from events in other parts of great britain and ireland; king charles i remains crucial ,  not just as king of england ,  but also because of his relationship with the peoples of his other realms . 
the english civil war broke out less than forty years after the death of queen elizabeth i in 1603.
the new parliament proved even more hostile to charles than its predecessor . 
this vision of at least partial democracy in ecclesiology paralleled the struggles between parliament and the king . 
with the help of the scots ,  parliament won at marston moor  -lrb-  2 july 1644 -rrb- ,  gaining york and the north of england . 
although the monarchy was restored ,  it was still only with the consent of parliament; therefore ,  the civil wars effectively set england and scotland on course to adopt a parliamentary monarchy form of government . 
the term `` english civil war '' appears most often in the singular form ,  although historians often divide the conflict into two or three separate wars . 
charles took exception to this `` lèse-majesté ''  -lrb-  offence against the ruler  -rrb-  and dissolved the parliament after only a few weeks; hence the name `` the short parliament '' . 
once summoned ,  a parliament's continued existence was at the king's pleasure ,  since it was subject to dissolution by him at any time . 
the english civil war  -lrb-  1642–1651 -rrb- was a series of armed conflicts and political machinations between parliamentarians  -lrb-  `` roundheads ''  -rrb-  and royalists  -lrb-  `` cavaliers ''  -rrb-  over ,  principally ,  the manner of england's governance . 
thus ,  revisionist historians claim to have discredited some whig and marxist interpretations of the english civil war . 
many of the officers and veteran soldiers of the english civil war studied and implemented war strategies that had been learned and perfected in other wars across europe ,  namely by the spanish and the dutch during the dutch war for independence which began in 1568.
nearly all the royalists who had fought in the first civil war had given their parole not to bear arms against the parliament ,  and many of these ,  like lord astley ,  refused to break their word by taking any part in the second war . 
in the spring of 1639, king charles i accompanied his forces to the scottish border to end the rebellion known as the bishops' war . 
it was hoped by both charles and parliament that the execution of strafford and the protestation would end the drift towards war; in fact ,  they encouraged it . 
the execution of charles i altered the dynamics of the civil war in scotland ,  which had raged between royalists and covenanters since 1644.
two large historical societies exist ,  the sealed knot and the english civil war society ,  which regularly re-enact events and battles of the civil war in full period costume . 
against this backdrop ,  and according to advice from the magnum concilium  -lrb-  the house of lords ,  but without the commons ,  so not a parliament  -rrb-  ,  charles finally bowed to pressure and summoned another english parliament in november 1640.
in general ,  the early part of the war went well for the royalists . 
this city would serve as his base for the remainder of the war . 
a series of royalist uprisings throughout england and a scottish invasion occurred in the summer of 1648.
at the outset of the conflict ,  much of the country remained neutral ,  though the royal navy and most english cities favoured parliament ,  while the king found considerable support in rural communities . 
the victors confiscated almost all irish catholic-owned land in the wake of the conquest and distributed it to the parliament's creditors ,  to the parliamentary soldiers who served in ireland ,  and to english people who had settled there before the war . 
for example ,  formula_6 is written as formula_7, and formula_8 may be written formula_9.
the relations `` less than '' formula_54 and greater than formula_52 have the property of transitivity: by reversing the inequation ,  formula_54 and formula_52 can be swapped ,  for example:
usually terms with the highest power  -lrb-  exponent  -rrb-  ,  are written on the left ,  for example ,  formula_10 is written to the left of formula_11.
for example ,  the expression formula_1 has the following components:
this equation states that formula_44, representing the square of the length of the side that is the hypotenuse  -lrb-  the side opposite the right angle  -rrb-  ,  is equal to the sum  -lrb-  addition  -rrb-  of the squares of the other two sides whose lengths are represented by formula_45 and formula_46.
an equation states that two expressions are equal using the symbol for equality ,  formula_42  -lrb-  the equals sign  -rrb-  . 
therefore ,  if `` abc ''=0, then `` a ''=0 or  -lrb-  `` b ''=0 or `` c ''=0 -rrb- ,  so `` abc ''=0 implies `` a ''=0 or `` b ''=0 or `` c ''=0.
many programming languages and calculators use a single asterisk to represent the multiplication symbol ,  and it must be explicitly used ,  for example ,  formula_15 is written `` 3*x '' . 
the first public performance of the poem was on august 14, 1888, by actor de wolf hopper ,  on thayer's 25th birthday . 
 ''the new york times ''' obituary of thayer on august 22, 1940, p .  19 quotes comedian dewolf hopper ,  who helped make the poem famous:
thayer's recitation of the poem at a harvard class reunion in 1895 helps solve the mystery ,  which lingered into the 20th century ,  of who had written it . 
in welsh legends ,  arthur's sword is known as `` caledfwlch '' . 
excalibur is by no means the only weapon associated with arthur ,  nor the only sword . 
malory records both versions of the legend in his `` le morte d'arthur '' ,  naming both swords as excalibur . 
geoffrey's `` historia '' is the first non-welsh source to speak of the sword . 
excalibur's scabbard was said to have powers of its own . 
though not named as caledfwlch ,  arthur's sword is described vividly in `` the dream of rhonabwy '' ,  one of the tales associated with the `` mabinogion '':
they suggest instead that both names `` may have similarly arisen at a very early date as generic names for a sword ''; this sword then became exclusively the property of arthur in the british tradition . 
eight bar blues progressions have more variations than the more rigidly defined twelve bar format . 
the move to the iv chord usually happens at bar 3  -lrb-  as opposed to 5 in twelve bar  -rrb- ; however ,  `` the i chord moving to the v chord right away ,  in the second measure ,  is a characteristic of the eight-bar blues . `` 
at the end of 1759 waring published the first chapter of `` miscellanea analytica '' . 
he also published a theorem ,  due to his friend john wilson ,  concerning prime numbers; it was later proven rigorously by lagrange . 
in `` proprietates algebraicarum curvarum ''  -lrb-  1772 -rrb- waring reissued in a much revised form the first four chapters of the second part of `` miscellanea analytica '' . 
edward waring  -lrb-  15 august 1798 -rrb- was a british mathematician . 
eden phillpotts was born on 4 november 1862 at mount abu in rajasthan . 
with her three small sons ,  of whom eden was the eldest ,  she returned to england and settled in plymouth . 
phillpotts wrote a great many books with a dartmoor setting . 
eden phillpotts died at his home in broadclyst near exeter ,  devon ,  on 29 december 1960.
when she herself finally married at the age of 55 her father never forgave her ,  and never communicated with her again . 
phillpotts was educated at mannamead school in plymouth . 
the u . s .  magnuson fishery conservation and management act then triggered an automatic prohibition of u . s .  imports of tuna products from ecuador . 
rafael correa is quite critical of u . s .  foreign policy . 
ecuador and the u . s .  agreed in 1999 to a 10-year arrangement whereby u . s .  military surveillance aircraft could use the airbase at manta ,  ecuador ,  as a `` forward operating location '' to detect drug trafficking flights through the region . 
julian assange applied for ecuadorian citizenship on 16 september 2017, which ecuador granted on 12 december 2017.
once all of a player's  -lrb-  or team's  -rrb-  group of object balls are pocketed ,  the player attempts to sink the 8 ball . 
eight-ball is played with cue sticks and 16 balls: a  ,  and 15 s consisting of seven striped balls ,  seven solid-colored balls and the black 8 ball . 
the ultimate object of the game is to legally pocket the eight ball in a called pocket ,  which can only be done after all of the balls from a player's assigned group have been cleared from the table . 
if the 8 ball is pocketed on the break then the breaker can choose either to the 8 ball and play from the current position or to re-rack and re-break; but if the cue ball is also pocketed on the break then the opponent is the one who has the choice: either to re-spot the 8 ball and shoot with behind the  ,  accepting the current position ,  or to re-break or have the breaker re-break . 
the balls are usually colored as follows:
implementations of evm can be scaled to fit projects of all sizes and complexities . 
earned value management is a project management technique for measuring project performance and progress . 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s ,  evm emerged as a project management methodology to be understood and used by managers and executives ,  not just evm specialists . 
in australia evm has been codified as standards as 4817-2003 and as 4817-2006.
project a has been approved for a duration of one year and with the budget of x . 
consider the same project ,  except this time the project plan includes pre-defined methods of quantifying the accomplishment of work . 
an electron microscope is a microscope that uses a beam of accelerated electrons as a source of illumination . 
the extinction dates given below are usually approximations of the actual date of extinction . 
over 190 species of birds have become extinct since 1500, and the rate of extinction seems to be increasing . 
a single cotton gin could generate up to of cleaned cotton daily . 
whitney received a patent  -lrb-  later numbered as x72 -rrb- for his cotton gin on march 14, 1794, but it was not validated until 1807.
eli whitney  -lrb-  december 8, 1765january 8, 1825 -rrb- was an american inventor best known for inventing the cotton gin . 
and the cotton gin transformed southern agriculture and the national economy . 
recently ,  historians have found that during 1801–1806, whitney took the money and headed into south carolina in order to profit from the cotton gin . 
the cotton gin is a mechanical device that removes the seeds from cotton ,  a process that had previously been extremely labor-intensive . 
whitney's mother ,  elizabeth fay ,  died in 1777, when he was 11.
the whitney armory finally succeeded not long after his death in 1825.
whitney is most famous for two innovations which came to have significant impacts on the united states in the mid-19th century: the cotton gin  -lrb-  1793 -rrb- and his advocacy of interchangeable parts . 
the field can be viewed as the combination of an electric field and a magnetic field . 
in the vector field formalism ,  these are:
if only the electric field  -lrb-  e  -rrb-  is non-zero ,  and is constant in time ,  the field is said to be an electrostatic field . 
an electromagnetic field  -lrb-  also emf or em field  -rrb-  is a physical field produced by electrically charged objects . 
when an em field  -lrb-  see electromagnetic tensor  -rrb-  is not varying in time ,  it may be seen as a purely electrical field or a purely magnetic field ,  or a mixture of both . 
as such ,  they are often written as e -lrb-  x ,  y ,  z ,  t  -rrb-   -lrb-  electric field  -rrb-  and b -lrb-  x ,  y ,  z ,  t  -rrb-   -lrb-  magnetic field  -rrb-  . 
ampere's law roughly states that 'a changing electric field creates a magnetic field' . 
the force created by the electric field is much stronger than the force created by the magnetic field . 
the electromagnetic field may be thought of in a more 'coarse' way . 
a common misunderstanding is that  -lrb-  a  -rrb-  the quanta of the fields act in the same manner as  -lrb-  b  -rrb-  the charged particles that generate the fields . 
however ,  if either the electric or magnetic field has a time-dependence ,  then both fields must be considered together as a coupled electromagnetic field using maxwell's equations . 
from a classical perspective in the history of electromagnetism ,  the electromagnetic field can be regarded as a smooth ,  continuous field ,  propagated in a wavelike manner; whereas from the perspective of quantum field theory ,  the field is seen as quantized ,  being composed of individual particles . 
there are different mathematical ways of representing the electromagnetic field . 
when a field travels across to different media ,  the properties of the field change according to the various boundary conditions . 
the empire state building was the first building to have more than 100 floors . 
in december 1975, the observation deck was opened on the 110th floor of the twin towers ,  significantly higher than the 86th floor observatory on the empire state . 
the height of the empire state building ,  to its 102nd floor ,  is  ,  including its pinnacle . 
the airships would have been moored to the spire at the equivalent of the building's 106th floor . 
on july 28, 1945, a b-25 mitchell bomber crashed into the north side of the empire state building ,  between the 79th and 80th floors . 
the new one world trade center surpassed the empire state building as the tallest leed-certified building when it opened in 2014.
in 1961, the same year that helmsley ,  wien ,  and malkin had purchased the empire state building ,  the port authority of new york and new jersey formally backed plans for a new world trade center in lower manhattan . 
on the 102nd floor of the empire state building  -lrb-  formerly the 101st floor  -rrb-  ,  there is a door with stairs ascending to the 103rd floor  -lrb-  formerly the 102nd  -rrb-  . 
following the september 11 attacks in 2001, it was again the tallest building in new york until the new one world trade center was completed in april 2012.
the empire state building is located on the west side of fifth avenue in manhattan ,  between 33rd and 34th streets . 
the empire state building is a 102-story art deco skyscraper in midtown manhattan ,  new york city . 
while plans for the empire state building were being finalized ,  an intense competition in new york for the title of `` world's tallest building '' was underway . 
only a few broadcasters renewed their leases in the empire state building . 
the empire state building's art deco design is typical of pre–world war ii architecture in new york . 
the lack of renters led new yorkers to deride the building as the `` empty state building '' . 
the hotel on the site of today's empire state building closed on may 3, 1929.
according to `` the new york times '' ,  builders and real estate speculators predicted that the empire state building would be the world's tallest building `` for many years '' ,  thus ending the great new york city skyscraper rivalry . 
as the tallest building in the world ,  at that time ,  and the first one to exceed 100 floors ,  the empire state building became an icon of the city and ,  ultimately ,  of the nation . 
the site of the empire state building ,  located on the west side of fifth avenue between west 33rd and 34th streets ,  was originally part of an early 18th century farm . 
the empire state inc .  consortium was announced to the public in august 1929.
the empire state building stood as the world's tallest building for nearly 40 years until the completion of the world trade center's north tower in lower manhattan in late 1970.
the empire state building's opening coincided with the great depression in the united states ,  and as a result much of its office space was vacant from its opening . 
bryant park and the new york public library main branch are located six blocks north of the empire state building ,  on the block bounded by fifth avenue ,  sixth avenue ,  40th street ,  and 42nd street . 
with the destruction of the world trade center in the september 11 attacks in 2001, the empire state building again became the tallest building in new york city ,  but was only the second-tallest building in the americas after the willis tower in chicago . 
the empire state building celebrated its 50th anniversary on may 1, 1981, with a much-publicized ,  but poorly received ,  laser light show ,  as well as an `` empire state building week '' that ran through to may 8.
it also praised the of proposed floor space near `` one of the busiest sections in the world '' . 
capital improvements were made to the empire state building during the early to mid-1990s at a cost of $55 million . 
galton published his observations and conclusions in his book `` inquiries into human faculty and its development '' . 
eugenics also had a place in medicine . 
galton defined eugenics as `` the study of all agencies under human control which can improve or impair the racial quality of future generations '' . 
in his 2003 book `` enough: staying human in an engineered age '' ,  environmental ethicist bill mckibben argued at length against germinal choice technology and other advanced biotechnological strategies for human enhancement . 
he was supported in part by the fact that francis galton ,  the father of eugenics ,  also had medical training . 
the concept predates this coinage ,  with plato suggesting applying the principles of selective breeding to humans around 400 bce . 
however ,  it is still problematic because it challenges the idea of human equality and opens up new forms of discrimination and stigmatization for those who do not want ,  or cannot afford ,  the technology . 
the term `` eugenics '' and its modern field of study were first formulated by francis galton in 1883, drawing on the recent work of his half-cousin charles darwin . 
pleiotropy occurs when one gene influences multiple ,  seemingly unrelated phenotypic traits ,  an example being phenylketonuria ,  which is a human disease that affects multiple systems but is caused by one gene defect . 
in the decades following world war ii ,  with the institution of human rights ,  many countries gradually began to abandon eugenics policies ,  although some western countries ,  among them the united states and sweden ,  continued to carry out forced sterilizations . 
the concept of positive eugenics to produce better human beings has existed at least since plato suggested selective mating to produce a guardian class . 
the idea of a modern project of improving the human population through a statistical understanding of heredity used to encourage good breeding was originally developed by francis galton and ,  initially ,  was closely linked to darwinism and his theory of natural selection . 
by the end of world war ii ,  many discriminatory eugenics laws were abandoned ,  having become associated with nazi germany . 
the first formal negative eugenics ,  that is a legal provision against the birth of allegedly inferior human beings ,  was promulgated in western european culture by the christian council of agde in 506, which forbade marriage between cousins . 
in october 2015, the united nations' international bioethics committee wrote that the ethical problems of human genetic engineering should not be confused with the ethical problems of the 20th century eugenics movements . 
eugenic policies could also lead to loss of genetic diversity ,  in which case a culturally accepted `` improvement '' of the gene pool could very likely—as evidenced in numerous instances in isolated island populations —result in extinction due to increased vulnerability to disease ,  reduced ability to adapt to environmental change ,  and other factors both known and unknown . 
alternatively ,  gene selection rather than `` people selection '' has recently been made possible through advances in genome editing ,  leading to what is sometimes called new eugenics ,  also known as neo-eugenics ,  consumer eugenics ,  or liberal eugenics . 
electronic mail  -lrb-  email or e-mail  -rrb-  is a method of exchanging messages  -lrb-  `` mail ''  -rrb-  between people using electronic devices . 
an internet e-mail consists of an envelope and content; the content in turn consists of a header and a body . 
electronic mail has been most commonly called `` email '' or `` e-mail '' since around 1993, but variations of the spelling have been used:
international email ,  with internationalized email addresses using utf-8, has been standardized ,  but it has not been widely adopted . 
the history of modern internet email services reaches back to the early arpanet ,  with standards for encoding email messages published as early as 1973  -lrb-  rfc 561 -rrb- . 
the basic internet email message format is now defined by rfc 5322, with encoding of non-ascii data and multimedia content attachments being defined in rfc 2045 through rfc 2049, collectively called `` multipurpose internet mail extensions '' or `` mime '' . 
in south korea ,  emoticons use korean hangul letters ,  and the western style is rarely used . 
this smiley presumably inspired many later emoticons; the most basic graphic emoticon that depicts this is ,  in fact ,  a small yellow smiley face . 
users from japan popularized a style of emoticons  -lrb-   ,  `` kaomoji ,  lit . `` 
usually ,  emoticons in western style have the eyes on the left ,  followed by nose and the mouth . 
codice_19 is also sometimes used to depict shock . 
some smiley faces were present in unicode since 1.1.0, including a white frowning face ,  a white smiling face ,  and a black smiling face . 
scott fahlman was the first documented person to use the emoticons codice_1 and codice_2, with a specific suggestion that they be used to express emotion . 
the emoticon codice_1 was also filed in 2006 and registered in 2008 as a european community trademark  -lrb-  ctm  -rrb-  . 
these emoticons are usually found in a format similar to codice_49.
the first ascii emoticons ,  codice_1 and codice_2, were written by scott fahlman in 1982, but emoticons actually originated on the plato iv computer system in 1972.
in western countries ,  emoticons are usually written at a right angle to the direction of the text . 
an equal sign is often used for the eyes in place of the colon ,  seen as codice_29, without changing the meaning of the emoticon . 
similar-looking emoticons were used on the byte information exchange  -lrb-  bix  -rrb-  around the same time . 
the 'shrug' emoticon ,  codice_28, uses the glyph ツ from the japanese katakana writing system . 
the character 囧  -lrb-  u+56e7 -rrb- ,  which means `` bright '' ,  is also used in the chinese computing community for a frowning face . 
english-language anime forums adopted those japanese-style emoticons that could be used with the standard ascii characters available on western keyboards . 
the terms of the settlement were undisclosed ,  but walmart continued to use its smiley design intermittently and returned to using it in a major marketing role in 2016.
the character existed in oracle bone script ,  but its use as emoticon was documented as early as january 20, 2005.
the two character version codice_8 which omits the nose is also very popular . 
it is also common for the user to replace the rounded brackets used for the mouth with other ,  similar brackets ,  such as codice_36 instead of codice_37.
the popular computer and mobile app skype uses these in a separate keyboard or by typing the code of the `` emoticon videos '' between parentheses . 
her erdős number is 4, and her bacon number is 2.
a small number of people are connected to both erdős and bacon and thus have an erdős–bacon number ,  which combines the two numbers by taking their sum . 
physicist stephen hawking had an erdős–bacon–sabbath number of 8, and natalie portman has one of 11  -lrb-  her erdős number is 5 -rrb- . 
computational biologist lior pachter has an erdős number of 2.
the erdős number was most likely first defined in print by casper goffman ,  an analyst whose own erdős number is 2.
the median erdős number among fields medalists is as low as 3.
there are no fields medalists with erdős number 1, however endre szemerédi is an abel prize laureate with erdős number 1.
the erdős number project web site says:
it was created in 1994, 25 years after goffman's article on the erdős number . 
the “erdős number of the second kind” restricts assignment of erdős numbers to papers with only two collaborators . 
in 2004 william tozier ,  a mathematician with an erdős number of 4, auctioned off a co-authorship on ebay ,  hence providing the buyer with an erdős number of 5.
a number of variations on the concept have been proposed to apply to other fields . 
in some countries ,  vouchers only exist for tuition at private schools . 
a school voucher ,  also called an education voucher ,  in a voucher system ,  is a certificate of government funding for a student at a school chosen by the student or the student's parents . 
today ,  all modern voucher programs prohibit racial discrimination . 
white's works created . 
in 1959, white edited and updated `` the elements of style '' . 
in the late 1930s ,  white turned his hand to children's fiction on behalf of a niece ,  janice hart white . 
white was born in mount vernon ,  new york ,  the youngest child of samuel tilly white ,  the president of a piano firm ,  and jessie hart white ,  the daughter of scottish-american painter william hart . 
in 1949, white published `` here is new york '' ,  a short book based on an article he had been commissioned to write for `` holiday '' . 
elwyn brooks white  -lrb-  july 11, 1899 – october 1, 1985 -rrb- was an american writer and a world federalist . 
an evangelist is part of the quorum of seventy evangelists . 
in 1839, joseph smith equated an evangelist with the office of patriarch ,  stating that `` an evangelist is an patriarch '' . 
in the community of christ ,  which was formerly known as the reorganized church of jesus christ of latter day saints  -lrb-  rlds church  -rrb-  ,  an evangelist is an office in the melchizedec order of the priesthood . 
all evangelists belong to the order of evangelists ,  which is directed by the presiding evangelist  -lrb-  currently jane m .  gardner ,  since 2016 -rrb- . 
it is not known who first identified the term `` evangelist '' with the office of patriarch . 
the elegiac couplet is presumed to be the oldest greek form of epodic poetry  -lrb-  a form where a later verse is sung in response or comment to a previous one  -rrb-  . 
like many greek forms ,  elegy was adapted by the romans for their own literature . 
but it is the elegists of the mid-to-late first century bce who are most commonly associated with the distinctive roman form of the elegiac couplet . 
the elegiac couplet is a poetic form used by greek lyric poets for a variety of themes usually of smaller scale than the epic . 
the form continued to be popular throughout the greek period and treated a number of different themes . 
as with the english heroic ,  each couplet usually makes sense on its own ,  while forming part of a larger work . 
arguably the most famous elegiac couplet in latin is his two-line 85th poem `` odi et amo '':
a related unit ,  the exbibyte ,  using a binary prefix ,  is equal to  -lrb-  = ,  about 15% larger . 
an era is a span of time defined for the purposes of chronology or historiography ,  as in the regnal eras in the history of a given monarchy ,  a calendar era used for a given calendar ,  or the geological eras defined for the history of earth . 
in chronology ,  an era is the highest level for the organization of the measurement of time . 
this concept is commonly referred to as the `` end of the world '' or `` end times '' . 
in bahá'í belief ,  creation has neither a beginning nor an end . 
the idea of a messianic age has a prominent place in jewish thought and is incorporated as part of the end of days . 
christian eschatology looks to study and discuss matters such as death and the afterlife ,  heaven and hell ,  the second coming of jesus ,  the resurrection of the dead ,  the rapture ,  the tribulation ,  millennialism ,  the end of the world ,  the last judgment ,  and the new heaven and new earth in the world to come . 
in judaism ,  the end times are usually called the `` end of days ''  -lrb-  `` aḥarit ha-yamim '' ,  אחרית הימים  -rrb-  ,  a phrase that appears several times in the tanakh . 
jewish eschatology is concerned with events that will happen in the end of days ,  according to the hebrew bible and jewish thought . 
most modern eschatology and apocalypticism ,  both religious and secular ,  involve the violent disruption or destruction of the world; whereas christian and jewish eschatologies view the end times as the consummation or perfection of god's creation of the world ,  albeit with violent overtures ,  such as the great tribulation . 
most hindus believe that the current period is the kali yuga ,  the last of four `` yuga '' that make up the current age . 
judaism addresses the end times in the book of daniel and numerous other prophetic passages in the hebrew scriptures ,  and also in the talmud ,  particularly tractate avodah zarah . 
these include the council of jerusalem  -lrb-  c .  50 -rrb- ,  the council of rome  -lrb-  155 -rrb- ,  the second council of rome  -lrb-  193 -rrb- ,  the council of ephesus  -lrb-  193 -rrb- ,  the council of carthage  -lrb-  251 -rrb- ,  the council of iconium  -lrb-  258 -rrb- ,  the council of antioch  -lrb-  264 -rrb- ,  the councils of arabia  -lrb-  246–247 -rrb- ,  the council of elvira  -lrb-  306 -rrb- ,  the council of carthage  -lrb-  311 -rrb- ,  the synod of neo-caesarea  -lrb-  c .  314 -rrb- ,  the council of ancyra  -lrb-  314 -rrb- and the council of arles  -lrb-  314 -rrb- . 
the church of the east accepts two ecumenical councils ,  the first council of nicaea and the first council of constantinople . 
oriental orthodoxy accepts three ecumenical councils ,  the first council of nicaea ,  the first council of constantinople ,  and the council of ephesus . 
church councils were ,  from the beginning ,  bureaucratic exercises . 
the eastern orthodox church accepts seven ecumenical councils ,  with the disputed council in trullo—rejected by catholics—being incorporated into ,  and considered as a continuation of ,  the third council of constantinople . 
it is their position that ,  since the seventh ecumenical council ,  there has been no synod or council of the same scope . 
eastern orthodox catechisms teach that there are seven ecumenical councils and there are feast days for seven ecumenical councils . 
church councils were traditional and the ecumenical councils were a continuation of earlier councils  -lrb-  also known as synods  -rrb-  held in the empire before christianity was made legal . 
of the seven councils recognised in whole or in part by both the roman catholic and the eastern orthodox church as ecumenical ,  all were called by a roman emperor . 
this too ceased to be considered an ecumenical council . 
both the roman catholic and eastern orthodox churches recognize seven councils in the early centuries of the church ,  but roman catholics also recognize fourteen councils in later times called or confirmed by the pope . 
the roman catholic church recognizes as ecumenical various councils held later than the first council of ephesus  -lrb-  after which churches out of communion with the holy see because of the nestorian schism did not participate  -rrb-  ,  later than the council of chalcedon  -lrb-  after which there was no participation by churches that rejected dyophysitism  -rrb-  ,  later than the second council of nicaea  -lrb-  after which there was no participation by the eastern orthodox church  -rrb-  ,  and later than the fifth council of the lateran  -lrb-  after which groups that adhered to protestantism did not participate  -rrb-  . 
in the history of christianity ,  the first seven ecumenical councils ,  from the first council of nicaea  -lrb-  325 -rrb- to the second council of nicaea  -lrb-  787 -rrb- ,  represent an attempt to reach an orthodox consensus and to unify christendom . 
besides exoplanets ,  there are also rogue planets ,  which do not orbit any star . 
an exoplanet  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  or extrasolar planet is a planet outside the solar system . 
initially ,  most known exoplanets were massive planets that orbited very close to their parent stars . 
kepler-16 contains the first discovered planet that orbits around a binary main-sequence star system . 
more extrasolar planets were later detected by observing the variation in a star's apparent luminosity as an orbiting planet transited in front of it . 
the least massive planet known is draugr  -lrb-  also known as psr b1257+12 a or psr b1257+12 b  -rrb-  ,  which is about twice the mass of the moon . 
on 23 july 2015, nasa announced kepler-452b ,  a near-earth-size planet orbiting the habitable zone of a g2-type star . 
the nearest exoplanet is proxima centauri b ,  located 4.2 light-years  -lrb-  1.3 parsecs  -rrb-  from earth and orbiting proxima centauri ,  the closest star to the sun . 
goldman was released on september 27, 1919.
emma goldman was born on june 27, 1869.
they shared a residence there with friends of goldman . 
the jury found goldman and berkman guilty . 
goldman suffered during his long absence . 
in 1906, goldman founded the anarchist journal `` mother earth '' . 
after czolgosz was executed ,  goldman withdrew from the world . 
berkman and goldman came together through the homestead strike . 
emma goldman  -lrb-   ,  1869may 14, 1940 -rrb- was an anarchist political activist and writer . 
goldman spoke and wrote extensively on a wide variety of issues . 
goldman was also an outspoken critic of prejudice against homosexuals . 
goldman returned to the us and continued speaking to large audiences . 
goldman has been honored by a number of organizations named in her memory . 
on saturday ,  february 17, 1940, goldman suffered a debilitating stroke . 
the book enthralled goldman and remained a source of inspiration throughout her life . 
meanwhile ,  goldman had begun a friendship with berkman ,  whom she affectionately called sasha . 
on her first day in the city ,  goldman met two men who greatly changed her life . 
goldman felt that the encounter forever soured her interactions with men . 
two years later ,  goldman began feeling frustrated with lecture audiences . 
ethel mannin's 1941 novel `` red rose '' is also based on goldman's life . 
goldman initially viewed the bolshevik revolution in a positive light . 
goldman ,  meanwhile ,  decided to help fund the scheme through prostitution . 
goldman later wrote: `` whatever love she had had died with the young man to whom she had been married at the age of fifteen . `` 
convinced goldman was involved in the plot ,  police raided her apartment . 
goldman viewed the state as essentially and inevitably a tool of control and domination . 
goldman found it difficult to acclimate to the german leftist community in berlin . 
goldman's relationships with her elder half-sisters ,  helena and lena ,  were a study in contrasts . 
alternating between lectures and midwifery ,  goldman conducted the first cross-country tour by an anarchist speaker . 
goldman believed that the economic system of capitalism was incompatible with human liberty . 
goldman was well known during her life ,  described as—among other things— ''the most dangerous woman in america '' . 
to make money ,  goldman decided to pursue the medical work she had studied in prison . 
after initially promising a court fight ,  goldman decided not to appeal his ruling . 
goldman was a committed war resister ,  believing that wars were fought by the state on behalf of capitalists . 
in 1970, dover press reissued goldman's biography ,  `` living my life '' ,  and in 1972, feminist writer alix kates shulman issued a collection of goldman's writing and speeches ,  `` red emma speaks '' . 
her faith in the movement unshaken ,  goldman returned to london as an official representative of the cnt-fai . 
delivering lectures and giving interviews ,  goldman enthusiastically supported the spanish anarcho-syndicalists . 
uk punk band martha's song `` goldman's detective agency '' reimagines goldman as a private detective investigating police and political corruption . 
there are few variable stars in equuleus . 
it is also very faint ,  having no stars brighter than the fourth magnitude . 
the brightest star in equuleus is alpha equulei ,  traditionally called kitalpha ,  a yellow star magnitude 3.9, 186 light-years from earth . 
the bread which we break ,  is it not the `` communion '' of the body of christ ? 
they also call the eucharist the breaking of bread or the lord's supper . 
in the reformed churches the eucharist is variously administered . 
in the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints the term `` the sacrament '' is used of the rite . 
in the catholic church the eucharist is considered as a sacrament ,  according to the church the eucharist is `` the source and summit of the christian life . `` 
this was done in 2009 by the church of england . 
some churches of christ ,  among others ,  use grape juice and unleavened wafers or unleavened bread and practice open communion . 
the armenian apostolic church ,  like the latin church ,  uses unleavened bread ,  whereas the greek orthodox church utilizes leavened bread in their celebration . 
the eucharist is mentioned again in chapter 14.
lutherans believe that the body and blood of christ are `` truly and substantially present in ,  with ,  and under the forms '' of the consecrated bread and wine  -lrb-  the elements  -rrb-  ,  so that communicants eat and drink the body and blood of christ himself as well as the bread and wine in this sacrament . 
many non-denominational christians ,  including the churches of christ ,  receive communion every sunday . 
the eucharist  -lrb-  ; also called holy communion or the lord's supper ,  among other names  -rrb-  is a christian rite that is considered a sacrament in most churches ,  and as an ordinance in others . 
churches such as the roman catholic and the eastern orthodox churches practice closed communion under normal circumstances . 
the elements of the eucharist ,  sacramental bread  -lrb-  leavened or unleavened  -rrb-  and sacramental wine  -lrb-  or by some grape juice  -rrb-  ,  are consecrated on an altar  -lrb-  or a communion table  -rrb-  and consumed thereafter . 
for in the blessed eucharist is contained the whole spiritual good of the church ,  namely christ himself ,  our pasch . `` 
most protestant communities including congregational churches ,  the church of the nazarene ,  the assemblies of god ,  methodists ,  most presbyterians ,  anglicans ,  and churches of christ and other non-denominational churches practice various forms of open communion . 
traditional mennonite and german baptist brethren churches such as the church of the brethren churches and congregations have the agape meal ,  footwashing and the serving of the bread and wine two parts to the communion service in the lovefeast . 
the presbyterian church  -lrb-  usa  -rrb-  ,  for instance ,  prescribes `` bread common to the culture '' . 
the term divine service  -lrb-  german: gottesdienst  -rrb-  is used in the lutheran churches ,  in addition to the terms `` eucharist '' ,  `` mass '' and `` holy communion '' . 
those protestant churches generally avoid the term `` sacrament '' . 
in the communion meal ,  the members of the mennonite churches renew their covenant with god and with each other . 
'holy communion'  -lrb-  or simply 'communion'  -rrb-  are used by some groups originating in the protestant reformation to mean the entire eucharistic rite . 
the catholic church teaches that jesus is present in a true ,  real and substantial way ,  with his body and his blood ,  with his soul and his divinity under the eucharistic species of bread and wine ,  christ whole and entire ,  god and man . 
some churches use bread without any raising agent  -lrb-  whether leaven or yeast  -rrb-  ,  in view of the use of unleavened bread at jewish passover meals ,  while others use any bread available . 
in influenza epidemics ,  some churches suspend the giving of communion under the form of wine ,  for fear of spreading the disease . 
mass is used in the latin rite of the catholic church ,  the lutheran churches  -lrb-  especially in the church of sweden ,  the church of norway ,  the evangelical lutheran church of finland  -rrb-  ,  by many anglicans  -lrb-  especially those of an anglo-catholic churchmanship  -rrb-  ,  and in some other forms of western christianity . 
among open assemblies ,  also termed plymouth brethren ,  the eucharist is more commonly called the breaking of bread or the lord's supper . 
many christian denominations classify the eucharist as a sacrament . 
the interpretation of christ's words against this old testament background coheres with and supports belief in the real presence of christ in the eucharist . 
the united methodist church practices open communion ,  inviting `` all who intend a christian life ,  together with their children '' to receive communion . 
the term eclipse is most often used to describe either a solar eclipse ,  when the moon's shadow crosses the earth's surface ,  or a lunar eclipse ,  when the moon moves into the earth's shadow . 
for the special cases of solar and lunar eclipses ,  these only happen during an `` eclipse season '' ,  the two times of each year when the plane of the earth's orbit around the sun crosses with the plane of the moon's orbit around the earth . 
this depends on the location of the shadow on the earth and the angle in which it is moving . 
on earth ,  the shadow cast during an eclipse moves very approximately at 1 km per sec . 
this occurs ,  for example ,  during an eclipse of the moon by the earth—producing a faint ,  ruddy illumination of the moon even at totality . 
the unix stream editor ,  sed implemented many of the scripting features of qed that were not supported by ed on unix . 
edlin is a line editor ,  and the only text editor provided with early versions of ms-dos . 
microsoft acquired 86-dos and sold it as ms-dos ,  so edlin was included in v1.0–v5.0 of ms-dos ,  after which the only editor included was the new full-screen ms-dos editor in v6.0–v8.0.
the gaps between letters made simple code that worked in ascii fail on ebcdic . 
the table below shows the `` invariant subset '' of ebcdic ,  which are characters that `` should '' have the same assignments on all ebcdic code pages . 
ebcdic was devised in 1963 and 1964 by ibm and was announced with the release of the ibm system/360 line of mainframe computers . 
all ibm mainframe and midrange peripherals and operating systems use ebcdic as their inherent encoding  -lrb-  with toleration for ascii ,  for example ,  ispf in z/os can browse and edit both ebcdic and ascii encoded files  -rrb-  . 
by using all eight bits ebcdic may have encouraged the use of the eight-bit byte by ibm ,  while ascii was more likely to be adopted by systems with 36 bits  -lrb-  as five seven-bit ascii characters fit into one word  -rrb-  . 
the surface of the rough endoplasmic reticulum  -lrb-  often abbreviated rer or rough er  -rrb-   -lrb-  also called `` granular endoplasmic reticulum ''  -rrb-  is studded with protein-manufacturing ribosomes giving it a `` rough '' appearance  -lrb-  hence its name  -rrb-  . 
the general structure of the endoplasmic reticulum is a network of membranes called cisternae . 
executive order 9066 was a united states presidential executive order signed and issued during world war ii by united states president franklin d .  roosevelt on february 19, 1942.
in february 2012, a major munch exhibition ,  `` edvard munch . 
edvard was related to painter jacob munch and to historian peter andreas munch . 
 ''the scream '' is munch's most famous work ,  and one of the most recognizable paintings in all art . 
the u . s .  copyright representative for the munch museum and the estate of edvard munch is the artists rights society . 
munch's art was highly personalized and he did little teaching . 
when munch died ,  his remaining works were bequeathed to the city of oslo ,  which built the munch museum at tøyen  -lrb-  it opened in 1963 -rrb- . 
in 1881, munch enrolled at the royal school of art and design of kristiania ,  one of whose founders was his distant relative jacob munch . 
munch's works are now represented in numerous major museums and galleries in norway and abroad . 
around the start of the 20th century ,  munch worked to finish the `` frieze '' . 
the 1910 painting was stolen in 2004 from the munch museum in oslo ,  but recovered in 2006 with limited damage . 
munch's younger sister laura was the subject of his 1899 interior `` melancholy: laura '' . 
in december 1889 his father died ,  leaving munch's family destitute . 
 ''the frieze of life '' themes recur throughout munch's work but he especially focused on them in the mid-1890s . 
already ,  munch was showing a reluctance to part with his paintings ,  which he termed his `` children '' . 
in 1896, munch moved to paris ,  where he focused on graphic representations of his `` frieze of life '' themes . 
edvard munch was born in a farmhouse in the village of ådalsbruk in løten ,  united kingdoms of sweden and norway ,  to laura catherine bjølstad and christian munch ,  the son of a priest . 
the berlin critics were beginning to appreciate munch's work even though the public still found his work alien and strange . 
edvard munch  -lrb-  ; ; 12 december 1863 – 23 january 1944 -rrb- was a norwegian painter ,  whose best known work ,  `` the scream '' ,  has become one of the most iconic images of world art . 
three munch works were stolen from the hotel refsnes gods in 2005; they were shortly recovered ,  although one of the works was damaged during the robbery . 
munch's image appears on the norwegian 1,000-kroner note ,  along with pictures inspired by his artwork . 
during these early years ,  munch experimented with many styles ,  including naturalism and impressionism . 
with this painting ,  munch met his stated goal of `` the study of the soul ,  that is to say the study of my own self '' . 
eisa's success was far from guaranteed . 
unlike mca ,  eisa can accept older xt and isa boards — the lines and slots for eisa are a superset of isa . 
these brought eisa nearly to par with mca from a performance standpoint ,  and eisa easily defeated mca in industry support . 
one of the benefits to come out of the eisa standard was a final codification of the standard to which isa slots and cards should be held  -lrb-  in particular ,  clock speed was fixed at an industry standard of 8.33 mhz  -rrb-  . 
the original ibm pc included five 8-bit slots ,  running at the system clock speed of 4.77 mhz . 
the first eisa computer announced was the hp vectra 486 in october 1989.
thus ,  even systems which didn't use the eisa bus gained the advantage of having the isa standardized ,  which contributed to its longevity . 
step 1 is 1d4 - 2.
the setting of earthdawn is the same world as shadowrun  -lrb-  i . e . 
earthdawn is a fantasy role-playing game ,  originally produced by fasa in 1993.
one of the most innovative ideas in `` earthdawn '' is how magical items work . 
living room games last published in 2005 and they no longer have a license with fasa to publish earthdawn material . 
the dice in steps 3 through 13 form the basis of an 11-step cycle . 
in 1999 `` pyramid '' magazine named `` earthdawn '' as one of `` the millennium's most underrated games '' . 
to add 7 steps from then on ,  simply add 1d12.
in 2014, fasa games announced the forthcoming publication of earthdawn fourth edition and launched a successful kickstarter to support the project . 
the game is similar to fantasy games like `` dungeons & dragons '' ,  but draws more inspiration from games like `` runequest '' . 
edi has existed at least since the early 70s ,  and there are many edi standards  -lrb-  including x12, edifact ,  odette ,  etc . 
some major sets of edi standards: many of these standards first appeared in the early to mid 1980s . 
edi documents generally contain the same information that would normally be found in a paper document used for the same organizational function . 
astronauts also used eva in 1973 to repair launch damage to skylab ,  the united states' first space station . 
a `` stand-up '' eva  -lrb-  seva  -rrb-  is when an astronaut does not fully leave a spacecraft ,  but is completely reliant on the spacesuit for environmental support . 
erin brockovich herself had a cameo role as a waitress named julia r . 
brockovich said `` the only difference between here and hinkley is that i saw higher levels here than i saw in hinkley . `` 
masry & vititoe ,  the law firm for which brockovich was a legal clerk ,  received $133.6 million of that settlement ,  and brockovich herself was given a bonus of $2.5 million . 
in june 2009, brockovich began investigating a case of contaminated water in midland ,  texas . 
brockovich's work in bringing litigation against pacific gas and electric was the focus of the 2000 feature film ,  `` erin brockovich '' ,  starring julia roberts in the title role . 
brockovich's book ,  titled `` take it from me: life's a struggle but you can win '' ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  was published in 2001.
96485.33289-lrb- 59 -rrb- c . 
the electrical properties of the two pieces of glass are similar to each other but opposite to those of the two pieces of resin: the glass attracts what the resin repels and repels what the resin attracts . 
see also casimir effect . 
an `` ion '' is an atom  -lrb-  or group of atoms  -rrb-  that has lost one or more electrons ,  giving it a net positive charge  -lrb-  cation  -rrb-  ,  or that has gained one or more electrons ,  giving it a net negative charge  -lrb-  anion  -rrb-  . 
if a body electrified in any manner whatsoever behaves as the glass does ,  that is ,  if it repels the glass and attracts the resin ,  the body is said to be `` vitreously '' electrified ,  and if it attracts the glass and repels the resin it is said to be `` resinously '' electrified . 
thus macroscopic objects tend toward being neutral overall ,  but macroscopic objects are rarely perfectly net neutral . 
this property has been experimentally verified by showing that the charge of `` one '' helium nucleus  -lrb-  two protons and two neutrons bound together in a nucleus and moving around at high speeds  -rrb-  is the same as `` two '' deuterium nuclei  -lrb-  one proton and one neutron bound together ,  but moving much more slowly than they would if they were in a helium nucleus  -rrb-  . 
electric current is the flow of electric charge through an object ,  which produces no net loss or gain of electric charge . 
an electrostatic discharge creates a change in the charge of each of the two objects . 
even when an object's net charge is zero ,  charge can be distributed non-uniformly in the object  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  due to an external electromagnetic field ,  or bound polar molecules  -rrb-  . 
charge is the fundamental property of forms of matter that exhibit electrostatic attraction or repulsion in the presence of other matter . 
a second piece of glass rubbed with a second piece of resin ,  then separated and suspended near the former pieces of glass and resin causes these phenomena:
the state of new york leased the island in 1794 and started to fortify it in 1795.
in 1785, he unsuccessfully attempted to sell the island:
the natural island and contiguous areas comprise the that are part of new york . 
ellis island is in upper new york bay ,  east of liberty state park and north of liberty island ,  in jersey city ,  new jersey ,  with a small section that is part of new york city . 
it was long considered part of new york ,  but a 1998 united states supreme court decision found that most of the island is in new jersey . 
the south side of the island ,  home to the ellis island immigrant hospital ,  is closed to the general public although there are tours of the hospital itself . 
ellis island ,  in upper new york bay ,  was the gateway for over 12 million immigrants to the u . s .  as the united states' busiest immigrant inspection station for over 60 years from 1892 until 1954.
altogether his plays won first prize only five times . 
tragic poets were often mocked by comic poets during the dramatic festivals dionysia and lenaia ,  and euripides was travestied more than most . 
summaries of the transmission are often found in modern editions of the plays ,  three of which are used as sources for this summary
tragic poets in the 5th century competed against one another at the city dionysia ,  each with a tetralogy consisting of three tragedies and a satyr-play . 
euripides first competed in the city dionysia ,  the famous athenian dramatic festival ,  in 455 bc ,  one year after the death of aeschylus ,  and it was not until 441 bc that he won a first prize . 
the textual transmission of the plays from the 5th century bc ,  when they were first written ,  up until the era of the printing press ,  was largely a haphazard process in which much of euripides' work was lost and corrupted ,  but it also included triumphs by scholars and copyists ,  thanks to whom much was also recovered and preserved . 
in addition to l ,  p and many other medieval manuscripts ,  there are also fragments of plays recorded on papyrus . 
p contains all the extant plays of euripides ,  l is missing `` the trojan women '' and latter part of `` the bacchae '' . 
see chronology for details about his style in the original greek . 
aeschylus and sophocles were innovative ,  but euripides had arrived at a position in the `` ever-changing genre '' where he could move easily between tragic ,  comic ,  romantic and political effects ,  a versatility that appears in individual plays and also over the course of his career . 
elizabeth died soon after their return home . 
during the trip the sisters acted out some of their gondal characters . 
in 1846, the sisters' poems were published in one volume as `` poems by currer ,  ellis ,  and acton bell '' . 
the three remaining sisters and their brother patrick branwell were thereafter educated at home by their father and aunt elizabeth branwell ,  their mother's sister . 
emily brontë never knew the extent of fame she achieved with her only novel ,  as she died a year after its publication ,  aged 30.
it has also been suggested that ,  though less likely ,  the letter could have been intended for anne brontë ,  who was already writing `` the tenant of wildfell hall '' ,  her second novel . 
although a letter from her publisher indicates that emily had begun to write a second novel ,  the manuscript has never been found . 
emily brontë's `` wuthering heights '' was first published in london in 1847 by thomas cautley newby ,  appearing as the first two volumes of a three-volume set that included anne brontë's `` agnes grey '' . 
emily jane brontë  -lrb-   ,  ; 30 july 1818 – 19 december 1848 -rrb- was an english novelist and poet who is best known for her only novel ,  `` wuthering heights '' ,  now considered a classic of english literature . 
in a landmark paper published in 1982, jack sepkoski and david m .  raup identified five mass extinctions . 
despite the popularization of these five events ,  there is no definite line separating them from other extinction events; using different methods of calculating an extinction's impact can lead to other events featuring in the top five . 
edward elmer smith was born in sheboygan ,  wisconsin on may 2, 1890, to fred jay smith and caroline mills smith ,  both staunch presbyterians of british ancestry . 
edward elmer smith  -lrb-  may 2, 1890 – august 31, 1965 -rrb- ,  better known by his pen name e .  e .  `` doc '' smith ,  was an american food engineer  -lrb-  specializing in doughnut and pastry mixes  -rrb-  and science-fiction author ,  best known for the `` lensman '' and `` skylark '' series . 
the recent death of his father may have also influenced his behavior . 
galois' fatal duel took place on 30 may . 
in his last letter to chevalier and attached manuscripts ,  the second of three ,  he made basic studies of linear groups over finite fields:
he also introduced the concept of a finite field  -lrb-  also known as a galois field in his honor  -rrb-  ,  in essentially the same form as it is understood today . 
his work has been compared to that of niels henrik abel ,  another mathematician who died at a very young age ,  and much of their work had significant overlap . 
while many mathematicians before galois gave consideration to what are now known as groups ,  it was galois who was the first to use the word `` group ''  -lrb-  in french `` groupe ''  -rrb-  in a sense close to the technical sense that is understood today ,  making him among the founders of the branch of algebra known as group theory . 
he died at age 20 from wounds suffered in a duel . 
the third was an important one in number theory ,  in which the concept of a finite field was first articulated . 
what is known is that five days before his death ,  he wrote a letter to chevalier which clearly alludes to a broken love affair . 
from the closing lines of a letter from galois to his friend auguste chevalier ,  dated may 29, 1832, two days before galois' death:
some have proposed that the work was written before the `` annales '' ,  and others have said that the work was written after scipio's 201 bc triumph that followed the battle of zama  -lrb-  202 bc  -rrb-  . 
a copy of the work is among the latin rolls of the herculaneum library . 
the `` sota '' was a poem ,  potentially of some length ,  named after the greek poet sotades . 
ennius's `` scipio '' was a work  -lrb-  possibly a panegyric poem  -rrb-  that apparently celebrated the life and deeds of scipio africanus . 
although only fragments of his works survive ,  his influence in latin literature was significant ,  particularly in his use of greek literary models . 
the `` annales '' was an epic poem in fifteen books ,  later expanded to eighteen ,  covering roman history from the fall of troy in 1184 bc down to the censorship of cato the elder in 184 bc . 
eris  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` strife ''  -rrb-  is the greek goddess of strife and discord . 
she also has a son whom she named strife . 
<poem>so ,  after all ,  there was not one kind of strife alone ,  but all over the earth there are two . 
enyo is mentioned in book 5, and zeus sends strife to rouse the achaeans in book 11, of the same work . 
millay died at her home on october 19, 1950.
after her graduation from vassar in 1917, millay moved to new york city . 
millay's sister norma and her husband ,  the painter and actor charles frederick ellis ,  moved to steepletop after millay's death . 
after graduating from vassar ,  millay moved to greenwich village . 
in 1925, boissevain and millay bought steepletop near austerlitz ,  new york ,  which had been a blueberry farm . 
milford would then go on to edit and write an introduction for a collection of millay's poems called `` the selected poetry of edna st .  vincent millay . `` 
edna st .  vincent millay  -lrb-  february 22, 1892 – october 19, 1950 -rrb- was an american poet and playwright . 
millay entered vassar college in 1913 when she was 21 years old ,  later than usual . 
details of millay's life were compiled by biographer nancy milford in the book titled `` savage beauty: the life of edna st vincent millay '' ,  published in 2001.
william graham sumner proposed two different definitions . 
the term `` ethnocentrism '' was coined by ludwig gumplowicz and subsequently employed by social scientist william g .  sumner . 
this also happens when a dominant group may perceive the new members as a threat . 
the first is in-group consciousness ,  a sense of communal interests found even in sub-human animals ,  but the second arises from the processes of socialization and enculturation and has no counterpart among sub-human groups . 
it's theorized that in order to maintain that positive view ,  people make social comparisons that cast competing cultural groups in an unfavorable light . 
william g .  sumner defined ethnocentrism as `` the technical name for the view of things in which one's own group is the center of everything ,  and all others are scaled and rated with reference to it . `` 
eskilstuna municipality  -lrb-  `` eskilstuna kommun ''  -rrb-  is a municipality in södermanland county in southeast sweden ,  between lake mälaren and lake hjälmaren . 
