tcm distinguishes many kinds of qi  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
it is also known to be the most difficult aspect of practicing tcm . 
tcm has been the subject of controversy within china . 
in tcm ,  `` pattern ''  -lrb-  证 ,    -rrb-  refers to a `` pattern of disharmony '' or `` functional disturbance '' within the functional entities the tcm model of the body is composed of . 
qi is said to circulate in the meridians . 
tcm uses special terms for qi running inside of the blood vessels and for qi that is distributed in the skin ,  muscles ,  and tissues between those . 
in tcm ,  a disease has two aspects: `` bìng '' and `` zhèng '' . 
tcm also identifies drugs believed to treat these specific symptom combinations ,  i . e .  ,  to reinforce yin and yang . 
  -rrb-  ,  typical disharmony patterns are recognized; for example: qi vacuity and qi stagnation in the case of qi; blood vacuity ,  blood stasis ,  and blood heat in the case of xuĕ; spleen qi vacuity ,  spleen yang vacuity ,  spleen qi vacuity with down-bearing qi ,  spleen qi vacuity with lack of blood containment ,  cold-damp invasion of the spleen ,  damp-heat invasion of spleen and stomach in case of the spleen zàng; wind/cold/damp invasion in the case of the meridians . 
for each of the functional entities  -lrb-  qi ,  xuĕ ,  zàng-fǔ ,  meridians etc . 
just as the qi held by each of the zang-fu organs ,  this is considered to be part of the 'principal' qi  -lrb-    -rrb-  of the body  -lrb-  also called 真氣  ,  ‘’true‘’ qi ,  or 原氣  ,  ‘’original‘’ qi  -rrb-  . 
they can also transform from one into another . 
in the 1950s ,  the chinese government promoted a systematized form of tcm . 
the zàng-fǔ are also connected to the twelve standard meridians–each yang meridian is attached to a fǔ organ ,  and five of the yin meridians are attached to a zàng . 
the zàng-fǔ  -lrb-    -rrb-  constitute the centre piece of tcm's systematization of bodily functions . 
in general ,  disease is perceived as a disharmony  -lrb-  or imbalance  -rrb-  in the functions or interactions of yin ,  yang ,  qi ,  xuĕ ,  zàng-fǔ ,  meridians etc . 
the process of determining which actual pattern is on hand is called 辩证  -lrb-   ,  usually translated as `` pattern diagnosis '' ,  `` pattern identification '' or `` pattern discrimination ''  -rrb-  . 
there are also three special pattern diagnosis systems used in case of febrile and infectious diseases only  -lrb-  `` six channel system '' or `` six division pattern '' 六经辩证 ,  ; `` wei qi ying xue system '' or `` four division pattern '' 卫气营血辩证 ,  ; `` san jiao system '' or `` three burners pattern '' 三焦辩证 ,    -rrb-  . 
even if they could agree ,  the tcm theories are so nebulous that no amount of scientific study will enable tcm to offer rational care . `` 
see sigma bonds and pi bonds for lcao-description of such bonding . 
a coordinate covalent bond is a covalent bond in which the two shared bonding electrons are from the same one of the atoms involved in the bond . 
bonds of this type are known as polar covalent bonds . 
other types include the double bond ,  the triple bond ,  one- and three-electron bonds ,  the three-center two-electron bond and three-center four-electron bond . 
a less often mentioned type of bonding is `` metallic '' bonding . 
in metallic bonding ,  bonding electrons are delocalized over a lattice of atoms . 
in a simplified view of an `` ionic '' bond ,  the bonding electron is not shared at all ,  but transferred . 
the strength of chemical bonds varies considerably; there are `` strong bonds '' or `` primary bonds '' such as covalent ,  ionic and metallic bonds ,  and `` weak bonds '' or `` secondary bonds '' such as dipole–dipole interactions ,  the london dispersion force and hydrogen bonding . 
the electronegativity difference between the two atoms in these bonds is 0.3 to 1.7.
a polar covalent bond is a covalent bond with a significant ionic character . 
in the  -lrb-  unrealistic  -rrb-  limit of `` pure '' ionic bonding ,  electrons are perfectly localized on one of the two atoms in the bond . 
a chemical bond is an attraction between atoms . 
a triple bond consists of three shared electron pairs ,  forming one sigma and two pi bonds . 
climate is the statistics of weather over long periods of time . 
a polar ice cap ,  or polar ice sheet ,  is a high-latitude region of a planet or moon that is covered in ice . 
regions within north america ,  south america ,  sub-saharan africa ,  australia and east asia are monsoon regimes . 
the simplest classification is that involving air masses . 
climate differs from weather ,  in that weather only describes the short-term conditions of these variables in a given region . 
the lower the value of the index in any given area ,  the drier the area is . 
they are widespread on africa ,  and are found in india ,  the northern parts of south america ,  malaysia ,  and australia . 
if the air mass is colder than the ground below it ,  it is labeled k .  if the air mass is warmer than the ground below it ,  it is labeled w .  while air mass identification was originally used in weather forecasting during the 1950s ,  climatologists began to establish synoptic climatologies based on this idea in 1973.
earth has undergone periodic climate shifts in the past ,  including four major ice ages . 
climate  -lrb-  from ancient greek `` klima '' ,  meaning `` inclination ''  -rrb-  is commonly defined as the weather averaged over a long period . 
the difference between climate and weather is usefully summarized by the popular phrase `` climate is what you expect ,  weather is what you get . `` 
climate change is the variation in global or regional climates over time . 
in the 8th to 13th centuries ad they were followed by an influx of austronesian sailors from southeast asia ,  who had earlier settled nearby madagascar . 
over the centuries ,  the comoros have been settled by a succession of diverse groups from the coast of africa ,  the persian gulf ,  southeast asia and madagascar . 
the mongoose lemur  -lrb-  `` eulemur mongoz ''  -rrb-  ,  also introduced from madagascar by humans ,  can be found on the islands of mohéli and anjouan . 
islets are also scattered in the coastal waters of grande comore ,  anjouan ,  and mohéli . 
a coral reef lies close to shore; the island's capital of mutsamudu is also its main port . 
mohéli's capital is fomboni . 
the comoros archipelago consists of four main islands aligned along a northwest-southeast axis at the north end of the mozambique channel ,  between mozambique and the island of madagascar . 
these include the karthala scops-owl ,  anjouan scops-owl and humblot's flycatcher . 
the most common language is comorian ,  related to swahili . 
the new union of the comoros consists of three islands ,  grande comore ,  anjouan and mohéli . 
president assoumani azali of grande comore is the first union president . 
the accord called for the creation of a new tripartite commission for national reconciliation to develop a `` new comorian entity '' with a new constitution . 
in may 1999, azali decreed a constitution that gave him both executive and legislative powers . 
in april 2004 legislative elections were held ,  completing the implementation of the new constitution . 
the union of comoros abolished the position of prime minister . 
in large part thanks to international aid programs ,  moroni has international telecommunications service . 
more than 99% of freight is transported by sea . 
the isolation of the comoros had made air traffic a major means of transportation . 
comoros was also a member of the oau ,  the edf ,  the world bank ,  the imf ,  the ioc ,  and the african development bank . 
comoros also is a member of the african union ,  the arab league ,  the european development fund ,  the world bank ,  the international monetary fund ,  the indian ocean commission ,  and the african development bank . 
in november 1975, comoros became the 143d member of the un . 
worms spread by exploiting vulnerabilities in operating systems . 
any code designed to do more than spread the worm is typically referred to as the `` payload '' . 
many worms are designed only to spread ,  and do not attempt to change the systems they pass through . 
probably the most common payload for worms is to install a backdoor . 
there's never been a worm with that tough a head or that long a tail ! `` 
type-0 grammars include all formal grammars . 
type-3 grammars generate the regular languages . 
a formal grammar of this type consists of a finite set of `` production rules ''  -lrb-  `` left-hand side '' → `` right-hand side ''  -rrb-  ,  where each side consists of a finite sequence of the following symbols:
type-1 grammars generate context-sensitive languages . 
type-2 grammars generate the context-free languages . 
most color crt displays ,  i . e . 
the cathode-ray tube  -lrb-  crt  -rrb-  is a vacuum tube that contains one or more electron guns and a phosphorescent screen ,  and is used to display images . 
some crt manufacturers ,  both lg display and samsung display ,  innovated crt technology by creating a slimmer tube . 
flood beam crts are small tubes that are arranged as pixels for large screens like jumbotrons . 
leaded crt glass was sold to be remelted into other crts ,  or even broken down and used in road construction . 
the williams tube or williams-kilburn tube was a cathode-ray tube used to electronically store binary data . 
either monochrome or color crts can be used in vector displays ,  and the essential principles of crt design and operation are the same for either type of display; the main difference is in the beam deflection patterns and circuits . 
flat panel displays dropped in price and started significantly displacing cathode-ray tubes in the 2000s ,  with lcd screens exceeding crts in 2008.
as electronic waste ,  crts are considered one of the hardest types to recycle . 
by 1935, he had invented an early all-electronic crt television . 
dixons ceased selling crt televisions in 2006.
in contrast to other crts in this article ,  the williams tube was not a display device ,  and in fact could not be viewed since a metal plate covered its screen . 
older color and monochrome crts may have been manufactured with toxic substances ,  such as cadmium ,  in the phosphors . 
in oscilloscope crts ,  electrostatic deflection is used ,  rather than the magnetic deflection commonly used with television and other large crts . 
when displaying fast one-shot events ,  the electron beam must deflect very quickly ,  with few electrons impinging on the screen ,  leading to a faint or invisible image on the display . 
crts can emit a small amount of x-ray radiation as a result of the electron beam's bombardment of the shadow mask/aperture grille and phosphors . 
dot pitch defines the maximum resolution of the display ,  assuming delta-gun crts . 
in smaller crts ,  these strips maintain position by themselves ,  but larger aperture-grille crts require one or two crosswise  -lrb-  horizontal  -rrb-  support strips . 
electronics retailers such as best buy steadily reduced store spaces for crts . 
the last known manufacturer of  -lrb-  in this case ,  recycled  -rrb-  crts ceased in 2015.
it was a cold-cathode diode ,  a modification of the crookes tube with a phosphor-coated screen . 
the initial charge on the storage mesh is such as to repel the electrons from the flood gun which are prevented from striking the phosphor screen . 
not all solids are crystals . 
not all crystals have all of these properties . 
the process of crystal formation via mechanisms of crystal growth is called crystallization or solidification . 
anhedral crystals do not ,  usually because the crystal is one grain in a polycrystalline solid . 
crystals can also be formed by biological processes ,  see above . 
likewise ,  if a substance can form crystals ,  it can also form polycrystals . 
these are grouped into 7 crystal systems ,  such as cubic crystal system  -lrb-  where the crystals may form cubes or rectangular boxes ,  such as halite shown at right  -rrb-  or hexagonal crystal system  -lrb-  where the crystals may form hexagons ,  such as ordinary water ice  -rrb-  . 
despite the name ,  lead crystal ,  crystal glass ,  and related products are `` not '' crystals ,  but rather types of glass ,  i . e . 
a single snowflake is a single crystal or a collection of crystals ,  while an ice cube is a polycrystal . 
 ''crystallography '' is the science of measuring the crystal structure  -lrb-  in other words ,  the atomic arrangement  -rrb-  of a crystal . 
for more details on geological crystal formation ,  see above . 
a crystal's habit is its visible external shape . 
the unit cells are stacked in three-dimensional space to form the crystal . 
mosaicity is a spread of crystal plane orientations . 
this is determined by the crystal structure  -lrb-  which restricts the possible facet orientations  -rrb-  ,  the specific crystal chemistry and bonding  -lrb-  which may favor some facet types over others  -rrb-  ,  and the conditions under which the crystal formed . 
the scientific definition of a `` crystal '' is based on the microscopic arrangement of atoms inside it ,  called the crystal structure . 
cytosine can be found as part of dna ,  as part of rna ,  or as a part of a nucleotide . 
when found third in a codon of rna ,  cytosine is synonymous with uracil ,  as they are interchangeable as the third base . 
cytosine  -lrb-  ; c  -rrb-  is one of the four main bases found in dna and rna ,  along with adenine ,  guanine ,  and thymine  -lrb-  uracil in rna  -rrb-  . 
this can lead to a point mutation if not repaired by the dna repair enzymes such as uracil glycosylase ,  which cleaves a uracil in dna . 
in the early 1970s ,  efficient `` ab initio '' computer programs such as atmol ,  gaussian ,  ibmol ,  and polyaytom ,  began to be used to speed `` ab initio '' calculations of molecular orbitals . 
both `` ab initio '' and semi-empirical approaches involve approximations . 
abstracts of many earlier developments in `` ab initio '' theory have been published by schaefer . 
the `` journal of computational chemistry '' was first published in 1980.
the methods used cover both static and dynamic situations . 
ballard . `` 
crash is a novel by english author j .  g .  ballard ,  first published in 1973.
c is an imperative procedural language . 
c has been standardized by the american national standards institute  -lrb-  ansi  -rrb-  since 1989  -lrb-  see ansi c  -rrb-  and subsequently by the international organization for standardization  -lrb-  iso  -rrb-  . 
time the game tracks how much time has been spent playing the game . 
upon defeating surtur and escaping the dungeons ,  the player sits upon the throne ,  completing the game . 
 ''castle of the winds '' also allows the player to restore saved games after dying . 
the player begins in a tiny hamlet ,  near which he/she used to live . 
justification is the part of salvation where god pardons the sin of those who believe in christ . 
reformed theologians believe that god communicates knowledge of himself to people through the word of god . 
reformed christians see the christian church as the community with which god has made the covenant of grace ,  a promise of eternal life and relationship with god . 
the visible church is the institutional body which contains both members of the invisible church as well as those who appear to have faith in christ ,  but are not truly part of god's elect . 
this view is opposed to the arminian view that god's choice of whom to save is conditional or based on his foreknowledge of who would respond positively to god . 
calvinism is named after john calvin . 
in reformed theology ,  the word of god takes several forms . 
sanctification is the part of salvation in which god makes the believer holy ,  by enabling them to exercise greater love for god and for other people . 
sanctification ,  like justification ,  is by faith ,  because doing good works is simply living as the son of god one has become . 
the second channel through which god reveals himself is redemption ,  which is the gospel of salvation from condemnation which is punishment for sin . 
people gain knowledge of god from the bible which cannot be gained in any other way . 
church of tuvalu is the only officially established state church in the calvinist tradition in the world . 
some have also argued that calvinism as a whole stresses the sovereignty or rule of god in all things including salvation . 
for the most part ,  the reformed tradition did not modify the medieval consensus on the doctrine of god . 
god's justice towards and condemnation of sinful people is spoken of by these theologians as out of his love for them and a desire to reconcile them to himself . 
wcrc is the third largest christian communion in the world ,  after the roman catholic church and the eastern orthodox churches . 
reformed theologians teach that sin so affects human nature that they are unable even to exercise faith in christ by their own will . 
the reformed family of churches is one of the largest christian denominations . 
reformed theologians ,  along with other protestants ,  believe salvation from punishment for sin is to be given to all those who have faith in christ . 
christians believe jesus' death and resurrection makes it possible for believers to attain forgiveness for sin and reconciliation with god through the atonement . 
some sets are `` infinite ''; these sets have more than `` n '' elements for any integer `` n '' . 
in mathematics ,  a countable set is a set with the same cardinality  -lrb-  number of elements  -rrb-  as some subset of the set of natural numbers . 
what about sets being naturally `` larger than '' n ? 
consider the sets `` a '' = {1, 2, 3,  .  .  .  } ,  the set of positive integers and `` b '' = {2, 4, 6,  .  .  .  } ,  the set of even positive integers . 
a set is `` countable '' if:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- it is finite ,  or  -lrb-  2 -rrb- it has the same cardinality  -lrb-  size  -rrb-  as the set of natural numbers . 
this is an example of a set of the same size as one of its proper subsets ,  which is impossible for finite sets . 
theorem: z  -lrb-  the set of all integers  -rrb-  and q  -lrb-  the set of all rational numbers  -rrb-  are countable . 
what does it tell us about the size of infinite sets ? 
in other words ,  a set is `` countably infinite '' if it has one-to-one correspondence with the natural number set ,   . 
however ,  not all infinite sets have the same cardinality . 
in 1874, in his first set theory article ,  cantor proved that the set of real numbers is uncountable ,  thus showing that not all infinite sets are countable . 
the cahn–ingold–prelog  -lrb-  cip  -rrb-  sequence rules ,  named for organic chemists robert sidney cahn ,  christopher kelk ingold ,  and vladimir prelog — alternatively termed the cip priority rules ,  `` system '' ,  or `` conventions '' — are a standard process used in organic chemistry to completely and unequivocally name a stereoisomer of a molecule . 
in the catholic church ,  a consecrated virgin ,  is a woman who has been consecrated by the church to a life of perpetual virginity in the service of god . 
in the roman catholic church ,  the twelve apostles are considered to have been the first priests and bishops of the church . 
there are also many pentecostal churches which practice celibate ministry . 
the view of the church is that celibacy is a reflection of life in heaven ,  a source of detachment from the material world which aids in one's relationship with god . 
the laws and traditions founded upon st .  augustine's views of sexuality and women continue to exercise considerable influence over church doctrinal positions regarding the role of women in the church . 
in the early church higher clerics lived in marriages . 
and celibacy is to lead the pure relationship in one's life . 
in contrast ,  saint peter ,  whom the church considers its first pope ,  was married given that he had a mother-in-law whom christ healed  -lrb-  matthew 8 -rrb- . 
they seek a new understanding of celibacy that is focused on god rather than a future marriage or a lifelong vow to the church . 
he equated flesh with woman and spirit with man . 
in his `` tractates on the gospel of john '' ,  augustine ,  commenting on the samaritan woman from john 4:1–42, uses the woman as a figure of the church . 
celibacy not only for religious and monastics  -lrb-  brothers/monks and sisters/nuns  -rrb-  but also for bishops is upheld by the catholic church traditions . 
 ''the second lateran council  -lrb-  1139 -rrb- seems to have enacted the first written law making sacred orders a diriment impediment to marriage for the universal church . `` 
 ''the clergy ,  like plato's guardians ,  were placed in authority .  .  .  by their talent as shown in ecclesiastical studies and administration ,  by their disposition to a life of meditation and simplicity ,  and  .  .  .  by the influence of their relatives with the powers of state and church . 
the protestant reformation rejected celibate life and sexual continence for preachers . 
the reintroduction of a permanent diaconate has permitted the church to allow married men to become deacons but they may not go on to become priests . 
the 2016 welsh government is also a coalition with the liberal democrats and labour with kirsty williams am taking the education portfolio . 
for example ,  helmut kohl's cdu governed for years in coalition with the free democratic party  -lrb-  fdp  -rrb- ; from 1998 to 2005 gerhard schröder's spd was in power with the greens; and from 2009 angela merkel ,  cdu/csu was in power with the fdp . 
 ''grand coalitions '' of the two large parties also occur ,  but these are relatively rare ,  as large parties usually prefer to associate with small ones . 
in germany ,  for instance ,  coalition government is the norm ,  as it is rare for either the christian democratic union of germany together with their partners the christian social union in bavaria  -lrb-  cdu/csu  -rrb-  ,  or the social democratic party of germany  -lrb-  spd  -rrb-  ,  to win an unqualified majority in a national election . 
a unit operation is a physical step in an individual chemical engineering process . 
by 1910, the profession ,  `` chemical engineer , ``  was already in common use in britain and the united states . 
plant construction is coordinated by project engineers and project managers depending on the size of the investment . 
these constraints dictate a plant's choice of process ,  materials and equipment . 
starting from 1888, lewis m .  norton taught at mit the first chemical engineering course in the united states . 
process design requires the definition of equipment types and sizes as well as how they are connected together and the materials of construction . 
icheme likewise helped make unit operations considered essential to the discipline . 
the term compact set is sometimes a synonym for compact space ,  but usually refers to a compact subspace of a topological space . 
various equivalent notions of compactness ,  such as sequential compactness and limit point compactness ,  can be developed in general metric spaces . 
various equivalent notions of compactness ,  including sequential compactness and limit point compactness ,  can be developed in general metric spaces . 
apart from closed and bounded subsets of euclidean space ,  typical examples of compact spaces include spaces consisting not of geometrical points but of functions . 
one such generalization is that a topological space is `` sequentially '' compact if every infinite sequence of points sampled from the space has an infinite subsequence that converges to some point of the space . 
the feminine form is clodia . 
the view that `` clodius '' represents a plebeian or politicized form has been questioned by clodius's chief modern-era biographer . 
cicero was elected consul for the year 63 bc . 
cicero married terentia probably at the age of 27, in 79 bc . 
cicero's case was divided into three parts . 
cicero also had an influence on modern astronomy . 
in 79 bc ,  cicero left for greece ,  asia minor and rhodes . 
however ,  it was octavian's acquiescence that had allowed cicero to be killed ,  as cicero was proscribed by the new triumvirate . 
in the 50s bc ,  cicero's letters to terentia became shorter and colder . 
cicero's exile caused him to fall into depression . 
at the time cicero's popularity as a public figure was unrivalled . 
cicero was born in 106 bc in arpinum ,  a hill town southeast of rome . 
cicero grew up in a time of civil unrest and war . 
cicero has been traditionally considered the master of latin prose ,  with quintilian declaring that cicero was `` not the name of a man ,  but of eloquence itself . `` 
after the conspirators were put to death ,  cicero was proud of his accomplishment . 
cicero refused the invitation because he suspected it would undermine the republic . 
cicero was one of the most viciously and doggedly hunted among the proscribed . 
some suggest that it is not in fact cicero's tomb ,  but a monument built on the spot where cicero was intercepted and assassinated while trying to reach the sea . 
however contemporaneous descriptions of the ruins combined with cicero's own references to his `` pompeianum '' differ ,  making it unlikely that it is cicero's villa . 
in a letter to varro on c .  20 april 46 bc ,  cicero outlined his strategy under caesar's dictatorship . 
cicero's brother quintus wrote in a letter that she was a thrifty housewife . 
cicero and all of his contacts and supporters were numbered among the enemies of the state ,  even though octavian argued for two days against cicero being added to the list . 
marcus tullius cicero  -lrb-  ; ; 3 january 106 bc – 7 december 43 bc  -rrb-  was a roman statesman ,  orator ,  lawyer and philosopher ,  who served as consul in the year 63 bc . 
cicero's cognomen ,  or personal surname ,  comes from the latin for chickpea ,  `` cicer '' . 
consul  -lrb-  abbrev . 
this usage contrasts with modern terminology ,  where a consul is a type of diplomat . 
in reality ,  the first consul ,  bonaparte ,  dominated his two colleagues and held supreme power ,  soon making himself consul for life  -lrb-  1802 -rrb- and eventually ,  in 1804, emperor . 
the unit axial vector
defines the axis of rotation ,  formula_2 = unit vector in direction of r ,  formula_3 = unit vector tangential to the angle . 
the consuls served for only a year  -lrb-  a restriction intended to limit the amassing of power by individuals  -rrb-  and could only rule when they agreed ,  because each consul could veto the other's decision . 
after serving either as quaestor or as aedile ,  a man of 39 years could run for `` praetor '' . 
if one of these two praetors was absent from rome ,  the other would perform the duties of both . 
a consul was escorted by twelve lictors ,  held imperium and wore the toga praetexta . 
at 36 years of age ,  proquaestor could stand for election to one of the `` aedile '' positions . 
a second consulship could only be attempted after an interval of 10 years to prevent one man holding too much power . 
however ,  men of patrician rank could subtract two years from this and other minimum age requirements . 
this later changed ,  and both plebeians and patricians could stand for curule aedileship . 
this office ,  like the tribune ,  did not own `` imperium '' ,  was not escorted by lictors ,  and could not wear the `` toga praetexta '' . 
essentially by definition ,  only one dictator could serve at a time ,  and no dictator could ever be held legally responsible for any action during his time in office for any reason . 
after a term as consul ,  the final step in the cursus honorum was the office of `` censor '' . 
it is now known that there are two kinds of crust: continental crust and oceanic crust . 
continental drift is the theory that the earth's continents have moved over geologic time relative to each other ,  thus appearing to have `` drifted '' across the ocean bed . 
the theory of continental drift was not accepted for many years . 
wegener was the first to use the phrase `` continental drift ''  -lrb-  1912, 1915 -rrb-  -lrb-  in german `` die verschiebung der kontinente '' – translated into english in 1922 -rrb- and formally publish the hypothesis that the continents had somehow `` drifted '' apart . 
formation of new crust then displaces the magnetized crust apart ,  akin to a conveyor belt — hence the name . 
the idea of continental drift has since been subsumed by the theory of plate tectonics ,  which explains that the continents move by riding on plates of the earth's lithosphere . 
the widespread distribution of permo-carboniferous glacial sediments in south america ,  africa ,  madagascar ,  arabia ,  india ,  antarctica and australia was one of the major pieces of evidence for the theory of continental drift . 
his `` principles of physical geology '' ,  ending with a chapter on continental drift ,  was published in 1944.
the british geologist arthur holmes championed the theory of continental drift at a time when it was deeply unfashionable . 
an important conclusion was that along this system ,  new ocean floor was being created ,  which led to the concept of the `` great global rift '' . 
 -lrb-  orange was the lead singer on the top 10 hits `` brick house '' and `` nightshift '' .   -rrb- 
in 1986, the commodores won their first grammy for the song `` nightshift '' . 
commodores is an american funk/soul band ,  which was at its peak in the late 1970s through the mid 1980s . 
the group's most successful period was in the late 1970s and early 1980s when lionel richie was the co-lead singer . 
 ''nightshift '' won the commodores their first grammy for best r&b performance by a duo or group with vocals in 1985.
over 90% of the collagen in the human body ,  however ,  is type i . 
so far ,  28 types of collagen have been identified and described . 
calvin and hobbes is a daily comic strip by american cartoonist bill watterson that was syndicated from november 18, 1985 to december 31, 1995.
bill watterson took two sabbaticals from the daily requirements of producing the calvin and hobbes comic strip . 
for the later sunday strips watterson had 125 colors as well as the ability to fade the colors into each other . 
watterson also lampooned the academic world . 
 ''calvin and hobbes '' has also won several more awards . 
during watterson's first sabbatical from the strip ,  universal press syndicate continued to charge newspapers full price to re-run old `` calvin and hobbes '' strips . 
the final strip ran on sunday ,  december 31, 1995.
there are many recurring gags in the strip ,  some in `` reality '' and others in calvin's imagination . 
watterson used the strip to poke fun at the art world ,  principally through calvin's unconventional creations of snowmen but also through other expressions of childhood art . 
ultimately universal did not approve any products against watterson's wishes ,  understanding that unlike other comic strips ,  it would be near impossible to separate the creator from the strip if watterson chose to walk away . 
the first strip was published on november 18, 1985 in 35 newspapers . 
following his second sabbatical ,  watterson made the decision that he was going to retire from the comic strip entirely . 
watterson admits that calvin and susie have a nascent crush on each other ,  and that susie is inspired by the type of woman whom watterson himself found attractive and eventually married . 
watterson says some fans are angered by the sometimes sardonic way that calvin's parents respond to him . 
watterson took a second sabbatical from april 3 through december 31, 1994.
watterson has expressed admiration for animation as an artform . 
the campaign for real ale  -lrb-  camra  -rrb-  is an independent voluntary consumer organisation headquartered in st albans ,  england ,  which promotes real ale ,  real cider and the traditional british pub . 
on 31 march 2016, founder michael hardman returned to chair a revitalisation project steering group . 
the cno cycle  -lrb-  for carbon–nitrogen–oxygen  -rrb-  is one of the two known sets of fusion reactions by which stars convert hydrogen to helium ,  the other being the proton–proton chain reaction  -lrb-  pp-chain reaction  -rrb-  . 
the reactions are started when one of the reactions in cno-ii results in fluorine-18 and gamma instead of nitrogen-14 and alpha ,  and continues →→→→→→:
the reactions are started when one of the reactions in cno-iii results in fluorine-19 and gamma instead of nitrogen-15 and alpha ,  and continues →→→→→→:
in the cno cycle ,  four protons fuse ,  using carbon ,  nitrogen ,  and oxygen isotopes as catalysts ,  to produce one alpha particle ,  two positrons and two electron neutrinos . 
the limiting  -lrb-  slowest  -rrb-  reaction in the cno-i cycle is the proton capture on  . 
in a minor branch of the above reaction ,  occurring in the sun's core 0.04% of the time ,  the final reaction involving shown above does not produce carbon-12 and an alpha particle ,  but instead produces oxygen-16 and a photon and continues →→→→→→:
the don't pass bet is a no-contract bet . 
the pass line bet is a contract bet . 
the bets include:
in the same way that a come bet is similar to a pass line bet ,  a don't come bet is similar to a don't pass bet . 
the fundamental bet in craps is the pass line bet ,  which is a bet for the shooter to win . 
this bet can only be placed on the numbers 4, 6, 8, and 10.
put bets are better than place bets  -lrb-  to win  -rrb-  when betting more than 5-times odds over the flat bet portion of the put bet . 
a lay bet is the opposite of a buy bet ,  where a player bets on a 7 to roll before the number that is laid . 
a don't pass bet is a bet for the shooter to lose  -lrb-  `` seven out ,  line away ''  -rrb-  and is almost the opposite of the pass line bet . 
 -lrb-  the same applies to `` come '' and `` don't come '' bets ,  discussed below .   -rrb- 
players may bet both the don't come and come on the same roll if desired . 
a put bet is a bet which allows players to increase or make a pass line bet after a point has been established  -lrb-  after come-out roll  -rrb-  . 
the don't pass bet pays even money . 
the shooter is required to make either a pass line bet or a don't pass bet if he wants to shoot . 
the pass line bet pays even money . 
a come bet can be visualized as starting an entirely new pass line bet ,  unique to that player . 
if ,  instead ,  the seven is rolled before the come-bet point ,  the come bet  -lrb-  and any odds bet  -rrb-  loses . 
while acting as the shooter ,  a player must have a bet on the `` pass '' line and/or the `` don't pass '' line . 
the bets are located in the corners behind the pass line ,  and bets may be placed directly by players . 
any player can make a bet on pass or don't pass as long as a point has not been established ,  or come or don't come as long as a point is established . 
winning don't come bets are paid the same as winning don't pass bets: even money for the original bet and true odds for the odds lay . 
if the come-bet point is rolled on the come-out roll ,  the odds do not win but the come bet does and the odds bet is returned  -lrb-  along with the come bet and its payoff  -rrb-  . 
put betting also allows a player to bet on a come and take odds immediately on a point number without a come bet point being established . 
there are also `` place bets to lose '' . 
many players will use a come bet as `` insurance '' against sevening out: if the shooter rolls a seven ,  the come bet pays 1:1, offsetting the loss of the pass line bet . 
clausewitz had many aphorisms ,  of which the most famous is `` war is the continuation of politics by other means . `` 
clausewitz served in the rhine campaigns  -lrb-  1793–1794 -rrb- including the siege of mainz ,  when the prussian army invaded france during the french revolution ,  and fought in the napoleonic wars from 1806 to 1815.
in 1815 the russian-german legion became integrated into the prussian army and clausewitz re-entered prussian service as a colonel . 
carl philipp gottfried  -lrb-  or gottlieb  -rrb-  von clausewitz  -lrb-  ; 1 june 1780 – 16 november 1831 -rrb- was a prussian general and military theorist who stressed the `` moral ''  -lrb-  meaning ,  in modern terms ,  psychological  -rrb-  and political aspects of war . 
the word `` strategy '' had only recently come into usage in modern europe ,  and clausewitz's definition is quite narrow: `` the use of engagements for the object of war . `` 
clausewitz served during the jena campaign as aide-de-camp to prince august . 
common lisp is a dialect of lisp . 
this allows older lisp software to be ported to common lisp . 
the common lisp hyperspec ,  a hyperlinked html version ,  has been derived from the ansi common lisp standard . 
common lisp provides some backwards compatibility to maclisp and to john mccarthy's original lisp . 
a color code or colour code is a system for displaying information by using different colors . 
color codes do present some potential problems . 
it is not sufficient for each term to become arbitrarily close to the term . 
in some cases it may be difficult to describe `` x '' independently of such a limiting process involving rational numbers . 
when it did refer to the christian era ,  it was sometimes qualified ,  e . g .  ,  `` common era of the incarnation '' ,  `` common era of the nativity '' ,  or `` common era of the birth of christ '' . 
common era or current era  -lrb-  ce  -rrb-  is one of the notation systems for the world's most widely used calendar era . 
the english phrase `` common era '' appears at least as early as 1708, and in a 1715 book on astronomy is used interchangeably with `` christian era '' and `` vulgar era '' . 
a 1796 book uses the term `` vulgar era of the nativity '' . 
the phrase `` common era '' ,  in lower case ,  also appeared in the 19th century in a `` generic '' sense ,  not necessarily to refer to the christian era ,  but to any system of dates in common use throughout a civilization . 
a 1652 ephemeris is the first instance so-far-found for english usage of `` christian era '' . 
in 1835, in his book `` living oracles '' ,  alexander campbell ,  wrote: `` the vulgar era ,  or anno domini; the fourth year of jesus christ ,  the first of which was but eight days '' ,  and also refers to the `` common era '' as a synonym for `` vulgar era '' with `` the fact that our lord was born on the 4th year before the vulgar era ,  called anno domini ,  thus making  -lrb-  for example  -rrb-  the 42d year from his birth to correspond with the 38th of the common era .  .  . ``  the `` catholic encyclopedia ''  -lrb-  1909 -rrb- in at least one article reports all three terms  -lrb-  christian ,  vulgar ,  common era  -rrb-  being commonly understood by the early 20th century . 
malden was born in putney ,  surrey ,  son of jonas malden ,  a surgeon . 
he built the windlesham house school at brighton in 1844, and conducted the school until his death there in 1855.
chechnya  -lrb-  ; ;  ,  `` noxçiyçö ''  -rrb-  ,  officially the chechen republic  -lrb-  ; ;  ,  `` noxçiyn respublika ''  -rrb-  ,  is a federal subject  -lrb-  a republic  -rrb-  of russia . 
after the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991, the chechen-ingush assr was split into two parts: the republic of ingushetia and the chechen republic . 
pope urban ii ,  pope calixtus ii ,  and pope eugene iii conformed to this discipline . 
the first persons honored as saints were the martyrs . 
thereafter ,  recourse to the judgment of the pope was had more frequently . 
pope paul vi initiated a simplification of the procedures . 
the canonization of saint udalric ,  bishop of augsburg by pope john xv in 993 was the first undoubted example of papal canonization of a saint from outside of rome; some historians maintain further that the first papal canonization was of st .  swibert by pope leo iii in 804.
the church of england ,  the mother church of the anglican communion ,  canonized charles i as a saint ,  in the convocations of canterbury and york of 1660.
however ,  the procedure initiated by the decretal of pope alexander iii was confirmed by a bull of pope innocent iii issued on the occasion of the canonization of cunigunde_of_luxembourg in 1200.
carboxylic acids are polar . 
carboxylic acids are brønsted–lowry acids because they are proton  -lrb-  h  -rrb-  donors . 
they are the most common type of organic acid . 
industrially important carboxylic acids include acetic acid  -lrb-  component of vinegar ,  precursor to solvents and coatings  -rrb-  ,  acrylic and methacrylic acids  -lrb-  precursors to polymers ,  adhesives  -rrb-  ,  adipic acid  -lrb-  polymers  -rrb-  ,  citric acid  -lrb-  beverages  -rrb-  ,  ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  -lrb-  chelating agent  -rrb-  ,  fatty acids  -lrb-  coatings  -rrb-  ,  maleic acid  -lrb-  polymers  -rrb-  ,  propionic acid  -lrb-  food preservative  -rrb-  ,  terephthalic acid  -lrb-  polymers  -rrb-  . 
carboxylic acids occur widely and include the amino acids  -lrb-  which make up proteins  -rrb-  and acetic acid  -lrb-  which is part of vinegar and occurs in metabolism  -rrb-  . 
in nature ,  carboxylic acids are converted to thioesters . 
electronegative substituents give stronger acids . 
salts and esters of carboxylic acids are called carboxylates . 
the carboxyl group tends to dimerise to form oxalic acid . 
chernobyl had a population of 10,800 in 1898, including 7,200 jews . 
chernobyl city was evacuated soon after the disaster . 
chernobyl was originally part of the land of kievan rus′ . 
the city was evacuated on 27 april 1986, 30 hours after the chernobyl disaster at the chernobyl nuclear power plant which was the most disastrous nuclear accident in history . 
between 1929 and 1933, chernobyl suffered from killings during stalin's collectivization campaign . 
the polish community of chernobyl was deported to kazakhstan in 1936, during the frontier clearances . 
chernobyl  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a city in the restricted chernobyl exclusion zone situated in the ivankiv raion of northern kiev oblast ,  near ukraine's border with belarus . 
with the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991, chernobyl remained part of ukraine . 
cyan  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a greenish-blue color . 
the web color cyan is synonymous with aqua . 
in the html color list ,  this same color is called aqua . 
the web colors are more vivid than the cyan used in the cmyk color system ,  and the web colors cannot be accurately reproduced on a printed page . 
double cream can be thinned with milk to make an approximation of single cream . 
cream skimmed from milk may be called `` sweet cream '' to distinguish it from cream skimmed from whey ,  a by-product of cheese-making . 
cream must contain no less than 350 g/kg  -lrb-  35%  -rrb-  milk fat . 
canadian cream definitions are similar to those used in the united states ,  except for `` light cream '' ,  which is very low-fat cream ,  usually with 5% or 6% butterfat . 
fat content may also be displayed on canned cream in canada . 
cvd is practiced in a variety of formats . 
chemical vapor deposition  -lrb-  cvd  -rrb-  is a deposition method used to produce high quality ,  high-performance ,  solid materials ,  typically under vacuum . 
there is no am broadcasting on the cn tower . 
the cn tower was the tallest tower by this definition until 2010  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
on april 20, the cn tower reopened . 
the ostankino tower was completed nine years before the cn tower ,  and is only shorter . 
 ''guinness world records '' has called the cn tower `` the world's tallest self-supporting tower '' and `` the world's tallest free-standing tower '' . 
the cn tower opened to the public on june 26, 1976.
the cn tower consists of several substructures . 
construction on the cn tower began on february 6, 1973, with massive excavations at the tower base for the foundation . 
the cn tower held the record for the world's tallest free-standing structure for 32 years until 2007 and was the world's tallest tower until 2009 when it was overtaken by burj khalifa and canton tower ,  respectively . 
the cn tower is the tallest freestanding structure in the western hemisphere . 
the cn tower  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a concrete communications and observation tower located in downtown toronto ,  ontario ,  canada . 
the cn tower has been and continues to be used as a communications tower for a number of different media and by numerous companies . 
it also belongs to the world federation of great towers . 
the cn tower held the record of tallest free-standing structure on land for over 30 years . 
on august 1, 2011, the cn tower opened the edgewalk ,  an amusement in which thrill-seekers can walk on and around the roof of the main pod of the tower at  ,  which is directly above the 360 restaurant . 
the cn tower ,  as of 2018, stands as the ninth-tallest free-standing structure on land ,  remains the tallest free-standing structure in the western hemisphere ,  and is the third-tallest tower . 
the chain rule then states , 
the two versions of the chain rule are related; if formula_4 and formula_5, then
they are some of the very few np problems not known to be in p or to be np-complete . 
informally ,  an np-complete problem is an np problem that is at least as `` tough '' as any other problem in np . 
np-hard problems are those at least as hard as np problems ,  i . e .  ,  all np problems can be reduced  -lrb-  in polynomial time  -rrb-  to them . 
although it is unknown whether p = np ,  problems outside of p are known . 
the p versus np problem is a major unsolved problem in computer science . 
it was shown by ladner that if p ≠ np then there exist problems in np that are neither in p nor np-complete . 
many of these problems are #p-complete ,  and hence among the hardest problems in #p ,  since a polynomial time solution to any of them would allow a polynomial time solution to all other #p problems . 
an answer to the p = np question would determine whether problems that can be verified in polynomial time ,  like sudoku ,  can also be solved in polynomial time . 
if it turned out that p ≠ np ,  it would mean that there are problems in np that are harder to compute than to verify: they could not be solved in polynomial time ,  but the answer could be verified in polynomial time . 
np-hard problems need not be in np ,  i . e .  ,  they need not have solutions verifiable in polynomial time . 
for instance ,  the boolean satisfiability problem is np-complete by the cook–levin theorem ,  so `` any '' instance of `` any '' problem in np can be transformed mechanically into an instance of the boolean satisfiability problem in polynomial time . 
the first natural problem proven to be np-complete was the boolean satisfiability problem ,  also known as sat . 
although the p versus np problem was formally defined in 1971, there were previous inklings of the problems involved ,  the difficulty of proof ,  and the potential consequences . 
132–33 -rrb- . 
relational logic gained applications . 
in print and online . 
peirce's most important work in pure mathematics was in logical and foundational areas . 
edited  -lrb-  1–6 -rrb- by charles hartshorne and paul weiss and  -lrb-  7–8 -rrb- by arthur burks ,  in print and online . 
 -lrb-  see also de morgan's laws .   -rrb- 
edited by carolyn eisele ,  back in print . 
edited by carolyn eisele ,  back in print . 
the first published anthology of peirce's articles was the one-volume `` chance ,  love and logic: philosophical essays '' ,  edited by morris raphael cohen ,  1923, still in print . 
besides lectures during his years  -lrb-  1879–1884 -rrb- as lecturer in logic at johns hopkins ,  he gave at least nine series of lectures ,  many now published; see lectures by peirce . 
1992: `` reasoning and the logic of things '' collects in one place peirce's 1898 series of lectures invited by william james . 
in 1880–1981 he showed how boolean algebra could be done via a repeated sufficient single binary operation  -lrb-  logical nor  -rrb-  ,  anticipating henry m .  sheffer by 33 years . 
1985: `` historical perspectives on peirce's logic of science: a history of science '' ,  2 volumes . 
peirce apparently was ignorant of frege's work ,  despite their overlapping achievements in logic ,  philosophy of language ,  and the foundations of mathematics . 
in 1949, while doing unrelated archival work ,  the historian of mathematics carolyn eisele  -lrb-  1902–2000 -rrb- chanced on an autograph letter by peirce . 
edited by patricia ann turisi ,  in print . 
edited by matthew e .  moore ,  in print . 
1975–1987: `` charles sanders peirce: contributions to '' the nation ,  4 volumes ,  includes peirce's more than 300 reviews and articles published 1869–1908 in `` the nation '' . 
the main posthumous editions of peirce's works in their long trek to light ,  often multi-volume ,  and some still in print ,  have included:
a carnot heat engine is a theoretical engine that operates on the reversible carnot cycle . 
carnot defined work as “weight lifted through a height” . 
the carnot cycle when acting as a heat engine consists of the following steps:
the population of central america is estimated at 47,448,333 as of  . 
other high points of central america are as listed in the table below: high points in central america
the predominant religion in central america is christianity  -lrb-  95.6%  -rrb-  . 
the middle america trench is not the only source of seismic activity in central america . 
central america is a part of the mesoamerican biodiversity hotspot ,  which extends from northern guatemala through to central panama . 
most of central america rests atop the caribbean plate . 
xinca and garifuna are also present in central america . 
volcanic eruptions are also common in central america . 
the central american red brocket is a brocket deer found in central america's tropical forest . 
panama ,  situated in the southernmost part of central america on the isthmus of panama ,  has for most of its history been culturally linked to south america . 
central america is the tapering isthmus of southern north america ,  with unique and varied geographic features . 
the combined population of central america has been estimated to be 41,739,000  -lrb-  2009 estimate  -rrb-  and 42,688,190  -lrb-  2012 estimate  -rrb-  . 
the central american pine-oak forests ecoregion ,  in the tropical and subtropical coniferous forests biome ,  is found in central america and southern mexico . 
the captaincy general of guatemala encompassed most of central america ,  with the exception of present-day belize and panama . 
