all languages have nasal clicks ,  and all but dahalo and damin also have oral clicks . 
as do other consonants ,  clicks vary in phonation . 
each language below is illustrated with alveolar clicks ,  apart from dahalo ,  which only has dental . 
in east africa ,  however ,  the alveolar clicks tend to be flapped ,  whereas the lateral clicks tend to be more sharp . 
these contour clicks may be `` linguo-pulmonic '' ,  that is ,  they may transition from a click  -lrb-  lingual  -rrb-  articulation to a normal pulmonic consonant like  -lrb-  e . g . 
clicks may be pronounced with a third place of articulation ,  glottal . 
a few languages also have pre-glottalised nasal clicks ,  which have very brief prenasalisation but have not been phonetically analysed to the extent that other types of clicks have . 
the dental ,  lateral and bilabial clicks are rarely confused . 
this convention is used in the literature on damin ,  where the clicks are transcribed as  . 
scattered clicks are found in ideophones and mimesis in other languages ,  such as kongo  ,  mijikenda and hadza  -lrb-  hadza does not otherwise have labial clicks  -rrb-  . 
click consonants ,  or clicks ,  are speech sounds that occur as consonants in many languages of southern africa and in three languages of east africa . 
apart from dahalo ,  damin and many of the bantu languages  -lrb-  yeyi and xhosa being exceptions  -rrb-  ,  'click' languages have glottalised clicks . 
miller and colleagues  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- used ultrasound imaging to show that the rear articulation of the alveolar clicks  -lrb-    -rrb-  in nama is substantially different from that of palatal and dental clicks . 
that is ,  in a simple click ,  the release of the rear articulation is not audible ,  whereas in a contour click ,  the rear  -lrb-  uvular  -rrb-  articulation is audibly released after the front  -lrb-  click  -rrb-  articulation ,  resulting in a double release . 
click manners are often called click `` accompaniments '' or `` effluxes '' ,  but both terms have met with objections on theoretical grounds . 
clicks occur in all three khoisan language families of southern africa ,  where they may be the most numerous consonants . 
for the most part ,  the southern african khoisan languages only use root-initial clicks . 
click consonants occur at six principal places of articulation . 
the above clicks sound like affricates ,  in that they involve a lot of friction . 
one of the clicks in damin is actually an egressive click ,  using the tongue to compress the air in the mouth for an outward  -lrb-  egressive  -rrb-  `` spurt '' . 
wilbur's and homer's lives are complicated by wilbur also secretly being an abortionist . 
homer ,  upon learning wilbur's secret ,  considers it morally wrong . 
as a young man ,  homer befriends a young couple ,  candy kendall and wally worthington ,  who come to st . 
a subplot follows the character melony ,  who grew up alongside homer in the orphanage . 
the consumer also forms part of the chain of distribution . 
in india ,  the consumer protection act 1986 differentiates the consummation of a commodity or service for personal use or to earn a livelihood . 
recently in marketing instead of marketers generating broad demographic profiles and fisio-graphic profiles of market segments ,  marketers have started to engage in personalized marketing ,  permission marketing ,  and mass customization . 
cacti have many other uses . 
it is not known when cacti were first cultivated . 
cacti are used as construction materials . 
semi-desert cacti need careful watering . 
other cacti have a quite different appearance . 
areoles are structures unique to cacti . 
hummingbirds are significant pollinators of cacti . 
slugs and snails also eat cacti . 
all cacti have some adaptations to promote efficient water use . 
naming and classifying cacti has been both difficult and controversial since the first cacti were discovered for science . 
although in most cacti ,  the stem acts as the main organ for storing water ,  some cacti have in addition large taproots . 
conservation of cacti can be `` in situ '' or `` ex situ '' . 
cacti can be propagated by seed ,  cuttings or grafting . 
cochineal is the product of an insect that lives on some cacti . 
a range of pests attack cacti in cultivation . 
cacti may also be planted outdoors in regions with suitable climates . 
unlike the flowers of other cacti ,  `` pereskia '' flowers may be borne in clusters . 
commercially ,  huge numbers of cacti are produced annually . 
the stems of most cacti are some shade of green ,  often bluish or brownish green . 
for the cultivation of epiphytic cacti ,  see cultivation of `` schlumbergera ''  -lrb-  christmas or thanksgiving cacti  -rrb-  ,  and cultivation of epiphyllum hybrids . 
this is particularly true of tree-living cacti ,  such as `` rhipsalis '' or `` schlumbergera '' ,  but some ground-living cacti ,  such as `` ariocarpus '' ,  also lack spines when mature . 
the absence of visible leaves is one of the most striking features of most cacti . 
the majority of cacti are stem succulents ,  i . e .  ,  plants in which the stem is the main organ used to store water . 
cacti are often grown in greenhouses ,  particularly in regions unsuited to the cultivation of cacti outdoors ,  such the northern parts of europe and north america . 
the 1,500 to 1,800 species of cacti mostly fall into one of two groups of `` core cacti '': opuntias  -lrb-  subfamily opuntioideae  -rrb-  and `` cactoids ''  -lrb-  subfamily cactoideae  -rrb-  . 
classification of the cacti currently remains uncertain and is likely to change . 
the stems of most cacti have adaptations to allow them to conduct photosynthesis in the absence of leaves . 
illegal collecting of cacti from the wild continues to pose a threat . 
cacti were cultivated as ornamental plants from the time they were first brought from the new world . 
the remaining cacti fall into only two genera ,  `` pereskia '' and `` maihuenia '' ,  and are rather different ,  which means any description of cacti as a whole must frequently make exceptions for them . 
for a more detailed discussion of the phylogeny of the cacti ,  see classification of the cactaceae . 
the popularity of cacti means many books are devoted to their cultivation . 
the american public made the ccc the most popular of all the new deal programs . 
the ccc operated separate programs for veterans and native americans . 
liquidation appropriations for the ccc continued through april 20, 1948.
the civilian conservation corps  -lrb-  ccc  -rrb-  was a public work relief program that operated from 1933 to 1942 in the united states for unemployed ,  unmarried men . 
in the first few weeks of operation ,  ccc camps in the north were integrated . 
despite its popular support ,  the ccc was not a permanent agency . 
although the ccc was probably the most popular new deal program ,  it never was authorized as a permanent agency . 
the ccc performed 300 types of work projects within ten approved general classifications:
following the second bonus army march on washington d . c .  ,  president roosevelt amended the ccc program on may 11, 1933, to include work opportunities for veterans . 
in 1939 congress ended the independent status of the ccc ,  transferring it to the control of the federal security agency . 
responding to favorable public opinion to alleviate unemployment ,  congress approved the emergency relief appropriation act of 1935, on april 8, 1935, which included continued funding for the ccc program through march 31, 1937.
the caribbean sea is an oceanic sea largely situated on the caribbean plate . 
the caribbean sea  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is a sea of the atlantic ocean in the tropics of the western hemisphere . 
the entire area of the caribbean sea ,  the numerous islands of the west indies ,  and adjacent coasts ,  are collectively known as the caribbean . 
tropical cyclones are a threat to the nations that rim the caribbean sea . 
the caribbean sea had been unknown to the populations of eurasia until 1492, when christopher columbus sailed into caribbean waters on a quest to find a sea route to asia . 
the caribbean is home to about 9% of the world's coral reefs covering about  ,  most of which are located off the caribbean islands and the central american coast . 
from the 16th century ,  europeans visiting the caribbean region identified the `` south sea ''  -lrb-  the pacific ocean ,  to the south of the isthmus of panama  -rrb-  as opposed to the `` north sea ''  -lrb-  the caribbean sea ,  to the north of the same isthmus  -rrb-  . 
during the past ten years ,  unusually warm caribbean waters have been increasingly threatening caribbean coral reefs . 
the caribbean region supports a large tourism industry . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the caribbean sea as follows:
the caribbean sea has the world's second biggest barrier reef ,  the mesoamerican barrier reef . 
historically the caribbean is thought to contain 14% of the world's coral reefs . 
it runs along the caribbean coasts of mexico ,  belize ,  guatemala and honduras . 
maclaurin was born in kilmodan ,  argyll . 
at eleven ,  maclaurin entered the university of glasgow . 
the maclaurin series ,  a special case of the taylor series ,  is named after him . 
newton was so impressed with maclaurin that he had offered to pay his salary himself . 
upon the death of his pupil at montpellier ,  maclaurin returned to aberdeen . 
nevertheless ,  maclaurin received credit for his use of the series ,  and the taylor series expanded around 0 is sometimes known as the `` maclaurin series ''  . 
celestial globes show the apparent positions of the stars in the sky . 
ruhi afnan ,  shoghi effendi's cousin through `abdu'l-bahá's daughter tuba:
the entire bahá'í family was stigmatized by shoghi effendi as covenant-breakers as he was displeased with their marriages . 
when a person is a declared a covenant-breaker ,  all bahá'ís are expected to avoid unnecessary association with that person . 
through the influence of bahiyyih khanum ,  the eldest daughter of bahá'u'lláh ,  everyone in the household initially rallied around shoghi effendi after the death of `abdu'l-bahá . 
covenant-breaker is a term used by bahá'ís to refer to a person who has been excommunicated from the bahá'í community for the act of covenant-breaking ,  roughly defined as active opposition to the bahá'í faith from a current member . 
concord is a village in jackson county in the u . s .  state of michigan . 
the michigan historical center operates a museum in concord called the mann house . 
the ccc's findings were widely reported in the german press . 
the ccc sensitises and introduces people to the questions of data privacy . 
on october 8, 2011, the ccc published an analysis of the staatstrojaner software . 
the ccc publishes the irregular magazine `` datenschleuder ''  -lrb-  `` data slingshot ''  -rrb-  since 1984.
in march 2008, the ccc acquired and published the fingerprints of german minister of the interior wolfgang schäuble . 
the ccc often uses the c-base station located in berlin as an event location or as function rooms . 
the chaos computer club  -lrb-  ccc  -rrb-  is europe's largest association of hackers with 7,700 registered members . 
the ccc hosts the annual chaos communication congress ,  europe's biggest hacker gathering . 
ccc members are present in big tech companies and in administrative instances . 
members of the ccc have demonstrated and publicized a number of important information security problems . 
in sociology a `` social rule '' refers to any social convention commonly adhered to in a society . 
social rules reflect what is `` acceptable '' or `` normal '' behaviour in any situation . 
in a social context ,  a convention may retain the character of an `` unwritten law '' of custom  -lrb-  for example ,  the manner in which people greet each other ,  such as by shaking each other's hands  -rrb-  . 
other such rules are as follows:
let be a complete metric space . 
a topological space homeomorphic to a separable complete metric space is called a polish space . 
if `` x '' is a set and `` m '' is a complete metric space ,  then the set of all bounded functions `` f '' from `` x '' to `` m '' is a complete metric space . 
every compact metric space is complete ,  though complete spaces need not be compact . 
a metric space is complete if and only if its expansion constant is ≤ 2.
for any metric space `` m '' ,  one can construct a complete metric space `` m′ ''  -lrb-  which is also denoted as   -rrb-  ,  which contains `` m '' as a dense subspace . 
the baire category theorem says that every complete metric space is a baire space . 
the space r of real numbers and the space c of complex numbers  -lrb-  with the metric given by the absolute value  -rrb-  are complete ,  and so is euclidean space r ,  with the usual distance metric . 
this space is homeomorphic to the product of a countable number of copies of the discrete space `` s '' . 
this space completes q with the `` p ''-adic metric in the same way that r completes q with the usual metric . 
it is said that west sold criswell her old luxury cars for five dollars . 
jeron criswell king  -lrb-  born jeron criswell konig ,  august 18, 1907 – october 4, 1982 -rrb- ,  known by his stage-name the amazing criswell  ,  was an american psychic known for wildly inaccurate predictions . 
she spent a great deal of time sunbathing  .  .  .  which ,  given her size ,  was not too pleasing a sight . `` 
in person ,  he went by charles criswell king ,  and was sometimes credited as jeron king criswell . 
in a chain reaction ,  positive feedback leads to a self-amplifying chain of events . 
a chain reaction is a sequence of reactions where a reactive product or by-product causes additional reactions to take place . 
numerous chain reactions can be represented by a mathematical model based on markov chains . 
christiansen and kramers also noted that if ,  in one link of the reaction chain ,  two or more unstable molecules are produced ,  the reaction chain would branch and grow . 
in a professional golf tour setting ,  a player often pays their caddie a percentage of their winnings ,  which can be as high as 10% . 
in golf ,  a caddie  -lrb-  or caddy  -rrb-  is the person who carries a player's bag and clubs ,  and gives insightful advice and moral support . 
caddies are most frequently employed at clubs on weekends ,  when the majority of country club golf takes place . 
coronal loops are the basic structures of the magnetic solar corona . 
a corona  -lrb-  latin ,  'crown'  -rrb-  is an aura of plasma that surrounds the sun and other stars . 
the solar plasma that feed these structures is heated from under 6000 k to well over 10 k from the photosphere ,  through the transition region ,  and into the corona . 
the fraction of the solar surface covered by bright points varies with the solar cycle . 
in the direction longitudinal to the magnetic field ,  the thermal conductivity of the corona is
the high speed solar wind arises mainly from these regions . 
the outer edges of the sun's corona are constantly being transported away due to open magnetic flux and hence generating the solar wind . 
the plasma may cool rapidly in this region  -lrb-  for a thermal instability  -rrb-  ,  its dark filaments obvious against the solar disk or prominences off the sun's limb . 
the corona is not always evenly distributed across the surface of the sun . 
thus they appear to have neither chromospheres nor coronae . 
the corona emits radiation mainly in the x-rays ,  observable only from space . 
the sun's corona is much hotter  -lrb-  by a factor from 150 to 450 -rrb- than the visible surface of the sun: the photosphere's average temperature is 5800 kelvins compared to the corona's one to three million kelvins . 
bright points are small active regions found on the solar disk . 
in 1952, american astronomer eugene parker proposed that the solar corona might be heated by myriad tiny 'nanoflares' ,  miniature brightenings resembling solar flares that would occur all over the surface of the sun . 
accompanying solar flares or large solar prominences ,  `` coronal transients ''  -lrb-  also called coronal mass ejections  -rrb-  are sometimes released . 
when there is a magnetic field the thermal conductivity of the plasma becomes higher in the direction which is parallel to the field lines rather than in the perpendicular direction . 
magnetohydrodynamic waves  -lrb-  mhd waves  -rrb-  can also propagate in this plasma ,  even if it is not still clear how they can be transmitted or generated in the corona . 
 ''chrono cross '' was scored by freelance video game music composer yasunori mitsuda ,  who previously worked on `` chrono trigger '' . 
 ''chrono cross '' shipped 850,000 units in japan and 650,000 abroad . 
full production began on `` chrono cross '' in mid-1998.
 ''chrono cross '' features standard role-playing video game gameplay with some differences . 
another innovative aspect of `` chrono cross '' is its stamina bar . 
although the trademark `` chrono cross '' was registered in the european union ,  the game was not released in europe . 
 ''chrono cross '' features a diverse cast of 45 party members . 
 ''chrono cross '' employs story arcs ,  characters ,  and themes from ``  '' ,  a satellaview side story to `` chrono trigger '' released in japan . 
the `` chrono cross '' team devised an original battle system using a stamina bar and elements . 
in the ds version of `` chrono trigger '' ,  kato teases the possibility of an amnesiac magus . 
planned economies contrast with `` command '' economies . 
therefore ,  command economies are planned economies ,  but not necessarily the reverse . 
most of a command economy is organized in a top-down administrative model by a central authority ,  where decisions regarding investment and production output requirements are decided upon at the top in the chain of command ,  with little input from lower levels . 
a command economy or administrative command economy is any of the nominally-planned economies of the former soviet union and eastern bloc—these terms highlight the central role of hierarchical administration in guiding the allocation of resources in these economic systems as opposed to planned coordination . 
common chimpanzees have been known to attack humans . 
human and common chimpanzee dna are very similar . 
it is more common among adult males than adult females . 
chimps also fish for ants using the same tactic . 
two types of human immunodeficiency virus  -lrb-  hiv  -rrb-  infect humans: hiv-1 and hiv-2.
vocalizations are also important in chimp communication . 
chimps may also be unintentionally maimed or killed by snares meant for other animals . 
chimps also use leaves as sponges or spoons to drink water . 
the adult male common chimpanzee weighs between  ,  the female weighs  . 
it is the anatomically closest relative of the human . 
as human populations grow ,  so does the risk of disease transmission between humans and chimpanzees . 
chimpanzees are a common target for poachers . 
the chimpanzee  -lrb-  `` pan troglodytes ''  -rrb-  ,  also known as the common chimpanzee ,  robust chimpanzee ,  or simply `` chimp , ``  is a species of great ape . 
also ,  communities have large ranges that overlap with those of other groups . 
research into genetic conditions in wild chimpanzees has also been undertook . 
adolescent males spend time with adult males in social activities like hunting and boundary patrolling . 
the common chimpanzee is a highly adaptable species . 
by four to six years ,  chimps are weaned and infancy ends . 
a chimpanzee's great strength and sharp teeth mean that attacks ,  even on adult humans ,  can cause severe injuries . 
isolated cases of cannibalism have also been documented . 
cmt is divided into the primary demyelinating neuropathies  -lrb-  cmt1, cmt3, and cmt4 -rrb- and the primary axonal neuropathies  -lrb-  cmt2 -rrb- ,  with frequent overlap . 
these signals are disrupted in cmt . 
most mutations in cmt affect the myelin sheath ,  but some affect the axon . 
cmt is a result of genetic mutations in a number of genes . 
based on the affected gene ,  cmt can be categorized into types and subtypes . 
the severity of symptoms varies widely even for the same type of cmt . 
cmt was previously classified as a subtype of muscular dystrophy . 
additionally ,  the resulting inactivity may cause the cmt to worsen . 
the most common cause is overly rapid correction of low blood sodium levels  -lrb-  hyponatremia  -rrb-  . 
there is a case report of central pontine myelinolysis occurring in the context of re-feeding syndrome ,  in the absence of hyponatremia . 
these result from a rapid myelinolysis of the corticobulbar and corticospinal tracts in the brainstem . 
central pontine myelinolysis presents most commonly as a complication of treatment of patients with profound hyponatremia  -lrb-  low sodium  -rrb-  ,  which can result from a varied spectrum of conditions ,  based on different mechanisms . 
point defects are defects that occur only at or around a single lattice point . 
an ε-rule is a rule of the form  where `` a '' is not `` s '' ,  the grammar's start symbol . 
a unit rule is a rule of the form  where `` a '' ,  `` b '' are nonterminal symbols . 
introduce a new start symbol `` s '' ,  and a new rule  where `` s '' is the previous start symbol . 
by deleting in this grammar each ε-rule ,  unless its left-hand side is the start symbol ,  the transformed grammar is obtained . 
in step `` start '' of the above conversion algorithm ,  just a rule `` s ''→ ''expr '' is added to the grammar . 
replace each rule  with more than 2 nonterminals `` x '' .  .  .  , `` x '' by rules  where `` a '' are new nonterminal symbols . 
between the trinity nuclear test of 16 july 1945 and the signing of the partial test ban treaty  -lrb-  ptbt  -rrb-  on 5 august 1963, 499 nuclear tests were conducted . 
in october 1977, the us ,  uk ,  and soviet union returned to negotiations over a test ban . 
in 1974, a step towards a comprehensive test ban was made with the threshold test ban treaty  -lrb-  ttbt  -rrb-  ,  ratified by the us and soviet union ,  which banned underground tests with yields above 150 kilotons . 
the plan ,  which would serve as the basis for united states nuclear policy into the 1950s ,  was rejected by the soviet union as a us ploy to cement its nuclear dominance . 
dance is generally ,  though not exclusively ,  performed with the accompaniment of music and may or may not be performed `` in time '' to such music . 
some musical genres have a parallel dance form such as baroque music and baroque dance; other varieties of dance and music may share nomenclature but developed separately ,  such as classical music and classical ballet . 
just as musical rhythms are defined by a pattern of strong and weak beats ,  so repetitive body movements often depends on alternating `` strong '' and `` weak '' muscular movements . 
most classical forms are centred upon dance alone ,  but performance dance may also appear in opera and other forms of musical theatre . 
similarly ,  poems are often structured and named after dances or musical works ,  while dance and music have both drawn their conception of `` measure '' or `` metre '' from poetry . 
social dances ,  those intended for participation rather than for an audience ,  may include various forms of mime and narrative ,  but are typically set much more closely to the rhythmic pattern of music ,  so that terms like waltz and polka refer as much to musical pieces as to the dance itself . 
he concluded that `` musical rhythm is only the transposition into sound of movements and dynamisms spontaneously and involuntarily expressing emotion '' . 
hence ,  though doubtless ,  as shawn asserts ,  `` it is quite possible to develop the dance without music and .  .  .  music is perfectly capable of standing on its own feet without any assistance from the dance '' ,  nevertheless the `` two arts will always be related and the relationship can be profitable both to the dance and to music '' ,  the precedence of one art over the other being a moot point . 
scholes ,  not a dancer but a musician ,  offers support for this view ,  stating that the steady measures of music ,  of two ,  three or four beats to the bar ,  its equal and balanced phrases ,  regular cadences ,  contrasts and repetitions ,  may all be attributed to the `` incalculable '' influence of dance upon music . 
ballet developed first in italy and then in france from lavish court spectacles that combined music ,  drama ,  poetry ,  song ,  costumes and dance . 
dances generally have a characteristic tempo and rhythmic pattern . 
musical accompaniment therefore arose in the earliest dance ,  so that ancient egyptians attributed the origin of the dance to the divine athotus ,  who was said to have observed that music accompanying religious rituals caused participants to move rhythmically and to have brought these movements into proportional measure . 
indian classical music provides accompaniment and dancers of nearly all the styles wear bells around their ankles to counterpoint and complement the percussion . 
shawn quotes with approval the statement of dalcroze that ,  while the art of musical rhythm consists in differentiating and combining time durations ,  pauses and accents `` according to physiological law '' ,  that of `` plastic rhythm ''  -lrb-  i . e . 
ballet reached widespread vogue in the romantic era ,  accompanied by a larger orchestra and grander musical conceptions that did not lend themselves easily to rhythmic clarity and by dance that emphasised dramatic mime . 
the ballet developed out of courtly dramatic productions of 16th- and 17th-century france and italy and for some time dancers performed dances developed from those familiar from the musical suite ,  all of which were defined by definite rhythms closely identified with each dance . 
the very act of dancing ,  the steps themselves ,  generate an `` initial skeleton of rhythmic beats '' that must have preceded any separate musical accompaniment ,  while dance itself ,  as much as music ,  requires time-keeping just as utilitarian repetitive movements such as walking ,  hauling and digging take on ,  as they become refined ,  something of the quality of dance . 
the film was a commercial success ,  grossing $84.5 million . 
she was a great-grandniece of broadway idol john drew jr .  and silent film actor ,  writer ,  and director sidney drew . 
despite a positive critical reception ,  the film flopped at the box office . 
in 1995, barrymore and nancy juvonen formed the production company flower films . 
 ''50 first dates '' was a commercial success; it made us$120.9 million in north america and us$196.4 million worldwide . 
she won the golden globe award for best actress – miniseries or television film and won the screen actors guild for outstanding performance by a female actor in a television movie or miniseries award . 
the film went largely unnoticed by audiences and received negative reviews from critics ,  who dismissed the sexual portrayal of her role . 
it garnered generally mixed reviews by critics ,  who summed it as `` timelier and a little more honest than most romantic comedies '' ,  and budgeted at us$32 million ,  the film made us$40 million at the worldwide box office . 
in the romantic drama `` ever after '' ,  inspired by the fairy tale cinderella ,  she took on the leading role; the film ,  which made $98 million globally ,  served as a reminder ,  according to roger ebert ,  of how well `` she can hold the screen and involve us in her characters '' . 
for her work ,  she won a young artist award for best supporting actress . 
in the 1984 horror film adaptation of stephen king's 1980 novel `` firestarter , ``  barrymore played a girl with pyrokinesis who becomes the target of a secret government agency known as the shop . 
in a review in the `` chicago sun-times '' ,  roger ebert stated ,  `` barrymore is the right actress for this role precisely because she approaches it with such grave calm . `` 
when roach advertised the film in late 1939 with griffith listed as producer ,  griffith asked that his name be removed . 
while the two were filming their scenes ,  griffith hid behind set scenery . 
although griffith eventually disagreed with roach over the production and parted ,  roach later insisted that some of the scenes in the completed film were directed by griffith . 
griffith left biograph because of company resistance to his goals and his cost overruns on the film . 
griffith has five films preserved in the united states national film registry deemed as being `` culturally ,  historically ,  or aesthetically significant . `` 
the naacp attempted to stop showings of the film . 
his short `` in old california ''  -lrb-  1910 -rrb- was the first film shot in hollywood ,  california . 
although mostly forgotten by movie-goers of the time ,  griffith was held in awe by many in the film industry . 
neither was successful ,  and after `` the struggle '' he never made another film . 
a side of a dune that the sand has slid down is called a slip face  -lrb-  or slipface  -rrb-  . 
a `` dune field '' or erg is an area covered by extensive dunes . 
lynch was raised a presbyterian . 
lynch has had several long-term relationships . 
later describing living there ,  lynch stated that
it was believed that lynch was going to retire from the film industry; according to abel ferrara ,  lynch `` doesn't even want to make films any more . 
lynch was born in missoula ,  montana ,  on january 20, 1946.
lynch has also been involved in a number of music projects ,  many of them related to his films . 
many of his works are very dark in colour ,  and lynch has said this is because
in 2009, lynch organized a benefit concert at radio city music hall for the david lynch foundation . 
lynch has stated that not a single reviewer of the film understood it the way that he intended . 
all author's royalties will be donated to the david lynch foundation . 
commenting on much of his early life ,  lynch has remarked:
following these unsuccessful television ventures ,  lynch returned to making feature films . 
the couple have one child ,  lula boginia lynch ,  born in 2012.
meanwhile ,  lynch worked with mark frost on some new television shows . 
lynch is on the board of trustees of mum and has hosted an annual `` david lynch weekend for world peace and meditation '' there since 2005.
the moving image collection of david lynch is held at the academy film archive ,  which has preserved two of his student films therein . 
lynch and frost reunited for the showtime limited series `` twin peaks: the return ''  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- ,  with lynch co-writing and directing every episode . 
it was heavily influenced by the fearful mood of philadelphia ,  and lynch referred to the film as `` my `` philadelphia story '' '' . 
on hearing the title of the first ,  `` the elephant man '' ,  lynch chose the script . 
the same year ,  lynch approached abc once again with ideas for a television drama . 
in 2009, lynch produced a documentary web series directed by his son ,  austin lynch ,  and friend jason s .  called `` interview project '' . 
david lynch proposed that he make the film which would become `` the amputee '' to present to afi to test two different types of film stock . 
lynch is also widely noted for his collaborations with various production artists and composers on his films and other productions . 
lynch approaches his characters and film content in a way that steeps them in a dream state rather than reality . 
in 1977, lynch would remarry ,  this time to mary fisk ,  sister of jack fisk . 
for the film ,  lynch decided to include pop songs from the 1960s ,  including `` in dreams '' by roy orbison and `` blue velvet '' by bobby vinton ,  the latter of which was largely inspirational for the film ,  with lynch stating that `` it was the song that sparked the movie  .  .  . 
in 2016, the film was named the top film of the 21st century by the bbc following a poll of 177 film critics from 36 countries . 
at the pennsylvania academy lynch made his first short film ,  which was titled `` six men getting sick  -lrb-  six times  -rrb- ``   -lrb-  1967 -rrb- . 
lynch has said that he is `` not a political person '' and that politics is `` something he knows little about . `` 
angelo badalamenti again produced the music for the film ,  although it was `` very different from the kind of score he's done for lynch in the past '' . 
together with kristine mckenna ,  lynch ,  in june 2018, published the book `` room to dream '' . 
following `` lost highway '' ,  lynch began work directing a film from a script written by mary sweeney and john e .  roach . 
ballard novel on which cronenberg's film was based . 
cronenberg has also appeared as an actor in other directors' films . 
this was the first time cronenberg filmed in the united states . 
on june 26, 2014, cronenberg's short film `` the nest '' was published on youtube . 
cronenberg's fascination with the film `` winter kept us warm ''  -lrb-  1966 -rrb- ,  by classmate david secter ,  sparked his interest in film . 
since `` dead ringers ''  -lrb-  1988 -rrb- ,  cronenberg has worked with cinematographer peter suschitzky on each of his films  -lrb-  see list of film director and cinematographer collaborations  -rrb-  . 
in 2012, his film `` cosmopolis '' competed for the palme d'or at the 2012 cannes film festival . 
cronenberg's films follow a definite progression: a movement from the social world to the inner life . 
the film was commissioned for `` david cronenberg - the exhibition '' at eye film institute in amsterdam and was available on youtube for the duration of the exhibition ,  until september 14, 2014.
earnhardt drove the no . 
avondale is where earnhardt won a cup race in 1990.
earnhardt competed in eight more races until 1979.
the 1991 season saw earnhardt win his fifth winston cup championship . 
earnhardt finished eighth in the final standings . 
in 1997, earnhardt went winless for only the second time in his career . 
dale earnhardt ,  inc .  won five races in the 2001 season ,  beginning with steve park's victory in the race at rockingham just one week after earnhardt's death . 
earnhardt started off the 1995 season by finishing second in the daytona 500 to sterling marlin . 
dale earnhardt jr .  made two special appearances in 2002 in a no . 
after the 1983 season ,  earnhardt returned to richard childress racing ,  replacing ricky rudd in the no . 
the 1986 season saw earnhardt win his second career winston cup championship and the first owner's championship for rcr . 
earnhardt's only win of the 1992 season came at charlotte ,  in the coca-cola 600, ending a 13-race win streak by ford teams . 
in 1968, at the age of 17, earnhardt married his first wife ,  latane brown . 
during the daytona 500 at daytona international speedway on february 18, 2001, earnhardt was killed in a three-car crash on the final lap of the race . 
on june 18, 2006, at michigan for the 3m performance 400, earnhardt jr .  ran a special vintage budweiser car to honor his father and his grandfather ralph earnhardt . 
before the 1999 season ,  fans began discussing earnhardt's age and speculating that with his son ,  dale jr .  ,  making his winston cup debut ,  earnhardt might be contemplating retirement . 
this is also the track where earnhardt claimed his sixth winston cup series title . 
of german ancestry ,  dale earnhardt was born on april 29, 1951, in kannapolis ,  north carolina ,  as the third child of martha  -lrb-  coleman  -rrb-  and ralph earnhardt . 
earnhardt jr .  also won the fall races at dover  -lrb-  first post 9/11 race  -rrb-  and talladega and came to an eighth-place points finish . 
1998 saw earnhardt finally win the daytona 500 in his 20th attempt after being shut out in his previous 19 attempts . 
a number of games have been published which are based on the `` dune '' universe created by frank herbert . 
frank herbert's `` dune '' was published in 1965, and he wrote five sequels before his death in 1986: `` dune messiah ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- ,  `` children of dune ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- ,  `` god emperor of dune ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- ,  `` heretics of dune ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- ,  and ``  ''  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- . 
baron harkonnen is portrayed by kenneth mcmillan in in david lynch's 1984 film `` dune '' . 
baron harkonnen will be portrayed by stellan skarsgård in the upcoming denis villeneuve film `` dune '' . 
the baron vladimir harkonnen is a fictional character and antagonist from the `` dune '' universe created by frank herbert . 
mohiam's second child with the baron is jessica . 
in david lynch's 1984 film ,  baron harkonnen was portrayed by kenneth mcmillan . 
in the `` prelude to dune '' prequel series by brian herbert and anderson ,  it is established that baron vladimir harkonnen is the son and heir of dmitri harkonnen and his wife victoria . 
the baron ,  duke leto ,  and jessica herself are unaware that jessica is secretly the baron's daughter or that he has even fathered one; in the year 10,176, the baron's grandson paul is born to leto and jessica . 
harkonnen will be portrayed by stellan skarsgård in the upcoming denis villeneuve film `` dune '' . 
as `` dune '' begins ,  a longstanding feud exists between the harkonnens of giedi prime and the atreides of caladan . 
as he says in `` dune '':
de vries is portrayed by brad dourif in david lynch's 1984 film `` dune '' ,  and by jan unger in the 2000 `` dune '' miniseries . 
piter de vries is a fictional character from the `` dune '' universe created by frank herbert . 
diffie–hellman key exchange establishes a shared secret between two parties that can be used for secret communication for exchanging data over a public network . 
this key can then be used to encrypt subsequent communications using a symmetric key cipher . 
diffie–hellman key exchange  -lrb-  dh  -rrb-  is a method of securely exchanging cryptographic keys over a public channel and was one of the first public-key protocols as originally conceptualized by ralph merkle and named after whitfield diffie and martin hellman . 
the result is a final color mixture  -lrb-  yellow-brown in this case  -rrb-  that is identical to the partner's final color mixture . 
when kent sends a member of his gang to check on keogh's burial site ,  boris and dimsdale follow ,  capture ,  and jail him . 
under destry's command ,  the honest townsmen form a posse and prepare to attack the saloon ,  where kent's gang is fortified ,  while destry enters through the roof and looks for kent . 
saloon owner kent  -lrb-  brian donlevy  -rrb-  ,  the unscrupulous boss of the fictional western town of bottleneck ,  has the town's sheriff ,  mr .  keogh  -lrb-  joe king  -rrb-  ,  killed when keogh asks one too many questions about a rigged poker game . 
this function is written and is called the `` derivative function '' or the `` derivative of ''  . 
at an inflection point ,  a function switches from being a convex function to being a concave function or vice versa . 
by the definition of the derivative function ,   . 
the derivatives of a function at a point provide polynomial approximations to that function near  . 
this limit is defined to be the derivative of the function at :
this output function can then be evaluated to get  ,   ,  and so on . 
hence the slope of the graph of the squaring function at the point is  ,  and so its derivative at is  . 
let be a function that has a derivative at every point in its domain . 
even a function with a smooth graph is not differentiable at a point where its tangent is vertical: for instance ,  the function given by is not differentiable at  . 
the derivative of a function of a single variable at a chosen input value ,  when it exists ,  is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function at that point . 
using this idea ,  differentiation becomes a function of functions: the derivative is an operator whose domain is the set of all functions that have derivatives at every point of their domain and whose range is a set of functions . 
instead ,  define to be the difference quotient as a function of :
let be a differentiable function ,  and let be its derivative . 
the squaring function given by is differentiable at  ,  and its derivative there is 6.
most functions that occur in practice have derivatives at all points or at almost every point . 
in summary: for a function to have a derivative it is `` necessary '' for the function to be continuous ,  but continuity alone is not `` sufficient '' . 
however ,  even if a function is continuous at a point ,  it may not be differentiable there . 
in particular ,  they exist ,  so polynomials are smooth functions . 
southern india has remained majority dravidian ,  but pockets of dravidian can be found in central india ,  pakistan ,  bangladesh and nepal . 
the date of dravidian is estimated to be 4,500 years old . 
the dravidian languages are spoken by more than 215 million people in india ,  pakistan ,  and sri lanka . 
the dravidian languages form a close-knit family . 
telugu is the most spoken dravidian language ,  with over 74 million native speakers . 
the largest group is south dravidian ,  with almost 150 million speakers . 
the smallest branch of the dravidian languages is the central branch ,  which has only around 200,000 speakers . 
the kurukh and malto are pockets of dravidian languages in central india ,  spoken by people who may have migrated from south india . 
since 1981, the census of india has reported only languages with more than 10,000 speakers ,  including 17 dravidian languages . 
 -lrb-  2018 -rrb- estimate the dravidian language family to be approximately 4,500 years old . 
the total number of speakers of dravidian languages is around 227 million people ,  around 13% of the population of the indian subcontinent . 
though some scholars have argued that the dravidian languages may have been brought to india by migrations in the fourth or third millennium bce or even earlier ,  the dravidian languages cannot easily be connected to any other language family ,  and they could well be indigenous to india . 
nonetheless ,  although there are no readily detectable genealogical connections ,  dravidian shares strong areal features with the indo-aryan languages ,  which have been attributed to a substratum influence from dravidian . 
dracula is an 1897 gothic horror novel by irish author bram stoker . 
although it is a widely known vampire novel ,  `` dracula '' was not the first . 
dracula scholar elizabeth miller has remarked that aside from the name and some mention of romanian history ,  the background of stoker's count bears no resemblance to that of vlad iii dracula . 
soon dracula is indirectly shown to be stalking lucy . 
 ''dracula '' was published in london in may 1897 by archibald constable and company . 
attention was drawn to the supposed connections between the historical transylvanian-born vlad iii dracula  -lrb-  also known as vlad tepes  -rrb-  of wallachia and bram stoker's fictional dracula ,  following the publication of `` in search of dracula '' by radu florescu and raymond mcnally in 1972.
stoker mentions that his dracula fought against the turks and was later betrayed by his brother ,  historical facts in the novel which point to vlad iii:
the lyceum theatre where stoker worked between 1878 and 1898 was headed by actor-manager henry irving ,  who was stoker's real-life inspiration for dracula's mannerisms and who stoker hoped would play dracula in a stage version . 
after dracula learns of the group's plot against him ,  he attacks mina on three occasions ,  and feeds mina his own blood to control her . 
around the same time ,  jonathan harker arrives from budapest ,  where mina marries him after his escape ,  and he and mina join the campaign against dracula . 
renfield is able to detect dracula's presence and supplies clues accordingly . 
contrary to popular belief ,  the name dracula does not translate to `` son of the devil '' in romanian ,  which would be `` fiul diavolului '' . 
hume wrote:
hume wrote:
hume did not graduate . 
hume returned to edinburgh in 1751.
i approached the problem of induction through hume . 
this ,  in hume's philosophy ,  was especially problematic . 
hume's religious views were often suspect . 
hume's separation between matters of fact and relations of ideas is often referred to as `` hume's fork '' . 
the cornerstone of hume's epistemology is the problem of induction . 
in his `` dialogues concerning natural religion '' ,  hume wrote:
hume was an early cultural historian of science . 
it is difficult to categorise hume's political affiliations . 
hume discusses the testimony of those who report miracles . 
hume was impressed by butler's way of thinking about religion ,  and butler may well have been influenced by hume's writings . 
hume was extremely pleased with his argument against miracles in his `` enquiry '' . 
hume also criticised the argument in his `` dialogues concerning natural religion ''  -lrb-  1779 -rrb- . 
hume calls this form of decision making the liberty of spontaneity . 
hume also put forward the is–ought problem ,  later called `` hume's law '' ,  denying the possibility of logically deriving what `` ought '' to be from what `` is '' . 
years after hume ,  commentators such as charles sanders peirce have demurred from hume's solution ,  while ,  some ,  such as kant and karl popper ,  saw that hume's analysis `` had posed a most fundamental challenge to all human knowledge claims . `` 
hume influenced and was influenced by the christian philosopher joseph butler . 
in `` of the standard of taste '' ,  hume argues that no rules can be drawn up about what is a tasteful object . 
hume's problem of induction was also of fundamental importance to the philosophy of karl popper . 
however ,  some philosophers have criticised hume's bundle-theory interpretation of personal identity . 
once this has been abandoned ,  hume argues that `` liberty and necessity will be found not to be in conflict one with another '' . 
in contrast to locke ,  hume believes that private property is not a natural right . 
attention to hume's philosophical works grew after the german philosopher immanuel kant ,  in his `` prolegomena to any future metaphysics ''  -lrb-  1783 -rrb- ,  credited hume with awakening him from his `` dogmatic slumber '' . 
until recently ,  hume was seen as a forerunner of logical positivism; a form of anti-metaphysical empiricism . 
reid formulated his common sense philosophy in part as a reaction against hume's views . 
the fact that contemporaries thought that he may have been an atheist is exemplified by a story hume liked to tell:
kant himself credited hume as the spur to his philosophical thought who had awakened him from his `` dogmatic slumbers '' . 
although there has been some academic speculation as to who actually wrote this pamphlet it is generally regarded as hume's creation . 
hume engaged with contemporary intellectual luminaries such as jean-jacques rousseau ,  james boswell ,  and adam smith  -lrb-  who acknowledged hume's influence on his economics and political philosophy  -rrb-  . 
eventually ,  with the publication of his six-volume `` the history of england '' between 1754 and 1762, hume achieved the fame that he coveted . 
empiricist philosophers ,  such as hume and berkeley ,  favoured the bundle theory of personal identity . 
berlin also writes about hume's influence on what berlin calls the counter-enlightenment ,  and german anti-rationalism . 
hume was just 23 years old when he started this work and it is now regarded as one of the most important in the history of western philosophy . 
in the introduction to `` a treatise of human nature '' ,  hume wrote ,  `` 'tis evident ,  that all the sciences have a relation ,  more or less ,  to human nature  .  .  . 
hume's compatibilist theory of free will takes causal determinism as fully compatible with human freedom . 
trumbo's role in the screenplay was not revealed until 1992.
in 1938, trumbo married cleo fincher . 
a dramatization of trumbo's life ,  also called `` trumbo '' ,  was released in november 2015.
trumbo was born in montrose ,  colorado ,  the son of maud  -lrb-  née tillery  -rrb-  and orus bonham trumbo . 
during this blacklist period ,  trumbo also wrote `` the brave one ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb- for the king brothers . 
in 1993, trumbo was posthumously awarded the academy award for writing `` roman holiday ''  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- . 
he adapted it as the film `` trumbo ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- ,  which added documentary footage and new interviews . 
for his portrayal of trumbo ,  cranston was nominated for best actor at the 88th academy awards . 
in 1975, the academy officially recognized trumbo as the winner of the oscar for `` the brave one '' and presented him with a statuette . 
the racial composition of the state was:
delaware  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the 50 states of the united states ,  in the mid-atlantic or northeastern region . 
on december 7, 1787, delaware became the first state to ratify the constitution of the united states ,  and has since been known as `` the first state '' . 
the definition of the northern boundary of the state is unusual . 
delaware is long and ranges from to across ,  totaling  ,  making it the second-smallest state in the united states after rhode island . 
massachusetts and new hampshire also shared a governor for some time . 
the state takes its name from thomas west ,  3rd baron de la warr ,  an english nobleman and virginia's first colonial governor . 
delaware is on a level plain ,  with the lowest mean elevation of any state in the nation . 
following the american revolution ,  statesmen from delaware were among the leading proponents of a strong central united states with equal representation for each state . 
the united states census bureau estimates that the population of delaware was 952,065 people on july 1, 2016, a 6.0% increase since the 2010 united states census . 
the state was named after the delaware river ,  which in turn derived its name from thomas west ,  3rd baron de la warr  -lrb-  1577–1618 -rrb- who was the ruling governor of the colony of virginia at the time europeans first explored the river . 
according to the 2010 united states census ,  delaware had a population of 897,934 people . 
a ridge about in elevation extends along the western boundary of the state and separates the watersheds that feed delaware river and bay to the east and the chesapeake bay to the west . 
following the battle of brandywine ,  wilmington was occupied by the british ,  and state president john mckinly was taken prisoner . 
delaware officially ratified the 13th ,  14th ,  and 15th amendments on february 12, 1901.
the state of delaware ,  together with the eastern shore counties of maryland and two counties of virginia ,  form the delmarva peninsula ,  which stretches down the mid-atlantic coast . 
with these ,  the rest of english ,  and even the 4000 most common english idioms and metaphors ,  can be defined . 
the first purely english alphabetical dictionary was `` a table alphabeticall '' ,  written by english schoolteacher robert cawdrey in 1604.
 -lrb-  similarly ,  british english subsequently underwent a few spelling changes that did not affect american english; see further at american and british english spelling differences .   -rrb- 
it was not until samuel johnson's `` a dictionary of the english language ''  -lrb-  1755 -rrb- that a more reliable english dictionary was produced . 
the earliest dictionaries in the english language were glossaries of french ,  spanish or latin words along with their definitions in english . 
in 1806, american noah webster published his first dictionary ,  ``  '' . 
elisha coles published his `` english dictionary '' in 1676.
in 1616, john bullokar described the history of the dictionary with his `` english expositor '' . 
an early non-alphabetical list of 8000 english words was the `` elementarie '' ,  created by richard mulcaster in 1582.
large 20th-century dictionaries such as the `` oxford english dictionary ''  -lrb-  oed  -rrb-  and `` webster's third '' are descriptive ,  and attempt to describe the actual use of words . 
johnson's masterwork could be judged as the first to bring all these elements together ,  creating the first `` modern '' dictionary . 
david friedman is the son of economists rose and milton friedman . 
david director friedman  -lrb-  born february 12, 1945 -rrb- is an american economist ,  physicist ,  legal scholar ,  and libertarian theorist . 
his son ,  patri friedman ,  has also written about libertarian theory and market anarchism ,  particularly seasteading . 
where formula_6 is the total electronic spin quantum number ,  formula_7 is the total electronic angular momentum quantum number along the internuclear axis ,  and formula_8 is the vibrational quantum number . 
diatomic molecules are normally in their lowest or ground state ,  which conventionally is also known as the formula_1 state . 
in the table ,  the subscripts and superscripts after formula_7 give additional quantum mechanical details about the electronic state . 
in quantum theory ,  an electronic state of a diatomic molecule is represented by
as a consequence ,  confusion existed regarding atomic weights and molecular formulas for about half a century . 
the molecular term symbol is a shorthand expression of the angular momenta that characterize the electronic quantum states of a diatomic molecule ,  which are also eigenstates of the electronic molecular hamiltonian . 
the excitation energy must be greater than or equal to the energy of the electronic state in order for the excitation to occur . 
a duopoly  -lrb-  from greek δύο ,  `` duo ''  -lrb-  two  -rrb-  + πωλεῖν ,  `` polein ''  -lrb-  to sell  -rrb-   -rrb-  is a form of oligopoly where two firms have dominant or exclusive control over a market . 
an appeal was upheld in 2004.
 ''d&d '' also had a large impact on modern video games . 
 ''d&d '' publication is commonly recognized as the beginning of modern role-playing games and the role-playing game industry . 
tsr marketed them as an introductory game for new players and a more complex game for experienced ones; the `` basic set '' directed players who exhausted the possibilities of that game to switch to the advanced rules . 
hobby and toy stores sell dice ,  miniatures ,  adventures ,  and other game aids related to `` d&d '' and its game offspring . 
as many as six million people played the game in 2007.
the role-playing movement initiated by `` d&d '' would lead to release of the science fiction game `` traveller ''  -lrb-  1977 -rrb- ,  the fantasy game `` runequest ''  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- ,  and subsequent game systems such as chaosium's `` call of cthulhu ''  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- ,  `` champions ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- ,  `` gurps ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- ,  and ``  ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
the early success of `` dungeons & dragons '' led to a proliferation of similar game systems . 
on january 9, 2012, wizards of the coast announced that it was working on a 5th edition of the game . 
 ''dungeons & dragons '' is a structured yet open-ended role-playing game . 
as the game is played ,  each pc changes over time and generally increases in capability . 
the results of the party's choices and the overall storyline for the game are determined by the dungeon master  -lrb-  dm  -rrb-  according to the rules of the game and the dm's interpretation of those rules . 
a game often continues over a series of meetings to complete a single adventure ,  and longer into a series of related gaming adventures ,  called a `` campaign '' . 
the ogl and d20 trademark license made possible new games ,  some based on licensed products like `` star wars '' ,  and new versions of older games ,  such as `` call of cthulhu '' . 
 ,  `` dungeons & dragons '' remained the best-known and best-selling role-playing game ,  with an estimated 20 million people having played the game and more than us$1 billion in book and equipment sales . 
if resurrection is not possible or not desired ,  the player may instead create a new pc to resume playing the game . 
the game had more than three million players around the world by 1981, and copies of the rules were selling at a rate of about 750,000 per year by 1984.
thus miniatures were no longer required for game play ,  although some players continued to use them as a visual reference . 
 ''d&d '' grew in popularity through the late 1970s and 1980s . 
the only items required to play the game are the rulebooks ,  a character sheet for each player ,  and a number of polyhedral dice . 
before the game begins ,  each player creates their player character and records the details  -lrb-  described below  -rrb-  on a character sheet . 
a verdict is final if nobody appeals against it . 
however ,  each trial party can appeal against a verdict in the first instance . 
in this case the trial starts again in the second instance ,  the court of appeal  -lrb-  `` berufungsgericht ''  -rrb-  ,  which considers the facts and reasons again and delivers the final judgement then . 
for an appeal from an acquittal to be successful ,  the supreme court of canada requires that the crown show that an error in law was made during the trial and that the error contributed to the verdict . 
turcotte was later convicted of second-degree murder in the second trial . 
in new south wales ,  retrials of serious cases with a minimum sentence of 20 years or more are now possible ,  whether or not the original trial preceded the 2006 reform . 
in the guy turcotte case ,  for instance ,  the quebec court of appeal overturned turcotte's not criminally responsible verdict and ordered a second trial after it found that the judge committed an error in the first trial while giving instructions to the jury . 
a notable example of this is guy paul morin ,  who was wrongfully convicted in his second trial after the acquittal in his first trial was vacated by the supreme court of canada . 
in the case of an order of summary punishment ,  which can be issued by the court without a trial for lesser misdemeanours ,  there is a further exception:
in many european countries ,  the prosecution may appeal an acquittal to a higher court . 
once all appeals have been exhausted on a case ,  the judgement is final and the action of the prosecution is closed  -lrb-  code of penal procedure ,  art . 
neither the us district court ,  nor the us supreme court would hear his appeal ,  rendering the judgment of the florida supreme court final . 
disbarment is the removal of a lawyer from a bar association or the practice of law ,  thus revoking his or her law license or admission to practice law . 
the 20th and the 21st centuries have seen one former u . s .  president and one former u . s .  vice president disbarred ,  and another president suspended from one bar and caused to resign from another bar rather than face disbarment . 
in the united states legal system ,  disbarment is specific to regions; one can be disbarred from some courts ,  while still being a member of the bar in another jurisdiction . 
he had attempted to resign from the new york bar ,  as he had done with california and the supreme court ,  but his resignation was not accepted as he would not acknowledge that he was unable to defend himself from the charges brought against him . 
however ,  under the american bar association's model rules of professional conduct ,  which have been adopted in most states ,  disbarment in one state or court is grounds for disbarment in a jurisdiction which has adopted the model rules . 
duplicate tags are issued . 
dog tags are usually fabricated from a corrosion-resistant metal . 
the tags contain the following information:
the tags contain the following information:
 ''dog tag '' is an informal but common term for a specific type of identification tag worn by military personnel . 
the dog tags hang from the rifle's handle or trigger guard . 
to force proper orientation of the tags ,  the tags are produced with a notch ,  and there is a locator tab inside the model 70 which prevents the printer from operating if the tag is inserted with the notch in the wrong place  -lrb-  as it is if the tag is upside down  -rrb-  . 
dog tags have recently found their way into youth fashion by way of military chic . 
the term arose and became popular because of the tags' resemblance to animal registration tags ,  and the dehumanizing connotations of war . 
there is a recurring myth about the notch situated in one end of the dog tags issued to united states army personnel during world war ii ,  and up until the vietnam war era . 
the first tag was intended to remain on the body for future identification ,  while the second tag could be taken to record the death . 
the people's liberation army issues two long ,  rectangular tags . 
the drum head has the most effect on how a drum sounds . 
the type of shell also affects the sound of a drum . 
several factors determine the sound a drum produces ,  including the type ,  shape and construction of the drum shell ,  the type of drum heads it has ,  and the tension of these drumheads . 
drums with cylindrical shells can be open at one end  -lrb-  as is the case with timbales  -rrb-  ,  or can have two drum heads ,  one head on each end . 
drums may be played individually ,  with the player using a single drum ,  and some drums such as the djembe are almost always played in this way . 
the second biggest factor that affects drum sound is head tension against the shell . 
for more information about tuning drums or the physics of a drum ,  visit the external links listed below . 
a number of different drums together with cymbals form the basic modern drum kit . 
the importance of delphi for the greeks is significant . 
delphi inspired literature as well . 
the presence of delphi in greek literature is very intense . 
by the 4th century ,  delphi had acquired the status of a city . 
the name `` delphi '' comes from the same root as δελφύς `` delphys '' ,  `` womb '' and may indicate archaic veneration of gaia at the site . 
ottoman delphi gradually began to be investigated . 
apollo spoke through his oracle . 
the ottomans finalized their domination over phocis and delphi about . 
moreover ,  the greeks considered delphi the navel  -lrb-  or centre  -rrb-  of the world ,  as represented by the stone monument known as the omphalos of delphi . 
delphi became the site of a major temple to phoebus apollo ,  as well as the pythian games and the prehistoric oracle . 
the charioteer of delphi is another ancient relic that has withstood the centuries . 
delphi is perhaps best known for its oracle ,  the pythia ,  the sibyl or priestess at the sanctuary dedicated to apollo . 
the sacred spring of delphi lies in the ravine of the phaedriades . 
the ancient theatre at delphi was built further up the hill from the temple of apollo giving spectators a view of the entire sanctuary and the valley below . 
delphi is famous for its many preserved athletic statues . 
from the 16th century onwards ,  west europe developed an interest in delphi . 
the site was abandoned in the 6th or 7th centuries ,  although a single bishop of delphi is attested in an episcopal list of the late 8th and early 9th centuries . 
examples of such works are displayed in the `` sculpture park of the european cultural center of delphi '' and in exhibitions taking place at the archaeological museum of delphi . 
the ruins of the temple of delphi visible today date from the 4th century bc ,  and are of a peripteral doric building . 
delphi was since ancient times a place of worship for gaia ,  the mother goddess connected with fertility . 
delphi was set apart from the other games sites because it hosted the mousikos agon ,  musical competitions . 
the tholos is located approximately a half a mile  -lrb-  800 m  -rrb-  from the main ruins at delphi  -lrb-  at   -rrb-  . 
three of the doric columns have been restored ,  making it the most popular site at delphi for tourists to take photographs . 
delphi is located in upper central greece ,  on multiple plateaux along the slope of mount parnassus ,  and includes the sanctuary of apollo ,  the site of the ancient oracle . 
in myths dating to the classical period of ancient greece  -lrb-  510-323 bc  -rrb-  ,  zeus determined the site of delphi when he sought to find the centre of his `` grandmother earth ''  -lrb-  gaia  -rrb-  . 
over time ,  the town of delphi gained more control of itself and the council lost much of its influence . 
occupation of the site at delphi can be traced back to the neolithic period with extensive occupation and use beginning in the mycenaean period  -lrb-  1600–1100 bc  -rrb-  . 
in 1805 edward dodwell visited delphi ,  accompanied by the painter simone pomardi . 
the amphictyonic council was a council of representatives from six greek tribes that controlled delphi and also the quadrennial pythian games . 
after the battle of plataea ,  the greek cities extinguished their fires and brought new fire from the hearth of greece ,  at delphi; in the foundation stories of several greek colonies ,  the founding colonists were first dedicated at delphi . 
some of the former employees of dec's research labs or dec's r&d in general include:
dec's research laboratories  -lrb-  or research labs ,  as they were commonly known  -rrb-  conducted dec's corporate research . 
dec was acquired in june 1998 by compaq ,  in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry . 
dec was acquired in june 1998 by compaq ,  in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry . 
the company subsequently merged with hewlett-packard  -lrb-  hp  -rrb-  in may 2002.  ,  some of dec's product lines were still produced under the hp name . 
dead kennedys have been described as a hardcore punk band . 
while ray and the rest of the band expressed interest in the concept ,  biafra refused . 
after the break up of the band ,  jello biafra brought up the court case on `` the oprah winfrey show '' . 
dead kennedys are an american punk rock band that formed in san francisco ,  california ,  in 1978.
the band was one of the first american hardcore bands to make a significant impact in the united kingdom . 
in 2017, east bay ray revealed that the band and jello biafra had been approached by the punk-oriented music festival riot fest about a potential reunion . 
the band followed with a poorly attended east coast tour ,  being a new and fairly unknown band at the time ,  without a full album release . 
the band also maintains that the levi's story was completely fictitious and invented by biafra to discredit them . 
in 2001, the band reformed without biafra; various singers have since been recruited for vocal duties . 
the release of the album `` frankenchrist '' in 1985 showed the band had grown in musical proficiency and lyrical maturity . 
the band continued to work on songs ,  with biafra penning songs such as `` chickenshit conformist '' and `` anarchy for sale '' ,  which articulated their feelings about the `` dumbing down '' of punk rock . 
matters were stirred up even further when the three bandmates invited jello biafra to `` bury the hatchet '' in the form of a band reunion . 
biafra's former bandmates maintain that they sued because of jello biafra's deliberate withholding of money ,  though when pressed they have acknowledged that the payment was an accounting mistake ,  but insist that biafra was wrong in failing to inform the band directly . 
biafra further criticized them for advertising shows using his own image taken from the original 1980s incarnation of the band ,  which he labeled as false advertising . 
polydor decided not to sign the band after they learned that dead kennedys' next single was to be entitled `` too drunk to fuck '' . 
jeff penalty left the band in march 2008 in what he describes as a `` not amicable split . `` 
