greenland is the world's largest island . 
greenland is abundant in minerals . 
greenland also has its own parliament ,  which has 31 members . 
kalaallisut is the greenlandic dialect of west greenland ,  which has long been the most populous area of the island . 
the rate of suicide in greenland is very high . 
greenlandic was declared the sole official language of greenland at the historic ceremony . 
greenland had been a protected and very isolated society until 1940.
 -lrb-  see gemstone industry in greenland  -rrb-  . 
greenland has a population of 56,370  -lrb-  january 2013 estimate  -rrb-  ,  of whom 88% are greenlandic inuit  -lrb-  including mixed persons  -rrb-  . 
greenland is a member state of the council of europe . 
in 1973, greenland joined the european economic community with denmark . 
in 1979, denmark granted home rule to greenland ,  and in 2008, greenlanders voted in favor of the self-government act ,  which transferred more power from the danish government to the local greenlandic government . 
bluie was the military code name for greenland . 
the majority of greenland ,  however ,  is less than in elevation . 
a majority of the population speaks greenlandic ,  most of them bilingually . 
the early norse settlers named the island as `` greenland . `` 
the greenlandic economy is highly dependent on fishing . 
greenland does not have an independent seat at the united nations . 
greenland suffered an economic contraction in the early 1990s . 
greenland became danish in 1814, and was fully integrated in the danish state in 1953 under the constitution of denmark . 
in the early 18th century ,  danish explorers reached greenland again . 
air transportation exists both within greenland and between the island and other nations . 
the northeastern part of greenland is not part of any municipality ,  but it is the site of the world's largest national park ,  northeast greenland national park . 
the thule people are the ancestors of the current greenlandic population . 
gradually ,  greenland was opened up to danish merchants ,  and closed to those from other countries . 
greenland's head of state is margrethe ii ,  queen regnant of denmark . 
greenlanders elect two representatives to the folketing ,  denmark's parliament ,  out of a total of 179.
greenland also has a successful ,  albeit small ,  music culture . 
greenland is the world's largest non-continental island and the third largest country in north america . 
the name of the country in the indigenous greenlandic language is  -lrb-  `` land of the kalaallit ''  -rrb-  . 
from 2400 bc to 1300 bc ,  the independence i culture existed in northern greenland . 
greenland's flora comprises about 500 species of higher plants ,  i . e . 
greenland sits atop the greenland plate ,  a subplate of the north american plate . 
greenland is located between the arctic ocean and the north atlantic ocean ,  northeast of canada and northwest of iceland . 
on 1 july 2014, greenland had 56,295 inhabitants . 
with denmark having responsibility for greenland's international affairs ,  other countries do not have direct diplomatic representation in greenland — their embassies or consulates in copenhagen are responsible for their relations with greenland and their citizens staying or living there . 
the high commissioner of greenland is appointed by the monarch  -lrb-  on from 2011: queen margrethe ii  -rrb-  ,  and the prime minister is elected indirectly by parliament elections results for four-year terms . 
greenland's judicial system is based on the danish civil law system ,  operates independently of the legislature and the executive . 
executive power rests with a high commissioner ,  and a prime minister heads the cabinet . 
the second-largest sector by employment is greenland's fishing industry . 
the economy of greenland can be characterized as small ,  mixed and vulnerable . 
the largest employers in greenland are the various levels of administration ,  including the central government in denmark ,  the greenland home rule government ,  and the municipalities . 
whaling and seal hunting were once traditional mainstays of greenland's economy . 
the kgh monopolies were ended in 1950; greenland was made an equal part of the danish kingdom in 1953 and home rule granted in 1979.
the fish processing industry is almost entirely centered on royal greenland ,  the world's largest retailer of cold-water shrimp . 
at 70% ,  greenland has one of the highest shares of renewable energy in the world ,  mostly coming from hydropower . 
while cod was formerly the main catch ,  today the industry centers on cold-water shrimp and greenland halibut . 
this type of monopoly is not uncommon in greenland . 
air cargo is very important for greenland . 
greenland now has 18 airstrips ,  14 of which are paved . 
air iceland flies from reykjavík to narsarsuaq . 
the government of greenland does not have control of greenland's military or foreign affairs . 
grenada achieved independence from britain in 1974.
in 1833, grenada became part of the british windward islands administration and remained so until 1958.
in 1784 the first newspaper ,  the `` grenada chronicle '' ,  began publication . 
in 1700, grenada had a population of 257 whites ,  53 coloureds ,  and 525 slaves . 
in 1885, the island became the capital of the british windward islands . 
on 7 february 1974, grenada became a fully independent state . 
the recorded history of the caribbean island of grenada begins in the early 17th century . 
in 1958, the windward islands administration was dissolved ,  and grenada joined the federation of the west indies . 
in 1675, dutch privateers captured grenada ,  but a french man-of-war arrived unexpectedly and recaptured the island . 
the united states gave $48.4 million in economic assistance to grenada in 1984.
about 2 million years ago ,  grenada was formed as an underwater volcano . 
grenada is a caribbean island  -lrb-  one of the grenadines  -rrb-  between the caribbean sea and atlantic ocean ,  north of trinidad and tobago . 
according to the 2011 census grenada has 105,539 inhabitants . 
grenada was readmitted into the eastern caribbean states supreme court in 1986.
from 1979 to 1986 the court system comprises the high court and the court of appeals ,  which replaced the eastern caribbean states supreme court established under the west indies act of 1967.
as head of state ,  queen elizabeth ii is represented in grenada by a governor general who acts on the advice of the prime minister and the cabinet . 
an associate judge resides in grenada . 
as a result ,  public debt has increased sharply to over 100 percent of gdp since 2002; it remained as high as near 130 percent of gdp in 2004.
as the damage of hurricane ivan to the economy exceeded 200 percent of gdp ,  economic growth registered a negative growth of three percent in 2004, compared with a positive growth rate of 5.8 percent in 2003.
although signs of recovery have been seen in grenada after the damage inflicted by hurricanes ivan and emily ,  economic conditions remain difficult; gdp is projected at a growth rate of only one percent for 2005.
economic growth picked up in the late 1990s following slow growth and domestic fiscal adjustment in early years of the decade . 
after experiencing gdp growth averaging nearly six percent a year in the late 1990s ,  economic growth declined considerably after 2001 as a result of a decline in the tourism industry following the september 11, 2001, terrorist attacks ,  and damages caused by several hurricanes . 
grenada also is a member of the eastern caribbean's regional security system  -lrb-  rss  -rrb-  . 
there are signs that guam is recovering from these setbacks . 
guam's history of colonialism is the longest among the pacific islands . 
the japanese military occupation of guam lasted from 1941 to 1944.
the result was the guam organic act of 1950 which established guam as an unincorporated organized territory of the united states and ,  for the first time in guam history ,  provided for a civilian government . 
through the spanish colonial period ,  guam inherited food ,  language ,  and surnames from spain and spanish america . 
the following year after passage of the guam delegate act saw the creation of the `` status commission '' by the twelfth guam legislature . 
archaeologists using carbon-dating have broken pre-contact guam  -lrb-  i . e . 
the immigration and nationality act of 1952, section 307, granted u . s .  citizenship to `` all persons born in the island of guam on or after april 11, 1899.
guam's southern villages largely escaped damage ,  however . 
guam was subsequently converted into a forward operations base for the u . s .  navy and air force . 
on june 21, 1898, the united states captured guam in a bloodless landing during the spanish–american war . 
guam's u . s .  military installations remain among the most strategically vital in the pacific ocean . 
although public law 94-584 established the formation of a `` locally drafted '' constitution  -lrb-  later known as the `` guam constitution ''  -rrb-  ,  the proposed document was rejected by guam residents in an august 4, 1979 referendum . 
during the course of the spanish administration of guam ,  lower birth rates and diseases reduced the population from 12,000 to roughly 5,000 by 1741.
the economy of guam is greatly dependent on the u . s .  military bases there . 
guam is an organized ,  unincorporated territory of the united states with policy relations between guam and the us under the jurisdiction of the office of insular affairs . 
some companies in the u . s .  mainland still treat guam as a foreign country and refuse to sell and ship items to guam . 
in this way ,  only domestic charges are incurred between the us and guam on most carriers . 
as of 1850, it was estimated that guatemala had a population of 600,000.
the modern history of guatemala began with the spanish conquest of guatemala in 1511.
rafael carrera was elected guatemalan governor in 1844.
with salazar gone ,  carrera reinstated rivera paz as head of state of guatemala . 
carrera then forcibly annexed quetzaltenango and much of los altos back into conservative guatemala . 
on 21 march 1847, guatemala declared itself an independent republic and carrera became its first president . 
knowing that morazán was going to attack el salvador ,  francisco ferrera gave arms and ammunition to carrera and convinced him to attack guatemala city . 
guzmán ,  who was freed by morazán when the latter had seemingly defeated carrera in guatemala city ,  had gone back to quetzaltenango to bring the good news . 
guatemala was able to recruit 2,000 men ,  led by lieutenant general carrera as commander in chief ,  with several colonels . 
aycinena remained in the legislature and was advisor of the governors of guatemala in the next few years . 
in 1838, the liberal forces of the honduran leader francisco morazán and guatemalan josé francisco barrundia invaded guatemala and reached san sur ,  where they executed pascual alvarez ,  carrera's father-in-law . 
guatemala was part of the captaincy general of guatemala ,  for nearly 330 years; this captaincy ,  or `` capitanía '' ,  included the territories comprising modern mexico ,  and the modern countries of guatemala ,  el salvador ,  honduras ,  nicaragua and costa rica . 
they also signed a treaty with guatemala about belize's borders ,  which has been called by guatemalans as the worst mistake made by the conservative regime of rafael carrera- . 
carrera ,  by then an experienced military man ,  was able to defeat morazán thoroughly . 
when the emissary returned to guatemala city ,  he told the president everything carrera said ,  and added that the native forces were formidable . 
this engagement sealed the status of carrera and marked the decline of morazán ,  and forced the conservative aycinena clan criollos to negotiate with carrera and his peasant revolutionary supporters . 
in the late 20 century ,  guatemala experienced a series of authoritarian governments . 
gálvez asked the national assembly to transfer the capital of the federation from guatemala city to san salvador . 
los altos was the region with the main production and economic activity of the former state of guatemala . 
after his victory in san miguelito ,  morazán's army increased in size given that a lot of voluntaries from guatemala joined him . 
most of the great classic-era  -lrb-  250 – 900 ad  -rrb-  maya cities of the petén basin region ,  in the northern lowlands of guatemala ,  had been abandoned by the year 1000 ad . 
then ,  the government of guatemala tried to reach to a peaceful solution ,  but altenses ,  protected by the recognition of the central american federation congress ,  did not accept; guatemala's government then resorted to force ,  sending carrera as commanding general of the army to subdue los altos . 
on 18 march 1840, liberal caudillo morazán invaded guatemala with 1500 soldiers to avenge the insult done in los altos . 
guatemala's pre-columbian era can be divided into the preclassic period  -lrb-  from 2000 bc to 250 ad  -rrb-  ,  the classic period  -lrb-  250 to 900 ad  -rrb-  and the postclassic period  -lrb-  900 to 1500 ad  -rrb-  . 
in september of that year ,  he attempted an assault on the capital of guatemala ,  but the liberal general carlos salazar castro defeated him in the fields of villa nueva and carrera had to retreat . 
on 2 april 1838, in the city of quetzaltenango ,  a secessionist group founded the independent state of los altos which sought independence from guatemala . 
the classic period of mesoamerican civilization corresponds to the height of the maya civilization ,  and is represented by countless sites throughout guatemala . 
in 1840, belgium began to act as an external source of support for carrera's independence movement ,  in an effort to exert influence in central america . 
when carrera came to power in 1840, stopped the complaints over belize ,  and established a guatemalan consulate in the region to oversee the guatemalan interests in that important commercial location . 
the official language of guatemala is spanish . 
in guatemala ,  there are 22 departments that make up the country . 
these people are called ladino in guatemala . 
the islamic community in guatemala is growing ,  muslim population of guatemala is approximately 1,200.
there are also thousands of jews residing in guatemala . 
guatemala city is home to almost 3 million inhabitants . 
the whole indigenous community in guatemala is about 40.5% of the population . 
according to the table ,  guatemala city accounts for 20% of the entire population in guatemala ,  while el progreso only accounts for 0.14% of the population . 
the mayan civilization ruled guatemala and the surrounding regions until around 1,000 a . d . 
the supreme court of justice ``  -lrb-  corte suprema de justicia  -rrb- ``  is guatemala's highest court . 
when one of the supreme court is absent or cannot participates in a case ,  one of the appeal court takes its place . 
the constitutional court ``  -lrb-  corte de constitucionalidad  -rrb- ``  is guatemala's constitutional court and only interprets the law in matters that affect the country's constitution . 
it is composed of five judges ,  elected for concurrent five-year terms each with a supplement ,  each serving one year as president of the court: one is elected by congress ,  one elected by the supreme court of justice ,  one is appointed by the president ,  one is elected by superior council of the universidad san carlos de guatemala ,  and one by the bar association ``  -lrb-  colegio de abogados  -rrb- ; ''
this was a milestone in the history of guatemala and made national headlines . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated guatemala as `` hybrid regime '' in 2016.
political parties in guatemala are generally numerous and unstable . 
politics of guatemala takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic ,  where by the president of guatemala is both head of state ,  head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
drug trafficking is undoubtedly the greatest threat to political freedom in guatemala today . 
guatemala is divided into 22 departments ,  administered by governors appointed by the president . 
labor force participation for women was at 51% in 2010, 50% in 2007, and 44% in 2004.
self-employment for men is about 50% ,  while the rate for women is about 32%  -lrb-  pagàn 1 -rrb- . 
unfortunately ,  this means that women in rural guatemala are greater victims of poverty than urban women ,  and most poverty is found in the rural parts of guatemala ,  so gammage found that many rural women perform unpaid work . 
children in guatemala are engaged in child labor ,  primarily in agriculture ,  according to the u . s .  department of labor . 
men work more hours in all professions ,  except in the household ,  because many women have part-time jobs . 
there are a number of guatemalan bus and van transport companies that most travelers use to get from the airport in guatemala city to antigua ,  lake atitlan in the western highlands of guatemala and monterrico on the pacific coast . 
transportation in guatemala includes roads  -lrb-  a majority unpaved  -rrb-  ,  waterways ,  and airports . 
the guatemalan armed forces consists of the national army of guatemala  -lrb-  `` ejercito nacional de guatemala '' ,  eng  -rrb-  ,  the guatemalan national defense navy  -lrb-  `` marina de la defensa nacional '' ,  includes marines  -rrb-  ,  the guatemalan air force  -lrb-  `` fuerza aerea guatemalteca '' ,  fag  -rrb-  ,  and the presidential honor guard  -lrb-  `` guardia de honor presidencial ''  -rrb-  . 
guatemala is a signatory to the rio pact and was a member of the central american defense council  -lrb-  condeca  -rrb-  . 
prior to 1945 the defence ministry was titled the secretariat of war  -lrb-  `` secretaría de la guerra ''  -rrb-  . 
the air force operates three air bases; the navy has two port bases . 
guatemala also originated the idea for ,  and is the seat of ,  the central american parliament  -lrb-  parlacen  -rrb-  . 
the central american ministers of trade meet on a regular basis to work on regional approaches to trade issues . 
guernsey  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an island in the english channel off the coast of normandy . 
guernsey is home to specsavers optical group and healthspan also has its headquarters in guernsey . 
of these ,  about 1,000 served in the royal guernsey light infantry regiment formed from the royal guernsey militia in 1916.
in march 2016 there were over 32,291 people employed in guernsey with 4,864 being self-employed . 
guernsey ,  alderney and sark each raise their own taxation ,  although in 1949 alderney  -lrb-  but not sark  -rrb-  transferred its fiscal rights to guernsey . 
the island was liberated on 9 may 1945, now celebrated as liberation day across both guernsey and jersey . 
there are many smaller islands ,  islets ,  rocks and reefs in guernsey waters . 
elevation varies from sea level to at hautnez on guernsey . 
the two bailiwicks of guernsey and jersey together form the geographical grouping known as the channel islands . 
previous names for the channel islands vary over history ,  but include the `` lenur '' islands ,  and `` sarnia '' ,  sarnia is the latin name for guernsey ,  or `` lisia ''  -lrb-  guernsey  -rrb-  and `` angia ''  -lrb-  jersey  -rrb-  . 
the oldest courts of guernsey can be traced back to the 9th century . 
the guernsey militia was first mentioned as operational in 1331 and would help defend the island for a further 600 years . 
situated around  ,  guernsey ,  herm and some other smaller islands together have a total area of and coastlines of about  . 
guernsey is a parliamentary representative democracy and legally a british crown dependency . 
guernsey has a public bus service ,  operated by ct plus on behalf of the states of guernsey environment and infrastructure department . 
by the beginning of the 18th century ,  guernsey's residents were starting to settle in north america ,  in particular founding guernsey county in ohio in 1810.
the president of the committee is the de facto head of government of guernsey . 
the name `` guernsey '' ,  as well as that of neighbouring `` jersey '' ,  is of old norse origin . 
 ,  the finance industry forms the largest economic sector in guernsey ,  generating around 40% of guernsey's gdp and directly employing around 21% of its workforce . 
guernsey has a geological history stretching further back into the past than most of europe . 
guernsey does not have a central bank and it issues its own sterling coinage and banknotes . 
guernsey county was founded in ohio in 1810.
the guernsey roll of honour includes 1,343 who were bailiwick of guernsey individuals or who served in the royal guernsey light infantry . 
in 1821 the population of guernsey was 20,302 with over 50% ,  11,173 living in st peter port . 
the economic depression in the 1930s also affected guernsey . 
during the english civil war ,  guernsey sided with the parliamentarians ,  while jersey remained royalist . 
the islands and guernsey in particular provided an important element to the blockading of enemies of britain . 
by 1901 the island population would double . 
during their migration to brittany ,  britons occupied the `` lenur '' islands  -lrb-  the former name of the channel islands  -rrb-  including `` sarnia '' or `` lisia ''  -lrb-  guernsey  -rrb-  and `` angia ''  -lrb-  jersey  -rrb-  . 
two years later elizabeth i came to the throne and catholicism faded in guernsey . 
the french and piracy were problems to trade with guernsey in the 16th century ,  requiring english naval ships to keep them at bay . 
somewhere around a . d .  968, monks ,  from the benedictine monastery of mont saint-michel ,  came to guernsey to establish a community in the north of the island . 
guernsey was very heavily fortified during world war ii out of all proportion to the island's strategic value ,  including by four 1911-vintage russian 305 mm guns . 
the newfoundland cod trade was important to guernsey until around 1700 when the small guernsey ships found that the smuggling trade could prove more profitable ,  with island businesses established to buy in goods for sale to smugglers until smuggling declined at the end of the 18th century ,  when legal privateering took over as the most profitable business . 
there are ten parishes in guernsey . 
the bailiff is the first civil officer in the bailiwick of guernsey ,  serving as president of the legislature and the royal court . 
parishes: castel ,  forest ,  st andrew ,  st martin ,  st peter ,  st peter port ,  st sampson ,  st saviour ,  torteval and vale
in addition there are two representatives of the states of alderney in the states of guernsey . 
laws made by the states are known as `` projet -lrb-  s  -rrb-  de loi '' before they are passed and `` loi '' or `` law -lrb-  s  -rrb- ``  afterwards  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  `` the human rights  -lrb-  bailiwick of guernsey  -rrb-  law 2000 '' . 
the lieutenant governor is the appointed unelected representative of `` the crown in right of the `` république '' of the bailiwick of guernsey '' . 
guinea  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of guinea  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a west-coastal country in west africa . 
guinea has a population of /1e6 round 1 million and an area of  . 
what is now guinea was on the fringes of the major west african empires . 
guinea's colonial period began with french military penetration into the area in the mid-19th century . 
this is expected to lead to more protests and fighting in the streets of guinea . 
its current boundaries were determined during the colonial period by the berlin conference  -lrb-  1884-1885 -rrb- and the french ,  who ruled guinea until 1958.
the french withdrew quickly ,  and on october 2, 1958, guinea proclaimed itself a sovereign and independent republic ,  with sékou touré as president . 
the slave trade came to the coastal region of guinea with european adventurers in the 16th century . 
after the fall of the major west african empires ,  various kingdoms existed in what is now guinea . 
the other french colonies chose the former but guinea — under the leadership of ahmed sékou touré whose democratic party of guinea  -lrb-  pdg  -rrb-  had won 56 of 60 seats in 1957 territorial elections — voted overwhelmingly for independence . 
france negotiated guinea's present boundaries in the late 19th and early 20th centuries with the british for sierra leone ,  the portuguese for their guinea colony  -lrb-  now guinea-bissau  -rrb-  ,  and liberia . 
in 1970, portuguese forces ,  from neighboring portuguese guinea ,  staged operation green sea ,  a raid into guinea with the support of exiled guinean opposition forces . 
lieutenant governors administered the individual colonies ,  including guinea . 
in several hours following his death ,  moussa dadis camara seized control of guinea as the head of a junta . 
the pdg was due to elect a new leader on april 3, 1984.
guinea's total area is 245,857 km² ,  comprising 245,717 km² of land and 140 km² of water . 
guinea's land boundaries span a total of 4,046 km: with ivory coast 816 km ,  guinea-bissau 421 km ,  liberia 590 km ,  mali 1,062 km ,  senegal 363 km ,  and sierra leone 794 km . 
guinea's total renewable water resources total 226 km . 
guinea is divided into four geographic regions: maritime guinea  -lrb-  lower guinea  -rrb-  a coastal plain running north to south behind the coast; the pastoral fouta djallon highlands  -lrb-  middle guinea  -rrb- ; the northern savanna  -lrb-  upper guinea  -rrb- ; and a southeastern rain-forest region  -lrb-  forest guinea  -rrb-  . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
demographics of guinea describes the condition and overview of guinea's peoples . 
politics of guinea takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of guinea is both head of state and head of government of guinea . 
according to somparé ,  conté `` hid his physical suffering '' for years `` in order to give happiness to guinea . `` 
since the 2010 presidential elections ,  the head of state has been alpha condé . 
a military dictatorship ,  led by then-lt .  col .  lansana conté and styling itself the military committee of national recovery  -lrb-  cmrn  -rrb-  ,  took control of guinea in april 1984, shortly after the death of independent guinea's first president ,  sékou touré . 
six hours after somparé announced conté's death ,  a statement was read on television announcing a military `` coup d'état '' . 
the first round took place normally on 27 june 2010 with ex prime minister cellou dalein diallo and his rival alpha condé emerging as the two runners-up for the second round . 
president alpha conde derives support from guinea's second-largest ethnic group ,  the malinke . 
guinea's opposition is backed by some of the fula ethnic group  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  who account for around 40 percent of the population . 
in its place ,  the military said it had established a consultative council composed of civilian and military leaders . 
guinea was part of the franc zone countries that included most of the former french colonies . 
guinea also has considerable potential for growth in the agricultural and fishing sectors . 
telecommunications in guinea include radio ,  television ,  fixed and mobile radio ,  and the internet . 
there is a single government-owned radio network ,  a growing number of private radio stations ,  and one government tv station . 
transport in guinea is composed by a variety of systems that people in the country use to get around as well as to and from domestic and international destinations . 
the last guinean troops were withdrawn in 1974.
the republic of guinea armed forces  -lrb-  french: `` forces armées guinéennes ''  -rrb-  are the armed forces of guinea . 
with much focus on the militia ,  touré kept much of the armed forces in poverty . 
in early 1975 the guinean military consisted of an army of around 5,000, an air force of 300, and a naval component of around 200.
increasing mistrust of the regular armed forces after the labé plot led to the militia assuming greater importance . 
the army resisted the portuguese invasion of guinea in november 1970.
however ,  these and other measures failed to stop the 2008 guinean coup d'état led by moussa dadis camara in late december 2008.
there are four military régions - the 1st rm: kindia; 2nd rm: labé; 3rd rm: kankan; 4ème rm: nzérékoré ,  plus the conakry special zone . 
in 1969, the militia was officially granted a role equivalent to the army ,  as a counterbalance in any military coup d'état . 
the militia had grown out of a 1961 democratic party of guinea  -lrb-  pdg  -rrb-  decision to create workplace ‘committees for the defence of the revolution . ’ these committees were encouraged by party officials to report dishonest practices such as theft and embezzlement of funds which might ‘endanger the achievements of the revolution . ’
the foreign relations of guinea ,  including those with its west african neighbors ,  have improved steadily since 1985.
the guinean representatives to the european union ,  the united nations and the african union were also affected . 
guinea has been active in efforts toward regional integration and cooperation ,  especially regarding the organisation of african unity and the economic community of west african states  -lrb-  ecowas  -rrb-  . 
guinea-bissau is a republic . 
guinea-bissau was once part of the kingdom of gabu ,  as well as part of the mali empire . 
according to  ,  guinea-bissau's population was in  ,  compared to 518,000 in 1950.
guinea-bissau was once part of the kingdom of gabu ,  part of the mali empire; parts of this kingdom persisted until the 18th century . 
guinea-bissau  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of guinea-bissau  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a country in west africa that covers with an estimated population of  . 
guinea-bissau is bordered by senegal to the north and guinea to the south and east ,  with the atlantic ocean to its west . 
guinea-bissau is divided into eight regions  -lrb-    -rrb-  and one autonomous sector  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
luís cabral ,  brother of amílcar and co-founder of paigc ,  was appointed the first president of guinea-bissau . 
guinea-bissau's gdp per capita is one of the lowest in the world ,  and its human development index is one of the lowest on earth . 
a 2008 estimate put the size of the guinea-bissau armed forces at around 4,000 personnel . 
guinea-bissau is a member of the organization for the harmonization of business law in africa  -lrb-  ohada  -rrb-  . 
guinea-bissau is warm all year around and there is little temperature fluctuation; it averages  . 
portuguese guinea was known as the slave coast ,  as it was a major area for the exportation of african slaves by europeans to the western hemisphere . 
by 1973, the paigc was in control of many parts of guinea ,  although the movement suffered a setback in january 1973 when cabral was assassinated . 
the paigc national assembly met at boe in the southeastern region and declared the independence of guinea-bissau on 24 september 1973 and was recognized by a 93-7 un general assembly vote in november . 
guinea-bissau's transition back to democracy has been complicated by a crippled economy devastated by civil war and the military's predilection for governmental meddling . 
in january 2000, the second round of a general election took place . 
according to  ,  guinea-bissau's population was in  ,  compared to 518,000 in 1950.
most guineans ,  99% ,  are blacks — mostly fula and mandinka-speakers concentrated in the north and northeast ,  the balanta and papel ,  living in the southern coastal regions ,  and the manjaco and mancanha ,  occupying the central and northern coastal areas . 
on april 1, 2010, soldiers entered un offices and left with bubo na tchuto . 
on 12 april 2012 the military took over the central district of the capital . 
he took office on april 13, and his government ,  composed of 20 ministers  -lrb-  including eight from the paigc ,  eight from the prs ,  and two from the pusd  -rrb-  was named on april 17.
guinea-bissau's first multi-party elections for president and parliament were held in 1994.
president viera was reported killed on march 2, 2009 by soldiers as retaliation for the killing of the head of the joint chiefs of staff ,  general tagme na waie ,  who was killed the previous day . 
martinho ndafa kabi was proposed as prime minister by a coalition composed of the paigc ,  the social renewal party  -lrb-  prs  -rrb-  ,  and the united social democratic party  -lrb-  pusd  -rrb-  . 
there are regional courts ,  one in each of nine regions ,  first court of appeals for sectoral court decisions ,  hear all felony cases and civil cases valued at over $1,000 and 24 sectoral courts ,  judges are not necessarily trained lawyers ,  hear civil cases under $1,000 and misdemeanor criminal cases . 
after army chief of staff general antonio indjai was reported to have been arrested under the orders of navy chief rear admiral jose americo bubo na tchuto ,  his troops freed him while prime minister carlos gomes júnior went to seek asylum at the angolan embassy . 
before the arrival of the europeans ,  the african slave trade ,  centuries old in africa ,  was not yet the major feature of the coastal economy of guinea . 
portugal's main rival were the french ,  their colonial neighbours along the coast on both sides - in senegal and in the region which became french guinea . 
as the portuguese extended their influence around the coast ,  mauritania ,  senegambia  -lrb-  by 1445 -rrb- and guinea ,  they created trading posts . 
they then traded these goods ,  in the estuary of the geba river ,  for black slaves captured by other black peoples in local african wars and raids . 
the fight for independence began in 1956, when amílcar cabral founded the `` partido africano da independência da guiné e cabo verde ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  the paigc . 
from a european viewpoint ,  the economic history of the guinea coast is largely associated with slavery . 
the portuguese found muslim merchants entrenched along the african coast as far as the bight of benin . 
following the april 2012 coup d'état growth plunged to reach -1.5% of gdp . 
the portuguese presence in guinea was therefore largely limited to the port of bissau . 
following the 12 april 2012 coup ,  the junta shut down all private radio stations and the national television station . 
guinea-bissau is one of the poorest countries in the world . 
major general batista tagme na waie was chief of staff of the guinea-bissau armed forces until his assassination in 2009.
un chief ban ki-moon has called for sanctions against those involved in guinea-bissau's drugs trade . 
military unrest occurred in guinea-bissau on 1 april 2010.
air force head ibraima papa camara and former navy chief jose americo bubo na tchuto have been named `` drug kingpins '' . 
the eu ended its mission to reform the country's security forces ,  eu ssr guinea-bissau ,  on 4 august 2010, a risk that may further embolden powerful generals and drug traffickers in the army and elsewhere . 
from 1964 to 1992, the pnc dominated guyana's politics . 
under guyana's constitution the president is both the head of state and head of government of the co-operative republic of guyana . 
race and ideology have been the dominant political influences in guyana . 
the audit office of guyana  -lrb-  aog  -rrb-  is the country's supreme audit institution  -lrb-  sai  -rrb-  . 
this makes guyana an `` assembly-independent '' regime ,  much like switzerland . 
legislative power of guyana rests in a unicameral national assembly . 
this road is referred to as the umda road . 
the coastal main road system is not continuous . 
linden is therefore one of the main hubs for road transportation in the hinterland . 
the main coastal roads are ,  from west to east ,  the essequibo coast road ,  the parika to vreed en hoop road ,  the east coast demerara and west coast berbice roads ,  and the corentyne highway from new amsterdam to moleson creek  -lrb-  86 kilometers  -rrb-  . 
the infrastructure that supports water transport in guyana is located along the banks of the navigable rivers ,  namely ,  the essequibo river ,  demerara river and berbice river . 
south of georgetown the primary road is the east bank demerara road ,  a four-lane road from rumiveldt to providence and two-lane from providence to timehri georgetown to timehri ,  where the cheddi jagan international airport - timehri  -lrb-  cjiat  -rrb-  is located . 
it is estimated that roads carry 80 percent of guyana's passenger traffic and about 33 percent of its freight . 
commuters to west demerara have a choice of road transport via the demerara harbour bridge or by the demerara river ferry from the stabroek stelling to vreed en hoop ,  which is obliquely opposite . 
outside the existing main roads there are several other interior roads or trails that comprise approximately 1,570 kilometers . 
ferry services link the primary roads in the coastal area ,  and guyana with suriname . 
in 2004, guyana's road network was approximately long ,  24 percent or 940 kilometers of which comprised primary roads in the coastal and riverine areas serving the agricultural sector ,  while the road to linden serves the mining and forestry sectors . 
all these roads are paved and their speed limit vary between 50-100kph . 
since there was already an existing road between mabura and kurupukari ,  and between annai and lethem ,  it was now possible for vehicles to travel between georgetown and lethem . 
air transport plays a vital role in the development of guyana . 
two neighbours have longstanding territorial disputes with guyana . 
guyana strongly supports the concept of regional integration . 
all of the area west of the essequibo river claimed by venezuela; suriname claims area east of the new upper courantyne . 
when a rock solidifies or crystallizes from melt  -lrb-  magma or lava  -rrb-  ,  it is an igneous rock . 
after the initial sequence of rocks has been deposited ,  the rock units can be deformed and/or metamorphosed . 
this can remove signs of the original textures of the rocks ,  such as bedding in sedimentary rocks ,  flow features of lavas ,  and crystal patterns in crystalline rocks . 
in addition to identifying rocks in the field  -lrb-  lithology  -rrb-  ,  petrologists identify rock samples in the laboratory . 
rock units are first emplaced either by deposition onto the surface or intrusion into the overlying rock . 
the majority of research in geology is associated with the study of rock ,  as rock provides the primary record of the majority of the geologic history of the earth . 
geology  -lrb-  from the ancient greek γῆ ,  `` gē ''  -lrb-  `` earth ''  -rrb-  and -λoγία ,  `` -logia '' ,   -lrb-  `` study of '' ,  `` discourse ''  -rrb-   -rrb-  is an earth science concerned with the solid earth ,  the rocks of which it is composed ,  and the processes by which they change over time . 
although any amount of rock emplacement and rock deformation can occur ,  and they can occur any number of times ,  these concepts provide a guide to understanding the geological history of an area . 
the addition of new rock units ,  both depositionally and intrusively ,  often occurs during deformation . 
the geologic time scale encompasses the history of the earth . 
geologists also use methods to determine the absolute age of rock samples and geological events . 
these typically fall into one of two categories: rock and unconsolidated material . 
the rock cycle  illustrates the relationships among them  -lrb-  see diagram  -rrb-  . 
where rock units slide past one another ,  strike-slip faults develop in shallow regions ,  and become shear zones at deeper depths where the rocks deform ductilely . 
this work can also help to explain processes that occur within the earth ,  such as subduction and magma chamber evolution . 
to study all three types of rock ,  geologists evaluate the minerals of which they are composed . 
these stretched rocks can also pinch into lenses ,  known as `` boudins '' ,  after the french word for `` sausage '' because of their visual similarity . 
other scientists perform stable-isotope studies on the rocks to gain information about past climate . 
the principle of faunal succession is based on the appearance of fossils in sedimentary rocks . 
extension causes the rock units as a whole to become longer and thinner . 
structural geologists use microscopic analysis of oriented thin sections of geologic samples to observe the fabric within the rocks ,  which gives information about strain within the crystalline structure of the rocks . 
in the laboratory ,  biostratigraphers analyze rock samples from outcrop and drill cores for the fossils found in them . 
the majority of geological data comes from research on solid earth materials . 
when rock units are placed under horizontal compression ,  they shorten and become thicker . 
geologists use a number of field ,  laboratory ,  and numerical modeling methods to decipher earth history and to understand the processes that occur on and inside the earth . 
today the earth is known to be approximately 4.5 billion years old . 
kelly appeared as actor and dancer in musical films . 
the film was nominated for four academy awards and won three . 
he achieved a significant breakthrough as a dancer on film when mgm loaned him to columbia to work with rita hayworth in `` cover girl ''  -lrb-  1944 -rrb- ,  a film that foreshadowed the best of his future work . 
as was the practice at the time ,  he was rarely formally credited in the film titles . 
in 1999, the american film institute also numbered him 15th in their greatest male stars of classic hollywood cinema list . 
eugene curran kelly  -lrb-  august 23, 1912 – february 2, 1996 -rrb- was an american dancer ,  actor of film ,  stage ,  and television ,  singer ,  film director ,  producer ,  and choreographer . 
kelly continued to make some film appearances ,  such as hornbeck in the 1960 hollywood production of `` inherit the wind '' . 
he was asked to direct the film version of `` the sound of music '' ,  which had been previously turned down by stanley donen . 
best known today for his performances in films such as `` an american in paris ''  -lrb-  1951 -rrb- ,  `` anchors aweigh ''  -lrb-  1945 -rrb-— for which he was nominated for the academy award for best actor—and `` singin' in the rain ''  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- ,  he starred in musical films until they fell out of fashion in the late 1950s . 
his final film project was in 1994 for the animated film `` cats don't dance '' ,  released in 1997 and dedicated to him ,  on which kelly acted as an uncredited choreographic consultant . 
there followed in quick succession two musicals that secured kelly's reputation as a major figure in the american musical film . 
in 1977, kelly starred in the poorly received action film `` viva knievel ! 
a breakthrough in the musical film genre ,  it has been described as `` the most inventive and effervescent musical thus far produced in hollywood . `` 
his many innovations transformed the hollywood musical ,  and he is credited with almost single-handedly making the ballet form commercially acceptable to film audiences . 
after leaving mgm ,  kelly returned to stage work . 
though the film did not initially generate the same enthusiasm as `` an american in paris '' had produced ,  it has subsequently overtaken the earlier film to occupy its current preeminent place among critics and filmgoers alike . 
when kelly returned to hollywood in 1953, the film musical was already beginning to feel the pressures from television ,  and mgm cut the budget for his next picture `` brigadoon ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- ,  with cyd charisse ,  forcing him to make the film on studio back lots instead of on location in scotland . 
kelly appeared frequently on television shows during the 1960s ,  including `` going my way '' ,  which was based on the 1944 film of the same name . 
there is also debate about the causation between gangsta rap and real-world crime . 
ice cube famously satirized the blame placed on gangsta rap for social ills in his song `` gangsta rap made me do it '' . 
gangsta rap or gangster rap is a style of hip hop characterized by themes and lyrics that generally emphasize the `` gangsta '' lifestyle . 
in 2011, ice-t repeated in his autobiography that schoolly d was his inspiration for gangsta rap . 
the first blockbuster gangsta rap album was n . w . a's `` straight outta compton '' ,  released in 1988.
gangsta rap's pioneers have met success in other forms of pop culture as well . 
mafioso rap is a hardcore hip hop subgenre founded by kool g rap in the late 1980s . 
the explicit nature of gangsta rap's lyrics has made it heavily controversial . 
midwest gangsta rap originated in the mid-1990s and rose to major prominence in the 2000s . 
the subject matter inherent in gangsta rap has caused a great deal of controversy . 
those who are supportive or at least less critical of gangsta rap hold that crime on the street level is for the most part a reaction to poverty and that gangsta rap reflects the reality of lower class life . 
the earlier ,  somewhat controversial crossover success enjoyed by popular gangsta rap songs like `` gin and juice '' gave way to gangsta rap's becoming a widely accepted staple on the pop charts in the late 1990s . 
in the early 1990s ,  former n . w . a member ice cube would further influence gangsta rap with his hardcore ,  socio-political solo albums ,  which suggested the potential of gangsta rap as a political medium to give voice to inner-city youth . 
in an interview for `` the independent '' in 1994, the wu-tang clan's gza commented on the term `` gangsta rap '' and its association with his group's music and hip hop at the time:
n . w . a's second album ,  `` efil4zaggin ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb-  -lrb-  released after ice cube's departure from the group  -rrb-  ,  broke ground as the first gangsta rap album to reach #1 on the billboard pop charts . 
gangsta rap parallels other indigenous gang and crime-oriented forms of music ,  such as the narcocorrido genre of northern mexico . 
the album also began the subgenre of g-funk ,  a slow ,  drawled form of hip hop that dominated the rap charts for some time . 
the new york rap group run dmc is often credited with popularizing hardcore and confrontational attitudes and lyrics in hip hop culture ,  and were one of the first rap groups to dress in gang-like street clothing . 
they often used gangsta rap to tell the stories of their lives ,  which sometimes included strong violence ,  hypersexuality ,  and drug abuse . 
the `` second `` gleichschaltung '' law ''  -lrb-  ' ,  7 april 1933 -rrb- deployed one '  -lrb-  reich governor  -rrb-  in each state ,  apart from prussia . 
the nazis used the word `` gleichschaltung '' for the process of successively establishing a system of totalitarian control and coordination over all aspects of german society . 
the `` first `` gleichschaltung '' law ''  -lrb-  ``  '' ,  31 march 1933 -rrb- ,  passed using the enabling act; this law dissolved the diets of all `` länder '' except the recently-elected prussian parliament ,  which the nazis already controlled . 
this was also the purpose of `` co-ordination '': to ensure that every aspect of the lives of german citizens was permeated with the ideas and prejudices of the nazis . 
those critical of hitler and the nazis were suppressed ,  intimidated or murdered . 
the same law ordered the state diets reconstituted on the basis of the votes in the last reichstag election  -lrb-  with the exception of communist seats  -rrb-  ,  and also gave the state governments the same powers the reich government possessed under the enabling act . 
these officers ,  responsible to interior minister wilhelm frick ,  were supposed to act as local proconsuls in each state ,  with near-complete control over the state governments . 
the apex of the nazification of germany was in the resolutions approved during the nuremberg rally of 1935, when the symbols of the nazi party and the state were fused  -lrb-  see flag of germany  -rrb-  and german jews were deprived of their citizenship  -lrb-  see nuremberg laws  -rrb-  . 
cantor also introduced the cantor set during this period . 
cantor's work between 1874 and 1884 is the origin of set theory . 
cantor introduced fundamental constructions in set theory ,  such as the power set of a set `` a '' ,  which is the set of all possible subsets of `` a '' . 
after cantor's 1884 hospitalization ,  there is no record that he was in any sanatorium again until 1899.
in 1874, cantor married vally guttmann . 
in 1932, zermelo criticized the construction in cantor's proof . 
jakob cantor ,  cantor's grandfather ,  gave his children christian saints' names . 
cantor's next article contains a construction that proves the set of transcendental numbers has the same `` power ''  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  as the set of real numbers . 
cantor established these results using two constructions . 
cantor also published an erroneous `` proof '' of the inconsistency of infinitesimals . 
in one of his earliest papers ,  cantor proved that the set of real numbers is `` more numerous '' than the set of natural numbers; this showed ,  for the first time ,  that there exist infinite sets of different sizes . 
cantor extended his work on the absolute infinite by using it in a proof . 
 -lrb-  he also states that cantor's wife ,  vally guttmann ,  was jewish  -rrb-  . 
cantor's first ten papers were on number theory ,  his thesis topic . 
cantor suffered his first known bout of depression on may 1884.
in 1888, cantor published his correspondence with several philosophers on the philosophical implications of his set theory . 
a passage from one of these letters is revealing of the damage to cantor's self-confidence:
nevertheless ,  cantor never again submitted anything to crelle . 
cantor was a good student ,  and he received his doctorate degree in 1867.
cantor avoided paradoxes by recognizing that there are two types of multiplicities . 
cantor submitted his dissertation on number theory at the university of berlin in 1867.
the university of gothenburg  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a university in sweden's second largest city ,  gothenburg . 
the university of gothenburg is one of sweden’s largest universities . 
the university of gothenburg was founded as `` göteborgs högskola ''  -lrb-  gothenburg university college  -rrb-  in 1891.
in 1971, the originally separate gothenburg school of economics and commercial law became part of the university of gothenburg . 
the university of gothenburg is a pronounced city university ,  that is most of its facilities are within the city centre of gothenburg . 
the main building as well as most faculties are located in the central part of gothenburg . 
the editors of filmsite . org argue that animation ,  pornographic film ,  documentary film ,  silent film and so on are non-genre-based film categories . 
film genres may appear to be readily categorizable from the setting of the film . 
film genres draw on genres from other forms; western novels existed before the western film ,  and musical theatre existed before film musicals were made . 
many films cross into multiple genres . 
this is also important to remember when looking at films in the future . 
there are other methods of dividing films into groups besides genre . 
some are performer-based  -lrb-  fred astaire and ginger rogers films  -rrb-  or budget-based  -lrb-  blockbusters ,  low budget film  -rrb-  ,  while others are based on artistic status  -lrb-  the art film  -rrb-  ,  racial identity  -lrb-  race films  -rrb-  ,  location  -lrb-  the western  -rrb-  ,  or sexual orientation  -lrb-  queer cinema  -rrb-  . 
science fiction and fantasy films are associated with special effects ,  notably computer generated imagery  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  the harry potter films  -rrb-  . 
he believed that the men carlyle called `` great men '' were merely products of their social environment:
carlyle also felt that the study of great men was `` profitable '' to one's own heroic side; that by examining the lives led by such heroes ,  one could not help but uncover something about one's true nature . 
thus ,  according to hegel ,  a great man does not create historical reality himself but only uncovers the inevitable future . 
tolstoy's `` war and peace '' features criticism of great man theories as a recurring theme in the philosophical digressions . 
there are three known chambers inside the great pyramid . 
the great pyramid of giza  -lrb-  also known as the pyramid of khufu or the pyramid of cheops  -rrb-  is the oldest and largest of the three pyramids in the giza pyramid complex bordering what is now el giza ,  egypt . 
on the south side are the subsidiary pyramids ,  popularly known as the queens' pyramids . 
the great pyramid is surrounded by a complex of several buildings including small pyramids . 
one mystery of the pyramid's construction is its planning . 
the original entrance to the great pyramid is on the north ,  vertically above ground level and east of the centre line of the pyramid . 
the giza pyramid complex ,  which includes among other structures the pyramids of khufu ,  khafre and menkaure ,  is surrounded by a cyclopean stone wall ,  the wall of the crow . 
some egyptologists suggest that this lower chamber was intended to be the original burial chamber ,  but pharaoh khufu later changed his mind and wanted it to be higher up in the pyramid . 
the `` queen's chamber '' is exactly halfway between the north and south faces of the pyramid and measures north to south ,  east to west ,  and has a pointed roof with an apex above the floor . 
joyce tyldesley states that the great pyramid itself `` is known to have been opened and emptied by the middle kingdom '' ,  before the arab caliph abdullah al-mamun entered the pyramid around ad 820.
the main part of the giza complex is a set of buildings that included two mortuary temples in honour of khufu  -lrb-  one close to the pyramid and one near the nile  -rrb-  ,  three smaller pyramids for khufu's wives ,  an even smaller `` satellite '' pyramid ,  a raised causeway connecting the two temples ,  and small mastaba tombs surrounding the pyramid for nobles . 
the great pyramid consists of an estimated 2.3 million blocks which most believe to have been transported from nearby quarries . 
although succeeding pyramids were smaller ,  pyramid-building continued until the end of the middle kingdom . 
the `` king's chamber '' is 20 egyptian royal cubits or from east to west and 10 cubits or north to south . 
the generic universal roleplaying system ,  or gurps ,  is a tabletop role-playing game system designed to allow for play in any game setting . 
it was created by steve jackson games and first published in 1986 at a time when most such systems were story- or genre-specific . 
gaming sessions are story-told and run by `` game masters ''  -lrb-  often referred to as simply `` gms ''  -rrb-  . 
see `` steve jackson games ,  inc .  v .  united states secret service '' . 
steve jackson games released `` gurps fourth edition '' at the first day of gen con on august 19, 2004.
prior to `` gurps '' ,  roleplaying games  -lrb-  rpgs  -rrb-  of the 1970s and early 1980s were developed especially for certain gaming environments ,  and they were largely incompatible with one another . 
a government is the system or group of people governing an organized community ,  often a state . 
the main aspect of any philosophy of government is how political power is obtained ,  with the two main forms being electoral contest and hereditary succession . 
on may 28, 2010, coleman died of a subdural hematoma at age 42.
in august 1999, coleman filed for bankruptcy protection . 
while coleman's final will ,  signed in 2005, named gray as executor and awarded his entire estate to her ,  coleman and price married in 2007.
very few details of coleman's medical history have been made public . 
in 1998, coleman was charged with assault while he was working as a security guard . 
in the 2003 california recall election ,  coleman was a candidate for governor . 
coleman was an avid railfan ,  model railroader ,  and supporter of amtrak . 
in 1974, coleman's career began when he appeared in a commercial for harris bank . 
coleman is photographed on the front cover ,  with his `` rio grande '' layout . 
coleman placed 8th in a field of 135 candidates ,  receiving 14,242 votes . 
coleman is parodied in `` avenue q '' ,  which won the 2004 tony award for best musical . 
currently ,  at least one of coleman's model railroads is being preserved in colorado springs ,  colorado . 
the coleman character remained in the show after modifications were made to relevant dialogue . 
 ,  brooks is now the only artist in music history to have released seven albums that achieved diamond status in the united states  -lrb-  surpassing the beatles' record of six  -rrb- ; those albums are `` garth brooks ''  -lrb-  10× platinum  -rrb-  ,  `` no fences ''  -lrb-  17× platinum  -rrb-  ,  `` ropin' the wind ''  -lrb-  14× platinum  -rrb-  ,  `` the hits ''  -lrb-  10× platinum  -rrb-  ,  `` sevens ''  -lrb-  10× platinum  -rrb-  ,  `` double live ''  -lrb-  21× platinum  -rrb-  ,  and `` the ultimate hits ''  -lrb-  10× platinum  -rrb-  . 
garth brooks' eponymous first album was released in 1989 and was a chart success . 
brooks was inducted into the country music hall of fame on october 21, 2012.
he won several awards in his career ,  including two grammy awards ,  17 american music awards  -lrb-  including `` artist of the '90s ''  -rrb-  and the riaa award for best-selling solo albums artist of the century in the u . s . 
he is also one of the world's best-selling artists of all time ,  having sold more than 170 million records . 
troyal garth brooks was born on february 7, 1962, in tulsa ,  oklahoma . 
this had been patented by eiffel in 1881.
the name was changed to the anciens etablissements eiffel in 1937.
although the family always used the name eiffel ,  gustave's name was registered at birth as bonickhausen dit eiffel ,  and was not officially changed to eiffel until 1880.
on 6 october 1868 he entered into partnership with théophile seyrig ,  like eiffel a graduate of the école centrale ,  forming the company eiffel et cie  -lrb-  `` eiffel and company ''  -rrb-  . 
eiffel later established a separate company to manage the tower . 
alexandre gustave eiffel  -lrb-  born bonickhausen dit eiffel; ; ; 15 december 183227 december 1923 -rrb- was a french civil engineer . 
in 1886 eiffel also designed the dome for the astronomical observatory in nice . 
gustave eiffel's career was facilitated by the industrial revolution . 
about six months after his retirement from the compagnie des etablissements eiffel ,  eiffel was approached by felix-max richard ,  owner of the comptoir general de photographie . 
in 1879 the partnership with seyrig was dissolved ,  and the company was renamed the compagnie des établissements eiffel . 
in 1887, eiffel became involved with the french effort to construct a canal across the panama isthmus . 
the protests did not stop the u . s .  from detonating the bomb . 
environmental historian frank zelko dates the formation of the `` don't make a wave committee '' to 1969 and according to jim bohlen the group adopted the name `` don't make a wave committee '' on 28 november 1969.
the nuclear test was criticized and the u . s .  decided not to continue with their test plans at amchitka . 
paul watson ,  founder of the sea shepherd conservation society maintains that he also was one of the founders of the don't make a wave committee and greenpeace . 
in 2014, the annual revenue of greenpeace was reported to be about €300 million  -lrb-  us$400 million  -rrb-  although they lost about €4 million  -lrb-  us$5 million  -rrb-  in currency speculation that year . 
after the assault was publicized ,  france announced it would stop the atmospheric nuclear tests . 
the current greenpeace web site lists the founders of the don't make a wave committee as dorothy and irving stowe ,  marie and jim bohlen ,  ben and dorothy metcalfe ,  and robert hunter . 
according to both patrick moore and an interview with dorothy stowe ,  dorothy metcalfe ,  jim bohlen and robert hunter ,  the founders of the don't make a wave committee were paul cote ,  irving and dorothy stowe and jim and marie bohlen . 
in the late 1960s ,  the u . s .  had plans for an underground nuclear weapon test in the tectonically unstable island of amchitka in alaska . 
while no earthquake or tsunami followed the test ,  the opposition grew when the u . s .  announced they would detonate a bomb five times more powerful than the first one . 
he was dean of that medical school in 1920 and 1921.
whipple's research interests during his career primarily included anemia and the physiology and pathology of the liver . 
but he also researched and made significant contributions to tuberculosis ,  pancreatitis ,  chloroform poisoning in animals ,  the metabolism of bile pigments and iron ,  the constituents of the bile ,  and the regeneration of plasma protein ,  protein metabolism ,  and the stroma of the red blood cells . 
through his chloroform liver injury studies ,  whipple demonstrated that the liver was the site of fibrinogen synthesis . 
whipple shared the nobel prize in physiology or medicine in 1934 with george r .  minot and william p .  murphy `` for their discoveries concerning liver therapy in cases of anemia '' . 
later ,  he and hooper studied bile pigments and their production outside the liver by way of bile fistulas at the hooper foundation at uc san francisco . 
in 1937, whipple collaborated with william b .  hawkins to determine the life-span of the red blood cell in dogs . 
in his landmark studies ,  published as a series `` blood regeneration in severe anemia '' beginning in 1925, he demonstrated that raw liver fed to anemic dogs was the most effective diet additive for reversing the anemia by boosting the production of red blood cells . 
when whipple first joined the johns hopkins university as an assistant ,  he worked under william h .  welch ,  focusing on the repair and regeneration of liver cells . 
george hoyt whipple  -lrb-  august 28, 1878 – february 1, 1976 -rrb- was an american physician ,  pathologist ,  biomedical researcher ,  and medical school educator and administrator . 
the göktürk rulers originated from the ashina clan ,  who were first attested to 439.
although göktürk khaganate once provided support to the tang dynasty in the early period of chinese civil war ,  the conflicts between göktürk and tang finally broke out when tang was gradually reuniting china . 
in 679, ashide wenfu and ashide fengzhi ,  who were turkic leaders of the chanyu protectorate  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  declared ashina nishufu as qaghan and revolted against the tang dynasty . 
in 744, allied with tang dynasty ,  uyghur khaganate defeated the last göktürk khaganate and controlled mongolia plateau . 
with the submission of turk tribes ,  tang conquered mongolia plateau . 
guilt ,  from o . e . 
feeling guilt for one's own actions . 
guilt is often associated with anxiety . 
feelings of guilt can prompt subsequent virtuous behavior . 
guilt is closely related to the concept of remorse . 
defenses against feeling guilt can become an overriding aspect of one's personality . 
the latin word for guilt is `` culpa '' ,  a word sometimes seen in law literature ,  for instance in `` mea culpa '' meaning `` my fault  -lrb-  guilt  -rrb- ``  . 
in mania ,  according to otto fenichel ,  the patient succeeds in applying to guilt `` the defense mechanism of denial by overcompensation .  .  . re-enacts being a person without guilt feelings . `` 
collective guilt  -lrb-  or group guilt  -rrb-  is the unpleasant and often emotional reaction that results among a group of individuals when it is perceived that the group illegitimately harmed members of another group . 
