also in 1867, abdülaziz became the first ottoman sultan to formally recognize the title of khedive  -lrb-  viceroy  -rrb-  to be used by the vali  -lrb-  governor  -rrb-  of the ottoman eyalet of egypt and sudan  -lrb-  1517–1867 -rrb- ,  which thus became the autonomous ottoman khedivate of egypt and sudan  -lrb-  1867–1914 -rrb- . 
some of his compositions ,  together with those of the other members of the ottoman dynasty ,  have been collected in the album ``  ''european music at the ottoman court '' '' by the london academy of ottoman court music . 
abdülaziz  -lrb-  ottoman turkish: عبد العزيز / `` `abdü’l-`azīz '' ,  ; 8 february 18304 june 1876 -rrb- was the 32nd sultan of the ottoman empire and reigned between 25 june 1861 and 30 may 1876.
he was also integral in establishing the first ottoman civil code . 
apart from his passion for the ottoman navy ,  which had the world's third largest fleet in 1875  -lrb-  after the british and french navies  -rrb-  ,  the sultan took an interest in documenting the ottoman empire . 
egypt and sudan  -lrb-  together with cyprus  -rrb-  nominally remained ottoman territories until 5 november 1914, when the british empire declared war against the ottoman empire during world war i . 
abdera was an ancient carthaginian and roman port on a hill above the modern adra on the southeastern mediterranean coast of spain . 
abdera is a municipality and a former major greek `` polis '' on the coast of thrace . 
paul urged him to go to corinth at the time ,  but apollos refused ,  stating that he would come later when he had an opportunity . 
priscilla and aquila ,  a jewish christian couple who had come to ephesus with the apostle paul ,  instructed apollos:
paul's first epistle to the corinthians  -lrb-  ad 55 -rrb- mentions apollos as an important figure at corinth . 
paul states that the schism arose because of the corinthians' immaturity in faith . 
the term `` acquis '' is also used to describe laws adopted under the schengen agreement ,  prior to its integration into the european union legal order by the treaty of amsterdam ,  in which case one speaks of the `` schengen acquis '' . 
during the process of the enlargement of the european union ,  the acquis was divided into 31 chapters for the purpose of negotiation between the eu and the candidate member states for the fifth enlargement  -lrb-  the ten that joined in 2004 plus romania and bulgaria which joined in 2007 -rrb- . 
an antacid is a substance which neutralizes stomach acidity and is used to relieve heartburn ,  indigestion or an upset stomach . 
effervescent antacids may also contain aspirin ,  sodium carbonate ,  or tartaric acid . 
when excessive amounts of acids are produced in the stomach the natural mucous barrier that protects the lining of the stomach can damage the esophagus in people with acid reflux . 
antacids may be formulated with other active ingredients such as simethicone to control gas or alginic acid to act as a physical barrier to acid . 
the `` chronicle of the kings of alba '' says of áed: `` edus áed held the same i . e . 
áed mac cináeda  -lrb-  died 878 -rrb- was a son of cináed mac ailpín . 
in spite of his failures ,  abdul hamid was regarded as the most gracious ottoman sultan . 
when his brother mustafa iii died ,  abdul hamid succeeded him on 21 january 1774.
abdul hamid tried to strengthen ottoman rule over syria ,  egypt ,  and iraq . 
abdul hamid died on 7 april 1789, at the age of sixty-four ,  in constantinople . 
abdul hamid now sought to reform the empire's armed forces . 
abdur rahman khan  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  between 1840 and 1844october 1, 1901 -rrb- was emir of afghanistan from 1880 to 1901.
he was the third son of mohammad afzal khan ,  and grandson of dost mohammad khan . 
abdur rahman lived in exile in tashkent . 
before his death in herat ,  on june 9, 1863, abdur rahman's grandfather ,  dost mohammad khan ,  nominated his third son ,  sher ali khan ,  as his successor ,  passing over the two elder brothers ,  afzal khan and azam khan . 
the musahiban are descendants of dost mohammad khan's older brother ,  sultan mohammad khan . 
j .  p .  de florian's `` gonsalve de cordoue '' and chateaubriand's `` le dernier des abencerrages '' are adaptations of pérez de hita's story . 
the apartment where this is said to have taken place is one of the most beautiful courts of the alhambra ,  and is still called the hall of the abencerrages . 
1997-2010: the borough of port talbot ,  and the borough of neath wards of briton ferry east ,  briton ferry west ,  coedffranc central ,  coedffranc north and coedffranc west . 
1983-1997: the borough of afan ,  and the borough of neath wards nos . 
the 2017 result also made aberavon the safest labour seat in wales . 
the former urban district corresponds to the three communities of abercarn ,  crumlin and newbridge . 
abercarn is home to abercarn rugby club which is a member of the welsh rugby union ,  and to abercarn united football club which plays in division one of the gwent county league . 
two major industries supported the growth of the community: first iron ,  then coal . 
coal mined in aberdare parish rose from in 1844 to in 1850, and the coal trade ,  which after 1875 was the chief support of the town ,  soon reached huge dimensions . 
the growth of the coal trade inevitably led to a number of industrial disputes ,  some of which were local and others which affected the wider coalfield . 
welsh was the prominent language until the mid 20th century and aberdare was an important centre of welsh language publishing . 
in 1974, following local government re-organization ,  aberdare became part of the county of mid glamorgan and the cynon valley borough council . 
aberdare  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is a town in the cynon valley area of rhondda cynon taf ,  wales ,  at the confluence of the rivers dare  -lrb-  dâr  -rrb-  and cynon . 
since 1984 the parliamentary seat ,  now known as cynon valley has been held by ann clwyd . 
steam coal was subsequently found in the rhondda and further west ,  but many of the great companies of the welsh coal industry's gilded age started operation in aberdare and the lower cynon valley ,  including those of samuel thomas ,  david davies and sons ,  nixon's navigation and powell duffryn . 
by 1901, the census recorded that 71.5% of the population of aberdare urban district spoke welsh ,  but this fell to 65.2% in 1911.
in the early 19th century the population grew rapidly ,  owing to the abundance of coal and iron ore , : the population of the whole parish ,  1,486 in 1801, increased tenfold during the first half of the 19th century . 
the rise of the political labour movement and the subsequent decline of the welsh language in the valleys ,  ultimately led to its decline and closure in 1934.
later ,  the formation of the glamorgan county council  -lrb-  upon which aberdare had five elected members  -rrb-  in 1889, followed by the aberdare urban district council ,  which replaced the local board in 1889, transformed the local politics of the aberdare valley . 
the iron industry was gradually superseded by coal and all the five iron works had closed by 1875, as the local supply of iron ore was inadequate to meet the ever-increasing demand created by the invention of steel ,  and as a result the importing of ore proved more profitable . 
aberdare ,  during its boom years ,  was considered a centre of welsh culture: it hosted the first national eisteddfod in 1861, with which david williams  -lrb-  alaw goch  -rrb-  was closely associated . 
these formulae are
in the case of formula_8, this gives formula_9.
in the case of formula_8, this result reduces to formula_9, which in the limit formula_10 may be approximated by formula_11.
in the case of formula_8, this result reduces to formula_17, and in the limit formula_10 this may be approximated by formula_11.
where formula_14, giving the components of the light beam in the earth's frame in terms of the components in the sun's frame . 
in the sun's frame ,  consider a beam of light with velocity equal to the speed of light c ,  with x and y velocity components formula_1 and formula_2, at an angle formula_3.
thus the angle of the light in the earth's frame in terms of the angle in the sun's frame is
thus ,  the speed of light to the speed of the earth's annual motion in its orbit is `` 10210 to one ,  from whence it would follow ,  that light moves ,  or is propagated as far as from the sun to the earth in 8' 12 '' . `` 
the angle of the beam in the earth's frame is thus
the earth's motion would be unaffected by the aether due to d'alembert's paradox . 
this deflection may equivalently be described as a light-time effect due to motion of the earth during the 8.3 minutes that it takes light to travel from the sun to earth . 
this relativistic derivation keeps the speed of light formula_20 constant in all frames of reference ,  unlike the classical derivation above . 
these results allowed bradley to make one of the earliest measurements of the speed of light . 
the first classical explanation was provided in 1729, by james bradley as described above ,  who attributed it to the finite speed of light and the motion of earth in its orbit around the sun . 
by projecting the little circle for a star in the pole of the ecliptic ,  he could simplify the calculation of the relationship between the speed of light and the speed of the earth's annual motion in its orbit as follows:
bradley conceived of an explanation in terms of a corpuscular theory of light in which light is made of particles unaffected by gravity . 
aberration is related to two other phenomena ,  light-time correction ,  which is due to the motion of an observed object during the time taken by its light to reach an observer ,  and relativistic beaming ,  which is an angling of the light emitted by a moving light source . 
consider the case of an observer and a light source moving relative to each other at constant velocity ,  with a light beam moving from the source to the observer . 
in the early nineteenth century the wave theory of light was being rediscovered ,  and in 1804 thomas young adapted bradley's explanation for corpuscular light to wavelike light traveling through a medium known as the luminiferous aether . 
planetary aberration is the combination of the aberration of light  -lrb-  due to earth's velocity  -rrb-  and light-time correction  -lrb-  due to the object's motion and distance  -rrb-  ,  as calculated in the rest frame of the solar system . 
aberration may be explained as the difference in angle of a beam of light in different inertial frames of reference . 
however ,  if the time between emission and detection of the light is short compared to the orbital period of the earth ,  the earth may be approximated as an inertial frame and aberrational effects are equivalent to light-time corrections . 
in optics ,  aberration is a property of optical systems such as lenses that causes light to be spread out over some region of space rather than focused to a point . 
they appear even when using monochromatic light ,  hence the name . 
chromatic aberration does not appear when monochromatic light is used . 
2007 was grant's 30th year in music . 
grant followed this album with the first of her christmas albums ,  which would later be the basis for her holiday shows . 
the album was certified gold in 2000.
on june 24, 2008, grant re-released her 1988 album ,  `` lead me on '' ,  in honor of its 20th anniversary . 
grant and gill have one daughter together ,  corrina grant gill ,  born march 12, 2001.
grant recreated the `` lead me on '' tour in the fall of 2008.
 ''age to age '' became the first christian album by a solo artist to be certified gold  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- and the first christian album to be certified platinum  -lrb-  1985 -rrb- . 
during the 1980s ,  grant was also a backup singer for bill gaither . 
on june 19, 1982, grant married fellow christian musician gary chapman . 
grant's next album ,  `` how mercy looks from here '' ,  was released on may 14, 2013 and was produced by marshall altman . 
grant returned to her roots with the 2002 release of an album of hymns titled `` legacy .  .  .  hymns and faith '' . 
she appeared on the 2008 album ``  '' singing `` could i have this dance '' . 
she has been referred to as `` the queen of christian pop '' . 
as aberdeen grew ,  many businesses and buildings were constructed along aberdeen's main street . 
the only railroad still running through aberdeen is the burlington northern santa fe . 
aberdeen had four different railroad companies with depots built in the newly developing town . 
aberdeen is located in northeastern south dakota ,  in the james river valley ,  approximately west of the river . 
aberdour is home to fife's only senior shinty club . 
another road leads coastwards from easter aberdour . 
for much of its history aberdour was two villages ,  wester aberdour and easter aberdour ,  on either side of the dour burn; however this distinction was blurred by the 19th century arrival of the railway . 
aberdour  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  is a scenic and historic village on the south coast of fife ,  scotland . 
aberdour was a 2005 finalist in the prestigious `` beautiful scotland in bloom '' awards . 
kirk had long believed that the local doon hill was the gateway to the `` secret commonwealth '' ,  or the land of the fairies . 
kirk's cousin ,  graham of duchray ,  was then to claim that the spectre of kirk had visited him in the night ,  and told him that he had been carried off by the fairies . 
the huge pine tree that still stands at the top of doon hill is said to contain kirk's imprisoned spirit . 
however ,  the most local historical figure is the reverend robert kirk ,  born in 1644.
however ,  when kirk's spectre appeared ,  graham was apparently too shocked by the vision to throw the knife ,  and kirk's ghost faded away forever . 
town play at the penypound stadium and are members of the welsh league division 2 for season 2016-17.
the town hosted the 2016 national eisteddfod of wales . 
in recent decades the number of welsh speakers in the town has increased dramatically . 
a cattle market has been held in abergavenny on its current site since 1863.
owing to its geographical location ,  the town was frequently embroiled in the border warfare and power play of the 12th and 13th centuries in the welsh marches . 
various markets are held in the market hall ,  for example: tuesdays ,  fridays and saturdays – retail market; wednesdays – flea market; fourth thursday of each month – farmers' market; third sunday of each month – antique fair; second saturday of each month – craft fair . 
originally the site of a roman fort ,  gobannium ,  it became a medieval walled town within the welsh marches . 
the town derives its name from a brythonic word `` gobannia '' meaning `` river of the blacksmiths '' ,  and relates to the town's pre-roman importance in iron smelting . 
abergavenny  -lrb-  ;  ,  archaically `` abergafenni '' meaning `` mouth of the river gavenny ''  -rrb-  is a market town and community in monmouthshire ,  wales . 
coldbrook park was a country house in an estate some southeast of the town . 
it is also home to the abergavenny welsh society ,  cymreigyddion y fenni ,  and the local abergavenny eisteddfod . 
abersychan is a settlement and community north of pontypool in torfaen ,  wales ,  and lies within the boundaries of the historic county of monmouthshire and the preserved county of gwent . 
the project included a new multi-storey car park ,  a revamp of public areas and the town's metropole theatre . 
there are very few written historical records relating to the area before the town developed in the middle of the 19th century . 
whilst in the main the area has an older housing stock there are several developments of modern ,  often large homes ,  generally found on the outskirts of the town with views out over the surrounding area . 
situated on the a467 the town is north of the m4 and south of the a465 `` heads of the valleys '' trunk road . 
major industry came to the area in 1843 when the locality's first deep coal mine was sunk at tir nicholas farm ,  cwmtillery . 
before the coming of major industry ,  abertillery was little more than an area of scattered farms in the ancient parish of aberystruth . 
abettor  -lrb-  from `` to abet , ``  old french `` abeter '' ,  `` à '' and `` beter '' ,  to bait ,  urge dogs upon any one; this word is probably of scandinavian origin ,  meaning to cause to bite  -rrb-  ,  is a legal term implying one who instigates ,  encourages or assists another to commit an offence . 
the term hold in abeyance is used in lawsuits and court cases when a case is temporarily put on hold . 
other court cases may be held in abeyance when the issue may be resolved by another court or another event . 
in this system ,  sons are preferred from eldest to youngest ,  the heirs of a son over the next son ,  and any son over daughters ,  but there is no preference among daughters: they or their heirs inherit equally . 
the most common use of the term is in the case of english peerage dignities . 
if the claim is unopposed ,  the committee will generally award the claim ,  unless there is evidence of collusion ,  the peerage has been in abeyance for more than a century ,  or the petitioner holds less than one-third of the claim . 
in modern law ,  the title would have fallen into abeyance between the two daughters of the second son ,  and nobody else would have been able to claim it even if the abeyance were settled; however ,  in 1597, the grandson of the third son  -lrb-  whose father had been re-created baron de la warr in 1570 -rrb- claimed the title and its precedence . 
anders celsius was born in uppsala ,  sweden on 27 november 1701.
he founded the uppsala astronomical observatory in 1741, and in 1742 proposed the celsius temperature scale which bears his name . 
anders celsius  -lrb-  27 november 170125 april 1744 -rrb- was a swedish astronomer ,  physicist and mathematician . 
the name `` celsius '' is a latinization of the estate's name  -lrb-  latin `` celsus '' `` mound ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''the adam carolla show '' debuted in january 2006.
the show was cancelled in 2015.
from august 2005 to november 2005, carolla hosted the talk show `` too late with adam carolla '' on comedy central . 
carolla can be seen paying off the book and receiving his diploma in an episode of his 2005 television show ,  `` the adam carolla project '' . 
carolla's `` the car show '' debuted on speed tv july 13, 2011.
adam carolla was born in los angeles county ,  california . 
he hosts `` the adam carolla show '' ,  a talk show distributed as a podcast which set the record as the `` most downloaded podcast '' as judged by guinness world records in 2011.
on the july 23, 2009, episode of the adam carolla podcast ,  carolla announced that cbs was not picking up the pilot for the 2009 season ,  `` in any way ,  shape or form . `` 
in early 2008, actor gerard butler sat in and observed adam carolla on `` the adam carolla show '' in order to prepare for his role in the ugly truth as the cynical and crass talk-radio host mike chadway allegedly based on adam carolla . 
carolla has made numerous guest appearances on political talk shows as a commentator . 
in october 2005, carolla was announced as the host of a new morning radio show on the infinity broadcasting network . 
in june 2010, carolla said that his nbc pilot had not been picked up and was now `` dead . `` 
he hosted `` the adam carolla project '' ,  a home improvement television program which aired on tlc in 2005 and `` the car show '' on speed tv in 2011.
at the end of 2009, the adam carolla podcast was selected by itunes for its end-of-the-year awards as the best audio podcast of 2009.
then the definition of the auto-correlation function between times formula_10 and formula_11 is
subtracting the mean before multiplication yields the auto-covariance function between times formula_10 and formula_11:
if formula_1 is a wide-sense stationary process then the mean formula_16 and the variance formula_17 are time-independent ,  and further the autocovariance function depends only on the lag between formula_10 and formula_11: the autocovariance depends only on the time-distance between the pair of values but not on their position in time . 
it removed some algol features such as `` passing parameters by name ''  -lrb-  which in algol 60 means passing the address of a short subroutine to recalculate the parameter each time it was mentioned  -rrb-  . 
the au file format is a simple audio file format introduced by sun microsystems . 
andalusia  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is an autonomous community in southern spain . 
the name `` andalusia '' is derived from the arabic word `` al-andalus ''  -lrb-  الأندلس  -rrb-  . 
it is the highest distinction given by the autonomous community of andalusia . 
the spanish place name `` andalucía ''  -lrb-  immediate source of the english `` andalusia ''  -rrb-  was introduced into the spanish languages in the 13th century under the form `` el andalucía '' . 
andalusia has been a traditionally agricultural region ,  compared to the rest of spain and the rest of europe . 
to the south the geographic subregion of upper andalusia lies mostly within the baetic system ,  while lower andalusia is in the baetic depression of the valley of the guadalquivir . 
to prevent this bill from passing into law ,  charles had dissolved parliament in july 1679, and in the following october had prorogued its successor ,  which became known as the exclusion bill parliament ,  without allowing it to meet . 
8:17 `` abiathar ,  the son of achimelech '' should be read ,  with the syriac ,  for `` achimelech ,  the son of abiathar . `` 
abiathar joined david ,  who was then in the cave of adullam  -lrb-  1 sam . 
abiathar  -lrb-   `` ’eḇyāṯār '' ,  `` the father is great ''  -rrb-  ,  in the hebrew bible ,  son of ahimelech or ahijah ,  high priest at nob ,  the fourth in descent from eli  -lrb-  1 sam . 
abigail  -lrb-   ,  `` avigayil ''  -rrb-  was the wife of nabal; she became a wife of the future king david after nabal's death  -lrb-  1 samuel   -rrb-  . 
levenson and halpern suggest that abigail may ,  in fact ,  also be the same person as abigail ,  mother of amasa . 
abigail and david's second wife ,  ahinoam the jezreelite ,  accompany david and his war band as they seek refuge in philistine territory . 
both wives then settle with david in hebron ,  where abigail gives birth to david's second son ,  chileab  -lrb-  also called daniel  -rrb-  . 
azad kashmir is part of the greater kashmir region ,  which is the subject of a long-running conflict between pakistan and india . 
agriculture is a major part of azad kashmir's economy . 
azad jammu and kashmir has an almost entirely muslim population . 
another major language of azad kashmir is gujari . 
the population of azad kashmir is almost entirely muslim . 
azad jammu and kashmir  -lrb-   `` āzād jammū̃ o kaśmīr '' ,  translation: free jammu and kashmir  -rrb-  ,  abbreviated as ajk and commonly known as azad kashmir ,  is a nominally self-governing polity administered by pakistan . 
except in the legal sense ,  azad kashmir has been fully integrated into pakistan . 
the state has its own supreme court and a high court ,  while the government of pakistan's ministry of kashmir affairs and gilgit-baltistan serves as a link with azad kashmir's government ,  although azad kashmir is not represented in the parliament of pakistan . 
kashmiris in azad kashmir observe the kashmir black day on october 27 of each year since 1947 as day of protest against military occupation in indian controlled jammu and kashmir . 
azad kashmir's financial matters ,  i . e .  ,  budget and tax affairs ,  are dealt with by the azad jammu and kashmir council rather than by pakistan's central board of revenue . 
azad jammu and kashmir  -lrb-  ajk  -rrb-  is a self-governing state under pakistani control ,  but under pakistan's constitution the state is informally part of the country . 
azad kashmir has a total area of  ,  and a total population of 4,045,366 as per the 2017 census . 
the territory lies west of the indian-administered state of jammu and kashmir ,  and was previously part of the former princely state of jammu and kashmir . 
the arabian sea's surface area is about  . 
major indian ports in the arabian sea are mundra port ,  kandla port ,  nava sheva ,  kochi port ,  mumbai port ,  and mormugão . 
jawaharlal nehru port in mumbai is the largest port in the arabian sea ,  and the largest container port in india . 
port of salalah in salalah ,  oman is also a major port in the area . 
the arabian sea historically and geographically has been referred to by many different names by arabian and european geographers and travellers ,  including indian sea ,  persian sea ,  sindhu sagar ,  arabbi samudra ,  erythraean sea ,  sindh sea ,  and akhzar sea . 
the gulf of aden in the west ,  connects the arabian sea to the red sea through the strait of bab-el-mandeb ,  and the gulf of oman is in the northwest ,  connecting it to the persian gulf . 
aspartic acid  -lrb-  aspartate  -rrb-  is one of the most common amino acids in the typical diet . 
reviews have found no association between aspartame and cancer . 
in 1996, the fda removed all restrictions from aspartame ,  allowing it to be used in all foods . 
aspartame is a methyl ester of the dipeptide of the natural amino acids -aspartic acid and -phenylalanine . 
as with methanol and aspartic acid ,  common foods in the typical diet such as milk ,  meat ,  and fruits ,  will lead to ingestion of significantly higher amounts of phenylalanine than would be expected from aspartame consumption . 
phenylalanine is one of the essential amino acids and is required for normal growth and maintenance of life . 
in some fruit juices ,  `` higher '' concentrations of methanol can be found than the amount produced from aspartame in beverages . 
the joint fao/who expert committee on food additives  -lrb-  jecfa  -rrb-  and the european commission's scientific committee on food has determined this value is 40 mg/kg of body weight for aspartame ,  while fda has set its adi for aspartame at 50 mg/kg . 
manufacturers are also required to print ' ''with sweetener -lrb-  s  -rrb- ``  on the label close to the main product name on foods that contain `` sweeteners such as aspartame '' or `` with sugar and sweetener -lrb-  s  -rrb- ``  on `` foods that contain both sugar and sweetener '' . 
independent agencies such as the fda and national cancer institute have reanalyzed multiple studies based on these worries and found no association between aspartame and brain cancer . 
reviews by governmental regulatory bodies have found aspartame safe for consumption at current levels . 
like many other peptides ,  aspartame may hydrolyze  -lrb-  break down  -rrb-  into its constituent amino acids under conditions of elevated temperature or high ph . 
aspartame has been deemed safe for human consumption by over 100 regulatory agencies in their respective countries ,  including the uk food standards agency ,  the european food safety authority  -lrb-  efsa  -rrb-  and health canada . 
at the highest expected human doses of consumption of aspartame ,  there are no increased blood levels of methanol or formic acid ,  and ingesting aspartame at the 90th percentile of intake would produce 25 times less methanol than what would be considered toxic . 
under more severe conditions ,  the peptide bonds are also hydrolyzed ,  resulting in free amino acids . 
in a study done in 1979, the effect of aspartame ingestion on blood and milk amino acid levels in lactating women was tested . 
aspartame  -lrb-  apm  -rrb-  is an artificial non-saccharide sweetener used as a sugar substitute in some foods and beverages . 
a 12 us fluid ounce  -lrb-  355 ml  -rrb-  can of diet soda contains of aspartame ,  and for a adult ,  it takes approximately 21 cans of diet soda daily to consume the of aspartame that would surpass the fda's 50 milligrams per kilogram of body weight adi of aspartame from diet soda alone . 
the native file format of autocad is ``  . dwg '' . 
since 2010, autocad was released as a mobile- and web app as well ,  marketed as autocad 360.
esri arcmap 10 permits export as autocad drawing files . 
autocad supports a number of apis for customization and automation . 
autocad dxf  -lrb-  drawing interchange format ,  or drawing exchange format  -rrb-  is a cad data file format developed by autodesk for enabling data interoperability between autocad and other programs . 
the data format of a dxf is called a `` tagged data '' format which `` means that each data element in the file is preceded by an integer number that is called a group code . 
the basic organization of a dxf file is as follows:
fragmentation is a form of asexual reproduction where a new organism grows from a fragment of the parent . 
an important form of fission is binary fission ,  where the parent organism is replaced by two daughter organisms ,  because it literally divides in two . 
parthenogenesis is a form of agamogenesis in which an unfertilized egg develops into a new individual . 
many protists and fungi alternate between sexual and asexual reproduction . 
a number of plants use both sexual and asexual means to produce new plants ,  some species alter their primary modes of reproduction from sexual to asexual under varying environmental conditions . 
eukaryotes  -lrb-  such as protists and unicellular fungi  -rrb-  may reproduce in a functionally similar manner by mitosis; most of these are also capable of sexual reproduction . 
many multi-cellular organisms form spores during their biological life cycle in a process called sporogenesis . 
vegetative propagation is a type of asexual reproduction found in plants where new individuals are formed without the production of seeds or spores by meiosis or syngamy . 
apomixis in plants is the formation of a new sporophyte without fertilization . 
agamogenesis is any form of reproduction that does not involve a male gamete . 
jacob gerritsz cuyp ,  his father ,  was a portraitist . 
cuyp's `` van goyen phase '' can be placed approximately in the early 1640s . 
generally ,  cuyp learned tone from the exceptionally prolific jan van goyen ,  light from jan both and form from his father ,  jacob gerritsz cuyp . 
the next phase in the development of cuyp's increasingly amalgamated style is due to the influence of jan both . 
lastly and most importantly ,  the precision in mimicking cuyp's style by his follower abraham van calraet and their contentious signatures makes it all the more difficult to determine which paintings are genuinely that of cuyp and which ones are actually accurate reproductions in his style . 
cuyp's drawings reveal him to be a draftsman of superior quality . 
the amount of biographical information regarding aelbert cuyp is tremendously limited . 
with a strength of 65 kcal/mol ,  the pi bond is significantly weaker than the sigma bond . 
like a single covalent bond ,  double bonds can be described in terms of overlapping atomic orbitals ,  except that ,  unlike a single bond  -lrb-  which consists of a single sigma bond  -rrb-  ,  a carbon–carbon double bond consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond . 
this reaction can be used to determine the position of a double bond in an unknown alkene . 
related to the wittig reaction is the peterson olefination . 
each carbon of the double bond uses its three sp hybrid orbitals to form sigma bonds to three atoms  -lrb-  the other carbon and two hydrogen atoms  -rrb-  . 
twisting to a 90° dihedral angle between two of the groups on the carbons requires less energy than the strength of a pi bond ,  and the bond still holds . 
if the substituents are on either side of the bond ,  it is defined as `` trans ''- . 
for example ,  the c–c–c bond angle in propylene is 123.9° . 
this double bond is stronger than a single covalent bond  -lrb-  611 kj/mol for c=c vs .  347 kj/mol for c–c  -rrb-  and also shorter ,  with an average bond length of 1.33 ångströms  -lrb-  133 pm  -rrb-  . 
the most well-known of these methods is the wittig reaction ,  but other related methods are known . 
alkenes can also be converted into alcohols via the oxymercuration–demercuration reaction  ,  the hydroboration–oxidation reaction or by mukaiyama hydration . 
alkenes can be synthesized from other alkenes via rearrangement reactions . 
the cope reaction is a `` syn ''-elimination that occurs at or below 150 °c ,  for example:
as predicted by the vsepr model of electron pair repulsion ,  the molecular geometry of alkenes includes bond angles about each carbon in a double bond of about 120° . 
iupac recognizes two names for hydrocarbon groups containing carbon–carbon double bonds ,  the vinyl group and the allyl group . 
besides olefin metathesis  -lrb-  described above  -rrb-  ,  a large number of pericyclic reactions can be used such as the ene reaction and the cope rearrangement . 
in contrast ,  a fully broken pi bond has an energetic cost of around 65 kcal/mol . 
this reaction is carried out on an industrial scale to produce ethanol . 
the wittig reaction involves reaction of an aldehyde or ketone with a wittig reagent  -lrb-  or phosphorane  -rrb-  of the type php=chr to produce an alkene and php=o . 
an allene is a compound in which one carbon atom has double bonds with each of its two adjacent carbon centres . 
the central carbon atom of allene forms two sigma bonds and two pi bonds . 
the triple bond is very strong with a bond strength of 839 kj/mol . 
in acetylene ,  the h–c≡c bond angles are 180° . 
in chemistry ,  the suffix -yne is used to denote the presence of a triple bond . 
sometimes a number between hyphens is inserted before it to state which atoms the triple bond is between . 
the c≡c bond distance of 121 picometers is much shorter than the c=c distance in alkenes  -lrb-  134 pm  -rrb-  or the c–c bond in alkanes  -lrb-  153 pm  -rrb-  . 
the two sp orbitals project on opposite sides of the carbon atom . 
in organic chemistry ,  an alkyne is an unsaturated hydrocarbon containing at least one carbon—carbon triple bond . 
acetylide derivatives are synthetically useful nucleophiles that participate in c–c bond forming reactions ,  as illustrated in the area called `` reppe chemistry '' . 
 ''-yne '' is also used as an infix to name substituent groups that are triply bound to the parent compound . 
abiword  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a free and open-source software word processor . 
the name `` abiword '' is derived from the root of the spanish word ``  ''abierto '' '' ,  meaning `` open '' . 
link grammar is both a theory of syntax and an open source parser which is now developed by the abiword project . 
the ames test is a widely employed method that uses bacteria to test whether a given chemical can cause mutations in the dna of the test organism . 
mutagens identified in the ames test need not necessarily be carcinogenic ,  and further tests are required for any potential carcinogen identified in the test . 
the method tests the capability of the tested substance in creating mutations that result in a return to a `` prototrophic '' state ,  so that the cells can grow on a histidine-free medium . 
mutagens identified via ames test are also possible carcinogens ,  and early studies by ames showed that 90% of known carcinogens may be identified via this test . 
the ames test is often used as one of the initial screens for potential drugs to weed out possible carcinogens ,  and it is one of the eight tests required under the pesticide act  -lrb-  usa  -rrb-  and one of six tests required under the toxic substances control act  -lrb-  usa  -rrb-  . 
the ames test was initially developed using agar plates  -lrb-  the plate incorporation technique  -rrb-  ,  as described above . 
ace inhibitors block the conversion of angiotensin i  -lrb-  ati  -rrb-  to angiotensin ii  -lrb-  atii  -rrb-  . 
bradykinin increases because of less inactivation by ace . 
this group of drugs causes relaxation of blood vessels as well as a decrease in blood volume ,  which leads to lower blood pressure and decreased oxygen demand from the heart . 
an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor  -lrb-  ace inhibitor  -rrb-  is a pharmaceutical drug used primarily for the treatment of hypertension  -lrb-  elevated blood pressure  -rrb-  and congestive heart failure . 
an antianginal is any drug used in the treatment of `` angina pectoris '' ,  a symptom of ischaemic heart disease . 
the atc classification system is a strict hierarchy ,  meaning that each code necessarily has one and only one parent code ,  except for the 14 codes at the topmost level which have no parents . 
this pharmaceutical coding system divides drugs into different groups according to the organ or system on which they act ,  their therapeutic intent or nature ,  and the drug's chemical characteristics . 
other manufacturers introduced their own variations of ata-1 such as `` fast ata '' and `` fast ata-2 '' . 
on the other hand ,  ata hard drives and solid state drives do not use atapi . 
an early `` eide '' drive might be compatible with ata-2, while a later one with ata-6.
after the introduction of serial ata  -lrb-  sata  -rrb-  in 2003, the original ata was renamed to parallel ata ,  or pata for short . 
when a newer serial ata  -lrb-  sata  -rrb-  was introduced in 2003, the original ata was renamed to parallel ata ,  or pata for short . 
from ata-2 on ,  an `` identify drive '' command was implemented that can be sent and which will return all drive parameters . 
soon after the introduction of serial ata  -lrb-  sata  -rrb-  in 2003, use of parallel ata declined . 
the parallel ata protocols up through ata-3 require that once a command has been given on an ata interface ,  it must complete before any subsequent command may be given . 
atapi devices include cd-rom and dvd-rom drives ,  tape drives ,  and large-capacity floppy drives such as the zip drive and superdisk drive . 
parallel ata cables transfer data 16 bits at a time . 
in the ata standard ,  pin 20 is defined as a mechanical key and is not used . 
a drive mode called `` cable select '' was described as optional in ata-1 and has come into fairly widespread use with ata-5 and later . 
the latest versions of parallel ata support up to 133 mbyte/s . 
the terms `` integrated drive electronics ''  -lrb-  ide  -rrb-  ,  `` enhanced ide '' and `` eide '' have come to be used interchangeably with ata  -lrb-  now parallel ata ,  or pata  -rrb-  . 
parallel ata cables have a maximum allowable length of  . 
parallel ata  -lrb-  pata  -rrb-  ,  originally ' ,  is an interface standard for the connection of storage devices such as hard disk drives ,  floppy disk drives ,  and optical disc drives in computers . 
it uses the underlying '  -lrb-  ata  -rrb-  and packet interface  -lrb-  atapi  -rrb-  standards . 
for comparison ,  in serial ata ,  32-bit crc is used for both commands and data . 
it is a common myth that the controller on the master drive assumes control over the slave drive ,  or that the master drive may claim priority of communication over the other device on the same ata interface  . 
for all modern ata host adapters ,  this is not true ,  as modern ata host adapters support `` independent device timing '' . 
adding the cd-rom drive would have required removal of one of the drives . 
similarly ,  ata-6 introduced a maximum transfer speed of 100 megabytes per second ,  and some drives complying to this version of the standard are marketed as `` pata/100 '' drives . 
pin 28 is only used to let the drives know their position on the cable; it is not used by the host when communicating with the drives . 
atapi devices are also `` speaking ata '' ,  as the ata physical interface and protocol are still being used to send the packets . 
in addition ,  no ata hard drives existed in 2005 that were capable of measured sustained transfer rates of above 80 mb/s . 
ata-2 also was the first to note that devices other than hard drives could be attached to the interface: as mentioned in the previous sections ,  ata was originally designed for ,  and worked only with hard disk drives and devices that could emulate them . 
connecting such a drive to a host with an ata-5 or earlier interface will limit the usable capacity to the maximum of the interface . 
the interface used by these drives was standardized in 1994 as ansi standard x3.221-1994, `` at attachment interface for disk drives '' . 
this evolved into the standard ata interface for ease of cross-compatibility ,  though the sound card ata interface still usually supported only a single cd-rom and not hard drives . 
after later versions of the standard were developed ,  this became known as `` ata-1 '' . 
a 44-pin variant pata connector is used for 2.5 inch drives inside laptops . 
the first such drives appeared in compaq pcs in 1986.
the mode that a drive must use is often set by a jumper setting on the drive itself ,  which must be manually set to `` master '' or `` slave '' . 
when pc motherboard makers started to include onboard ata interfaces in place of the earlier isa plug-in cards ,  there was usually only one ata connector on the board ,  which could support up to two hard drives . 
the first drive interface used 22-bit addressing mode which resulted in a maximum drive capacity of two gigabytes . 
the atari 2600, originally sold as the atari video computer system or atari vcs until november 1982, is a home video game console from atari ,  inc . 
two atari published titles ,  both from 1982, `` e . t . 
atari invested heavily in two games for the 2600, `` pac-man '' and `` e . t . 
atari sued mystique in court over the release of the game . 
modern atari 2600 clones remain on the market . 
atari dropped support for the atari 2600 on january 1, 1992, after an estimated 30 million units were sold over the system's lifetime . 
in 1982, atari launched its second home console ,  which it named the atari 5200; to standardize its naming ,  the vcs was renamed to the `` atari 2600 video computer system '' ,  or `` atari 2600 '' for short ,  with the 2600 being derived from the manufacture part number cx2600.
the atari 2800 is the japanese version of the 2600 released in october 1983.
after over 14 years on the market ,  the 2600 line was formally discontinued on january 1, 1992, along with the atari 7800 and atari 8-bit computers . 
the atari vcs microconsole ,  planned for release from atari interactive by 2019, is designed on a miniaturization of the atari 2600, including the option for its faux wood paneling . 
by 1977, the product had advanced far enough to brand it as the `` atari video computer system ''  -lrb-  vcs  -rrb-  and engage atari's programmers to develop games for it . 
the atari vcs—and later as the 2600—was wildly successful in the late 1970s and early 1980s ,  to where `` atari '' was a synonym for the system in mainstream media and ,  by extension ,  for video games in general . 
third-party titles competed with atari's share of vcs games ,  only having about half of vcs game sales by 1982.
this microconsole is designed to play several atari 2600 games under emulation on a linux operating system ,  as well as potentially other games for computers and other gaming systems . 
in 1982 atari rebranded the console as the `` atari 2600, '' a name first used on a version of the four-switch model without woodgrain ,  giving it an all black appearance . 
the atari 2600's cpu is the mos technology 6507, a version of the 6502, running at 1.19 mhz in the 2600.
in 1983, the previously japan-only atari 2800 was rebranded as the sears video arcade ii . 
the atari 5200 supersystem ,  commonly known as the atari 5200, is a home video game console that was introduced in 1982 by atari inc .  as a higher-end complementary console for the popular atari 2600.
actual working `` atari video system x '' machines ,  whose hardware is 100% identical to the atari 5200 do exist ,  but are extremely rare . 
david h .  ahl in 1983 described the atari 5200 as `` a 400 computer in disguise '' . 
the 5200's internal hardware is almost identical to that of atari's 8-bit computers ,  although software is not directly compatible between the two systems . 
atari later decided to re-enter the games market with a design that closely matched their original 1978 specifications . 
the atari 7800 does not support backward compatibility for atari 5200 games or accessories . 
the atari 7800 prosystem ,  or simply the atari 7800, is a home video game console officially released by the atari corporation in 1986.
however ,  most atari development was contracted out . 
the project was originally called the atari 3600, though was later renamed the atari 7800.
at the same time ,  the atari 5200  -lrb-  the original intended successor to the atari 2600 -rrb- had been widely criticized for not being able to play atari 2600 games without an adapter . 
the 7800's compatibility with the atari 2600 is made possible by including many of the same chips used in the atari 2600.
this project was cancelled when atari was sold to jack tramiel . 
the atari 7800 differs from the 2600 in several key areas . 
the atari 7800 prosystem was the first game system from atari inc .  designed by an outside company ,  general computer corporation  -lrb-  gcc  -rrb-  . 
atari had been facing mounting pressure in the form of competition from the colecovision ,  which boasted graphics that more closely mirrored arcade games of the time than atari's 2600 system . 
atari's launch of the 7800 under tramiel was far more subdued than warner had planned for the system in 1984 with a marketing budget of just $300,000  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the software libraries of the atari 7800 and sega master system suffered tremendously as a result . 
despite trailing the nintendo entertainment system in terms of number of units sold ,  the 7800 was a profitable enterprise for atari corp .  ,  benefiting largely from atari's name and the system's 2600 compatibility . 
the atari jaguar is a home video game console that was developed by atari corporation . 
atari corp .  tried to play down competing consoles by proclaiming the jaguar was the only `` 64-bit '' system . 
development on the atari jaguar started in the early 1990s by flare technology . 
the atari jaguar struggled to attain a substantial user base . 
atari attempted to extend the lifespan of the system with the atari jaguar cd add-on and marketing the jaguar as the low-cost next generation console ,  with a price tag over $100 less than any of its competitors . 
the jaguar shipped with `` cybermorph '' as the pack-in game . 
the lynx system was originally developed by epyx as the handy game . 
in 1996, atari shut down its internal game development . 
the lynx started off successfully . 
during 1990, the lynx had moderate sales . 
the game system was reviewed in 1990 in `` dragon '' ,  which gave the lynx 5 out of 5 stars . 
in 1995, atari started shifting its focus away from the lynx and put more focus on the atari jaguar . 
ahimsa is not meant to imply pacifism . 
ahimsa as an ethical concept evolved in vedic texts . 
the kural says that ahimsa applies to all life forms . 
the jain concept of ahimsa is characterised by several aspects . 
the ancient hindu texts discuss ahimsa and non-animal life . 
ahimsa is one of the cardinal virtues and an important tenet of jainism ,  hinduism ,  and buddhism . 
the precepts of ahimsa under hinduism require that war must be avoided ,  with sincere and truthful dialogue . 
gandhi stated that he viewed `` ahimsa is in hinduism ,  it is in christianity as well as in islam . `` 
nonviolence or `` ahimsa '' is one of the cardinal virtues and an important tenet of jainism ,  hinduism ,  and buddhism . 
this precept of ahimsa is applicable to both the buddhist layperson and the monk community . 
ahimsa's precept of 'cause no injury' includes one's deeds ,  words ,  and thoughts . 
most popularly ,  mahatma gandhi strongly believed in the principle of `` ahimsa '' . 
later texts of hinduism declare ahimsa one of the primary virtues ,  declare any killing or harming any life as against `` dharma ''  -lrb-  moral life  -rrb-  . 
among the five-sensed beings ,  the precept of non-injury and non-violence to the rational ones  -lrb-  humans  -rrb-  is strongest in jain ahimsa . 
ahimsa is imperative for practitioners of patañjali's eight limb raja yoga system . 
alternate theories of self-defence ,  inspired by ahimsa ,  build principles similar to theories of just war . 
across the texts of hinduism ,  there is a profusion of ideas about the virtue of ahimsa when applied to non-human life ,  but without a universal consensus . 
according to the `` journal citation reports '' ,  the journal has a 2012 impact factor of 3.027, ranking it third out of 296 journals in the category `` mathematics '' . 
an important period for the journal was 1928–1958 with solomon lefschetz as editor . 
sakharov was born in moscow on may 21, 1921.
sakharov entered moscow state university in 1938.
sakharov was the first scientist to introduce twin universes he called `` sheets '' . 
he later wrote:
sakharov never felt that by creating nuclear weapons he had `` known sin '' ,  in oppenheimer's expression . 
sakharov also proposed the idea of induced gravity as an alternative theory of quantum gravity . 
since the late 1950s sakharov had become concerned about the moral and political implications of his work . 
andrei dmitrievich sakharov  -lrb-  ; 21 may 192114 december 1989 -rrb- was a russian nuclear physicist ,  dissident ,  and activist for disarmament ,  peace and human rights . 
 ''life investigation for enceladus ''  -lrb-  `` life ''  -rrb-  is a proposed astrobiology sample-return mission concept . 
 ,  no evidence of extraterrestrial life has been identified . 
the origin of life ,  known as abiogenesis ,  distinct from the evolution of life ,  is another ongoing field of research . 
the fossil record provides the oldest known evidence for life on earth . 
until the 1970s ,  life was thought to be entirely dependent on energy from the sun . 
exobiology is considered to have a narrow scope limited to search of life external to earth ,  whereas subject area of astrobiology is wider and investigates the link between life and the universe ,  which includes the search for extraterrestrial life ,  but also includes the study of life on earth ,  its origin ,  evolution and limits . 
the five research topics are: 1 -rrb- origin and evolution of planetary systems; 2 -rrb- origins of organic compounds in space; 3 -rrb- rock-water-carbon interactions ,  organic synthesis on earth ,  and steps to life; 4 -rrb- life and habitability; 5 -rrb- biosignatures as facilitating life detection . 
according to american astrophysicist neil degrasse tyson: `` at the moment ,  life on earth is the only known life in the universe ,  but there are compelling arguments to suggest we are not alone . `` 
the rare earth hypothesis postulates that multicellular life forms found on earth may actually be more of a rarity than scientists assume . 
the principle of mediocrity suggests that life on earth is not exceptional ,  and it is more than likely to be found on innumerable other worlds . 
the systematic search for possible life outside earth is a valid multidisciplinary scientific endeavor . 
mars ,  enceladus and europa are considered likely candidates in the search for life primarily because they may have underground liquid water ,  a molecule essential for life as we know it for its use as a solvent in cells . 
since earth is the only planet known to harbor life ,  there is no evident way to know if any of these simplifying assumptions are correct . 
astroecology concerns the interactions of life with space environments and resources ,  in planets ,  asteroids and comets . 
more than 20% of the carbon in the universe may be associated with pahs ,  possible starting materials for the formation of life . 
an estimate for the number of planets with intelligent `` communicative '' extraterrestrial life can be gleaned from the drake equation ,  essentially an equation expressing the probability of intelligent life as the product of factors such as the fraction of planets that might be habitable and the fraction of planets on which life might arise: where:
astroecology attempts to quantify future life in space ,  addressing this area of astrobiology . 
thought on where in the solar system life might occur ,  was limited historically by the understanding that life relies ultimately on light and warmth from the sun and ,  therefore ,  is restricted to the surfaces of planets . 
research into the environmental limits of life and the workings of extreme ecosystems is ongoing ,  enabling researchers to better predict what planetary environments might be most likely to harbor life . 
when looking for life on other planets like earth ,  some simplifying assumptions are useful to reduce the size of the task of the astrobiologist . 
on 17 march 2013, researchers reported that microbial life forms thrive in the mariana trench ,  the deepest spot on the earth . 
this may support the idea that clumps greater than 0.5 millimeters of microorganisms could be one way for life to spread from planet to planet . 
 ''exomars rover '' is a robotic mission to mars to search for possible biosignatures of martian life ,  past or present . 
on the largest scale ,  cosmoecology concerns life in the universe over cosmological times . 
this interdisciplinary field encompasses research on the origin of planetary systems ,  origins of organic compounds in space ,  rock-water-carbon interactions ,  abiogenesis on earth ,  planetary habitability ,  research on biosignatures for life detection ,  and studies on the potential for life to adapt to challenges on earth and in outer space . 
whatever extraterrestrial life may be ,  its tendency to chemically alter its environment might just give it away . 
an air show ,   -lrb-  or airshow ,  air fair ,  air tattoo  -rrb-  is a public event where aircraft are exhibited . 
air `` seasons '' vary around the world . 
air shows may present some risk to spectators and aviators . 
they often include aerobatics demonstrations ,  without they are called `` static air shows '' with aircraft parked on the ground . 
the largest is le bourget followed by farnborough ,  while dubai air show and singapore air show are both claiming the third place . 
before the second world war ,  air shows were associated with long distance air races ,  often lasting many days and covering thousands of miles . 
air displays are often monitored by aviation authorities to ensure safe procedures . 
any form of life or any form of heavy atom ,  stone ,  star or galaxy would do; nothing specifically human or anthropic is involved . 
however ,  if the cosmological constant were only several orders of magnitude larger than its observed value ,  the universe would suffer catastrophic inflation ,  which would preclude the formation of stars ,  and hence life . 
the anthropic principle is a philosophical consideration that observations of the universe must be compatible with the conscious and sapient life that observes it . 
more generally ,  small changes in the relative strengths of the four fundamental interactions can greatly affect the universe's age ,  structure ,  and capacity for life . 
during its history the australian army has fought in a number of major wars ,  including: second boer war  -lrb-  1899–1902 -rrb- ,  first world war  -lrb-  1914–18 -rrb- ,  the second world war  -lrb-  1939–45 -rrb- ,  korea war  -lrb-  1950–53 -rrb- ,  malayan emergency  -lrb-  1950–60 -rrb- ,  indonesia-malaysia confrontation  -lrb-  1962–66 -rrb- ,  vietnam war  -lrb-  1962–73 -rrb- ,  and more recently in afghanistan  -lrb-  2001 – present  -rrb-  and iraq  -lrb-  2003–09 -rrb- . 
the ranks of the australian army are as follows:
the army banner bears the australian coat of arms on the obverse ,  with the dates `` 1901–2001 '' in gold in the upper hoist . 
the australian army is australia's military land force . 
although australian soldiers have been involved in a number of minor and major conflicts throughout its history ,  only in world war ii has australian territory come under direct attack . 
like the other rirs ,  arin:
for information on requesting internet number resources from arin ,  see https://www . arin . net/resources/index . html . 
all arin policies are set by the community . 
organization services pertain to interaction between stakeholders ,  arin members ,  and arin . 
the main area of akihabara is located on a street just west of akihabara station ,  where most of the major shops are situated . 
as mentioned above ,  the area called akihabara now ranges over some districts in chiyoda ward:  ,   ,  and  . 
the connection between akihabara and otaku has survived and grown to the point that the region is now known worldwide as a center for otaku culture ,  and some otaku even consider akihabara to be a sacred place . 
akihabara's role as a free market has also allowed a large amount of amateur work to find a passionate audience in the otaku who frequent the area . 
a server running active directory domain services  -lrb-  ad ds  -rrb-  is called a domain controller . 
active directory domain services  -lrb-  ad ds  -rrb-  is the cornerstone of every windows domain network . 
unlike ad ds ,  however ,  multiple ad lds instances can run on the same server . 
the best known is active directory domain services ,  commonly abbreviated as ad ds or simply ad . 
aldona had two daughters:
aldona married casimir iii of poland ,  when he was 15 or 16 years old . 
nimzowitsch is considered one of the most important players and writers in chess history . 
kmoch was in fact a great admirer of nimzowitsch ,  and nimzowitsch was amused at the effort . 
many chess openings and variations are named after nimzowitsch ,  the most famous being the nimzo-indian defence  -lrb-  1.d4 nf6 2.c4 e6 3.nc3 bb4 -rrb- and the less often played nimzowitsch defence  -lrb-  1.e4 nc6 -rrb- . 
nimzowitsch was annoyed by his opponents' smoking . 
the height of nimzowitsch's career was the late 1920s and early 1930s . 
aron nimzowitsch  -lrb-   ,   ,  `` aron isayevich nimtsovich ''; born aron niemzowitsch; 7 november 1886 – 16 march 1935 -rrb- was a russian-born ,  danish leading chess grandmaster and influential chess writer . 
during the 1917 russian revolution ,  nimzowitsch was in the baltic war zone . 
nimzowitsch had lengthy and somewhat bitter dogmatic conflicts with tarrasch over whose ideas constituted 'proper' chess . 
the spread of castilian  -lrb-  spanish  -rrb-  ,  the castilian origin of the trastámara dynasty ,  and the similarity between castilian  -lrb-  spanish  -rrb-  and aragonese facilitated the recession of the latter . 
in 2009, the languages act of aragon  -lrb-  law 10/2009 -rrb- recognized the `` native language ,  original and historic '' of aragon . 
a turning point was the 15th-century coronation of the castilian ferdinand i of aragon ,  also known as ferdinand of antequera . 
in the early 18th century ,  after the defeat of the allies of aragon in the spanish sucession war ,  philip v ordered the prohibition of the aragonese language in the schools and the establishment of castilian  -lrb-  spanish  -rrb-  as the only official language in aragon . 
the kingdom of aragon  -lrb-  formed by the counties of aragon ,  sobrarbe and ribagorza  -rrb-  expanded southward from the mountains ,  pushing the moors farther south in the `` reconquista '' and spreading the aragonese language . 
motorola and others designed and built the cellular phones for this and other cellular systems . 
amps cellular service operated in the 850 mhz cellular band . 
while motorola was developing a cellular phone ,  from 1968-1983 bell labs worked out a system called advanced mobile phone system  -lrb-  amps  -rrb-  ,  which became the first cellular network standard in the united states . 
cellular phone cloning became possible with off-the-shelf technology in the 1990s . 
there are some phones capable of supporting amps ,  d-amps and gsm all in one phone  -lrb-  using the gait standard  -rrb-  . 
he later introduced the so-called bag phone . 
martin cooper ,  a former general manager for the systems division at motorola ,  led a team that produced the dynatac8000x ,  the first commercially available cellular phone small enough to be easily carried ,  and made the first phone call from it . 
the first cellular network efforts began at bell labs and with research conducted at motorola . 
this gave the cloner ,  through the oki phone ,  the ability to use the mobile-phone service of the legitimate subscriber whose phone was cloned - just as if that phone had been physically stolen ,  except that the subscriber retained his or her phone ,  unaware that the phone had been cloned—at least until that subscriber received his or her next bill . 
at the inception of cellular in 1983, the fcc had granted each carrier within a market 333 channel pairs  -lrb-  666 channels total  -rrb-  . 
flow that is not turbulent is called laminar flow . 
flows for which viscosity cannot be neglected are called viscous flows . 
transonic ,  supersonic ,  and hypersonic flows are all compressible flows . 
supersonic flow behaves very differently from subsonic flow . 
an incompressible flow is a flow in which density is constant in both time and space . 
flow velocity is used to classify flows according to speed regime . 
aerodynamic problems are classified by the flow environment or properties of the flow ,  including flow speed ,  compressibility ,  and viscosity . 
compressible flow accounts for varying density within the flow . 
supersonic aerodynamic problems are those involving flow speeds greater than the speed of sound . 
subsonic  -lrb-  or low-speed  -rrb-  aerodynamics describes fluid motion in flows which are much lower than the speed of sound everywhere in the flow . 
aerodynamic problems can also be classified according to whether the flow speed is below ,  near or above the speed of sound . 
this assumption allows fluid properties such as density and flow velocity to be defined everywhere within the flow . 
density ,  flow velocity ,  and an additional property ,  viscosity ,  are used to classify flow fields . 
schlüter was invited to berlin in 1694 by eberhard von danckelmann to work as court sculptor at the armory  -lrb-  `` zeughaus ''  -rrb-  for elector frederick iii . 
schlüter's first known work was the decoration of the facade of the danzig royal chapel ,  in 1681.
andreas schlüter was born probably in hamburg . 
in calculus ,  an antiderivative ,  primitive function ,  primitive integral or indefinite integral of a function is a differentiable function whose derivative is equal to the original function  . 
an alphabet song is any of various songs used to teach children the alphabet . 
after a period of confusion ,  demetrius's son antigonus ii gonatas was able to establish the family's control over the old kingdom of macedon ,  as well as over most of the greek city-states ,  by 276 bc . 
this oath was the climax of the eighty years' war  -lrb-  dutch revolt  -rrb-  . 
the wives and children of such men could also be put out of their houses if they had spoken to the suspect or refused the oath themselves . 
during the killing time of the 1680s an abjuration oath could be put to suspects where they were given the option to abjure or renounce their allegiances . 
the `` rights of woman '' is an extension of wollstonecraft's arguments in the `` rights of men '' . 
wollstonecraft famously and ambiguously states:
one of wollstonecraft's most scathing criticisms in the `` rights of woman '' is against false and excessive sensibility ,  particularly in women . 
wollstonecraft's leading ambition for women was that they should attain virtue ,  and it was to this end that she sought their liberation . 
while wollstonecraft does call for equality between the sexes in particular areas of life ,  such as morality ,  she does not explicitly state that men and women are equal . 
one of wollstonecraft's central arguments in the `` rights of woman '' is that women should be educated in a rational manner to give them the opportunity to contribute to society . 
claudia johnson ,  a prominent wollstonecraft scholar ,  has called the `` rights of woman '' `` a republican manifesto '' . 
hays cited the `` rights of woman '' in her novel `` memoirs of emma courtney ''  -lrb-  1796 -rrb- and modelled her female characters after wollstonecraft's ideal woman . 
wollstonecraft was forced to write the `` rights of woman '' hurriedly to respond to talleyrand and ongoing events . 
wollstonecraft's argument exposed the sexual double standard of the late 18th century and demanded that men adhere to the same virtues demanded of women . 
wollstonecraft defends her positions not only with reasoned argument but also with ardent rhetoric . 
describing wollstonecraft's philosophy as feminist is problematic ,  and i do it only after much consideration . 
it is wollstonecraft's last novel ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  1798 -rrb- ,  the fictionalized sequel to the `` rights of woman '' ,  that is usually considered her most radical feminist work . 
by the time wollstonecraft was writing the `` rights of woman '' ,  sensibility had already been under sustained attack for a number of years . 
wollstonecraft's ideas became associated with her life story and women writers felt that it was dangerous to mention her in their texts . 
other names for this breed are `` kuchi hound '' ,  `` tāzī '' ,  `` balkh hound '' ,  `` baluchi hound '' ,  `` barakzai hound '' ,  `` shalgar hound '' ,  `` kabul hound '' ,  `` galanday hound '' or sometimes incorrectly `` african hound '' . 
the afghan hound can also come with a much more `` patterned '' coat . 
genomic studies have pointed to the afghan hound as one of the oldest of dog breeds . 
the afghan hound is tall ,  standing in height and weighing  . 
the afghan hound has been identified as a basal breed that predates the emergence of the modern breeds in the 19th century . 
afghan hounds in uk surveys had an average lifespan of about 12 years . 
the khalag tazi is a variety of the afghan . 
afghan hounds have also been featured in television advertisements and in fashion magazines . 
the afghan hound is a hound that is distinguished by its thick ,  fine ,  silky coat and its tail with a ring curl at the end . 
once out of afghanistan ,  the history of the afghan hound breed became entwined with that of the very earliest dog shows and the kennel club  -lrb-  uk  -rrb-  . 
azawakh thrive on companionship of other azawakh . 
the azawakh is a sighthound livestock guardian breed of dog from west africa . 
azawakh have no known incidence of hip dysplasia . 
azawakh have high energy and tremendous endurance . 
 -lrb-  akc and ukc are not a member of the fci  -rrb- 
acrylic paints are the most common paints used in grattage ,  a surrealist technique that became popular with the advent of acrylic paint . 
wet acrylic paint is easily removed from paint brushes and skin with water ,  whereas oil paints require the use of a hydrocarbon . 
acrylic paint is a fast-drying paint made of pigment suspended in acrylic polymer emulsion . 
acrylic artists' paints may be thinned with water and used as washes in the manner of watercolor paints ,  but unlike watercolor the washes are not rehydratable once dry . 
oils and warm ,  soapy water can remove acrylic paint from skin . 
it also is less likely to leave a stain on clothes than oil paint . 
