he termed the stream of consciousness an `` epiphenomenon; '' like the bell of a clock that has no role in keeping the time ,  consciousness has no role in determining behavior . 
huxley's mechanistic attitude towards the body convinced him that the brain alone causes behavior . 
the idea that even if the animal were conscious nothing would be added to the production of behavior ,  even in animals of the human type ,  was first voiced by la mettrie  -lrb-  1745 -rrb- ,  and then by cabanis  -lrb-  1802 -rrb- ,  and was further explicated by hodgson  -lrb-  1870 -rrb- and huxley  -lrb-  1874 -rrb- . 
in the pasporta servo and the esperanto citizens' community . 
during the 1960s came a new effort of creating an esperanto state ,  which this time was called republic of rose island . 
 ''esperanto civito '' always uses the name esperantujo  -lrb-  introduced by hector hodler in 1908 -rrb- ,  which itself is defined according to their interpretation of `` raumism '' ,  and the meaning therefore may differ from the traditional esperanto understanding of the word `` esperantujo '' . 
in 1908, dr .  william molly attempted to create an esperanto nation in neutral moresnet known as `` amikejo ''  -lrb-  place of friendship  -rrb-  . 
ethernet was developed at xerox parc between 1973 and 1974.
mixed-speed networks can be built using ethernet switches and repeaters supporting the desired ethernet variants . 
while repeaters can isolate some aspects of ethernet segments ,  such as cable breakages ,  they still forward all traffic to all ethernet devices . 
in 1989, the networking company kalpana introduced their etherswitch ,  the first ethernet switch . 
ethernet initially competed with token ring and other proprietary protocols . 
since packets are typically delivered only to the port they are intended for ,  traffic on a switched ethernet is less public than on shared-medium ethernet . 
through the first half of the 1980s ,  ethernet's 10base5 implementation used a coaxial cable in diameter ,  later called `` thick ethernet '' or `` thicknet '' . 
by 2010, the market for ethernet equipment amounted to over $16 billion per year . 
as per the osi model ,  ethernet provides services up to and including the data link layer . 
the original 10base5 ethernet uses coaxial cable as a shared medium ,  while the newer ethernet variants use twisted pair and fiber optic links in conjunction with switches . 
the coaxial cable was replaced with point-to-point links connected by ethernet repeaters or switches . 
for signal degradation and timing reasons ,  coaxial ethernet segments have a restricted size . 
ethernet stations communicate by sending each other data packets: blocks of data individually sent and delivered . 
despite this ,  switched ethernet should still be regarded as an insecure network technology ,  because it is easy to subvert switched ethernet systems by means such as arp spoofing and mac flooding . 
systems communicating over ethernet divide a stream of data into shorter pieces called frames . 
ethernet is a family of computer networking technologies commonly used in local area networks  -lrb-  lan  -rrb-  ,  metropolitan area networks  -lrb-  man  -rrb-  and wide area networks  -lrb-  wan  -rrb-  . 
ethernet has replaced infiniband as the most popular system interconnect of top500 supercomputers . 
they settled in vienna . 
canetti went back to vienna in 1924 in order to study chemistry . 
he died in zürich in 1994.
for his last 20 years ,  canetti lived mostly in zürich . 
his father ,  the reverend stephen jenner ,  was the vicar of berkeley ,  so jenner received a strong basic education . 
in 2002, jenner was named in the bbc's list of the `` 100 greatest britons '' . 
in `` ts-19 '' ,  a cdc scientist is named edwin jenner . 
jenner's findings were published in `` philosophical transactions of the royal society '' in 1788.
returning to london in 1811, jenner observed a significant number of cases of smallpox after vaccination . 
jenner successfully tested his hypothesis on 23 additional subjects . 
jenner continued his research and reported it to the royal society ,  which did not publish the initial paper . 
phipps was the 17th case described in jenner's first paper on vaccination . 
jenner married catherine kingscote  -lrb-  died 1815 from tuberculosis  -rrb-  in march 1788.
jenner's vaccine laid the foundation for contemporary discoveries in immunology . 
in 2010, britannica released britannica imagequest ,  a database of images . 
there have been and are several abridged `` britannica '' encyclopaedias . 
the following is `` britannica ''s description of the work:
the official title of the 15th edition is the `` new encyclopædia britannica '' ,  although it has also been promoted as `` britannica 3 '' . 
the `` britannica '' has a reputation for summarising knowledge . 
britannica introduced the `` children's britannica '' to the us market in 1988, aimed at ages seven to 14.
 ''britannica junior '' was first published in 1934 as 12 volumes . 
the print version of the `` britannica '' was significantly more expensive than its competitors . 
however ,  jorge cauz  -lrb-  president of encyclopædia britannica inc .   -rrb-  asserted in 2012 that ``  ''britannica ''  .  .  .  will always be factually correct . `` 
official `` britannica '' material would carry a `` britannica checked '' stamp ,  to distinguish it from the user-generated content . 
since 1985, the `` britannica '' has had four parts: the  ,  the  ,  the  ,  and a two-volume index . 
 ''britannica ''s final print edition was in 2010, a 32-volume set . 
on 7 june 2018, britannica released a google chrome extension ,  britannica insights ,  which shows snippets of information from britannica online in a sidebar for google search results . 
in 1968, near the end of this era ,  the `` britannica '' celebrated its bicentennial . 
in the fifteenth edition of `` britannica '' ,  dale hoiberg ,  a sinologist ,  was listed as `` britannica's '' senior vice president and editor-in-chief . 
in march 2012, encyclopædia britannica ,  inc .  announced it would no longer publish printed editions ,  and would focus instead on `` encyclopædia britannica online '' . 
in the timeliness category ,  `` britannica '' averaged an 86% to `` americana '''s 90% and `` collier's '' 85% . 
on rare occasions ,  the `` britannica `` was criticized for its editorial choices . 
eventually ,  the `` britannica '' turned to focus more on its online edition . 
 ''britannica '' online is a website with more than 120,000 articles and is updated regularly . 
 ,  a replica of britannica's 1768 first edition is sold on the online store . 
in the fourth era  -lrb-  1974–94 -rrb- ,  the `` britannica '' introduced its 15th edition ,  which was re-organized into three parts: the  ,  the  ,  and the  . 
 ''my first britannica '' is aimed at children ages six to 12, and the `` britannica discovery library '' is for children aged three to six  -lrb-  issued 1974 to 1991 -rrb- . 
paul t .  armstrong remains the longest working employee of encyclopædia britannica . 
however ,  by the close of the 19th century ,  the 9th edition was outdated ,  and the `` britannica '' faced financial difficulties . 
the cd/dvd-rom version of the `` britannica '' ,  `` encyclopædia britannica ultimate reference suite '' ,  received the 2004 distinguished achievement award from the association of educational publishers . 
interviewed in february 2009, the managing director of `` britannica uk '' said:
the `` britannica ultimate reference suite 2012 dvd '' contains over 100,000 articles . 
the `` britannica '' is the english-language encyclopaedia/encyclopedia that was in print for the longest time: it lasted 244 years . 
the uterus and endometrium was for a long time thought to be sterile . 
thin endometrium may be defined as an endometrial thickness of less than 8 mm . 
the endometrium consists of a single layer of columnar epithelium plus the stroma on which it rests . 
during pregnancy ,  the glands and blood vessels in the endometrium further increase in size and number . 
the endometrium is the inner epithelial layer ,  along with its mucous membrane ,  of the mammalian uterus . 
menstruation may be accompanied by a series of uterine contractions; these help expel the menstrual endometrium . 
the endometrium is central ,  echogenic  -lrb-  detectable using ultrasound scanners  -rrb-  ,  and has an average thickness of 6.7 mm . 
electronic music is music that employs electronic musical instruments ,  digital instruments and circuitry-based music technology . 
musical improvisation often plays a large role in the performance of this music . 
in the 1950s ,  japanese electronic musical instruments began influencing the international music industry . 
in the 1960s ,  live electronics were pioneered in america and europe ,  japanese electronic musical instruments began influencing the music industry ,  and jamaican dub music emerged as a form of popular electronic music . 
in jamaica ,  a form of popular electronic music emerged in the 1960s ,  dub music ,  rooted in sound system culture . 
the music program was written by christopher strachey . 
musical melodies were first generated by the computer csirac in australia in 1950.
electronically produced music became prevalent in the popular domain by the 1990s ,  because of the advent of affordable music technology . 
dub music influenced electronic musical techniques later adopted by hip hop music ,  when jamaican immigrant dj kool herc in the early 1970s introduced jamaica's sound system culture and dub music techniques to america . 
cage completed `` williams mix '' in 1953 while working with the music for magnetic tape project . 
critics of musical conventions at the time saw promise in these developments . 
modelling the nwdr studio in cologne ,  nhk established an electronic music studio in tokyo in 1955, which became one of the world's leading electronic music facilities . 
the first electronic devices for performing music were developed at the end of the 19th century ,  and shortly afterward italian futurists explored sounds that had not been considered musical . 
their infusion of asian music into the emerging genre would eventually support japan's popularity in the development of music technology several decades later . 
live electronics  -lrb-  or electroacoustic improvisation  -rrb-  is a form of experimental improvised music that developed in response to the rigidity of sound-based composition for fixed media such as musique concrète ,  early studio based electronic music ,  and computer music . 
two months later ,  on october 28, vladimir ussachevsky and otto luening presented the first tape music concert in the united states . 
starting in 1957, max mathews of bell labs developed the music programs ,  culminating in music v ,  a direct digital synthesis language
karlheinz stockhausen worked briefly in schaeffer's studio in 1952, and afterward for many years at the wdr cologne's studio for electronic music . 
the world's first computer to play music was csirac ,  which was designed and built by trevor pearcey and maston beard . 
the world's first computer to play music was csirac ,  which was designed and built by trevor pearcey and maston beard in the 1950s . 
at the turn of the 20th century ,  experimentation with emerging electronics led to the first electronic musical instruments . 
the first practical audio tape recorder was unveiled in 1935.
while his initial experiments in tape-based composition were not widely known outside of egypt at the time ,  el-dabh is also known for his later work in electronic music at the columbia-princeton electronic music center in the late 1950s . 
these were the basis for the first commercially produced tape recorder in 1948.
pietro grossi was an italian pioneer of computer composition and tape music ,  who first experimented with electronic techniques in the early sixties . 
released in 1970 by moog music ,  the mini-moog was among the first widely available ,  portable and relatively affordable synthesizers . 
in the early 1980s ,  digital technologies for synthesizers including digital synthesizers such as the yamaha dx7 were popularized ,  and a group of musicians and music merchants developed the musical instrument digital interface  -lrb-  midi  -rrb-  . 
more recently ,  stockhausen turned to producing electronic music in his own studio in kürten ,  his last work in the medium being `` cosmic pulses ''  -lrb-  2007 -rrb- . 
edvard grieg was raised in a musical family . 
edvard hagerup grieg was born in bergen ,  norway . 
the edvard grieg museum at grieg's former home ,  troldhaugen ,  is dedicated to his legacy . 
grieg himself recorded many of these piano works before his death in 1907.
edvard hagerup grieg  -lrb-  ; 15 june 18434 september 1907 -rrb- was a norwegian composer and pianist . 
in 1861, grieg made his debut as a concert pianist in karlshamn ,  sweden . 
in the summer of 1858, grieg met the eminent norwegian violinist ole bull ,  who was a family friend; bull's brother was married to grieg's aunt . 
in 1868, franz liszt ,  who had not yet met grieg ,  wrote a testimonial for him to the norwegian ministry of education ,  which led to grieg's obtaining a travel grant . 
abolitionists had long been urging lincoln to free all slaves . 
slaves had been part of the `` engine of war '' for the confederacy . 
on september 22, 1862, lincoln issued a preliminary warning that he would order the emancipation of all slaves in any state that did not end its rebellion against the union by january 1, 1863.
it made the eradication of slavery an explicit war goal ,  in addition to the goal of reuniting the union . 
conflicting advice ,  to free all slaves ,  or not free them at all ,  was presented to lincoln in public and private . 
runaway slaves who had escaped to union lines had previously been held by the union army as `` contraband of war '' under the confiscation acts; when the proclamation took effect ,  they were told at midnight that they were free to leave . 
the state of tennessee had already mostly returned to union control ,  under a recognized union government ,  so it was not named and was exempted . 
the emancipation proclamation broadened the goals of the civil war . 
while the proclamation had freed most slaves as a war measure ,  it had not made slavery illegal . 
although secretary of war edwin stanton supported it ,  seward advised lincoln to issue the proclamation after a major union victory ,  or else it would appear as if the union was giving `` its last shriek of retreat '' . 
so it is that the version of lincoln we keep is also the version we make . 
it led many slaves to escape from their masters and get to union lines to obtain their freedom ,  and to join the union army . 
in december 1861, lincoln sent his first annual message to congress  -lrb-  the state of the union address ,  but then typically given in writing and not referred to as such  -rrb-  . 
in december 1863, lincoln issued his `` proclamation of amnesty and reconstruction '' ,  which dealt with the ways the rebel states could reconcile with the union . 
slaves fled their masters and were often assisted by union soldiers . 
lincoln responded in his from august 22, 1862, in terms of the limits imposed by his duty as president to save the union:
near the end of the war ,  abolitionists were concerned that the emancipation proclamation would be construed solely as a war measure ,  lincoln's original intent ,  and would no longer apply once fighting ended . 
however ,  lincoln's position continued to be that congress lacked power to free all slaves within the borders of rebel held states ,  but lincoln as commander in chief could do so if he deemed it a proper military measure ,  and that lincoln had already drafted plans to do . 
since the emancipation proclamation made the eradication of slavery an explicit union war goal ,  it linked support for the south to support for slavery . 
the proclamation applied in the ten states that were still in rebellion in 1863, and thus did not cover the nearly 500,000 slaves in the slave-holding border states  -lrb-  missouri ,  kentucky ,  maryland or delaware  -rrb-  which were union states . 
racism remained pervasive on both sides of the conflict and many in the north supported the war only as an effort to force the south to stay in the union . 
the proclamation ordered the freedom of all slaves in ten states . 
those slaves were freed by later separate state and federal actions . 
lincoln's gettysburg address in november 1863 made indirect reference to the proclamation and the ending of slavery as a war goal with the phrase `` new birth of freedom '' . 
on 20 may rommel reached arras . 
in november 1916 in danzig ,  rommel and lucia married . 
during world war i ,  rommel fought in france as well as in the romanian and italian campaigns . 
rommel reluctantly decided on 20 november to call off his planned attack on tobruk . 
following his success in battleaxe ,  rommel returned his attention to the capture of tobruk . 
following the campaign in poland ,  rommel began lobbying for command of one of germany's panzer divisions ,  of which there were then only ten . 
erwin rommel  -lrb-  15 november 1891 – 14 october 1944 -rrb- was a german general and military theorist . 
this thrust was not anticipated by the british ,  who had ultra intelligence showing that rommel had orders to remain on the defense until at least may ,  when the 15th panzers were due to arrive . 
rommel opposed him with the 15th and 21st panzer divisions with a total of 260 tanks ,  the 90th light infantry division ,  five italian infantry divisions ,  and one italian armoured division of 278 tanks . 
rommel and his troops were technically subordinate to italian commander-in-chief general italo gariboldi . 
hoping to catch the defenders off-guard ,  rommel launched a failed attack on 14 april . 
the british had retaken almost all of cyrenaica ,  but rommel's retreat dramatically shortened his supply lines . 
on 6 february 1941, rommel was appointed commander of the newly created `` deutsches afrika korps ''  -lrb-  dak  -rrb-  ,  consisting of the 5th light division  -lrb-  later redesignated 21st panzer division  -rrb-  and of the 15th panzer division . 
he was introduced to husserl's work through his wife ,  helene joseph ,  herself a student of husserl at göttingen . 
fink delivered the eulogy for husserl in 1938.
roman ingarden ,  an early student of husserl at freiburg ,  corresponded with husserl into the mid-1930s . 
in 1913 karl jaspers visited husserl at göttingen . 
martin heidegger is the best known of husserl's students ,  the one whom husserl chose as his successor at freiburg . 
eugen fink was a close associate of husserl during the 1920s and 1930s . 
husserl was impressed by this work and asked schutz to be his assistant . 
ludwig landgrebe became assistant to husserl in 1923.
academic discussion of husserl and heidegger is extensive . 
josé ortega y gasset visited husserl at freiburg in 1934.
derrida continued to make reference to husserl in works such as `` of grammatology '' . 
at göttingen in 1913 adolf reinach  -lrb-  1884–1917 -rrb- `` was now husserl's right hand . 
rudolf carnap was also influenced by husserl ,  not only concerning husserl's notion of essential insight that carnap used in his `` der raum '' ,  but also his notion of `` formation rules '' and `` transformation rules '' is founded on husserl's philosophy of logic . 
edith stein was husserl's student at göttingen while she wrote her `` on the problem of empathy ''  -lrb-  1916 -rrb- . 
the major dividing line in husserl's thought is the turn to transcendental idealism . 
emmanuel levinas in 1929 gave a presentation at one of husserl's last seminars in freiburg . 
despite retirement ,  husserl gave several notable lectures . 
he expressed very strong appreciation for husserl's work ,  especially with regard to `` bracketing '' or `` epoché '' . 
although scheler later criticised husserl's idealistic logical approach and proposed instead a `` phenomenology of love '' ,  he states that he remained `` deeply indebted '' to husserl throughout his work . 
husserl stated that logic has three strata ,  each further away from consciousness and psychology than those that precede it . 
at the university of leipzig from 1876 to 1878, husserl studied mathematics ,  physics ,  and astronomy . 
following his phd in mathematics ,  husserl returned to berlin to work as the assistant to karl weierstrass . 
in 1901 husserl with his family moved to the university of göttingen ,  where he taught as `` extraordinarius professor '' . 
from the `` ideen '' onward ,  husserl concentrated on the ideal ,  essential structures of consciousness . 
consequently ,  frege and husserl independently elaborated a theory of sense and reference before 1891.
since his university retirement husserl had `` worked at a tremendous pace ,  producing several major works . `` 
in detail ,  husserl's conception of logic and mathematics differs from that of frege ,  who held that arithmetic could be derived from logic . 
following his marriage husserl began his long teaching career in philosophy . 
hermann weyl's interest in intuitionistic logic and impredicativity appears to have resulted from his reading of husserl . 
control engineers often utilize feedback when designing control systems . 
analog signal processing is still important in the design of many control systems . 
note i - in may 2014 there were around 175,000 people working as electrical engineers in the us . 
the future includes satellite controlled power systems ,  with feedback in real time to prevent power surges and prevent blackouts . 
signal processing deals with the analysis and manipulation of signals . 
typically ,  if the power of the transmitted signal is insufficient once the signal arrives at the receiver's antenna -lrb-  s  -rrb-  ,  the information contained in the signal will be corrupted by noise . 
for digital signals ,  signal processing may involve the compression ,  error detection and error correction of digitally sampled signals . 
where there is regular feedback ,  control theory can be used to determine how the system responds to such feedback . 
 ''electronic systems design '' is the subject within electrical engineering that deals with the multi-disciplinary design issues of complex electrical and mechanical systems . 
control engineering focuses on the modeling of a diverse range of dynamic systems and the design of controllers that will cause these systems to behave in the desired manner . 
computer engineering deals with the design of computers and computer systems . 
power engineering deals with the generation ,  transmission ,  and distribution of electricity as well as the design of a range of related devices . 
microelectronics engineering deals with the design and microfabrication of very small electronic circuit components for use in an integrated circuit or sometimes for use on their own as a general electronic component . 
this allowed for the powerful computers and other electronic devices we see today . 
often instrumentation is not used by itself ,  but instead as the sensors of larger electrical systems . 
for this reason ,  instrumentation engineering is often viewed as the counterpart of control . 
once the transmission characteristics of a system are determined ,  telecommunication engineers design the transmitters and receivers needed for such systems . 
the workplaces of engineers are just as varied as the types of work they do . 
the spread in the use of ac set off in the united states what has been called the `` war of currents '' between a george westinghouse backed ac system and a thomas edison backed dc power system ,  with ac being adopted as the overall standard . 
the units are:
the electromagnetic force is one of the four known fundamental forces . 
this deflection convinced him that magnetic fields radiate from all sides of a wire carrying an electric current ,  just as light and heat do ,  and that it confirmed a direct relationship between electricity and magnetism . 
as a consequence ,  the square of the speed of light appears explicitly in some of the equations interrelating quantities in this system . 
the maxwell equations are `` linear , ``  in that a change in the sources  -lrb-  the charges and currents  -rrb-  results in a proportional change of the fields . 
formulas for physical laws of electromagnetism  -lrb-  such as maxwell's equations  -rrb-  need to be adjusted depending on what system of units one uses . 
there are numerous mathematical descriptions of the electromagnetic field . 
in faraday's law ,  magnetic fields are associated with electromagnetic induction and magnetism ,  and maxwell's equations describe how electric and magnetic fields are generated and altered by each other and by charges and currents . 
the word `` euphemism '' itself can be used as a euphemism . 
expressions or words from a foreign language may be imported for use as a replacement for an offensive word . 
the same word has also been used in his short story `` flies '' . 
to alter the pronunciation or spelling of a taboo word  -lrb-  such as a swear word  -rrb-  to form a euphemism is known as `` taboo deformation '' ,  or a minced oath . 
 ''euphemism '' comes from the greek word  -lrb-    -rrb-  which refers to the use of 'words of good omen'; it is a compound of  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  meaning 'good ,  well' ,  and  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  meaning 'prophetic speech; rumour ,  talk' . 
in battlestar galactica  -lrb-  2004 tv series  -rrb-  use of the words `` frak '' and `` fraking '' was directly substituted for the english slang words `` fuck '' and `` fucking '' ,  confounding the censors . 
the use of a term with a softer connotation ,  though it shares the same meaning . 
a euphemism is a generally innocuous word or expression used in place of one that may be found offensive or suggest something unpleasant . 
without receiving his payment in due time ,  spenser gave the queen this quatrain on one of her progresses:
in 1596, spenser wrote a prose pamphlet titled `` a view of the present state of ireland '' . 
he returned to ireland . 
</poem>
<poem> i was promis'd on a time ,  to have a reason for my rhyme: from that time unto this season ,  i receiv'd nor rhyme nor reason . 
central power stations became economically practical with the development of alternating current  -lrb-  ac  -rrb-  power transmission ,  using power transformers to transmit power at high voltage and with low loss . 
other energy sources include solar photovoltaics and geothermal power . 
the amount supplied to the final consumer was 1,445,285 ktoe  -lrb-  16,430 twh  -rrb-  which was 33% of the total energy consumed at power plants and heat and power co-generation  -lrb-  chp  -rrb-  plants . 
due to advancements in technology ,  and with mass production ,  renewable sources other than hydroelectricity  -lrb-  solar power ,  wind energy ,  tidal power ,  etc .   -rrb- 
the first power plants used water power or coal; and today a variety of energy sources are used ,  such as coal ,  nuclear ,  natural gas ,  hydroelectric ,  wind generators ,  and oil ,  as well as solar energy ,  tidal power ,  and geothermal sources . 
data source of values  -lrb-  electric power generated  -rrb-  is iea/oecd . 
osmotic power is a possibility at places where salt and fresh water merges . 
a very small proportion of electric power distributed by utilities is provided by batteries . 
variations between countries generating electrical power affect concerns about the environment . 
the design of experiments  -lrb-  doe ,  dox ,  or experimental design  -rrb-  is the design of any task that aims to describe or explain the variation of information under conditions that are hypothesized to reflect the variation . 
a methodology for designing experiments was proposed by ronald fisher ,  in his innovative books: `` the arrangement of field experiments ''  -lrb-  1926 -rrb- and `` the design of experiments ''  -lrb-  1935 -rrb- . 
main concerns in experimental design include the establishment of validity ,  reliability ,  and replicability . 
in 1918, kirstine smith published optimal designs for polynomials of degree six  -lrb-  and less  -rrb-  . 
one specific type of sequential design is the `` two-armed bandit '' ,  generalized to the multi-armed bandit ,  on which early work was done by herbert robbins in 1952.
empirical research is research using empirical evidence . 
in other words ,  it describes the research that has not taken place before and their results . 
in some fields ,  quantitative research may begin with a research question  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  `` does listening to vocal music during the learning of a word list have an effect on later memory for these words ? ``   -rrb- 
among scientific researchers ,  empirical `` evidence ''  -lrb-  as distinct from empirical `` research ''  -rrb-  refers to objective evidence that appears the same regardless of the observer . 
engineering statistics combines engineering and statistics using scientific methods for analyzing data . 
poe's final home is preserved as the edgar allan poe cottage in the bronx . 
poe had a keen interest in cryptography . 
poe moved with the allans back to richmond ,  virginia in 1820.
the poe toaster's last appearance was on january 19, 2009, the day of poe's bicentennial . 
the journal was never produced before poe's death . 
poe was increasingly unstable after his wife's death . 
the allan family had poe baptized in the episcopal church in 1812.
the earliest surviving home in which poe lived is in baltimore ,  preserved as the edgar allan poe house and museum . 
edgar allan poe  -lrb-  ; born edgar poe; january 19, 1809 – october 7, 1849 -rrb- was an american writer ,  editor ,  and literary critic . 
he was born edgar poe in boston on january 19, 1809, the second child of english-born actress elizabeth arnold hopkins poe and actor david poe jr . 
poe was born in boston ,  the second child of actors david and elizabeth `` eliza '' arnold hopkins poe . 
often ,  fictional depictions of poe use his mystery-solving skills in such novels as `` the poe shadow '' by matthew pearl . 
during his lifetime ,  poe was mostly recognized as a literary critic . 
other poe landmarks include a building in the upper west side where poe temporarily lived when he first moved to new york . 
poe traveled to west point and matriculated as a cadet on july 1, 1830.
the allans served as a foster family and gave him the name `` edgar allan poe '' ,  though they never formally adopted him . 
it is believed that only 12 copies have survived of poe's first book `` tamerlane and other poems '' . 
no childhood home of poe is still standing ,  including the allan family's moldavia estate . 
thus we can speak of electric potential at a certain point in space ,  which is equal to the work done by an external agent in carrying a unit of positive charge from an arbitrarily chosen reference point to that point without any acceleration and is typically measured in volts . 
when a charge is placed in a location with a non-zero electric field ,  a force will act on it . 
according to aristotle ,  he died at the age of sixty  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  even though other writers have him living up to the age of one hundred and nine . 
these physical speculations were part of a history of the universe which also dealt with the origin and development of life . 
empedocles  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` empedoklēs '';   -rrb-  was a greek pre-socratic philosopher and a citizen of akragas ,  a greek city in sicily . 
within tribe rhodoreae ,  five genera were described ,  `` rhododendron '' l .   -lrb-  including `` azalea '' l .  pro parte  -rrb-  ,  `` therorhodion '' small ,  `` ledum '' l .  ,  `` tsusiophyllum '' max .  ,  `` menziesia '' j .  e .  smith ,  that were eventually transferred into `` rhododendron '' ,  along with diplarche from the monogeneric tribe diplarcheae . 
the ericaceae are a family of flowering plants ,  commonly known as the heath or heather family ,  found most commonly in acid and infertile growing conditions . 
some evidence suggests eutrophic rainwater can convert ericoid heaths with species such as `` erica tetralix '' to grasslands . 
in eastern north america ,  members of this family often grow in association with an oak canopy ,  in a habitat known as an oak-heath forest . 
a resistive circuit is a circuit containing only resistors and ideal current and voltage sources . 
an active network is a network that contains an active source – either a voltage source or current source . 
hence there is but one empty set ,  and we speak of `` the empty set '' rather than `` an empty set '' . 
the empty set may also be called the `` void set '' . 
for sets of size there are endofunctions on the set . 
in the category of sets ,  endomorphisms are functions from a set `` s '' to itself . 
every ring with one is the endomorphism ring of its regular module ,  and so is a subring of an endomorphism ring of an abelian group; however there are rings that are not the endomorphism ring of any abelian group . 
let be an arbitrary set . 
hoffer was a young man when he also lost his father . 
hoffer was born in 1898 in the bronx ,  new york ,  to knut and elsa  -lrb-  goebel  -rrb-  hoffer . 
his recovery proved permanent ,  but hoffer never abandoned his reading habit . 
these would ultimately form the blueprint for today's european commission ,  european parliament ,  the council of the european union and the european court of justice . 
it laid out a plan for a european community to pool the coal and steel of its members in a common market . 
the european coal and steel community  -lrb-  ecsc  -rrb-  was an organization of six european countries created after world war ii to regulate their industrial production under a centralised authority . 
the institutions of the ecsc were the high authority ,  the common assembly ,  the special council of ministers and the court of justice . 
the welfare guarantees invented by the ecsc were extended to workers outside the coal and steel sector by some of its members . 
the schuman declaration that created the ecsc had several distinct aims:
however ,  areas outside coal and steel required the consent of the council . 
far more important than creating europe's first social and regional policy ,  it is argued that the ecsc introduced european peace . 
the ecsc was first proposed by french foreign minister robert schuman on 9 may 1950 as a way to prevent further war between france and germany . 
the ecsc stood as a model for the communities set up after it by the treaty of rome in 1957, the european economic community and european atomic energy community ,  with whom it shared its membership and some institutions . 
six years after the treaty of paris ,  the treaties of rome were signed by the six ecsc members ,  creating the european economic community  -lrb-  eec  -rrb-  and the european atomic energy community  -lrb-  eaec or euratom  -rrb-  . 
among the ecsc's greatest achievements are those on welfare issues . 
under the community ,  the european parliament  -lrb-  formerly the european parliamentary assembly  -rrb-  had an advisory role to the council and commission . 
the european council ,  or european summit ,  had developed since the 1960s as an informal meeting of the council at the level of heads of state . 
this was reflected in the names of the institutions ,  the council was formally the `` council of the `` european union '' '' while the commission was formally the `` commission of the `` european communities '' '' . 
in place of the ecsc's council of ministers was the council of the european economic community ,  and in place of the high authority was the commission of the european communities . 
from here on ,  the term `` european communities '' were used for the institutions  -lrb-  for example ,  from `` commission of the european economic community '' to the `` commission of the european communities ''  -rrb-  . 
the eu absorbed the european communities as one of its three pillars . 
the resulting communities were the european economic community  -lrb-  eec  -rrb-  and the european atomic energy community  -lrb-  euratom or sometimes eaec  -rrb-  . 
in the aim of creating a federal europe two further communities were proposed: a european defence community and a european political community . 
it was mentioned in the treaties for the first time in the single european act  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
the single european act gave parliament more power ,  with the assent procedure giving it a right to veto proposals and the cooperation procedure giving it equal power with the council if the council was not unanimous . 
the treaties of rome had stated that the european parliament must be directly elected ,  however this required the council to agree on a common voting system first . 
a year later ,  in february 1962, spain attempted to join the european communities . 
this agreement also extended the internal market to include most of the member states of the european free trade association ,  forming the european economic area covering 15 countries . 
this was originally proposed under the european constitution but that treaty failed ratification in 2005.
most other institutions ,  including the european court of justice ,  have some form of national division of its members . 
efta is governed by the efta council and serviced by the efta secretariat . 
the efta council is the highest governing body of efta . 
except for switzerland ,  the efta members are also members of the european economic area  -lrb-  eea  -rrb-  . 
in addition ,  in connection with the eea agreement of 1992, two other efta organisations were established ,  the efta surveillance authority and the efta court . 
as the eea memberships are currently only open to the efta or eu members ,  the consent of the existing efta member states is required for the microstates to join the eea without becoming members of the eu . 
the efta surveillance authority performs a role for efta members that is equivalent to that of the european commission for the eu ,  as `` guardian of the treaties '' and the efta court performs the european court of justice-equivalent role . 
one efta member ,  switzerland ,  has not joined the eea but has a series of bilateral agreements ,  including a free trade agreement ,  with the eu . 
the original plan for the eea lacked the efta court or the efta surveillance authority: the european court of justice and the european commission were to exercise those roles . 
austria ,  sweden ,  and finland joined the eu in 1995 and thus ceased to be efta members . 
rather than setting up pan-eea institutions ,  the activities of the eea are regulated by the efta surveillance authority and the efta court . 
the european free trade association  -lrb-  efta  -rrb-  is a regional trade organization and free trade area consisting of four european states: iceland ,  liechtenstein ,  norway ,  and switzerland . 
the portugal fund was established in 1975 when portugal was still a member of efta . 
the united kingdom was a co-founder of efta in 1960, but ceased to be a member upon joining the european economic community . 
twice ,  in 1973 and in 1995, the norwegian government had tried to join the eu  -lrb-  still the eec ,  in 1973 -rrb- and by doing so ,  leave the efta . 
the founding members of the efta were: austria ,  denmark ,  norway ,  portugal ,  sweden ,  switzerland ,  and the united kingdom . 
 ,  the european parliament budget was eur 1.756 billion . 
the president of the european commission is proposed by the european council on the basis of the european elections to parliament . 
according to the european parliament website ,  the annual parliament budget for 2016 was €1.838 billion . 
the most recent union-wide elections to the european parliament were the european elections of 2014, held from 22 to 25 may 2014.
according to `` the economist '' ,  the european parliament costs more than the british ,  french and german parliaments combined . 
the parliamentarians are known in english as members of the european parliament  -lrb-  meps  -rrb-  . 
the president of the european parliament  -lrb-  parliament's speaker  -rrb-  is antonio tajani  -lrb-  epp  -rrb-  ,  elected in january 2017.
although the european parliament has legislative power ,  as does the council ,  they do not formally possess legislative initiative  -lrb-  it is for the european commission  -rrb-  ,  as most national parliaments of european union member states do . 
this is seen as the birth of the modern european parliament ,  with parliament's 50 years celebrations being held in march 2008 rather than 2002.
they are then ,  as a body ,  approved or rejected by the parliament . 
however ,  when parliament threatened to vote down the nice treaty ,  the belgian and italian parliaments said they would veto the treaty on the european parliament's behalf . 
delegations of the parliament are formed in a similar manner and are responsible for relations with parliaments outside the eu . 
the european ombudsman is elected by the parliament ,  who deals with public complaints against all institutions . 
the european parliament  -lrb-  ep  -rrb-  is the only parliamentary institution of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  that is directly elected by eu citizens aged 18 or older . 
the european parliamentary research service  -lrb-  eprs  -rrb-  is the european parliament's in-house research department and think tank . 
the eighth term of parliament started on 1 july 2014.
before 2009, members received the same salary as members of their national parliament . 
it is awarded by the european parliament and the foundation of the international charlemagne prize of aachen to youth projects aimed at nurturing common european identity and european citizenship . 
the three communities merged their remaining organs as the european communities in 1967, and the body's name was changed to the current `` european parliament '' in 1962.
the parliament and council have been compared to the two chambers of a bicameral legislature . 
like the other institutions ,  the parliament's seat was not yet fixed . 
speakers in the european parliament are entitled to speak in any of the 24 official languages of the european union ,  ranging from french and german to maltese and irish . 
the european parliament is the only assembly in the world with more than one meeting place and one of the few that does not have the power to decide its own location . 
barroso gained the support of the european council for a second term and secured majority support from the parliament in september 2009.
yet it has been argued by former parliament president hans-gert pöttering that as the parliament does have the right to ask the commission to draft such legislation ,  and as the commission is following parliament's proposals more and more parliament does have a `` de facto '' right of legislative initiative . 
as a comparison ,  the german lower house of parliament  -lrb-  bundestag  -rrb-  is estimated to cost €517 million in total for 2018, for a parliament with 709 members . 
a number of notable figures have been president of the parliament and its predecessors . 
all member states hold elections to the european parliament using various forms of proportional representation . 
its meetings are partly controlled by the treaties but are otherwise up to parliament according to its own `` rules of procedure ''  -lrb-  the regulations governing the parliament  -rrb-  . 
the intergroups in the european parliament are informal fora which gather meps from various political groups around any topic . 
the parliament is also responsible for discharging the implementation of previous budgets based on the annual report of the european court of auditors . 
the ecb president is also obliged to present an annual report to the parliament . 
voter turnout in 2014 stood at 42.54% of all european voters . 
the president must report to the european parliament after each european council meeting . 
the european council officially gained the status of an eu institution after the treaty of lisbon in 2007, distinct from the council of the european union  -lrb-  council of ministers  -rrb-  . 
the president of the european council is elected by the european council by a qualified majority for a once-renewable term of two and a half years . 
the european council is a collective body that defines the european union's overall political direction and priorities . 
when the european council ,  already introduced into the treaties by the single european act ,  became an institution by virtue of the treaty of lisbon ,  this was no longer necessary ,  and the `` council of the european union meeting in the composition of the heads of state or government '' ,  was replaced in these instances by the european council now taking formal legally binding decisions in these cases  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
decisions of the european council are taken by consensus ,  except where the treaties provide otherwise . 
voluntary euthanasia is conducted with the consent of the patient . 
there are different euthanasia laws in each country . 
non-voluntary euthanasia is conducted when the consent of the patient is unavailable . 
in current usage ,  euthanasia has been defined as the `` painless inducement of a quick death '' . 
their definition specifically discounts fetuses to distinguish between abortions and euthanasia:
although the epac ethics task force argued that both non-voluntary and involuntary euthanasia could not be included in the definition of euthanasia ,  there is discussion in the literature about excluding one but not the other . 
life on mars has been long speculated . 
extraterrestrial life ,  also called alien life  -lrb-  or ,  if it is a sentient or relatively complex individual ,  an `` extraterrestrial '' or `` alien ''  -rrb-  ,  is life that occurs outside of earth and that probably did not originate from earth . 
one of the scientists suggested that these compounds may have been related to the development of life on earth and said that ,  `` if this is the case ,  life on earth may have had an easier time getting started as these organics can serve as basic ingredients for life . `` 
the presence of water on ceres has led to speculation that life may be possible there . 
the science of extraterrestrial life in all its forms is known as exobiology . 
life on earth requires water as a solvent in which biochemical reactions take place . 
directed panspermia concerns the deliberate transport of microorganisms in space ,  sent to earth to start life here ,  or sent from earth to seed new stellar systems with life . 
the panspermia hypothesis proposes that life elsewhere in the solar system may have a common origin . 
mars may have niche subsurface environments where microbial life might exist . 
in february 2005, nasa scientists reported that they may have found some evidence of present life on mars . 
the science of astrobiology considers life on earth as well ,  and in the broader astronomical context . 
alien life ,  such as microorganisms ,  has been hypothesized to exist in the solar system and throughout the universe . 
the scientific search for extraterrestrial life is being carried out both directly and indirectly . 
according to one of the researchers ,  `` if life arose relatively quickly on earth ,  then it could be common in the universe . `` 
titan and enceladus have been speculated to have possible habitats supportive of life . 
some astronomers search for extrasolar planets that may be conducive to life ,  narrowing the search to terrestrial planets within the habitable zone of their star . 
europa's subsurface ocean is considered the best target for the discovery of life . 
at age six ,  he wrote to his father:
cummings also wrote children's books and novels . 
his poems are also often rife with satire . 
this work was the public's first encounter with his characteristic eccentric use of grammar and punctuation . 
he taught briefly at harvard university in the 1950s before his death in 1962.
edward estlin `` e .  e . ``  cummings  -lrb-  october 14, 1894 – september 3, 1962 -rrb- ,  often styled as e e cummings ,  as he is attributed in many of his published works ,  was an american poet ,  painter ,  essayist ,  author ,  and playwright . 
cummings returned to paris in 1921 and had lived there for two years before returning to new york . 
he started this new period by paying homage to his father in the poem `` my father moved through dooms of love '' . 
he worked as an essayist and portrait artist for `` vanity fair '' magazine  -lrb-  1924–1927 -rrb- . 
he wrote approximately 2,900 poems ,  two autobiographical novels ,  four plays ,  and several essays . 
the seeds of cummings' unconventional style appear well established even in his earliest work . 
cummings married his second wife anne minnerly barton on may 1, 1929, and they separated three years later in 1932.
the east river is a salt water tidal estuary in new york city . 
after the war ,  east river waterfront development continued once more . 
by 1700, the manhattan bank of the river has been `` wharfed-out '' up to around whitehall street ,  narrowing the strait of the river . 
the river is navigable for its entire length of  . 
on the south side of wards island ,  it is joined by the harlem river . 
throughout most of the history of new york city ,  and new amsterdam before it ,  the east river has been the receptacle for the city's garbage and sewage . 
newtown creek on long island drains into the east river ,  and forms part of the boundary between queens and brooklyn . 
in the stretch of the river between manhattan island and the borough of queens ,  lies roosevelt island ,  a narrow  -lrb-  maximum width   -rrb-  long island consisting of  . 
in 2011, ny waterway started operating its east river ferry line . 
by 1870, the condition of the port of new york along both the east and hudson rivers had so deteriorated that the new york state legislature created the department of docks to renovate the port and keep new york competitive with other ports on the american east coast . 
the east river became very polluted ,  and its animal life decreased drastically . 
beginning in 1934, and then again from 1948–1966, the manhattan shore of the river became the location for the limited-access east river drive ,  which was later renamed after franklin delano roosevelt ,  and is universally known by new yorkers as the `` fdr drive '' . 
the east river's course would ,  once again ,  be shifted to run through queens ,  and this time brooklyn as well ,  to channel it to the harbor . 
the bronx river drains into the east river in the northern section of the strait ,  and the flushing river ,  historically known as `` flushing creek '' empties into it near laguardia airport via flushing bay . 
at the same time that hell gate was being cleared ,  the harlem river ship canal was being planned . 
why the river turns to the east as it approaches the three lower manhattan bridges is currently geologically unknown . 
nyc ferry started service on may 1, 2017, with the east river ferry as part of the system . 
water from the east river was reported to have tested positive for low levels of pcb ,  a known carcinogen . 
philanthropist john d .  rockefeller founded what is now rockefeller university in 1901, between 63rd and 64th streets on the river side of york avenue ,  overlooking the river . 
at the beginning of the 19th century ,  the east river was the center of new york's shipping industry ,  but by the end of the century ,  much of it had moved to the hudson river ,  leaving the east river wharves and slips to begin a long process of decay ,  until the area was finally rehabilitated in the mid-1960s ,  and the south street seaport museum was opened in 1967.
another aspect of existential freedom is that one can change one's values . 
the focus on freedom in existentialism is related to the limits of the responsibility one bears ,  as a result of one's freedom: the relationship between freedom and responsibility is one of interdependency ,  and a clarification of freedom also clarifies that for which one is responsible . 
the look is then co-constitutive of one's facticity . 
how `` one should '' act is often determined by an image one has ,  of how one such as oneself  -lrb-  say ,  a bank manager ,  lion tamer ,  prostitute ,  etc .   -rrb- 
the paris-based existentialists had become famous . 
what sets the existentialist notion of despair apart from the conventional definition is that existentialist despair is a state one is in even when they aren't overtly in despair . 
in contrast to this ,  the inauthentic is the denial to live in accordance with one's freedom . 
søren kierkegaard is generally considered to have been the first existentialist philosopher ,  though he did not use the term existentialism . 
it is only one's perception of the way another might perceive him . 
however ,  to disregard one's facticity when ,  in the continual process of self-making ,  one projects oneself into the future ,  that would be to put oneself in denial of oneself ,  and thus would be inauthentic . 
jean anouilh's `` antigone '' also presents arguments founded on existentialist ideas . 
this image usually corresponds to some sort of social norm ,  but this does not mean that all acting in accordance with social norms is inauthentic: the main point is the attitude one takes to one's own freedom and responsibility ,  and the extent to which one acts in accordance with this freedom . 
this was then brought to kierkegaard by sibbern . 
while this experience ,  in its basic phenomenological sense ,  constitutes the world as objective ,  and oneself as objectively existing subjectivity  -lrb-  one experiences oneself as seen in the other's look in precisely the same way that one experiences the other as seen by him ,  as subjectivity  -rrb-  ,  in existentialism ,  it also acts as a kind of limitation of freedom . 
this can take many forms ,  from pretending choices are meaningless or random ,  through convincing oneself that some form of determinism is true ,  to a sort of `` mimicry '' where one acts as `` one should '' . 
although it was sartre who explicitly coined the phrase ,  similar notions can be found in the thought of existentialist philosophers such as heidegger ,  and kierkegaard:
the first half of the book contains an extended rebuttal of what camus took to be existentialist philosophy in the works of kierkegaard ,  shestov ,  heidegger ,  and jaspers . 
simone de beauvoir ,  an important existentialist who spent much of her life as sartre's partner ,  wrote about feminist and existentialist ethics in her works ,  including `` the second sex '' and `` the ethics of ambiguity '' . 
in the first decades of the 20th century ,  a number of philosophers and writers explored existentialist ideas . 
the play examines questions such as death ,  the meaning of human existence and the place of god in human existence . 
the role of facticity in relation to authenticity involves letting one's actual values come into play when one makes a choice  -lrb-  instead of ,  like kierkegaard's aesthete ,  `` choosing '' randomly  -rrb-  ,  so that one also takes responsibility for the act instead of choosing either-or without allowing the options to have different values . 
søren kierkegaard and friedrich nietzsche were two of the first philosophers considered fundamental to the existentialist movement ,  though neither used the term `` existentialism '' and it is unclear whether they would have supported the existentialism of the 20th century . 
angst ,  according to the modern existentialist ,  adam fong ,  is the sudden realization of a lack of meaning ,  often while one completes a task that initially seems to have intrinsic meaning . 
these are considered absurd since they issue from human freedom ,  undermining their foundation outside of themselves . 
another aspect of facticity is that it entails angst ,  both in the sense that freedom `` produces '' angst when limited by facticity ,  and in the sense that the lack of the possibility of having facticity to `` step in '' for one to take responsibility for something one has done ,  also produces angst . 
the more positive ,  therapeutic aspect of this is also implied: a person can choose to act in a different way ,  and to be a good person instead of a cruel person . 
rudolf bultmann used kierkegaard's and heidegger's philosophy of existence to demythologize christianity by interpreting christian mythical concepts into existentialist concepts . 
paul tillich ,  an important existentialist theologian following kierkegaard and karl barth ,  applied existentialist concepts to christian theology ,  and helped introduce existential theology to the general public . 
 ''text … text ''  -rrb-  . 
as the japanese word for dot is pronounced ``  '' ,  the dots are colloquially called ``  ''  -lrb-   ,  akin to the english `` dot dot dot ''  -rrb-  . 
when the suppressed text is at the beginning or at the end of a text ,  the ellipsis does not need to be placed in a parenthesis . 
 -lrb-   .  .  .   -rrb-  is also used for awkward silence . 
 ''the oxford style guide '' recommends setting the ellipsis as a single character  -lrb-  …  -rrb-  or as a series of three  -lrb-  narrow  -rrb-  spaced dots  -lrb-   . 
  -rrb-  ,  while the `` associated press stylebook ''  -lrb-  `` ap '' style  -rrb-  puts the dots together ,  but retains a space before and after the group . 
 ''the chicago manual of style '' suggests the use of an ellipsis for any omitted word ,  phrase ,  line ,  or paragraph from within but not at the end of a quoted passage . 
in chinese ,  the ellipsis is six dots  -lrb-  in two groups of three dots ,  occupying the same horizontal or vertical space as two characters  -rrb-   -lrb-  i . e . 
the modern language association  -lrb-  mla  -rrb-  used to indicate that an ellipsis must include spaces before and after each dot in all uses . 
other use is the suspension of a part of a text ,  or a paragraph ,  or a phrase or a part of a word because it is obvious ,  or unnecessary ,  or implied . 
contrary to `` the oxford style guide '' ,  the `` university of oxford style guide '' demands an ellipsis not to be surrounded by spaces ,  except when it stands for a pause; then ,  a space has to be set after the ellipsis  -lrb-  but not before  -rrb-  . 
the mla now indicates that a three-dot ,  spaced ellipsis  -lrb-    . 
 ''enola gay '' was used on 31 july on a rehearsal flight for the actual mission . 
the enola gay  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a boeing b-29 superfortress bomber ,  named after enola gay tibbets ,  the mother of the pilot ,  colonel paul tibbets . 
hiroshima was the primary target of the first nuclear bombing mission on 6 august ,  with kokura and nagasaki as alternative targets . 
on 5 august 1945, during preparation for the first atomic mission ,  tibbets assumed command of the aircraft and named it after his mother ,  enola gay tibbets ,  who ,  in turn ,  had been named for the heroine of a novel . 
the name was painted on the aircraft on 5 august by allan l .  karl ,  an enlisted man in the 509th . 
although buffeted by the shock ,  neither `` enola gay '' nor `` the great artiste '' was damaged . 
the mass equivalent of is
by mass–energy equivalence ,  the electronvolt is also a unit of mass . 
the dimensions of momentum units are  . 
in high-energy physics ,  the electronvolt is often used as a unit of momentum . 
by dividing energy in ev by the speed of light ,  one can describe the momentum of an electron in units of ev/ ''c '' . 
in physics ,  the electronvolt  -lrb-  symbol ev ,  also written electron-volt and electron volt  -rrb-  is a unit of energy equal to approximately joules  -lrb-  symbol j  -rrb-  in si units . 
william grove produced the first fuel cell in 1839.
by the 1810s ,  william hyde wollaston made improvements to the galvanic cell . 
in 1800, william nicholson and johann wilhelm ritter succeeded in decomposing water into hydrogen and oxygen by electrolysis . 
galvani refuted this by obtaining muscular action with two pieces of the same material . 
in 1832, michael faraday's experiments led him to state his two laws of electrochemistry . 
in 1868, georges leclanché patented a new cell which eventually became the forerunner to the world's first widely used battery ,  the zinc carbon cell . 
walther hermann nernst developed the theory of the electromotive force of the voltaic cell in 1888.
this work led directly to the isolation of sodium and potassium from their compounds and of the alkaline earth metals from theirs in 1808.
