between 1926 and 1959 bioko and rio muni were united as the colony of spanish guinea . 
the soviets also made loans to equatorial guinea . 
equatorial guinea consists of two parts ,  an insular and a mainland region . 
equatorial guinea  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of equatorial guinea  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  ,  is a country located on the west coast of central africa ,  with an area of  . 
in 1995 mobil ,  an american oil company ,  discovered oil in equatorial guinea . 
since the mid-1990s ,  equatorial guinea has become one of sub-saharan africa's largest oil producers . 
independence was conceded on 12 october 1968 and the region became the republic of equatorial guinea . 
fernando pó and annobón were colonized by portugal in 1474.
between 1778 and 1810, the territory of equatorial guinea was administered by the viceroyalty of the río de la plata ,  based in buenos aires . 
pygmies probably once lived in the continental region that is now equatorial guinea ,  but are today found only in isolated pockets in southern río muni . 
by 1968 there were almost 100,000 nigerians in spanish guinea . 
between 1926 and 1959 bioko and rio muni were united as the colony of spanish guinea . 
the islands of fernando pó and annobón were colonized by portugal in 1474.
most of the cameroonian natives stayed in muni ,  while the germans moved to fernando po . 
during world war i ,  due to spain's neutrality ,  rio muni and fernando po were host to large numbers of german troops and refugees who fled german kamerun after the entente conquered the colony . 
the history of equatorial guinea is marked by centuries of colonial domination by the portuguese ,  british and spanish empires ,  and by the local kingdoms
the first inhabitants of the region that is now equatorial guinea are believed to have been pygmies ,  of whom only isolated pockets remain in northern río muni . 
from the opening years of the 20th century ,  the fernandinos were put on the defensive by a new generation of spanish immigrants . 
at the beginning of the spanish civil war the colony remained loyal to the republican government . 
between 1778 and 1810, the territory of equatorial guinea was administered by the viceroyalty of the río de la plata ,  based in buenos aires
temperatures and humidity in rio muni are generally lower than on bioko island . 
bioko island ,  called fernando po until the 1970s ,  is the largest island in the gulf of guinea -  . 
annobon island ,  named for its discovery on new year's day 1472, is a small volcanic island covering  . 
total fertility rate  -lrb-  tfr  -rrb-   -lrb-  wanted fertility rate  -rrb-  and crude birth rate  -lrb-  cbr  -rrb- :
the proportion of children between the ages of 0 and 14 in 2010 was 39.2% ,  57.9% was between 15 and 64 years of age ,  while 2.9% was 65 years or older
teodoro obiang nguema mbasogo seized power in a military coup . 
equatorial guinea became independent from spain on october 12, 1968.
the 1982 constitution gives obiang extensive powers ,  including the right to name ,  and dismiss ,  members of the cabinet . 
as for the legal profession ,  the equatorial guinea bar association  -lrb-  colegio de abogados de guinea ecuatorial  -rrb-  was dissolved by the government in 2002.
a november 2004 report named mark thatcher as a financial backer of a march 2004 attempt to topple obiang organized by simon mann . 
obiang won an election widely considered fraudulent by members of the western press . 
since president obiang has been constrained only by a need to maintain a consensus among his advisers and political supporters in the democratic party of equatorial guinea ,  most of whom are drawn from the nguema family in mongomo ,  part of the esangu subclan of the fang in the eastern part of río muni . 
equatorial guinea is divided in seven provinces  -lrb-  `` provincias ''  -rrb- ; annobon ,  bioko norte ,  bioko sur ,  centro sur ,  kie-ntem ,  litoral ,  wele-nzas . 
growth remained strong in 2005 and 2006, led by oil . 
with an upturn in oil prices ,  exploration intensified in 2000.
its oil production had then risen to  ,  up from only two years earlier . 
after a slow start ,  equatorial guinea has recently emerged as a major oil producer in the gulf of guinea ,  one of the most promising hydrocarbon regions in the world . 
imports into equatorial guinea also are growing very quickly . 
equatorial guinea's balance-of-payments situation has improved substantially since the mid-1990s because of new oil and gas production and favorable world energy prices . 
after the oil price collapsed in 2014, the economy has gone into a free for all which has put growth in a downwards spiral from around 15% to -10% . 
additional oil production coming on line in 2001, combined with methanol gas exports from the new cms-nomeco plant ,  should increase export earnings substantially . 
in early 2001 the government announced plans to establish a national oil company ,  to allow equatorial guinea to take a greater stake in the sector and to facilitate the more rapid transfer of skills . 
equatorial guinea's foreign debt stock was approximately francs cfa 69 billion  -lrb-  100 m$us  -rrb-  in 2000, slightly less than the debt stock in 1999, according to beac data . 
oil and gas exports have increased substantially  -lrb-  in 2003 equatorial guinea was ranked third among sub-sahara african producers behind nigeria and angola  -rrb-  and will drive the economy for years to come . 
the plant began to operate in may 2007 and a second plant is now under development . 
the equato-guinean budget has grown enormously in the past 3 years as royalties and taxes on foreign company oil and gas production have provided new resources to a once poor government . 
there are both air and sea connections between the two cities of malabo and bata . 
the state maintains direct or indirect control of all broadcast media . 
in 2002, a report said `` the oil companies do not view equatorial guinea's military – a product of decades of brutal dictatorial rule – with much confidence . 
the air force of equatorial guinea consists of seven fixed wing aircraft and nine helicopters providing ground support ,  transport ,  sar ,  and training . 
the armed forces of equatorial guinea  -lrb-  in spanish: `` fuerzas armadas de guinea ecuatorial ''  -rrb-  consists of approximately 2,500 service members . 
a transitional agreement ,  signed in october 1968, implemented a spanish preindependence decision to assist equatorial guinea and provided for the temporary maintenance of spanish forces there . 
the result of the referendum was 99.83% for eritrea's independence . 
the italians brought to eritrea a huge development of catholicism . 
this fact made asmara the main `` italian town '' of the italian empire in africa . in all eritrea the italian eritreans were 75,000 in that year . 
the kingdom of aksum was a trading empire centered in eritrea and northern ethiopia . 
by 1977 the eplf seemed poised to drive the ethiopians out of eritrea . 
eritrea is an isolated country in the east of africa . 
eritrea was chosen by the italian government to be the industrial center of italian east africa . 
since allied with ethiopia ,  it seems as if eritrea's `` haters '' acted up
the eritrean authorities declared eritrea an independent state on 27 april . 
eritrea was placed under british military administration after the italian surrender in world war ii . 
the city of italian asmara had a population of 98,000, of which 53,000 were italians according to the italian census of 1939.
in 1952 un general assembly resolution 390 to federate eritrea with ethiopia went into effect . 
d'mt was a kingdom that encompassed most of eritrea and the northern fringes of ethiopia ,  it existed during the 8th and 7th centuries bc . 
while the canadian ngo observation delegation to eritrea reported that the referendum question was `` do you want eritrea to be an independent and sovereign country ? `` 
however ,  he was forced by circumstance to live by the tenets of italian sovereignty over eritrea . 
in july 1996 the constitution of eritrea was ratified ,  but it has yet to be implemented . 
the researchers found that the mummies most closely matched modern baboon specimens in eritrea and ethiopia ,  which they suggested implied that punt was likely a narrow region that included eastern ethiopia ,  somalia ,  and all of eritrea . 
the first italian settlers arrived in 1880.
eritrea officially celebrated its 1st anniversary of independence on may 24, 1991.
the boundaries of the present-day eritrea nation state were established during the scramble for africa . 
the details of eritrea's association with ethiopia were established by the un general assembly resolution 390a  -lrb-  v  -rrb-  of 2 december 1950.
the bbc published on 19 june 2008 a timeline of eritrea's conflict with ethiopia to that date and reported that the `` border dispute rumbles on '':
in qatar ,  the `` gulf times '' said: `` they were asked only one question: do you support a free eritrea ? 
meanwhile ,  eritrea witnessed a very slow ,  but steady intrusion of islam . 
in september ,  2012, the israeli 'haaretz' newspaper published an exposé on eritrea . 
italian asmara was populated by a large italian community and the city acquired an italian architectural look . 
many industrial investments were done by the italians in the area of asmara and massawa ,  but the beginning of world war ii stopped the blossoming industrialization of eritrea . 
this party ruled by dr .  di meglio obtained in 1947 the dismissal of a proposal to divide eritrea between sudan and ethiopia . 
the kingdom used the name `` ethiopia '' as early as the 4th century . 
furthermore ,  eritrea's diplomatic relations with djibouti were briefly severed during the border war with ethiopia in 1998 due to a dispute over djibouti's intimate relation with ethiopia during the war but were restored and normalized in 2000.
ethiopian ambition in the horn was apparent in the expansionist ambition of its monarch when haile selassie claimed italian somaliland and eritrea . 
the italians took advantage of disorder in northern ethiopia following the death of emperor yohannes iv in 1889 to occupy the highlands and established their new colony ,  henceforth known as eritrea ,  and received recognition from menelik ii ,  ethiopia's new emperor . 
in the central highlands ,  the hottest month is usually may to june with highs around 27 °c  -lrb-  80.6 °f  -rrb-  to 30 °c  -lrb-  86 °f  -rrb-  . 
eritrea has no year-round rivers . 
in the western lowlands ,  the high temperatures are comparable to those on the coast in the hottest months of april until june . 
eritrea has an estimated population of as of  . 
the saho represent 4% of eritrea's population . 
the rashaida are one of eritrea's nine recognized ethnic groups . 
the bilen in eritrea represent around 2% of the country's population . 
the beja in eritrea ,  or hedareb ,  constitute under 5% of local residents . 
they are predominantly muslim ,  although a few christians known as the irob live in the debub region of eritrea and the tigray region of ethiopia . 
according to the cia ,  the kunama constitute around 2% of eritrea's population . 
the tigre reside in the western lowlands in eritrea . 
politics of eritrea takes place in a framework of a single-party presidential republican totalitarian dictatorship ,  whereby the eritrean president is both head of state and head of government and a single-party state ,  led by the people's front for democracy and justice . 
in 2004 the u . s .  state department declared eritrea a country of particular concern  -lrb-  cpc  -rrb-  for its alleged record of religious persecution . 
following a successful referendum on independence for the autonomous region of eritrea between 23 and 25 april 1993, on 19 may of that year the provisional government of eritrea  -lrb-  pge  -rrb-  issued a proclamation regarding the reorganization of the government . 
eritrea's gdp ,  estimated at $4.037 billion in 2011, is 8.7 percent above the gdp in 2010.
there is growing interest in u . s .  products and services in eritrea ,  although u . s .  investment in eritrea is still small . 
in 2004, agriculture employed nearly 80 percent of the population but accounted for only 12.4 percent of gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  in eritrea . 
financial services ,  the bulk of the services sector ,  are principally rendered by the national bank of eritrea  -lrb-  the nation's central bank  -rrb-  ,  the commercial bank of eritrea ,  the housing and commerce bank of eritrea ,  the agricultural and industrial bank of eritrea ,  the eritrean investment and development bank ,  and the national insurance corporation of eritrea . 
in 2011, eritrea's gdp grew by 8.7 percent making it one of the fastest growing economies in the world . 
agriculture employs about 80 percent of the population in eritrea ,  and the remaining 20 percent are employed in industry and services . 
eritrea's lack of access to funds ,  the presence of large numbers of land mines ,  and the continued tensions that flare up between eritrea and ethiopia have deterred the development of a tourist industry in eritrea . 
the economy of eritrea has experienced considerable growth in recent years ,  indicated by an improvement in gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  in october 2012 of 7.5 percent over 2011.
major foreign investors in eritrea include china ,  south korea ,  italy ,  south africa ,  and germany ,  as well as the world bank . 
eritrea's substantial mineral deposits are largely unexplored . 
telecommunications in eritrea are under the authority of the government of eritrea . 
on 13 april 2006, eritrea received a soft loan from the government of china to upgrade their communication infrastructure . 
by 2003, the line had been restored from massawa all the way through to asmara . 
the commander-in-chief of the edf is the president of eritrea . 
during the war for eritrea's independence rebel movements  -lrb-  the elf and the eplf  -rrb-  used volunteers . 
the eritrean defence forces military role stems from eritrea's strategic geographical location . 
military history in eritrea stretches back for thousands of years; during ancient times up until the current day ,  the society of eritreans has dealt with war and peace . 
eritrea is a member of the united nations ,  the african union ,  and is an observing member of the arab league . 
between 57.3 and 59.5 latitude and 21.5 and 28.1 longitude ,  estonia lies on the eastern shores of the baltic sea on the level northwestern part of the rising east european platform . 
the governorate of estonia comprised the northern part of present-day estonia . 
as of 2008, the largest ethnic groups in estonia are estonians  -lrb-  68.7%  -rrb-  ,  russians  -lrb-  25.6%  -rrb-  ,  ukrainians  -lrb-  2.1%  -rrb-  ,  belarusians  -lrb-  1.2%  -rrb-  ,  and finns  -lrb-  0.8%  -rrb-  . 
these five groups made up 98.4% of estonia's population . 
at that time estonians were still the predominant ethnic group ,  while all others constituted 12% of the population of estonia . 
life expectancy in estonia is lower than in most western european countries . 
the rise and fall of the soviet union ,  including the annexation and eventual independence of estonia ,  has had a major effect on estonia's ethnic makeup and educational achievement . 
from 1947–1989 the number of births was higher than the number of deaths ,  but from 1990 onwards the number of deaths outnumbered the number of births . 
in the twentieth century ,  estonia's ethnic makeup was altered radically by policies implemented by the soviet government . 
in the same period the proportion of ethnic russians decreased from 30.0% to 25.6% ,  the proportion of ethnic ukrainians decreased from 3.1% to 2.1% ,  and the proportion of ethnic belarusians decreased from 1.8% to 1.2% . 
the infant mortality rate in estonia has decreased considerably during the past decades . 
languages spoken in estonia largely reflect the ethnic groups composing the country ,  and thus have changed with historical trends affecting the ethnic makeup of the country . 
the bank of estonia  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the central bank of the republic of estonia . 
the parliament  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the representative legislative authority of the republic of estonia . 
the organisation and activities of the bank of estonia is regulated by the bank of estonia act . 
the president is elected by the parliament of estonia for a five-year term ,  but no more than two terms . 
there are four types of public elections in estonia: local government council elections ,  state parliament elections ,  european parliament elections and referendums . 
on 1 may 2004, estonia was accepted into the european union . 
citizens of estonia who are at least 21 years of age and are eligible to vote may stand to be elected to the parliament of estonia . 
the framework for the political institutions of estonia is provided by the constitution of estonia  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the president is the head of state of the republic of estonia and serves as the highest representative of the state . 
estonia is a member of united nations ,  the european union ,  and nato . 
electronic voting was first used in estonia during the municipal council elections of 2005.
estonia's 1990 per capita gdp was $10,733 compared to $26,100 for finland . 
estonia joined the world trade organization in 1999.
in the first quarter 2008, gdp grew only 0.1% . 
after a long period of very high growth of gdp ,  the gdp of estonia decreased by a little over 3% on a yearly basis in the 3rd quarter of 2008.
estonian service sector employs over 60% of workforce . 
estonia is 21st on the ease of doing business index 2013 by the world bank group . 
for estonia ,  the late-2000s recession was comparatively easier to weather ,  because estonia's budget has consistently been kept balanced ,  and this meant that estonia's public debt relative to the country's gdp has remained one of the lowest in europe . 
on july 2009, estonian vat was increased from 18% to 20% . 
since 2009, the estonian economy has rebounded . 
the ussr's annexation of estonia in 1940 and the ensuing nazi and soviet destruction during world war ii crippled the estonian economy . 
estonia had the eu's worst year for unemployment ,  which rose from 3.9% in may 2008 to 15.6% in may 2009.
until the early 13th century ,  the territory that is now known as estonia was independent . 
on 1 january 2011, estonia adopted the euro and became the 17th eurozone member state . 
the ussr's forcible annexation of estonia in 1940 and the ensuing nazi and soviet destruction during world war ii crippled the estonian economy . 
the government of estonia decided that the country should adopt the euro as its official currency ,  and finalized the design of estonian euro coins in late 2004.
estonia also has made excellent progress in regard to structural adjustment . 
in 2009 it had about 0.97 million internet users . 
with a population of about 1.3 million ,  estonia had in 2012 about 2.07 million cellular telephones and 0.45 million fixed phones . 
estonia established diplomatic relations with kazakhstan on 27 may 1992.
kazakhstan is represented in estonia through its embassy in vilnius  -lrb-  lithuania  -rrb-  . 
whereas in 1992 russia accounted for 92% of estonia's international trade ,  today there is extensive economic interdependence between estonia and its nordic neighbors: three quarters of foreign investment in estonia originates in the nordic countries  -lrb-  principally finland and sweden  -rrb-  ,  to which estonia sends 42% of its exports  -lrb-  as compared to 6.5% going to russia ,  8.8% to latvia ,  and 4.7% to lithuania  -rrb-  . 
uruguay is represented in estonia through its embassy in helsinki  -lrb-  finland  -rrb-  and an honorary consulate in tallinn . 
they include ,  from north to south ,  gumuz in gondar and gojjam ,  berta in welega ,  and anuak in ilubabor
ethiopia's semitic languages are today spoken mainly in the north and centre of the country . 
nilo-saharan-speaking nilotic ethnic minorities also inhabit the southern regions of the country ,  particularly in areas bordering south sudan . 
cushitic languages ,  however ,  are also used in the north of the country ,  namely afarinya ,  spoken by the afar of eastern wollo and the northern half of the djibouti republic; saho ,  in parts of tigray; and agawinya ,  in small pockets in different parts of western ethiopia . 
it is used in a wide stretch of country ,  including welega and parts of ilubabor in the west ,  wollo in the north ,  shewa and arsi in the centre ,  bale and sidamo in the south ,  and harerge in the east . 
among these are the mursi and anuak . 
ethiopia today has nine semi-autonomous regions of ethiopia that have the power to raise and spend their own revenues . 
the politics of ethiopia arise from the way the government of ethiopia is structured as well as socioeconomic factors . 
a group of ethiopian royalists continue to operate the crown council of ethiopia as a government in exile . 
the government of the federal democratic republic of ethiopia was installed in august 1995.
additionally ,  the eprdf won all but one of 1,904 council seats in regional elections . 
ethiopia is a key partner for countries concerned about security in the region ,  especially the us ,  uk and the european union . `` 
the president of ethiopia is elected by the house of peoples' representatives for a six-year term . 
ethiopia held its third general election in may 2005, which drew a record number of voters ,  with 90% of the electorate turning out to cast their vote . 
in june 1992 the olf withdrew from the government; in march 1993, members of the southern ethiopia peoples' democratic coalition left the government . 
with ethiopia’s national election in may 2010 approaching ,  some opposition groups begun to hint a boycott ,  accusing the government of stepping up harassment against them . 
the mining sector is small in ethiopia . 
in 2000, ethiopia's livestock contributed to 19% of total gdp . 
in 2015, ethiopia was ranked the `` world's best tourist destination '' by the european council on tourism and trade . 
the current gdp  -lrb-  usd  -rrb-  per capita of ethiopia shrank by 43% in the 1990s . 
dependent on a few vulnerable crops for its foreign exchange earnings and reliant on imported oil ,  ethiopia lacks sufficient foreign exchange . 
waterpower and forests are ethiopia's main energy sources . 
ethiopia has one of the fastest-growing economies in the world and is africa's second most populous country . 
until 2013, the major agricultural export crop was coffee ,  providing about 26.4% of ethiopia's foreign exchange earnings . 
the economy of ethiopia is a mixed and transition economy with a large public sector . 
around the 5th–8th century ,  the coffee plant was introduced into the arab world from ethiopia . 
ethiopia's fisheries are entirely fresh water ,  as it has no marine coastline . 
as of 2012, 20.524 million cellular phones and 797,500 main line phones were in use . 
the telephone system in ethiopia consists of open wire and microwave radio relay systems adequate for government use . 
ethiopia's country code  -lrb-  tld  -rrb-  is  . et . 
the share of federally managed roads in good quality improved from 14% in 1995 to 31% in 2002 as a result of this program ,  and to 89% in 2009 the road density increased from 21 km per 1000 km  -lrb-  in 1995 -rrb- to 889 km; per 1000 km  -lrb-  in 2009 -rrb- however ,  this is much greater than the average of 50 km per 1000 km for africa . 
this had involved the upgrading or construction of over 7,500 km of roads ,  with the goal of improving the average road density for ethiopia to 35 km per 1000 km ,  and reduce the proportion of the country area that is more than 5 km from an all-weather road from 75% to 70% . 
the port of djibouti is served by one international railway ,  the electrified standard gauge 756 km long addis ababa – djibouti railway  -lrb-  of which 656 km run in ethiopia  -rrb-  . 
ethiopia is building a standard gauge railway network ,  the national railway network of ethiopia ,  planned to consist of up to 5,000 km of railways in a number of years . 
more than 95% of ethiopia's trade passes through djibouti . 
30 to 40 ethiopian officers were trained in russia from 1901 until 1913.
the ethiopian national defense force  -lrb-  endf  -rrb-  is the military of ethiopia . 
the first ethiopian military orchestra was organized at the same time . 
3,518 ethiopian troops served in the war ,  where 121 were killed and 536 wounded during the korean war . 
in accordance with the order of the emperor of ethiopia ,  directly nikolay leontiev organized the first battalion of the regular ethiopian army in february 1899.
the ethiopian army's origins and military traditions date back to the earliest history of ethiopia . 
emperor haile selassie divided the ethiopian military into separate commands . 
the ethiopian army grew considerably under the derg  -lrb-  1974–1987 -rrb- ,  and the people's democratic republic of ethiopia under mengistu  -lrb-  1987–1991 -rrb- ,  especially during the latter regime . 
when the derg gained control of ethiopia ,  they lessened their reliance on the west . 
he became `` ras , ``  a general and minister of defense of the imperial ethiopian armed forces until his death in the 1960 ethiopian coup attempt . 
in obedience to the agreement with russia and the order of menelik ii ,  first ethiopian officers began to be trained at the first russian cadet school in 1901.
being a landlocked country ,  ethiopia today has no navy . 
they honed both conventional and guerrilla tactics during campaigns in eritrea ,  and the ethiopian civil war that toppled ethiopian former military dictator mengistu haile mariam in 1991 and also by repelling an invasion launched by somalia in the 1977–1978 ogaden war . 
following world war ii ,  ethiopia played an active role in regional and global politics . 
today ,  ethiopia is a major economic partner of djibouti and sudan ,  although border demarcation negotiations are still ongoing with the omar al-bashir administration . 
the island is a nature reserve . 
additionally ,  the island is also home to its own species of hissing cockroach . 
the island is also home to an endemic subspecies of white-tailed tropicbird  -lrb-  `` phaethon lepturus europae ''  -rrb-  . 
the island officially became a possession of france in 1897.
euclidean geometry is a mathematical system attributed to alexandrian greek mathematician euclid ,  which he described in his textbook on geometry: the `` elements '' . 
an implication of albert einstein's theory of general relativity is that physical space itself is not euclidean ,  and euclidean space is a good approximation for it only over short distances  -lrb-  relative to the strength of the gravitational field  -rrb-  . 
the oldest epic recognized is the `` epic of gilgamesh ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which was recorded in ancient sumer during the neo-sumerian empire . 
the first epics were products of preliterate societies and oral history poetic traditions . 
originating before the invention of writing ,  primary epics were composed by bards who used complex rhetorical and metrical schemes by which they could memorize the epic as received in tradition and add to the epic in their performances . 
parry and lord also contend that the most likely source for written texts of the epics of homer was dictation from an oral performance . 
water vapor traps more infrared than does carbon dioxide . 
for contrast ,  today the carbon dioxide levels are at 400 ppm or 0.04% . 
during the warming in the early eocene between 52 and 55 million years ago ,  there were a series of short-term changes of carbon isotope composition in the ocean . 
to test the polar stratospheric clouds effects on the eocene climate ,  models were run comparing the effects of polar stratospheric clouds at the poles to an increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide . 
due to the nature of water as opposed to land ,  less temperature variability would be present if a large body of water is also present . 
due to the warming of the troposphere from the increased greenhouse effect of the polar stratospheric clouds ,  the stratosphere would cool and would potentially increase the amount of polar stratospheric clouds . 
different types of polar stratospheric clouds occur in the atmosphere: polar stratospheric clouds that are created due to interactions with nitric or sulfuric acid and water  -lrb-  type i  -rrb-  or polar stratospheric clouds that are created with only water ice  -lrb-  type ii  -rrb-  . 
methane  -lrb-  ch  -rrb-  has ten to twenty times the greenhouse gas effect of carbon dioxide  -lrb-  co  -rrb-  . 
another method considered for producing the warm polar temperatures were polar stratospheric clouds . 
at the end of the middle eocene climatic optimum ,  cooling and the carbon dioxide drawdown continued through the late eocene and into the eocene-oligocene transition around 34 million years ago . 
cooling after this event continued due to continual decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide from organic productivity and weathering from mountain building . 
polar forests were quite extensive . 
the middle to late eocene marks not only the switch from warming to cooling ,  but also the change in carbon dioxide from increasing to decreasing . 
global cooling continued until there was a major reversal from cooling to warming indicated in the southern ocean at around 42–41 million years ago . 
tropical rainforests grew as far north as northern north america and europe . 
during this decrease ice began to reappear at the poles ,  and the eocene-oligocene transition is the period of time where the antarctic ice sheet began to rapidly expand . 
eindhoven did not become part of the netherlands until 1629.
industrialisation brought population growth to eindhoven . 
eindhoven was originally located at the confluence of the dommel and gender . 
eindhoven  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the fifth-largest city and a municipality of the netherlands . 
on the establishment of the kingdom of the netherlands in 1815, eindhoven had 2,310 inhabitants . 
the reconstruction of eindhoven was finished in 1502, with a stronger rampart and a new castle . 
in 1486, eindhoven was plundered and burned by troops from guelders . 
helsingør  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  classically known in english as elsinore ,  is a city in eastern denmark . 
north of gävle the road is of mixed standard . 
the road is now fully authorized as e 4 by the relevant authority ,  not as e 55.
south of gävle ,  the road becomes an almost continuous motorway ,  with the only non-motorway part being a long section past ljungby ,  currently a 2+1 limited-access road . 
ericsson's workforce worldwide fell during 2001 from 107,000 to 85,000.
during the cutbacks ,  ericsson had reduced its cdma organization . 
ericsson issued a profit warning in march 2001.
ericsson  -lrb-  telefonaktiebolaget l .  m .  ericsson  -rrb-  is a swedish multinational networking and telecommunications company headquartered in stockholm . 
kreuger had effectively bought lm ericsson with its own money . 
ericsson picked up this invention and incorporated it into ericsson products ,  beginning with a telephone named `` the dachshund '' . 
sony ericsson remained in operation until february 2012, when sony bought out ericsson's share; ericsson said it wanted to focus on the global wireless market as a whole . 
as a joint venture with sony ,  ericsson's mobile telephone production was moved into the company sony ericsson in 2001.
in 1918 the companies were merged into `` allmänna telefonaktiebolaget lm ericsson '' . 
ericsson had 35% market share in the 2g/3g/4g mobile network infrastructure market in 2012.
founded in 1993, ericsson hewlett packard telecom  -lrb-  ehpt  -rrb-  was a joint venture made up of 60% ericsson interests and 40% hewlett-packard interests . 
ericsson got caught up in the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s . 
with his company now multinational ,  lars ericsson stepped down from the company in 1901.
ericsson hosts a developer program called ericsson developer connection designed to encourage development of applications and services . 
in may 2018, softbank partnered with ericsson to trial new radio technology . 
ericsson became a major supplier of telephone equipment to scandinavia . 
operators use ericsson products to migrate from 2g to 3g and ,  most recently ,  to 4g networks . 
ericsson created a division to develop its multimedia business in early 2007.
in 1928, ericsson began issuing `` a '' and `` b '' shares; an `` a '' share had 1000 votes against a `` b '' share . 
the following is a list of mobile phones marketed under the brand name ericsson . 
once the qualcomm conflict was settled ,  ericsson continued to be involved in mobile internet . 
in september 2001, ericsson purchased the remaining shares in ehpt from hewlett packard . 
ericsson was now regarded by itt as a takeover target as its main international competitor . 
the company was founded in 1876 by lars magnus ericsson; it is headquartered in stockholm ,  sweden . 
sony ericsson mobile communications ab  -lrb-  sony ericsson  -rrb-  was a joint venture with sony that merged the previous mobile telephone operations of both companies . 
despite their successes elsewhere ,  ericsson did not make significant sales into the united states . 
the book and study investigated animal behaviour and then compared human behaviour to it as a similar phenomenon . 
it also enables the trainer to encourage the performance of naturally occurring behaviours and also the discontinuance of undesirable behaviours . 
imitation is an advanced behaviour whereby an animal observes and exactly replicates the behaviour of another . 
ethology is the scientific and objective study of animal behaviour ,  usually with a focus on behaviour under natural conditions ,  and viewing behaviour as an evolutionarily adaptive trait . 
this behaviour was soon expressed by the individuals living in contact with her; when they gave birth ,  this behaviour was also expressed by their young - a form of social transmission . 
other examples are the classic studies by tinbergen on the egg-retrieval behaviour and the effects of a `` supernormal stimulus '' on the behaviour of graylag geese . 
ethologists are typically interested in a behavioural process rather than in a particular animal group ,  and often study one type of behaviour ,  such as aggression ,  in a number of unrelated animals . 
altruistic behaviour has been explained by the gene-centred view of evolution . 
a well-documented example of social transmission of a behaviour occurred in a group of macaques on hachijojima island ,  japan . 
their beginning for studying the behaviour of a new species was to construct an ethogram  -lrb-  a description of the main types of behaviour with their frequencies of occurrence  -rrb-  . this provided an objective ,  cumulative database of behaviour ,  which subsequent researchers could check and supplement . 
understanding ethology or animal behaviour can be important in animal training . 
e .  o .  wilson's book ``  '' appeared in 1975, and since that time ,  the study of behaviour has been much more concerned with social aspects . 
teaching is a highly specialized aspect of learning in which the `` teacher ''  -lrb-  demonstrator  -rrb-  adjusts their behaviour to increase the probability of the `` pupil ''  -lrb-  observer  -rrb-  achieving the desired end-result of the behaviour . 
ethology is now a well-recognized scientific discipline ,  and has a number of journals covering developments in the subject ,  such as `` animal behaviour '' ,  `` animal welfare '' ,  `` applied animal behaviour science '' ,  `` animal cognition '' ,  `` behaviour '' ,  `` behavioral ecology '' and `` journal of ethology '' . 
interference is the superposition of two or more waves resulting in a new wave pattern . 
these derivatives require that the e and b fields in emr are in-phase  -lrb-  see math section below  -rrb-  . 
electromagnetic waves in free space must be solutions of maxwell's electromagnetic wave equation . 
in physics ,  electromagnetic radiation  -lrb-  em radiation or emr  -rrb-  refers to the waves  -lrb-  or their quanta ,  photons  -rrb-  of the electromagnetic field ,  propagating  -lrb-  radiating  -rrb-  through space ,  carrying electromagnetic radiant energy . 
in this language ,  the near field refers to em fields near the charges and current that directly produced them specifically ,  electromagnetic induction and electrostatic induction phenomena . 
according to maxwell's equations ,  a spatially varying electric field is always associated with a magnetic field that changes over time . 
the distant em field formed in this way by the acceleration of a charge carries energy with it that `` radiates '' away through space ,  hence the term . 
some experiments display both the wave and particle natures of electromagnetic waves ,  such as the self-interference of a single photon . 
since light is an oscillation it is not affected by traveling through static electric or magnetic fields in a linear medium such as a vacuum . 
the term “far from sources” refers to how far from the source  -lrb-  moving at the speed of light  -rrb-  any portion of the outward-moving em field is located ,  by the time that source currents are changed by the varying source potential ,  and the source has therefore begun to generate an outwardly moving em field of a different phase . 
from may 1944 to march 1945, hemingway was in london and europe . 
from the end of the year in 1955 to early 1956, hemingway was bedridden . 
hemingway was raised in oak park ,  illinois . 
pound introduced hemingway to james joyce ,  with whom hemingway frequently embarked on `` alcoholic sprees '' . 
hemingway returned home early in 1919 to a time of readjustment . 
hemingway said he `` was out of business as a writer '' from 1942 to 1945 during his residence in cuba . 
in 1980, a group of hemingway scholars gathered to assess the donated papers ,  subsequently forming the hemingway society ,  `` committed to supporting and fostering hemingway scholarship . `` 
at this time ,  hemingway was constantly worried about money and his safety . 
on july 25, 1960, hemingway and mary left cuba ,  never to return . 
hemingway's marriage to hadley deteriorated as he was working on `` the sun also rises '' . 
benson believes the details of hemingway's life have become a `` prime vehicle for exploitation '' ,  resulting in a hemingway industry . 
in 1933, hemingway and pauline went on safari to east africa . 
in october 1954, hemingway received the nobel prize in literature . 
hemingway habitually used the word `` and '' in place of commas . 
almost exactly 35 years after hemingway's death ,  on july 1, 1996, his granddaughter margaux hemingway died in santa monica ,  california . 
in 1965, mary hemingway established the hemingway foundation and in the 1970s she donated her husband's papers to the john f .  kennedy library . 
the couple were divorced in january 1927, and hemingway married pfeiffer in may . 
after his departure from paris ,  hemingway `` never again lived in a big city '' . 
the theme of emasculation is prevalent in hemingway's work ,  most notably in `` the sun also rises '' . 
three houses associated with hemingway are listed on the u . s .  national register of historic places: the ernest hemingway cottage on walloon lake ,  michigan ,  designated in 1968; the ernest hemingway house in key west ,  designated in 1968; and the ernest and mary hemingway house in ketchum ,  designated in 2015.
in 1947, hemingway was awarded a bronze star for his bravery during world war ii . 
from 1913 until 1917, hemingway attended oak park and river forest high school . 
hemingway's mother frequently performed in concerts around the village . 
hemingway bought a boat in 1934, named it the `` pilar '' ,  and began sailing the caribbean . 
hemingway's legacy to american literature is his style: writers who came after him emulated it or avoided it . 
in 1966, a memorial to ernest hemingway was placed just north of sun valley ,  above trail creek . 
during his first 20 months in paris ,  hemingway filed 88 stories for the `` toronto star '' newspaper . 
three months after hemingway was released from the mayo clinic ,  when he was back in ketchum in april 1961, mary `` found hemingway holding a shotgun '' in the kitchen one morning . 
he is guy . 
and when will received the coat ,  its belt was missing . 
erica and will go to the hotel together ,  hoping to find him . 
alfred hitchcock's cameo is a signature occurrence in most of his films . 
separated from the group ,  erica is taken in by the police . 
significant changes were made in adapting the book for the film . 
the book is author david bergen's fifth novel . 
the time in between is a novel by canadian author david bergen . 
spain in flames is a 1937 compilation film made by helen van dongen during the spanish civil war . 
 ''the downward spiral '' has been listed on several publications' best album lists . 
retrospective reviews regard `` the downward spiral '' as one of the most important albums of the 1990s and reznor's greatest work . 
the album was produced by frontman trent reznor and flood . 
a companion remix album ,  `` further down the spiral ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  was also released . 
one year after `` the downward spiral ''’s release ,  the band released an accompanying remix album titled `` further down the spiral '' . 
 ''the downward spiral ''s release date was delayed at various times to slow down reznor's intended pace of the album's recording . 
the album was also included in the book `` 1001 albums you must hear before you die '' . 
the nine inch nails live band embarked on the self destruct tour in support of `` the downward spiral '' . 
the immediate success of `` the downward spiral '' established nine inch nails as a reputable force in the 1990s . 
the downward spiral is the second studio album by american industrial rock band nine inch nails ,  released on march 8, 1994, by nothing records ,  interscope records ,  and island records . 
in july 2014, `` guitar world '' placed `` the downward spiral '' at number 43 in their `` superunknown: 50 iconic albums that defined 1994 '' list . 
reznor searched for and moved to 10050 cielo drive in 1992 for recording `` broken '' and `` the downward spiral '' ,  a decision made against his initial choice to record the album in new orleans . 
reznor interpreted `` the downward spiral '' as an extension of himself that `` became the truth fulfilling itself , ``  as he experienced personal and social issues presented in the album after its release . 
most of the egyptian lover's successful recordings were 12 '' singles . 
the egyptian lover began touring again in 2004 throughout europe ,  asia ,  and north america . 
the first commercial electrical telegraph ,  was the cooke and wheatstone telegraph . 
the telegraph system wasn't without its flaws . 
the electrical telegraph ,  or more commonly just telegraph ,  superseded optical semaphore telegraph systems ,  thus becoming the first form of electrical telecommunications . 
in america ,  the end of the telegraph era can be associated with the fall of the western union telegraph company . 
before the american civil war ,  the telegraph systems were primarily used in the commercial sector . 
the telegraph lines from britain to india were connected in 1870  -lrb-  those several companies combined to form the `` eastern telegraph company '' in 1872 -rrb- . 
in 1846, alexander bain patented a chemical telegraph in edinburgh . 
an electrical telegraph is a telegraph that uses electrical signals ,  usually conveyed via dedicated telecommunication circuit or radio . 
the telegraph had a separate wire for each of the 26 letters of the alphabet and its range was only between two rooms of his home . 
the most expensive aspect of a telegraph system was the installation – the laying of the wire ,  which was often very long . 
the atlantic telegraph company was formed in london in 1856 to undertake to construct a commercial telegraph cable across the atlantic ocean . 
the telegraph across the pacific was completed in 1902, finally encircling the world . 
at first ,  gauss and weber used the telegraph to coordinate time ,  but soon they developed other signals; finally ,  their own alphabet . 
in 1851, a conference in vienna of countries in the german-austrian telegraph union  -lrb-  which included many central european countries  -rrb-  adopted the morse telegraph as the system for international communications . 
in 1774, georges-louis le sage realised an early electric telegraph . 
with the invention of the teletypewriter ,  telegraphic encoding became fully automated . 
australia was first linked to the rest of the world in october 1872 by a submarine telegraph cable at darwin . 
the etruscans had a rich literature ,  as noted by latin authors . 
etruscan was traditionally considered to be a language isolate . 
plautia urgulanilla ,  the emperor's first wife ,  was etruscan . 
according to woudhuizen ,  the etruscans were initially colonizing the latins ,  bringing the alphabet from anatolia . 
etruscan religion influenced that of the romans ,  and many of the few surviving etruscan language artifacts are of votive or religious significance . 
the phonology of etruscan is known through the alternation of greek and etruscan letters in some inscriptions  -lrb-  for example ,  the iguvine tablets  -rrb-  ,  and many individual words are known through loans into or from greek and latin ,  as well as explanations of etruscan words by ancient authors . 
the pyrgi tablets are a bilingual text in etruscan and phoenician engraved on three gold leaves ,  one for the phoenician and two for the etruscan . 
the 19th century saw numerous attempts to reclassify etruscan . 
annio also started to excavate etruscan tombs ,  unearthing sarcophagi and inscriptions ,  and made a bold attempt at deciphering the etruscan language . 
giulio mauro facchetti ,  a researcher who has dealt with both etruscan and minoan ,  put forward this hypothesis again in 2001, comparing some minoan words of known meaning with similar etruscan words . 
the latin script owes its existence to the etruscan alphabet ,  which was adapted for latin in the form of the old italic script . 
they date from about 700 bc . 
the tablets were found in 1964 by massimo pallottino during an excavation at the ancient etruscan port of pyrgi ,  now santa severa . 
the question of who may vote is a central issue in elections . 
electoral systems are the detailed constitutional arrangements and voting systems that convert the vote into a political decision . 
in some countries ,  voting is required by law; if an eligible voter does not cast a vote ,  he or she may be subject to punitive measures such as a fine . 
this was known as the `` kudavolai '' system . 
in western australia ,  the penalty for a first time offender failing to vote is a $20.00 fine ,  which increases to $50.00 if the offender refused to vote prior . 
problems that prevent an election from being `` free and fair '' take various forms . 
electoral reform describes the process of introducing fair electoral systems where they are not in place ,  or improving the fairness or effectiveness of existing systems . 
non-partisan systems tend to differ from partisan systems as concerns nominations . 
enniskillen  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a town and civil parish in county fermanagh ,  northern ireland . 
the town's name comes from the  . 
by 1689 the town had grown significantly . 
it was the seat of local government for the former fermanagh district council ,  and is the county town of fermanagh as well as its largest town . 
the longest word in that dictionary is `` electroencephalographically ''  -lrb-  27 letters  -rrb-  . 
the longest non-technical word in major dictionaries is `` floccinaucinihilipilification '' at 29 letters . 
the identity of the longest word in english depends upon the definition of what constitutes a word in the english language ,  as well as how length should be compared . 
the longest non-contrived place name in the united kingdom which is a single non-hyphenated word is cottonshopeburnfoot  -lrb-  19 letters  -rrb-  and the longest which is hyphenated is sutton-under-whitestonecliffe  -lrb-  29 characters  -rrb-  . 
the longest official geographical name in australia is mamungkukumpurangkuntjunya . 
 ''parastratiosphecomyia stratiosphecomyioides '' is the longest accepted binomial name . 
a number of scientific naming schemes can be used to generate arbitrarily long words . 
the word is composed of the following elements:
 ''antidisestablishmentarianism '' is the longest common example of a word formed by agglutinative construction . 
raymond is a member of the libertarian party . 
raymond was born in boston ,  massachusetts ,  in 1957 and lived in venezuela as a child . 
raymond has had a number of public disputes with other figures in the free software movement . 
from the late 1990s onward ,  due in part to the popularity of his essay ,  raymond became a prominent voice in the open source movement . 
raymond began his programming career writing proprietary software ,  between 1980 and 1985.
it first appeared in his book `` the cathedral and the bazaar '' . 
the euro is subdivided into 100 cents . 
euro coins from any member state may be freely used in any nation that has adopted the euro . 
the euro was established by the provisions in the 1992 maastricht treaty . 
the design for the euro banknotes has common designs on both sides . 
the `` definitive '' values of one euro in terms of the exchange rates at which the currency entered the euro are shown on the right . 
the name `` euro '' was officially adopted on 16 december 1995 in madrid . 
the name `` euro '' was officially adopted in madrid on 16 december 1995.
the introduction of the euro seems to have had a strong effect on european financial integration . 
hence export from the euro zone becomes more difficult . 
additionally ,  the moroccan dirham is tied to a basket of currencies ,  including the euro and the us dollar ,  with the euro given the highest weighting . 
the euro is the second-most widely held reserve currency after the u . s .  dollar . 
the euro  -lrb-  sign: €; code: eur  -rrb-  is the official currency of 19 of the member states of the european union . 
the procedure used to fix the conversion rate between the greek drachma and the euro was different ,  since the euro by then was already two years old . 
the euro is divided into 100 cents  -lrb-  sometimes referred to as `` euro cents '' ,  especially when distinguishing them from other currencies ,  and referred to as such on the common side of all cent coins  -rrb-  . 
all nations that have joined the eu since 1993 have pledged to adopt the euro in due course . 
the evidence on the convergence of prices in the eurozone with the introduction of the euro is mixed . 
the ecb has also set up a clearing system ,  target ,  for large euro transactions . 
the euro has been used as a trading currency in cuba since 1998, and syria since 2006.
additionally ,  240 million people worldwide use currencies pegged to the euro . 
the introduction of the euro has led to extensive discussion about its possible effect on inflation . 
the maltese scudo itself is pegged to the euro and is only recognised as legal tender within the order . 
within the eu several currencies are pegged to the euro ,  mostly as a precondition to joining the eurozone . 
the european central bank is the `` de facto '' successor of the european monetary institute  -lrb-  emi  -rrb-  . 
the european central bank  -lrb-  ecb  -rrb-  is the central bank for the euro and administers monetary policy of the eurozone ,  which consists of 19 eu member states and is one of the largest currency areas in the world . 
the first president of the bank was wim duisenberg ,  the former president of the dutch central bank and the european monetary institute . 
when the ecb was created ,  it covered a eurozone of eleven members . 
the ecb is governed by european law directly ,  but its set-up resembles that of a corporation in the sense that the ecb has shareholders and stock capital . 
independent electrons moving in vacuum are termed `` free '' electrons . 
the electron microscope directs a focused beam of electrons at a specimen . 
electron beams are used in welding . 
as with all particles ,  electrons can act as waves . 
the electron has an intrinsic angular momentum or spin of  . 
the magnetic moments of the electrons that occupy the same orbital  -lrb-  so called ,  paired electrons  -rrb-  cancel each other out . 
the orbital angular momentum of electrons is quantized . 
a muon ,  in turn ,  can decay to form an electron or positron . 
because of collisions between electrons and atoms ,  the drift velocity of electrons in a conductor is on the order of millimeters per second . 
the acceleration of the electron results in the emission of bremsstrahlung radiation . 
the invariant mass of an electron is approximately  kilograms ,  or  atomic mass units . 
this evidence strengthened the view that electrons existed as components of atoms . 
in the theory of electroweak interaction ,  the left-handed component of electron's wavefunction forms a weak isospin doublet with the electron neutrino . 
electrons are involved in many applications such as electronics ,  welding ,  cathode ray tubes ,  electron microscopes ,  radiation therapy ,  lasers ,  gaseous ionization detectors and particle accelerators . 
once spin and the interaction between multiple electrons were describable ,  quantum mechanics made it possible to predict the configuration of electrons in atoms with atomic numbers greater than hydrogen . 
virtual particles cause a comparable shielding effect for the mass of the electron . 
all members of the lepton group are fermions ,  because they all have half-odd integer spin; the electron has spin  . 
an electron beam can be used to supplement the treatment of areas that have been irradiated by x-rays . 
however ,  electron microscopes are expensive instruments that are costly to maintain . 
two main types of electron microscopes exist: transmission and scanning . 
electrons  -lrb-  and positrons  -rrb-  are thought to be created at the event horizon of these stellar remnants . 
remote observation of electrons requires detection of their radiated energy . 
this radiation was caused by the acceleration of electrons through a magnetic field as they moved near the speed of light . 
the positron is symbolized by because it has the same properties as the electron but with a positive rather than negative charge . 
these electrons are not associated with specific atoms ,  so when an electric field is applied ,  they are free to move like a gas  -lrb-  called fermi gas  -rrb-  through the material much like free electrons . 
when an electron collides with a positron ,  both particles can be annihilated ,  producing gamma ray photons . 
when electrons and positrons collide ,  they annihilate each other ,  giving rise to two or more gamma ray photons . 
the apparent paradox in classical physics of a point particle electron having intrinsic angular momentum and magnetic moment can be explained by the formation of virtual photons in the electric field generated by the electron . 
europium is the most reactive rare-earth element . 
europium is not found in nature as a free element . 
europium is one of the least abundant elements in the universe; only about % of all matter in the universe is europium . 
depletion or enrichment of europium in minerals relative to other rare-earth elements is known as the europium anomaly . 
europium is a chemical element with symbol eu and atomic number 63.
europium is a ductile metal with a hardness similar to that of lead . 
naturally occurring europium is composed of 2 isotopes ,  eu and eu ,  with eu being the most abundant  -lrb-  52.2% natural abundance  -rrb-  . 
europium is associated with the other rare-earth elements and is ,  therefore ,  mined together with them . 
europium ignites in air at 150 to 180 °c to form europium -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  oxide:
relative to most other elements ,  commercial applications for europium are few and rather specialized . 
europium is produced by nuclear fission ,  but the fission product yields of europium isotopes are low near the top of the mass range for fission products . 
erbium is a chemical element with symbol er and atomic number 68.
erbium is ferromagnetic below 19 k ,  antiferromagnetic between 19 and 80 k and paramagnetic above 80 k . 
erbium can form propeller-shaped atomic clusters ern ,  where the distance between the erbium atoms is 0.35 nm . 
einsteinium is a synthetic element with symbol es and atomic number 99.
einsteinium was observed in przybylski's star in 2008.
einsteinium halides are known for the oxidation states +2 and +3.
einsteinium is a soft ,  silvery ,  paramagnetic metal . 
einsteinium is a synthetic ,  silvery-white ,  radioactive metal . 
like all actinides ,  einsteinium is rather reactive . 
because of the short half-life of all isotopes of einsteinium ,  any primordial einsteinium — that is ,  einsteinium that could possibly have been present on the earth during its formation — has long since decayed . 
the heavier isotopes es ,  es ,  es and es were obtained by bombarding bk with α-particles . 
the symbol for einsteinium was first given as `` e '' and later changed to `` es '' by iupac . 
separation procedure of einsteinium depends on the synthesis method . 
einsteinium is the element with the highest atomic number which has been observed in macroscopic quantities in its pure form ,  and this was the common short-lived isotope einsteinium-253.
the distribution of einsteinium over the bone surfaces is uniform and is similar to that of plutonium . 
in particular ,  einsteinium was used to synthesize ,  for the first time ,  17 atoms of the new element mendelevium in 1955.
magnetic properties have been studied for einsteinium metal ,  its oxide and fluoride . 
known oxyhalides of einsteinium include esocl ,  esobr and esoi . 
most of the available einsteinium toxicity data originate from research on animals . 
einsteinium has a high rate of nuclear fission that results in a low critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction . 
the divalent compounds of einsteinium are obtained by reducing the trivalent halides with hydrogen:
stoiber is roman catholic . 
in 1971, stoiber joined the bavarian state ministry of development and environment . 
edmund stoiber was born in oberaudorf in the district of rosenheim ,  bavaria . 
during stoiber's 14 years leading bavaria ,  the state solidified its position as one of germany's richest . 
in 2002, stoiber publicly expressed support for the united states in their policy toward iraq . 
in 1978 stoiber was elected secretary general of the csu ,  a post he held until 1982/83.
stoiber is known for backing vladimir putin and there have been comparisons to gerhard schröder . 
in may 1993, the landtag of bavaria ,  the state's parliament ,  elected stoiber as minister-president succeeding max streibl . 
stoiber's remarks drew heavy criticism in the press . 
in his capacity as minister-president ,  stoiber served as president of the bundesrat in 1995/96.
edmund rüdiger stoiber  -lrb-  born 28 september 1941 -rrb- is a german politician ,  who was the 16th minister president of the state of bavaria between 1993 and 2007 and chairman of the christian social union  -lrb-  csu  -rrb-  between 1999 and 2007.
stoiber has been said to be skeptical of germany's decision to adopt the euro . 
stoiber subsequently led the csu to an absolute majority in the 2003 bavarian state elections ,  for the third time in a row ,  winning this time 60,7% of the votes and a two-thirds majority in the landtag . 
in 1379, the university of erfurt was founded . 
erfurt is an old germanic settlement . 
max weber  -lrb-  1864 - 1920 -rrb- was born in erfurt . 
most of them migrated to erfurt from russia and ukraine in the 1990s . 
the `` erfurt program '' was adopted by the social democratic party of germany during its congress at erfurt in 1891.
erfurt was an early adopter of the protestant reformation ,  in 1521.
from 1949 until 1990 erfurt was part of the german democratic republic  -lrb-  east germany  -rrb-  . 
her former home and weaving workshop in erfurt ,  the `` margaretha reichardt haus '' ,  is now a museum ,  managed by the angermuseum erfurt . 
he lived in st .  augustine's monastery in erfurt ,  as a friar from 1505 to 1511.
an attempt in this direction was the failed erfurt union of german states in 1850.
in 1501 martin luther  -lrb-  1483 - 1546 -rrb- moved to erfurt and began his studies at the university . 
erfurt  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the capital and largest city in the state of thuringia ,  central germany . 
martin luther  -lrb-  1483-1546 -rrb- studied law and philosophy at the university of erfurt from 1501.
during the 10th and 11th centuries both the emperor and the electorate of mainz held some privileges in erfurt . 
the textile designer margaretha reichardt  -lrb-  1907 - 1984 -rrb- was born and died in erfurt . 
alexander müller  -lrb-  1808 - 1863 -rrb- pianist ,  conductor and composer ,  was born in erfurt . 
enya's vocal range is mezzo-soprano . 
enya undertook additional studio projects in 2001 and 2002.
enya described her upbringing as `` very quiet and happy . `` 
in 2009, during her three-year break from music ,  enya purchased a home in southern france . 
in 2012, enya returned to the studio to record her eighth album ,  `` dark sky island '' . 
in 2017 a new species of fish ,  `` leporinus enyae '' ,  found in the orinoco river drainage area ,  was named after enya . 
in 1991, warner music released a collection of five enya music videos as `` moonshadows '' for home video . 
enya continued to write music with a winter and christmas theme for her seventh studio album ,  `` and winter came .  .  . ``  . 
enya is known for keeping a private lifestyle ,  saying: `` the music is what sells . 
enya started work on her fifth studio album ,  titled `` a day without rain '' ,  in mid-1998.
after promoting `` and winter came .  .  . ``  ,  enya took an extended break from writing and recording music . 
enya is known for her privacy and has never undertaken a concert tour . 
in september 2003, enya returned to aigle studio to start work on her sixth studio album ,  `` amarantine '' . 
numerous critics and reviewers classify enya's albums as new age music and she has won four grammy awards in the category . 
on 3 october 1990, east and west germany and east and west berlin were reunited ,  thus formally ending the existence of east berlin . 
east berlin was the capital city of the german democratic republic from 1949 to 1990.
the western allied powers did not recognise east berlin as the gdr's capital ,  nor the gdr's authority to govern east berlin . 
in june 1948, all railways and roads leading to west berlin were blocked ,  and east berliners were not allowed to emigrate . 
despite the large sums of economic aid poured into east berlin ,  there still remain obvious differences between the former east and west berlin . 
there is also a latin epsilon or `` open e '' ,  which looks similar to the greek lowercase epsilon . 
the greek lowercase epsilon ε ,  the lunate epsilon symbol ϵ ,  or the latin lowercase epsilon ɛ  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  is used in a variety of places:
the letter ε was taken over from the phoenician letter he  -lrb-    -rrb-  when greeks first adopted alphabetic writing . 
the lunate epsilon  -lrb-  ϵ  -rrb-  is not to be confused with the set membership symbol  -lrb-  ∈  -rrb- ; nor should the latin uppercase epsilon  -lrb-  ɛ  -rrb-  be confused with the greek uppercase sigma  -lrb-  σ  -rrb-  . 
epsilon  -lrb-  uppercase ' ,  lowercase ' or lunate ;   -rrb-  is the fifth letter of the greek alphabet ,  corresponding phonetically to a  . 
letters that arose from eta include the latin h and the cyrillic letter и . 
this also gave rise to the latin alphabet with its letter h . 
the letter shape 'h' was originally used in most greek dialects to represent the sound /h/ ,  a voiceless glottal fricative . 
eta  -lrb-  uppercase ' ,  lowercase '; `` ē̂ta '' or `` ita ''   -rrb-  is the seventh letter of the greek alphabet . 
in alaska ,  `` eskimo '' is in common usage . 
in canada and greenland ,  the term `` eskimo '' has largely been supplanted by the term `` inuit '' . 
the eskimo sub-family consists of the inuit language and yupik language sub-groups . 
there has been some movement to use `` inuit '' ,  and the inuit circumpolar council ,  representing a circumpolar population of 150,000 inuit and yupik people of greenland ,  northern canada ,  alaska ,  and siberia ,  in its charter defines `` inuit '' for use within that icc document as including `` the inupiat ,  yupik  -lrb-  alaska  -rrb-  ,  inuit ,  inuvialuit  -lrb-  canada  -rrb-  ,  kalaallit  -lrb-  greenland  -rrb-  and yupik  -lrb-  russia  -rrb-  . `` 
the two main peoples known as `` eskimo '' are:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- the alaskan iñupiat peoples ,  greenlandic inuit ,  and the mass-grouping inuit peoples of canada ,  and  -lrb-  2 -rrb- the yupik of eastern siberia and alaska . 
the alutiiq ,  also called `` pacific yupik '' or `` sugpiaq '' ,  are a southern ,  coastal branch of yupik . 
alaskans also use the term alaska native ,  which is inclusive of all eskimo ,  aleut and other native american people of alaska . 
they lived in neighborhoods with siberian yupik and chukchi peoples . 
the alutiiq language is relatively close to that spoken by the yupik in the bethel ,  alaska area . 
greenlandic inuit make up 90% of greenland's population . 
other sources regard it as a group belonging to the yupik branch . 
the inuit of greenland refer to themselves as `` greenlanders '' and speak the greenlandic language . 
the inuit and yupik peoples generally do not use it to refer to themselves ,  and the governments in canada and greenland have ceased using it in official documents . 
 ''inuit '' is not accepted as a collective term and it is not used specifically for iñupiat  -lrb-  although they are related to the canadian inuit peoples  -rrb-  . 
the four yupik languages ,  by contrast ,  including alutiiq  -lrb-  sugpiaq  -rrb-  ,  central alaskan yup'ik ,  naukan  -lrb-  naukanski  -rrb-  ,  and siberian yupik ,  are distinct languages with phonological ,  morphological ,  and lexical differences . 
they maintain a unique inuit culture . 
