the queen sent for disraeli ,  and he became prime minister for the second time . 
he resigned ,  and the queen reluctantly sent for palmerston again . 
parliament opened in february 1877, with disraeli now in the lords as earl of beaconsfield . 
one essay ended:
the conservatives would not again have a majority in the house of commons until 1874.
the british installed a new ruler ,  and left a mission and garrison in kabul . 
in the following weeks ,  disraeli served as leader of the house  -lrb-  with derby as prime minister in the lords  -rrb-  and as chancellor . 
a work of fiction by a former prime minister was a new thing for britain ,  and the book became a bestseller . 
disraeli made his maiden speech in parliament on 7 december 1837.
lord stanley  -lrb-  who had succeeded his father ,  the former prime minister ,  as earl of derby  -rrb-  became foreign secretary and sir stafford northcote the chancellor . 
he articulated an imperial role for britain that would last into world war ii and brought an intermittently self-isolated britain into the concert of europe . `` 
the tories pursued a reform bill in 1859, which would have resulted in a modest increase to the franchise . 
a later foreign secretary ,  lord curzon ,  described the canal in 1909 as `` the determining influence of every considerable movement of british power to the east and south of the mediterranean '' . 
parliament was dissolved on 24 march ,  and the first borough constituencies began voting a week later . 
he was also a novelist ,  publishing works of fiction even as prime minister . 
disraeli wrote two novels in the aftermath of the tour . 
 ''dizzy married me for my money '' ,  his wife said later ,  `` but ,  if he had the chance again ,  he would marry me for love . `` 
both sides would reap profits ,  all the while causing real damage to spain ,  one of britain's bitterest enemies . 
lord john russell ,  the whig leader who had succeeded peel as prime minister and like rothschild was a member for the city of london ,  proposed in the commons that the oath should be amended to permit jews to enter parliament . 
his brief first premiership ,  and the first year of his second ,  gave him little opportunity to make his mark in foreign affairs . 
his last completed novel ,  `` endymion '' ,  was published in 1881 shortly before his death ,  more than 50 years after his first . 
the new prime minister told those who came to congratulate him ,  `` i have climbed to the top of the greasy pole . `` 
nevertheless ,  disraeli made fewer peers  -lrb-  only 22, and one of those one of victoria's sons  -rrb-  than had gladstone—the liberal leader had arranged for the bestowal of 37 peerages during his just over five years in office . 
in march 1851, lord john russell's government was defeated over a bill to equalise the county and borough franchises ,  mostly because of divisions among his supporters . 
by one account ,  the british ambassador in berlin ,  lord odo russell ,  hoping to spare the delegates disraeli's very poor french accent ,  told disraeli that the congress was hoping to hear a speech in the english tongue by one of its masters . 
benjamin disraeli ,  1st earl of beaconsfield ,   -lrb-  21 december 1804 – 19 april 1881 -rrb- was a british statesman who twice served as prime minister of the united kingdom . 
the negotiations were complicated by bentinck's sudden death on 21 september 1848, but disraeli obtained a loan of £25,000 from bentinck's brothers lord henry bentinck and lord titchfield . 
in august 1876, disraeli was elevated to the house of lords as earl of beaconsfield and viscount hughenden . 
disraeli told the queen ,  `` it is settled; you have it ,  madam ! `` 
murray had had ambitions to establish a new morning paper to compete with `` the times '' . 
amid british preparations for war ,  the russians and turks agreed to discussions at berlin . 
disraeli said of lowe that he was the only person in london with whom he would not shake hands and ,  `` he is in the mud and there i leave him . `` 
the suez canal ,  opened in 1869, cut weeks and thousands of miles off the journey between britain and india; in 1875, approximately 80% of the ships using the canal were british . 
he immediately resigned ,  and lord derby returned to office . 
disraeli took no public part in the electioneering ,  it being deemed improper for peers to make speeches to influence commons elections . 
when lord derby ,  the party leader ,  thrice formed governments in the 1850s and 1860s ,  disraeli served as chancellor of the exchequer and leader of the house of commons . 
when parliament met in january 1881, he served as conservative leader in the lords ,  attempting to serve as a moderating influence on gladstone's legislation . 
as leader of the house ,  disraeli resumed his regular reports to queen victoria ,  who had requested that he include what she `` could not meet in newspapers '' . 
although initially curious about disraeli when he entered parliament in 1837, victoria came to detest him over his treatment of peel . 
the first months of 1846 were dominated by a battle in parliament between the free traders and the protectionists over the repeal of the corn laws ,  with the latter rallying around disraeli and lord george bentinck . 
disraeli and the cabinet sent salisbury as lead british representative to the constantinople conference ,  which met in december 1876 and january 1877.
when disraeli returned as prime minister in 1874 and went to kiss hands ,  he did so literally ,  on one knee; and ,  according to richard aldous in his book on the rivalry between disraeli and gladstone ,  `` for the next six years victoria and disraeli would exploit their closeness for mutual advantage . `` 
disraeli's enthusiastic propagation of the british empire has also been seen as appealing to working class voters . 
disraeli's task as chancellor was to devise a budget which would satisfy the protectionist elements who supported the tories ,  without uniting the free-traders against it . 
in advance of the meeting ,  confidential negotiations took place between britain and russia in april and may 1878.
moreover ,  at the time `` gallomania '' was published ,  disraeli was electioneering in high wycombe in the radical interest . 
an alliance of free-trade conservatives  -lrb-  the `` peelites ''  -rrb-  ,  radicals ,  and whigs carried repeal ,  and the conservative party split: the peelites moved towards the whigs ,  while a `` new '' conservative party formed around the protectionists ,  led by disraeli ,  bentinck ,  and lord stanley  -lrb-  later lord derby  -rrb-  . 
data collection varies according to type of data . 
the research question will define the objective of a study . 
finally ,  all data collected of interest must be stored in an organized data frame for further analysis . 
any research in life sciences is proposed to answer a scientific question we might have . 
data collection methods must be considered in research planning ,  because it highly influences the sample size and experimental design . 
the hypothesis is defined by the researcher ,  according to his/her interests in answering the main question . 
although ,  the hypothesis is sustained by question research and its expected and unexpected answers . 
once the aim of the study is defined ,  the possible answers to the research question can be proposed ,  transforming this question into a hypothesis . 
a tour to south africa by the lions was anticipated in 1986.
the first post-war tour went to new zealand and australia in 1950.
in 1908, another tour took place to australia and new zealand . 
the tour to new zealand in 1993 was the last of the amateur era . 
the next british isles team tour did not take place until 1924, again in south africa . 
the 1959 tour to australia and new zealand marked once again a very successful tour for the lions ,  who only lost six of their 35 fixtures . 
the tour to south africa in 1997 was a success for the lions ,  who completed the tour with only two losses ,  and won the test series 2–1.
in 1899 the british isles touring side returned to australia for the first time since the unofficial tour of 1888.
the lions easily won both tests against australia and lost the first three tests against new zealand ,  but did find victory  -lrb-  9–6 -rrb- in the final test . 
four years later ,  in 1903, the british isles team returned to south africa . 
the 1968 tour of south africa saw the lions win 15 of their 16 provincial matches ,  but the team actually lost three tests against the springboks and drew one . 
in 2001, the ten-game tour to australia saw the wallabies win the test series 2–1.
the earliest tours date back to 1888, when a 21-man squad visited australia and new zealand . 
the adoption of the red jersey happened in the 1950 tour . 
the 1983 tour to new zealand saw the team successful in the non-test games ,  winning all but two games ,  but being whitewashed in the test series against the all blacks . 
since the 1960s ,  the bass guitar has largely replaced the double bass in popular music as the bass instrument in the rhythm section . 
the `` fender bass '' was a revolutionary new instrument for gigging musicians . 
pickup shapes on electric basses are often referred to as `` p '' or `` j '' pickups in reference to the visual and electrical differences between the precision bass and jazz bass pickups . 
the bass guitar  -lrb-  also known as electric bass ,  or simply bass  -rrb-  is a stringed instrument similar in appearance and construction to an electric guitar ,  except with a longer neck and scale length ,  and four to six strings or courses . 
the electric bass guitar has pickups and must be connected to an amplifier and speaker ,  to be loud enough to compete with other instruments . 
a pass is a method of moving the ball between players . 
five players from each team may be on the court at one time . 
players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket . 
the ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot ,  passed between players ,  thrown ,  tapped ,  rolled or dribbled  -lrb-  bouncing the ball while running  -rrb-  . 
the `` overhead pass '' is used to pass the ball over a defender . 
the ball is released while over the passer's head . 
dribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand ,  and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball . 
in 3x3, a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game ,  a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions  -lrb-  men's ,  women's ,  and mixed teams  -rrb-  . 
the ball may not be kicked ,  nor be struck with the fist . 
in either case possession of the ball is turned over to the defensive team . 
the ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession . 
the school of agriculture won in a 9–3 game . 
a shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an `` air ball '' . 
a block is performed when ,  after a shot is attempted ,  a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball . 
a player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots ,  and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots . 
good dribblers  -lrb-  or `` ball handlers ''  -rrb-  tend to bounce the ball low to the ground ,  reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand ,  making it more difficult for the defender to `` steal '' the ball . 
if a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful ,  the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot . 
if a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful ,  typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point . 
games are played in four quarters of 10  -lrb-  fiba  -rrb-  or 12 minutes  -lrb-  nba  -rrb-  . 
if a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation ,  the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play . 
the object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own . 
in 1989, fiba allowed professional nba players to participate in the olympics for the first time . 
the two most common shots that use the above described setup are the `` set shot '' and the `` jump shot '' . 
to block a shot ,  a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released . 
teams abounded throughout the 1920s . 
typically ,  a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket . 
by 1938, the women's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team . 
the most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the `` slam dunk '' ,  in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward ,  through the basket while touching it . 
a back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket ,  and may be shot with the dominant hand ,  or both; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful . 
at the time ,  football was being played with 10 to a team  -lrb-  which was increased to 11 -rrb- . 
point guard  -lrb-  often called the `` 1 ''  -rrb-  : usually the fastest player on the team ,  organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time . 
shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket ,  methods varying with players and situations . 
offensive plays are more varied ,  normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball . 
a skilled player can dribble without watching the ball ,  using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's location . 
the shortest player ever to play in the nba is muggsy bogues at  . 
 ''ball '' is used metaphorically sometimes to denote something spherical or spheroid ,  e . g .  ,  armadillos and human beings curl up into a ball ,  we make a ball with our fist . 
as balls are one of the most familiar spherical objects to humans ,  the word `` ball '' may be used to refer to or describe spherical or near-spherical objects . 
black-powder weapons use stone and metal balls as projectiles . 
for example ,  if formula_1, then formula_2, formula_3, and formula_4 are three distinct relations ,  where formula_5 is the set of integers ,  formula_6 is the set of real numbers and formula_7 is the set of natural numbers . 
the domain of a binary relation formula_8 is then defined as the set of all formula_9 such that there exists at least one formula_10 such that formula_11, the range of formula_8 is defined as the set of all formula_10 such that there exists at least one formula_9 such that formula_11, and the field of formula_8 is the union of its domain and its range . 
the domain of `` r '' is the set of all `` x '' such that `` xry '' for at least one `` y '' . 
in mathematics ,  a binary relation on a set `` a '' is a set of ordered pairs of elements of `` a '' . 
a binary relation `` r '' between arbitrary sets  -lrb-  or classes  -rrb-  `` x ''  -lrb-  the set of departure  -rrb-  and `` y ''  -lrb-  the set of destination or codomain  -rrb-  is specified by its graph `` g '' ,  which is a subset of the cartesian product `` x '' × `` y '' . 
a binary relation on `` a '' × `` b '' is an element in the power set on `` a '' × `` b '' . 
thus the first element of r is the set of objects ,  the second is the set of persons ,  and the last element is a set of ordered pairs of the form  -lrb-  object ,  owner  -rrb-  . 
a cell can be used to represent a letter ,  number ,  punctuation mark ,  or even a word . 
braille cells are not the only thing to appear in braille text . 
the `` fête de la fédération ''on 14 july 1790 was a celebration of the unity of the french nation during the french revolution . 
there is also an event in wellington for the french community held at the residence of france . 
the french national day is the anniversary of storming of the bastille on 14 july 1789, a turning point of the french revolution ,  as well as the fête de la fédération which celebrated the unity of the french people on 14 july 1790.
at the end of the festival ,  there is also a traditional french bal populaire . 
since 2008, prague has hosted a french market ``  ''  -lrb-  `` fourteenth of july market ''  -rrb-  offering traditional french food and wine as well as music . 
events in dublin include live entertainment ,  speciality menus on french cuisine ,  and screenings of popular french films . 
bastille day is celebrated with great festivity in pondicherry ,  a former french colony ,  every year . 
the embassy of france in ireland organizes several events around dublin ,  cork and limerick for bastille day; including evenings of french music and tasting of french food . 
restaurants host parties serving traditional french food . 
the different cities celebrate with many french staples such as food ,  music ,  games ,  and sometimes the recreation of famous french landmarks . 
the bastille day military parade is the french military parade that has been held on the morning of 14 july each year in paris since 1880.
blowfish has a 64-bit block size and a variable key length from 32 bits up to 448 bits . 
blowfish's use of a 64-bit block size  -lrb-  as opposed to e . g . 
blowfish is a fast block cipher ,  except when changing keys . 
 ''see '' key stretching . 
because the p-array is 576 bits long ,  and the key bytes are xored through all these 576 bits during the initialization ,  many implementations support key sizes up to 576 bits . 
first xoring p17 and p18 to the ciphertext block ,  then using the p-entries in reverse order  -rrb-  . 
when asked which blowfish version is the correct one ,  bruce schneier answered: ``  ''the test vectors should be used to determine the one true blowfish '' '' . 
a bijection from the set `` x '' to the set `` y '' has an inverse function from `` y '' to `` x '' . 
in computer science ,  this identification between a function from `` x '' × `` y '' to `` z '' and a function from `` x '' to `` z '' ,  where `` z '' is the set of all functions from `` y '' to `` z '' ,  is called `` currying '' . 
alternatively ,  a binary function may be interpreted as simply a function from `` x '' × `` y '' to `` z '' . 
in mathematics ,  a binary function  -lrb-  also called bivariate function ,  or function of two variables  -rrb-  is a function that takes two inputs . 
in linear algebra ,  a bilinear transformation is a binary function where the sets `` x '' ,  `` y '' ,  and `` z '' are all vector spaces and the derived functions `` f '' and `` f '' are all linear transformations . 
the various concepts relating to functions can also be generalised to binary functions . 
lynch was nominated for a best director oscar for the film . 
however ,  the film was not without its detractors . 
blue velvet is a 1986 american neo-noir mystery film written and directed by david lynch . 
in 2008, it was chosen by the american film institute as one of the greatest american mystery films ever made . 
mark kermode walked out on the film and gave the film a poor review upon its release ,  but revised his view of the film over time . 
peter travers ,  film critic for `` rolling stone , ``  named it the best film of the 1980s and referred to it as an `` american masterpiece . `` 
the final cut of the film runs at just over two hours . 
in august 2012, `` sight & sound '' unveiled their latest list of the 250 greatest films of all time ,  with `` blue velvet '' ranking at 69th . 
 ''entertainment weekly '' ranked `` blue velvet's '' soundtrack on its list of the `` 100 greatest film soundtracks , ``  at the 100th position . 
symbolism is used heavily in `` blue velvet . `` 
 ''blue velvet '' now frequently appears in various critical assessments of all-time great films ,  also ranked as one of the greatest films of the 1980s ,  one of the best examples of american surrealism and one of the finest examples of david lynch's work . 
in 1987, national society of film critics awarded best film ,  best director  -lrb-  david lynch  -rrb-  ,  best cinematography  -lrb-  frederick elmes  -rrb-  ,  and best supporting actor  -lrb-  dennis hopper  -rrb-  awards . 
despite `` blue velvet ''s initial appearance as a mystery ,  the film operates on a number of thematic levels . 
in a special `` entertainment weekly '' issue ,  100 new film classics were chosen from 1983 to 2008: `` blue velvet '' was ranked at fourth . 
in mathematics ,  a binary operation on a set is a calculation that combines two elements of the set  -lrb-  called operands  -rrb-  to produce another element of the set . 
for either set ,  this operation has a `` right identity ''  -lrb-  which is 1 -rrb- since for all `` a '' in the set ,  which is not an `` identity ''  -lrb-  two sided identity  -rrb-  since in general . 
division  -lrb-  /  -rrb-  ,  a partial binary operation on the set of real or rational numbers ,  is not commutative or associative . 
most generally ,  a `` magma '' is a set together with some binary operation defined on it . 
a binary operation ,  `` ab '' ,  depends on the ordered pair  -lrb-  `` a ,  b ''  -rrb-  and so  -lrb-  `` ab ''  -rrb- `` c ''  -lrb-  where the parentheses here mean first operate on the ordered pair  -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  and then operate on the result of that using the ordered pair  -lrb-   -lrb-  `` ab ''  -rrb-  ,  `` c ''  -rrb-   -rrb-  depends in general on the ordered pair  -lrb-   -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  ,  `` c ''  -rrb-  . 
a practice chanter is a chanter without bag or drones ,  allowing a player to practice the instrument quietly and with no variables other than playing the chanter . 
the chanter is the melody pipe ,  played with two hands . 
additional drones often add the octave below and then a drone consonant with the fifth of the chanter . 
a set of bagpipes minimally consists of an air supply ,  a bag ,  a chanter ,  and usually at least one drone . 
in general ,  double-reed chanters are found in pipes of western europe while single-reed chanters appear in most other regions . 
the note from the chanter is produced by a reed installed at its top . 
depending on the type of pipes ,  the drones may lie over the shoulder ,  across the arm opposite the bag ,  or may run parallel to the chanter . 
the chanter is usually open-ended ,  so there is no easy way for the player to stop the pipe from sounding . 
many bagpipes have more than one drone  -lrb-  and ,  sometimes ,  more than one chanter  -rrb-  in various combinations ,  held in place in stocks—sockets that fasten the various pipes to the bag . 
an innovation ,  dating from the 16th or 17th century ,  is the use of a bellows to supply air . 
if the amino group is removed from an amino acid ,  it leaves behind a carbon skeleton called an α-keto acid . 
the amino acids may then be linked together to make a protein . 
the most common nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid  -lrb-  dna  -rrb-  and ribonucleic acid  -lrb-  rna  -rrb-  . 
not all proteins have more than one subunit . 
proteins are very large molecules—macro-biopolymers—made from monomers called amino acids . 
fatty acids are considered the monomer in that case ,  and may be saturated  -lrb-  no double bonds in the carbon chain  -rrb-  or unsaturated  -lrb-  one or more double bonds in the carbon chain  -rrb-  . 
as an example ,  the important blood serum protein albumin contains 585 amino acid residues . 
in these cyclic forms ,  the ring usually has 5 or 6 atoms . 
ingested proteins are usually broken up into single amino acids or dipeptides in the small intestine ,  and then absorbed . 
glucose is an energy source in most life forms . 
cyclic forms with a 7-atom ring called heptoses are rare . 
a similar process is used to break down proteins . 
in aerobic cells with sufficient oxygen ,  as in most human cells ,  the pyruvate is further metabolized . 
also ,  the nitrogenous bases possible in the two nucleic acids are different: adenine ,  cytosine ,  and guanine occur in both rna and dna ,  while thymine occurs only in dna and uracil occurs in rna . 
while they can synthesize arginine and histidine ,  they cannot produce it in sufficient amounts for young ,  growing animals ,  and so these are often considered essential amino acids . 
badminton is a racquet sport played using racquets to hit a shuttlecock across a net . 
the game developed in british india from the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock . 
games employing shuttlecocks have been played for centuries across eurasia ,  but the modern game of badminton developed in the mid-19th century among the british as a variant of the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock . 
ball badminton ,  a form of the game played with a wool ball instead of a shuttlecock ,  was being played in thanjavur as early as the 1850s and was at first played interchangeably with badminton by the british ,  the woollen ball being preferred in windy or wet weather . 
the term did not originally describe a style of music or art . 
the term `` baroque '' is also used to designate the style of music composed during a period that overlaps with that of baroque art . 
lope de vega introduced through his `` arte nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo ''  -lrb-  1609 -rrb- the `` new comedy '' . 
tirso de molina ,  lope de vega ,  and calderón were the most important play writers in golden era spain . 
the terms `` style baroque '' and `` musique baroque '' appeared in `` le dictionnaire de l'académie française '' in 1835 '' . `` 
the principal architects of the style included françois mansart  -lrb-  chateau de balleroy ,  1626–1636 -rrb- ,  pierre le muet  -lrb-  church of val-de-grace ,  1645–1665 -rrb- ,  louis le vau  -lrb-  vaux-le-vicomte ,  1657–1661 -rrb- and especially jules hardouin mansart and robert de cotte ,  whose work included the galerie des glaces and the grand trianon at versailles  -lrb-  1687–1688 -rrb- . 
another notable example of the style is the pilgrimage church of wies  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in the mid to late 17th century the style reached its peak ,  later termed the high baroque . 
in the 18th century ,  the term was also used to describe music ,  and was not flattering . 
in 1788, the term was defined by quatremère de quincy in the `` encyclopédie méthodique '' as `` an architectural style that is highly adorned and tormented ''  . 
during the baroque period ,  the art and style of the theater evolved rapidly ,  alongside the development of opera and of ballet . 
the interior of this church illustrates the summit of rococo decoration . 
the baroque period was a golden age for theater in france and spain; playwrights included corneille ,  racine and moliere in france; and lope de vega and pedro calderón de la barca spain . 
some were in rococo style ,  a distinct ,  more flamboyant and asymmetric style which emerged from the baroque ,  then replaced it in central europe in the first half of the 18th century ,  until it was replaced in turn by classicism . 
in the 16th century the philosopher michel de montaigne associated the term 'baroco' with `` bizarre and uselessly complicated . `` 
madame de pompadour ,  the mistress of louis xv ,  probably without intending it ,  contributed to the decline of the baroque and rococo style . 
both words are also related to the spanish term `` berruca ''  -lrb-  verruca  -rrb-  . 
peter paul rubens was the most important painter of the flemish baroque style . 
cochin became an important art critic; he denounced the `` petit style '' of boucher ,  and called for a grand style with a new emphasis on antiquity and nobility in the academies of painting of architecture . 
tirso de molina is best known for two works ,  `` the convicted suspicions '' and `` the trickster of seville '' ,  one of the first versions of the don juan myth . 
the baroque style of architecture was a result of doctrines adopted by the catholic church at the council of trent in 1545–63, in response to the protestant reformation . 
françois boucher was an important figure in the more delicate french rococo style ,  which appeared during the late baroque period . 
mansart was also responsible for the baroque-classicism of the place vendôme  -lrb-  1686–1699 -rrb- . 
the interior was equally revolutionary; the main space of the church was oval ,  beneath an oval dome . 
the pioneer german art historian and archeologist johann joachim winckelmann also condemned the baroque style ,  and praised the superior values of classical art and architecture . 
a boolean algebra with only one element is called a trivial boolean algebra or a degenerate boolean algebra . 
in abstract algebra ,  a boolean algebra or boolean lattice is a complemented distributive lattice . 
therefore ,  by applying this operation to a boolean algebra  -lrb-  or boolean lattice  -rrb-  ,  one obtains another boolean algebra with the same elements; it is called its dual . 
the bank of italy ,  known in italian as la banca d'italia  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as bankitalia ,  is the central bank of italy and part of the european system of central banks . 
the bank's current governor is ignazio visco ,  who took the office on 1 november 2011.
it was later revived by william hartston ,  current author of the column . 
the column appeared daily until 1965 when it was changed to weekly . 
in 1969, milligan based a bbc television series named `` the world of beachcomber '' on the columns . 
the format of the column was a random assortment of small paragraphs which were otherwise unconnected . 
 ''by the way '' was originally a column in `` the globe '' ,  consisting of unsigned humorous pieces; p .  g .  wodehouse was assistant editor of the column from august 1903 and editor from august 1904 to may 1909, during which time he was assisted by herbert westbrook . 
joy was born in the detroit suburb of farmington hills ,  michigan ,  to william joy ,  a school vice-principal and counselor ,  and ruth joy . 
in 1986, joy was awarded a grace murray hopper award by the acm for his work on the berkeley unix operating system . 
joy was also criticized by `` the american spectator '' ,  which characterized joy's essay as a  -lrb-  possibly unwitting  -rrb-  rationale for statism . 
william nelson joy  -lrb-  born november 8, 1954 -rrb- is an american computer engineer . 
he initially worked on a pascal compiler left at berkeley by ken thompson ,  who had been visiting the university when joy had just started his graduate work . 
in 1982, after the firm had been going for six months ,  joy was brought in with full co-founder status at sun microsystems . 
to say that a system has a certain bandwidth means that the system can process signals of that bandwidth ,  or that the system reduces the bandwidth of a white noise input to that bandwidth . 
fractional bandwidth is used for wideband antennas because of the compression of the percent bandwidth that occurs mathematically with percent bandwidths above 100% ,  which corresponds to a fractional bandwidth of 3:1.
e . g .  ,  a passband filter that has a bandwidth of 2 mhz with center frequency 10 mhz will have a fractional bandwidth of 2/10, or 20% . 
baseband bandwidth applies to a low-pass filter or baseband signal; the bandwidth is equal to its upper cutoff frequency . 
in this context ,  bandwidth is also known as channel spacing . 
the theoretical limit to percent bandwidth is 200% ,  which occurs for formula_8.
in the context of ,  for example ,  the sampling theorem and nyquist sampling rate ,  bandwidth typically refers to baseband bandwidth . 
a commonly used quantity is fractional bandwidth . 
mahāyāna buddhism encourages everyone to become bodhisattvas and to take the bodhisattva vows . 
mahāyāna buddhism is based principally upon the path of a bodhisattva . 
some bodhisattvas such as samantabhadra are also said to have already attained buddhahood . 
bodhisattvas are a popular subject in buddhist art . 
a bodhisattva above the 7th ground is called a `` mahāsattva '' . 
the ten grounds of the bodhisattva then can be grouped into the next three paths
in contrast ,  the goal of the bodhisattva path is to achieve `` samyaksambodhi . `` 
various traditions within buddhism believe in specific bodhisattvas . 
some of the previous lives of the buddha as a bodhisattva are featured in the jataka tales . 
the six perfections that constitute bodhisattva practice should not be confused with the actual acts of benefiting beings that the bodhisattva vows to accomplish once he or she is a buddha . 
when paying a state visit to britain ,  foreign heads of state are usually entertained by the queen at buckingham palace . 
buckingham palace became the london residence of the british monarch on the accession of queen victoria in 1837.
state banquets also take place in the ballroom; these formal dinners are held on the first evening of a state visit by a foreign head of state . 
the state rooms ,  used for official and state entertaining ,  are open to the public each year for most of august and september and on some days in winter and spring . 
under the new crown ownership ,  the building was originally intended as a private retreat for king george iii's wife ,  queen charlotte ,  and was accordingly known as the queen's house . 
the chinese luncheon room and yellow drawing room are situated at each end of this gallery ,  with the centre room obviously placed in the centre . 
adjacent to the palace is the royal mews ,  also designed by nash ,  where the royal carriages ,  including the gold state coach ,  are housed . 
the ballroom wing and a further suite of state rooms were also built in this period ,  designed by nash's student sir james pennethorne . 
smaller ceremonies such as the reception of new ambassadors take place in the `` 1844 room '' . 
buckingham palace finally became the principal royal residence in 1837, on the accession of queen victoria ,  who was the first monarch to reside there; her predecessor william iv had died before its completion . 
the palace chapel was destroyed by a german bomb during world war ii; the queen's gallery was built on the site and opened to the public in 1962 to exhibit works of art from the royal collection . 
this route is used by the cavalcades and motorcades of visiting heads of state ,  and by the royal family on state occasions such as the annual trooping the colour . 
it was this critical omission that helped the british royal family regain the freehold under king george iii . 
these very formal rooms are used only for ceremonial and official entertaining ,  but are open to the public every summer . 
sheffield's leasehold on the mulberry garden site ,  the freehold of which was still owned by the royal family ,  was due to expire in 1774.
these transfers brought the site of buckingham palace back into royal hands for the first time since william the conqueror had given it away almost 500 years earlier . 
british airways provides cargo services under the british airways world cargo brand . 
british airways effected the takeover of the uk's `` second '' airline ,  british caledonian ,  in july of that same year . 
british airways' services will then be concentrated in terminals 3 and 5.
british airways' main base is at london heathrow airport ,  but it also has a major presence at gatwick airport . 
british airways was the official airline partner of the london 2012 olympic games . 
ba was created in 1974 after a british airways board was established by the british government to manage the two nationalised airline corporations ,  british overseas airways corporation and british european airways ,  and two regional airlines ,  cambrian airways from cardiff ,  and northeast airlines from newcastle upon tyne . 
proposals to establish a joint british airline ,  combining the assets of the british overseas airways corporation  -lrb-  boac  -rrb-  and british european airways  -lrb-  bea  -rrb-  were first raised in 1953 as a result of difficulties in attempts by boac and bea to negotiate air rights through the british colony of cyprus . 
on 27 may 2017, british airways suffered a computer power failure . 
the flights returned to be directly operated by british airways plc in 2015.
british airways limited was established in 2012 to take over the operation of the premium service between london city airport and new york-jfk . 
training wheels are sometimes used when learning to ride . 
to slow down ,  the rider applies resistance to the pedals ,  acting as a braking system which can be as effective as a conventional rear wheel brake ,  but not as effective as a front wheel brake . 
see also: bicycle infantry . 
the wheel axle fits into fork ends in the frame and fork . 
with a `` chain drive '' transmission ,  a `` chainring '' attached to a crank drives the chain ,  which in turn rotates the rear wheel via the rear sprocket -lrb-  s  -rrb-   -lrb-  cassette or freewheel  -rrb-  . 
there are specialized bicycle tools for use both in the shop and on the road . 
the act of purposefully using this force to lift the rear wheel and balance on the front without tipping over is a trick known as a stoppie ,  endo ,  or front wheelie . 
the great majority of modern bicycles have a frame with upright seating that looks much like the first chain-driven bike . 
basic mountain bicycles and hybrids usually have front suspension only ,  whilst more sophisticated ones also have rear suspension . 
bicycle also has lowest carbon intensity of travel . 
the bicycle is also used for recreational purposes ,  such as bicycle touring ,  mountain biking ,  physical fitness ,  and play . 
a pair of wheels may be called a wheelset ,  especially in the context of ready-built `` off the shelf '' ,  performance-oriented wheels . 
a bicycle ,  also called a cycle or bike ,  is a human-powered or motor-powered ,  pedal-driven ,  single-track vehicle ,  having two wheels attached to a frame ,  one behind the other . 
a rear hub brake may be either hand-operated or pedal-actuated ,  as in the back pedal `` coaster brakes '' which were popular in north america until the 1960s . 
bike trainers are used to enable cyclists to cycle while the bike remains stationary . 
bicycles are also celebrated in the visual arts . 
in terms of the ratio of cargo weight a bicycle can carry to total weight ,  it is also an efficient means of cargo transportation . 
the `` dandy horse '' ,  also called draisienne or laufmaschine ,  was the first human means of transport to use only two wheels in tandem and was invented by the german baron karl von drais . 
bicycle suspension refers to the system or systems used to `` suspend '' the rider and all or part of the bicycle . 
a human traveling on a bicycle at low to medium speeds of around uses only the power required to walk . 
because of its persistent image as a `` women's '' bicycle ,  step-through frames are not common for larger frames . 
they can't be shifted across a cassette of sprockets ,  and are used either as single speed or with a hub gear . 
an alternative to chaindrive is to use a synchronous belt . 
bicyclists also have specialized form fitting and high visibility clothing . 
a higher gear allows a cyclist to make fewer pedal turns to maintain a given speed ,  but with more effort per turn of the pedals . 
dérailleur gears and hand-operated bowden cable-pull brakes were also developed during these years ,  but were only slowly adopted by casual riders . 
they also offer a degree of exercise to keep individuals healthy . 
a bicycle stays upright while moving forward by being steered so as to keep its center of mass over the wheels . 
bicycle suspensions are used primarily on mountain bicycles ,  but are also common on hybrid bicycles ,  as they can help deal with problematic vibration from poor surfaces . 
bicycle brakes may be rim brakes ,  in which friction pads are compressed against the wheel rims; hub brakes ,  where the mechanism is contained within the wheel hub ,  or disc brakes ,  where pads act on a rotor attached to the hub . 
saddles also vary with rider preference ,  from the cushioned ones favored by short-distance riders to narrower saddles which allow more room for leg swings . 
the convention for a polypeptide is to list its constituent amino acid residues as they occur from the amino terminus to the carboxylic acid terminus . 
the cellulose content of cotton is 90 percent ,  for wood it is 50 percent . 
proteins can also be modified to include non-peptide components ,  such as saccharide chains and lipids . 
the convention for a nucleic acid sequence is to list the nucleotides as they occur from the 5' end to the 3' end of the polymer chain ,  where 5' and 3' refer to the numbering of carbons around the ribose ring which participate in forming the phosphate diester linkages of the chain . 
plaid cymru both gained a seat from labour and lost one to them . 
it was also the last election at which labour secured over 40% of the popular vote until the snap election in 2017.
for labour ,  the last four years had run relatively smoothly . 
in northern ireland the ulster unionists ,  despite gaining north down ,  lost 5 other seats . 
the snp failed to gain any seats and lost a seat to the conservatives by just 79 votes . 
throughout the election the labour party had maintained a significant lead in the opinion polls and the result was deemed to be so certain that some bookmakers paid out for a labour majority before the election day . 
the election was essentially a repeat of the 1997 election ,  with labour losing only 6 seats overall and the conservatives making a net gain of one seat  -lrb-  gaining nine seats ,  but losing eight  -rrb-  . 
factors contributing to the labour victory were a strong economy and falling unemployment ,  as well as that labour was seen as having delivered on many key election pledges that it had made in 1997.
it also saw a tightening of the parties as the small uk unionist party lost its only seat . 
by the end of 2000, however ,  the dispute had been solved and labour were firmly back in the lead of the opinion polls . 
the portion of the greater book of mormon called the book of mormon is an account of the events during mormon's life . 
as of 2011, more than 150 million copies of the book of mormon had been published . 
joseph smith characterized the book of mormon as the `` keystone '' of mormonism ,  and claimed that it was `` the most correct of any book on earth '' . 
accounts vary of the way in which smith dictated the book of mormon . 
the initial printing of the book of mormon in 1830 produced 5000 copies . 
in 2003, a `` south park '' episode titled `` all about mormons '' parodied the origins of the book of mormon . 
the original manuscript was used by smith to further correct errors printed in the 1830 and 1837 versions of the book of mormon for the 1840 printing of the book . 
today ,  the building in which the book of mormon was first published and sold is known as the book of mormon historic publication site . 
church members believe that the book of mormon is more correct than the bible because the bible was the result of a multiple-generation translation process and the book of mormon was not . 
as of april 2011, the lds church has published more than 150 million copies of the book of mormon . 
the book of mormon is organized as a compilation of smaller books ,  each named after its main named narrator or a prominent leader ,  beginning with the first book of nephi  -lrb-  1 nephi  -rrb-  and ending with the book of moroni . 
the remainder of the book of mormon is written in third-person historical narrative ,  said to be compiled and abridged by mormon  -lrb-  with moroni abridging the book of ether  -rrb-  . 
the book's sequence is primarily chronological based on the narrative content of the book . 
for most of the history of the lds church ,  the book of mormon was not used as much as other books of scripture such as the new testament and the doctrine and covenants . 
the book of mormon is one of four sacred texts or standard works of the lds church . 
since the late 1980s ,  church members have been encouraged to read from the book of mormon daily . 
the book of mormon has occasionally been analyzed in a non-religious context for its literary merits . 
many of his observations were included as improvements in the 1981 lds edition of the book of mormon . 
smith produced a written revelation in 1832 that condemned the `` whole church '' for treating the book of mormon lightly . 
the importance of the book of mormon was a focus of ezra taft benson ,  the church's thirteenth president . 
the book of mormon was dictated by joseph smith to several scribes over a period of 13 months ,  resulting in three manuscripts . 
the lds church ,  which distributes free copies of the book of mormon ,  reported in 2011 that 150 million copies of the book have been printed since its initial publication . 
the book of mormon is currently printed by the following publishers: the following non-current editions marked major developments in the text or reader's helps printed in the book of mormon . 
it was first published in march 1830 by joseph smith as `` the book of mormon: an account written by the hand of mormon upon plates taken from the plates of nephi '' . 
the book of mormon is divided into smaller books ,  titled after the individuals named as primary authors and ,  in most versions ,  divided into chapters and verses . 
a portion of the text on the plates was also `` sealed '' according to his account ,  so its content was not included in the book of mormon . 
most baptists hold that no church or ecclesiastical organization has inherent authority over a baptist church . 
in 1925, baptists worldwide formed the baptist world alliance  -lrb-  bwa  -rrb-  . 
these were referred to as regular baptist  -lrb-  calvinistic in their doctrine  -rrb-  and free will baptists . 
many baptist groups ,  including the southern baptist convention and the baptist bible fellowship do not cooperate with the alliance . 
some historically significant baptist doctrinal documents include the 1689 london baptist confession of faith ,  1742 philadelphia baptist confession ,  the 1833 new hampshire baptist confession of faith ,  the southern baptist convention's `` baptist faith and message , ``  and written church covenants which some individual baptist churches adopt as a statement of their faith and beliefs . 
baptist historian bruce gourley outlines four main views of baptist origins:
it has been suggested that a primary baptist principle is that local baptist churches are independent and self-governing ,  and if so the term 'baptist denomination' may be considered somewhat incongruous . 
a large percentage of baptists in north america are found in five bodies—the southern baptist convention  -lrb-  sbc  -rrb- ; national baptist convention  -lrb-  nbc  -rrb- ; national baptist convention of america ,  inc . ;  -lrb-  nbca  -rrb- ; american baptist churches usa  -lrb-  abc  -rrb- ; and baptist bible fellowship international  -lrb-  bbfi  -rrb-  . 
traditional baptist historians write from the perspective that baptists had existed since the time of christ . 
the great awakening energized the baptist movement ,  and the baptist community experienced spectacular growth . 
baptist missionaries have spread their faith to every continent . 
today ,  more than 100 million christians identify themselves as baptist or belong to baptist-type churches . 
in 1898 william whitsitt was pressured to resign his presidency of the southern baptist theological seminary for denying baptist successionism
once all the players have completed their hands ,  it is the dealer’s turn . 
additional side bets ,  such as `` dealer match '' which pays when the player's cards match the dealer's up card ,  are sometimes available . 
otherwise ,  the dealer wins . 
in european casinos ,  `` no hole card '' games are prevalent; the dealer's second card is neither drawn nor consulted until the players have all played their hands . 
if the dealer's upcard is an ace ,  the player is offered the option of taking `` insurance '' before the dealer checks the hole card . 
otherwise ,  the hand is `` hard '' . 
over 100 variations of blackjack have been documented . 
bets to insure against blackjack are slightly less likely to be advantageous than insurance bets in general ,  since the ten in the player's blackjack makes it less likely that the dealer has blackjack too . 
insurance is a side bet that the dealer has blackjack and is treated independently of the main wager . 
it is both the conjugate base of carbonic acid ; and the conjugate acid of  ,  the carbonate ion ,  as shown by these equilibrium reactions:
the flow of bicarbonate ions from rocks weathered by the carbonic acid in rainwater is an important part of the carbon cycle . 
with carbonic acid as the central intermediate species ,  bicarbonate – in conjunction with water ,  hydrogen ions ,  and carbon dioxide – forms this buffering system ,  which is maintained at the volatile equilibrium required to provide prompt resistance to ph changes in both the acidic and basic directions . 
70–75% of co in the body is converted into carbonic acid  -lrb-  hco  -rrb-  ,  which can quickly turn into bicarbonate . 
bicarbonate is the dominant form of dissolved inorganic carbon in sea water ,  and in most fresh waters . 
on march 19, 1988, federko became the 22nd nhl player to record 1000 career points . 
federko was the head coach/general manager of the st .  louis vipers roller hockey team of the roller hockey international for the 1993 and 1994 seasons . 
buffalo's major newspaper is `` the buffalo news '' . 
buffalo public schools serve most of the city of buffalo . 
a lake erie tributary that flows through south buffalo is the buffalo river and buffalo creek . 
during the 1840s ,  buffalo's port continued to develop . 
other newspapers in the buffalo area include `` artvoice , ``  `` the public '' ,  and `` buffalo business first . `` 
the city of buffalo received its name from a nearby creek called buffalo creek . 
situated at the confluence of lake erie and the buffalo and niagara rivers ,  buffalo is a waterfront city . 
three major expressways serve buffalo . 
the nhl's buffalo sabres play in the city of buffalo ,  while the nfl's buffalo bills play in suburban orchard park ,  new york ,  where they have been since 1973.
buffalo has several well-known food companies . 
more recently ,  the tesla gigafactory 2 opened in south buffalo in summer 2017, as a result of the buffalo billion program . 
buffalo is one of the largest polish-american centres in the united states . 
these are two of the many festivals that occur in buffalo during the summer . 
buffalo's crime rate is higher than the national average . 
the buffalo braves played at the national basketball association from 1970 to 1978, with their home games held at the buffalo memorial auditorium . 
buffalo is the second largest city in the u . s .  state of new york and the largest city in western new york . 
on october 26, 1825, the erie canal was completed ,  formed from part of buffalo creek ,  with buffalo a port-of-call for settlers heading westward . 
buffalo has four channels that flow through its boundaries: the niagara river ,  buffalo river and creek ,  scajaquada creek ,  and the black rock canal ,  which is adjacent to the niagara river . 
the first newspaper to be published was the `` buffalo gazette '' in october that same year . 
buffalo is also home to several minor sports teams ,  including the buffalo bisons  -lrb-  baseball; an affiliate of the mlb's toronto blue jays since 2014 -rrb- ,  fc buffalo  -lrb-  soccer  -rrb-  as well as a professional women's team ,  the buffalo beauts  -lrb-  hockey  -rrb-  . 
there are several theories regarding how buffalo creek received its name . 
the state university of new york  -lrb-  suny  -rrb-  operates three institutions within the city of buffalo . 
in 1860, there were a plethora of railway companies and lines crossing through and terminating in buffalo . 
well-known indie artist ani difranco hails from buffalo . 
later ,  the lehigh valley railroad would have its line terminate at buffalo in 1867.
buffalo's architecture is diverse ,  with a collection of buildings from the 19th and 20th centuries . 
the buffalo parks system has over 20 parks with several parks accessible from any part of the city . 
its culture blends northeastern and midwestern traditions ,  with annual festivals including taste of buffalo and allentown art festival ,  two professional sports teams  -lrb-  buffalo bills and buffalo sabres  -rrb-  ,  and a music and arts scene . 
buffalo and the surrounding region is home to two major leagues professional sports teams . 
franklin ,  printer . '
franklin was inducted into the u . s . 
franklin was a prodigious inventor . 
he was undoubtedly thinking of william franklin . `` 
franklin was an avid chess player . 
benjamin franklin's father ,  josiah franklin ,  was a tallow chandler ,  a soaper and candlemaker . 
deborah read franklin died of a stroke in 1774, while franklin was on an extended mission to england; he returned in 1775.
franklin remained a freemason for the rest of his life . 
in 1730 or 1731, franklin was initiated into the local masonic lodge . 
franklin is known to have played the violin ,  the harp ,  and the guitar . 
in june 1753, johnson ,  franklin ,  and smith met in stratford . 
as he matured ,  franklin began to concern himself more with public affairs . 
franklin became involved in philadelphia politics and rapidly progressed . 
franklin established a common-law marriage with deborah read on september 1, 1730.
upon denham's death ,  franklin returned to his former trade . 
at age 17, franklin ran away to philadelphia ,  pennsylvania ,  seeking a new start in a new city . 
however ,  franklin's `` connecticut gazette ''  -lrb-  1755–68 -rrb- proved unsuccessful . 
franklin's electrical experiments led to his invention of the lightning rod . 
on october 19 in a letter to england with directions for repeating the experiment ,  franklin wrote:
franklin published his gulf stream chart in 1770 in england ,  where it was completely ignored . 
benjamin franklin  -lrb-   april 17, 1790 -rrb- was an american polymath and one of the founding fathers of the united states . 
franklin left his apprenticeship without his brother's permission ,  and in so doing became a fugitive . 
at age 17 in 1723, franklin proposed to 15-year-old deborah read while a boarder in the read home . 
while franklin was in london ,  his trip was extended ,  and there were problems with sir william's promises of support . 
franklin was also a pioneer in the study of slave demography ,  as shown in his 1755 essay . 
in 1751, franklin and thomas bond obtained a charter from the pennsylvania legislature to establish a hospital . 
even this franklin could use for contemporary satire ,  since cretico ,  the `` sowre philosopher '' ,  is evidently a portrait of franklin's rival ,  samuel keimer . 
in other areas of analysis ,  the spaces under study are often banach spaces . 
stoker was raised a protestant in the church of ireland . 
after suffering a number of strokes ,  stoker died at no . 
this also marked dacre stoker's writing debut . 
canadian writer dacre stoker ,  a great-grandnephew of bram stoker ,  decided to write `` a sequel that bore the stoker name '' to `` reestablish creative control over '' the original novel ,  with encouragement from screenwriter ian holt ,  because of the stokers' frustrating history with `` dracula's '' copyright . 
stoker was born on 8 november 1847 at 15 marino crescent ,  clontarf ,  on the northside of dublin ,  ireland . 
before writing `` dracula '' ,  stoker met ármin vámbéry ,  a hungarian writer and traveller . 
the short story collection `` dracula's guest and other weird stories '' was published in 1914 by stoker's widow ,  florence stoker ,  who was also his literary executrix . 
abraham `` bram '' stoker  -lrb-  8 november 1847 – 20 april 1912 -rrb- was an irish author ,  best known today for his 1897 gothic novel `` dracula '' . 
the stokers moved to london ,  where stoker became acting manager and then business manager of irving's lyceum theatre ,  london ,  a post he held for 27 years . 
in spring 2012, dacre stoker  -lrb-  in collaboration with prof .  elizabeth miller  -rrb-  presented the `` lost '' dublin journal written by bram stoker ,  which had been kept by his great-grandson noel dobbs . 
eventually ,  the player who bid the highest contract—which is determined by the contract's level as well as the trump suit or no trump—wins the contract for their partnership . 
the player who played the highest-ranked card wins the trick . 
in rubber bridge ,  a partnership wins one game once it has accumulated 100 contract points; excess contract points do not carry over to the next game . 
in rubber bridge ,  each player draws a card at the start of the game: the two players who drew the highest cards are partners ,  and play against the other two . 
contrast with spades ,  where players only have to bid their own hand . 
players must play a card of the same suit as the original card led ,  unless they have none  -lrb-  said to be `` void ''  -rrb-  ,  in which case they may play any card . 
contract points are doubled or quadrupled if the contract is respectively doubled or redoubled . 
the four players sit in two partnerships ,  with each player sitting opposite his partner . 
the player from the declaring side who first bid the denomination named in the final contract becomes declarer . 
if the declaring side makes their contract ,  they receive points for  ,  or tricks bid and made in excess of six . 
contract bridge ,  or simply bridge ,  is a trick-taking card game using a standard 52-card deck . 
after a deal has been played ,  all four players slot their cards back into the board ,  ready to be played by the next table . 
boats were used between 4000 and 3000 bc in sumer ,  ancient egypt and in the indian ocean . 
a boat is a watercraft of a large range of type and size . 
boats can be propelled by manpower  -lrb-  e . g . 
in vertebrates ,  it is composed of blood cells suspended in blood plasma . 
blood is circulated around the body through blood vessels by the pumping action of the heart . 
vertebrate blood is bright red when its hemoglobin is oxygenated and dark red when it is deoxygenated . 
