academic philosophers were also starting to notice his work . 
he also became the editor of the first collected works of schopenhauer . 
although arthur claimed that he left voluntarily ,  his mother's letter indicates that he was expelled . 
arthur lived in hamburg with his friend jean anthime who was also studying to become a merchant . 
arthur schopenhauer  -lrb-   ; ; 22 february 1788 – 21 september 1860 -rrb- was a german philosopher . 
also contrary to his mother's prediction ,  schopenhauer's dissertation made an impression on goethe to whom he sent it as a gift . 
few attempts to revive his lectures – again scheduled at the same time as hegel's – also failed ,  as did his inquiries about relocating to other universities . 
he left weimar to become a student at the university of göttingen in 1809.
adele ,  arthur's only sibling was born on 12 july 1797.
after quitting his merchant apprenticeship ,  with some encouragement from his mother ,  he dedicated himself to studies at the gotha gymnasium  -lrb-    -rrb-  in saxe-gotha-altenburg ,  but he also enjoyed social life among local nobility spending large amounts of money which caused concern to his frugal mother . 
he attended philological courses by august böckh and friedrich august wolf and continued his naturalistic interests with courses by martin heinrich klaproth ,  paul erman ,  johann elert bode ,  ernst gottfried fischer ,  johann horkel ,  friedrich christian rosenthal and hinrich lichtenstein  -lrb-  lichtenstein was also a friend whom he met at one of his mother's parties in weimar  -rrb-  . 
he moved to weimar but didn't live with his mother who even tried to discourage him from coming by explaining that they wouldn't get along very well . 
schulze had made it plausible that kant had not disproven hume's skepticism ,  it was up to those loyal to the project of kant to prove this important matter . 
the capital and largest city of angola is luanda . 
angola  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of angola  -lrb-  ; kikongo ,  kimbundu and   -rrb-  ,  is a west-coast country of south-central africa . 
the name `` angola '' comes from the portuguese colonial name `` reino de angola  -lrb-  kingdom of angola  -rrb- ``  ,  which appeared as early as dias de novais's 1571 charter . 
angola's capital ,  luanda ,  lies on the atlantic coast in the northwest of the country . 
a largely ovimbundu guerrilla initiative against the portuguese in central angola from 1966 was spearheaded by jonas savimbi and the `` national union for the total independence of angola ''  -lrb-  unita  -rrb-  . 
the slave trade was abolished in angola in 1836, and in 1854 the colonial government freed all its existing slaves . 
angola borders namibia to the south ,  zambia to the east ,  the democratic republic of the congo to the north-east and the south atlantic ocean to the west . 
during the late 1950s ,  the rise of the marxist–leninist `` popular movement for the liberation of angola ''  -lrb-  mpla  -rrb-  in the east and dembos hills north of luanda came to hold special significance . 
the `` national front for the liberation of angola ''  -lrb-  fnla  -rrb-  recruited from bakongo refugees in zaire . 
although inhabited since the paleolithic era ,  what is now angola was molded by portuguese colonisation . 
modern angola was populated predominantly by nomadic khoi and san prior to the first bantu migrations . 
after a protracted anti-colonial struggle ,  independence was achieved in 1975 as the marxist–leninist people's republic of angola ,  a one-party state supported by the soviet union and cuba . 
registration of vital events is in angola not complete . 
as a former overseas territory of portugal until 1975, angola possesses a portuguese population of over 200,000, a number that has been growing from 2000 onwards ,  because of angola's growing demand for qualified human resources . 
however ,  only a very small percentage of all these people has remained in angola ,  either for personal reasons  -lrb-  intermarriage  -rrb-  or as professionals  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  medical doctors  -rrb-  . 
supreme court  -lrb-  or `` tribunal da relacao ''  -rrb-  judges of the supreme court are appointed by the president . 
angola changed from a one-party marxist-leninist system ruled by the popular movement for the liberation of angola  -lrb-  mpla  -rrb-  ,  in place since independence in 1975, to a multiparty democracy based on a new constitution adopted in 1992.
since the adoption of a new constitution in 2010, the politics of angola takes place in a framework of a presidential republic ,  whereby the president of angola is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
legislative power is vested in the president ,  the government and parliament . 
the u . s .  government has invested us$4 billion in angola's petroleum sector . 
oil production surpassed the exportation of coffee as angola's largest export in 1973.
cabinda gulf oil company found malange-1, an oil reservoir in block 14, on august 9, 2007.
block zero provides the majority of angola's crude oil production with produced annually . 
chevron corporation produces and receives  ,  27% of angolan oil . 
the angolan government created sonangol ,  a state-run oil company ,  in 1976.
in 1844, angola's ports were opened to foreign shipping . 
after independence from portugal in 1975, angola was ravaged by a horrific civil war between 1975 and 2002.
angola produces and exports more petroleum than any other nation in sub-saharan africa ,  surpassing nigeria in the 2000s . 
angola joined the organization of the petroleum exporting countries on january 1, 2007.
the army  -lrb-  `` exército ''  -rrb-  is the land component of the faa . 
in 2013, the international institute for strategic studies reported that the faa had six divisions ,  the 1st ,  5th ,  and 6th with two or three infantry brigades ,  and the 2nd ,  3rd ,  and 4th with five to six infantry brigades . 
the angolan armed forces  -lrb-  portuguese: `` forças armadas angolanas ''  -rrb-  or faa are the military of angola . 
the army further includes the special forces brigade  -lrb-  including commandos and special operations units  -rrb-  ,  but this unit is under the direct command of the general staff of the faa . 
the faa succeeded to the previous people's armed forces for the liberation of angola  -lrb-  fapla  -rrb-  following the abortive bicesse accord with the armed forces of the liberation of angola  -lrb-  fala  -rrb-  ,  armed wing of the national union for the total independence of angola  -lrb-  unita  -rrb-  . 
the foreign relations of angola are based on angola's strong support of u . s .  foreign policy as the angolan economy is dependent on u . s .  foreign aid . 
he saw extensive combat during his 34-year military career ,  fighting actions in the black hawk war ,  the texas war of independence ,  the mexican–american war ,  the utah war ,  and the american civil war . 
an android is a robot or other artificial being designed to resemble a human ,  and often made from a flesh-like material . 
authors have used the term `` android '' in more diverse ways than `` robot '' or `` cyborg '' . 
android stories ,  therefore ,  are not essentially stories `` about '' androids; they are stories about the human condition and what it means to be human . 
androids are a staple of science fiction . 
while the term `` android '' is used in reference to human-looking robots in general ,  a robot with a female appearance can also be referred to as a `` gynoid '' . 
other fictional depictions of androids fall somewhere in between . 
although karel čapek's robots in `` r . u . r . 
the country's new robotics ethics charter will establish ground rules and laws for human interaction with robots in the future ,  setting standards for robotics users and manufacturers ,  as well as guidelines on ethical standards to be programmed into robots to prevent human abuse of robots and vice versa . 
hanson robotics ,  inc .  ,  of texas and kaist produced an android portrait of albert einstein ,  using hanson's facial android technology mounted on kaist's life-size walking bipedal robot body . 
alberta  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a western province of canada . 
alberta has considerable ethnic diversity . 
alberta is home to many large carnivores . 
about south of the capital is calgary ,  the largest city in alberta . 
northern alberta gets about 18 hours of daylight in the summer . 
over 50% of alberta's doctors volunteered for service overseas . 
alberta is named after princess louise caroline alberta  -lrb-  1848–1939 -rrb- ,  the fourth daughter of queen victoria . 
the district of alberta was created as part of the north-west territories in 1882.
most of alberta's jews live in the metropolitan areas of calgary  -lrb-  8,200 -rrb- and edmonton  -lrb-  5,500 -rrb- . 
frogs and salamanders are a few of the amphibians that make their homes in alberta . 
alberta extends for over from north to south; its climate ,  therefore ,  varies considerably . 
lake louise and mount alberta were also named in her honour . 
dinosaur-bearing strata are distributed widely throughout alberta . 
muslims ,  sikhs ,  buddhists ,  and hindus live in alberta . 
the city of edmonton is the seat of the provincial government—the capital of alberta . 
in 2014, alberta had the second-largest economy in canada after ontario ,  with a gdp exceeding c$376 billion . 
alberta ,  with an area of  ,  is the fourth-largest province after quebec ,  ontario and british columbia . 
after saskatchewan ,  alberta experiences the most tornadoes in canada with an average of 15 verified per year . 
alberta is home to only one variety of venomous snake ,  the prairie rattlesnake . 
central and northern alberta and the region farther north is the nesting ground of many migratory birds . 
northern alberta is mostly covered by boreal forest and has a subarctic climate . 
alberta has a humid continental climate with warm summers and cold winters . 
alberta's capital city ,  edmonton ,  is located at about the geographic centre of the province . 
arctic air masses in the winter produce extreme minimum temperatures varying from in northern alberta to in southern alberta ,  although temperatures at these extremes are rare . 
many of alberta's french-speaking residents live in the central and northwestern regions of the province . 
the government of alberta is organized as a parliamentary democracy with a unicameral legislature . 
also in 2016, alberta had the smallest proportion of seniors  -lrb-  12.3%  -rrb-  among the provinces and one of the highest population shares of children  -lrb-  19.2%  -rrb-  ,  further contributing to alberta's young and growing population . 
alberta is bounded by the provinces of british columbia to the west and saskatchewan to the east ,  the northwest territories to the north ,  and the u . s .  state of montana to the south . 
there are a few examples of fish that self-fertilise . 
actinopterygii  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or the ray-finned fishes ,  constitute a class or subclass of the bony fishes . 
male territoriality `` preadapts '' a species for evolving male parental care . 
ray-finned fishes occur in many variant forms . 
this model became known as the einstein world or einstein's static universe . 
this modification was made by einstein and cartan in the 1920s . 
einstein became an american citizen in 1940.
always i am mistaken for professor einstein . `` 
einstein was appointed associate professor in 1909.
einstein was still undecided on his future . 
in 1926, einstein and his former student leó szilárd co-invented  -lrb-  and in 1930, patented  -rrb-  the einstein refrigerator . 
schrödinger urged einstein to add his name as co-author ,  although einstein declined the invitation . 
einstein's sketches for this project may be seen in the einstein archive in the library of the leiden university . 
einstein was deeply impressed by mahatma gandhi . 
einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned . 
einstein published more than 300 scientific papers and more than 150 non-scientific works . 
einstein was displeased with modern quantum mechanics as it had evolved after 1925.
in many einstein biographies ,  it is claimed that einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his `` biggest blunder '' . 
for einstein ,  `` war was a disease  .  .  .  and he called for resistance to war . `` 
einstein married elsa löwenthal in 1919, after having a relationship with her since 1912.
in 1916, einstein was elected president of the german physical society  -lrb-  1916–1918 -rrb- . 
throughout his life ,  einstein published hundreds of books and articles . 
in a 1905 paper ,  einstein postulated that light itself consists of localized particles  -lrb-  `` quanta ''  -rrb-  . 
music took on a pivotal and permanent role in einstein's life from that period on . 
einstein refused surgery ,  saying ,  `` i want to go when i want . 
einstein's affiliation with the institute for advanced study would last until his death in 1955.
general relativity  -lrb-  gr  -rrb-  is a theory of gravitation that was developed by einstein between 1907 and 1915.
einstein's remains were cremated and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location . 
einstein adopted minkowski's formalism in his 1915 general theory of relativity . 
in 1935, einstein returned quantum mechanics ,  in particular to the question of its completeness ,  in the `` epr paper '' . 
einstein contributed to these developments by linking them with the 1898 arguments wilhelm wien had made . 
einstein's first paper submitted in 1900 to `` annalen der physik '' was on capillary attraction . 
in 1933, while einstein was visiting the united states ,  adolf hitler came to power . 
the theory developed in this paper later became known as einstein's special theory of relativity . 
albert einstein was born in ulm ,  in the kingdom of württemberg in the german empire ,  on 14 march 1879.
einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels ,  films ,  plays ,  and works of music . 
locker-lampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend british citizenship to einstein ,  during which period einstein made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in europe . 
einstein developed an appreciation for music at an early age ,  and later wrote: `` if i were not a physicist ,  i would probably be a musician . 
in 1917, einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole . 
in each of these models ,  einstein discarded the cosmological constant ,  claiming that it was `` in any case theoretically unsatisfactory '' . 
a resident of princeton recalls that einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student . 
 ''time '' magazine's frederic golden wrote that einstein was `` a cartoonist's dream come true '' . 
after graduating in 1900, einstein spent almost two frustrating years searching for a teaching post . 
einstein rejected this second possibility  -lrb-  popularly called `` spooky action at a distance ''  -rrb-  . 
as a result of einstein's letter ,  jewish invitees to turkey eventually totaled over `` 1,000 saved individuals '' . 
einstein discovered louis de broglie's work and supported his ideas ,  which were received skeptically at first . 
according to conductor leon botstein ,  einstein began playing when he was 5, although he did not enjoy it at that age . 
however ,  einstein's steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea . 
einstein spoke of his spiritual outlook in a wide array of original writings and interviews . 
einstein declined ,  and wrote in his response that he was `` deeply moved '' ,  and `` at once saddened and ashamed '' that he could not accept it . 
while traveling ,  einstein wrote daily to his wife elsa and adopted stepdaughters margot and ilse . 
in 1907, einstein proposed a model of matter where each atom in a lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator . 
while developing general relativity ,  einstein became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory . 
the population of afghanistan was estimated at 29.2 million in 2017.
in late september 1996, the taliban ,  in control of kabul and most of afghanistan ,  proclaimed their islamic emirate of afghanistan . 
however ,  the modern constitution of afghanistan states that `` the word afghan shall apply to every citizen of afghanistan . `` 
afghanistan is administratively divided into 34 provinces  -lrb-  `` wilayats ''  -rrb-  . 
in the capital city of kabul ,  the mayor is appointed by the president of afghanistan . 
shortly after their fall from power ,  the taliban began an insurgency to regain control of afghanistan . 
as early as mid-1979  -lrb-  see `` cia activities in afghanistan ''  -rrb-  ,  the united states were supporting afghan `` mujahideen '' and foreign `` afghan arab '' fighters through pakistan's isi . 
there are several smaller ivc colonies to be found in afghanistan as well . 
dari and pashto are the official languages of afghanistan; bilingualism is very common . 
afghanistan  -lrb-  ; pashto/dari:  ,  pashto: `` afġānistān ''  ,  dari: `` afġānestān ''   -rrb-  ,  officially the islamic republic of afghanistan ,  is a landlocked country located in south and central asia . 
two of the four capitals of khorasan  -lrb-  herat and balkh  -rrb-  are now located in afghanistan ,  while the regions of kandahar ,  zabulistan ,  ghazni ,  kabulistan ,  and afghanistan formed the frontier between khorasan and hindustan . 
the political history of the modern state of afghanistan began with the hotak and durrani dynasties in the 18th century . 
the only christian church with a noteworthy number of members in afghanistan is the christian church international . 
mujahideen  -lrb-  islamic resistance  -rrb-  forces in october 1978  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  had started a guerrilla or civil war against the pdpa's government of afghanistan . 
<br>faced with mounting international pressure and numerous casualties ,  the soviets withdrew from afghanistan in 1989, but continued to support afghan president mohammad najibullah until 1992.
afghanistan remains one of the poorest countries in the world due to a lack of foreign investment ,  government corruption ,  and the taliban insurgency . 
on 9 september 2001, massoud was assassinated by two arab suicide attackers in panjshir province of afghanistan . 
a landlocked mountainous country with plains in the north and southwest ,  afghanistan is located within south asia and central asia . 
taliban forces meanwhile began regrouping inside pakistan ,  while more coalition troops entered afghanistan and began rebuilding the war-torn country . 
an estimated 99.7% of the afghan population is muslim . 
meanwhile ,  the afghan government was able to build some democratic structures ,  and the country changed its name to the islamic republic of afghanistan . 
according to transparency international ,  afghanistan remains in the top most corrupt countries list . 
in 1838, the british marched into afghanistan and arrested dost mohammad ,  sent him into exile in india and replaced him with the previous ruler ,  shah shuja . 
afghanistan is an islamic republic consisting of three branches ,  the executive ,  legislative ,  and judicial . 
the pdpa declared the establishment of the democratic republic of afghanistan ,  with its first president named as nur muhammad taraki . 
albanian is the official language of the republic of albania . 
albania is mostly dependent on hydroelectricity . 
by 1990, about 200 movies had been produced ,  and albania had over 450 theaters . 
albania participated at the olympic games in 1972 for the first time . 
albania reduced the number of active troops from 65,000 in 1988 to 14,500 in 2009.
albania has considerably large deposits of oil . 
albania  -lrb-   ; ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of albania  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  is a country in southeast europe on the adriatic and ionian sea within the mediterranean sea . 
at this point the albanians were fully christianized . 
the roads of albania are well maintained and still under construction . 
albania has one of europe's longest histories of viticulture . 
the origins of the albanian renaissance can be traced back to around the 19th century that was a very difficult period for albania . 
coffee is very much a part of the people's lifestyle in albania . 
the first albanian films were mostly documentaries; the first was about the monastir congress that sanctioned the albanian alphabet in 1908.
albania has been an active member of the united nations since 1955.
the term albania is the medieval latin name of the country . 
in november 1913, the albanian pro-ottoman forces had offered the throne of albania to the ottoman war minister of albanian origin ,  ahmed izzet pasha . 
nowadays ,  albanians call their country ' . 
albania and kosovo are culturally ,  socially and economically very closely rooted due to the albanian majority population in kosovo . 
according to the institute of statistics  -lrb-  instat  -rrb-   ,  the population of albania is 2,893,005.
albania has committed to increase the participations in multinational operations . 
socialist classicism arrived during the communism in albania after the second world war . 
wine drinking is popular throughout the albanians . 
in the 2010 environmental performance index ,  albania was ranked 23rd out of 163 countries in the world . 
albanian mobile ,  plus ,  eagle ,  vodafone and telekom albania are the leading telecommunications provider in the country . 
the smallest county ,  by area ,  is durrës county with an area of in the west of albania . 
the sovereignty is vested in the albanian people and exercised by the albanian people through their representatives or directly . 
the explanation for the recent population decrease is the fall of communism in albania . 
albania is defined in an area of and located on the balkan peninsula in south and southeast europe . 
the modern nation state of albania emerged in 1912 following the defeat of the ottomans in the balkan wars . 
as part of the pre-accession process of albania to the european union ,  farmers are being aided through ipa funds to improve albanian agriculture standards . 
rivers originate mostly in the east of albania and discharge into the adriatic sea in the west . 
a small country in size ,  albania ranked first with the most coffee houses per capita in the world . 
skanderbeg united initially the princes of albania and later on established a centralized authority over most of the non-conquered territories becoming the ruling `` lord of albania '' . 
the admission of albania into the north atlantic treaty organization was considered by albanian politicians as a primary ambition for the country . 
the population of albania ,  as defined by institute of statistics ,  was estimated in 2016 to be approximately 2,886,026.
the illyrian tribe of the ardiaei centered in montenegro ruled over much of nowadays albania . 
in ancient times ,  the territory of modern albania was mainly inhabited by a number of illyrian tribes . 
altogether ,  the number of ethnic albanian living abroad its territory is estimated to be higher than the total population inside the territory of albania . 
the flag of albania is a red flag with a black double-headed eagle in the centre . 
albania is a secular state without an official religion ,  with the freedom of religion being a constitutional right . 
the cultural renaissance was first of all expressed through the development of the albanian language in the area of church texts and publications ,  mainly of the catholic region in the northern of albania ,  but also of the orthodox in the south . 
in the first half of the 14th century ,  the ottoman empire invaded most of albania and the league of lezhë was held under skanderbeg as a ruler ,  who became the national hero of the albanian medieval history . 
the independence of albania from the ottoman empire was proclaimed on 28 november 1912 by ismail qemali in vlorë . 
greek representatives form part of the albanian parliament and the government has invited albanian greeks to register ,  as the only way to improve their status . 
the life expectancy at birth in albania is at 77.8 years and ranks 37th in the world outperforming several developed countries . 
the albanian folk music is a prominent section of the national identity and continues to play a major part in albanian music . 
albania shares many symbols associated with its history ,  culture and belief . 
mainly catholic albanians converted in the 17th century ,  while the orthodox albanians followed suit mainly in the following century . 
albania was the only country in europe where the jewish population increased significantly during the holocaust . 
albania applied to join the european union ,  becoming an official candidate for accession to the european union in june 2014.
transportation in albania has undergone significant changes and improvements in the past two decades . 
in 2012, albania's gdp per capita stood at 30% of the european union average ,  while gdp  -lrb-  ppp  -rrb-  per capita was 35% . 
islam survived communist era persecution and reemerged in the modern era as a practiced religion in albania . 
during the middle ages ,  the albanians called their country ' and referred to themselves as ' . 
the constitution of albania guarantees equal ,  free and universal health care for all its citizens . 
the first public showing to occur in albania was a little-known title ,  paddy the reliable a comical story . 
albania is a significant minerals producer and is ranked among the world's leading chromium producers and exporters . 
when all three corridors are completed ,  albania will have an estimated of highway linking it with all of its neighboring countries . 
religious tolerance is one of the most important values of the tradition of the albanians . 
the visual arts tradition of albania has been shaped by the many cultures ,  which have flourished on its territory . 
in the aftermath of the revolutions of 1991, the socialist republic was dissolved and the fourth republic of albania was established . 
after the roman empire was divided into east and west in the 4th century ,  the territory of albania remained within the eastern roman empire . 
the largest county in albania ,  by population ,  is tirana county with over 800,000 people followed by fier county with over 300,000 people . 
in 2007, albania welcomed george w .  bush who became the first president of the united states ever to visit the country . 
historically ,  the area of albania was populated by various illyrian ,  thracian and ancient greek tribes as well as several greek colonies established in the illyrian coast . 
in terms of phytogeography ,  albania is part of the boreal kingdom and stretches specifically within the illyrian province of the circumboreal and mediterranean region . 
the albanian athletes have won a total of 43  -lrb-  8 gold ,  17 silver and 18 bronze  -rrb-  medals from 1987 to 2013.
allah  -lrb-  ;  ,    -rrb-  is the arabic word for god in abrahamic religions . 
 -lrb-  see god in christianity for the christian concept of god .   -rrb- 
there are certain phrases in praise of god that are favored by muslims ,  including ``  ''  -lrb-  holiness be to god  -rrb-  ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  praise be to god  -rrb-  ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  there is no deity but god  -rrb-  and ``  ''  -lrb-  god is greater  -rrb-  as a devotional exercise of remembering god  -lrb-  dhikr  -rrb-  . 
in islamic tradition ,  there are 99 names of god  -lrb-  ``  '' lit . 
remembrance of god  -rrb-  ,  the sufi repeats and contemplates on the name `` allah '' or other divine names while controlling his or her breath . 
languages which may not commonly use the term `` allah '' to denote god may still contain popular expressions which use the word . 
the word is thought to be derived by contraction from `` al-ilāh '' ,  which means `` the god '' ,  and is related to `` el '' and `` elah '' ,  the hebrew and aramaic words for god . 
the aramaic word for `` god '' in the language of assyrian christians is `` ʼĕlāhā '' ,  or `` alaha '' . 
christians in malaysia and indonesia use `` allah '' to refer to god in the malaysian and indonesian languages  -lrb-  both of them standardized forms of the malay language  -rrb-  . 
in order to pronounce the word allah correctly ,  one has to focus on the second “l”  -lrb-  ل  -rrb-  in allah  -lrb-  الله  -rrb-  . 
in an inscription of christian martyrion dated back to 512, references to allah can be found in both arabic and aramaic ,  which called him `` allah '' and `` alaha '' ,  and the inscription starts with the statement `` by the help of allah '' . 
in islam ,  `` allah '' is the unique ,  omnipotent and only deity and creator of the universe and is equivalent to god in other abrahamic religions . 
azerbaijan is a unitary semi-presidential republic . 
there are 8,350 rivers of various lengths within azerbaijan . 
since the independence of azerbaijan in 1991, the azerbaijani government has taken measures to preserve the environment of azerbaijan . 
the first information on the flora and fauna of azerbaijan was collected during the visits of naturalists to azerbaijan in the 17th century . 
azerbaijan is home to a vast variety of landscapes . 
9 out of 11 existing climate zones are present in azerbaijan . 
the name `` azerbaijan '' was first adopted for the area of the present-day republic of azerbaijan by the government of musavat in 1918, after the collapse of the russian empire ,  when the independent azerbaijan democratic republic was established . 
the territory of azerbaijan extends from north to south ,  and from west to east . 
azerbaijan's flora consists of more than 4,500 species of higher plants . 
the hydrography of azerbaijan basically belongs to the caspian sea basin . 
azerbaijan's system of governance nominally can be called two-tiered . 
azerbaijan has placed a particular emphasis on its `` special relationship '' with turkey . 
about 67 percent of the species growing in the whole caucasus can be found in azerbaijan . 
nevertheless ,  the number of ethnic azerbaijanis in iran far outnumber those in neighbouring azerbaijan . 
azerbaijan  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of azerbaijan  -lrb-     -rrb-  ,  is a landlocked country in the south caucasus region of eurasia at the crossroads of eastern europe and western asia . 
ilham aliyev ,  heydar aliyev's son ,  became chairman of the new azerbaijan party as well as president of azerbaijan when his father died in 2003.
the first of these turkic dynasties established was the seljuk empire ,  who entered the area now known as azerbaijan by 1067.
the azerbaijan democratic republic proclaimed its independence in 1918 and became the first democratic muslim state . 
azerbaijan is an active member of international coalitions fighting international terrorism . 
over the span of millennia ,  the name evolved to  -lrb-  middle persian  -rrb-  ,  then to  ,   ,   -lrb-  new persian  -rrb-  and present-day `` azerbaijan '' . 
the internet is an essential tool of amateur astronomers . 
some people even focus on amateur telescope making as their primary interest within the hobby of amateur astronomy . 
amateur astronomers use a range of instruments to study the sky ,  depending on a combination of their interests and resources . 
there are a large number of amateur astronomical societies around the world ,  that serve as a meeting point for those interested in amateur astronomy . 
although many methods are used in amateur astronomy ,  most are variations of a few specific techniques . 
many amateurs use online tools to plan their nightly observing sessions ,  using tools such as the clear sky chart . 
to recognize this ,  the astronomical society of the pacific annually gives amateur achievement awards for significant contributions to astronomy by amateurs . 
the majority of scientific contributions by amateur astronomers are in the area of data collection . 
collectively ,  amateur astronomers observe a variety of celestial objects and phenomena . 
they may also have sections devoted to particular topics ,  such as observing the moon or amateur telescope making . 
aikido derives mainly from the martial art of daitō-ryū aiki-jūjutsu ,  but began to diverge from it in the late 1920s ,  partly due to ueshiba's involvement with the ōmoto-kyō religion . 
art criticism continues to grow and develop alongside art . 
in their most general form these activities include the production of works of art ,  the criticism of art ,  the study of the history of art ,  and the aesthetic dissemination of art . 
the second ,  and more recent ,  sense of the word `` art '' as an abbreviation for `` creative art '' or `` fine art '' emerged in the early 17th century . 
disputes as to whether or not to classify something as a work of art are referred to as classificatory disputes about art . 
this debate discussed the encounter of the work of art as being determined by the relative extent to which the conceptual encounter with the work of art dominates over the perceptual encounter with the work of art . 
art may be considered an exploration of the human condition; that is ,  what it is to be human . 
duchamp once proposed that art is any activity of any kind- everything . 
in the perspective of the history of art ,  artistic works have existed for almost as long as humankind: from early pre-historic art to contemporary art; however ,  some theories restrict the concept of `` artistic works '' to modern western societies . 
most modern public museums and art education programs for children in schools can be traced back to this impulse to have art available to everyone . 
anti-art is a label for art that intentionally challenges the established parameters and values of art; it is term associated with dadaism and attributed to marcel duchamp just before world war i ,  when he was making art from found objects . 
somewhat in relation to the above ,  the word `` art '' is also used to apply judgments of value ,  as in such expressions as `` that meal was a work of art ''  -lrb-  the cook is an artist  -rrb-  ,  or `` the art of deception '' ,   -lrb-  the highly attained level of skill of the deceiver is praised  -rrb-  . 
in `` the origin of the work of art '' ,  martin heidegger ,  a german philosopher and a seminal thinker ,  describes the essence of art in terms of the concepts of being and truth . 
art can be defined as an act of expressing feelings ,  thoughts ,  and observations . 
art can connote a sense of trained ability or mastery of a medium . 
the three classical branches of art are painting ,  sculpture and architecture . 
at issue was the question of whether the aesthetic intentions of the artist in creating the work of art ,  whatever its specific form ,  should be associated with the criticism and evaluation of the final product of the work of art ,  or ,  if the work of art should be evaluated on its own merits independent of the intentions of the artist . 
with regards to the literary art and the musical arts ,  aristotle considered epic poetry ,  tragedy ,  comedy ,  dithyrambic poetry and music to be mimetic or imitative art ,  each varying in imitation by medium ,  object ,  and manner . 
the functions of art described above are not mutually exclusive ,  as many of them may overlap . 
there have been attempts by artists to create art that can not be bought by the wealthy as a status object . 
in modern usage after the 17th century ,  where aesthetic considerations are paramount ,  the fine arts are separated and distinguished from acquired skills in general ,  such as the decorative or applied arts . 
following duchamp during the first half of the twentieth century ,  a significant shift to general aesthetic theory took place which attempted to apply aesthetic theory between various forms of art ,  including the literary arts and the visual arts ,  to each other . 
for some scholars ,  such as kant ,  the sciences and the arts could be distinguished by taking science as representing the domain of knowledge and the arts as representing the domain of the freedom of artistic expression . 
the systematic position of the order agnostida within the class trilobita remains uncertain ,  and there has been continuing debate whether they are trilobites or a stem group . 
agnostida is an order of arthropod which first developed near the end of the early cambrian period and thrived during the middle cambrian . 
others favor legal and accessible abortion as a public health measure . 
women seeking an abortion may use unsafe methods ,  especially when abortion is legally restricted . 
health education ,  access to family planning ,  and improvements in health care during and after abortion have been proposed to address this phenomenon . 
the world health organization recommends this procedure ,  also called `` sharp curettage , ``  only when mva is unavailable . 
an induced abortion may be classified as `` therapeutic ''  -lrb-  done in response to a health condition of the women or fetus  -rrb-  or `` elective ''  -lrb-  chosen for other reasons  -rrb-  . 
specific procedures may also be selected due to legality ,  regional availability ,  and doctor or a woman's personal preference . 
only 30% to 50% of conceptions progress past the first trimester . 
the dublin declaration on maternal health ,  signed in 2012, notes ,  `` the prohibition of abortion does not affect ,  in any way ,  the availability of optimal care to pregnant women . `` 
although it is very uncommon ,  women undergoing surgical abortion after 18 weeks gestation sometimes give birth to a fetus that may survive briefly . 
the most common early first-trimester medical abortion regimens use mifepristone in combination with a prostaglandin analog  -lrb-  misoprostol or gemeprost  -rrb-  up to 9 weeks gestational age ,  methotrexate in combination with a prostaglandin analog up to 7 weeks gestation ,  or a prostaglandin analog alone . 
a major factor in whether abortions are performed safely or not is the legal standing of abortion . 
unsafe abortions are a major cause of injury and death among women worldwide . 
from the 15th week of gestation until approximately the 26th ,  other techniques must be used . 
forty percent of the world's women are able to access therapeutic and elective abortions within gestational limits ,  while an additional 35 percent have access to legal abortion if they meet certain physical ,  mental ,  or socioeconomic criteria . 
under united states patent law ,  the abstract may be called `` abstract of the disclosure '' . 
the abstract of title ,  used in real estate transactions ,  is the more common form of abstract . 
the americans began the war with significant disadvantages compared to the british . 
british returns in 1783 listed 43,633 rank and file deaths across the british armed forces . 
the last british troops departed new york city on november 25, 1783, marking the end of british rule in the new united states . 
suppressing a rebellion in america presented the british with major problems . 
the british also hired german mercenaries to do much of their fighting . 
debate persists over whether a british defeat was a guaranteed outcome . 
henry clinton withdrew from philadelphia ,  consolidating his forces in new york following the british defeat at saratoga and the entry of france into the war . 
soon after france declared war ,  french and british fleets fought an indecisive action off ushant on 27 july 1778.
on 6 january 1781, a french attempt to capture jersey to neutralize british privateering failed . 
naval skirmishes continued until april 17, 1780, when british and french fleets clashed indecisively off martinique . 
at the onset of the war ,  the americans had no major international allies . 
the british leadership soon discovered it had overestimated the capabilities of its own troops ,  while underestimating those of the colonists ,  causing a sudden re-think in british planning . 
in the summer of 1779, the americans captured british posts at stony point and paulus hook . 
approximately 25,000 loyalists fought for the british throughout the war ,  and provided some of the best troops in the british service; the british legion ,  a mixed regiment of 250 dragoons and 200 infantry commanded by banastre tarleton ,  gained a fearsome reputation in the colonies ,  especially in the south . 
the delay allowed british forces to regroup for campaigning the following year . 
british attempts to disarm the massachusetts militia in concord led to open combat on april 19, 1775.
few operations were conducted against the dutch ,  although several dutch colonies were captured by the british in 1781.
in north america ,  the immediate strategic focus of the french ,  spanish ,  and british shifted to jamaica ,  whose sugar exports were more valuable to the british than the economy of the thirteen colonies combined . 
in the meantime ,  the british entered winter quarters and were in a good place to resume campaigning . 
one british statesman described the attempt as `` like trying to conquer a map '' . 
the british turned their attention to conquering the south in 1778, after loyalists in london assured them of a strong loyalist base there . 
about 55,000 sailors served aboard american privateers during the war . 
upon the entry of france and spain into the conflict ,  the british were forced to severely limit the number of troops and warships that they sent to north america in order to defend other key territories and the british mainland . 
meanwhile ,  british officials in quebec began lobbying indian tribes to support them ,  while the americans urged them to maintain their neutrality . 
both sides used partisan warfare but the americans effectively suppressed loyalist activity when british regulars were not in the area . 
they withdrew on november 8, the expedition having suffered a decisive defeat; some 2,500 troops had perished ,  making it the costliest british disaster of the war . 
minor skirmishes continued in the carolinas until the end of the war ,  and british troops were effectively confined to charleston and savannah for the remainder of the conflict . 
the american revolutionary war  -lrb-  17751783 -rrb- ,  also known as the american war of independence ,  was an 18th-century war between great britain and its thirteen colonies  -lrb-  allied with france  -rrb-  which declared independence as the united states of america . 
british tories criticized the signatories for not extending the same standards of equality to slaves . 
the french blockaded the lucrative sugar islands of barbados and jamaica ,  intending to damage british trade . 
general bernardo de gálvez raised an army in new orleans and drove the british out of the gulf of mexico . 
in 1775, the standing british army ,  exclusive of militia ,  comprised 45,123 men worldwide ,  made up of 38,254 infantry and 6,869 cavalry . 
washington then moved his army to new york . 
the war formally concluded on september 3, 1783.
following the end of the war ,  britain had lost some of her most populous colonies . 
this led to a common expression among the british: `` yankee flint was as good as a glass of grog '' . 
the americans had largely achieved this aim by the end of 1781, effectively confining the british to the coast ,  and undoing all the progress they had made in the previous year . 
washington's retreat left his forces isolated ,  and the british captured an american fortification on november 16, taking 3,000 prisoners and amounting to what one historian terms `` the most disastrous defeat of the entire war '' . 
loyalist activity surged in the wake of the american defeat ,  especially in new york . 
on october 28, the british fought an indecisive action against washington ,  in which howe declined to attack washington's army ,  instead concentrating his efforts upon a hill that was of no strategic value . 
in 1780, the primary british strategy hinged upon a loyalist uprising in the south ,  for which charles cornwallis was chiefly responsible . 
in early 1779, the americans counterattacked by undertaking a risky winter march ,  and they secured the surrender of the british at vincennes ,  taking hamilton prisoner . 
on 27 february 1782, the house voted against further war in america by 19 votes . 
britain continued trying to create an indian buffer state in the american midwest as late as 1814 during the war of 1812.
john paul jones became the first great american naval hero ,  capturing hms `` drake '' on april 24, 1778, the first victory for any american military vessel in british waters . 
thomas gage was the british commander-in-chief and military governor of massachusetts ,  and he received orders on april 14, 1775 to disarm the local militias . 
despite the harsh discipline ,  a distinct lack of self-discipline pervaded all ranks of the british forces . 
the french suffered approximately 7,000 total dead throughout the conflict; of those ,  2,112 were killed in combat in the american theaters of war . 
soon after ,  british admiral edward hughes captured trincomalee after a brief engagement on 11 january 1782.
in may ,  spanish troops captured the bahamas ,  although the british bloodlessly recaptured the islands the following year on 18 april . 
spain sought to recover gibraltar and menorca in europe ,  as well as mobile and pensacola in florida ,  and also to expel the british from central america . 
logistical organization of eighteenth century armies was chaotic at best ,  and the british army was no exception . 
the operation became notorious for its high degree of looting by british troops ,  enraging both loyalists and patriot colonists . 
the ampere  -lrb-  ; symbol: a  -rrb-  ,  often shortened to `` amp '' ,  is the base unit of electric current in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  . 
the concept of algorithm has existed for centuries . 
algorithm design refers to a method or mathematical process for problem-solving and engineering algorithms . 
algorithms are essential to the way computers process data . 
generally ,  a program is only an algorithm if it stops eventually . 
the transition from one state to the next is not necessarily deterministic; some algorithms ,  known as randomized algorithms ,  incorporate random input . 
one of the most important aspects of algorithm design is creating an algorithm that has an efficient run-time ,  also known as its big o . 
because an algorithm is a precise list of precise steps ,  the order of computation is always crucial to the functioning of the algorithm . 
the concept of `` algorithm '' is also used to define the notion of decidability . 
techniques for designing and implementing algorithm designs are also called algorithm design patterns ,  such as the template method pattern and decorator pattern . 
winter annuals germinate during the autumn and mature during the spring or summer of the following calendar year . 
salt water  -rrb-  ,  or foregoing mouthwash entirely . 
peoples of the americas used salt water mouthwashes for sore throats ,  and other mouthwashes for problems such as teething and mouth ulcers . 
common use involves rinsing the mouth with about 20-50 ml  -lrb-  2/3 fl oz  -rrb-  of mouthwash . 
mouthwash ,  mouth rinse ,  oral rinse ,  or mouth bath is a liquid which is held in the mouth passively or swilled around the mouth by contraction of the perioral muscles and/or movement of the head ,  and may be gargled ,  where the head is tilted back and the liquid bubbled at the back of the mouth . 
it is hypothesized that alcohol mouthwashes acts as a carcinogen  -lrb-  cancer-inducing  -rrb-  . 
the most common use of mouthwash is commercial antiseptics ,  which are used at home as part of an oral hygiene routine . 
gargling is where the head is tilted back ,  allowing the mouthwash to sit in the back of the mouth while exhaling ,  causing the liquid to bubble . 
macedonian losses were negligible compared to those of the persians . 
in the process ,  both alexander iv and philip iii were murdered . 
a considerable accession of power was granted him after the death of philip ,  son of machatas; and he was allowed to retain his authority at the death of alexander himself  -lrb-  323 bc  -rrb-  ,  as well as in the subsequent partition of the provinces at triparadisus ,  321 bc . 
philip and his army joined his son in 338 bc ,  and they marched south through thermopylae ,  taking it after stubborn resistance from its theban garrison . 
alexander iii of macedon  -lrb-  ; 20/21 july 356 bc – 10/11 june 323 bc  -rrb-  ,  commonly known as alexander the great  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was a king  -lrb-  `` basileus ''  -rrb-  of the ancient greek kingdom of macedon and a member of the argead dynasty . 
when philip returned to pella ,  he fell in love with and married cleopatra eurydice in 338 bc ,  the niece of his general attalus . 
eventually ,  the two sides reconciled ,  and after the birth of alexander iv ,  he and philip iii were appointed joint kings ,  albeit in name only . 
in the following year ,  the persian satrap  -lrb-  governor  -rrb-  of caria ,  pixodarus ,  offered his eldest daughter to alexander's half-brother ,  philip arrhidaeus . 
he overcame this by being personally involved in battle ,  in the manner of a macedonian king . 
news of philip's death roused many states into revolt ,  including thebes ,  athens ,  thessaly ,  and the thracian tribes north of macedon . 
philip was then named `` hegemon ''  -lrb-  often translated as `` supreme commander ''  -rrb-  of this league  -lrb-  known by modern scholars as the league of corinth  -rrb-  ,  and announced his plans to attack the persian empire . 
on either 10 or 11 june 323 bc ,  alexander died in the palace of nebuchadnezzar ii ,  in babylon ,  at age 32.
alexander's death was so sudden that when reports of his death reached greece ,  they were not immediately believed . 
upon philip's return ,  he dispatched alexander with a small force to subdue revolts in southern thrace . 
alexander advanced on egypt in later 332 bc ,  where he was regarded as a liberator . 
when alexander set out for asia ,  he left his general antipater ,  an experienced military and political leader and part of philip ii's `` old guard '' ,  in charge of macedon . 
in spring 333 bc ,  alexander crossed the taurus into cilicia . 
on the day alexander was born ,  philip was preparing a siege on the city of potidea on the peninsula of chalcidice . 
on the subsequent advance of the macedonian king ,  taxiles accompanied him with a force of 5,000 men and took part in the battle of the hydaspes river . 
during his stay in egypt ,  he founded alexandria-by-egypt ,  which would become the prosperous capital of the ptolemaic kingdom after his death . 
alexander reached susa in 324 bc ,  but not before losing many men to the harsh desert . 
in summer 336 bc ,  while at aegae attending the wedding of his daughter cleopatra to olympias's brother ,  alexander i of epirus ,  philip was assassinated by the captain of his bodyguards ,  pausanias . 
at issus in 333 bc ,  his first confrontation with darius ,  he used the same deployment ,  and again the central phalanx pushed through . 
the anguish that alexander felt after hephaestion's death may also have contributed to his declining health . 
in return for teaching alexander ,  philip agreed to rebuild aristotle's hometown of stageira ,  which philip had razed ,  and to repopulate it by buying and freeing the ex-citizens who were slaves ,  or pardoning those who were in exile . 
news then reached alexander that cleitus ,  king of illyria ,  and king glaukias of the taulantii were in open revolt against his authority . 
alexander was proclaimed king on the spot by the nobles and army at the age of 20.
however ,  more recently ,  it has been suggested that it may date from earlier than abdalonymus' death . 
the contention that korzybski `` opposed '' the use of the verb `` to be '' would be a profound exaggeration . 
william burroughs went to a korzybski workshop in the autumn of 1939.
many devotees and critics of korzybski reduced his rather complex system to a simple matter of what he said about the verb form `` is '' of the general verb `` to be . `` 
korzybski maintained that humans are limited in what they know by  -lrb-  1 -rrb- the structure of their nervous systems ,  and  -lrb-  2 -rrb- the structure of their languages . 
e .  p .  dutton published korzybski's first book ,  `` manhood of humanity '' ,  in 1921.
the resultant game borrows elements from `` asteroids '' and `` space invaders '' . 
logg modeled the player's ship ,  the five-button control scheme ,  and the game physics after `` spacewar ! 
the game becomes harder as the number of asteroids increases . 
a port for the atari 5200, identical to the atari 8-bit computer version ,  was in development in 1982, but was not published . 
the atari flashback series of dedicated video game consoles have included both the 2600 and the arcade versions of `` asteroids '' . 
the game is much more difficult than the original and enables saucers to shoot across the screen boundary ,  eliminating a common strategy for high scores in the original game . 
the game is rendered on a vector display in a two-dimensional view that wraps around in both screen axes . 
 ''asteroids '' was one of the first major hits of the golden age of arcade games . 
the game was included as part of the atari lynx title `` super asteroids & missile command '' ,  and featured in the original `` microsoft arcade '' compilation in 1993, the latter with four other atari video games: `` missile command '' ,  `` tempest '' ,  `` centipede '' ,  and `` battlezone '' . 
the arcade and atari 2600 versions of `` asteroids '' ,  along with `` asteroids deluxe '' ,  were included in `` atari anthology '' for both xbox and playstation 2.
 ''asteroids '' received positive reviews from video game critics and has been regarded as logg's magnum opus . 
by contrast ,  in march 1983 the atari 8-bit port won sixth place in `` softline ''s dog of the year awards `` for badness in computer games '' ,  atari division ,  based on reader submissions . 
the 2009 revision of the angiosperm phylogeny group system ,  apg iii ,  places the order in the clade monocots . 
within the monocots ,  asparagales is the sister group of the commelinid clade . 
in the apg circumscription ,  asparagales is the largest order of monocots with 14 families ,  1,122 genera ,  and about 36,000 species . 
as circumscribed within the angiosperm phylogeny group system asparagales is the largest order within the monocotyledons ,  with 14 families ,  1,122 genera and about 25,000–42,000 species ,  thus accounting for about 50% of all monocots and 10–15% of the flowering plants  -lrb-  angiosperms  -rrb-  . 
with this circumscription ,  the order consists of 14 families  -lrb-  dahlgren had 31 -rrb- with approximately 1120 genera and 26000 species . 
a 2009 study suggests that the asparagales have the highest diversification rate in the monocots ,  about the same as the order poales ,  although in both orders the rate is little over half that of the eudicot order lamiales ,  the clade with the highest rate . 
the orders which have been separated from the old liliales are difficult to characterize . 
the widely used cronquist system  -lrb-  1968–1988 -rrb- used the very broadly defined order liliales . 
from an economic point of view ,  the order asparagales is second in importance within the monocots to the order poales  -lrb-  which includes grasses and cereals  -rrb-  . 
orchidaceae is the largest family of all angiosperms and hence by far the largest in the order . 
asparagales  -lrb-  asparagoid lilies  -rrb-  is an order of plants in modern classification systems such as the angiosperm phylogeny group  -lrb-  apg  -rrb-  and the angiosperm phylogeny web . 
the 'core asparagales' ,  comprising amaryllidaceae `` sensu lato '' and asparagaceae `` sensu lato '' ,  are a strongly supported clade ,  as are clades for each of the families . 
thus although most species in the order are herbaceous ,  some no more than 15 cm high ,  there are a number of climbers  -lrb-  `` e . g . 
in the twentieth century the wettstein system  -lrb-  1901–1935 -rrb- placed many of the taxa in an order called 'liliiflorae' . 
this cladogram shows the placement of asparagales within the orders of lilianae `` sensu '' chase & reveal  -lrb-  monocots  -rrb-  based on molecular phylogenetic evidence . 
consequently ,  the family structure for apg iv is:
the angiosperm phylogeny group system  -lrb-  apg  -rrb-  of 1998 and apg ii  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- assigned the alismatales to the monocots ,  which may be thought of as an unranked clade containing the families listed below . 
the cronquist system  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- places the alismatales in subclass alismatidae ,  class liliopsida = monocotyledons and includes only three families as shown: cronquist's subclass alismatidae conformed fairly closely to the order alismatales as defined by apg ,  minus the araceae . 
collectively ,  they are commonly known as `` water plantain '' . 
the order apiales is placed within the asterid group of eudicots as circumscribed by the apg iii system . 
the apiales are an order of flowering plants . 
under the cronquist system ,  only the apiaceae and araliaceae were included here ,  and the restricted order was placed among the rosids rather than the asterids . 
however few fossils have been found ,  of the menyanthaceae-asteraceae clade in the oligocene ,  about 29 mya . 
the asterales order probably originated in the cretaceous  -lrb-  145 – 66 mya  -rrb-  on the supercontinent gondwana which broke up from 184 – 80 mya ,  forming the area that is now australia ,  south america ,  africa ,  india and antarctica . 
the phylogenetic tree according to apg iii for the campanulid clade is as below . 
an oligocene  -lrb-  34 – 23 mya  -rrb-  pollen is known for asteraceae and goodeniaceae ,  and seeds from oligocene and miocene  -lrb-  23 – 5.3 mya  -rrb-  are known for menyanthaceae and campanulaceae respectively . 
asterales are common plants and have many known uses . 
