some musicians dubbed the workshop a `` university '' for jazz . 
in 1959 mingus and his jazz workshop musicians recorded one of his best-known albums ,  `` mingus ah um '' . 
the italian band quintorigo recorded an entire album devoted to mingus's music ,  titled `` play mingus '' . 
mingus's vision ,  now known as `` epitaph '' ,  was finally realized by conductor gunther schuller in a concert in 1989, 10 years after mingus's death . 
nearly as well known as his ambitious music was mingus's often fearsome temperament ,  which earned him the nickname `` the angry man of jazz '' . 
the records ,  however ,  are often regarded as among the finest live jazz recordings . 
only one misstep occurred in this era: 1962's `` town hall concert '' . 
his mother allowed only church-related music in their home ,  but mingus developed an early love for other music ,  especially duke ellington . 
charles mingus' music is currently being performed and reinterpreted by the mingus big band ,  which in october 2008 began playing every monday at jazz standard in new york city ,  and often tours the rest of the u . s .  and europe . 
mingus witnessed ornette coleman's legendary—and controversial—1960 appearances at new york city's five spot jazz club . 
the mingus big band ,  the mingus orchestra ,  and the mingus dynasty band are managed by jazz workshop ,  inc .  and run by mingus' widow sue graham mingus . 
mingus often worked with a mid-sized ensemble  -lrb-  around 8–10 members  -rrb-  of rotating musicians known as the jazz workshop . 
he then played with lionel hampton's band in the late 1940s; hampton performed and recorded several of mingus's pieces . 
a major proponent of collective improvisation ,  he is considered to be one of the greatest jazz musicians and composers in history ,  with a career spanning three decades and collaborations with other jazz legends such as louis armstrong ,  duke ellington ,  charlie parker ,  dizzy gillespie ,  dannie richmond ,  and herbie hancock . 
considering the number of compositions that charles mingus wrote ,  his works have not been recorded as often as comparable jazz composers . 
mingus's pace slowed somewhat in the late 1960s and early 1970s . 
his compositions retained the hot and soulful feel of hard bop ,  drawing heavily from black gospel music and blues ,  while sometimes containing elements of third stream ,  free jazz ,  and classical music . 
mingus's autobiography also serves as an insight into his psyche ,  as well as his attitudes about race and society . 
mingus espoused collective improvisation ,  similar to the old new orleans jazz parades ,  paying particular attention to how each band member interacted with the group as a whole . 
one 1 millilitre is defined as one cubic centimetre ,  under the si system of units . 
the centimetre was the base unit of length in the now deprecated centimetre–gram–second  -lrb-  cgs  -rrb-  system of units . 
the committee on data for science and technology  -lrb-  codata  -rrb-  was established in 1966 as an interdisciplinary committee of the international council for science . 
jones remained at warner bros .  throughout the 1950s ,  except for a brief period in 1953 when warner closed the animation studio . 
jones moonlighted to work on the film since he had an exclusive contract with warner bros .  upa completed the film and made it available for distribution in 1962; it was picked up by warner bros . 
he later started his own studio ,  chuck jones enterprises ,  which created several one-shot specials ,  and periodically worked on `` looney tunes '' related works . 
jones' former animation unit was laid off after completing the final cartoon in their pipeline ,  `` the iceman ducketh '' ,  and the rest of the warner bros .  cartoons studio was closed in early 1963.
he was actively involved in efforts to unionize the staff of leon schlesinger studios . 
jones continued to work on other tv specials such as `` horton hears a who ! `` 
mgm closed the animation division in 1970, and jones once again started his own studio ,  chuck jones enterprises . 
upon the reopening of the warner animation department ,  jones was rehired and reunited with most of his unit . 
after his career at warner bros .  ended in 1962, jones started sib tower 12 productions ,  and began producing cartoons for metro-goldwyn-mayer ,  including a new series of `` tom and jerry '' shorts and the television adaptation of dr .  seuss' `` how the grinch stole christmas ! ``  . 
with business partner les goldman ,  jones started an independent animation studio ,  sib tower 12 productions ,  and brought on most of his unit from warner bros .  ,  including maurice noble and michael maltese . 
charles martin jones  -lrb-  september 21, 1912 – february 22, 2002 -rrb- was an american animator ,  filmmaker ,  cartoonist ,  author ,  artist ,  and screenwriter ,  best known for his work with warner bros .  cartoons on the `` looney tunes '' and `` merrie melodies '' shorts . 
in bhutan there is a traditional national dress prescribed for men and women ,  including the monarchy . 
before the advent of ready-to-wear apparel ,  clothing was made by hand . 
women also wear scarfs or stolls called rachus ,  made of raw silk with embroidery ,  over their shoulder but not indicative of their rank . 
costume is the distinctive style of dress of an individual or group that reflects their class ,  gender ,  profession ,  ethnicity ,  nationality ,  activity or epoch . 
the best known existing cable car system is the san francisco cable car system in the city of san francisco ,  california . 
rather than using a grip car and single trailer ,  as many cities did ,  or combining the grip and trailer into a single car ,  like san francisco's `` california cars '' ,  chicago used grip cars to pull trains of up to three trailers . 
other cable cars to use grips were those of the clay street hill railroad ,  which later became part of the san francisco cable car system . 
the success of these grips ensured that this line became the model for other cable car transit systems ,  and this model is often known as the `` hallidie cable car '' . 
several cities operate a modern version of the cable car system . 
a cable car is superficially similar to a funicular ,  but differs from such a system in that its cars are not permanently attached to the cable and can stop independently ,  whereas a funicular has cars that are permanently attached to the propulsion cable ,  which is itself stopped and started . 
while many of these systems involve cars permanently attached to the cable ,  the minimetro system from poma/leitner group and the cable liner system from dcc doppelmayr cable car both have variants that allow the cars to be automatically decoupled from the cable under computer control ,  and can thus be considered a modern interpretation of the cable car . 
in 1883 the new york and brooklyn bridge railway was opened ,  which had a most curious feature: though it was a cable car system ,  it used steam locomotives to get the cars into and out of the terminals . 
although creaky voice may occur with very low pitch ,  as at the end of a long intonation unit ,  it can also occur with a higher pitch . 
creaky voice is prevalent as a peer-group affectation among young women in the united states and united kingdom . 
the first computer monitors used cathode ray tubes  -lrb-  crts  -rrb-  . 
by the end of the 1980s color crt monitors that could clearly display 1024 x 768 pixels were widely available and increasingly affordable . 
there are multiple technologies that have been used to implement liquid crystal displays  -lrb-  lcd  -rrb-  . 
a computer monitor is an output device that displays information in pictorial form . 
lcd monitors have now very high temporal accuracy and can be used for vision research . 
tft-lcd is a variant of lcd which is now the dominant technology used for computer monitors . 
cleartype is not used when printing text . 
cleartype is microsoft's implementation of subpixel rendering technology in rendering text in a font system . 
cleartype only applies any processing to the text while it is being rendered onto the screen . 
computer displays where the positions of individual pixels are permanently fixed such as most modern flat panel displays can show saw-tooth edges when displaying small ,  high-contrast graphic elements ,  such as text . 
before dna replication ,  cells contain two centrioles . 
the last common ancestor of all eukaryotes was a ciliated cell with centrioles . 
the centrioles can self replicate during cell division . 
centrioles are present in the cells of most eukaryotes ,  for example those of animals . 
the main function of centrioles is to produce cilia during interphase and the aster and the spindle during cell division . 
creation science  -lrb-  dubbed `` scientific creationism '' at the time  -rrb-  emerged as an organized movement during the 1960s . 
the act defined creation science as follows:
creation science organizations are also known in other countries ,  most notably creation ministries international which was founded  -lrb-  under the name creation science foundation  -rrb-  in australia . 
after examining the key concepts from creation science ,  the court found:
the seventh-day adventist church has a history of support for creation science . 
however ,  there are also examples of islamic and jewish scientific creationism that conform to the accounts of creation as recorded in their religious doctrines . 
in response to this ruling ,  drafts of the creation science school textbook `` of pandas and people '' were edited to change references of creation to intelligent design before its publication in 1989.
creation science or scientific creationism is a branch of creationism that claims to provide scientific support for the genesis creation narrative in the book of genesis and disprove or reexplain the scientific facts ,  theories and paradigms about geology ,  cosmology ,  biological evolution ,  archeology ,  history ,  and linguistics . 
 '''creation-science' means the scientific evidences for creation and inferences from those evidences . 
creation science attempts to explain history and science within the span of biblical chronology ,  which places the initial act of creation some six thousand years ago . 
creation science is generally rejected by the church of england as well as the roman catholic church . 
while creationist movements also exist in islam and judaism ,  these movements do not use the phrase `` creation science '' to describe their beliefs . 
today ,  creation science as an organized movement is primarily centered within the united states . 
theistic evolution and evolutionary creationism are theologies that reconcile belief in a creator with biological evolution . 
creation science rejects evolution's theory of the common descent of all living things on the earth . 
 ''cirth '' is written with a capital letter when referring to the writing system; the runes themselves can be called `` cirth '' . 
the known ancient cirth don't cover all the sounds of sindarin ,  since we are missing `` rh '' ,  `` lh '' ,  `` mh '' ,  `` y '' ,  `` œ '' . 
more possibly it was one of some other cirth that did not survive . <br>long vowels were evidently indicated by doubling . 
the elf daeron ,  minstrel of king thingol of doriath reorganised the cirth and added new ones ,  being somehow inspired by fëanor's tengwar  -lrb-  therefore this mustn't have occurred before the return of the noldor  -rrb-  and made the extension of the cirth known as certhas daeron  -lrb-  where `` certhas '' means `` runic alphabet ''  -rrb-  ,  used for inscribing names in menegroth . 
the c-130a entered service with the u . s .  air force in december 1956.
all reverted to standard c-130b cargo aircraft after their replacement in the reconnaissance role by other aircraft . 
in 2017, france and germany announced that they are to build up a joint air transport squadron at evreux air base ,  france ,  comprising ten c-130j aircraft . 
in the 1970s ,  lockheed proposed a c-130 variant with turbofan engines rather than turboprops ,  but the u . s .  air force preferred the takeoff performance of the existing aircraft . 
as of january 2014, air mobility command ,  air force materiel command and the air force research lab are in the early stages of defining requirements for the c-x next generation airlifter program to replace both the c-130 and c-17.
since 1992, two successive c-130 aircraft named `` fat albert '' have served as the support aircraft for the u . s .  navy blue angels flight demonstration team . 
in 1964, c-130 crews from the 6315th operations group at naha air base ,  okinawa commenced forward air control  -lrb-  fac; `` flare ''  -rrb-  missions over the ho chi minh trail in laos supporting usaf strike aircraft . 
three c-130k  -lrb-  hercules c mk . 1p  -rrb-  were upgraded and sold to the austrian air force in 2002.
the current cost per aircraft is although boeing expects that this price will drop to us$7 million for the 69th aircraft . 
a single example is used by the islamic republic of iran air force ,  the aircraft having originally been sold to the former imperial iranian air force . 
the ac-130 also holds the record for the longest sustained flight by a c-130.
since 2004, the pakistan air force has employed c-130s in the war in north-west pakistan . 
in 1963, a hercules achieved and still holds the record for the largest and heaviest aircraft to land on an aircraft carrier . 
the c-130 entered service with the u . s .  in 1956, followed by australia and many other nations . 
the project was canceled and the c-130 has remained in production . 
in october 2010, the air force released a capabilities request for information  -lrb-  crfi  -rrb-  for the development of a new airlifter to replace the c-130.
the l-100 also has two stretched versions . 
in the 2000s ,  lockheed martin and the u . s .  air force began outfitting and retrofitting c-130s with the eight-blade utc aerospace systems np2000 propellers . 
the 1570 can read and write all single-sided cp/m-format disks that the 1571 can access . 
for data disks .   -rrb- 
a 1571 cannot boot from mfm disks; the user must boot cp/m from a gcr disk and then switch to mfm disks . 
when connected to a c128, the 1571 would default to double-sided mode ,  which allowed the drive to read its own 340k disks as well as single-sided 170 kb 1541 disks . 
unlike the 1541, which was limited to gcr formatting ,  the 1571 could read both gcr and mfm disk formats . 
the commodore 1571 is commodore's high-end 5¼ '' floppy disk drive . 
in the 1541 format ,  while 40 tracks are possible for a drive like the 154x/157x ,  only are used . 
the 1572 would have allowed for fast disk backups of non-copy-protected media ,  much like the old 4040, 8050, and 8250 dual drives . 
coca tea ,  an infusion of coca leaves ,  is also a traditional method of consumption . 
about 3.5 million or 87.5% of those who have used the drug in the last year are young adults  -lrb-  15–34 years old  -rrb-  . 
drug injection by turning the drug into a solution provides the highest blood levels of drug in the shortest amount of time . 
cocaine ,  also known as coke ,  is a strong stimulant mostly used as a recreational drug . 
cocaine use also increases the risk of having a heart attack . 
coca grown for traditional purposes by indigenous communities ,  a use which is still present and is permitted by colombian laws ,  only makes up a small fragment of total coca production ,  most of which is used for the illegal drug trade . 
coca herbal infusion  -lrb-  also referred to as coca tea  -rrb-  is used in coca-leaf producing countries much as any herbal medicinal infusion would elsewhere in the world . 
sophisticated drug subs are the latest tool drug runners are using to bring cocaine north from colombia ,  it was reported on 20 march 2008.
there is also evidence that these cultures used a mixture of coca leaves and saliva as an anesthetic for the performance of trepanation . 
stevedores along the mississippi river used the drug as a stimulant ,  and white employers encouraged its use by black laborers . 
because of its use as a local anesthetic ,  a suffix `` -caine '' was later extracted and used to form names of synthetic local anesthetics . 
attempts to eradicate coca fields through the use of defoliants have devastated part of the farming economy in some coca growing regions of colombia ,  and strains appear to have been developed that are more resistant or immune to their use . 
in many countries ,  cocaine is a popular recreational drug . 
use of the powder form has stayed relatively constant ,  experiencing a new height of use during the late 1990s and early 2000s in the u . s .  ,  and has become much more popular in the last few years in the uk . 
with excessive or prolonged use ,  the drug can cause itching ,  fast heart rate ,  hallucinations ,  and paranoid delusions . 
in 1859, an italian doctor ,  paolo mantegazza ,  returned from peru ,  where he had witnessed first-hand the use of coca by the local indigenous peoples . 
a 2007 study by the european monitoring centre for drugs and drug addiction showed that the purity levels for street purchased cocaine was often under 5% and on average under 50% pure . 
inhalation by smoking cocaine is one of the several ways the drug is consumed . 
in areas with a high volume of recreational traffic ,  smugglers use the same types of vessels ,  such as go-fast boats ,  as those used by the local populations . 
in modern popular culture references to the drug are prevalent ,  in it the drug has a glamorous image associated with the rich ,  famous and powerful with it also making users to `` feel rich and beautiful '' . 
a `` pinch of coca leaves '' was included in john styth pemberton's original 1886 recipe for coca-cola ,  though the company began using decocainized leaves in 1906 when the pure food and drug act was passed . 
this change can be identified rather quickly ,  and may be sustained weeks after the last dose of the drug . 
δfosb levels have been found to increase upon the use of cocaine . 
approximately 12 million europeans  -lrb-  3.6%  -rrb-  have used cocaine at least once ,  4 million  -lrb-  1.2%  -rrb-  in the last year ,  and 2 million in the last month  -lrb-  0.5%  -rrb-  . 
because of the drug's potential for addiction and overdose ,  cocaine is generally treated as a `` hard drug '' ,  with severe penalties for possession and trafficking . 
in western australia under the misuse of drugs act 1981 4.0g of cocaine is the amount of prohibited drugs determining a court of trial ,  2.0g is the amount of cocaine required for the presumption of intention to sell or supply and 28.0g is the amount of cocaine required for purposes of drug trafficking . 
in addition the pace of modern society − such as in finance − gives many the incentive to make use of the drug . 
in 1879 cocaine began to be used to treat morphine addiction . 
a schedule 8 substance is a controlled drug – substances which should be available for use but require restriction of manufacture ,  supply ,  distribution ,  possession and use to reduce abuse ,  misuse and physical or psychological dependence . 
the 2010 un world drug report concluded that `` it appears that the north american cocaine market has declined in value from us$47 billion in 1998 to us$38 billion in 2008.
since 1961, the international single convention on narcotic drugs has required countries to make recreational use of cocaine a crime . 
a problem with illegal cocaine use ,  especially in the higher volumes used to combat fatigue  -lrb-  rather than increase euphoria  -rrb-  by long-term users ,  is the risk of ill effects or damage caused by the compounds used in adulteration . 
the rectum and the vaginal canal is where the majority of the drug would be taken up through the membranes lining its walls . 
in this paper he declared coca and cocaine  -lrb-  at the time they were assumed to be the same  -rrb-  as being useful medicinally ,  in the treatment of `` a furred tongue in the morning ,  flatulence ,  and whitening of the teeth . `` 
cocaine is the second most popular illegal recreational drug in europe  -lrb-  behind cannabis  -rrb-  . 
cocaine use leads to an increased risk of hemorrhagic and ischemic strokes . 
bulk cargo ships are also used to smuggle cocaine to staging sites in the western caribbean–gulf of mexico area . 
cocaine is now predominantly used for nasal and lacrimal duct surgery . 
cocaine was introduced into clinical use as a local anesthetic in germany in 1884, about the same time as sigmund freud published his work `` über coca '' ,  in which he wrote that cocaine causes:
 ,  the sinaloa cartel is the most active drug cartel involved in smuggling illicit drugs like cocaine into the united states and trafficking them throughout the united states . 
importantly ,  these results also suggest strongly that the primary pharmacologically active metabolite in coca leaf infusions is actually cocaine and not the secondary alkaloids . 
with the discovery of this new alkaloid ,  western medicine was quick to exploit the possible uses of this plant . 
a euclidean plane with a chosen cartesian coordinate system is called a `` cartesian plane '' . 
a line with a chosen cartesian system is called a number line . 
the euclidean distance between two points of the plane with cartesian coordinates formula_4 and formula_5 is
since cartesian coordinates are unique and non-ambiguous ,  the points of a cartesian plane can be identified with pairs of real numbers; that is with the cartesian product formula_1, where formula_2 is the set of all reals . 
that is ,  if the original coordinates of a point are  ,  after the translation they will be
this is the cartesian version of pythagoras's theorem . 
in three-dimensional space ,  the distance between points formula_7 and formula_8 is
a cartesian coordinate system is a coordinate system that specifies each point uniquely in a plane by a set of numerical coordinates ,  which are the signed distances to the point from two fixed perpendicular oriented lines ,  measured in the same unit of length . 
thus ,  the origin has coordinates  ,  and the unit points on the three axes are  ,   ,  and  . 
choosing a cartesian coordinate system for a one-dimensional space—that is ,  for a straight line—involves choosing a point `` o '' of the line  -lrb-  the origin  -rrb-  ,  a unit of length ,  and an orientation for the line . 
the cartesian coordinates of a point are usually written in parentheses and separated by commas ,  as in or  . 
the euclidean transformations or euclidean motions are the  -lrb-  bijective  -rrb-  mappings of points of the euclidean plane to themselves which preserve distances between points . 
in the same way ,  the points in any euclidean space of dimension `` n '' be identified with the tuples  -lrb-  lists  -rrb-  of `` n '' real numbers ,  that is ,  with the cartesian product formula_3.
translating a set of points of the plane ,  preserving the distances and directions between them ,  is equivalent to adding a fixed pair of numbers to the cartesian coordinates of every point in the set . 
one can use the same principle to specify the position of any point in three-dimensional space by three cartesian coordinates ,  its signed distances to three mutually perpendicular planes  -lrb-  or ,  equivalently ,  by its perpendicular projection onto three mutually perpendicular lines  -rrb-  . 
the responsibilities of the commandant are outlined in title 10, section 5043, the united states code and the position is `` subject to the authority ,  direction ,  and control of the secretary of the navy . `` 
the commandant of the marine corps  -lrb-  cmc  -rrb-  is normally the highest-ranking officer in the united states marine corps and is a member of the joint chiefs of staff . 
the california department of transportation  -lrb-  caltrans  -rrb-  is an executive department of the us state of california . 
caltrans manages the state's highway system ,  which includes the california freeway and expressway system ,  and is involved with public transportation systems throughout the state . 
for administrative purposes ,  caltrans divides the state of california into 12 districts ,  supervised by district offices . 
it supports amtrak california and amtrak's capitol corridor . 
the war is considered a soviet victory . 
unconventional warfare was fought in both the finnish and soviet wildernesses . 
the motivations for the soviet peace agreement with finland are debated . 
after the winter war ,  germany was viewed with distrust by the finnish ,  as it was considered an ally of the soviet union . 
in october 1939, the soviet union attempted to negotiate with finland to cede finnish territory on the karelian isthmus and the islands of the gulf of finland ,  and to establish a soviet military base near the finnish capital of helsinki . 
in june 1941, with the start of the german invasion of the soviet union ,  the finnish defence forces launched their offensive following soviet airstrikes . 
the continuation war was a conflict fought by finland and nazi germany ,  as co-belligerents ,  against the soviet union  -lrb-  ussr  -rrb-  from 1941 to 1944, during world war ii . 
finland avoided total conquest of the country by the soviet union and retained its sovereignty . 
furthermore ,  finland was required to pay $300 million in war reparations to the ussr . 
the matter of when and why finland prepared for war is still somewhat opaque . 
according to finnish historians ,  the casualties of the finnish defence forces amounted to 63,204 dead or missing and around 158,000 wounded . 
the soviet union had received the hanko naval base ,  on finland's southern coast near the capital helsinki ,  where it deployed over 30,000 soviet military personnel . 
finland began to seek an exit from the war after the german defeat at the battle of stalingrad in february 1943.
after the incident ,  the finnish government refused to transfer any more jews to german detainment . 
russian historian nikolai baryshnikov disputed the view that the soviet union sought to deprive finland of its independence . 
in november ,  finland joined the anti-comintern pact . 
in january 1941, moscow demanded finland relinquish control of the petsamo mining area to the soviets ,  but finland ,  emboldened by a rebuilt defence force and german support ,  rejected the proposition . 
the `` wehrmacht '' rapidly advanced deep into soviet territory early in the operation barbarossa campaign ,  leading the finnish government to believe that germany would defeat the soviet union quickly . 
the finnish government assured the united states that it was unaware of the order . 
on 23 august 1939, the soviet union  -lrb-  ussr  -rrb-  and germany signed the molotov–ribbentrop pact ,  in which the two parties agreed to divide the independent countries of finland ,  estonia ,  latvia ,  lithuania ,  poland ,  and romania into spheres of interest ,  with finland falling within the soviet sphere . 
more battles were fought toward the end of the war ,  the last of which was the battle of ilomantsi ,  fought between 26 july and 13 august 1944 and resulting in a finnish victory with the destruction of two soviet divisions . 
mannerheim refused to assault leningrad and tie finland to its german allies inextricably ,  regarding his objectives for the war to be achieved ,  a decision which angered the germans . 
in the early stages of the war ,  the finnish army overran the former 1939 border ,  but ceased their advance from the center of leningrad . 
the earliest known statement of the theorem is by the chinese mathematician sunzi in `` sunzi suanjing '' in the 3rd century ad . 
the earliest known statement of the theorem ,  as a problem with specific numbers ,  appears in the 3rd-century book `` sunzi suanjing '' by the chinese mathematician sunzi:
sunzi's work contains neither a proof nor a full algorithm . 
kornbluth began writing at 15.
kornbluth died at age 34 in levittown ,  new york . 
the `` m '' in kornbluth's name may have been in tribute to his wife ,  mary byers; kornbluth's colleague and collaborator frederik pohl confirmed kornbluth's lack of any actual middle name in at least one interview . 
when kornbluth wrote a story that mentioned the `` ballista '' ,  an ancient roman weapon ,  pohl knew that kornbluth had finished the 'a's and had started on the 'b's . 
according to pohl ,  kornbluth never brushed his teeth ,  and they were literally green . 
cyril m .  kornbluth  -lrb-  july 2, 1923 – march 21, 1958 -rrb- was an american science fiction author and a member of the futurians . 
other species may eat feces under certain conditions . 
moore's work also appeared in `` astounding science fiction '' magazine throughout the 1940s . 
nevertheless ,  moore's work paved the way for many other female speculative fiction writers . 
moore married her first husband henry kuttner in 1940, and most of her work from 1940-1958  -lrb-  kuttner's death  -rrb-  was written by the couple collaboratively . 
 -lrb-  thus she became the eighth and final grand master of fantasy ,  sponsored by the swordsmen and sorcerers' guild of america ,  in partial analogy to the grand master of science fiction sponsored by the science fiction writers of america .   -rrb- 
moore met henry kuttner ,  also a science fiction writer ,  in 1936 when he wrote her a fan letter under the impression that `` c .  l .  moore '' was a man . 
the science fiction and fantasy hall of fame inducted moore in 1998, its third class of two deceased and two living writers . 
several stories written for that magazine were later collected in her first published book ,  `` judgment night ''  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- one of them ,  the novella `` no woman born ''  -lrb-  1944 -rrb- ,  was to be included in more than 10 different science fiction anthologies including `` the best of c .  l .  moore '' . 
no modern tube based hi-fi systems are known to use this tube type ,  as simpler and more readily available tubes have again filled this niche . 
the compactron was a trade name applied to multi-electrode structure tubes specifically constructed on a 12-pin duodecar base . 
equivalently ,  a carmichael number is a composite number formula_1 for which for all integers formula_3.
the carmichael numbers are the subset `` k '' of the knödel numbers . 
in 1910, carmichael found the first and smallest such number ,  561, which explains the name `` carmichael number '' . 
that 561 is a carmichael number can be seen with korselt's criterion . 
others were the federal food ,  drug ,  and cosmetic act  -lrb-  1938 -rrb- ,  and the kefauver harris amendment of 1962.
the act also served as the national implementing legislation for the single convention on narcotic drugs . 
he was a prolific author of esperanto works . 
in `` la bona lingvo '' ,  piron captures the basic linguistic and social aspects of esperanto . 
he also presents the idea that ,  once one has learned enough vocabulary to express himself ,  it is easier to think clearly in esperanto than in many other languages . 
is a novella which uses basic grammar and vocabulary in the first chapter and builds up to expert esperanto by the end ,  including word lists so that beginners may easily follow along . 
captain america returns to crime fighting and the avengers . 
sentinels of liberty was the title given to members of the `` captain america comics '' fan club who captain america sometimes addressed as an aside ,  or as characters in the `` captain america comics '' stories . 
captain america often uses his shield as an offensive throwing weapon . 
after rogers' return ,  barnes ,  at rogers' insistence ,  continued as captain america ,  beginning in the one-shot comic `` captain america: who will wield the shield ? `` 
captain america has used a custom specialized motorcycle ,  modified by the s . h . i . e . l . d . 
captain america was the first marvel comics character to appear in media outside comics with the release of the 1944 movie serial ,  `` captain america '' . 
spinoff series included `` captain america sentinel of liberty ''  -lrb-  sept .  1998 – aug .  1999 -rrb- and `` captain america and the falcon ''  -lrb-  may 2004 – june 2005 -rrb- . 
afterward ,  captain america plots to set himself and hydra in a position where they can conquer america in marvel's event `` secret empire . `` 
this series was almost immediately followed by the 13-issue `` captain america '' vol . 
since marvel comics revived the character in 1964, captain america has remained in publication . 
captain america has faced numerous foes in over 70 years of published adventures . 
in addition to bucky ,  captain america was occasionally assisted by the sentinels of liberty . 
bucky takes on the mantle of captain america ,  per rogers' antemortem request . 
captain america is a regular character in `` uncanny avengers ''  -lrb-  2012 -rrb- ,  beginning with issue #1 as part of marvel now !  . 
captain america  -lrb-  steve rogers  -rrb-  is a fictional superhero appearing in american comic books published by marvel comics . 
 ''captain america comics '' ran until issue #73  -lrb-  july 1949 -rrb- ,  at which time the series was retitled captain america's weird tales for two issues ,  with the finale being a horror/suspense anthology issue with no superheroes . 
the last of these other official captains ,  william burnside ,  was a history graduate enamored with the captain america mythos ,  having his appearance surgically altered to resemble rogers and legally changing his name to `` steve rogers '' ,  becoming the new `` 1950s captain america '' . 
this series — considered `` captain america '' volume one by comics researchers and historians ,  following the 1940s `` captain america comics '' and its 1950s numbering continuation of `` tales of suspense '' — ended with #454  -lrb-  aug .  1996 -rrb- . 
in 1940, writer joe simon conceived the idea for captain america and made a sketch of the character in costume . 
as part of the aftermath of marvel comics' company-crossover storyline `` civil war '' ,  steve rogers was ostensibly killed in `` captain america '' vol . 
on july 16, 2014 marvel comics announced that the mantle of captain america would be passed on by rogers  -lrb-  who in the most recent storyline has been turned into a 90-year-old man  -rrb-  to his long-time ally the falcon ,  with the series being relaunched as `` all-new captain america '' . 
captain america soon became timely's most popular character and even had a fan-club called the `` sentinels of liberty '' . 
marvel stated in may 2011 that rogers ,  following the public death of bucky barnes in the `` fear itself '' miniseries ,  would resume his captain america identity in a sixth volume of `` captain america '' ,  by writer ed brubaker and artist steve mcniven . 
in the `` avengers vs .  x-men '' story arc ,  captain america attempts to apprehend hope summers of the x-men . 
atlas' attempted superhero revival was a commercial failure ,  and the character's title was canceled with `` captain america '' #78  -lrb-  sept .  1954 -rrb- . 
barnes learns of rogers' dual identity and offers to keep the secret if he can become captain america's sidekick . 
captain america has used multiple shields throughout his history ,  the most prevalent of which is a nigh-indestructible disc-shaped shield made from an experimental alloy of steel and the fictional vibranium . 
in `` captain america: steve rogers '' #1  -lrb-  july 2016 -rrb- ,  the final panel apparently revealed that rogers has been a hydra double-agent since his early youth . 
from there ,  captain america proceeds to assemble the avengers unity squad ,  a new team of avengers composed of both classic avengers and x-men . 
when without his trademark shield ,  captain america sometimes uses other shields made from less durable metals such as steel ,  or even a photonic energy shield designed to mimic a vibranium matrix . 
some christians also share concerns similar to those of the secular anti-cult movement . 
the christian countercult movement or christian anti-cult movement is a social movement of certain protestant evangelical and fundamentalist and other christian ministries  -lrb-  `` discernment ministries ''  -rrb-  and individual activists who oppose religious sects they consider `` cults '' . 
christians have applied theological criteria to assess the teachings of non-orthodox movements throughout church history . 
christian countercult-activism stems mainly from evangelicalism or fundamentalism . 
one of the first prominent counter-cult apologists was jan karel van baalen  -lrb-  1890–1968 -rrb- ,  an ordained minister in the christian reformed church in north america . 
xavier is too late to intervene . 
xavier questions his dream again and magneto shortly thereafter is confronted by the x-men . 
in other instances ,  xavier is shown to be secretive and manipulative . 
charles xavier is a genius with multiple doctorates . 
charles francis xavier was born in new york city to the wealthy dr .  brian xavier ,  a well-respected nuclear scientist ,  and sharon xavier . 
in a virtual environment created by professor x ,  cerebro executes the xavier protocols against the x-men . 
with all his students now highly trained adults ,  professor xavier renames his school the xavier institute for higher learning . 
xavier founded xavier's school for gifted youngsters ,  which provides a safe haven for mutants and teaches them to master their abilities . 
each protocol is activated by the presence of a different combination of x-men and were written by xavier himself:
immediately afterward xavier's body disappears and cyclops declares that there are no more x-men . 
xavier leaves magneto in charge of the school ,  but some of the x-men are unwilling to forgive their former enemy . 
professor xavier survives bishop's gunshot but falls into a coma . 
the xavier protocols are a set of doomsday plans created by professor x . 
with reality restored ,  xavier is still missing and the x-men are unable to detect him with cerebro '' . 
when the x-men fight members of the extraterrestrial race known as the brood ,  xavier is captured by them ,  and implanted with a brood egg ,  which places xavier under the brood's control . 
now outed as a mutant ,  xavier makes speeches to the public about mutant tolerance . 
xavier hides his injuries from the others and resumes his life . 
with help from his longtime lover ,  lilandra ,  xavier escapes back to earth with several of his x-men . 
after helping him and his team to escape from david's mind ,  xavier promises he will always be there for him . 
the disgusted x-men leave . 
after the mission ,  the older team of x-men ,  except for cyclops ,  leave the school ,  believing they no longer belong there ,  and xavier mentors the new x-men . 
there ,  she and corsair take xavier with them so shi'ar advanced technology can heal him . 
charles xavier was also given possession of the mind infinity gem . 
following his encounter with cain it has been revealed that xavier is now searching for rogue . 
other x-men who have faced their xavier protocols are colossus ,  rogue ,  shadowcat ,  nightcrawler ,  storm ,  and gambit . 
xavier also trains tessa in order to spy on sebastian shaw . 
professor xavier's character development has been inspired by martin luther king ,  jr . 
during the ``  '' storyline ,  professor xavier is seen on utopia delivering a eulogy at nightcrawler's funeral . 
xavier is a member of a subspecies of humans known as mutants ,  who are born with superhuman abilities . 
xorn uses his healing power to restore xavier's use of his legs . 
writer scott lobdell established xavier's middle name to be francis in `` uncanny x-men '' #328  -lrb-  january 1996 -rrb- . 
xavier attempts to have scott give him permission to scan scott's mind for traces of sinister's influences ,  but instead ,  scott turns the tables on xavier by revealing that he has secretly invited emma frost into their entire meeting and also into xavier's mind . 
in the following months ,  xavier rebuilds the mansion ,  which previously was rebuilt with shi'ar technology ,  and restructures the x-men into two teams . 
xavier senses the changes taking place in jean grey ,  and returns to earth to help and resume leadership of the x-men . 
crucially ,  as he enters late adolescence ,  xavier inherits the mansion-house he was raised in ,  enabling him not only to continue to live in it ,  but also to turn it in to xavier's school for gifted youngsters ,  which he begins together with the first of the x-men . 
it later became part of the southern pacific railroad . 
in 1885 the central pacific railroad was leased by the southern pacific company . 
a replica of the sacramento ,  california central pacific railroad passenger station is part of the california state railroad museum ,  located in the old sacramento state historic park . 
the central pacific railroad  -lrb-  cprr  -rrb-  was a rail route between california and utah built eastwards from the west coast in the 1860s ,  to complete the western part of the `` first transcontinental railroad '' in north america . 
planned by theodore judah ,  the central pacific railroad was authorized by congress in 1862.
chinese labor was the most vital source for constructing the railroad . 
sec . 
any person who is claimed to have such ability is said accordingly to be a clairvoyant  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  `` one who sees clearly ''  -rrb-  . 
a significant development in clairvoyance research came when j . 
in 1980, charles tart claimed that a rejudging of the transcripts from one of targ and puthoff's experiments revealed an above-chance result . 
eileen garrett was tested by rhine at duke university in 1933 with zener cards . 
the psychologists david marks and richard kammann attempted to replicate targ and puthoff's remote viewing experiments that were carried out in the 1970s at the stanford research institute . 
in most of these cases ,  however ,  the ability to see things was attributed to a higher power and not thought of as an ability that lay within the person himself . 
in jainism ,  clairvoyance is regarded as one of the five kinds of knowledge . 
in 1988, the us national research council concluded `` the committee finds no scientific justification from research conducted over a period of 130 years ,  for the existence of parapsychological phenomena . `` 
although a wide diversity of ideas exist among chiropractors ,  they share the belief that the spine and health are related in a fundamental way ,  and that this relationship is mediated through the nervous system . 
palmer ,  called it `` a science of healing without drugs '' . 
metal complexes containing c are known as metal carbido complexes . 
the long-held view is that the carbon atoms fit into octahedral interstices in a close-packed metal lattice when the metal atom radius is greater than approximately 135 pm:
salt-like carbides are composed of highly electropositive elements such as the alkali metals ,  alkaline earth metals ,  and group 3 metals ,  including scandium ,  yttrium ,  and lanthanum . 
the simple view that the lattice of the pure metal `` absorbs '' carbon atoms can be seen to be untrue as the packing of the metal atom lattice in the carbides is different from the packing in the pure metal ,  although it is technically correct that the carbon atoms fit into the octahedral interstices of a close-packed metal lattice . 
some metals ,  such as lead and tin ,  are believed not to form carbides under any circumstances . 
the carbides of the group 4, 5 and 6 transition metals  -lrb-  with the exception of chromium  -rrb-  are often described as interstitial compounds . 
the c-c triple bond length ranges from 119.2 pm in cac  -lrb-  similar to ethyne  -rrb-  ,  to 130.3 pm in lac and 134 pm in uc . 
krulak was born in quantico ,  virginia ,  on march 4, 1942, the son of amy  -lrb-   chandler  -rrb-  and victor h .  krulak . 
krulak is the vice chair of the sweet briar college board of directors . 
krulak was generally referred to as `` the general '' by fans on these boards . 
krulak was elected as the 13th president of birmingham–southern college in birmingham ,  alabama on march 21, 2011, and retired june 1, 2015.
in 1997, krulak became a life member of the sons of the revolution in the state of california . 
compaq is sitting down at the typewriter '' . 
in january 1998, compaq was at its height . 
by 1989 compaq was so influential that observers and its executives spoke of `` compaq compatible '' . 
compaq entered 1999 with strong expectations . 
in early 1998, compaq had the problem of bloated pc inventories . 
in november 1982 compaq announced their first product ,  the compaq portable ,  a portable ibm pc compatible personal computer . 
compaq's pre-merger ticker symbol was cpq . 
compaq also built up a network engineering and marketing staff . 
hp discontinued the compaq brand name in the united states in 2013.
compaq instead emphasized pc compatibility ,  of which future computing in may 1983 ranked compaq as among the `` best '' examples . 
in 2002, compaq signed a merger agreement with hewlett-packard for $24.2 billion ,  including $14.45 billion for goodwill ,  where each compaq share would be exchanged for 0.6325 of a hewlett-packard share . 
in may 2007, hp announced in a press release a new logo for their compaq division to be placed on the new model compaq presarios . 
when compaq introduced the first pc based on intel's new 80386 microprocessor ,  the compaq deskpro 386, in 1986, it marked the first cpu change to the pc platform that was not initiated by ibm . 
under pfeiffer's tenure as chief executive ,  compaq entered the retail computer market with the compaq presario as one of the first manufacturers in the mid-1990s to market a sub-$1000 pc . 
by 1991, compaq held the fifth place spot in the pc market with $3 billion in sales that year . 
the compaq brand remained in use by hp for lower-end systems until 2013 when it was discontinued . 
support for the virtual 8086 mode was added by compaq engineers . 
most compaq products have been re-branded with the hp nameplate ,  such as the company's market leading proliant server line  -lrb-  now owned by hewlett packard enterprise ,  which spun off from hp in 2015 -rrb- ,  while the compaq brand was repurposed for some of hp's consumer-oriented and budget products ,  notably compaq presario pcs . 
on june 28, 1984 compaq released the compaq deskpro ,  a 16-bit desktop computer using an intel 8086 microprocessor running at 7.14 mhz . 
however compaq still struggled against lower-cost competitors with direct sales channels such as dell who took over the top spot of pc manufacturer from compaq in 2001.
it was compaq's first non-portable computer and began the deskpro line of computers . 
in 1998, compaq also signed new sales and equipment alliance with navisite . 
in 2009, hp sold part of compaq's former headquarters to the lone star college system . 
in 2009, hp sold part of compaq's former headquarters to the lone star college system . 
compaq had been producing the pc chassis at its plant in shenzhen ,  china to cut costs . 
he made his first rca victor recordings in chicago in 1947, but they did not sell . 
he recorded smooth jazz guitar still played on american airwaves today . 
also later on ,  chet and owen bradley would become instrumental in the creation of studio b’s adjacent building rca studio a as well . 
while he had not yet had a hit record for rca victor ,  his stature was growing . 
at the age of 13, the future jazz guitarist earl klugh was captivated watching atkins's guitar playing on `` the perry como show . `` 
when porter left rca in late-1964, atkins said ,  `` the sound was never the same ,  never as great . `` 
atkins's recordings of `` malagueña '' inspired a new generation of flamenco guitarists; the classical guitar selections included on almost all his albums were ,  for many american artists working in the field today ,  the first classical guitar they ever heard . 
atkins's trademark `` atkins style '' of playing uses the thumb and first two or sometimes three fingers of the right hand . 
sholes ,  a&r director of country music at rca ,  tracked atkins down in denver . 
he was a member of the american radio relay league . 
he is also well known for his song `` yankee doodle dixie '' ,  in which he played `` yankee doodle '' and `` dixie '' simultaneously ,  on the same guitar . 
he was inducted into the rock & roll hall of fame ,  the country music hall of fame and museum ,  and the musicians hall of fame and museum . 
a 1973 diagnosis of colon cancer ,  however ,  led atkins to redefine his role at rca ,  to allow others to handle administration while he went back to his first love ,  the guitar ,  often recording with reed or even jethro burns from homer and jethro  -lrb-  his brother-in-law  -rrb-  after homer died in 1971.
stories have been told about the very young chet ,  who ,  when a friend or relative would come to visit and play guitar ,  would crowd in and put his ear so close to the instrument that it became difficult for the visitor to play . 
while working with a western band in denver ,  colorado ,  atkins came to the attention of rca victor . 
cahiers du cinéma  -lrb-   ,  `` notebooks on cinema ''  -rrb-  is a french film magazine founded in 1951 by andré bazin ,  jacques doniol-valcroze ,  and joseph-marie lo duca . 
it is the oldest french-language film magazine in publication . 
the magazine has compiled a list of the top 10 films of each year for much of its existence . 
gradually ,  the tastes of the young turks drifted away from those of bazin ,  as members of the group began to write critical appreciations of more commercial american filmmakers such as alfred hitchcock and howard hawks rather than the canonized french and italian filmmakers that interested bazin . 
the first race on the circuit ,  the `` prijs van zandvoort '' ,  took place on 7 august 1948.
circuit zandvoort  -lrb-  ; known as circuit park zandvoort until 2017 -rrb- is a motorsport race track located in the dunes north of zandvoort ,  netherlands ,  near the north sea coast line . 
circuit park zandvoort played host to the first race in the 2006/07 season of a1 grand prix from 29 september–1 october 2006.
all the presents being placed round the trees .  .  . 
the vikings and saxons worshiped trees . 
a `` chrismon tree '' is a christmas tree decorated with explicitly christian symbols in white and gold . 
in some cities ,  a charity event called the festival of trees is organized ,  in which multiple trees are decorated and displayed . 
other sources have offered a connection between the symbolism of the first documented christmas trees in alsace around 1600 and the trees of pre-christian traditions . 
a christmas tree is a decorated tree ,  usually an evergreen conifer such as spruce ,  pine ,  or fir or an artificial tree of similar appearance ,  associated with the celebration of christmas ,  originating in northern europe . 
the term `` charlie brown christmas tree '' ,  describing any poor-looking or malformed little tree ,  also derives from the 1965 tv special ,  based on the appearance of charlie brown's christmas tree . 
the lyrics sung in the united states to the german tune begin `` o christmas tree .  .  . ``  ,  giving rise to the mistaken idea that the german word  -lrb-  fir tree  -rrb-  means `` christmas tree '' ,  the german word for which is instead  . 
in the 1980s some trees were sprayed with fluffy white flocking to simulate snow . 
johnson became the `` father of electric christmas tree lights '' . 
the image was reprinted in 1860, and by the 1870s ,  putting up a christmas tree had become even more common in america . 
both setting up and taking down a christmas tree are associated with specific dates . 
the giving of christmas trees has also often been associated with the end of hostilities . 
each year ,  33 to 36 million christmas trees are produced in america ,  and 50 to 60 million are produced in europe . 
georgians have their own traditional christmas tree called chichilaki ,  made from dried up hazelnut or walnut branches that are shaped to form a small coniferous tree . 
several cities in the united states with german connections lay claim to that country's first christmas tree: windsor locks ,  connecticut ,  claims that a hessian soldier put up a christmas tree in 1777 while imprisoned at the noden-reed house ,  while the `` first christmas tree in america '' is also claimed by easton ,  pennsylvania ,  where german settlers purportedly erected a christmas tree in 1816.
in the late 1800s ,  home-made white christmas trees were made by wrapping strips of cotton batting around leafless branches creating the appearance of a snow-laden tree . 
modern christmas trees originated during the renaissance of early modern germany . 
the relevance of ancient pre-christian customs to the 16th-century german initiation of the christmas tree custom is disputed . 
the cvs–asw  -lrb-  aircraft carrier with anti-submarine warfare  -rrb-  is italy's first carrier . 
a carrier battle group  -lrb-  cvbg  -rrb-  consists of an aircraft carrier  -lrb-  designated cv  -rrb-  and its large number of escorts ,  together defining the group . 
the carrier battle group  -lrb-  groupe aéronaval ,  gan ,  in french  -rrb-  of the force d'action navale is usually composed ,  in addition to the aircraft carrier ,  of:
in modern united states navy carrier air operations ,  the moniker of carrier strike group  -lrb-  csg  -rrb-  has replaced the traditional term of carrier battle group  -lrb-  cvbg or carbatgru  -rrb-  . 
carrier strike is directly commanded by commander carrier strike group  -lrb-  comcsg  -rrb-  ,  who is typically a one-star rank commodore . 
the indian navy has been operating carrier battle groups since 1961, with its first carrier battle group formed around the now decommissioned  . 
this group is commanded by a rear admiral  -lrb-  contre-amiral ,  in french  -rrb-  on board the aircraft carrier . 
cruisers ,  destroyers and attack submarines are deployed with either an expeditionary strike group or a carrier strike group . 
british and french carrier battle groups were involved in the 1956 suez crisis . 
china plans to set up several carrier battle groups in the future . 
india plans to have three carrier battle groups by 2025, each centered on `` vikrant '' ,  `` vikramaditya '' and `` vishal '' ,  the second ,  larger and is expected to be nuclear-powered vikrant-class carrier . 
with the construction of the large 'super carriers' of the cold war era ,  the practice of operating each carrier in a single formation was revived . 
the boeing vertol ch-46 sea knight is a medium-lift tandem-rotor transport helicopter powered by twin turboshaft engines . 
development of the sea knight ,  which was originally designated by the firm as the vertol model 107, commenced during 1956.
following the sea knight's first flight in august 1962, the military designation was changed to `` ch-46a '' . 
the `` boeing vertol ch-46 sea knight '' is a medium-lift tandem-rotor transport helicopter ,  furnished with a set of counter-rotating main rotors in a tandem-rotor configuration . 
by the end of us military operations in vietnam ,  over a hundred sea knights had been lost to enemy fire . 
during the vietnam war ,  the ch-46 was one of the prime us troop transport helicopters in the theatre ,  slotting between the smaller bell uh-1 iroquois and larger sikorsky ch-53 sea stallion . 
between 1968 and 1971, the u . s .  marine corps received a number of ch-46f standard rotorcraft . 
known colloquially as the `` phrog '' ,  the sea knight was used in all u . s .  marine operational environments between its introduction during the vietnam war and its frontline retirement in 2014.
the civilian version ,  designated as the bv 107-ii `` vertol '' ,  was developed prior to the military ch-46.
the cno is a member of the joint chiefs of staff as prescribed by and  . 
the chief of naval operations currently resides in quarters a in the washington naval yard . 
the chief of naval operations presides over the navy staff ,  formally known as the office of the chief of naval operations  -lrb-  opnav  -rrb-  . 
the chief of naval operations  -lrb-  cno  -rrb-  is typically the highest-ranking officer on active duty in the u . s .  navy unless the chairman and/or the vice chairman of the joint chiefs of staff are naval officers . 
petacci was 28 years younger than him . 
petacci had a long-standing relationship with mussolini while he was married to rachele mussolini . 
the costa smeralda  -lrb-   ,   ,    -rrb-  is a coastal area and tourist destination in northern sardinia ,  italy ,  with a length of some 20 km ,  although the term originally designated only a small stretch in the commune of arzachena . 
costa smeralda is the most expensive location in europe . 
in 2014 a new category of chianti classico was introduced: chianti classico gran selezione . 
a chianti wine  -lrb-    -rrb-  is any wine produced in the chianti region ,  in central tuscany ,  italy . 
outside of the chianti classico area ,  the wines of the chianti sub-zone of rufina are among the most widely recognised and exported from the chianti region . 
the production of chianti classico is realised under the supervision of  ,  a union of producers in the chianti classico subregion . 
chianti was chosen for the movie because of its recognition . 
chianti classico are premium chianti wines that tend to be medium-bodied with firm tannins and medium-high to high acidity . 
wines produced from these vineyards are labelled simply `` chianti '' . 
in the last three decades ,  more than 50% of the vineyards in the chianti classico subregion have been replanted with improved sangiovese clones and modern vineyard techniques as part of the consorzio chianti classico's project `` chianti 2000 '' . 
chianti from the rufina area is characterised by its multi-layered complexity and elegance . 
the first definition of a wine-area called `` chianti '' was made in 1716.
newton's laws of motion describe the motion of an object in an inertial  -lrb-  non-accelerating  -rrb-  frame of reference . 
in newtonian mechanics ,  the equation of motion for an object in an inertial reference frame is where formula_2 is the vector sum of the physical forces acting on the object ,  formula_3 is the mass of the object ,  and formula_4 is the acceleration of the object relative to the inertial reference frame . 
in physics ,  the coriolis force is an inertial or fictitious force that seems to act on objects that are in motion within a frame of reference that rotates with respect to an inertial frame . 
in popular  -lrb-  non-technical  -rrb-  usage of the term `` coriolis effect '' ,  the rotating reference frame implied is almost always the earth . 
the challenger deep is the deepest known point in the earth's seabed hydrosphere ,  with a depth of by direct measurement from submersibles ,  and slightly more by sonar bathymetry . 
according to the august 2011 version of the gebco gazetteer of undersea feature names ,  the location and depth of the challenger deep are and ± . 
over many years ,  the search for the point of maximum depth has involved many different vessels . 
berthollet first determined the elemental composition of the gas ammonia ,  in 1785.
in april ,  1789 berthollet was elected a fellow of the royal society of london . 
on a practical basis ,  berthollet was the first to demonstrate the bleaching action of chlorine gas ,  and was first to develop a solution of sodium hypochlorite as a modern bleaching agent . 
berthollet was one of the first chemists to recognize the characteristics of a reverse reaction ,  and hence ,  chemical equilibrium . 
once a crystal is obtained ,  data can be collected using a beam of radiation . 
some materials that have been analyzed crystallographically ,  such as proteins ,  do not occur naturally as crystals . 
the final plot allows the symmetry of the crystal to be established . 
complementary neutron crystallography techniques are used to identify the positions of hydrogen atoms ,  since x-rays only interact very weakly with light elements such as hydrogen . 
for example ,  the double-helical structure of dna was deduced from an x-ray diffraction pattern that had been generated by a fibrous sample . 
because of their highly ordered and repetitive structure ,  crystals give diffraction patterns of sharp bragg reflection spots ,  and are ideal for analyzing the structure of solids . 
auchinleck was an active freemason . 
auchinleck attended the staff college ,  quetta between 1920 and 1921.
by july 1942 auchinleck had lost the confidence of dominion commanders and relations with his british commanders had become strained . 
a bronze statue of auchinleck can be seen on broad street adjacent to auchinleck house ,  five ways ,  birmingham . 
field marshal sir claude john eyre auchinleck ,   -lrb-  21 june 1884 – 23 march 1981 -rrb- was a british army commander during the second world war . 
on the outbreak of war auchinleck was appointed to command the indian 3rd infantry division but in january 1940 was summoned to the united kingdom to command iv corps ,  the only time in the war that a wholly british corps was commanded by an indian army officer . 
churchill offered auchinleck command of the newly created persia and iraq command  -lrb-  this having been separated from alexander's command  -rrb-  ,  but auchinleck declined this post ,  as he believed that separating the area from the middle east command was not good policy and the new arrangements would not be workable . 
he served as commander-in-chief ,  india until the partition in 1947, when he assumed the role of supreme commander of all british forces in india and pakistan until late 1948.
born at 89 victoria road in aldershot ,  the son of colonel john claud alexander auchinleck and mary eleanor  -lrb-  eyre  -rrb-  auchinleck ,  auchinleck attended eagle house school at crowthorne and then wellington college on scholarships . 
as commander-in-chief middle east auchinleck ,  based in cairo ,  held responsibility not just for north africa but also for persia and the middle east . 
hall moved to berkeley in february 1971.
on march 24, 1945, camilla christine hall was born in saint peter ,  minnesota . 
while camilla hall attended elementary school in minnesota ,  the family moved to montclair ,  new jersey until hall was to start high school . 
in berkeley ,  hall continued being politically active . 
camilla hall attended gustavus adolphus college in st .  peter ,  minnesota . 
kuhn had used the term `` pre-paradigmatic '' for social science  -rrb-  . 
the book's second part contained an extensive analysis on the modern state's institutionalized forms of `` classroom learning '' as the cultural–historical context that shapes much of modern learning and socialization . 
in the field of developmental psychology ,  the work of erica burman has been influential . 
it does this ,  in part ,  because it tends to explain behavior at the level of the individual . 
one of the most important and sophisticated books in the field is the `` grundlegung der psychologie ''  -lrb-  `` foundations of psychology ''  -rrb-  by klaus holzkamp ,  who might be considered the theoretical founder of critical psychology . 
one core result of holzkamp's historical and comparative analysis of human reproductive action ,  perception and cognition is a very specific concept of meaning that identifies symbolic meaning as historically and culturally constructed ,  purposeful conceptual structures that humans create in close relationship to material culture and within the context of historically specific formations of social reproduction . 
this search culminated in plans to write a major work on life leadership in the specific historical context of modern  -lrb-  capitalist  -rrb-  society . 
consequently ,  in the last section of the book ,  holzkamp discusses forms of `` expansive learning '' that seem to avoid the limitations of classroom learning ,  such as apprenticeship and learning in contexts other than classrooms . 
this tactic came to prominence in world war i . 
use of armour ,  air support ,  indirect fire support ,  and stealth are tactics that may be used to assault a defensive position . 
in some parts of the world  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  near the horn of africa  -rrb-  piracy can be a problem . 
cruising is done on both sail and power boats ,  monohulls and multihulls although sail predominates over longer distances ,  as ocean-going power boats are considerably more expensive to purchase and operate . 
boats were almost exclusively used for working purposes prior to the nineteenth century . 
the canadian-american joshua slocum was one of the first people to carry out a long-distance sailing voyage for pleasure ,  circumnavigating the world between 1895 and 1898.
many cruisers find they spend ,  on average ,  4% of their boat's purchase price annually on boat maintenance . 
another common tactic for finding a yacht is to visit local yacht clubs and marinas and get to know the sailors there ,  in the hope that one of them will be able to provide a berth . 
cruising by boat is a lifestyle that involves living for extended time on a vessel while traveling from place to place for pleasure . 
awareness of impending weather conditions is particularly important to cruising sailors who are often far from safe harbours and need to steer clear of dangerous weather conditions . 
major places where cavitation occurs are in pumps ,  on propellers ,  or at restrictions in a flowing liquid . 
cavitation is the formation of vapour cavities in a liquid ,  small liquid-free zones  -lrb-  `` bubbles '' or `` voids ''  -rrb-  ,  that are the consequence of forces acting upon the liquid . 
inertial cavitation is the process where a void or bubble in a liquid rapidly collapses ,  producing a shock wave . 
hydrodynamic cavitation can be produced by passing a liquid through a constricted channel at a specific flow velocity or by mechanical rotation of an object through a liquid . 
cavitation inception occurs when the local pressure falls sufficiently far below the saturated vapor pressure ,  a value given by the tensile strength of the liquid at a certain temperature . 
when the bubbles collapse later ,  they typically cause very strong local shock waves in the fluid ,  which may be audible and may even damage the blades . 
hydrodynamic cavitation describes the process of vaporisation ,  bubble generation and bubble implosion which occurs in a flowing liquid as a result of a decrease and subsequent increase in local pressure . 
inertial cavitation was first observed in the late 19th century ,  considering the collapse of a spherical void within a liquid . 
inertial cavitation can also occur in the presence of an acoustic field . 
hydrodynamic cavitation can also improve some industrial processes . 
non-inertial cavitation is the process in which small bubbles in a liquid are forced to oscillate in the presence of an acoustic field ,  when the intensity of the acoustic field is insufficient to cause total bubble collapse . 
when the cavitation bubbles collapse ,  they force energetic liquid into very small volumes ,  thereby creating spots of high temperature and emitting shock waves ,  the latter of which are a source of noise . 
vapor pressure as relating to cavitation refers to the vapor pressure in equilibrium conditions and can therefore be more accurately defined as the equilibrium  -lrb-  or saturated  -rrb-  vapor pressure . 
in industry ,  cavitation is often used to homogenize ,  or mix and break down ,  suspended particles in a colloidal liquid compound such as paint mixtures or milk . 
cyprinodontiformes is an order of ray-finned fish ,  comprising mostly small ,  freshwater fish . 
they are small to medium-sized fish ,  with small mouths ,  large eyes ,  a single dorsal fin ,  and a rounded caudal fin . 
the church was consecrated on 13 september 335.
both city and church were captured by the khwarezmians in 1244.
the church of the holy sepulchre  -lrb-   `` kanīsatu al-qiyāmah ''; `` naos tes anastaseos ''; `` surb harut'yan tač̣ar ''; ;  ,  `` knesiyat ha-kever ''; also called the church of the resurrection or church of the `` anastasis '' by orthodox christians  -rrb-  is a church in the christian quarter of the old city of jerusalem . 
every year ,  the eastern orthodox church celebrates the anniversary of the  . 
the courtyard facing the entrance to the church is known as the parvis . 
the church has been a major christian pilgrimage destination since its creation in the fourth century ,  as the traditional site of the resurrection of christ ,  thus its original greek name ,  church of the anastasis . 
william of tyre ,  chronicler of the crusader kingdom of jerusalem ,  reports on the renovation of the church in the mid-12th century . 
cernunnos is the conventional name given in celtic studies to depictions of the `` horned god '' of celtic polytheism . 
not much is known about the god from literary sources ,  and details about his name ,  his followers or his significance in celtic religion are unknown . 
the god labelled `` cernunnos '' on the pillar of the boatmen is depicted with stag's antlers in their early stage of annual growth . 
the god may have symbolized the fecundity of the stag-inhabited forest . 
the root also appears in the names of celtic polities ,  most prominent among them the carnutes ,  meaning something like `` the horned ones , ``  and in several personal names found in inscriptions . 
the horned god reflects the seasons of the year in an annual cycle of life ,  death and rebirth . 
speculative interpretations identify him as a god of nature ,  life or fertility . 
maier  -lrb-  2010 -rrb- states that the etymology of `` cernunnos '' is unknown ,  as the celtic word for `` horn '' has an `` a ''  -lrb-  as in `` carnonos ''  -rrb-  . 
in wicca and other forms of neopaganism a horned god is revered; this divinity syncretises a number of horned or antlered gods from various cultures ,  including cernunnos . 
