in his 1989 autobiography ,  kane detailed finger's contributions to batman's creation:
at the time of finger's death in 1974, dc had not officially credited finger as batman co-creator . 
jerry robinson ,  who also worked with finger and kane on the strip at this time ,  has criticized kane for failing to share the credit . 
batman is a fictional superhero appearing in american comic books published by dc comics . 
kane signed away ownership in the character in exchange for ,  among other compensation ,  a mandatory byline on all batman comics . 
the red sox won the al pennant in 1975.
the red sox returned to the postseason in 1988.
the 1950s were viewed as a time of tribulation for the red sox . 
the red sox narrowly lost the al pennant in 1948 and 1949.
the boston red sox are an american professional baseball team based in boston ,  massachusetts . 
for over 100 years ,  the red sox and new york yankees have been rivals . 
red sox fans know 1967 as the season of the `` impossible dream . `` 
however ,  most fans simply refer to the team as the `` sox '' when the context is understood to mean red sox . 
the red sox lost game 7, 4–3 even though they had an early 3–0 lead . 
in 1978, the red sox and the yankees were involved in a tight pennant race . 
in the 1975 american league championship series ,  the red sox swept the oakland a's . 
in 1949, the red sox were one game ahead of the new york yankees ,  with the only two games left for both teams being against each other ,  and they lost both of those games . 
in 2008, the red sox made an `` exception '' by retiring #6 for johnny pesky . 
harry frazee bought the red sox from joseph lannin in 1916 for about $500,000.
currently ,  the flagship radio station of the red sox is weei-fm/93.7.
the red sox swept the st .  louis cardinals in the 2004 world series . 
dustin pedroia has since become the second such red sox player  -lrb-  2007, 2013, and 2018 -rrb- . 
the yankees were games behind the red sox in july ,  and on september 10, after completing a 4-game sweep of the red sox  -lrb-  known as `` the boston massacre ''  -rrb-  ,  the yankees tied for the divisional lead . 
the one bright spot was a lopsided win for the red sox in the much-hyped martinez-clemens game . 
on the field ,  the 1999 red sox were finally able to overturn their fortunes against the indians . 
the red sox won the al east for the first time in 11 seasons ,  and faced the california angels in the alcs . 
the red sox earned many accolades from the sports media and throughout the nation for their season ,  such as in december ,  when `` sports illustrated '' named the boston red sox the 2004 sportsmen of the year . 
although dent became a red sox demon ,  the red sox got retribution in 1990 when the yankees fired dent as their manager during a series at fenway park . 
the red sox faced a heavily favored new york mets team that had won 108 games in the regular season in the 1986 world series . 
the official spanish site uses the variant `` los red sox '' . 
the formal name of the entity which owns the team is `` boston red sox baseball club limited partnership '' . 
the red sox then found themselves with six- and seven-run wins at fenway park in games 6 and 7 to win the american league title . 
the boston red sox are owned by fenway sports group ,  which also owns liverpool f . c . 
mays had several good years for the yankees ,  but had been a discipline problem for the red sox . 
the ball complied ,  and bedlam ensued at fenway as fisk rounded the bases to win the game for the red sox 7–6.
in 2015, the red sox chose to forgo the official criteria and retire pedro martínez's #45.
the red sox comeback was the only time in baseball history that a team has come back from a 0–3 deficit to win a series . 
for 1908, the national league club returned to wearing red trim ,  but the american league team finally had an official nickname ,  and remained the `` red sox '' for good . 
the red sox won the newly realigned american league east in 1995, finishing seven games ahead of the yankees . 
after starting the season 42–28  -lrb-   . 600 -rrb- ,  the orioles finished the season with a stretch of 32–60  -lrb-   . 348 -rrb- ,  ending at 74–88  -lrb-   . 457 -rrb- . 
cuba won the second game 10–6.
the rays won 5–4.
the team finished last for the first time since their 1988 season . 
his number  -lrb-  8 -rrb- was retired in a ceremony before the final home game of the season . 
the team's first year without ripken saw the team with a record of 63–63 at the conclusion of play on august 23, but then proceed to lose 32 of its last 36 games of the season ,  including their final 12 in a row to finish the season 67–95.
on september 16, they won their 82nd game ,  securing the first season with a winning record since 1997.
the orioles finished the regular season in second place in the al east with a record of 93–69, reversing the 69–93 record from the previous year . 
he finished the regular season with 51 saves . 
davis would go on to finish the season with 53 home runs . 
on september 18, the orioles played their 114th errorless game of the season ,  setting a new mlb record for the most errorless games in one season since 1900.
although williams had hit 63 home runs in two seasons with atlanta ,  he would only hit 36 homers in two seasons with the orioles . 
the ripken countdown resumed once the season began . 
the orioles 2011 record was 69–93, the 14th consecutive losing season for the franchise dating back to 1998.
the orioles finished two games under  . 500  -lrb-  71–73 -rrb- in third place in phil regan's only season of managing the ballclub . 
the orioles finished the 2006 season with a record of 70 wins and 92 losses ,  27 games behind the al east-leading yankees . 
the orioles would also fall in the nightcap ,  9–7.
the orioles finished the first half of the 2012 season with a winning record for only the second time since going wire to wire in 1997, with a record of 45–40 before the all-star break . 
for 2012, the team unveiled its new uniforms . 
ripken finished his streak with 2,632 straight games ,  finally sitting on september 20, 1998, the orioles final home game of the season against the yankees at camden yards . 
the orioles then went 2–16 to begin the season ,  last in the league by quite a margin . 
cal ripken jr .  achieved his 3000th hit early in the season . 
the orioles also introduced a new alternate orange uniform to be worn on saturday home games throughout the 2012 season . 
by posting winning records in 2012 and 2013, the orioles achieved the feat of back-to-back winning seasons for the first time since 1996 and 1997.
this season marked the orioles return to postseason play . 
the orioles returned to contention in those first two seasons at camden yards ,  only to finish in third place both times . 
during the home opener on april 5, first baseman chris davis set a new mlb record with 16 rbi's during the first four games of a season ,  as well as becoming the fourth player ever to hit home runs in the first four games ,  including a grand slam in the fourth . 
on september 21, closer jim johnson earned his 46th save of the season ,  setting a new orioles franchise record for saves by one pitcher in a single season . 
this period included eighteen consecutive winning seasons  -lrb-  1968–1985 -rrb- – a run of success that saw the orioles become the envy of the league ,  and the winningest team in baseball . 
the orioles have won a total of nine division championships  -lrb-  1969–1971, 1973–1974, 1979, 1983, 1997, 2014 -rrb- ,  six pennants  -lrb-  1966, 1969–1971, 1979, 1983 -rrb- ,  and three wild card berths  -lrb-  1996, 2012, 2016 -rrb- . 
on june 30, the orioles rallied to score 10 runs against boston red sox after facing a 10–1 deficit in the 7th inning ,  winning the game by 11–10, setting a major league baseball record for the largest comeback by a last-place team over a first-place team . 
pappas went 30–29 in a little over two years with the reds before being traded . 
the glory years of the orioles effectively ended when the detroit tigers ,  a divisional rival at the time ,  went 35–5 to open the 1984 season on the way to winning the world series ,  in which hall-of-fame pitcher jim palmer retired during the 1984 season . 
with miller at the helm ,  the orioles found themselves not only out of the playoffs ,  but also with a losing season . 
the bastarnae first came into conflict with the romans during the 1st century bc ,  when ,  in alliance with dacians and sarmatians ,  they unsuccessfully resisted roman expansion into moesia and pannonia . 
the bastarnae  -lrb-  latin variants: `` bastarni '' ,  or `` basternae '';   -rrb-  were an ancient people who between 200 bc and 300 ad inhabited the region between the carpathian mountains and the river dnieper ,  to the north and east of ancient dacia . 
after the dissolution of czechoslovakia in 1993, the territory of bohemia remained in the czech republic . 
bohemia  -lrb-   ; ; ; ;   -rrb-  is the westernmost and largest historical region of the czech lands in the present-day czech republic . 
the 9th century was crucial for the future of bohemia . 
bohemia had an area of and today is home to approximately 6.5 million of the czech republic's 10.5 million inhabitants . 
the remainder of czech territory became the second czechoslovak republic and was subsequently occupied as the protectorate of bohemia and moravia ,  in 1969, the czech lands  -lrb-  including bohemia  -rrb-  were given autonomy within czechoslovakia as the czech socialist republic . 
however ,  the three lands are mentioned in the preamble of the constitution of the czech republic: `` we ,  citizens of the czech republic in bohemia ,  moravia and silesia… ''
until 1948, bohemia was an administrative unit of czechoslovakia as one of its `` lands ''  -lrb-  `` země ''  -rrb-  . 
from 1939 to 1945 bohemia ,   -lrb-  without the sudetenland  -rrb-  ,  together with moravia formed the german protectorate of bohemia and moravia  -lrb-  `` reichsprotektorat böhmen und mähren ''  -rrb-  . 
his reign brought bohemia to its peak both politically and in total area ,  resulting in his being the first king of bohemia to also be elected as holy roman emperor . 
in a broader meaning ,  bohemia sometimes refers to the entire czech territory ,  including moravia and czech silesia ,  especially in a historical context ,  such as the lands of the bohemian crown ruled by bohemian kings . 
the area around kłodzko  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  in south-western poland was culturally and traditionally a part of bohemia . 
bohemia was made a part of the early slavic state of great moravia ,  under the rule of svatopluk i  -lrb-  r .  870–894 -rrb- . 
the czech name `` čechy '' is derived from the name of the slavic ethnic group ,  the czechs ,  who settled in the area during the 6th or 7th century ad . 
after emperor matthias ii and then king of bohemia ferdinand ii  -lrb-  later holy roman emperor  -rrb-  began oppressing the rights of protestants in bohemia ,  the resulting bohemian revolt led to outbreak of the thirty years' war in 1618.
the formal independence of bohemia was further jeopardized when the bohemian diet approved administrative reform in 1749.
after world war i ,  bohemia  -lrb-  as the largest and most populous land  -rrb-  became the core of the newly formed country of czechoslovakia ,  which combined bohemia ,  moravia ,  czech silesia ,  upper hungary  -lrb-  present-day slovakia  -rrb-  and carpathian ruthenia into one state . 
after a decisive victory of the holy roman empire and bohemia over invading magyars in the 955 battle of lechfeld ,  boleslaus i of bohemia was granted the march of moravia by german emperor otto the great . 
after the death of king louis ii of hungary and bohemia in the battle of mohács in 1526, archduke ferdinand i of austria became the new king of bohemia and the country became a constituent state of the habsburg monarchy . 
radio 1 was launched at 6:55am on saturday 30 september 1967.
bbc radio 1 started 24-hour broadcasting on 1 may 1991.
bbc radio 1 can be heard on cable in the netherlands at 105.10 fm . 
former breakfast presenter sara cox hosted her last show on radio 1 in february 2014 before moving to radio 2.
tony blackburn recreated the first ever radio 1 broadcast on radio 2, simulcast on pop-up station radio 1 vintage ,  followed by the radio 1 breakfast show celebration ,  tricast on radio 1, radio 2 and radio 1 vintage ,  presented by tony blackburn and nick grimshaw ,  featuring former presenters as guests simon mayo ,  sara cox and mike read . 
the licence-fee funding of radio 1, alongside radio 2, is often criticised by the commercial sector . 
the first disc jockey to broadcast on the new station was tony blackburn ,  whose cheery style ,  first heard on radio caroline and radio london ,  won him the prime slot on what became known as the `` radio 1 breakfast show '' . 
despite this ,  it gained massive audiences ,  becoming the most listened-to station in the world with audiences of over 10 million claimed for some of its shows  -lrb-  up to 20 million for some of the combined radio 1 and radio 2 shows  -rrb-  . 
radio 1 was established in 1967  -lrb-  along with the more middle of the road bbc radio 2 -rrb- as a successor to the bbc light programme ,  which had broadcast popular music and other entertainment since 1945.
on sunday 30 september 2007, radio 1 celebrated its 40th birthday . 
many djs either ousted by bannister or who left during his tenure  -lrb-  such as johnnie walker ,  bob harris and steve wright  -rrb-  have joined radio 2 which has now overtaken radio 1 as the uk's most popular radio station ,  using a style that radio 1 had until the early 1990s . 
the first words on radio 1 – after a countdown by the controller of radios 1 and 2, robin scott ,  and a jingle ,  recorded at pams in dallas ,  texas ,  beginning `` the voice of radio 1 '' – were:
the stream is no longer available on the internet radio platform . 
radio 1 originally broadcast on 1214 khz medium wave  -lrb-  or 247 metres  -rrb-  . 
in september 2012, nick grimshaw replaced chris moyles as host of `` radio 1's breakfast show '' . 
this was the first use of us-style jingles on bbc radio ,  but the style was familiar to listeners who were acquainted with blackburn and other djs from their days on pirate radio . 
radio 1 provides alternative programming on some bank holidays . 
bbc radio 1 is a british radio station operated by the british broadcasting corporation which also broadcasts internationally ,  specialising in modern popular music and current chart hits throughout the day . 
cel spellman joined radio 1 to host sunday evenings . 
before july 2015, when the chart release day was changed to friday ,  the bbc show competed with networked commercial radio's the big top 40 show which was broadcast at the same time . 
commemorations include a three-day pop-up station `` radio 1 vintage '' celebrating the station's presenters and special on-air programmes on the day itself ,  including a special breakfast show co-presented by the station's launch dj tony blackburn ,  which is also broadcast on bbc radio 2.
the bbc launched its national radio stations on dab digital radio in 1995, however the technology was expensive at the time and so was not marketed ,  instead used as a test for future technologies . 
in 1985, radio 1 moved across the road from broadcasting house to egton house . 
thousands of angry sirius xm customers began a campaign on facebook and other social media to reinstate bbc radio 1 on sirius xm radio . 
in 15 november 2018, radio 1 announced that tiffany calver ,  who has previously hosted a dedicated hip-hop show on the new-music station kissfresh ,  will join the station and host the rap show . 
on 19 august 2014, siriusxm again stopped carrying bbc radio 1 programming with no advanced notice . 
the breakfast show remains the most prized slot in the radio 1 schedule ,  with every change of breakfast show presenter exciting considerable media interest . 
another problem was that ,  at the time ,  radio 2 was sticking resolutely to a format which appealed mainly to those who had been listening since the days of the light programme ,  and commercial radio ,  which was targeting the `` radio 1 and a half '' audience ,  consequently enjoyed a massive increase in its audience share at the expense of radio 1.
the service was renamed bbc red button+ in april 2015.
the service was launched in september 1999 as bbc text . 
in june 2013, a hd version of bbc red button was launched for the summertime . 
here is a table of the contents of the bbc red button  -lrb-  last updated april 2013 -rrb-:-
from 2008, the bbc gradually began to drop the bbci name from its digital interactive tv services also ,  replacing it with the name bbc red button . 
bbc red button is a branding used for digital interactive television services provided by the bbc ,  and broadcast in the united kingdom . 
bbc connected red button launched in december 2012 on virgin tivo and on some freeview and freesat 'smart tvs' in december 2013.
in september 2005, bbci launched an update to the interactivity available from the bbc's radio channels on freeview . 
according to the bbc ,  the `` i '' in bbci stood for `` interactivity '' as well as `` innovation '' . 
orthogonal midplanes connect vertical cards on one side to horizontal boards on the other side . 
one common orthogonal midplane connects many vertical telephone line cards on one side ,  each one connected to copper telephone wires ,  to a horizontal communications card on the other side . 
a single-board computer meeting the picmg 1.3 specification and compatible with a picmg 1.3 backplane is referred to as a system host board . 
when a backplane is used with a plug-in single board computer  -lrb-  sbc  -rrb-  or system host board  -lrb-  shb  -rrb-  ,  the combination provides the same functionality as a motherboard ,  providing processing power ,  memory ,  i/o and slots for plug-in cards . 
a `` virtual midplane '' is an imaginary plane between vertical cards on one side that directly connect to horizontal boards on the other side; the card-slot aligners of the card cage and self-aligning connectors on the cards hold the cards in position . 
midplanes are also popular in networking and telecommunications equipment where one side of the chassis accepts system processing cards and the other side of the chassis accepts network interface cards . 
picmg 1.3 provides pci-express support . 
the university of illinois marching illini wore two baldrics as a part of their uniform until 2009, with one over each shoulder . 
the baldric appears in the literary canon . 
today ,  the current marching illini wears one baldric with two sides: illini is on one side and the traditional orange and white baldric from the previous uniform . 
a crossed pair of baldrics is often worn as part of uniform of morris dance sides; different colours of baldric help to distinguish different sides . 
the french right ,  left ,  and centre had all now failed . 
more and more french artillery was brought forward . 
with the prussians breaking through on the french right flank ,  wellington's anglo-allied army counter-attacked in the centre ,  and the french army was routed . 
a very even fight between british and french infantry was about to occur . 
14,000 french troops of d'erlon's i corps had been committed to this attack . 
the french advance drove in the british skirmishers and reached the sunken road . 
only very late on the night of 15 june was wellington certain that the charleroi attack was the main french thrust . 
his army rushed forward from the lines and threw themselves upon the retreating french . 
along the sunken road ,  the french were forcing the anglo-allies back ,  the british line was dispersing ,  and at two o'clock in the afternoon napoleon was winning the battle of waterloo . 
the prussian i corps then advanced towards the brussels road and the only line of retreat available to the french . 
the british cavalry were unable ,  however ,  to break the french infantry ,  and fell back with losses from musketry fire . 
the 24th regiment linked up with a highlander battalion on its far right and along with the 13th `` landwehr '' regiment and cavalry support threw the french out of these positions . 
waterloo was the decisive engagement of the waterloo campaign and napoleon's last . 
the french army formed on the slopes of another ridge to the south . 
at about the same time ,  the prussian 5th ,  14th ,  and 16th brigades were starting to push through plancenoit ,  in the third assault of the day . 
a british eyewitness of the first french cavalry attack ,  an officer in the foot guards ,  recorded his impressions very lucidly and somewhat poetically:
as ponsonby tried to rally his men against the french cuirassers ,  he was attacked by jaquinot's lancers and captured . 
french `` tirailleurs '' occupied the dominant positions ,  especially one on a knoll overlooking the square of the 27th . 
it also ended the first french empire and the political and military career of napoleon bonaparte ,  one of the greatest commanders and statesmen in history . 
 ''i considered one squadron a match for two french ,  i didn't like to see four british opposed to four french: and as the numbers increased and order ,  of course ,  became more necessary i was the more unwilling to risk our men without having a superiority in numbers '' . 
in the right rear of the french position was the substantial village of plancenoit ,  and at the extreme right ,  the `` bois de paris '' wood . 
little food was available for the soldiers ,  but nevertheless the veteran french soldiers were fiercely loyal to napoleon . 
the french army of around 69,000 consisted of 48,000 infantry ,  14,000 cavalry ,  and 7,000 artillery with 250 guns . 
the waterloo position was a strong one . 
using the reverse slope ,  as he had many times previously ,  wellington concealed his strength from the french ,  with the exception of his skirmishers and artillery . 
the last of the guard retreated headlong . 
before leaving ligny ,  napoleon had ordered grouchy ,  who commanded the right wing ,  to with 33,000 men . 
as the 17th of june drew to a close ,  wellington's army had arrived at its position at waterloo ,  with the main body of napoleon's army following . 
they were placed as a guard against any possible wide flanking movement by the french forces ,  and also to act as a rearguard if wellington was forced to retreat towards antwerp and the coast . 
along with this artillery fire a multitude of french `` tirailleurs '' occupied the dominant positions behind la haye sainte and poured an effective fire into the squares . 
napoleon announced his second abdication on 24 june 1815.
french forces not retreating with the guard were surrounded in their positions and eliminated ,  neither side asking for nor offering quarter . 
the french were expecting grouchy to march to their support from wavre ,  and when zieten's i corps appeared at waterloo instead of grouchy ,  `` the shock of disillusionment shattered french morale '' and `` the sight of zieten's arrival caused turmoil to rage in napoleon's army '' . 
by june ,  napoleon had raised a total army strength of about 300,000 men . 
the fighting at hougoumont has often been characterised as a diversionary attack to draw in wellington's reserves which escalated into an all-day battle and drew in french reserves instead . 
however ,  the germans had held the centre of the battlefield for almost the entire day ,  and this had stalled the french advance . 
müffling saw this movement away and persuaded zieten to support wellington's left flank . 
and although elements of the prussians now began to appear on the field to his right ,  napoleon had already ordered lobau's vi corps to move to the right flank to hold them back before d'erlon's attack began . 
meanwhile on 16 june ,  napoleon attacked and defeated blücher's prussians at the battle of ligny using part of the reserve and the right wing of his army . 
wellington was also acutely short of heavy cavalry ,  having only seven british and three dutch regiments . 
in his memoirs ,  napoleon wrote that his intention was to separate wellington's army from the prussians and drive it back towards the sea . 
at about 13:30, d'erlon started to advance his three other divisions ,  some 14,000 men over a front of about  ,  against wellington's left wing . 
napoleon himself oversaw the initial deployment of the middle and old guard . 
he hoped this would prevent them from combining ,  and he would be able to destroy first the prussian's army ,  then wellington's . 
crucially ,  the prussians did not retreat to the east ,  along their own lines of communication . 
an additional consideration for napoleon was that a french victory might cause french-speaking sympathisers in belgium to launch a friendly revolution . 
the french pursued wellington's retreating army to waterloo; however ,  due to bad weather ,  mud and the head start that napoleon's tardy advance had allowed wellington ,  apart from a cavalry action at genappe ,  there was no substantial engagement . 
the battle marked the end of the napoleonic wars . 
the boomerang is then painted again . 
a returning boomerang is a rotating wing . 
an important distinction should be made between returning boomerangs and non-returning boomerangs . 
most sport boomerangs typically weigh less than  ,  with mta boomerangs  -lrb-  boomerangs used for the maximum-time-aloft event  -rrb-  often under  . 
when thrown correctly ,  a boomerang returns to its starting point . 
the boomerang is then thrown several times to check if it works . 
the most recognisable type of the boomerang is the l-shaped returning boomerang; while non-returning boomerangs ,  throwing sticks  -lrb-  or shaunies  -rrb-  were used as weapons ,  returning boomerangs have been used primarily for leisure or recreation . 
these conditions can subtly affect the shape of the boomerang and ruin its flight characteristics ,  and the boomerang will then need to be re-tuned . 
today ,  boomerangs are mostly used for recreation . 
modern returning boomerangs can be of various shapes or sizes . 
a right-handed boomerang is thrown with a counter-clockwise spin causing a counter-clockwise flight  -lrb-  as seen from above  -rrb-  . 
the modern boomerang is often computer-aided designed with precision airfoils . 
thus gyroscopic precession is what makes the boomerang return to the thrower when thrown correctly . 
modern boomerang tournaments usually involve some or all of the events listed below in all disciplines the boomerang must travel at least from the thrower . 
in 2004, contest promoter wayne demilia broke ranks with the ifbb and ami took over the promotion of the mr .  olympia contest . 
since then ,  mr .  olympia winners have been consistently awarded a replica of the bronze sandow . 
sandow organized the first bodybuilding contest on september 14, 1901, called the `` great competition '' . 
this is how the npc differs from the nanbf . 
besides the many `` mr .  xxx ''  -lrb-  insert town ,  city ,  state ,  or region  -rrb-  championships ,  the most prestigious titles were mr .  america ,  mr .  world ,  mr .  universe ,  mr .  galaxy ,  and ultimately mr .  olympia ,  which was started in 1965 by the ifbb and is now considered the most important bodybuilding competition in the world . 
some gain in fat mass is expected ,  which athletes seek to oxidize in a cutting period while maintaining as much lean mass as possible . 
he would later say that he does not regret using anything . 
this period also saw the rise of anabolic steroids in bodybuilding and many other sports . 
the first u . s .  women's national physique championship ,  promoted by henry mcghee and held in canton ,  ohio in 1978, is generally regarded as the first true female bodybuilding contest—that is ,  the first contest where the entrants were judged solely on muscularity . 
in the early 2000s ,  the ifbb was attempting to make bodybuilding an olympic sport . 
weightlifters who are attempting to gain mass quickly with no aesthetic concerns often choose to use the `` dirty bulk '' method . 
sandow was so successful at flexing and posing his physique that he later created several businesses around his fame ,  and was among the first to market products branded with his name . 
e .  wilma conner competed in the 2011 npc armbrust pro gym warrior classic championships in loveland ,  colorado ,  at the age of 75 years and 349 days . 
the use of biological agents in armed conflict is a war crime . 
in the latter case ,  or if a nation-state uses it clandestinely ,  it may also be considered bioterrorism . 
agent orange  -rrb-  and eelam war in sri lanka . 
the geneva protocol of 1925 prohibited the use of chemical weapons and biological weapons . 
control of the spread of the agent may be another desired characteristic . 
soon there were facilities for the mass production of anthrax spores ,  brucellosis ,  and botulism toxins ,  although the war was over before these weapons could be of much operational use . 
therefore ,  biological agents may be useful as strategic deterrents in addition to their utility as offensive weapons on the battlefield . 
the british army commanders approved the use of smallpox as a biological weapon in the french and indian war to target native americans during the siege of fort pitt in 1763.
the weapon may be further used to bog down an advancing army making them more vulnerable to counterattack by the defending force . 
in the united states ,  their possession ,  use ,  and transfer are regulated by the centers for disease control and prevention's select agent program . 
agents considered for weaponization ,  or known to be weaponized ,  include bacteria such as `` bacillus anthracis '' ,  `` brucella spp . 
entomological warfare  -lrb-  ew  -rrb-  is a type of biological warfare that uses insects to attack the enemy . 
the secret program was code-named `` ecology '' . 
biological warfare  -lrb-  bw  -rrb- —also known as germ warfare—is the use of biological toxins or infectious agents such as bacteria ,  viruses ,  and fungi with the intent to kill or incapacitate humans ,  animals or plants as an act of war . 
other nations ,  notably france and japan ,  had begun their own biological weapons programs . 
the book of nehemiah has been ,  since the 16th century ,  a separate book of the hebrew bible . 
the book is set in the 5th century bce . 
the original core of the book ,  the first-person memoir ,  may have been combined with the core of the book of ezra around 400 bc . 
the book tells how nehemiah ,  at the court of the king in susa ,  is informed that jerusalem is without walls ,  and resolves to restore them . 
the book of jeremiah  -lrb-  ; abbreviated jer . 
the book of jeremiah grew over a long period of time . 
the following is a list – not exhaustive – of noteworthy sign-acts found in jeremiah:
scholars from heinrich ewald onwards have identified several passages in jeremiah which can be understood as `` confessions '': they occur in the first section of the book  -lrb-  chapters 1–25 -rrb- and are generally identified as jeremiah 11:18–12.6, 15:10–21, 17:14–18, 18:18–23, and 20:7–18.
the book's superscription claims that jeremiah was active for forty years ,  from the thirteenth year of josiah  -lrb-  627 bce  -rrb-  to the fall of jerusalem in 587.
it is difficult to discern any structure in jeremiah ,  probably because the book had such a long and complex composition history . 
the influence of jeremiah during and after the exile was considerable in some circles ,  and three additional books ,  the book of baruch ,  lamentations ,  and the letter of jeremiah ,  were attributed to him in second temple judaism  -lrb-  judaism in the period between the building of the second temple in about 515 bce and its destruction in 70 ce  -rrb- ; in the greek septuagint they stand between jeremiah and the book of ezekiel ,  but only lamentations is included in modern jewish or protestant bibles  -lrb-  the letter of jeremiah appears in catholic bibles as the sixth chapter of baruch  -rrb-  . 
while it is widely accepted that the book of isaiah is rooted in a historic prophet called isaiah ,  who lived in the kingdom of judah during the 8th century bce ,  it is also widely accepted that this prophet did not write the entire book of isaiah . 
a central theme in second isaiah is that of a new exodus – the return of the exiled people israel from babylon to jerusalem . 
seeing isaiah as a two-part book  -lrb-  chapters 1–33 and 34–66 -rrb- with an overarching theme leads to a summary of its contents like the following:
isaiah was one of the most popular works among jews in the second temple period  -lrb-  c .  515 bce – 70 ce  -rrb-  . 
isaiah 44:6 contains the first clear statement of monotheism: `` i am the first and i am the last; beside me there is no god '' . 
the book of isaiah  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is the first of the latter prophets in the hebrew bible and the first of the major prophets in the christian old testament . 
isaiah is focused on the main role of jerusalem in god's plan for the world ,  seeing centuries of history as though they were all the single vision of the 8th-century prophet isaiah . 
thus many of the isaiah passages that are familiar to christians gained their popularity not directly from isaiah but from the use of them by jesus and the early christian authors – this is especially true of the book of revelation ,  which depends heavily on isaiah for its language and imagery . 
a bilinear map is a function such that for any `` w '' in `` w '' ,  the map formula_1 is a linear map from `` v '' to `` x '' ,  and for any `` v '' in `` v '' ,  the map formula_2 is a linear map from `` w '' to `` x '' . 
vector space ,  module  -rrb-  of all maps from into `` x '' . 
if `` v '' ,  `` w '' ,  `` x '' are finite-dimensional ,  then so is  . 
the set of all bilinear maps is a linear subspace of the space  -lrb-  viz . 
little is known of blake's life . 
blake recorded about 80 tracks for paramount records from 1926 to 1932.
blake's first recordings were made in 1926, and his records sold well . 
brian lara is also a golf player . 
on 26 april 2006 lara was reappointed the captain of the west indies cricket team for the third time . 
when he was 15 years old ,  he played in his first west indian under-19 youth tournament and that same year ,  lara represented west indies in under-19 cricket . 
in january 1993, lara scored 277 versus australia in sydney . 
on 23 july 2007 lara agreed to sign for the indian cricket league . 
lara holds several world records for high scoring . 
lara captained the west indies from 1998 to 1999, when west indies suffered their first whitewash at the hands of south africa . 
he captained the tournament-winning trinidad and tobago ,  who profited from a match-winning 116 from lara . 
lara also shares the test record of scoring the highest number of runs in a single over in a test match ,  when he scored 28 runs off an over by robin peterson of south africa in 2003  -lrb-  matched in 2013 by australia's george bailey  -rrb-  . 
lara went on to name his daughter sydney after scoring 277 at scg . 
brian lara was appointed honorary member of the order of australia on 27 november 2009.
lara played his final international game on 21 april 2007 in a dead rubber world cup game against england . 
lara's match-winning performance of 153 not out against australia in bridgetown ,  barbados in 1999 has been rated by wisden as the second best batting performance in the history of test cricket ,  next only to the 270 runs scored by sir donald bradman in the ashes test match of 1937.
the beagle is a breed of small hound that is similar in appearance to the much larger foxhound . 
the beagle-size varieties came close to extinction but some farmers in the south ensured the survival of the prototype breeds by maintaining small rabbit-hunting packs . 
by the 18th century two breeds had been developed for hunting hare and rabbit: the southern hound and the north country beagle  -lrb-  or northern hound  -rrb-  . 
in the 20th century the breed has spread worldwide . 
although beagle-type dogs have existed for 2,500 years ,  the modern breed was developed in great britain around the 1830s from several breeds ,  including the talbot hound ,  the north country beagle ,  the southern hound ,  and possibly the harrier . 
the kennel club  -lrb-  uk  -rrb-  and fci affiliated clubs recognize a single type ,  with a height of between  . 
by 1902, the number of packs had risen to 44.
although credited with the development of the modern breed ,  honeywood concentrated on producing dogs for hunting and it was left to thomas johnson to refine the breeding to produce dogs that were both attractive and capable hunters . 
from medieval times ,  `` beagle '' was used as a generic description for the smaller hounds ,  though these dogs differed considerably from the modern breed . 
the american kennel club recognizes two separate varieties of beagle: the 13-inch for hounds less than  ,  and the 15-inch for those between  . 
beagles fitting the american kennel club standard – which disallows animals over – are smaller on average than those fitting the kennel club standard which allows heights up to  . 
pocket beagles are sometimes advertised for sale but while the uk kennel club originally specified a standard for the pocket beagle in 1901, the variety is now not recognized by any kennel club . 
beagles are the dog breed most often used in animal testing ,  due to their size and passive nature . 
in the 11th century ,  william the conqueror brought the talbot hound to britain . 
more recently the trend has been for `` designer dogs '' and one of the most popular has been the beagle/pug cross known as a puggle . 
the exact cause of this behaviour is not known ,  but it can be a common occurrence and is not harmful to the dog . 
in the united states the beagle ranked 4th most popular breed in 2012 and 2013, behind the labrador retriever  -lrb-  #1 -rrb- ,  german shepherd  -lrb-  #2 -rrb- and golden retriever  -lrb-  #3 -rrb- breeds . 
alongside the bloodhound and basset hound ,  the beagle has one of the best developed senses of smell of any dog . 
the typical longevity of beagles is 12–15 years ,  which is a common lifespan for dogs of their size . 
regular exercise helps ward off the weight gain to which the breed is prone . 
cuir bouilli was also very common for scabbards . 
a few pieces of roman horse armour in cuir bouilli have been excavated . 
his wooden shield also has the heraldic animals appliqued in cuir bouilli . 
cuir bouilli was also often used for elaborate figurative crests on some helmets . 
a near life-size crucifix in the vatican museums is in cuir bouilli over wood . 
in information security and programming ,  a buffer overflow ,  or buffer overrun ,  is an anomaly where a program ,  while writing data to a buffer ,  overruns the buffer's boundary and overwrites adjacent memory locations . 
buffer overflow protection is used to detect the most common buffer overflows by checking that the stack has not been altered when a function returns . 
checking for buffer overflows and patching the bugs that cause them naturally helps prevent buffer overflows . 
a buffer overflow occurs when data written to a buffer also corrupts data values in memory addresses adjacent to the destination buffer due to insufficient bounds checking . 
techniques to avoid buffer overflows also exist for c . 
the earliest documented hostile exploitation of a buffer overflow was in 1988.
this can occur when copying data from one buffer to another without first checking that the data fits within the destination buffer . 
exploiting the behavior of a buffer overflow is a well-known security exploit . 
if the address of the user-supplied data used to affect the stack buffer overflow is unpredictable ,  exploiting a stack buffer overflow to cause remote code execution becomes much more difficult . 
buffer overflows work by manipulating pointers  -lrb-  including stored addresses  -rrb-  . 
the twilight hack accomplished the same with the wii ,  using a buffer overflow in ``  '' . 
the problem of buffer overflows is common in the c and c++ languages because they expose low level representational details of buffers as containers for data types . 
a buffer overflow occurring in the heap data area is referred to as a heap overflow and is exploitable in a manner different from that of stack-based overflows . 
executable space protection is an approach to buffer overflow protection which prevents execution of code on the stack or the heap . 
regardless ,  this is not a complete solution to buffer overflows ,  as sensitive data other than the return address may still be overwritten . 
a nop-sled is the oldest and most widely known technique for successfully exploiting a stack buffer overflow . 
for this reason ,  this is the technique most commonly used in internet worms that exploit stack buffer overflow vulnerabilities . 
various techniques have been used to detect or prevent buffer overflows ,  with various tradeoffs . 
he hit 46 home runs in 403 at-bats . 
bonds improved in 1988, hitting  . 283 with 24 home runs . 
on august 23, bonds hit his 400th career home run . 
the home run came on august 9 at home against kip wells of the pirates . 
bonds won his first mvp award in 1990, hitting  . 301 with 33 home runs and 114 rbis . 
that year ,  he hit 25 home runs in his second season ,  along with 32 stolen bases and 59 rbis . 
on september 23, bonds surpassed aaron for the nl career home run record . 
after hitting the home run ,  bonds gave bacsik an autographed bat . 
for the season ,  he hit  . 303 with 37 home runs and drove in 122 runs ,  winning his eighth gold glove ,  he finished 8th in the mvp voting . 
in 2000, the following year ,  bonds hit  . 306 with career bests through that time in both slugging percentage  -lrb-   . 688 -rrb- and home runs  -lrb-  49 -rrb- in just 143 games . 
bonds attended arizona state university ,  hitting  . 347 with 45 home runs and 175 runs batted in  -lrb-  rbi  -rrb-  . 
the hype surrounding bonds's pursuit of the home run record escalated on may 14.
in the lockout-shortened season of 1994, bonds hit  . 312 with 37 home runs and a league-leading 74 walks ,  and he finished 4th in mvp voting . 
bonds hit his 300th and 301st home runs off the florida marlins' john burkett on april 27.
bonds concluded the 2007 season with a  . 276 batting average ,  28 home runs ,  and 66 rbis in 126 games and 340 at bats . 
home runs number 739 and 740 came in back to back games on april 21 and 22 against the arizona diamondbacks . 
on august 7 at 8:51 pm pdt ,  at the giants home at&t park in san francisco ,  bonds hit a 435 foot  -lrb-  133 m  -rrb-  home run ,  his 756th ,  off a pitch from mike bacsik of the washington nationals ,  breaking the all-time career home run record ,  formerly held by hank aaron . 
this home run put bonds past the midway point between ruth and aaron . 
in 1995, bonds hit 33 homers and drove in 104 runs ,  hitting  . 294 but finished only 12th in mvp voting . 
the other members of the 40–40 club are josé canseco–1988, alex rodriguez–1998, and alfonso soriano–2006; his father bobby bonds was one home run short in 1973 when he hit 39 home runs and stole 43 bases . 
on may 20, bonds tied ruth ,  hitting his 714th career home run to deep right field to lead off the top of the 2nd inning . 
the brewers eventually won the game ,  13–12, though bonds went 3 for 5, with 2 doubles ,  the record-tying home run ,  and 6 runs batted in . 
bonds received the babe ruth home run award for leading mlb in homers that season . 
besides holding major league career records in home runs  -lrb-  762 -rrb- ,  walks  -lrb-  2,558 -rrb- ,  and intentional walks  -lrb-  688 -rrb- ,  at the time of his retirement ,  bonds also led all active players in rbi  -lrb-  1,996 -rrb- ,  on-base percentage  -lrb-   . 444 -rrb- ,  runs  -lrb-  2,227 -rrb- ,  games  -lrb-  2,986 -rrb- ,  extra-base hits  -lrb-  1,440 -rrb- ,  at-bats per home run  -lrb-  12.92 -rrb- ,  and total bases  -lrb-  5,976 -rrb- . 
on july 19, after a 21 at-bat hitless streak ,  bonds hit 2 home runs ,  numbers 752 and 753, against the chicago cubs . 
bonds's slugging percentage was a major league record  . 863  -lrb-  411 total bases in 476 at-bats  -rrb-  ,  and ,  most impressively ,  he ended the season with a major league record 73 home runs . 
in 1996, bonds became the first national league player and second  -lrb-  of the current list of four  -rrb-  major league player -lrb-  s  -rrb-  to hit 40 home runs and steal 40 bases in the same season . 
bonds is the lone member of the 500–500 club ,  which means he has hit at least 500 home runs  -lrb-  762 -rrb- and stolen at least 500 bases  -lrb-  514 -rrb-; no other player has even 400 of both . 
bonds hit  . 336 in 1993, leading the league with 46 home runs and 123 rbi en route to his second consecutive mvp award ,  and third overall . 
bonds purchased a home in scottsdale ,  arizona for kimberly . 
mayor gavin newsom presented bonds the key to the city and county of san francisco and giants vice president larry baer gave bonds the home plate he touched after hitting his 756th career home run . 
upon his return ,  bonds resumed his high-caliber performance at the plate ,  hitting home runs in four consecutive games from september 18 to 21 and finishing with five homers in only 14 games . 
the boundaries of the land are spelled out; the land is to be divided under the supervision of eleazar ,  joshua ,  and twelve princes ,  one of each tribe . 
numbers is the culmination of the story of israel's exodus from oppression in egypt and their journey to take possession of the land god promised their fathers . 
numbers begins at mount sinai ,  where the israelites have received their laws and covenant from god and god has taken up residence among them in the sanctuary . 
the promise has three elements: posterity  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  descendants – abraham is told that his descendants will be as innumerable as the stars  -rrb-  ,  divine-human relationship  -lrb-  israel is to be god's chosen people  -rrb-  ,  and land  -lrb-  the land of canaan ,  cursed by noah immediately after the deluge  -rrb-  . 
as chapters 1–10 progress ,  the theme of god's presence with israel comes to the fore: these chapters describe how israel is to be organised around the sanctuary ,  god's dwelling-place in their midst ,  under the charge of the levites and priests ,  in preparation for the conquest of the land . 
numbers also demonstrates the importance of holiness ,  faithfulness and trust: despite god's presence and his priests ,  israel lacks faith and the possession of the land is left to a new generation . 
the book of judges  -lrb-   ,  ``  ''  -rrb-  is the seventh book of the hebrew bible and the christian old testament . 
 ''judges '' follows on from the book of joshua and opens with reference to joshua's death  -lrb-  ; cf . 
 ''judges '' can be divided into three major sections: a double prologue  -lrb-  chapters 1:1–3:6 -rrb- ,  a main body  -lrb-  3:7–16:31 -rrb- ,  and a double epilogue  -lrb-  17–21 -rrb- . 
there are also brief glosses on six minor judges: shamgar  -lrb-  3:31 -rrb- ,  tola and jair  -lrb-  10:1–5 -rrb- ,  ibzan ,  elon ,  and abdon  -lrb-  12:8–15 -rrb- . 
yahweh tells samuel to anoint david of bethlehem as king ,  and david enters saul's court as his armor-bearer and harpist . 
samuel begins with the prophet samuel's birth and god's call to him as a boy . 
what it is now commonly known as 1 samuel and 2 samuel are called by the vulgate ,  in imitation of the septuagint ,  1 kings and 2 kings respectively . 
these themes are played out in the stories of the three main characters ,  samuel ,  saul and david . 
the 6th century bc authors and editors responsible for the bulk of the history drew on many earlier sources ,  including  -lrb-  but not limited to  -rrb-  an `` ark narrative ''  -lrb-  1 samuel 4:1–7:1 and perhaps part of 2 samuel 6 -rrb- ,  a `` saul cycle ''  -lrb-  parts of 1 samuel 9–11 and 13–14 -rrb- ,  the `` history of david's rise ''  -lrb-  1 samuel 16:14-2 samuel 5:10 -rrb- ,  and the `` succession narrative ''  -lrb-  2 samuel 9–20 and 1 kings 1–2 -rrb- . 
one of the main units within samuel is the `` history of david's rise '' ,  the purpose of which is to justify david as the legitimate successor to saul . 
the book of samuel is a theological evaluation of kingship in general and of dynastic kingship and david in particular . 
according to passages 14b and 15a of the bava basra tractate of the talmud ,  the book was written by samuel up until 1 samuel 25, which notes the death of samuel ,  and the remainder by the prophets gad and nathan . 
athanasius  -lrb-  367 ad  -rrb-  in his `` letter 39 '' ,   augustine of hippo  -lrb-  c .  397 ad  -rrb-  in his book `` on christian doctrine ''  -lrb-  book ii ,  chapter 8 -rrb- ,  tyrannius rufinus  -lrb-  c .  400 ad  -rrb-  in his `` commentary on the apostles' creed '' ,  pope innocent i  -lrb-  405 ad  -rrb-  in a letter to the bishop of toulouse and john of damascus  -lrb-  about 730 ad  -rrb-  in his work `` an exposition of the orthodox faith  -lrb-  book iv:7 -rrb- '' listed `` the revelation of john the evangelist '' as a canonical book . 
eusebius ,  in his church history  -lrb-  c .  330 ad  -rrb-  mentioned that the apocalypse of john was accepted as a canonical book and rejected at the same time:
cyril of jerusalem  -lrb-  348 ad  -rrb-  does not name it among the canonical books  -lrb-  catechesis iv . 33–36 -rrb- . 
the book of revelation ,  often called the revelation to john ,  the apocalypse of john ,  the revelation ,  or simply revelation ,  the revelation of jesus christ  -lrb-  from its opening words  -rrb-  or the apocalypse  -lrb-  and often misquoted as revelations  -rrb-  ,  is the final book of the new testament ,  and therefore also the final book of the christian bible . 
early church tradition dates the book to end of the rule of the emperor domitian  -lrb-  reigned ad 81–96 -rrb- ,  and most modern scholars agree ,  although the author may have written a first version after nero's great fire of rome  -lrb-  ad 64 -rrb- under vespasian  -lrb-  reigned ad 69–79 -rrb- and updated it under domitian . 
the bulk of traditional sources date the book to the reign of the emperor domitian  -lrb-  ad 81–96 -rrb- ,  and the evidence tends to confirm this . 
scholars tend to treat the books as made up of a first edition from the late 7th century bce and a second and final edition from the mid 6th century bce . 
the book tells of ruth's accepting the god of the israelites as her god and the israelite people as her own . 
 -lrb-  3:13–15 -rrb- . 
the coptic and ethiopic versions of esther are translations of the greek rather than the hebrew esther . 
the `` megillat esther ''  -lrb-  book of esther  -rrb-  became the last of the 24 books of the tanakh to be canonized by the sages of the great assembly . 
there are certain elements of the book of esther that are historically accurate . 
the genre of novellas under which esther falls was common during both the persian and hellenistic periods to which scholars have dated the book of esther . 
it translates the hebrew esther but interpolates translations of the greek esther where the latter provides additional material . 
when mordecai discovers the plan ,  he goes into mourning and implores esther to intercede with the king  -lrb-  4:1–5 -rrb- . 
the books of esther and song of songs are the only books in the hebrew bible that do not explicitly mention god . 
a latin version of esther was produced by jerome for the vulgate . 
jewish tradition relates that esther was the mother of a king darius and so some try to identify ahasuerus with artaxerxes i and esther with kosmartydene . 
based on the view that the ahasuerus of the book of tobit is identical with that of the book of esther ,  some have also identified him as nebuchadnezzar's ally cyaxares  -lrb-  ruled 625–585 bc  -rrb-  . 
the book of esther falls under the category of ketuvim ,  one of three parts of the jewish canon . 
alternative attempts have been made to identify her with esther ,  although esther is an orphan whose father was a jew named abihail . 
there are 2,560 passenger railway stations on the network rail network . 
high-speed rail  -lrb-  above   -rrb-  was first introduced in great britain in the 1970s by british rail . 
most of the track is managed by network rail ,  which in 2017 had a network of of standard-gauge lines ,  of which were electrified . 
british rail operations were privatised during 1994–1997.
most major cities have some form of commuter rail network . 
a final attempt by the nationalised british rail at high speed rail was the cancelled intercity 250 project in the 1990s for the west coast main line . 
train fares cost 2.7% more than under british rail in real terms on average . 
below are the total number of passengers using heavy rail transport in britain . 
from the start of 1948, the `` big four '' were nationalised to form british railways  -lrb-  latterly `` british rail ''  -rrb-  under the control of the british transport commission . 
in 2016, there were 1.718 billion journeys on the national rail network ,  making the british network the fifth most used in the world  -lrb-  great britain ranks 23rd in world population  -rrb-  . 
the railway system in great britain is the oldest in the world . 
the growth in road transport during the 1920s and 1930s greatly reduced revenue for the rail companies . 
after the building of the first of a new british rail class 395 train fleet for use partly on high speed 1 and parts of the rest of the uk rail network ,  the first domestic high-speed running over 125 mph  -lrb-  to about 140 mph  -rrb-  began in december 2009, including a special olympic javelin shuttle for the 2012 olympics . 
uk rail operators point out rail fare increases have been at a substantially lower rate than petrol prices for private motoring . 
the first implementation of high-speed rail up to 186 mph in regular passenger service in great britain was the channel tunnel rail link  -lrb-  now known as high speed 1 -rrb- ,  when its first phase opened in 2003 linking the british end of the channel tunnel at folkestone with fawkham junction in kent . 
the trains will be capable of a maximum speed of 140 mph with `` minor modifications '' ,  with the necessary signalling modifications required of the network rail infrastructure in britain likely to come from the phased rollout of the europe-wide european rail traffic management system  -lrb-  ertms  -rrb-  . 
the department for transport's `` transport ten year plan '' calls for an 80% increase in rail freight measured from a 2000–1 base . 
between 1994 and 1997, british rail was privatised . 
it was introduced by british rail in the early 1970s . 
british railways  -lrb-  br  -rrb-  ,  which from 1965 traded as british rail ,  was the state-owned company that operated most of the overground rail transport in great britain between 1948 and 1997.
a family of railway carriages ,  designed and built by british rail workshops  -lrb-  from 1969 british rail engineering limited  -rrb-   -lrb-  brel  -rrb-  between 1964 and 1975.
other preserved lines ,  or heritage railways ,  have reopened lines previously closed by british rail . 
the joint hovercraft services of british rail  -lrb-  under british rail hovercraft limited  -rrb-  in association with the french sncf . 
during the 1980s british rail ran the rail riders membership club aimed at 5- to 15-year-olds . 
since privatisation ,  many groups have campaigned for the renationalisation of british rail ,  most notably 'bring back british rail' . 
under the process of british rail's privatisation ,  operations were split into more than 100 companies . 
there were also joint railways between the big four and a few light railways to consider  -lrb-  see list of constituents of british railways  -rrb-  . 
various interested parties also have views on the privatisation of british rail . 
the narrow-gauge vale of rheidol railway in ceredigion ,  wales became part of british railways at nationalisation . 
the british railways board continued in existence as a corporation until early 2001, when it was replaced with the strategic rail authority . 
british railways operated ships from its formation in 1948 on several routes . 
originally a trading brand of the railway executive of the british transport commission ,  it became an independent statutory corporation in 1962 designated as the british railways board . 
the remaining obligations of british rail were transferred to brb  -lrb-  residuary  -rrb-  limited . 
british railways came into existence as the business name of the railway executive of the british transport commission  -lrb-  btc  -rrb-  on 1 january 1948 when it took over the assets of the big four . 
a further british rail report ,  from a committee chaired by sir david serpell ,  was published in 1983.
newspapers reported that as recently as the 1990s ,  public rail subsidy was counted as profit; as early as 1961, british railways were losing £300,000 a day . 
the new br corporate identity and double arrow were rolled out in 1965, and the brand name of the organisation was truncated to `` british rail '' . 
the rail transport system in great britain developed during the 19th century . 
the book of job  -lrb-  ; hebrew: אִיוֹב `` iyov ''  -rrb-  is a book in the ketuvim  -lrb-  `` writings ''  -rrb-  section of the hebrew bible  -lrb-  tanakh  -rrb-  ,  and the first poetic book in the old testament of the christian bible . 
wisdom is praised for her role in creation; god acquired her before all else ,  and through her he gave order to chaos; and since humans have life and prosperity by conforming to the order of creation ,  seeking wisdom is the essence and goal of the religious life . 
the first chapter uses standard alphabetical order . 
the book consists of five separate poems . 
lamentations consists of five distinct poems ,  corresponding to its five chapters . 
beginning with the reality of disaster ,  lamentations concludes with the bitter possibility that god may have finally rejected israel  -lrb-  chapter 5:22 -rrb- . 
the book opens with a vision of yhwh  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
the book of ezekiel is the third of the latter prophets in the tanakh and one of the major prophetic books in the old testament ,  following isaiah and jeremiah . 
 ,  there have been 445 seasons of `` big brother '' in over 54 franchise countries and regions . 
the first version of `` big brother '' was broadcast in 1999 on veronica in the netherlands . 
since `` big brother 2 '' ,  the uk series has opened with a twist . 
this has included having three finalists  -lrb-  `` big brother 2 ''  -rrb- ; public voting for least-favourite housemates ,  with the housemates choosing between two nominees to evict  -lrb-  `` big brother 3 ''  -rrb- ; first-night nominations  -lrb-  `` big brother 4 ''  -rrb- ; suitcase nominations  -lrb-  `` big brother 5 ''  -rrb- ; unlucky housemate 13  -lrb-  `` big brother 6 ''  -rrb- ; big brother hood  -lrb-  `` big brother 7 ''  -rrb- ; an all-female house and a set of twins as contestants  -lrb-  `` big brother 8 ''  -rrb- ; a couple entering as housemates ,  who must hide their relationship  -lrb-  `` big brother 9 ''  -rrb- ; housemates having to earn housemate status  -lrb-  `` big brother 10 ''  -rrb- ; a mole entering the house with an impossible task  -lrb-  `` big brother 11 ''  -rrb- ; pamela anderson entering as a guest for 5 days  -lrb-  big brother 12 -rrb-; first-night nominations and a public vote for a wildcard to become a housemate  -lrb-  big brother 13 -rrb-; a professional actor posing as a housemate and a mother and daughter as contestants  -lrb-  big brother 14 -rrb-; one contestant gets a pass to the final  -lrb-  big brother 15 -rrb-; first night eviction  -lrb-  big brother 16 -rrb-; two houses with `` the other house '' featuring enemies from the main house housemates past  -lrb-  big brother 17 -rrb-; jackie stallone entering a house containing her son's ex-wife brigitte nielsen  -lrb-  `` celebrity big brother 3 ''  -rrb- ; a non-celebrity in a celebrity edition  -lrb-  `` celebrity big brother 4 ''  -rrb- ; a visit from jade goody's family  -lrb-  `` celebrity big brother 5 ''  -rrb-  and unlocked bedrooms allowing housemates to immediately claim beds with the last housemate becoming the head of house  -lrb-  `` celebrity big brother 6 ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''big brother '' contestants are isolated in the house ,  without access to television ,  radio or the internet . 
the same twist was used in the  -lrb-  fourth bulgarian series  -rrb-  ,  and an all-male premiere was used on `` big brother africa 4 '' . 
most versions of `` big brother '' follow the weekly eviction format ,  broadcast over approximately three months for 16 contestants . 
in 2011, the uk version controversially adapted the discussion of nominations before reversing this rule after a poll by `` big brother '' broadcaster channel 5.
due to the intelligibility of certain languages across several nations ,  it has been possible to make regional versions of `` big brother '' . 
the term `` big brother '' originates from george orwell's novel `` nineteen eighty-four , ``  with its theme of continuous oppressive surveillance . 
the contestants are required to do housework and are assigned tasks by the producers of the show  -lrb-  who communicate with the housemates via the omnipresent authority figure known to them only as `` big brother ''  -rrb-  . 
in 2004, the fifth uk series introduced a villainous big brother with harsher punishments ,  such as taking away prize money ,  more difficult tasks and secret tricks . 
the fifth uk series introduced fake evictions ,  where big brother misleads housemates that an eviction has taken place ,  only for the `` evicted '' housemate to reenter the house sometime later . 
after a poor start to the 2011–12 season ,  millen left the club in october 2011. , 
bristol city started the 2016–17 season well ,  and after 11 games they were 5th in the league table ,  and city also appeared in the last 16 of the league cup for the first time since the 1988–89 season . 
in the 2006–07 season ,  bristol city finally achieved the elusive promotion that had evaded them in their 8 years in the third tier . 
bristol city were promoted back to championship for 2015–16 season after securing the 2014–15 football league one title ,  their first league title since 1955.
the club's highest ever league finish was second in the top flight way back in 1906–07.
after a poor start in the first half of the 2008–09 season ,  city recovered after christmas ,  peaking at 4th place in late february . 
in the same season ,  they also won the 2015 johnstone's paint trophy after a win over walsall ,  which finished 2–0 and their third league trophy ,  a record held by the club for having the most wins in that competition . 
bristol city would then go on to stay in division 2 until 3 years after the first world war had ended ,  and in that time they reached the semi-finals of the 1919–20 fa cup before being beaten 2–1 by huddersfield town f . c . 
had the season started when steve cotterill joined the club ,  bristol city would have finished 5th ,  showing the scale of the turnaround . 
city just failed to make the playoffs in tinnion's first season as manager ,  finishing seventh ,  and he stepped down in september 2005 after a poor start to the season . 
despite huge success in the previous season ,  the club struggled on their return to the second tier . 
after a five-season stay in the top flight ,  despite winning 1–0 at newcastle at the start of the 1910–11 campaign ,  failure to beat everton in the season's finale brought city's first ever taste of relegation and it was to be 65 years before top flight status would be regained . 
some bioterrorism agents ,  like the smallpox virus ,  can be spread from person to person and some ,  like anthrax ,  cannot . 
these high-priority agents pose a risk to national security ,  can be easily transmitted and disseminated ,  result in high mortality ,  have potential major public health impact ,  may cause public panic ,  or require special action for public health preparedness . 
by the time world war i began ,  attempts to use anthrax were directed at animal populations . 
under current united states law ,  bio-agents which have been declared by the u . s .  department of health and human services or the u . s .  department of agriculture to have the `` potential to pose a severe threat to public health and safety '' are officially defined as `` select agents . `` 
schwander died of natural causes in 1974, while pera returned to the u . s .  in 1975 and was put on probation . 
in 1980 the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  announced the eradication of smallpox ,  a highly contagious and incurable disease . 
the b-2 may cost up to $135,000 per flight hour to operate in 2010, which is about twice that of the b-52 and b-1.
by then ,  the b-2 had dropped 500 bombs in kosovo . 
reportedly ,  the b-2 has a radar cross-section  -lrb-  rcs  -rrb-  of about  . 
approximately 80 pilots fly the b-2.
 ,  there have been no instances of a missile being launched at a b-2.
nuclear ordnance includes the b61 and b83 nuclear bombs; the agm-129 acm cruise missile was also intended for use on the b-2 platform . 
 ''the stealth technology developed from the program was later incorporated into other operational aircraft designs ,  including the b-2 stealth bomber '' . 
during its design and development ,  the northrop b-2 program was a gray project before its revelation to the public . 
a number of upgrade packages have been applied to the b-2.
maintenance costs are about $3.4 million a month for each aircraft . 
the b-2 is the only acknowledged aircraft that can carry large air-to-surface standoff weapons in a stealth configuration . 
b-2s are supported by portable ,  environmentally-controlled hangars called b-2 shelter systems  -lrb-  b2ss  -rrb-  . 
the b-2 is vulnerable to visual interception at ranges of or less . 
nonetheless ,  congress did not approve funding for the purchase of any additional b-2 bombers . 
northrop  -lrb-  now northrop grumman  -rrb-  was the b-2's prime contractor; major subcontractors included boeing ,  hughes aircraft  -lrb-  now raytheon  -rrb-  ,  ge ,  and vought aircraft . 
the escalating cost of the b-2 program and evidence of flaws in the aircraft's ability to elude detection by radar were among factors that drove opposition to continue the program . 
each b-2 flew a 34-hour ,  round-trip mission from whiteman air force base ,  missouri with 15 refuelings during the trip . 
the b-2s flew directly from the u . s .  mainland across the atlantic ocean to libya; a b-2 was refueled by allied tanker aircraft four times during each round trip mission . 
the total program cost projected through 2004 was us$44.75 billion in 1997 dollars . 
in 1995, northrop made a proposal to the usaf to build 20 additional aircraft with a flyaway cost of $566 million each . 
the b-2's combat debut was in 1999, during the kosovo war . 
to reduce optical visibility during daylight flights ,  the b-2 is painted in an anti-reflective paint . 
in the 1976/1977 season ,  500,000 beaver pelts were harvested in north america . 
beavers live up to 24 years of age in the wild . 
beavers continue to grow throughout their lives . 
the north american beaver  -lrb-  `` castor canadensis ''  -rrb-  ,  also called the canadian beaver  -lrb-  which is also the name of a subspecies  -rrb-  ,  american beaver ,  or simply beaver in north america ,  is native to canada ,  much of the united states and the states of sonora and chihuahua in northern mexico . 
in north american beavers ,  50% have pale brown fur ,  25% are reddish brown ,  20% are brown and 6% are blackish . 
beavers fell trees for several reasons . 
beavers have been trapped for millennia ,  and this continues to this day . 
occurrences of beaver aggression ,  however ,  have been reported . 
beavers may create a series of dams along a river . 
beavers have webbed hind-feet ,  and a broad ,  scaly tail . 
being able to recognize kin is important for beaver social behavior ,  and it causes more tolerant behavior among neighboring beavers . 
beavers potentially even affect climate change . 
the north american and eurasian beavers are the only extant members of the family castoridae ,  contained in a single genus ,  castor . 
the english verb `` to beaver '' means to work hard and constantly . 
beavers fell small trees ,  especially young second-growth trees ,  for food . 
the habitat of the beaver is the riparian zone ,  inclusive of stream bed . 
bears do not have many predators . 
bears of northern regions ,  including the american black bear and the grizzly bear ,  hibernate in the winter . 
the brown bear can live an average of 25 years . 
the bears form a clade within the carnivora . 
bears are popular in children's stories ,  including winnie the pooh ,  paddington bear ,  gentle ben and `` the brown bear of norway '' . 
the polar bear is the most recently evolved species and descended from the brown bear around 400,000 years ago . 
bears in captivity have for centuries been used for entertainment . 
the relationships of the other species are not very well resolved ,  though the polar bear and the brown bear form a close grouping . 
bears are carnivoran mammals of the family ursidae . 
bear trust international works for wild bears and other wildlife through four core program initiatives ,  namely conservation education ,  wild bear research ,  wild bear management ,  and habitat conservation . 
the atlas bear ,  a subspecies of the brown bear was distributed in north africa from morocco to libya ,  but it became extinct around the 1870s . 
predatory behaviour in bears is typically taught to the young by the mother . 
bears produce a number of vocal and non-vocal sounds . 
bears may mark territory by rubbing against trees and other objects which may serve to spread their scent . 
the constellations of ursa major and ursa minor ,  the great and little bears ,  are named for their supposed resemblance to bears ,  from the time of ptolemy . 
female bears give birth during the hibernation period ,  and are roused when doing so . 
there is evidence of prehistoric bear worship ,  though this is disputed by archaeologists . 
