environmental movements often interact or are linked with other social movements ,  e . g . 
the anti-nuclear movement in the united states consists of more than 80 anti-nuclear groups which have acted to oppose nuclear power or nuclear weapons ,  or both ,  in the united states . 
the anti-nuclear movement has delayed construction or halted commitments to build some new nuclear plants ,  and has pressured the nuclear regulatory commission to enforce and strengthen the safety regulations for nuclear power plants . 
more recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has related to several nuclear power plants including the enrico fermi nuclear power plant ,  indian point energy center ,  oyster creek nuclear generating station ,  pilgrim nuclear generating station ,  salem nuclear power plant ,  and vermont yankee nuclear power plant . 
the creation of these laws led to a major shift in the environmental movement . 
anti-nuclear protests reached a peak in the 1970s and 1980s and grew out of the environmental movement . 
for peace ,  human rights ,  and animal rights; and against nuclear weapons and/or nuclear power ,  endemic diseases ,  poverty ,  hunger ,  etc . 
in 2004, with the environmental movement seemingly stalled ,  some environmentalists started questioning whether `` environmentalism '' was even a useful political framework . 
franklin delano roosevelt  -lrb-  1933–45 -rrb- ,  like his cousin theodore roosevelt ,  was an ardent conservationist . 
conservation first became a national issue during the progressive era's conservation movement  -lrb-  1890s - 1920s  -rrb-  . 
these `` post-environmental movement '' thinkers argue that the ecological crises the human species faces in the 21st century are qualitatively different from the problems the environmental movement was created to address in the 1960s and 1970s . 
in 1907, roosevelt designated 16 million acres  -lrb-  65,000 km²  -rrb-  of new national forests just minutes before a deadline . 
in 1903 roosevelt toured the yosemite valley with john muir ,  who had a very different view of conservation ,  and tried to minimize commercial use of water resources and forests . 
there have also been campaigns relating to the y-12 nuclear weapons plant ,  the idaho national laboratory ,  proposed yucca mountain nuclear waste repository ,  the hanford site ,  the nevada test site ,  lawrence livermore national laboratory ,  and transportation of nuclear waste from the los alamos national laboratory . 
the eastern orthodox church considers itself to be both orthodox and catholic . 
the eastern orthodox church ,  officially the orthodox catholic church ,  is the second-largest christian church ,  with approximately 200–260 million members . 
the eastern orthodox church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same early church . 
a number of other christian churches also make a similar claim: the catholic church ,  the anglican communion ,  the assyrian church and the oriental orthodox . 
the common name of the church ,  `` eastern orthodox church '' ,  is a shortened practicality that helps to avoid confusions in casual use . 
several other churches in europe ,  asia ,  and africa also came to use `` orthodox '' in their titles ,  but are still distinct from the eastern orthodox church as described in this article . 
the virgin mary is venerated in the eastern orthodox church as the god-bearer ,  honoured in devotions . 
the celebration of the resurrection of christ at pascha is the central event in the liturgical year of the eastern orthodox church . 
orthodox christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles ,  or more inclusively ,  the title `` eastern orthodox '' ,  `` orthodox catholic '' ,  or simply `` orthodox '' . 
while the church continues officially to call itself `` catholic '' ,  for reasons of universality ,  the common title of `` eastern orthodox church '' avoids casual confusion with the roman catholic church . 
eastern orthodox theology is based on the nicene creed . 
while the eastern orthodox church recognizes what it shares in common with other churches ,  including the catholic church ,  it sees catholicity in terms of complete union in communion and faith ,  with the church throughout all time ,  and the sharing remains incomplete when not shared fully . 
the eastern orthodox church shared communion with the roman catholic church until the east–west schism in 1054, triggered by disputes over doctrine ,  especially the authority of the pope . 
each church has a ruling bishop and a holy synod to administer its jurisdiction and to lead the orthodox church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices . 
the eastern orthodox church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural—a result of the fall of man . 
the eastern orthodox believe that christ ,  from the moment of his conception ,  was both fully god and fully human . 
because of the schism the eastern orthodox no longer recognize the primacy of the pope of rome . 
with the mutual excommunications of the east–west schism in 1054, the churches in rome and constantinople each viewed the other as having departed from the true church ,  leaving a smaller but still-catholic church in place . 
the orthodox church holds that seven ecumenical councils ,  held between the 4th and the 8th centuries ,  are authoritative . 
this unity of the church is sometimes called the `` communion of the saints '' . 
all members of the eastern orthodox church profess the same faith ,  regardless of race or nationality ,  jurisdiction or local custom ,  or century of birth . 
the eastern orthodox church understands the death and resurrection of jesus to be real historical events ,  as described in the gospels of the new testament . 
eusebius baptised constantine the great in his villa in nicomedia ,  on may 22, 337 just before the death of the emperor . 
eusebius of nicomedia  -lrb-  died 341 -rrb- was the man who baptised constantine the great . 
he brought ulfilas into the arian priesthood and sent the latter to convert the heathen goths . 
at the first council of nicaea ,  325, he signed the confession ,  but only after a long and desperate opposition in which he `` subscribe with hand only ,  not heart '' according to ancient sources . 
during this period ,  it grew to become one of the largest cities in the world and home to an urban culture centered on the notion of a `` floating world '' . 
an explosive material ,  or simply an explosive ,  is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly ,  usually accompanied by the production of light ,  heat ,  sound ,  and pressure . 
the film also ranks no . 
in japan ,  the film grossed  . 
the film is considered to be one of the greatest martial arts films of all time . 
due to the success with his earlier films ,  warner bros began helping bruce lee with the film in 1972.
enter the dragon is a 1973 martial arts action film produced by and starring bruce lee . 
the film was shot on location in hong kong . 
the film was well received by critics and is regarded by many as one of the best films of 1973.
lee's martial arts films were broadly lampooned in the recurring `` almost live ! `` 
sammo hung appears in a brief fight scene against lee at the start of the film . 
however ,  yuen wah was lee's main stunt double for the film . 
in 2004, the film was deemed `` culturally significant '' by the library of congress and selected for preservation in the national film registry . 
in hong kong ,  the film grossed hk$3,307,536—huge business for the time ,  but substantially less than lee's `` fist of fury '' and `` way of the dragon '' . 
on the other hand ,  in an endothermic reaction or system ,  energy is taken from the surroundings in the course of the reaction . 
in thermodynamics ,  the term exothermic process  -lrb-  exo- : `` outside ''  -rrb-  describes a process or reaction that releases energy from the system to its surroundings ,  usually in the form of heat ,  but also in a form of light  -lrb-  e . g . 
yale was also a vestryman and treasurer of st .  mary's church at fort st .  george . 
on 5 april 1999, yale university recognized the 350th anniversary of yale's birthday . 
elihu yale was re-appointed as president of the administration of fort st george on 26 july 1687.
for 20 years yale served the honourable east india company . 
in boston ,  massachusetts ,  a tablet to yale was erected in 1927 at scollay square ,  near the site of yale's birth . 
yale married catherine hynmers ,  a widow ,  in 1680.
it was around this time that yale's three-year-old son david yale died and was interred in the madras cemetery . 
in 1718, cotton mather contacted yale and asked for his help . 
baudot invented his telegraph code in 1870 and patented it in 1874.
on 17 june 1874 baudot patented his first printing telegraph  -lrb-  patent no . 
in the meantime ,  baudot had patented his prototype telegraph a few weeks earlier . 
baudot’s code was later standardised as international telegraph alphabet number one . 
the telegraph service trained him in the morse telegraph and also sent him on a four-month course of instruction on the hughes printing telegraph system ,  which was later to inspire his own system . 
in 1874, french telegraph operator louis victor mimault patented a telegraph system using five separate lines to transmit . 
the telegraph service encouraged baudot to develop—on his own time—a system for time-multiplexing several telegraph messages using hughes teleprinters . 
the baudot system was accepted by the french telegraph administration in 1875, with the first online tests of his system occurring between paris and bordeaux on 12 november 1877.
in 2003, the minnesota department of economic security and minnesota department of trade and economic development were merged to form the minnesota department of employment and economic development . 
in the united states ,  children's economic security is indicated by the income level and employment security of their families or organizations . 
in 1972, the state legislature of arizona formed a department of economic security with a mission to promote `` the safety ,  well-being ,  and self sufficiency of children ,  adults ,  and families '' . 
the headers are coded more robustly than the data . 
it also enhances the circuit data mode called hscsd ,  increasing the data rate of this service . 
in gprs coding scheme cs-4, no convolutional coding is applied . 
enhanced data rates for gsm evolution  -lrb-  edge  -rrb-   -lrb-  also known as enhanced gprs  -lrb-  egprs  -rrb-  ,  or imt single carrier  -lrb-  imt-sc  -rrb-  ,  or enhanced data rates for global evolution  -rrb-  is a digital mobile phone technology that allows improved data transmission rates as a backward-compatible extension of gsm . 
in edge ,  a single rlc data block  -lrb-  ranging from 23 to 148 bytes of data  -rrb-  is transmitted over four frames ,  using a single time slot . 
edge is standardized also by 3gpp as part of the gsm family . 
once this time expires ,  it is considered lost ,  and subsequent data blocks may then be forwarded to upper layers . 
unlike the runic letter þ ,  ð is a modified roman letter . 
eth  -lrb-   ,  uppercase: ð ,  lowercase: ð; also spelled edh or eð  -rrb-  is a letter used in old english ,  middle english ,  icelandic ,  faroese  -lrb-  in which it is called `` edd ''  -rrb-  ,  and elfdalian . 
in the icelandic and faroese alphabets ,  `` ð '' follows `` d '' . 
syria also built three smaller dams on the khabur and its tributaries . 
in syria ,  three rivers add their water to the euphrates; the sajur ,  the balikh and the khabur . 
originating in eastern turkey ,  the euphrates flows through syria and iraq to join the tigris in the shatt al-arab ,  which empties into the persian gulf . 
the drainage basins of the kara su and the murat river cover an area of and  ,  respectively . 
this was in violation of an agreement reached in 1987 in which turkey committed to releasing a minimum of of water per second at the turkish–syrian border . 
large parts of the euphrates basin were for the first time united under a single ruler during the akkadian empire  -lrb-  2335–2154 bc  -rrb-  and ur iii empires ,  which controlled – either directly or indirectly through vassals – large parts of modern-day iraq and northeastern syria . 
the flooding of lake assad led to the forced displacement of c .  4,000 families ,  who were resettled in other parts of northern syria as part of a now abandoned plan to create an `` arab belt '' along the borders with turkey and iraq . 
through a newly restored power line ,  the haditha dam in iraq provides electricity to baghdad . 
in sumerian ,  the name of the city of sippar in modern-day iraq was also written ud . kib . nun ,  indicating a historically strong relationship between the city and the river . 
the euphrates is the longest river of western asia . 
once the euphrates enters iraq ,  there are no more natural tributaries to the euphrates ,  although canals connecting the euphrates basin with the tigris basin exist . 
there are 9 vowels and 36 diphthongs ,  28 of which are native to estonian . 
although the estonian and germanic languages are of very different origins ,  one can identify many similar words in estonian and german ,  for example . 
in 1945, 97.3% of estonia considered itself ethnic estonian and spoke the language . 
although the estonian and germanic languages are of very different origins ,  one can identify many similar words in estonian and english ,  for example . 
estonian went back to being the only state language in estonia which in practice meant that use of estonian was promoted while the use of russian was discouraged . 
after the estonian war of independence in 1919, the estonian language became the state language of the newly independent country . 
the return of soviet immigrants to their countries of origin has brought the proportion of estonians in estonia back above 70% . 
in english: in the period from 1525 to 1917, 14,503 titles were published in estonian; by comparison ,  between 1918 and 1940, 23,868 titles were published . 
south estonian consists of the tartu ,  mulgi ,  võro and seto varieties . 
the most famous reformer of estonian ,  johannes aavik  -lrb-  1880–1973 -rrb- ,  used creations `` ex nihilo ''  -lrb-  cf . 
the two languages were united based on northern estonian by anton thor helle . 
the estonian language  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the official language of estonia ,  spoken natively by about 1.1 million people: 922,000 people in estonia and 160,000 outside estonia . 
in the english language ,  the verb 'to be'  -lrb-  also known as the `` copula ''  -rrb-  has several distinct functions:
bourland and johnston then edited a third book ,  `` e-prime iii: a third anthology '' ,  published in 1997.
e-prime  -lrb-  short for english-prime or english prime ,  sometimes denoted é or e′  -rrb-  is a version of the english language that excludes all forms of the verb `` to be '' ,  including all conjugations ,  contractions and archaic forms . 
bourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation . 
then ,  for any `` p '' and `` q '' ,  `` p '' + `` q '' is defined as − ''r '' where `` r '' is the unique third point on the line containing `` p '' and `` q '' . 
however ,  if `` p '' happens to be an inflection point  -lrb-  a point where the concavity of the curve changes  -rrb-  ,  we take `` r '' to be `` p '' itself and `` p '' + `` p '' is simply the point opposite itself . 
we then take `` p '' + `` q '' to be − ''r '' ,  the point opposite `` r '' . 
if `` p '' and `` q '' are two points on the curve ,  then we can uniquely describe a third point ,  `` p '' + `` q '' ,  in the following way . 
since the curve is symmetrical about the x-axis ,  given any point `` p '' ,  we can take − ''p '' to be the point opposite it . 
let `` y = sx + d '' be the line that intersects `` p '' and `` q '' ,  which has the following slope:
for more see also:
the torus is also an abelian group ,  and in fact this correspondence is also a group isomorphism . 
for a cubic curve not in weierstrass normal form ,  we can still define a group structure by designating one of its nine inflection points as the identity `` o '' . 
equidae belongs to the order perissodactyla ,  which includes the extant tapirs and rhinoceros ,  and several extinct families . 
there are many programs based on eliza in different programming languages . 
weizenbaum named his program eliza after eliza doolittle ,  a working-class character in george bernard shaw's `` pygmalion '' . 
however ,  this required eliza to have a script of instructions on how to respond to inputs from users . 
her behavior in the story often mimics the responses of the eliza program . 
eliza starts its process of responding to an input by a user by first examining the text input for a `` keyword '' . 
in the 2008 anime rd sennou chousashitsu ,  aka `` real drive '' ,  a character named eliza weizenbaum appears ,  an obvious tribute to eliza and joseph weizenbaum . 
as such ,  eliza was one of the first chatterbots and one of the first programs capable of attempting the turing test . 
while these functions were all framed in eliza's programming ,  the exact manner by which the program dismantled ,  examined ,  and reassembled inputs is determined by the operating script . 
while eliza was built to be a `` doctor '' parry was intended to simulate a patient with schizophrenia . 
the effect is named for the 1966 chatterbot eliza ,  developed by mit computer scientist joseph weizenbaum . 
the eliza effect ,  in computer science ,  is the tendency to unconsciously assume computer behaviors are analogous to human behaviors ,  that is anthropomorphisation . 
if we write formula_12 in binary as formula_13, then this is equivalent to defining a sequence formula_14 by letting formula_15 and then defining formula_16 for formula_17, where formula_18 will equal formula_19.
a brief analysis shows that such an algorithm uses formula_20 squarings and at most formula_20 multiplications ,  where formula_22 denotes the floor function . 
first ,  initialize the result to 1: formula_3.
across all eukaryotic genes in genbank there were  -lrb-  in 2002 -rrb- ,  on average ,  5.48 exons per gene . 
exonization is the creation of a new exon ,  as a result of mutations in introns . 
an exon is any part of a gene that will encode a part of the final mature rna produced by that gene after introns have been removed by rna splicing . 
some non-coding rna transcripts also have exons and introns . 
in 1972, exxon was unveiled as the new ,  unified brand name for all former enco and esso outlets . 
exxon was the brand name of oil and natural resources company exxon corporation ,  prior to 1972 known as standard oil company of new jersey . 
exxon replaced the esso ,  enco ,  and humble brands in the united states in 1973.
by 1967, humble oil's esso stations in the southeast were rebranded to enco . 
as a result ,  standard oil company of new jersey was restricted from using esso in the u . s .  ,  except in those states awarded to it in the 1911 standard oil antitrust settlement . 
in 1959, standard oil company of new jersey secured full control of humble oil and restructured it into its u . s .  marketing and refining division ,  to market nationwide under the enco ,  esso and humble brands . 
in states where it was restricted from using the esso name ,  the company marketed under the humble or enco brands . 
the unrestricted international use of the popular esso brand prompted exxon to continue using it outside the u . s .  esso is the only widely used standard oil descendant brand left in existence . 
the `` exxon valdez '' oil spill occurred in prince william sound ,  alaska ,  march 24, 1989, when `` exxon valdez '' ,  an oil tanker owned by exxon shipping company ,  bound for long beach ,  california ,  struck prince william sound's bligh reef ,  1.5 miles west of tatitlek ,  alaska at 12:04 am local time and spilled  -lrb-  or a mass of 35,000 metric tonnes  -rrb-  of crude oil over the next few days . 
édouard alexandre de pomiane ,  sometimes édouard pozerski  -lrb-  20 april 1875 in paris – 26 january 1964 in paris  -rrb-  was a french scientist ,  radio broadcaster and food writer . 
the cause of edward vi's death is not certain . 
in february 1553, at age 15, edward fell ill . 
the council was first led by his uncle edward seymour ,  1st duke of somerset  -lrb-  1547–1549 -rrb- ,  and then by john dudley ,  1st earl of warwick  -lrb-  1550–1553 -rrb- ,  who from 1551 was duke of northumberland . 
edward vi  -lrb-  12 october 1537 – 6 july 1553 -rrb- was king of england and ireland from 28 january 1547 until his death . 
edward was a healthy baby who suckled strongly from the outset . 
as edward was growing up ,  he was able to understand more and more government business . 
the war ,  which continued into edward's reign ,  has become known as `` the rough wooing '' . 
henry viii's will named sixteen executors ,  who were to act as edward's council until he reached the age of eighteen . 
the king's greatest influence was in matters of religion ,  where the council followed the strongly protestant policy that edward favoured . 
although edward reigned for only six years and died at the age of 15, his reign made a lasting contribution to the english reformation and the structure of the church of england . 
the council replied that jane was queen by edward's authority and that mary ,  by contrast ,  was illegitimate and supported only by `` a few lewd ,  base people '' . 
king edward wrote in his `` chronicle '' that the 1549 risings began `` because certain commissions were sent down to pluck down enclosures '' . 
edward himself fully approved these changes ,  and though they were the work of reformers such as thomas cranmer ,  hugh latimer ,  and nicholas ridley ,  backed by edward's determinedly evangelical council ,  the fact of the king's religion was a catalyst in the acceleration of the reformation during his reign . 
edward became ill during january 1553 with a fever and cough that gradually worsened . 
edward vi was crowned at westminster abbey four days later on sunday 20 february . 
edward's reign was marked by economic problems and social unrest that in 1549 erupted into riot and rebellion . 
northumberland soon realised that he had miscalculated drastically ,  not least in failing to secure mary's person before edward's death . 
on mary's death in 1558, the english reformation resumed its course ,  and most of the reforms instituted during edward's reign were reinstated in the elizabethan religious settlement . 
edward noted his uncle's death in his `` chronicle '': `` the duke of somerset had his head cut off upon tower hill between eight and nine o'clock in the morning '' . 
other children were brought to play with edward ,  including the granddaughter of edward's chamberlain ,  sir william sidney ,  who in adulthood recalled the prince as `` a marvellous sweet child ,  of very mild and generous condition '' . 
however ,  cranmer was unable to implement all these reforms once it became clear in spring 1553 that king edward ,  upon whom the whole reformation in england depended ,  was dying . 
edsac 1 was finally shut down on 11 july 1958, having been superseded by edsac 2, which remained in use until 1965.
the first calculation done by edsac was a square number program run on 6 may 1949.
internally ,  the edsac used two's complement ,  binary numbers . 
the user then copied the code for the subroutine from a master tape onto their own tape following the end of their own program . 
there is a simulation of edsac available and a full description of the initial orders and first programs . 
all instruction codes were by design represented by one mnemonic letter ,  so that the `` add '' instruction ,  for example ,  used the edsac character code for the letter a . 
the accumulator could hold 71 bits ,  including the sign ,  allowing two long  -lrb-  35-bit  -rrb-  numbers to be multiplied without losing any precision . 
shepard was recommended to a . 
these now form the e . h .  shepard archive . 
shepard was born in st john's wood ,  london . 
shepard was a prolific painter ,  showing in a number of major exhibitions . 
shepard wrote two autobiographies: `` drawn from memory ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- and `` drawn from life ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- . 
shepard was made an officer of the order of the british empire in the 1972 birthday honours . 
they typically appear as medium to large-sized grey colonies on blood agar ,  although some can express pigments  -lrb-  such as serratia marcescens  -rrb-  . 
in fact ,  the etymology of the family is enterobacterium with the suffix to designate a family  -lrb-  aceae  -rrb- —not after the genus `` enterobacter ''  -lrb-  which would be `` enterobacteraceae ''  -rrb- —and the type genus is `` escherichia '' . 
in 1891 essendon won their first vfa premiership ,  which they repeated in 1892, 1893 and 1894.
it was known firstly as essendon town and ,  after 1905, as essendon  -lrb-  although it was often called essendon a ,  with the a standing for association  -rrb-  . 
with its preferred option off the table ,  the club returned to essendon ,  and the essendon vfa club disbanded ,  with most of its players moving to north melbourne . 
essendon  -lrb-  18 wins ,  2 draws  -rrb-  was undefeated in the 1893 season . 
in the 1922 season ,  playing in essendon for the first time in decades ,  essendon reached the final four for the first time since 1912, finishing in third place . 
at the end of the 1896 season essendon along with seven other clubs formed the victorian football league . 
the club played its first recorded match against the carlton second twenty on 7 june 1873, with essendon winning by one goal . 
in 1882 the club moved home games to the east melbourne cricket ground ,   -lrb-  since gone  -rrb-  after an application to play on the essendon cricket ground  -lrb-  later known as windy hill  -rrb-  was voted down by then lord mayor james taylor on the basis that city of essendon the mayor considered the essendon cricket ground `` to be suitable only for the gentleman's game of cricket '' , 
this move away from essendon ,  at a time when fans would walk to their local ground ,  didn't go down too well with many essendon people; and ,  as a consequence ,  a new team and club was formed in 1900, unconnected with the first  -lrb-  although it played in the same colours  -rrb-  ,  that was based at the essendon cricket ground ,  and playing in the victorian football association . 
blyton herself wrote that `` my love of children is the whole foundation of all my work '' . 
by the late 1950s blyton's clubs had a membership of 500,000, and raised £35,000 in the six years of the `` enid blyton magazine '''s run . 
in a 1982 survey of 10,000 eleven-year-old children blyton was voted their most popular writer . 
the first enid blyton day was held at rickmansworth on 6 march 1993, and in october 1996 the enid blyton award ,  the enid ,  was given to those who have made outstanding contributions towards children . 
blyton's daily routine varied little over the years . 
 ''sunny stories '' was renamed `` enid blyton's sunny stories '' in january 1937, and served as a vehicle for the serialisation of blyton's books . 
blyton's daughter imogen has stated that she `` loved a relationship with children through her books '' ,  but real children were an intrusion ,  and there was no room for intruders in the world that blyton occupied through her writing . 
blyton's `` the faraway tree '' series of books has also been adapted to television and film . 
the first book in blyton's barney mysteries series ,  `` the rockingdown mystery '' ,  was published in 1949, as was the first of her fifteen secret seven novels . 
in 1920 blyton relocated to chessington ,  and began writing in her spare time . 
the enid blyton trust for children was established in 1982 with imogen as its first chairman ,  and in 1985 it established the national library for the handicapped child . 
in 1938 blyton and her family moved to a house in beaconsfield ,  which was named green hedges by blyton's readers following a competition in her magazine . 
accusations of racism in blyton's books were first made by lena jeger in a `` guardian '' article published in 1966, in which she was critical of blyton's `` the little black doll '' ,  published a few months earlier . 
noddy made his first appearance in the `` sunday graphic '' in 1949, the same year as blyton's first daily noddy strip for the london `` evening standard '' . 
enid blyton was born on 11 august 1897 in east dulwich ,  south london ,  the oldest of the three children ,  to thomas carey blyton  -lrb-  1870–1920 -rrb- ,  a cutlery salesman ,  and his wife theresa mary  -lrb-   harrison; 1874–1950 -rrb- . 
enid mary blyton  -lrb-  11 august 1897 – 28 november 1968 -rrb- was an english children's writer whose books have been among the world's best-sellers since the 1930s ,  selling more than 600 million copies . 
the london-based entertainment and retail company trocadero plc purchased blyton's darrell waters ltd in 1995 for £14.6 million and established a subsidiary ,  enid blyton ltd ,  to handle all intellectual properties ,  character brands and media in blyton's works . 
blyton's depictions of boys and girls are considered by many critics to be sexist . 
in 1962 many of her books were among the first to be published by armada books in paperback ,  making them more affordable to children . 
in blyton's 1944 novel `` the island of adventure '' ,  a black servant named jo-jo is very intelligent ,  but is particularly cruel to the children . 
blyton's first daughter gillian ,  was born on 15 july 1931, and after a miscarriage in 1934, she gave birth to a second daughter ,  imogen ,  on 27 october 1935.
blyton had an interest in biblical narratives ,  and retold old and new testament stories . 
in 1950 blyton established the company darrell waters ltd to manage her affairs . 
blyton's first full-length adventure novel ,  `` the secret island '' ,  was published in 1938, featuring the characters of jack ,  mike ,  peggy and nora . 
blyton's range of plots and settings has been described as limited and continually recycled . 
from the mid-1950s rumours began to circulate that blyton had not written all the books attributed to her ,  a charge she found particularly distressing . 
the famous five series gathered such a following that readers asked blyton if they might form a fan club . 
the early epipaleolithic ,  also known as kebaran ,  lasts from 20,000 to 12,150 bp . 
the period may be subdivided into early ,  middle and late epipaleolithic: the early epipaleolithic corresponds to the kebaran culture ,  c .  20,000 to 14,500 years ago ,  the middle epipaleolithic is the geometric kebaran or late phase of the kebaran ,  and the late epipaleolithic to the natufian ,  14,500–11,500 bp . 
the late epipaleolithic is also called the natufian culture . 
the natufian culture is commonly split into two subperiods: early natufian  -lrb-  12,500–10,800 bce  -rrb-   -lrb-  christopher delage gives 13,000–11,500 bp uncalibrated ,  equivalent to 13,700–11,500 bce  -rrb-  and late natufian  -lrb-  10,800–9500 bce  -rrb-  . 
the earliest known battle occurred during the mesolithic period at a site in sudan known as cemetery 117.
by 18,000 bp the climate and environment had changed ,  starting a period of transition . 
in a presidential system ,  the leader of the executive is both the `` head of state and head of government '' . 
in a parliamentary system ,  a cabinet minister responsible to the legislature is the head of government ,  while the head of state is usually a largely ceremonial monarch or president . 
many things bear fermi's name . 
in september 1920, fermi was admitted to the physics department . 
many awards ,  concepts ,  and institutions are named after fermi ,  including the enrico fermi award ,  the enrico fermi institute ,  the fermi national accelerator laboratory ,  the fermi gamma-ray space telescope ,  the enrico fermi nuclear generating station ,  and the synthetic element fermium ,  making him one of 16 scientists who have elements named after them . 
fermi's first major contribution was to statistical mechanics . 
enrico fermi was born in rome ,  italy ,  on 29 september 1901.
fermi arrived in new york city on 2 january 1939.
in his later years ,  fermi continued teaching at the university of chicago . 
fermi achieved first place in the classification of the entrance exam . 
initially ,  argonne was run by fermi as part of the university of chicago ,  but it became a separate entity with fermi as its director in may 1944.
but their work habits and personalities were different ,  and fermi had trouble working with szilárd . 
this experiment was a landmark in the quest for energy ,  and it was typical of fermi's approach . 
enrico fermi  -lrb-  ; 29 september 1901 – 28 november 1954 -rrb- was an italian and naturalized-american physicist and the creator of the world's first nuclear reactor ,  the chicago pile-1.
fermi reluctantly moved ,  and his team became part of the new metallurgical laboratory there . 
fermi married laura capon ,  a science student at the university ,  on 19 july 1928.
thus fermi saw the theory published in italian and german before it was published in english . 
these laws threatened laura ,  who was jewish ,  and put many of fermi's research assistants out of work . 
editor war is the common name for the rivalry between users of the emacs and vi  -lrb-  usually vim  -rrb-  text editors . 
in the past ,  many small editors modeled after or derived from vi flourished . 
supporters of vi have created an opposing cult of vi ,  argued by the more hardline emacs users to be an attempt to `` ape their betters '' . 
due to the unintuitive character sequence to exit vi  -lrb-  `` :q ! 
in addition to emacs and vi workalikes ,  pico and its free and open-source clone nano and other text editors such as ne often have their own third-party advocates in the editor wars ,  though not to the extent of emacs and vi . 
the eastern orthodox church ,  like the catholic church ,  claims to be the one ,  holy ,  catholic and apostolic church . 
the orthodox church is a communion comprising the fifteen separate autocephalous hierarchical churches that recognize each other as `` canonical '' orthodox christian churches . 
the term `` western orthodox church '' is disfavored by members of that vicariate . 
the term western orthodoxy is sometimes used to denominate what is technically a vicariate within the antiochian orthodox and the russian orthodox churches and thus a part of the eastern orthodox church as that term is defined here . 
some guitars have a fixed bridge  -lrb-  3.4 -rrb- . 
a few guitars feature stereo output ,  such as rickenbacker guitars equipped with `` rick-o-sound '' . 
some guitars have no frets—and others ,  like the gittler guitar ,  have no neck in the traditional sense . 
an electric guitar is a guitar that uses one or more pickups to convert the vibration of its strings into electrical signals . 
electric guitar necks vary in composition and shape . 
while an acoustic guitar's sound depends largely on the vibration of the guitar's body and the air inside it ,  the sound of an electric guitar depends largely on the signal from the pickups . 
compared to an acoustic guitar ,  which has a hollow body ,  electric guitars make much less audible sound when their strings are plucked ,  so electric guitars are normally plugged into a guitar amplifier and speaker . 
according to collier ,  `` floyd's guitar blues '' may be the first important use of the electric guitar on record . 
these are common on carved-top guitars ,  such as the gibson les paul and the paul reed smith models ,  and on slab-body guitars ,  such as the music man albert lee and fender guitars that are not equipped with a vibrato arm . 
neck-through bodies are somewhat more common in bass guitars . 
invented in 1931, the amplified electric guitar was adopted by jazz guitar players ,  who wanted to play single-note guitar solos in large big band ensembles . 
the guitar output jack typically provides a monaural signal . 
some guitars have piezo pickups ,  in addition to or instead of magnetic pickups . 
there are several types of electric guitar ,  including: the solid-body guitar; various types of hollow-body guitars; the six-string guitar  -lrb-  the most common type  -rrb-  ,  which is usually tuned e ,  b ,  g ,  d ,  a ,  e ,  from highest to lowest strings; the seven-string guitar ,  which typically adds a low b string below the low e; and the twelve-string guitar ,  which has six pairs of strings . 
the demand for amplified guitars began during the big band era; as orchestras increased in size ,  guitar players soon realized the necessity in guitar amplification & electrification . 
in acoustic and archtop guitars ,  wood choices more clearly affect tone . 
these appear on rickenbackers ,  gretsches ,  epiphones ,  a wide variety of archtop guitars ,  particularly jazz guitars ,  and the 1952 gibson les paul . 
embryo drawing is the illustration of embryos in their developmental sequence . 
in defense of haeckel's embryo drawings ,  the principal argument is that of `` schematisation . `` 
this is partly because haeckel's drawings were very inaccurate . 
to this day ,  embryo drawings are made in undergraduate developmental biology lessons . 
from a more modern perspective ,  haeckel's drawings were the beginnings of the field of evolutionary developmental biology  -lrb-  evo-devo  -rrb-  . 
the debate between haeckel and his ultimately becomes fueled by the description of an embryo that wilhelm krause propels directly into the ongoing feud between haeckel and his . 
in current biology ,  fundamental research in developmental biology and evolutionary developmental biology is no longer driven by morphological comparisons between embryos ,  but more by molecular biology . 
the exactness of ernst haeckel's drawings of embryos has caused much controversy among intelligent design proponents recently and haeckel's intellectual opponents in the past . 
his completes his denunciation of haeckel by pronouncing that haeckel had “‘relinquished the right to count as an equal in the company of serious researchers . ’”
haeckel's work was published in 1866 and 1874, years after darwin's `` the origin of species ''  -lrb-  1859 -rrb- . 
nevertheless ,  new interest in evolution in and around 1977 inspired developmental biologists to look more closely at haeckel's illustrations . 
in a system enclosed so as to prevent matter transfer ,  at constant pressure ,  the enthalpy change equals the energy transferred from the environment through heat transfer or work other than expansion work . 
the total enthalpy ,  `` h '' ,  of a system cannot be measured directly . 
in a system enclosed so as to prevent matter transfer ,  for processes at constant pressure ,  the heat absorbed or released equals the change in enthalpy . 
josiah willard gibbs used the term `` a heat function for constant pressure '' for clarity . 
for processes under constant pressure ,  δ ''h '' is equal to the change in the internal energy of the system ,  plus the pressure-volume work p δv done by the system on its surroundings  -lrb-  which is > 0 for an expansion and < 0 for a contraction  -rrb-  . 
until the 1920s ,  the symbol was used ,  somewhat inconsistently ,  for `` heat '' in general . 
many orchestral and chamber compositions date ,  in fact ,  from the period between 1954 and 1959: `` musica per archi e pianoforte ''  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- ,  `` invenzione ,  canone e ricercare per piano ''; `` sestetto per flauto ,  oboe ,  fagotto ,  violino ,  viola e violoncello ''  -lrb-  1955 -rrb- ,  `` dodici variazione per oboe ,  violoncello e piano ''; `` trio per clarinetto ,  corno e violoncello ''; `` variazione su un tema di frescobaldi ''  -lrb-  1956 -rrb-; `` quattro pezzi per chitarra ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb-; `` distanze per violino ,  violoncello e piano ''; `` musica per undici violini ,  tre studi per flauto ,  clarinetto e fagotto ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb-; and the `` concerto per orchestra ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  dedicated to his teacher goffredo petrassi . 
his first teacher was his father mario morricone ,  who taught him how to read music and also to play several instruments . 
morricone soon gained popularity by writing his first background music for radio dramas and quickly moved into film . 
in 2007, he received the academy honorary award `` for his magnificent and multifaceted contributions to the art of film music . `` 
in 1969, he co-founded forum music village ,  a prestigious recording studio . 
ennio morricone ,   -lrb-  ; born 10 november 1928 -rrb- is an italian composer ,  orchestrator ,  conductor ,  and former trumpet player ,  writing in a wide range of musical styles . 
his fight with traditional wing chun kung fu master william cheung in 1986, at a seminar in germany ,  caused controversy in the wider wing chun community . 
he was a notable member of leung ting's wing tsun organisation until 2002, when he formed his own organisation . 
boztepe also began training in latosa-escrima ,  which kernspecht's german wing tsun organization had decided to make part of the family in 1982.
carried traffic in erlangs is the average number of concurrent calls measured over a given period  -lrb-  often one hour  -rrb-  ,  while offered traffic is the traffic that would be carried if all call-attempts succeeded . 
a third measurement of traffic is instantaneous traffic ,  expressed as a certain number of erlangs ,  meaning the exact number of calls taking place at a point in time . 
one hour  -rrb-  is said to have a load of 1 erlang . 
the more recent extended erlang b method provides a further traffic solution that draws on erlang's results . 
where the existing busy-hour carried traffic ,  `` e '' ,  is measured on an already-overloaded system ,  with a significant level of blocking ,  it is necessary to take account of the blocked calls in estimating the busy-hour offered traffic `` e ''  -lrb-  which is the traffic value to be used in the erlang formulae  -rrb-  . 
full utilization of that capacity ,  60 minutes of traffic ,  constitutes 1 erlang . 
the ccitt named the international unit of telephone traffic the erlang in 1946 in honor of agner krarup erlang . 
the formula also assumes that blocked traffic is cleared and does not return . 
any player may legally catch a backwards or lateral pass . 
before the snap of the ball ,  in the american game ,  backfield players may only move parallel to the line of scrimmage ,  only one back may be in motion at any given time ,  and if forward motion has occurred ,  the back must be still for a full second before the snap . 
if ,  for example ,  eight men line up on the line of scrimmage ,  the team loses an eligible receiver . 
the rules on eligible receivers only apply to forward passes . 
in american football and canadian football ,  not all players on offense are entitled to receive a forward pass . 
hoxha stated:
hoxha's son sokol hoxha was the ceo of the albanian post and telecommunication service and is married to liliana hoxha . 
hoxha then began to accuse yugoslavia of misconduct:
in july 1942, hoxha wrote `` call to the albanian peasantry '' ,  issued in the name of the communist party of albania . 
enver halil hoxha  -lrb-  ; ; 16 october 190811 april 1985 -rrb- was an albanian communist politician who served as the head of state of albania from 1944 until his death in 1985, as the first secretary of the party of labour of albania . 
on 8 november 1941, the communist party of albania  -lrb-  later renamed the party of labour of albania in 1948 -rrb- was founded . 
hoxha's death left albania with a legacy of isolation and fear of the outside world . 
on 13 july 1978, china announced that it was cutting off all aid to albania . 
on 11 january 1946, zog was officially deposed and albania was proclaimed the people's republic of albania  -lrb-  renamed the people's socialist republic of albania in 1976 -rrb- . 
enver hoxha had declared during the anti-religious campaign that `` the only religion of albania is albanianism '' ,  a quotation from the poem `` o moj shqiperi ''  -lrb-  `` o albania ''  -rrb-  by the 19th-century albanian writer pashko vasa . 
hoxha's daughter ,  pranvera ,  is an architect . 
on 7 april 1939, albania was invaded by fascist italy . 
after the break with yugoslavia ,  hoxha aligned himself with the soviet union ,  for which he had a great admiration . 
hoxha's parents were halil and gjylihan  -lrb-  gjylo  -rrb-  hoxha ,  and hoxha had three sisters named fahrije ,  haxhire and sanije . 
a problem developed when the yugoslav communists disagreed with the goal of a greater albania and asked the communists in albania to withdraw their agreement . 
the state university of tirana was established in 1957, which was the first of its kind in albania . 
it has been estimated that there were approximately 32,000 people imprisoned in albania in 1985. ''
during this period ,  albania became the second largest producer of chromium in the world ,  which was considered an important export for albania . 
aid given from china was interest-free and it did not have to be repaid until albania could afford to do so . 
the later democratic president of albania sali berisha was often seen socializing with sokol hoxha and other close relatives of leading communist figures in albania . 
as a result ,  the population of albania tripled from 1 million in 1944 to around 3 million in 1985.
it marked the only real effort to kill hoxha . 
the first consultative meeting of activists of the communist party of albania was held in tirana from april 8 to 11, 1942, with hoxha himself delivering the main report on 8 april 1942.
by 1973, hoxha wrote in his diary `` reflections on china '' that the chinese leaders:
in an effort to keep albania in the soviet sphere ,  increased aid was given but the albanian leadership continued to move closer towards china . 
when albania responded by making agreements with the soviet union to purchase a supply of agricultural machinery ,  yugoslavia said that albania could not enter into any agreements with other countries without yugoslav approval . 
china never intervened in what albania's economic output should be ,  and chinese technicians worked for the same wages as albanian workers ,  unlike soviet technicians who sometimes made more than three times the pay of hoxha . 
the surname `` hoxha '' is the albanian variant of hodja  -lrb-  from   -rrb-  ,  a title given to his ancestors due to their efforts to teach albanians about islam . 
relations with china improved ,  as evidenced by chinese aid to albania being 4.2% in 1955 before the visit ,  and rising to 21.6% in 1957.
when his grandfather ,  emperor meiji ,  died on 30 july 1912, hirohito's father ,  yoshihito ,  assumed the throne and hirohito became the heir apparent . 
born in tokyo's aoyama palace  -lrb-  during the reign of his grandfather ,  emperor meiji  -rrb-  on 29 april 1901, hirohito was the first son of 21-year old crown prince yoshihito  -lrb-  the future emperor taishō  -rrb-  and 17-year old crown princess sadako  -lrb-  the future empress teimei  -rrb-  . 
by 1901 the population of emsworth was about 2,000.
emsworth has a population of approximately 10,000.
during the 18th and 19th centuries ,  emsworth was still a port . 
emsworth began as a saxon village . 
for a few years  -lrb-  2001 to 2007 -rrb- ,  emsworth held a food festival . 
for example ,  proteins dissolve better in water than in oil ,  and so tend to form oil-in-water emulsions  -lrb-  that is ,  they promote the dispersion of oil droplets throughout a continuous phase of water  -rrb-  . 
one example would be a mixture of water and oil . 
emulsifiers that are more soluble in water  -lrb-  and conversely ,  less soluble in oil  -rrb-  will generally form oil-in-water emulsions ,  while emulsifiers that are more soluble in oil will form water-in-oil emulsions . 
two special classes of emulsions – microemulsions and nanoemulsions ,  with droplet sizes below 100 nm – appear translucent . 
two liquids can form different types of emulsions . 
emulsions contain both a dispersed and a continuous phase ,  with the boundary between the phases called the `` interface '' . 
the word `` emulsion '' comes from the latin mulgeo ,  mulgere `` to milk '' ,  as milk is an emulsion of fat and water ,  along with other components . 
mountbatten left with his tail between his legs . `` 
mountbatten was a favourite of winston churchill . 
in 1934, mountbatten was appointed to his first command – the destroyer  . 
mountbatten brought forward the date of the partition from june 1948 to 15 august 1947.
in 1969 mountbatten participated in a 12 part autobiographical television series `` lord mountbatten: a man for the century '' ,  also known as `` the life and times of lord mountbatten '' ,  produced by associated-rediffusion and scripted by historian john terraine . 
like many members of the royal family ,  mountbatten was an aficionado of polo . 
in 1978, mountbatten passed the presidency of the college to his great-nephew ,  the prince of wales . 
on hearing of mountbatten's death ,  the then master of the queen's music ,  malcolm williamson ,  was moved to write the `` lament in memory of lord mountbatten of burma '' for violin and string orchestra . 
the creation of pakistan was never emotionally accepted by many british leaders ,  among them mountbatten . 
during this period mountbatten also served as chairman of the nato military committee for a year . 
charles was rescheduled to tour india alone ,  but mountbatten did not live to the planned date of departure . 
in 1974, mountbatten began corresponding with charles about a potential marriage to his granddaughter ,  hon . 
four years later mountbatten secured an invitation for himself and amanda to accompany charles on his planned 1980 tour of india . 
mountbatten was elected a fellow of the royal society and had received an honorary doctorate from heriot-watt university in 1968.
mountbatten admitted `` edwina and i spent all our married lives getting into other people's beds . `` 
from 1954 to 1959, mountbatten was first sea lord ,  a position that had been held by his father ,  prince louis of battenberg ,  some forty years earlier . 
mountbatten was mentioned in despatches on 9 august 1940 and 21 march 1941 and awarded the distinguished service order in january 1941.
lord and lady mountbatten had two daughters: patricia knatchbull ,  2nd countess mountbatten of burma  -lrb-  14 february 1924 – 13 june 2017 -rrb- ,  sometime lady-in-waiting to queen elizabeth ii ,  and lady pamela hicks  -lrb-  born 19 april 1929 -rrb- ,  who accompanied them to india in 1947–1948 and was also sometime lady-in-waiting to the queen . 
canada's capital city of ottawa ,  ontario ,  erected mountbatten avenue in his memory . 
the ira issued a statement afterward ,  saying:the ira claim responsibility for the execution of lord louis mountbatten . 
mountbatten was educated at home for the first 10 years of his life: he was then sent to lockers park school in hertfordshire and on to the royal naval college ,  osborne in may 1913.
on 5 september 1979 mountbatten received a ceremonial funeral at westminster abbey ,  which was attended by the queen ,  the royal family and members of the european royal houses . 
on 27 october 1941 mountbatten replaced roger keyes as chief of combined operations and was promoted commodore . 
after india ,  mountbatten served as commander of the 1st cruiser squadron in the mediterranean fleet and ,  having been granted the substantive rank of vice-admiral on 22 june 1949, he became second-in-command of the mediterranean fleet in april 1950.
gerry also advanced numerous proposals for indirect elections of the president of the united states ,  most of them involving limiting the right to vote to the state governors and electors . 
in 1812 the state adopted new constitutionally mandated electoral district boundaries . 
after its ratification he was elected to the inaugural united states congress ,  where he was actively involved in drafting and passage of the bill of rights as an advocate of individual and state liberties . 
gerry was convinced to rejoin the confederation congress in 1783, when the state legislature agreed to support his call for needed reforms . 
because of his fear of demagoguery and belief the people of the united states could be easily misled ,  gerry also advocated indirect elections . 
the harvard bill had significant political slant because the recent split between orthodox congregationalists and unitarians also divided the state to some extent along party lines ,  and federalist unitarians had recently gained control over the harvard board . 
gerry vigorously supported alexander hamilton's reports on public credit ,  including the assumption at full value of state debts ,  and supported hamilton's new bank of the united states ,  positions consistent with earlier calls he had made for economic centralization . 
gerry is generally remembered for the use of his name in the word `` gerrymander '' ,  for his refusal to sign the united states constitution ,  and for his role in the xyz affair . 
the gerrymandering of the state senate was a notable success in the 1812 election: the body was thoroughly dominated by republicans ,  even though the house and the governor's seat went to federalists by substantial margins . 
republican james sullivan won the governor's seat from strong in 1807, but his successor was unable to hold the seat in the 1809 election ,  which went to federalist christopher gore . 
he was elected as a representative to the first continental congress in september 1774, but refused ,  still grieving the loss of his father . 
in symmetric-key schemes ,  the encryption and decryption keys are the same . 
in public-key encryption schemes ,  the encryption key is published for anyone to use and encrypt messages . 
the basic idea was that the quantum states of two particles in a system cannot always be decomposed from the joint state of the two ,  as is the case for the bell state ,  formula_1
the original epr paradox challenges the prediction of quantum mechanics that it is impossible to know both the position and the momentum of a quantum particle . 
quantum theory and quantum mechanics do not provide single measurement outcomes in a deterministic way . 
because it is in a superposition of states it is impossible without measuring to know the definite state of spin of either particle in the spin singlet . 
there is ,  of course ,  nothing special about choosing the `` z ''-axis: according to quantum mechanics the spin singlet state may equally well be expressed as a superposition of spin states pointing in the `` x '' direction . 
per epr ,  the paradox demonstrated that quantum theory was incomplete ,  and needed to be extended with hidden variables . 
alice now measures the spin along the `` z ''-axis . 
epr tried to set up a paradox to question the range of true application of quantum mechanics: quantum theory predicts that both values cannot be known for a particle ,  and yet the epr thought experiment purports to show that they must all have determinate values . 
according to quantum mechanics ,  under some conditions ,  a pair of quantum systems may be described by a single wave function ,  which encodes the probabilities of the outcomes of experiments that may be performed on the two systems ,  whether jointly or individually . 
in quantum mechanics ,  the `` x ''-spin and `` z ''-spin are `` incompatible observables '' ,  meaning the heisenberg uncertainty principle applies to alternating measurements of them: a quantum state cannot possess a definite value for both of these variables . 
in 2002, `` ethnologue '' was asked to work with the international organization for standardization  -lrb-  iso  -rrb-  to integrate its codes into a draft international standard . 
this anomaly resulted because the iso 639-2 standard has separate codes for twi and fante ,  which have separate literary traditions ,  and all 639-2 codes for individual languages are automatically part of 639–3, even though 639-3 would not normally assign them separate codes . 
in 2008 in the same journal ,  lyle campbell and verónica grondona said: ``  ''ethnologue '' .  .  . has become the standard reference ,  and its usefulness is hard to overestimate . `` 
in 1986, william bright ,  then editor of the journal `` language '' ,  wrote of `` ethnologue '' that it `` is indispensable for any reference shelf on the languages of the world '' . 
with sufficient energy ,  the liquid will turn into vapor . 
if a liquid is heated ,  when the vapor pressure reaches the ambient pressure the liquid will boil . 
on a molecular level ,  there is no strict boundary between the liquid state and the vapor state . 
on average ,  only a fraction of the molecules in a liquid have enough heat energy to escape from the liquid . 
when evaporation occurs ,  the energy removed from the vaporized liquid will reduce the temperature of the liquid ,  resulting in evaporative cooling . 
evaporation is a type of vaporization that occurs on the surface of a liquid as it changes into the gas phase . 
 -lrb-  `` see twelve-tone equal temperament below . ``   -rrb- 
in twelve-tone equal temperament ,  which divides the octave into 12 equal parts ,  the width of a semitone ,  i . e . 
other equal temperaments divide the octave differently . 
in classical music and western music in general ,  the most common tuning system since the 18th century has been twelve-tone equal temperament  -lrb-  also known as 12 equal temperament ,  12-tet or 12-et  -rrb-  ,  which divides the octave into 12 parts ,  all of which are equal on a logarithmic scale ,  with a ratio equal to the 12th root of 2  -lrb-   ≈ 1.05946 -rrb- . 
in equal temperament tunings ,  the generating interval is often found by dividing some larger desired interval ,  often the octave  -lrb-  ratio 2:1 -rrb- ,  into a number of smaller equal steps  -lrb-  equal frequency ratios between successive notes  -rrb-  . 
in an equal temperament ,  the distance between two adjacent steps of the scale is the same interval . 
where the ratio `` r '' divides the ratio `` p ''  -lrb-  typically the octave ,  which is 2:1 -rrb- into `` n '' equal parts . 
henricus grammateus drew a close approximation to equal temperament in 1518.
twelve-tone equal temperament took hold for a variety of reasons . 
an example of an equal temperament that finds its smallest interval by dividing an interval other than the octave into equal parts is the equal-tempered version of the bohlen–pierce scale ,  which divides the just interval of an octave and a fifth  -lrb-  ratio 3:1 -rrb- ,  called a `` tritave '' or a `` pseudo-octave '' in that system ,  into 13 equal parts . 
scales are often measured in cents ,  which divide the octave into 1200 equal intervals  -lrb-  each called a cent  -rrb-  . 
according to gene cho ,  zhu zaiyu was the first person to solve the equal temperament problem mathematically . 
gibbon later wrote:
as a youth ,  gibbon's health was under constant threat . 
edward gibbon was born in 1737, the son of edward and judith gibbon at lime grove ,  in the town of putney ,  surrey . 
evelyn waugh admired gibbon's style ,  but not his secular viewpoint . 
in june 1765, gibbon returned to his father's house ,  and remained there until the latter's death in 1770.
the subject of gibbon's writing ,  as well as his ideas and style ,  have influenced other writers . 
gibbon's work has been praised for its style ,  his piquant epigrams and its effective irony . 
edward gibbon frs  -lrb-  ; 8 may 173716 january 1794 -rrb- was an english historian ,  writer and member of parliament . 
in a letter to lord sheffield on 5 february 1791, gibbon praised burke's `` reflections on the revolution in france '':
davis followed gibbon's `` vindication '' with yet another reply  -lrb-  1779 -rrb- . 
besides his influence on churchill ,  gibbon was also a model for isaac asimov in his writing of `` the foundation trilogy '' ,  which he said involved `` a little bit of cribbin' from the works of edward gibbon '' . 
in this insistence upon the importance of primary sources ,  gibbon is considered by many to be one of the first modern historians:
smith remarked that gibbon's triumph had positioned him `` at the very head of europe's literary tribe . `` 
in 1793, word came of lady sheffield's death; gibbon immediately left lausanne and set sail to comfort a grieving but composed sheffield . 
