capra recalls his fears:
the film ,  however ,  became capra's most controversial . 
capra wrote of this period and recalled the confidence that cohn placed in capra's vision and directing:
during his first year with columbia ,  capra directed nine films ,  some of which were successful . 
capra's films in the 1930s enjoyed immense success at the academy awards . 
capra ,  however ,  denied any connection of the story with his own life . 
capra would eventually direct 20 films for cohn's studio ,  including all of his classics . 
capra directed his first `` real '' sound picture ,  `` the younger generation '' ,  in 1929.
capra ,  with the help of a cameraman ,  made the film in two days and cast it with amateurs . 
after that first serious job in films ,  capra began efforts to finding similar openings in the film industry . 
in many of capra's films ,  the wise-cracking and sharp dialogue was often written by riskin ,  and he and capra went on to become hollywood's `` most admired writer-director team . `` 
because of capra's engineering education ,  he adapted more easily to the new sound technology than most directors . 
17 countries have hosted the world cup . 
the fifa confederations cup is a tournament held one year before the world cup at the world cup host nation -lrb-  s  -rrb-  as a dress rehearsal for the upcoming world cup . 
the 21 world cup tournaments have been won by eight national teams . 
fifa also organises international tournaments for youth football  -lrb-  fifa u-20 world cup ,  fifa u-17 world cup ,  fifa u-20 women's world cup ,  fifa u-17 women's world cup  -rrb-  ,  club football  -lrb-  fifa club world cup  -rrb-  ,  and football variants such as futsal  -lrb-  fifa futsal world cup  -rrb-  and beach soccer  -lrb-  fifa beach soccer world cup  -rrb-  . 
each fifa world cup since 1966 has its own mascot or logo . 
both argentina and uruguay thus boycotted the 1938 fifa world cup . 
on 10 january 2017, fifa confirmed the 2026 world cup will have 48 finalist teams . 
two hundred teams entered the 2002 fifa world cup qualification rounds; 198 nations attempted to qualify for the 2006 fifa world cup ,  while a record 204 countries entered qualification for the 2010 fifa world cup . 
in all ,  79 nations have played in at least one world cup . 
the fifa u-20 women's world cup is held the year before each women's world cup and both tournaments are awarded in a single bidding process . 
the world cup was first televised in 1954 and is now the most widely viewed and followed sporting event in the world . 
with five titles ,  brazil are the most successful world cup team and also the only nation to have played in every world cup  -lrb-  21 -rrb- to date . 
the two teams have played each other twice in the world cup ,  in the 2002 final and in the 2014 semi-final . 
early world cups were given to countries at meetings of fifa's congress . 
the 2014 fifa world cup was hosted by brazil ,  the first held in south america since argentina 1978, and was the first occasion where consecutive world cups were held outside europe . 
the 1950 world cup ,  held in brazil ,  was the first to include british participants . 
since the 1958 fifa world cup ,  to avoid future boycotts or controversy ,  fifa began a pattern of alternating the hosts between the americas and europe ,  which continued until the 1998 fifa world cup . 
an equivalent tournament for women's football ,  the fifa women's world cup ,  was first held in 1991 in china . 
the 2026 fifa world cup was chosen to be held in the united states ,  canada and mexico ,  marking the first time a world cup has been shared by three host nations . 
since the second world cup in 1934, qualifying tournaments have been held to thin the field for the final tournament . 
forming a partnership with fifa in 1970, panini published its first sticker album for the 1970 world cup . 
from 1930 to 1970, the `` jules rimet trophy '' was awarded to the world cup winning team . 
in october 2016, fifa president gianni infantino stated his support for a 48-team world cup in 2026.
it is contested by the winners of each of the six fifa confederation championships ,  along with the fifa world cup champion and the host country . 
quintus fabius maximus verrucosus ,  surnamed cunctator  -lrb-   280–203 bc  -rrb-  ,  was a roman statesman and general of the third century bc . 
when the consul gaius flaminius was killed during the disastrous roman defeat at the battle of lake trasimene in 217 bc ,  panic swept rome . 
when word reached rome of the disastrous roman defeat under varro and paullus at the battle of cannae in 216 bc ,  the senate and the people of rome turned to fabius for guidance . 
while still a youth in 265 bc ,  fabius was consecrated an augur . 
born at rome c .  280 bc ,  fabius was a descendant of the ancient patrician fabia gens . 
the romans were unimpressed with this defensive strategy and at first gave fabius his epithet cunctator  -lrb-  delayer  -rrb-  as an insult . 
it is not known if fabius truly believed that these actions had won the gods over to the roman side ,  although the actions probably did  -lrb-  as intended  -rrb-  convince the average roman that the gods had finally been won over . 
fabius became gravely ill and died in 203 bc ,  shortly after hannibal's army left italy ,  and before the eventual roman victory over hannibal at the battle of zama won by scipio . 
logically ,  a floating-point number consists of:
a number representation specifies some way of encoding a number ,  usually as a string of digits . 
the term `` floating point '' refers to the fact that a number's radix point  -lrb-  `` decimal point '' ,  or ,  more commonly in computers ,  `` binary point ''  -rrb-  can `` float ''; that is ,  it can be placed anywhere relative to the significant digits of the number . 
a floating-point system can be used to represent ,  with a fixed number of digits ,  numbers of different orders of magnitude: e . g . 
there is consensus among historians and christian theologians that paul is the author of the first epistle to the corinthians  -lrb-  c .  ad 53–54 -rrb- . 
by comparing acts of the apostles 18:1–17 and mentions of ephesus in the corinthian correspondence ,  scholars suggest that the letter was written during paul's stay in ephesus ,  which is usually dated as being in the range of ad 53–57.
anthony c .  thiselton suggests that it is possible that i corinthians was written during paul's first  -lrb-  brief  -rrb-  stay in ephesus ,  at the end of his second journey ,  usually dated to early ad 54.
a file manager or file browser is a computer program that provides a user interface to manage files and folders . 
 ''file-list '' file managers are lesser known and older than orthodox file managers . 
the flist program provided a list of files in the user's minidisk ,  and allowed sorting by any file attribute . 
an orthodox file manager typically has three windows . 
image viewers display graphics files onscreen . 
and the same consideration of different file formats is present . 
a file viewer is an application software that presents the data stored in a computer file in a human-friendly form . 
the first epistle of peter ,  usually referred to simply as first peter and often written 1 peter ,  is a book of the new testament . 
the authorship of 1 peter has traditionally been attributed to the apostle peter because it bears his name and identifies him as its author  -lrb-  1:1 -rrb- . 
one common supposition is that 1 peter was written during the reign of domitian  -lrb-  ad 81–96 -rrb- . 
ultimately ,  the authorship of 1 peter remains contested . 
while the new christians have encountered oppression and hostility from locals ,  peter advises them to maintain loyalty to both their religion and the roman empire  -lrb-  1 peter 2:17 -rrb- . 
graham stanton rejects petrine authorship because 1 peter was most likely written during the reign of domitian in ad 81, which is when he believes widespread christian persecution began ,  which is long after the death of peter . 
the first epistle of john ,  often referred to as first john and written 1 john or i john ,  is the first of the johannine epistles of the new testament ,  and the fourth of the catholic epistles . 
whereas the gospel of john was written to unbelievers ,  this epistle was written to those who were already believers  -lrb-  5:13 -rrb- . 
the epistles  -lrb-  first ,  second ,  and third john  -rrb-  `` describe the fracturing of the johannine community itself '' . 
it appears that john might have also been rebuking a proto-gnostic named cerinthus ,  who also denied the true humanity of christ . 
the second is that the author of the epistle `` uses the conditional sentence in a variety of rhetorical figures which are unknown to the gospel '' . 
this council was summoned by pope pius ix by a bull on 29 june 1868.
the first vatican council  -lrb-    -rrb-  was convoked by pope pius ix on 29 june 1868, after a period of planning and preparation that began on 6 december 1864.
there was stronger opposition to the draft constitution on the nature of the church ,  which at first did not include the question of papal infallibility ,  but the majority party in the council ,  whose position on this matter was much stronger ,  brought it forward . 
only a few bishops appear to have had doubts about the dogma itself . 
guido was later created cardinal by pope paschal ii . 
the first lateran council was called by pope callistus ii whose reign began february 1, 1119.
pope paschal ii confirmed these which were received in general terms ,  on october 20, 1112.
he was crowned pope at vienne on february 9, 1119.
the council of 1123 is reckoned in the series of ecumenical councils by the catholic church . 
in the remaining few years of his life ,  callistus ii attempted to secure the status of the church as it had existed at the end of the reign of pope gregory vii . 
by this document the church gave up much of what had been claimed and subsequently attained by pope gregory vii and his gregorian reforms . 
the four truths became of central importance in the theravada tradition of buddhism ,  which holds to the idea that insight into the four truths is liberating in itself . 
the theravada tradition regards insight into the four truths as liberating in itself . 
yet ,  in other sutras ,  where the four truths have a propositional function ,  the comprehension of the four truths destroys the corruptions . 
the four mnemonic terms can be translated as follows:
in the `` sutras '' ,  buddhist religious texts ,  the four truths have both a symbolic and a propositional function . 
according to tsering ,  the study of the four truths is combined with the study of the sixteen characteristics of the four noble truths . 
according to bronkhorst ,  the four truths may already have been formulated in earliest buddhism ,  but did not have the central place they acquired in later buddhism . 
for many western buddhists ,  the rebirth doctrine in the four noble truths teaching is a problematic notion . 
according to anderson ,  `` the four truths are recognized as perhaps the most important teaching of the buddha . `` 
bronkhorst points to an inconsistency ,  noting that the four truths refer here to the eightfold path as the means to gain liberation ,  while the attainment of insight into the four truths is portrayed as liberating in itself . 
in their symbolic function ,  the sutras present the insight into the four truths as the culmination of the buddh's path to awakening . 
according to anderson there is a strong tendency within scholarship to present the four truths as the most essential teaching of buddhism . 
according to geshe tashi tsering ,  within tibetan buddhism ,  the four noble truths are studied as part of the bodhisattva path . 
according to carol anderson ,  the four truths have `` a singular position within the theravada canon and tradition . `` 
the four truths are best known from their presentation in the `` dhammacakkappavattana sutta '' text ,  which contains two sets of the four truths ,  while various other sets can be found in the pali canon ,  a collection of scriptures in the theravadan buddhist tradition . 
hendrik kern proposed in 1882 that the model of the four truths may be an analogy with classical indian medicine ,  in which the four truths function as a medical diagnosis ,  and the buddha is presented as a physician . 
the four truths describe `` dukkha '' and its ending as a means to reach peace of mind in this life ,  but also as a means to end rebirth . 
the `` maha-salayatanika sutta '' ,  majjhima nikaya 149:3 plus 149:9, give an alternative presentation of the four truths:
the presentation of the four truths as one of the most important teachings of the buddha `` has been done to reduce the four noble truths to a teaching that is accessible ,  pliable ,  and therefore readily appropriated by non-buddhists . `` 
according to ambedkar ,  four noble truths was `` the invention of wrong-headed monks '' . 
according to geoffrey samuel ,  `` the four noble truths  .  .  .  describe the knowledge needed to set out on the path to liberation from rebirth . `` 
the four truths were discovered by the british by reading the buddhist texts ,  and were not immediately granted the central position they later received . 
the french republican calendar  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also commonly called the french revolutionary calendar  -lrb-  `` calendrier révolutionnaire français ''  -rrb-  ,  was a calendar created and implemented during the french revolution ,  and used by the french government for about 12 years from late 1793 to 1805, and for 18 days by the paris commune in 1871.
he theorized several concepts that bear his name ,  such as dyson's transform ,  dyson tree ,  dyson series ,  and dyson sphere . 
also in 1949, in related work ,  dyson invented the dyson series . 
dyson also has some credits in pure mathematics . 
dyson is a long-time member of the jason group . 
dyson never got his phd degree . 
politically ,  dyson says he was `` brought up as a socialist '' . 
dyson has also proposed the creation of a `` dyson tree '' ,  a genetically-engineered plant capable of growing on a comet . 
dyson retired from the institute for advanced study in 1994.
dyson has suggested a kind of cosmic metaphysics of mind . 
born on 15 december 1923, at crowthorne in berkshire ,  dyson is the son of the english composer george dyson ,  who was later knighted . 
dyson agrees that anthropogenic global warming exists . 
dyson is a regular contributor to `` the new york review of books '' . 
dyson has won numerous scientific awards but never a nobel prize . 
the fourth lateran council was the largest and most representative of the medieval councils to that date . 
the fourth council of the lateran was convoked by pope innocent iii with the papal bull `` vineam domini sabaoth '' of 19 april 1213, and the council gathered at rome's lateran palace beginning 11 november 1215.
during this council ,  the teaching on transubstantiation— a doctrine of the roman catholic church which describes the method by which the bread and wine offered in the sacrament of the eucharist becomes the actual blood and body of christ— was defined . 
franconia has almost 300 small breweries . 
the two largest cities of franconia are nuremberg and würzburg . 
the region of franconia is divided among the states of hesse ,  thuringia ,  bavaria and baden-württemberg . 
east franconian german ,  the dialect spoken in franconia ,  is very different from the austro-bavarian dialect . 
franconia ,  as part of germany ,  has a high quality of life . 
the franconian parts of thuringia  -lrb-  henneberg franconia  -rrb-  lie within the southwest thuringia planning region . 
small parts of franconia also belong to the bavarian provinces of upper palatinate and upper bavaria . 
most of modern-day franconia became part of bavaria in 1803 thanks to bavaria's alliance with napoleon . 
in the west ,  franconia proper comprises the tauber franconia region along the tauber river ,  which is largely part of the main-tauber-kreis in baden-württemberg . 
while old bavaria is overwhelmingly roman catholic ,  franconia is a mixed area . 
the smallest town in franconia is thuringia's ummerstadt with 487 inhabitants . 
franconia has many cultural peculiarities which have been adopted from other regions and further developed . 
franconia's flora is dominated by deciduous and coniferous forests . 
nature parks cover almost half the area of franconia . 
in the 16th century ,  the college of franconian counts was founded to represent the interests of the counts in franconia . 
the following regions are counted as part of franconia today: the bavarian provinces of lower franconia ,  upper franconia and middle franconia ,  the municipality of pyrbaum in the county of neumarkt in der oberpfalz ,  the northwestern part of the upper bavarian county of eichstätt  -lrb-  covering the same area as the old county of alt-eichstätt  -rrb-  ,  the east franconian counties of south thuringia ,  parts of fulda and the odenwaldkreis in hesse ,  the baden-württemberg regions of tauber franconia and hohenlohe as well as the region around the badenian buchen . 
even though there is no franconian state ,  red and white are regarded as the state colours  -lrb-  `` landesfarben ''  -rrb-  of franconia . 
the tourism industry stresses the romantic character of franconia . 
franconia has several regions with sandy habitats that are unique for south germany and are protected as the so-called sand belt of franconia or `` sandachse franken '' . 
at the beginning of the 10th century a `` duchy of franconia ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  was established within east francia ,  which comprised modern hesse ,  palatinate ,  parts of baden-württemberg and most of today's franconia . 
with the exception of heilbronn ,  all cities in franconia and all towns with a population of over 50,000 are within the free state of bavaria . 
also part of the cultural region of franconia are the adjacent franconian-speaking region of south thuringia ,  as well as heilbronn-franconia in the state of baden-württemberg ,  and small parts of the state of hesse . 
before the nazi era franconia was as a region with significant jewish communities ,  most of whom were ashkenazi jews . 
in the middle ages franconia ,  with its numerous towns ,  was separate and not part of other territories such as the duchy of bavaria . 
the franconian territories of baden-württemberg are the regions of tauber franconia and hohenlohe  -lrb-  which belong to the heilbronn-franconia region with its office in heilbronn and form part of the stuttgart region  -rrb-  and the area around the badenian buchen in the rhein-neckar region . 
today ,  franconia is in the centre of the eu  -lrb-  at oberwestern near westerngrund;   -rrb- 
the proportion of roman catholics and protestants among the population of franconia is roughly the same ,  but varies from region to region . 
like all parts of the german reich ,  franconia was badly affected by allied air raids . 
another important `` plateosaurus '' find in franconia was made at ellingen . 
this approach does not fit the traditional relational data model . 
fileman may be used standalone ,  or may be used with the va kernel ,  which provides an operating system neutral environment for applications . 
02-001 ''  -rrb-  ,  24 years after the founding of the court . 
no judge may be appointed to this court more than once ,  and no judge may be appointed to both the court of review and the fisa court . 
it also wrote ,  with respect to the court:
because of the sensitive nature of its business ,  the court is a `` secret court '' – its hearings are closed to the public . 
acting like a parallel u . s .  supreme court ,  the court greatly broadened the `` special-needs '' exception to do so . 
later in the interview he said congress should seek to `` diversify some of the thinking on the court '' . 
 ''that process cannot happen when a secret court considers a case with only one party before it . `` 
there has been growing criticism of the court since the september 11, 2001 attacks . 
each application for one of these surveillance warrants  -lrb-  called a fisa warrant  -rrb-  is made before an individual judge of the court . 
if an application is denied by one judge of the court ,  the federal government is not allowed to make the same application to a different judge of the court ,  but may appeal to the united states foreign intelligence surveillance court of review . 
 ''what we really don't know ,  though ,  are what the fisa court's opinions say . `` 
in 2013, `` the new york times '' said `` it has quietly become almost a parallel supreme court . `` 
the united states foreign intelligence surveillance court  -lrb-  fisc ,  also called the fisa court  -rrb-  is a u . s .  federal court established and authorized under the foreign intelligence surveillance act of 1978  -lrb-  fisa  -rrb-  to oversee requests for surveillance warrants against foreign spies inside the united states by federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies . 
the court's judges are appointed solely by the chief justice of the united states without confirmation or oversight by the u . s .  congress . 
since may 2014, however ,  four of the five judges appointed by chief justice roberts to the fisa court were appointed to their prior federal court positions by presidents bill clinton and barack obama . 
a related bias of the court results from what critics such as julian sanchez ,  a scholar at the cato institute ,  have described as the near certainty of the polarization or groupthink of the judges of the court . 
there are no known health benefits . 
until the 1980s fgm was widely known in english as female circumcision ,  implying an equivalence in severity with male circumcision . 
female genital mutilation  -lrb-  fgm  -rrb-  ,  also known as female genital cutting and female circumcision ,  is the ritual cutting or removal of some or all of the external female genitalia . 
pork fatback is preferred as a fat ,  as it has a somewhat neutral flavor . 
grimm took `` forseti '' ,  ``  ''praeses '' '' ,  to be the older form of the name ,  first postulating an unattested old high german equivalent * ''forasizo ''  -lrb-  cf . 
the stranger and the spring have traditionally been identified with fosite and the sacred spring of fositesland . 
according to snorri sturluson in the prose edda ,  forseti is the son of baldr and nanna . 
la guardia married twice . 
la guardia was born in greenwich village in new york city . 
fiorello henry la guardia  -lrb-  ; born fiorello enrico la guardia ,  ; december 11, 1882september 20, 1947 -rrb- was an american politician . 
la guardia became deputy attorney general of new york in january 1915.
la guardia ,  a republican who appealed across party lines ,  was very popular in new york during the 1930s . 
this number was sufficient to defeat moran ,  who lost to la guardia by 1,363 votes . 
in 1919, la guardia was chosen to run as the republican candidate for the office of president of the new york city board of aldermen . 
some military units are called `` flags '' after their use of flags . 
the study of flags is known as `` vexillology '' from the latin `` vexillum '' ,  meaning `` flag '' or `` banner '' . 
flags are also used in messaging ,  advertising ,  or for decorative purposes . 
father dougal mcguire is a character in the channel 4 sitcom `` father ted '' . 
in 1994, the writers took `` father ted '' to television ,  casting o'hanlon as the on-screen dougal . 
references to dougal's family are rare . 
on the channel 4 website for father ted ,  the profile for father dougal states that 'dougal was relegated to the island after an unfortunate incident on a sealink ferry that put the lives of hundreds of nuns in danger . '
the dominican order was extremely important in this island ,  as well as in the neighbouring islands of timor and solor . 
flores  -lrb-  indonesian: pulau flores  -rrb-  is one of the lesser sunda islands ,  a group of islands in the eastern half of indonesia . 
unlike most islands in the indonesian archipelago ,  the name `` flores '' was given by the portuguese ,  from `` cabo de flores ''  -lrb-  cape of flowers  -rrb-  ,  the portuguese term for the eastern part of the island . 
among all islands containing indonesian territory ,  flores is the 10th most populous after java ,  sumatra ,  borneo  -lrb-  kalimantan  -rrb-  ,  sulawesi ,  new guinea ,  bali ,  madura ,  lombok ,  and timor and also the 10th biggest island of indonesia . 
the land war in sicily began with the roman landing at messana in 264 bc . 
the first major roman fleet was constructed after the victory of agrigentum in 261 bc . 
the war was followed by a failed revolt against the carthaginian empire . 
the first punic war  -lrb-  264 to 241 bc  -rrb-  was the first of three wars fought between ancient carthage and the roman republic ,  the two great powers of the western mediterranean . 
rome won the first punic war after 23 years of conflict and in the end became the dominant naval power of the mediterranean . 
the series of wars between rome and carthage took the name `` punic '' from the latin adjective for carthaginian ,  `` punicus '' . 
hostilities of the first punic war began with developments involving the romans ,  carthaginians ,  and greek colonists in sicily and southern italy . 
the roman advance now continued westward from agrigentum to relieve the besieged city of macella in 260 bc ,  which had sided with rome and was attacked by the carthaginians for doing so . 
the `` corvi '' were very successful ,  and helped the romans seize the first 30 carthaginian ships that were close enough . 
after a brief siege ,  with no carthaginian help in sight ,  syracuse made peace with the romans . 
in the midst of the first punic war ,  some tribes rebelled against carthage ,  opening a second front while the carthaginians battled the romans in sicily . 
in 23 years ,  the romans slowly conquered sicily and drove the carthaginians to the west end of the island . 
the roman fleet ,  under the command of gaius duilius ,  engaged the carthaginians ,  under general hannibal gisco ,  off northern mylae in 260 bc . 
the romans ,  however ,  made great progress in the north . 
the war began in 264 bc with the roman conquest of the carthaginian-controlled city of messina in sicily ,  granting rome a military foothold on the island . 
despite the roman victories at sea ,  the roman republic lost countless ships and crews during the war ,  due to both storms and battles . 
a carthaginian name -lrb-  s  -rrb-  for the conflicts does not survive in any records . 
the goal of a false document is to convince an audience that what is being presented is factual . 
pessoa was born in lisbon on 13 june 1888.
he also wrote in and translated from english and french . 
later on ,  in 1918, pessoa wrote a letter in which refers:
some full moons have developed new names in modern times ,  e . g .  ,  the blue moon ,  and the names `` harvest moon '' and `` hunter's moon '' for the full moons of autumn . 
all full moons rise around the time of sunset . 
the full moon occurs once roughly every month . 
the full moon is the lunar phase when the moon appears fully illuminated from earth's perspective . 
a full moon is often thought of as an event of a full night's duration . 
full moon is generally a suboptimal time for astronomical observation of the moon because shadows vanish . 
 ''ice moon '' is also used to refer to the first full moon of january or february . 
in the modern system of `` traditional '' full moon names tied to the solstice and equinox points ,  a supernumerary full moon in such a period is called a blue moon . 
the age and apparent size of the full moon vary in a cycle of just under 14 synodic months ,  which has been referred to as a full moon cycle . 
for any given location ,  about half of these maximum full moons may be visible ,  while the other half occurs during the day ,  when the full moon is below the horizon . 
the primary characteristic of a film format is its size and shape . 
the film format would thus be exactly the same as the size of the print—so if you wanted large prints ,  you would have to use a large camera and corresponding film format . 
in physics ,  the speed of light in a vacuum is assumed to be a constant . 
the speed of light is a dimensional quantity and so cannot be measured . 
in special relativity ,  it is impossible to accelerate an object the speed of light ,  or for a massive object to move the speed of light . 
however ,  hypotheses exist that the speed of light is variable . 
special relativity postulate that the speed of light in vacuum is invariant in inertial frames . 
this may approach twice the speed of light ,  as in the case of two particles travelling at close to the speed of light in opposite directions with respect to the reference frame . 
the speed of light is related to the vacuum permittivity `` ε '' and the vacuum permeability `` μ '' . 
faster-than-light  -lrb-  also superluminal or ftl  -rrb-  communication and travel are the conjectural propagation of information or matter faster than the speed of light . 
since 1983, the si unit of length  -lrb-  the meter  -rrb-  has been defined using the speed of light . 
the special theory of relativity implies that only particles with zero rest mass may travel at the speed of light . 
a light signal that left the earth at the same time as the traveller would always get to the destination before the traveller . 
in the following examples ,  certain influences may appear to travel faster than light ,  but they do not convey energy or information faster than light ,  so they do not violate special relativity . 
the expansion of the universe causes distant galaxies to recede from us faster than the speed of light ,  if proper distance and cosmological time are used to calculate the speeds of these galaxies . 
expressing the speeds in units of `` c '' ,  β = `` v ''/ ''c '':
since one might not travel faster than light ,  one might conclude that a human can never travel further from the earth than 40 light-years if the traveler is active between the age of 20 and 60.
as with the alcubierre drive ,  travelers moving through the wormhole would not `` locally '' move faster than light travelling through the wormhole alongside them ,  but they would be able to reach their destination  -lrb-  and return to their starting location  -rrb-  faster than light traveling outside the wormhole . 
thus in the system of units in which the fine structure constant is fixed ,  the observational claim is that the speed of light is time-dependent . 
the group velocity of a wave  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  a light beam  -rrb-  may also exceed `` c '' in some circumstances . 
that is to say ,  such a wave can break the light barrier under certain conditions . 
in the context of this article ,  ftl is the transmission of information or matter faster than `` c '' ,  a constant equal to the speed of light in a vacuum ,  which is 299,792,458 m/s  -lrb-  by definition of the meter  -rrb-  or about 186,282.397 miles per second . 
the phase velocity of an electromagnetic wave ,  when traveling through a medium ,  can routinely exceed `` c '' ,  the vacuum velocity of light . 
if a laser beam is swept across a distant object ,  the spot of laser light can easily be made to move across the object at a speed greater than `` c '' . 
from the point of view of an observer standing at rest relative to the accelerator ,  this rate will be slightly less than twice the speed of light . 
at its peak ,  fidonet listed approximately 39,000 systems . 
the fidonet system was based on a number of small interacting programs . 
in this fashion ,  rush's system implemented a store and forward public message system similar to usenet ,  but based on ,  and hosted by ,  the fidonet system . 
fidonet is a worldwide computer network that is used for communication between bulletin board systems  -lrb-  bbses  -rrb-  . 
echomail was so popular that for many users ,  echomail `` was '' the fidonet . 
by june 1984 version 7 of the system was being run in production ,  and nodes were rapidly being added to the network . 
fidonet started in 1984 and listed 100 nodes by the end of that year . 
the fidonet program was what later became known as a `` mailer '' . 
that site would then process the mail as normal ,  although all of the messages in the packet would be guaranteed to be local calls . 
a new version of fido and fidonet ,  10c ,  was released containing all of these features . 
it was also realized that fido systems were generally clustered – of the 15 systems running by the start of june 1984, 5 of them were in st .  louis . 
it was common ,  however ,  for system operators to reserve the right to review the content of mail that passed through their system . 
once delivered ,  the packet would be broken out into separate packets for local systems ,  and delivered using multiple local free calls . 
although fidonet was ,  by far ,  the best known bbs-based network ,  it was by no means the only one . 
while searching for software that would run on the ms-dos side of the system ,  baker learned of fido through madil . 
similar concepts were used by online games and other systems as well . 
nodelist was the list of fido bbs systems ,  which jennings had already been compiling . 
the national anthem of the netherlands between 1815 and 1932, `` wien neêrlands bloed '' ,  makes extensive use of the parallel dutch word ,  as does the current dutch national anthem ,  het wilhelmus . 
the ancient greek `` patris '' ,  fatherland ,  led to `` patrios '' ,  `` of our fathers '' and thence to the latin `` patriota '' and old french `` patriote '' ,  meaning compatriot; from these the english word patriotism is derived . 
to properly fold the flag:
on july 4, 2007, the 50-star flag became the version of the flag in longest use ,  surpassing the 48-star flag that was used from 1912 to 1959.
the flag of the united states of america ,  often referred to as the american flag ,  is the national flag of the united states . 
traditionally ,  the flag may be decorated with golden fringe surrounding the perimeter of the flag as long as it does not deface the flag proper . 
other organizations that wear flag patches on their uniforms can have the flag facing in either direction . 
it is the longest-used version of the u . s .  flag and has been in use for over years . 
the current design of the u . s .  flag is its 27th; the design of the flag has been modified officially 26 times since 1777.
the flag contemporaneously known as `` the continental colors '' has historically been referred to as the first national flag . 
furthermore ,  the exact `` colors '' of the flag were not standardized until 1934.
flags that are made to the prescribed 1.9 ratio are often referred to as `` g-spec ''  -lrb-  for `` government specification ''  -rrb-  flags . 
there is also no specific meaning for each fold of the flag . 
both flags were documented by the dutch government in october 1779, making them two of the earliest known flags of 13 stars . 
the united states flag code outlines certain guidelines for the use ,  display ,  and disposal of the flag . 
the national standard was not a reference to the national or naval flag . 
the flag closely resembles the british east india company flag of the era ,  and sir charles fawcett argued in 1937 that the company flag inspired the design . 
since that time the flag has frequently appeared on u . s .  stamps . 
ceremonial displays of the flag ,  such as those in parades or on indoor posts ,  often use fringe to enhance the appearance of the flag . 
section 3 of the flag code defines `` the flag '' as anything `` by which the average person seeing the same without deliberation may believe the same to represent the flag of the united states of america '' . 
though not part of the official flag code ,  according to military custom ,  flags should be folded into a triangular shape when not in use . 
the flag did not appear on u . s .  postal stamp issues until the battle of white plains issue was released in 1926, depicting the flag with a circle of 13 stars . 
section 8, entitled respect for flag states in part: `` the flag should never be used as wearing apparel ,  bedding ,  or drapery '' ,  and `` no part of the flag should ever be used as a costume or athletic uniform '' . 
the flag should especially be displayed at full staff on the following days:
the flag is customarily flown year-round at most public buildings ,  and it is not unusual to find private houses flying full-size  -lrb-    -rrb-  flags . 
spain has a claim to sovereignty over a few islands including kapingamarangi in pohnpei state . 
the federated states of micronesia is served by four international airports . 
the federated states of micronesia  -lrb-  ; abbreviated fsm and also known simply as micronesia  -rrb-  is an independent republic associated to the united states . 
the capital is palikir ,  on pohnpei . 
the federated states of micronesia consists of 607 islands extending across the archipelago of the caroline islands east of the philippines . 
the fsm has a seat in the united nations . 
the islands have a combined area of  . 
the fsm is an active member of the pacific islands forum . 
the four states in the federation are ,  from west to east: these states are further divided into municipalities . 
the federated states of micronesia claims sovereignty and has de facto control of the island . 
the term `` micronesia '' may refer to the federated states or to the region as a whole . 
elector frederick william was born in berlin to george william ,  elector of brandenburg ,  and elisabeth charlotte of the palatinate . 
frederick william  -lrb-  ; 16 february 1620 – 29 april 1688 -rrb- was elector of brandenburg and duke of prussia ,  thus ruler of brandenburg-prussia ,  from 1640 until his death in 1688.
in the conflict for pomerania inheritance ,  frederick william had to accept two setbacks ,  one in the northern war and one in the scanian war . 
frederick william was a military commander of wide renown ,  and his standing army would later become the model for the prussian army . 
the natural horn is the ancestor of the modern horn . 
horns may be classified in single horn ,  double horn ,  compensating double horn ,  and triple horn as well as the versatility of detachable bells . 
there is also a more specific use of `` french horn '' to describe a particular horn type ,  differentiated from the german horn and vienna horn . 
here ,  the first and second horns played as a pair  -lrb-  first horn being high ,  second horn being low  -rrb-  ,  and the third and fourth horns played as another pair  -lrb-  third horn being high ,  fourth horn being low  -rrb-  . 
the variety in horn history necessitates consideration of the natural horn ,  vienna horn ,  mellophone ,  marching horn ,  and wagner tuba . 
a musician who plays a french horn is known as a horn player or hornist . 
the vienna horn is a special horn used primarily in vienna ,  austria . 
the international horn society has recommended since 1971 that the instrument be simply called the `` horn '' . 
the double horn also combines two instruments into a single frame: the original horn in f ,  and a second ,  higher horn keyed in b . 
music written for the modern horn follows a similar pattern with the first and third horns being high and the second and fourth horns being low . 
in english ,  the term `` french horn '' is often used . 
there is an abundance of chamber music repertoire for horn . 
to compensate ,  horn makers can make the bell detachable; this allows for smaller and more manageable horn cases . 
a crucial element in playing the horn deals with the mouthpiece . 
the french horn was at first rarely used in jazz music  -lrb-  note that colloquially in jazz ,  the word `` horn '' refers to any wind instrument  -rrb-  . 
fra angelico was the contemporary of gentile da fabriano . 
from 1449 until 1452, fra angelico returned to his old convent of fiesole ,  where he was the prior . 
fra angelico was working at a time when the style of painting was in a state of change . 
he was known to contemporaries as fra giovanni da fiesole  -lrb-  brother john of fiesole  -rrb-  and fra giovanni angelico  -lrb-  angelic brother john  -rrb-  . 
in 1439 fra angelico completed one of his most famous works ,  the `` san marco altarpiece '' at florence . 
in 1455, fra angelico died while staying at a dominican convent in rome ,  perhaps on an order to work on pope nicholas' chapel . 
the works of fra angelico reveal elements that are both conservatively gothic and progressively renaissance . 
in modern italian he is called beato angelico  -lrb-  blessed angelic one  -rrb- ; the common english name fra angelico means the `` angelic friar '' . 
the series of frescoes that fra angelico painted for the dominican friars at san marcos realise the advancements made by masaccio and carry them further . 
in 1436, fra angelico was one of a number of the friars from fiesole who moved to the newly built convent or friary of san marco in florence . 
the following year he entered the convent of san marco . 
fra bartolomeo or bartolommeo op  -lrb-  28 march 1472 – 31 october 1517 -rrb- ,  also known as bartolommeo di pagholo ,  bartolommeo di s .  marco ,  and his original name baccio della porta ,  was an italian renaissance painter of religious subjects . 
he was born in savignano di prato ,  tuscany . 
he remained friends with raphael ,  and each influenced the other . 
fra bartolomeo's figures are generally small and draped . 
jean frédéric bazille  -lrb-  december 6, 1841 – november 28, 1870 -rrb- was a french impressionist painter . 
his father travelled to the battlefield a few days later to take his body back for burial at montpellier over a week later . 
ford madox brown was married twice . 
brown was the grandson of the medical theorist john brown ,  founder of the brunonian system of medicine . 
in 1852 he started work on two of his most significant works . 
the j d wetherspoon pub in oxford road ,  manchester is named after ford madox brown . 
the tate gallery holds an early example of brown's work ,  a portrait of his father . 
from the 1860s ,  brown also designed furniture and stained glass . 
emma hill became a frequent model for brown from 1848; for example ,  she is the wife in `` the last of england '' . 
brown's parents had limited financial resources ,  and they moved to calais to seek cheaper lodgings ,  where their daughter elizabeth coffin was born in 1819 and their son ford madox brown in 1821.
crick was the first son of harry crick  -lrb-  1887–1948 -rrb- and annie elizabeth crick  -lrb-  née wilkins; 1879–1955 -rrb- . 
francis harry compton crick  -lrb-  8 june 1916 – 28 july 2004 -rrb- was a british molecular biologist ,  biophysicist ,  and neuroscientist . 
in 1947, aged 31, crick began studying biology and became part of an important migration of physical scientists into biology research . 
at the age of 21, crick earned a bachelor of science degree in physics from university college ,  london . 
crick was an important theoretical molecular biologist and played a crucial role in research related to revealing the helical structure of dna . 
he was born in brussels ,  the son of cornelis van aarsens ,  also a statesman . 
baron francis van aarssens or baron françois van aerssen  -lrb-  27 september 1572 - 27 december 1641 -rrb- ,  from 1611 on lord of sommelsdijk ,  was a diplomat and statesman of the united provinces . 
the term `` frigate '' was used because such ships still mounted their principal armaments on a single continuous upper deck . 
the term was generally used for ships too small to stand in the line of battle ,  although early line-of-battle ships were frequently referred to as frigates when they were built for speed . 
from 1859, armour was added to ships based on existing frigate and ship of the line designs . 
both british and american frigates could  -lrb-  and usually did  -rrb-  additionally carry smaller carriage-mounted guns on their quarter decks and forecastles  -lrb-  the superstructures above the upper deck  -rrb-  . 
after 1875, the term `` frigate '' fell out of use . 
in the definition adopted by the british admiralty ,  they were rated ships of at least 28 guns ,  carrying their principal armaments upon a single continuous deck – the upper deck – while ships of the line possessed two or more continuous decks bearing batteries of guns . 
it was not until the royal navy's of 1944 that a british design classified as a `` frigate '' was produced for fleet use ,  although it still suffered from limited speed . 
technically ,  rated ships with fewer than 28 guns could not be classed as frigates but as `` post ships ''; however ,  in common parlance most post ships were often described as `` frigates '' ,  the same casual misuse of the term being extended to smaller two-decked ships that were too small to stand in the line of battle . 
this also results in some recent classes of french ships such as the being among the largest in the world to carry the rating of frigate . 
in the 17th century ,  a frigate was any warship built for speed and maneuverability ,  the description often used being `` frigate-built '' . 
one of the most successful post-1945 designs was the british  ,  which was used by several navies . 
in the late 19th century  -lrb-  beginning about 1858 with the construction of prototypes by the british and french navies  -rrb-  ,  the armoured frigate was a type of ironclad warship that for a time was the most powerful type of vessel afloat . 
the lower deck ,  known as the `` gun deck '' ,  now carried no armament ,  and functioned as a `` berth deck '' where the crew lived ,  and was in fact placed below the waterline of the new frigates . 
the rank `` frigate captain '' derives from the name of this type of ship . 
the hull was designed so that all the weight from the guns was upon the keel itself . 
stealth technology has been introduced in modern frigate design by the french design . 
to this end they had reduced armament compared to the type 41 `` leopard ''-class air-defence frigates built on the same hull . 
in the 18th century ,  frigates were usually as long as a ship of the line and were square-rigged on all three masts  -lrb-  full-rigged  -rrb-  ,  but were faster and with lighter armament ,  used for patrolling and escort . 
the term `` frigate ''  -lrb-  italian: `` fregata ''; spanish/catalan/portuguese/sicilian: `` fragata ''; dutch: `` fregat ''; french: `` frégate ''  -rrb-  originated in the mediterranean in the late 15th century ,  referring to a lighter galleass-type ship with oars ,  sails and a light armament ,  built for speed and maneuverability . 
twenty-two of these were reclassified as frigates after the war ,  as were the remaining 24 smaller s . 
franco died in 1975 at the age of 82.
the civil war ravaged the spanish economy . 
in spain and abroad ,  the legacy of franco remains controversial . 
similarly ,  as recently as 2006, franco supporters in spain have honored pinochet . 
franco personally guided military operations from this time until the end of the war . 
on 26 july 1947 franco proclaimed spain a monarchy ,  but did not designate a monarch . 
the spanish civil war began in july 1936 and officially ended with franco's victory in april 1939, leaving 190,000 to 500,000 dead . 
francisco franco bahamonde  -lrb-  ; ; 4 december 1892 – 20 november 1975 -rrb- was a spanish general who ruled over spain as a military dictator from 1939, after the nationalist victory in the spanish civil war ,  until his death in 1975.
franco was recognised as the spanish head of state by great britain and france in february 1939.
franco initially sought support from various groups . 
spain attempted to retain control of its colonial empire throughout franco's rule . 
franco's spanish nationalism promoted a unitary national identity by repressing spain's cultural diversity . 
in his history of the spanish civil war ,  antony beevor `` reckons franco's ensuing 'white terror' claimed 200,000 lives . 
a highly controversial figure within spain ,  franco is seen as a divisive leader . 
franco was initially disliked by cuban president fulgencio batista ,  who ,  during world war ii ,  suggested a joint u . s . -latin american declaration of war on spain in order to overthrow franco's regime . 
with the fall of the monarchy in 1931, franco did not take any notable stand . 
the nazis were disappointed with franco's resistance to installing fascism . 
for six months franco was without a post and under surveillance . 
franco signed a revised anti-comintern pact on 25 november 1941.
the basque country and catalonia were among the regions that offered the strongest resistance to franco in the civil war . 
following 18 july 1936 `` pronunciamiento '' ,  franco assumed the leadership of the 30,000 soldiers of the spanish army of africa . 
this period in spanish history is commonly known as francoist spain . 
after the war ,  franco allowed many former nazis ,  such as otto skorzeny and léon degrelle ,  and other former fascists ,  to flee to spain . 
outwardly franco maintained an ambiguous attitude almost until july . 
franco was removed as director of the zaragoza military academy in 1931; about 95% of his former zaragoza cadets later came to side with him in the civil war . 
during the 1923–1930 dictatorship of primo de rivera ,  franco was promoted general at age 33, the youngest in europe . 
in september 1939 world war ii began . 
while the loyalist forces presented the war as a struggle to defend the republic against fascism ,  franco depicted himself as the defender of `` catholic spain '' against `` atheist communism . `` 
spaniards who suffered under franco's rule have sought to remove memorials of his regime . 
the coup had failed in the attempt to bring a swift victory ,  but the spanish civil war had begun . 
the `` oxford living dictionary '' uses franco's regime as an example of fascism . 
after the war ,  the spanish government tried to destroy all evidence of its cooperation with the axis . 
franco was born on 4 december 1892 at 108 calle frutos saavedra in ferrol ,  galicia . 
franco's body was interred at valle de los caídos ,  a colossal memorial built by the forced labour of political prisoners in order to honour the casualties of the spanish civil war . 
 ''flash crowd '' is a 1973 english-language novella by science fiction author larry niven ,  one of a series about the social consequence of inventing an instant ,  practically free transfer booth . 
kekulé never used his first given name; he was known throughout his life as august kekulé . 
kekulé's most famous work was on the structure of benzene . 
in 1856 kekulé became privatdozent at the university of heidelberg . 
kekulé's 1890 speech ,  in which these anecdotes appeared ,  has been translated into english . 
friedrich august kekulé ,  later friedrich august kekule von stradonitz  -lrb-  ; ; 7 september 1829 – 13 july 1896 -rrb- ,  was a german organic chemist . 
in a 2017 essay titled `` the kekulé problem '' ,  the novelist cormac mccarthy analyzed kekulé's ouroboros dream as a model of the unconscious mind and the origin of language . 
of the first five nobel prizes in chemistry ,  kekulé's students won three: van 't hoff in 1901, fischer in 1902 and baeyer in 1905.
in 1424, nine-year-old frederick's father died ,  making frederick the duke of inner austria ,  as frederick v ,  with his uncle ,  duke frederick iv of tyrol ,  acting as regent . 
upon the death of his uncle duke frederick iv in 1439, frederick took over the regency of tyrol and further austria for the duke's heir sigismund . 
frederick iii died in 1493, aged 77, at linz . 
frederick had five children from his marriage with eleanor of portugal: for the last 10 years of frederick's life ,  he and maximilian ruled jointly . 
as a cousin of late king albert ii ,  frederick became a candidate for the imperial election . 
frederick iii  -lrb-  21 september 1415 – 19 august 1493 -rrb- was holy roman emperor from 1452 until his death . 
frederick was the last emperor to be crowned in rome; his great-grandson charles v was the last emperor to be crowned ,  but this was done in bologna . 
frederick's political initiatives were hardly bold ,  but they were still successful . 
the island has a population of 113,275.
the elongated island has an area of  . 
hawkmoths also occur on the island . 
a total of 74,983 people lived on the island in 2003.
the island has 116 schools ,  with a total of 14,337 pupils . 
with many hills present throughout the island ,  hikers are also attracted to this island . 
the island's garrison was officially instated in 1708.
the highest point in fuerteventura is pico de la zarza  -lrb-  807 m  -rrb-  in the southwestern part of the island . 
another theory is that the island's name derives from `` fortunatae insulae ''  -lrb-  fortunate islands  -rrb-  ,  the name by which the romans knew the canary islands . 
fuerteventura is the oldest island in the canary islands dating back 20 million years to a volcanic eruption from the canary hotspot . 
in 1405, de béthencourt completed his conquest of the island ,  establishing its capital in betancuria  -lrb-  puerto rosario took over the mantle as island capital in 1835 -rrb- . 
the ancient name for the island ,  erbania ,  is derived from this wall's name . 
in later years ,  the island was invaded by the spanish ,  french and the english . 
at that time betancuria became the religious capital of the island . 
fuerteventura has three auditoriums . 
in 1424 pope martin v ,  through the betancuria brief ,  edicted the establishment of the bishopric of fuerteventura ,  which encompassed all the canary islands save for the island of lanzarote . 
fuerteventura  -lrb-   is one of the canary islands ,  in the atlantic ocean and is part of the north africa region ,  politically part of spain . 
over time ,  the island endured numerous pirate raids . 
people are also very keen on the mussels and limpets collected on the island's coasts . 
by the 1940s the island had an airport  -lrb-  just west of puerto del rosario on the road to tindaya ,  still visible today  -rrb-  . 
fuerteventura is governed by the island department of the government of spain ,  which holds the rank of a government subdepartment . 
many sports are commonly played in fuerteventura ,  both in the open air and in sports centres across the island . 
fairmount is a town in fairmount township ,  grant county in the east central part of the u . s .  state of indiana . 
free verse is an open form of poetry . 
poets have explained that free verse is not totally free: `` its only freedom is from the tyrant demands of the metered line . `` 
some poets have considered free verse restrictive in its own way . 
many poets of the victorian era experimented with free verse . 
technically ,  free verse has been described as spaced prose ,  a mosaic of verse and prose experience . 
most free verse maintains the poetic convention of the poetic line to some degree ,  at least in written representations ,  donald hall goes as far as to say that `` the `` form '' of free verse is as binding and as liberating as the `` form '' of a rondeau , ``  and t .  s .  eliot wrote ,  `` no verse is free for the man who wants to do a good job . `` 
de klerk is a controversial figure . 
f .  w .  de klerk was born on 18 march 1936 in mayfair ,  a suburb of johannesburg . 
frederik willem de klerk  -lrb-  ; born 18 march 1936 -rrb- is a south african politician who served as state president of south africa from 1989 to 1994 and as deputy president from 1994 to 1996.
the rod was defined as yards or feet ,  and the mile was eight furlongs ,  so the definition of the furlong became 40 rods and that of the mile became 5,280 feet  -lrb-  eight furlongs/mile times 40 rods/furlong times feet/rod  -rrb-  . 
in the roman system ,  there were 625 feet to the `` stadium '' ,  eight `` stadia '' to the mile ,  and three miles to the league . 
city blocks in the hoddle grid of melbourne are also one furlong in length . 
the name `` furlong '' derives from the old english words '  -lrb-  furrow  -rrb-  and '  -lrb-  long  -rrb-  . 
using the international definition of the inch as exactly 25.4 millimetres ,  one furlong is 201.168 metres . 
where formula_3 is the value of the waveform at formula_4.
the period of a waveform is the formula_1 for which the following equation is true:
for a tube of length formula_8 with one end closed and the other end open the wavelength of the fundamental harmonic is formula_9, as indicated by the first two animations . 
when the time units are seconds ,  the frequency is in formula_7, also known as hertz . 
in the king james version of the new testament ,  ``  ''  -lrb-  ``  ''mythos '' ''  -rrb-  was rendered by the translators as `` fable '' in the first epistle to timothy ,  the second epistle to timothy ,  the epistle to titus and the first epistle of peter . 
the foot can be subdivided into the hindfoot ,  the midfoot ,  and the forefoot:
the `` instep '' is the arched part of the top of the foot between the toes and the ankle . 
 ''anterior group ''
all muscles originating on the lower leg except the popliteus muscle are attached to the bones of the foot . 
the human foot has two longitudinal arches and a transverse arch maintained by the interlocking shapes of the foot bones ,  strong ligaments ,  and pulling muscles during activity . 
fallout shelters are not always underground . 
some gamma radiation from fallout will penetrate into even the best shelters . 
the bulk of the radioactivity in nuclear accident fallout is more long-lived than that in weapons fallout . 
the 1985 adaption of the series had the episode `` shelter skelter '' that featured a fallout shelter . 
the fallout emits alpha and beta particles ,  as well as gamma rays . 
a fallout shelter is an enclosed space specially designed to protect occupants from radioactive debris or fallout resulting from a nuclear explosion . 
a basic fallout shelter consists of shields that reduce gamma ray exposure by a factor of 1000.
a fallout shelter is designed to allow its occupants to minimize exposure to harmful fallout until radioactivity has decayed to a safer level . 
from this data it is possible to calculate the isotopic mixture in the fallout  -lrb-  due to fission products in bomb fallout  -rrb-  . 
fallout shelters are often featured on the reality television show `` doomsday preppers '' . 
usually ,  an expedient purpose-built fallout shelter is a trench; with a strong roof buried by 1 m  -lrb-  3 ft  -rrb-  of earth . 
above ground buildings with walls and roofs dense enough to afford a meaningful protection factor can be used as a fallout shelter . 
while a person's home may not be a purpose-made shelter ,  it could be thought of as one if measures are taken to improve the degree of fallout protection . 
beta radiation consists of particles  -lrb-  high-speed electrons  -rrb-  given off by some fallout . 
the primary dangers associated with beta radiation are internal exposure from ingested fallout particles and beta burns from fallout particles no more than a few days old . 
during world war i ,  many of the germany possessions in the pacific were conquered by japan ,  who fought on the side of the allies of world war i and was active in the asian and pacific theatre of world war i . 
on pohnpei ,  pre-colonial history is divided into three eras: `` mwehin kawa '' or `` mwehin aramas ''  -lrb-  period of building ,  or period of peopling ,  before ca . 
isokelekel is regarded as the creator of the modern pohnpeian `` nahnmwarki '' social system and the father of the pompeian people . 
the compact was renewed in 2004.
in world war ii ,  japanese-held yap was one of the islands bypassed in the u . s .  `` leapfrogging '' strategy ,  although it was regularly bombed by u . s .  ships and aircraft ,  and yap-based japanese bombers did some damage in return . 
the president and the vice president are elected by congress from among the four senators-at-large for four-year terms . 
the fsm is divided in four states: chuuk  -lrb-  truk  -rrb-  ,  kosrae ,  pohnpei ,  and yap . 
a head of state  -lrb-  the president  -rrb-  and a legislature are elected on a national level . 
the federal capital is palikir ,  on pohnpei island . 
the demographics of the federated states of micronesia refers to the population characteristics of people who inhabit the federated states of micronesia . 
the fsm public sector plays a central role in the economy as the administrator of the compact money . 
total official development assistance from all sources was more than $100 million in 2001, with nearly 90% of that total coming from the u . s . 
under the terms of the compact of free association ,  the united states provided fsm with around $2 billion in grants and services from 1986 to 2001.
new zealand has its non-resident embassy for the fsm in kiribati . 
the fsm maintains permanent embassies in four nations: china ,  fiji ,  japan and the united states . 
the government of the federated states of micronesia  -lrb-  fsm  -rrb-  conducts its own foreign relations . 
