william declared:
william brought over 11,212 horse and foot . 
prior to his arrival in england ,  the new king william iii of england was not anglican ,  but rather was a member of the dutch reformed church . 
for william the english problem was inextricably intertwined with the situation in germany . 
in ireland there was no equivalent of the english or scottish convention and william had to conquer ireland by force . 
the english convention presumed to legislate for ireland as well ,  and the declaration of right deemed william to be king of ireland as well as of england . 
on 16/26 october william boarded his ship ,  the `` den briel ''  -lrb-  `` brill '' in english  -rrb-  . 
on 9 september 1689  -lrb-  gregorian calendar  -rrb-  ,  william as king of england joined the league of augsburg against france . 
william's successful invasion of england with a dutch fleet and army led to his ascension to the throne as william iii of england jointly with his wife ,  mary ii ,  james's daughter ,  after the declaration of right ,  leading to the bill of rights 1689.
in may ,  russell told william that the english opposition to james would not wait any longer for help and they would rise against james in any event . 
meanwhile ,  william's confidante willem bentinck launched a propaganda campaign in england . 
although their succession to the english throne was relatively peaceful ,  much blood would be shed before william's authority was accepted in ireland and scotland . 
in june ,  william sent count zuylestein to england ,  ostensibly to congratulate james on the birth of the prince of wales but in reality to communicate with william's associates . 
in november 1686 james had wished to gain william's support for the repeal of the test acts ,  as this would have delivered a blow to the english opposition . 
the english convention parliament was very divided on the issue . 
mary had a husband ,  her cousin william henry of orange . 
zuylestein was sent in part to see how successful ,  or amenable ,  james's packed parliament would be ,  and have discussions with english statesmen ,  with zuylestein sending letters from them back to william . 
the claim that william was fighting for the protestant cause in england was used to great effect to disguise the military ,  cultural and political impact that the dutch regime had on england at the time . 
william feared that even english neutrality would not suffice and that control over the royal navy was a prerequisite for a successful naval campaign against france . 
during the next two days william's army disembarked in calm weather . 
the seven also promised to rally to william upon his landing in england and would `` do all that lies in our power to prepare others to be in as much readiness as such an action is capable of '' . 
much of the later `` spontaneous '' support for william had been carefully organised by bentinck and his agents . 
in august ,  it became clear that william had surprisingly strong support within the english army ,  a situation brought about by james himself . 
the glorious revolution ,  also called the revolution of 1688, was the overthrow of king james ii of england  -lrb-  james vii of scotland  -rrb-  by a union of english parliamentarians with the dutch stadtholder william iii ,  prince of orange ,  who was james's nephew and son-in-law . 
on 4/14 october william responded to the allegations by james in a second declaration ,  denying any intention to become king or conquer england . 
the correspondence between william and the english politicians was ,  at first ,  sent by ordinary post to genuine addresses in either country and then distributed . 
after consolidating political and financial support ,  william crossed the north sea and english channel with a large invasion fleet in november 1688, landing at torbay . 
although james had fled the country ,  he still had many followers ,  and william feared that the king might return ,  relegating william to the role of a mere regent ,  an outcome which was unacceptable to him . 
meanwhile ,  on 18 november plymouth had surrendered to william ,  and on 21 november he began to advance . 
although irish and manx are often referred to as irish gaelic and manx gaelic  -lrb-  as they are goidelic or gaelic languages  -rrb-  ,  the use of the word `` gaelic '' is unnecessary because the terms irish and manx ,  to refer to language  -lrb-  as in ,  `` to speak irish ''  -rrb-  ,  always refer to these languages ,  but scots has come to refer to a germanic language and so `` scottish '' can refer to things that are not gaelic at all . 
 ''gaelic '' ,  by itself ,  is sometimes used to refer to scottish gaelic ,  especially in scotland ,  and so it is ambiguous . 
in many gnostic systems ,  god is known as the `` monad '' ,  the one . 
jewish gnosticism with a focus on sophia was active by 90 ad . 
in gnostic tradition ,  the term `` sophia ''  -lrb-  σoφíα ,  greek for `` wisdom ''  -rrb-  refers to the final and lowest emanation of god . 
the term is thus a central element of gnostic cosmology . 
many heads of gnostic schools were identified as jewish christians by church fathers ,  and hebrew words and names of god were applied in some gnostic systems . 
gnosticism became the first group to be declared heresy . 
in the 1880s gnostic connections with neo-platonism were proposed . 
 ''pleroma ''  -lrb-  greek πληρωμα ,  `` fullness ''  -rrb-  refers to the totality of god's powers . 
alexandria was of central importance for the birth of gnosticism . 
no gnostic texts have been discovered that pre-date christianity ,  and `` pre-christian gnosticism as such is hardly attested in a way to settle the debate once and for all . `` 
gnostic systems postulate a dualism between god and the world ,  varying from the `` radical dualist '' systems of manichaeism to the `` mitigated dualism '' of classic gnostic movements . 
in many gnostic systems ,  the aeons are the various emanations of the superior god or monad . 
valentinian gnosticism is a form of monism ,  expressed in terms previously used in a dualistic manner . 
proponents of the view that paul was actually a gnostic ,  such as elaine pagels ,  view the reference in colossians as a term that has to be interpreted in a gnostic sense . 
unlike the italian text ,  the spanish text has no arabic marginal notes or chapter summaries ,  nor are the italian titles for the first twenty-seven chapters represented in the spanish . 
the text of this gospel is late and pseudepigraphical . 
hence ,  linguistically ,  the surviving spanish text appears later than the surviving italian text; but this does not necessarily confirm that the underlying spanish text is secondary . 
both italian and spanish texts are referred to in 1734 by george sale in `` the preliminary discourse to the koran '':
other than in their respective copyist errors ,  there appear to be few substantial differences of meaning between the spanish and italian text; but one notable variant is found in the description of the crucifixion of judas iscariot in chapter 218 in the spanish text  -lrb-  217 in the italian text  -rrb-  . 
aside from the missing 80 chapters ,  there are differences in the chapter divisions between the italian and spanish texts; and also between the sydney transcript and the spanish passages quoted by dr .  white in english . 
besides the absent final chapter ,  and the large lacuna already noted; the spanish text also misses a section of around 100 words from its chapter 222  -lrb-  chapter 221 in the italian  -rrb-  and another substantial but shorter section from chapter 211  -lrb-  chapter 210 in the italian  -rrb-  . 
a detailed comparison between the surviving italian and spanish texts shows numerous places where the spanish reading appears to be secondary ,  as for example ,  where a word or phrase necessary for the meaning is missing in the spanish text but present in the italian . 
the lost spanish manuscript claimed to have been written in istanbul ,  and the surviving italian manuscript has several turkish features; so ,  whether the language of origin was spanish or italian ,  istanbul is regarded by most researchers as the place of origin of the two known texts . 
if true ,  this would also support an italian origin . 
this suggests that whatever text the scribe of the italian manuscript was using as his copy ,  was unclear as to chapter divisions at this point . 
subsequent scholars examining the italian and spanish texts have been unable ,  however ,  to confirm toland's observation . 
contrariwise ,  there is a title provided above chapter 218 in the sydney transcript ,  which is not found either above the corresponding chapter 217 in the italian text ,  nor is quoted at this point by dr .  white . 
no trace is known of the original spanish manuscript after dr .  monkhouse's death in 1792.
in the spanish manuscript ,  and dr .  white's translation ,  it is said that all jesus's disciples remained fooled by the transformation throughout the crucifixion `` excepting peter ''; but this specific qualification is not present in the italian text ,  nor is peter stated as an exception in the earlier account of the transformation itself in chapter 217 of the spanish text . 
conversely there are also around a dozen places where the raggs had speculated that a word or phrase might have been accidentally omitted in their italian text ,  and in all these instances ,  the spanish text supplies the missing words . 
he is best known for his book `` de re metallica ''  -lrb-  1556 -rrb- . 
georgius agricola  -lrb-  ; 24 march 1494 – 21 november 1555 -rrb- was a german mineralogist and metallurgist . 
agricola's most famous work ,  the ``  de re metallica libri xii '' was published the year after his death ,  in 1556; it was perhaps finished in 1550, since the dedication to the elector and his brother is dated to that year . 
in that year ,  he published a book about greek and roman weights and measures ,  `` de mensuris et ponderibus '' . 
roman forces took the initiative in ad 9, and pushed into dalmatia . 
germanicus's forces withdrew and returned to the rhine . 
in early spring ad 15, germanicus crossed the rhine and struck the chatti . 
germanicus became a quaestor in ad 7, four years before the legal age of 25.
ovid's `` fasti '' dates the senate vote of germanicus's triumph to 1 january ad 15.
piso was rumored to have been responsible for his death . 
in ad 17 he returned to rome where he received a triumph before leaving to reorganize the provinces of asia minor ,  whereby he incorporated the provinces of cappadocia and commagene in ad 18.
tiberius gave money out to the people of rome in germanicus's name ,  and germanicus was scheduled to hold the consulship next year with the emperor . 
in ad 13, augustus appointed him commander of the forces in the rhine ,  which totaled eight legions and was about one-third of rome's total military force . 
he then made his way to egypt ,  arriving to a tumultuous reception in january ad 19.
in ad 9, three roman legions commanded by varus were destroyed by a coalition of german tribes led by arminius in the battle of the teutoburg forest . 
for the next two years ,  he led his legions across the rhine against the germans ,  where they would confront the forces of arminius and his allies . 
as well as being the great-nephew of augustus ,  he was the nephew of the second emperor ,  tiberius ,  his son gaius would become the third emperor ,  caligula ,  who would be succeeded by germanicus's brother claudius ,  and his grandson would become the fifth emperor ,  nero . 
germanicus's successes in germany had made him popular with the soldiers . 
at the beginning of ad 17, germanicus returned to the capital and on may 26 he celebrated a triumph for his victories over the germans . 
as a result ,  in ad 18, germanicus was granted the eastern part of the empire ,  just as agrippa and tiberius had received before ,  when they were successors to the emperor . 
tacitus says that the battle was a roman victory:
on the day of germanicus's death his sister livilla gave birth to twins by drusus . 
alberoni was a gourmet . 
alberoni worked with her and when maria luisa died in 1714 they arranged for philip to marry elisabetta farnese ,  daughter of the duke of parma . 
giulio alberoni  -lrb-  30 may 1664 os – 26 june ns 1752 -rrb- was an italian cardinal and statesman in the service of philip v of spain . 
alberoni took priest's orders ,  and afterwards accompanied the son of his patron to rome . 
during the war of the spanish succession alberoni laid the foundation of his political success by the services he rendered to louis-joseph ,  duc de vendôme ,  commander of the french forces in italy ,  to whom the duke of parma had sent him . 
under the terms of the 1713 treaty of utrecht ,  philip became king of spain but the spanish empire was effectively partitioned . 
albornoz missed only bologna to complete his rebuilding of the papal states . 
albornoz then moved to the marche and romagna against the malatesta of rimini and the ordelaffi of forlì . 
towards the end of 1356 albornoz was appointed as bishop of sabina . 
gil álvarez carrillo de albornoz  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  1310 – 23 august 1367 -rrb- was a spanish cardinal ,  archbishop ,  chancellor of toledo and ecclesiastical leader . 
only giovanni manfredi of faenza and francesco ii ordelaffi of forlì were at that point resisting the papal reconquest . 
giovanni aldini  -lrb-  april 10, 1762 – january 17, 1834 -rrb- ,  was an italian physicist born in bologna . 
he was a brother of a statesman . 
aleandro resigned as archbishop of brindisi on 30 january 1541.
aleandro is depicted by jonathan firth in the 2003 film `` luther '' as the main antagonist . 
in august 1524 pope clement vii appointed aleandro the archbishop of brindisi ,  for which office he was ordained to the priesthood two months later . 
galeazzo alessi  -lrb-  1512 – december 30, 1572 -rrb- was an italian architect from perugia ,  known throughout europe for his distinctive style based on his enthusiasm for ancient architecture . 
giulio aleni  -lrb-  ; 1582– june 10, 1649 -rrb- ,  in chinese  ,  was an italian jesuit missionary and scholar . 
in 1610, he was sent as a missionary to china . 
ice cream and sorbets are also very popular . 
wine is also popular throughout the country . 
some breads are even made with potato starch flour . 
bread  -lrb-  `` brot ''  -rrb-  is a significant part of german cuisine ,  with the largest bread diversity in the world . 
of salt water fish ,  alaska pollock is the most common . 
besides noodles ,  potatoes are common . 
a similar dish ,  `` obstkaltschale '' ,  may also be found all around germany . 
common side dishes are potato salad ,  cucumber salad or potatoes . 
regarding bread ,  german cuisine is more varied than that of either eastern or western europe . 
salads ,  also modern variations ,  as well as vegetarian dishes become more and more popular in germany . 
fresh dill is very common in a green salad or fish fillet . 
: `` fish sticklets ''  -rrb-  ,  are a popular processed food made using a whitefish ,  such as cod ,  haddock or pollock ,  which has been battered or breaded . 
a typical dish that came to the east german kitchen this way is `` soljanka '' . 
bread is served usually for breakfast  -lrb-  often replaced by bread rolls  -rrb-  and in the evening as  -lrb-  open  -rrb-  sandwiches ,  but rarely as a side dish for the main meal  -lrb-  popular ,  for example ,  with `` eintopf '' or soup  -rrb-  . 
since the 1990s ,  the sunday brunch has also become common ,  especially in city cafés . 
coffee is also very common ,  not only for breakfast ,  but also accompanying a piece of cake  -lrb-  `` kaffee und kuchen ''  -rrb-  in the afternoon ,  usually on sundays or special occasions and birthdays . 
germany's most popular breads are rye-wheat  -lrb-  `` roggenmischbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  toast bread  -lrb-  `` toastbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  whole-grain  -lrb-  `` vollkornbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  wheat-rye  -lrb-  `` weizenmischbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  white bread  -lrb-  `` weißbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  multigrain ,  usually wheat-rye-oats with sesame or linseed  -lrb-  `` mehrkornbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  rye  -lrb-  `` roggenbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  sunflower seeds in dark rye bread  -lrb-  `` sonnenblumenkernbrot ''  -rrb-  ,  pumpkin seeds in dark rye bread  -lrb-  `` kürbiskernbrot ''  -rrb-  and roasted onions in light wheat-rye bread  -lrb-  `` zwiebelbrot ''  -rrb-  . 
vegetables are often used in stews or vegetable soups ,  but are also served as side dishes . 
 ''korn '' ,  a german spirit made from malt  -lrb-  wheat ,  rye or barley  -rrb-  ,  is consumed predominantly in the middle and northern parts of germany . 
beer is very common throughout all parts of germany ,  with many local and regional breweries producing a wide variety of beers . 
in fact ,  one of the major complaints of the german expatriates in many parts of the world is their inability to find acceptable local breads . 
the region is located at higher elevations ,  and is known for yielding beet and potato crops and also for the production of fine beers . 
german mustard is usually considerably less acidic than american varieties . 
greek cuisine  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a mediterranean cuisine . 
the most characteristic and ancient element of greek cuisine is olive oil ,  which is used in most dishes . 
ancient greek cuisine was characterized by its frugality and was founded on the `` mediterranean triad '': wheat ,  olive oil ,  and wine ,  with meat being rarely eaten and fish being more common . 
wine and olive oil have always been a central part of it and the spread of grapes and olive trees in the mediterranean and further afield is correlated with greek colonization . 
too much refinement is generally considered to be against the hearty spirit of the greek cuisine ,  though recent trends among greek culinary circles tend to favour a somewhat more refined approach . 
the gospel of mark is anonymous . 
there is no agreement on the structure of mark . 
mark probably dates from ad 66–70.
the gospel according to mark  -lrb-    -rrb-  is one of the four canonical gospels and one of the three synoptic gospels . 
mark does not explicitly state what he means by `` son of god '' ,  nor when the sonship was conferred . 
the point of the beelzebub incident in mark  -lrb-  mark 3:20–30 -rrb- is to set forth jesus' claims to be an instrument of god ,  not satan . 
mark's despairing death of jesus was changed to a more victorious one in subsequent gospels . 
christians of mark's time expected jesus to return as messiah in their own lifetime – mark ,  like the other gospels ,  attributes the promise to jesus himself  -lrb-  mark 9:1 and 13:30 -rrb- ,  and it is reflected in the letters of paul ,  in the epistle of james ,  in hebrews ,  and in revelation . 
the 19th-century recognition of mark as the earliest gospel led to the belief that it must therefore be the most reliable . 
in 1901, william wrede identified the `` messianic secret '' – jesus' secrecy about his identity as the messiah – as one of mark's central themes . 
the gospel according to luke  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called the gospel of luke ,  or simply luke ,  is the third of the four canonical gospels . 
– but to encourage faith – `` what happened ,  and what does it all mean ? `` 
most q and l-source material is grouped in two clusters ,  luke 6:17–8:3 and 9:51–18:14, and l-source material forms the first two sections of the gospel  -lrb-  the preface and infancy and childhood narratives  -rrb-  . 
the gospel of luke and the acts of the apostles make up a two-volume work which scholars call luke–acts . 
the eclipse of the traditional attribution to luke the companion of paul has meant that an early date for the gospel is now rarely put forward . 
the gospel according to matthew  -lrb-  ; also called the gospel of matthew or simply ,  matthew; usually in   -rrb-  is the first book of the new testament and one of the three synoptic gospels . 
 -lrb-  matthew avoids using the holy word god in the expression `` kingdom of god ''; instead he prefers the term `` kingdom of heaven '' ,  reflecting the jewish tradition of not speaking the name of god  -rrb-  . 
matthew's prime concern was that the jewish tradition should not be lost in a church that was increasingly becoming gentile . 
the divine nature of jesus was a major issue for the community of matthew ,  the crucial element marking them from their jewish neighbors . 
matthew ,  alone among the gospels ,  alternates five blocks of narrative with five of discourse ,  marking each off with the phrase `` when jesus had finished .  .  . ``   -lrb-  see five discourses of matthew  -rrb-  . 
as son of god he is god revealing himself through his son ,  and jesus proving his sonship through his obedience and example . 
as son of god he is named immanuel  -lrb-  god with us  -rrb-   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  god revealing himself through his son ,  and jesus proving his sonship through his obedience and example . 
the herodian caucus also become involved in a scheme to entangle jesus  -lrb-  matthew 22:15–16 -rrb- ,  but jesus' careful response to their enquiry ,  `` render therefore to caesar the things that are caesar’s ,  and to god the things that are god’s ''  -lrb-  matthew 22:21 -rrb- ,  leaves them marveling at his words  -lrb-  matthew 22:22 -rrb- . 
matthew has taken over his key christological texts from mark ,  but sometimes he has changed the stories he found in mark ,  giving evidence of his own concerns . 
the gospel of matthew begins with the words `` the book of genealogy in greek ,  `` genesis '' of jesus christ '' ,  deliberately echoing the words of genesis 2:4 in the old testament in greek . 
the gospel of john  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the fourth of the canonical gospels . 
john's account of the baptist is different from that of the synoptic gospels . 
the gospel of john ,  the three johannine epistles ,  and the book of revelation ,  exhibit marked similarities ,  although more so between the gospel and the epistles  -lrb-  especially the gospel and 1 john  -rrb-  than between those and revelation . 
the portrayal of jesus' death in john is unique among the four gospels . 
irenaeus stated that john wrote the first epistle of john and the second epistle of john to warn the less mature in faith and doctrine about the changes cerinthus was making to the gospel . 
in john's gospel ,  jesus and his disciples go to judea early in jesus' ministry before john the baptist was imprisoned and executed by herod . 
the authorship of the johannine works ,  the gospel of john ,  epistles of john ,  and the book of revelation ,  has been debated by scholars since at least the 2nd century ad . 
there may have been a single author for the gospel and the three epistles . 
parts of the gospel have been set to music . 
in the prologue ,  john identifies jesus as the logos  -lrb-  word  -rrb-  . 
the gospel of john is significantly different from the synoptic gospels ,  with major variations in material ,  theological emphasis ,  chronology ,  and literary style . 
it has been suggested that similarities between john's gospel and gnosticism may spring from common roots in jewish apocalyptic literature . 
the gospel of john went through two to three stages ,  or `` editions '' ,  before reaching its current form around ad 90–110.
gnostics read john but interpreted it differently from the way non-gnostics did . 
the arguments of bultmann and his school were seriously compromised by the mid-20th-century discoveries of the nag hammadi library of genuine gnostic writings  -lrb-  which are dissimilar to the gospel of john  -rrb-  as well as the qumran library of jewish writings  -lrb-  which are often similar to the gospel of john  -rrb-  . 
the clevelands are depicted in local murals . 
no new states were admitted to the union during cleveland's first term . 
cleveland also reformed other parts of the government . 
a letter from the british ambassador supporting cleveland caused a scandal which cost cleveland votes in new york . 
while they lived in new york ,  the clevelands' first child ,  ruth ,  was born in 1891.
cleveland was distantly related to general moses cleaveland ,  after whom the city of cleveland ,  ohio ,  was named . 
grover cleveland hall at buffalo state college in buffalo ,  new york . 
cleveland's portrait was on the u . s .  $1000 bill of series 1928 and series 1934.
the first u . s .  postage stamp to honor cleveland appeared in 1923.
stephen grover cleveland was born on march 18, 1837, in caldwell ,  new jersey ,  to ann  -lrb-  née neal  -rrb-  and richard falley cleveland . 
cleveland's military policy emphasized self-defense and modernization . 
cleveland entered the white house as a bachelor ,  and his sister rose cleveland joined him ,  to act as hostess for the first two years of his administration . 
cleveland's service as sheriff was unremarkable; biographer rexford tugwell described the time in office as a waste for cleveland politically . 
cleveland was a formidable policymaker ,  and he also drew corresponding criticism . 
after the votes were counted ,  cleveland narrowly won all four of the swing states ,  including new york by 1200 votes . 
when cleveland took office he faced the question of hawaiian annexation . 
cleveland was a committed non-interventionist who had campaigned in opposition to expansion and imperialism . 
the final result was a victory for cleveland by wide margins in both the popular and electoral votes ,  and it was cleveland's third consecutive popular vote plurality . 
cleveland later took a clerkship with the firm ,  began to read the law ,  and was admitted to the new york bar in 1859.
from his earliest involvement in politics ,  cleveland aligned with the democratic party . 
cleveland was easily renominated at the democratic convention in st .  louis . 
just before the 1894 election ,  cleveland was warned by francis lynde stetson ,  an advisor:
new york democratic party officials began to consider cleveland a possible nominee for governor . 
it was during this period that cleveland began a relationship with a widow ,  maria crofts halpin . 
cleveland also claimed paternity of an additional child named oscar folsom cleveland with maria croft halpin who claimed the child was a product of rape . 
during his first term ,  cleveland successfully nominated two justices to the supreme court of the united states . 
cleveland faced a republican senate and often resorted to using his veto powers . 
the `` silver letter '' thrust cleveland's name back into the spotlight just as the 1892 election was approaching . 
the scott act easily passed both houses of congress ,  and cleveland signed it into law on october 1, 1888.
in 1906, a group of new jersey democrats promoted cleveland as a possible candidate for the united states senate . 
cleveland worked for the rogers firm for three years ,  then left in 1862 to start his own practice . 
he was born and died in rome . 
the music as it is performed today includes a strange error by a copyist in the 1880s . 
the entire music performed at rome in holy week ,  allegri's `` miserere '' included ,  has been issued at leipzig by breitkopf and härtel . 
the `` miserere '' is one of the most often-recorded examples of late renaissance music ,  although it was actually written during the chronological confines of the baroque era; in this regard it is representative of the music of the roman school of composers ,  who were stylistically conservative . 
akre ,  friel ,  and newcomb later joined mike mccready of pearl jam and rick friel to form the rock band the rockfords . 
goodness was an american rock band from seattle ,  washington ,  led by carrie akre ,  formerly of hammerbox and now primarily a solo artist . 
england won 1–0 and were in the semi-finals . 
hurst and west ham had a poor start to the 1963–64 season ,  and went on to finish in 14th place . 
hudson adapted well to life in the hurst household and stoke recorded a fifth place in the 1973–74 season – a career high for hurst . 
the club's success won them a place in the european cup winners cup for the 1964–65 season . 
the west germans scored in extra time and won 3–2.
hurst was selected for uefa euro 1968, but did not play as england lost 1–0 to yugoslavia in the semi-final . 
he was in the west ham side which lost the league cup final 5–3 on aggregate to west bromwich albion . 
hurst is also one of the few footballers who have been knighted . 
hurst scored six goals in a first division match against sunderland at upton park on 19 october 1968, which west ham won 8–0.
hurst made his senior england debut against west germany on 23 february 1966.
greaves was not fit for the game against portugal so hurst and hunt continued up front ,  and england won 2–1 thanks to two goals by bobby charlton ,  the second of which was set up by hurst . 
hurst began his career with west ham united ,  where he scored 242 goals in 500 first team appearances . 
hurst's football career began when he was apprenticed to west ham united at the age of 15.
hurst was born in ashton-under-lyne ,  lancashire ,  on 8 december 1941.
west ham won 2–0, alan sealey scoring both goals ,  to give the club their first european trophy . 
giovanni d'andrea was born at rifredo ,  near florence ,  and studied roman law and canon law at the university of bologna ,  the great law school of the age ,  where he distinguished himself in this subject so much that he was made professor at padua ,  and then at pisa before returning to bologna ,  where he remained from the season of 1301-02 until his death ,  save for brief seasons at padua 1307-09 and 1319.
giovanni d'andrea or johannes andreæ  -lrb-  1270  1275 – 1348 -rrb- was an italian expert in canon law ,  the most renowned and successful canonist of the later middle ages . 
on february 13, 1610, galileo wrote to the grand duke's secretary:
in 1605, galileo had been employed as a mathematics tutor for cosimo de' medici . 
nevertheless ,  galileo accepted the copernican theory . 
on january 7, 1610, galileo wrote a letter containing the first mention of jupiter's moons . 
galileo initially called his discovery the cosmica sidera  -lrb-  `` cosimo's stars ''  -rrb-  ,  in honour of cosimo ii de' medici  -lrb-  1590–1621 -rrb- . 
gaynor would achieve her final success in the 1980s with the release of her album `` i am gloria gaynor '' in 1984.
gaynor also recorded a disco song called `` love is just a heartbeat away '' in 1979 for the vampire movie ``  '' which featured a number of disco songs . 
gaynor is a christian and has released a contemporary christian album in late 2013.
her 1986 album ,  `` the power of gloria gaynor '' ,  was almost entirely composed of cover versions of other songs that were popular at the time . 
as a disco number ,  the song was unique for its time by virtue of gaynor's having no background singers or lush production . 
in the next few years ,  gaynor released the albums `` glorious '' and `` gloria gaynor's park avenue sound '' ,  but would only enjoy a few more moderate hits . 
in 1980 and again in 1981, gaynor released two disco albums which were virtually ignored in the united states due to the backlash against disco ,  which began late in 1979.
namely ,  that from the perspective of the point of origin of the big bang ,  according to einstein's equations of the 'stretching factor' ,  time dilates by a factor of roughly 1,000,000,000,000, meaning one trillion days on earth would appear to pass as one day from that point ,  due to the stretching of space . 
schroeder's wife barbara sofer is a popular columnist for the english language israeli newspaper `` jerusalem post '' . 
schroeder received his bsc in 1959, his msc in 1961, and his phd in nuclear physics and earth and planetary sciences in 1965, from the massachusetts institute of technology  -lrb-  mit  -rrb-  . 
the `` holy ghost '' . 
there is widespread belief in ghosts in tibetan culture . 
the overwhelming consensus of science is that ghosts do not exist . 
in fictional television programming ,  ghosts have been explored in series such as `` supernatural '' ,  `` ghost whisperer '' ,  and `` medium '' . 
there is extensive and varied belief in ghosts in mexican culture . 
belief in ghosts is found in all cultures around the world ,  and thus ghost stories may be passed down orally or in written form . 
there are many references to ghosts in chinese culture . 
ghosts are prominent in story-telling of various nations . 
in english renaissance theater ,  ghosts were often depicted in the garb of the living and even in armor ,  as with the ghost of hamlet's father . 
 ''wraith '' is a scots word for `` ghost '' ,  `` spectre '' ,  or `` apparition '' . 
also related is the concept of a fetch ,  the visible ghost or spirit of a person yet alive . 
even it is believed that other animals and creatures can also be turned into ghost after their death . 
the 5th-century bc play `` oresteia '' includes an appearance of the ghost of clytemnestra ,  one of the first ghosts to appear in a work of fiction . 
there was widespread belief in ghosts in polynesian culture ,  some of which persists today . 
medieval european ghosts were more substantial than ghosts described in the victorian age ,  and there are accounts of ghosts being wrestled with and physically restrained until a priest could arrive to hear its confession . 
ghost hunting also gave rise to multiple guidebooks to haunted locations ,  and ghost hunting `` how-to '' manuals . 
the idea of ghosts can be considered a tradition for certain cultures . 
there was widespread belief in ghosts in ancient egyptian culture the hebrew bible contains few references to ghosts ,  associating spiritism with forbidden occult activities cf . 
the ghosts take many forms ,  depending on how the person died ,  and are often harmful . 
various other television shows have depicted ghosts as well . 
a 2005 gallup poll found that about 32 percent of americans believe in ghosts . 
even confucius said ,  `` respect ghosts and gods ,  but keep away from them . `` 
the english word `` ghost '' continues old english `` gāst '' ,  from proto-germanic `` *gaistaz '' . 
benjamin radford from the committee for skeptical inquiry and author of the 2017 book `` investigating ghosts: the scientific search for spirits '' writes that `` ghost hunting is the world's most popular paranormal pursuit '' yet ,  to date ghost hunters can't agree on what a ghost is ,  or offer proof that they exist `` it's all speculation and guesswork '' . 
similarly ,  jesus' followers at first believed he was a ghost  -lrb-  spirit  -rrb-  when they saw him walking on water . 
similarly ,  jesus' followers at first believe he is a ghost  -lrb-  spirit  -rrb-  when they see him walking on water . 
the soul of a dead person would divulge its mission ,  while a demonic ghost would be banished at the sound of the holy name . 
ghosts reported in medieval europe tended to fall into two categories: the souls of the dead ,  or demons . 
the folklore of thailand also includes the belief that sleep paralysis is caused by a ghost ,  phi am . 
from the medieval period an apparition of a ghost is recorded from 1211, at the time of the albigensian crusade . 
in buddhism ,  there are a number of planes of existence into which a person can be reborn ,  one of which is the realm of hungry ghosts . 
in folklore ,  a ghost  -lrb-  sometimes known as an apparition ,  haunt ,  phantom ,  poltergeist ,  shade ,  specter or spectre ,  spirit ,  spook ,  and wraith  -rrb-  is the soul or spirit of a dead person or animal that can appear to the living . 
the child ballad `` sweet william's ghost ''  -lrb-  1868 -rrb- recounts the story of a ghost returning to his fiancée begging her to free him from his promise to marry her . 
are figures in japanese folklore ,  analogous to western legends of ghosts . 
in many cultures ,  malignant ,  restless ghosts are distinguished from the more benign spirits involved in ancestor worship . 
geneva has a population  -lrb-    -rrb-  of  . 
situated where the rhône exits lake geneva ,  it is the capital of the republic and canton of geneva . 
the official language of geneva  -lrb-  both the city and the canton  -rrb-  is french . 
geneva intentionally does not have any sister relationships with other cities . 
geneva is located at 46°12' north ,  6°09' east ,  at the south-western end of lake geneva ,  where the rhône flows out . 
in the city of geneva ,   ,  48% of the population are resident foreign nationals . 
in june 2011, the average price of an apartment in and around geneva was 13,681 chf per square metre  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
mont blanc can be seen from geneva and is an hour's drive from the city . 
for houses in and around geneva ,  the average price was 11,595 swiss francs  -lrb-  chf  -rrb-  per square metre  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  june 2011 -rrb- ,  with a lowest price per square metre  -lrb-    -rrb-  of 4,874 swiss francs  -lrb-  chf  -rrb-  ,  and a maximum price of 21,966 swiss francs  -lrb-  chf  -rrb-  . 
 ,  the average price to rent an average apartment in geneva was 1163.30 swiss francs  -lrb-  chf  -rrb-  per month  -lrb-  us$930, £520, €740 approx . 
the climate of geneva is temperate ,  more specifically oceanic  -lrb-  köppen: `` cfb ''  -rrb-  . 
the name takes various forms in modern languages ,  `` geneva '' in english ,   ,   ,   ,  and  . 
geneva flourished in the 19th and 20th centuries ,  becoming the seat of many international organizations . 
geneva was an allobrogian border town ,  fortified against the helvetii tribe ,  when the romans took it in 121 bc . 
geneva  -lrb-  ; ; ; ; ;   -rrb-  is the second-most populous city in switzerland  -lrb-  after zürich  -rrb-  and the most populous city of the romandy ,  the french-speaking part of switzerland . 
i loved my life . `` 
this is just one interpretation of hopkins's most famous poem ,  one which he felt was his best . 
hopkins's first ambitions were to be a painter ,  and he would continue to sketch throughout his life ,  inspired ,  as an adult ,  by the work of john ruskin and the pre-raphaelites . 
gerard manley hopkins  -lrb-  28 july 1844 – 8 june 1889 -rrb- was an english poet and jesuit priest ,  whose posthumous fame established him among the leading victorian poets . 
hopkins composed two poems about dolben ,  `` where art thou friend '' and `` the beginning of the end . `` 
the language of hopkins’s poems is often striking . 
one contemporary literary critic ,  m .  m .  kaylor ,  has argued for hopkins's inclusion with the uranian poets ,  a group whose writings derived ,  in many ways ,  from the prose works of walter pater ,  hopkins's academic coach for his greats exams ,  and later his lifelong friend . 
as a poet ,  hopkins's father published works including `` a philosopher's stone and other poems ''  -lrb-  1843 -rrb- ,  `` pietas metrica ''  -lrb-  1849 -rrb- ,  and `` spicelegium poeticum ,  a gathering of verses by manley hopkins ''  -lrb-  1892 -rrb- . 
hopkins studied classics at balliol college ,  oxford  -lrb-  1863–1867 -rrb- . 
the poem `` to seem the stranger '' was written in ireland between 1885 and 1886 and is a poem of isolation and loneliness . 
he would later write sermons and other religious pieces . 
he paused to first visit switzerland ,  which officially forbade jesuits to enter . 
 ''cis ''– ''trans '' isomerism ,  also known as geometric isomerism or configurational isomerism ,  is a term used in organic chemistry . 
the term `` geometric isomerism '' is considered by iupac to be an obsolete synonym of ``  ''cis ''– ''trans '' isomerism '' . 
alicyclic compounds can also display `` cis ''– ''trans '' isomerism . 
diazenes  -lrb-  and the related diphosphenes  -rrb-  can also exhibit cis/trans isomerism . 
an example of a small hydrocarbon displaying `` cis ''– ''trans '' isomerism is but-2-ene . 
a related type of isomerism in octahedral mxy complexes is facial–meridional  -lrb-  or `` fac ''/ ''mer ''  -rrb-  isomerism ,  in which different numbers of ligands are `` cis '' or `` trans '' to each other . 
 ''cis ''– ''trans '' isomerism can also occur in inorganic compounds ,  most notably in diazenes and coordination compounds . 
odin then vanished ,  and agnarr ,  son of the dead king geirröth ,  ruled in his father's stead . 
in hliðskjálf ,  odin remarked to frigg that his foster-child geirröth seemed to be prospering more so than her agnarr . 
after this time ,  geirröth's son ,  named agnarr after the king's brother ,  came to grímnir and gave him a full horn from which to drink ,  saying that his father ,  the king ,  was not right to torture him . 
geirröth returned to his father's kingdom where he became king upon his father's death ,  while agnarr dwelt with a giantess in a cave . 
peppard made his stage debut in 1949 at the pittsburgh playhouse . 
in addition to acting ,  peppard was a pilot . 
george peppard ,  jr .  was born october 1, 1928, in detroit ,  michigan ,  the son of building contractor george peppard ,  sr .  and opera singer vernelle rohrer . 
smaller containers are more common in urban areas because they can be more easily hidden . 
a typical cache is a small waterproof container containing a logbook and sometimes a pen or pencil . 
the game is quite similar to geocaching but has time limitations and hints . 
for the traditional geocache ,  a geocacher will place a waterproof container containing a log book  -lrb-  with pen and/or pencil  -rrb-  and trade items or trackables ,  then record the cache's coordinates . 
caches can be grouped in three categories – with and without a paper log ,  and events . 
the geographical mile is a unit of length determined by 1 minute of arc along the earth's equator . 
in any ellipsoid ,  the length of a degree of longitude at the equator is thus exactly 60 geographical miles . 
golden heroes is a superhero role-playing game that was originally written and published on an amateur basis in 1982.
the more professional and complete version was published by games workshop in 1984.
it was written by simon burley and peter haines and was illustrated by a group of artists who were working for `` 2000 ad '' at the time . 
guangzhou is a sub-provincial city . 
most of guangzhou's population is han chinese . 
buddhism is the most prominent religion in guangzhou . 
the 2010 census found guangzhou's population to be 12.78 million . 
guangzhou  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  ,  also known as canton ,  is the capital and most populous city of the province of guangdong in southern china . 
when the first line of the guangzhou metro opened in 1997, guangzhou was the fourth city in mainland china to have an underground railway system ,  behind beijing ,  tianjin ,  and shanghai . 
in 2008, about 5 million of guangzhou's permanent residents were hukouless migrants . 
there are also coach bus services connecting guangzhou with hkia . 
from 12–27 november 2010, guangzhou hosted the 16th asian games . 
guangzhou's main airport is the baiyun international airport in baiyun district; it opened on august 5, 2004.
the domestic migrant population from other provinces of china in guangzhou was 40% of the city's total population in 2008.
guangzhou was then the most populous consolidated district-governed city in china until beijing overtook it the next year . 
notable aspects of guangzhou's cultural heritage include:
guangzhou is the main manufacturing hub of the pearl river delta ,  one of mainland china's leading commercial and manufacturing regions . 
qing-era guangzhou had around 124 religious pavilions ,  halls ,  and temples . 
the old town of guangzhou was near baiyun mountain on the east bank of the pearl river  -lrb-  zhujiang  -rrb-  about from its junction with the south china sea and about below its head of navigation . 
guangzhou peugeot automobile company produced the peugeot 504 and peugeot 505 automobiles from 1989 to 1997.
the guangzhou bus rapid transit  -lrb-  gbrt  -rrb-  system which was introduced in 2010 along zhongshan road . 
before acquiring its current name ,  the town was known as panyu ,  a name still borne by one of guangzhou's districts not far from the main city . 
long the only chinese port accessible to most foreign traders ,  guangzhou fell to the british during the first opium war . 
guangzhou is the terminus of the beijing–guangzhou ,  guangzhou–shenzhen ,  guangzhou–maoming and guangzhou–meizhou–shantou conventional speed railways . 
the 18,000 seat guangzhou international sports arena will be one of the venues for the 2019 fiba basketball world cup . 
on the pearl river about north-northwest of hong kong and north of macau ,  guangzhou has a history of over 2,200 years and was a major terminus of the maritime silk road ,  and continues to serve as a major port and transportation hub ,  as well as one of china's three largest cities . 
for the three consecutive years 2013–2015, forbes ranked guangzhou as the best commercial city on the chinese mainland . 
guangzhou ,  like most of southern china ,  is also notably observant concerning ancestral veneration during occasions like the tomb sweeping and ghost festivals . 
in some languages ,  nouns in the genitive case also agree in case with the nouns they modify  -lrb-  that is ,  it is marked for two cases  -rrb-  . 
in some languages ,  nouns in the genitive case may be found in inclusio – that is ,  between the main noun’s article and the noun itself . 
in grammar ,  the genitive case  -lrb-  abbreviated   -rrb-  ,  also called the second case ,  is the grammatical case that marks a word ,  usually a noun ,  as modifying another word ,  also usually a noun—thus ,  indicating an attributive relationship of one noun to the other noun . 
similar systems have been used in other languages and cultures: earlier ,  the greek isopsephy ,  and later ,  derived from or inspired by hebrew gematria ,  arabic abjad numerals ,  and english gematria . 
the term does not appear in the hebrew bible itself . 
some also hold it to derive from the order of the greek alphabet ,  gamma being the third letter of the greek alphabet . 
gematria  -lrb-   or  ,  plural or  ,  `` gematriot ''  -rrb-  is one of several methods of assigning a numerical value to a hebrew name ,  word or phrase based on its letters . 
after the death of garcia in 1995, former members of the band ,  along with other musicians ,  toured as the other ones in 1998, 2000, and 2002, and the dead in 2003, 2004, and 2009.
the grateful dead was an american rock band formed in 1965 in palo alto ,  california . 
the name `` grateful dead '' was chosen from a dictionary . 
the band's first lp ,  `` the grateful dead '' ,  was released on warner brothers in 1967.
the death of pigpen did not slow the band down ,  and they continued with their new members . 
the grateful dead have sold more than 35 million albums worldwide . 
a groupoid can be seen as a:
these steps are: right ,  left ,  right ,  left ,  cadence . 
a galliard pattern may also last twice as long ,  or more ,  which would involve 11 steps ,  or 17 steps . 
another special step used during a galliard is the tassel kick  -lrb-  salti del fiocco  -rrb-  . 
musical compositions in the galliard form appear to have been written and performed after the dance fell out of popular use . 
most cardiothoracic surgeons in the u . s .   -lrb-  d . o . 
general surgeons may sub-specialize into one or more of the following disciplines:
however ,  general surgeons are capable of treating minor vascular disorders . 
general surgeons can perform vascular surgery if they receive special training and certification in vascular surgery . 
they are also called upon to staff surgical intensive care units or trauma intensive care units . 
all general surgeons are trained in emergency surgery . 
the eastern gorilla is more darkly coloured than the western gorilla ,  with the mountain gorilla being the darkest of all . 
mountain gorillas and western lowland gorillas also commonly transfer to second new groups . 
gorillas have a patchy distribution . 
the eastern gorilla also has a longer face and broader chest than the western gorilla . 
gorillas live in groups called troops . 
gorillas mate year round . 
western lowland gorillas  -lrb-  `` g .  g .  gorilla ''  -rrb-  are believed to be one of the zoonotic origins of hiv/aids . 
a gorilla's lifespan is normally between 35 and 40 years ,  although zoo gorillas may live for 50 years or more . 
gorillas are considered highly intelligent . 
eastern lowland gorillas have more diverse diets ,  which vary seasonally . 
western lowland gorillas live in swamp and lowland forests ranging up to  ,  and cross river gorillas live in low-lying and submontane forests ranging from  . 
one possible predator of gorillas is the leopard . 
lowland gorillas live in dense forests and lowland swamps and marshes as low as sea level ,  with western lowland gorillas living in central west african countries and eastern lowland gorillas living in the democratic republic of the congo near its border with rwanda . 
the proposed third subspecies of `` gorilla beringei '' ,  which has not yet received a trinomen ,  is the bwindi population of the mountain gorilla ,  sometimes called the bwindi gorilla . 
other species of gorilla were described in the next few years . 
the second edition book is revised and corrected . 
the book also contains suggestions for running a superhero campaign ,  and a detailed background setting with the un controlling most superheroes . 
gurps supers is a superhero roleplaying game written by loyd blankenship and published by steve jackson games . 
the rules book included advice on creating superhero campaigns ,  and ways for the game master to customize the style of the campaign . 
 ''gurps supers '' was written by loyd blankenship ,  with a cover by alan gutierrez and charlie weidman ,  and was first published by steve jackson games in 1988 as a 112-page book . 
 ''gurps supers '' is a supplement of rules for comic-book superhero characters and campaigns for `` gurps '' . 
 ''the end of time ''  -lrb-  2009–10 -rrb- once again featured gallifrey . 
it is stated by the tenth doctor in `` the end of time '' that gallifrey is not how he and the master knew it in their youth . 
in `` the time of the doctor ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- ,  the time lords are depicted as trying to re-enter the universe through a crack in the universe on the planet trenzalore . 
gallifrey appeared in the `` doctor who '' 50th anniversary special ,  `` the day of the doctor '' which aired on november 23, 2013.
somewhere on gallifrey there is also an institute called the academy ,  which the doctor and various other time lords have attended . 
in the revived series  -lrb-  2005 onwards  -rrb-  gallifrey was originally referred to as having been destroyed in the time war ,  fought between the time lords and the daleks . 
when the doctor destroys gallifrey the war no longer happens and his actions also apparently  -lrb-  and retroactively  -rrb-  wipe the time lords from history . 
in the last regular eighth doctor novel ,  `` the gallifrey chronicles '' by lance parkin ,  it is revealed that while gallifrey was destroyed ,  the time lords were not erased from history . 
a young pilot rejects assistance from the eighth doctor due to her fear of the time lords . 
gallifrey is revealed at the conclusion of `` the day of the doctor ''  -lrb-  2013 -rrb- to have actually survived the time war ,  although it was frozen in time and shunted into another dimension ,  before returning to the universe at some point before `` hell bent ''  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- . 
it was first shown in `` the war games ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- during the second doctor's trial though was not identified by name until `` the time warrior ''  -lrb-  1973–74 -rrb- . 
the b score  -lrb-  or e score  -rrb-  ,  is the score for execution ,  and is given for how well the skills are performed . 
most forms of competitive gymnastics events are governed by the fédération internationale de gymnastique  -lrb-  fig  -rrb-  . 
it typically involves the women's events of vault ,  uneven bars ,  balance beam and floor exercise as well as the men's events of floor exercise ,  pommel horse ,  still rings ,  vault ,  parallel bars and horizontal bar . 
the word `` gymnastics '' derives from the common greek adjective γυμνός  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  by way of the related verb γυμνάζω  -lrb-  `` gymnazo ''  -rrb-  ,  whose meaning is to `` train naked '' ,  `` train in gymnastic exercise '' ,  generally `` to train ,  to exercise '' . 
the great auk had disappeared from funk island by 1800.
the last colony of great auks lived on geirfuglasker  -lrb-  the `` great auk rock ''  -rrb-  off iceland . 
the great auk is the subject of `` the last great auk '' ,  a novel by allen eckert ,  which tells of the events leading to the extinction of the great auk as seen from the perspective of the last one alive . 
the great auk also is present in a wide variety of other works of fiction . 
the inuit name for the great auk was `` isarukitsok '' ,  which meant `` little wing '' . 
great auks matured sexually when they were four to seven years old . 
historical descriptions of the great auk breeding behaviour are somewhat unreliable . 
great auk calls included low croaking and a hoarse scream . 
the irish name for the great auk is 'falcóg mhór' ,  meaning 'big seabird/auk' . 
the great auk is mentioned in several novels and the scientific journal of the american ornithologists' union is named `` the auk '' in honour of this bird . 
when the colonies included other species of alcid ,  the great auks were dominant due to their size . 
the word `` penguin '' first appears in the sixteenth century as a synonym for `` great auk '' . 
the great auk was generally an excellent swimmer ,  using its wings to propel itself underwater . 
the great auk is one of the more frequently referenced extinct birds in literature ,  much as the famous dodo . 
native americans valued the great auk as a food source during the winter and as an important cultural symbol . 
the great auk was not related closely to the other extinct genera of flightless alcids ,  `` mancalla '' ,  `` praemancalla '' ,  and `` alcodes '' . 
the great auk was tall and weighed about  ,  making it the second-largest member of the alcid family  -lrb-  `` miomancalla '' was larger  -rrb-  . 
the great auk  -lrb-  `` pinguinus impennis ''  -rrb-  is a species of flightless alcid that became extinct in the mid-19th century . 
the great auk left the north atlantic waters for land only to breed ,  even roosting at sea when not breeding . 
glorantha is immense . 
the glorantha website introduces glorantha as: `` glorantha is an action-packed world of adventure . 
glorantha is an exciting world of heroes . 
glorantha is full of surprises . 
glorantha is as deep as you want it to be ,  or not . 
the first game system set in glorantha was the board game `` white bear and red moon '' . 
glorantha is colorful and full of magic . 
the first edition of the role-playing game `` runequest '' was released in 1978.
glorantha is a fantasy world created by greg stafford . 
latest publication is runequest roleplaying in glorantha ,  published 21 st of september 2018.
during this period of breakdown ,  glorantha continued to evolve . 
stafford began imagining glorantha in 1966 as a way to deepen his own understanding of mythology . 
bailey's family founded the ace bailey children's foundation in his memory . 
garnet edward `` ace '' bailey was born june 13, 1948 in lloydminster ,  saskatchewan . 
bailey played junior hockey with the edmonton oil kings from 1964 to 1967, during which time the oil kings won the memorial cup in 1966.
bailey then worked as a scout with the oilers from 1981 to 1994, during which time the team won five stanley cups  -lrb-  1984, 1985, 1987, 1988 and 1990 -rrb-; his name was engraved on three of them  -lrb-  1985, 1987 and 1990 -rrb- . 
gilles deleuze  -lrb-  ; ; 18 january 1925 – 4 november 1995 -rrb- was a french philosopher who ,  from the early 1950s until his death in 1995, wrote on philosophy ,  literature ,  film ,  and fine art . 
he married denise paul `` fanny '' grandjouan in 1956.
spiral galaxies resemble spiraling pinwheels . 
in his view ,  the milky way is celestial . 
spiral galaxies ,  like the milky way ,  produce new generations of stars as long as they have dense molecular clouds of interstellar hydrogen in their spiral arms . 
their luminosity can be 100 times greater than that of the milky way . 
about 70–80% of the mass in a cluster is in the form of dark matter ,  with 10–30% consisting of this heated gas and the remaining few percent of the matter in the form of galaxies . 
they are thought to have an increased star formation rate around 30 times faster than the milky way . 
a majority of spiral galaxies ,  including our own milky way galaxy ,  have a linear ,  bar-shaped band of stars that extends outward to either side of the core ,  then merges into the spiral arm structure . 
it contains about two hundred billion  -lrb-  2×10 -rrb- stars and has a total mass of about six hundred billion  -lrb-  6×10 -rrb- times the mass of the sun . 
the greek philosopher democritus  -lrb-  450–370 bce  -rrb-  proposed that the bright band on the night sky known as the milky way might consist of distant stars . 
although the milky way has never collided with a galaxy as large as andromeda before ,  evidence of past collisions of the milky way with smaller dwarf galaxies is increasing . 
a study of 27 milky way neighbors found that in all dwarf galaxies ,  the central mass is approximately 10 million solar masses ,  regardless of whether the galaxy has thousands or millions of stars . 
spiral galaxies consist of a rotating disk of stars and interstellar medium ,  along with a central bulge of generally older stars . 
this has led to the suggestion that galaxies are largely formed by dark matter ,  and that the minimum size may indicate a form of warm dark matter incapable of gravitational coalescence on a smaller scale . 
a galaxy is a gravitationally bound system of stars ,  stellar remnants ,  interstellar gas ,  dust ,  and dark matter . 
galaxies range in size from dwarfs with just a few hundred million  -lrb-    -rrb-  stars to giants with one hundred trillion  -lrb-    -rrb-  stars ,  each orbiting its galaxy's center of mass . 
the dust present in the interstellar medium is opaque to visual light . 
the first project to describe the shape of the milky way and the position of the sun was undertaken by william herschel in 1785 by counting the number of stars in different regions of the sky . 
actual proof of the milky way consisting of many stars came in 1610 when the italian astronomer galileo galilei used a telescope to study the milky way and discovered that it is composed of a huge number of faint stars . 
galaxies come in three main types: ellipticals ,  spirals ,  and irregulars . 
seen in visible light ,  most seyfert galaxies look like normal spiral galaxies ,  but when studied under other wavelengths ,  the luminosity of their cores is equivalent to the luminosity of whole galaxies the size of the milky way . 
during the following two billion years ,  the accumulated matter settles into a galactic disc . 
the light from egs-zs8-1 has taken 13 billion years to reach earth ,  and is now 30 billion light-years away ,  because of the expansion of the universe during 13 billion years . 
in 1917, heber curtis observed nova s andromedae within the `` great andromeda nebula ''  -lrb-  as the andromeda galaxy ,  messier object m31, was then known  -rrb-  . 
once protogalaxies began to form and contract ,  the first halo stars  -lrb-  called population iii stars  -rrb-  appeared within them . 
a lirg's luminosity is 100 billion times that of our sun . 
the origin of the word `` galaxy '' derives from the greek term for the milky way ,  '  -lrb-  ' ,  `` milky one ''  -rrb-  ,  or ``  ''  -lrb-  `` milky circle ''  -rrb-  due to its appearance as a `` milky '' band of light in the sky . 
for example ,  messier 109 is a spiral galaxy having the number 109 in the catalogue of messier ,  but also codes ngc3992, ugc6937, cgcg 269-023, mcg +09-20-044, and pgc 37617.
hackman decided that he wanted to become an actor when he was ten years old . 
hackman's first marriage was to faye maltese . 
eugene allen hackman  -lrb-  born january 30, 1930 -rrb- is a retired american actor and novelist . 
hackman's final film appearance to date was the romantic comedy film `` welcome to mooseport '' in 2004, co-starring comedian ray romano . 
hackman was born in san bernardino ,  california ,  the son of eugene ezra hackman and anna lyda elizabeth  -lrb-  née gray  -rrb-  . 
a 2008 american film institute poll voted `` hoosiers '' the fourth-greatest film of all time in the sports genre . 
that same year ,  hackman appeared in what became one of his most famous comedic roles as the blindman in `` young frankenstein '' . 
hackman's final film to date was `` welcome to mooseport ''  -lrb-  2004 -rrb- ,  a comedy with ray romano ,  when he portrayed a former president of the united states . 
he also co-starred with will smith in the 1998 film `` enemy of the state '' ,  where his character was reminiscent of the one from `` the conversation '' . 
he first came to fame in 1967 with his performance as buck barrow in `` bonnie and clyde '' ,  when he received his first academy award nomination for best supporting actor . 
other scholars agree with fisher that mendel's various observations come uncomfortably close to mendel's expectations . 
mendel also experimented with hawkweed  -lrb-  `` hieracium ''  -rrb-  and honeybees . 
mendel began his studies on heredity using mice . 
mendel worked with seven characteristics of pea plants: plant height ,  pod shape and color ,  seed shape and color ,  and flower position and color . 
it was not until the early 20th century that the importance of mendel's ideas was realized . 
mendel's results were quickly replicated ,  and genetic linkage quickly worked out . 
fisher asserted that `` the data of most ,  if not all ,  of the experiments have been falsified so as to agree closely with mendel's expectations , ``  mendel's alleged observations ,  according to fisher ,  were `` abominable '' ,  `` shocking '' ,  and `` cooked '' . 
mendel ,  on the other hand ,  was fond of his bees ,  and referred to them as `` my dearest little animals '' . 
he also described novel plant species ,  and these are denoted with the botanical author abbreviation `` mendel '' . 
at times ,  mendel must have entertained doubts about his work ,  but not always: `` my time will come , ``  he reportedly told a friend . 
about forty scientists listened to mendel's two path-breaking lectures ,  but it would appear that they failed to understand his work . 
in other martial sports such as mma ,  the fight may continue on the ground . 
many combat sports ,  such as shooto and mixed martial arts competitions use grappling while retaining striking as part of the sport
the world jiu-jitsu championship ,  also commonly called the mundials  -lrb-  portuguese for `` worlds ''  -rrb-  ,  is the most prestigious jacketed full range  -lrb-  takedown ,  position ,  and submission inclusive  -rrb-  grappling tournament in the world . 
grappling techniques are also used in mixed martial arts along with striking techniques . 
grappling is not allowed in some martial arts and combat sports ,  usually for the sake of focusing on other aspects of combat such as punching ,  kicking or mêlée weapons . 
grappling covers techniques used in many disciplines ,  styles and martial arts that are practiced both as combat sports and for self-defense . 
in combat sports ,  stand-up grappling usually revolves around successful takedowns and throws . 
the flagship grappling's event of uww is the grappling world championships . 
george mason university  -lrb-  gmu ,  mason ,  or george mason  -rrb-  is a public research university in fairfax county ,  virginia . 
each of these languages has its own grammar . 
prescriptive grammar is taught in primary and secondary school . 
there are various additional notation schemes for some grammars:
in the united states ,  the society for the promotion of good grammar designated 4 march as national grammar day in 2008.
the first grammar of slovene language was written in 1583 by adam bohorič . 
these should not be confused with the related ,  albeit distinct ,  modern british grammar schools . 
frameworks of grammar ,  which attempt to give a precise scientific theory of the syntax rules of grammar and their function ,  have been developed in theoretical linguistics . 
thus ,  grammar is the cognitive information underlying language use . 
a specific description ,  study or analysis of such rules may also be referred to as a grammar . 
a grammar of irish originated in the 7th century with the auraicept na n-éces . 
since the first disk drive ,  the ibm 350, disk drive manufacturers expressed hard drive capacities using decimal prefixes . 
for example ,  the manufacturer of a `` 300 gb '' hard drive is claiming a capacity of  ,  not 300x1024  -lrb-  which would be   -rrb-  bytes . 
the unit symbol for the gigabyte is gb . 
hard disk capacities as described and marketed by drive manufacturers using the standard metric definition of the gigabyte ,  but when a 500-gb drive's capacity is displayed by ,  for example ,  microsoft windows ,  it is reported as 465 gb ,  using a binary interpretation . 
based on powers of 10, this definition uses the prefix giga- as defined in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  . 
