the film had its detractors . 
the film was voted the 27th greatest comedy film of all time by readers of `` total film '' in 2000.
in 1999, `` four weddings and a funeral '' placed 23rd on the british film institute's 100 greatest british films of the 20th century . 
the film earned £27.8 million in the united kingdom . 
he was eventually persuaded by mike newell and the film's producers to approve of grant . 
four weddings and a funeral is a 1994 british romantic comedy film directed by mike newell . 
the success of the film propelled hugh grant to international stardom ,  particularly in the united states . 
the film would continue to gross $52.7 million in north america with an additional $193 million internationally ,  earning $245.7 million worldwide . 
in 2017 a poll of 150 actors ,  directors ,  writers ,  producers and critics for `` time out '' magazine ranked it the 74th best british film ever . 
on 5 december 2018, it was announced that richard curtis has written `` one red nose day and a wedding '' ,  a 25th anniversary reunion short film ,  to be directed by the original film's director ,  mike newell . 
the character of carrie was voted one of the most annoying film characters of all time in a british online poll . 
this song would later be adapted into `` christmas is all around '' and sung by the character of billy mack in richard curtis' 2003 film `` love actually '' ,  in which grant also stars . 
hugh grant commented of the experience of the film's phenomenal success and its effect on his career in 2016: `` i was making `` an awfully big adventure '' at the time that `` four weddings '' came out ,  with mike newell again ,  same director ,  even tinier budget ,  in dublin . 
in 1988, enzo ferrari oversaw the launch of the ferrari f40, the last new ferrari launched before his death later that year . 
the various dino models were named for enzo's son ,  dino ferrari ,  and were marketed as dinos by ferrari and sold at ferrari dealers—for all intents and purposes they are ferraris . 
the 1940 aac 815 was the first racing car to be designed by enzo ferrari ,  although it was not badged as a ferrari model . 
early in 1969, fiat took a 50% stake in ferrari . 
enzo ferrari retained a 10% share ,  which is currently owned by his son piero lardi ferrari . 
the `` cavallino rampante '' is the visual symbol of ferrari . 
throughout its history ,  ferrari has supplied racing cars to other entrants ,  aside from its own works scuderia ferrari team . 
ferrari has had a long-standing relationship with shell oil . 
ferrari has produced a number of concept cars ,  such as the mythos . 
the most recent concept car to be produced by ferrari themselves was the 2010 millechili . 
enzo ferrari was not initially interested in the idea of producing road cars when he formed scuderia ferrari in 1929, with headquarters in modena . 
for a time ,  ferrari built 2+2 versions of its mid-engined v8 cars . 
fiat s . p . a .  acquired 50% of ferrari in 1969 and expanded its stake to 90% in 1988.
historically ,  ferrari has also produced flat 12 engines . 
ferrari also runs a museum ,  the museo ferrari in maranello ,  which displays road and race cars and other items from the company's history . 
in the 1950s and '60s ,  ferrari supplied formula one cars to a number of private entrants and other teams . 
in the mid-1990s ,  ferrari added the letter `` f '' to the beginning of all models  -lrb-  a practice abandoned after the f512 m and f355, but adopted again with the f430, but not with its successor ,  the ferrari 458   -rrb-  . 
in 2014, ferrari was rated the world's most powerful brand by brand finance . 
approximately thirty ferrari boutiques exist worldwide ,  with two owned by ferrari and the rest operating as franchises . 
the first ferrari-badged car was the 1947 125 s ,  powered by a 1.5 l v12 engine; enzo ferrari reluctantly built and sold his automobiles to fund scuderia ferrari . 
the 1984 288 gto may be considered the first in the line of ferrari supercars . 
most ferraris were also given designations referring to their body style . 
this was done as a protest concerning arguments between ferrari and the italian racing authorities regarding the homologation of a new mid-engined ferrari race car . 
the result was the withdrawal of recognition of the grand orient of france by the united grand lodge of england ,  a situation that continues today . 
in 1913, the united grand lodge of england recognised a new grand lodge of regular freemasons ,  a grand lodge that follows a similar rite to anglo-american freemasonry with a mandatory belief in a deity . 
the ritual form on which the grand orient of france was based was abolished in england in the events leading to the formation of the united grand lodge of england in 1813.
however ,  countries such as turkey and morocco have established grand lodges ,  while in countries such as malaysia and lebanon there are district grand lodges operating under a warrant from an established grand lodge . 
relations between grand lodges are determined by the concept of `` recognition '' . 
they united on 27 december 1813 to form the united grand lodge of england  -lrb-  ugle  -rrb-  . 
there is no international ,  worldwide grand lodge that supervises all of freemasonry; each grand lodge is independent ,  and they do not necessarily recognise each other as being legitimate . 
the resolution of the grand orient the following year that neither colour ,  race ,  nor religion could disqualify a man from masonry prompted the grand lodge to withdraw recognition ,  and it persuaded other american grand lodges to do the same . 
exclusive jurisdiction can be waived when the two overlapping grand lodges are themselves in amity and agree to share jurisdiction  -lrb-  for example ,  since the grand lodge of connecticut is in amity with the prince hall grand lodge of connecticut ,  the principle of exclusive jurisdiction does not apply ,  and other grand lodges may recognise both  -rrb-  . 
the first grand lodge ,  the grand lodge of london and westminster  -lrb-  later called the grand lodge of england  -lrb-  gle  -rrb-   -rrb-  ,  was founded on st john's day ,  24 june 1717, when four existing london lodges met for a joint dinner . 
grand lodges and grand orients are independent and sovereign bodies that govern masonry in a given country ,  state ,  or geographical area  -lrb-  termed a `` jurisdiction ''  -rrb-  . 
the grand lodge of ireland and the grand lodge of scotland were formed in 1725 and 1736 respectively ,  although neither persuaded all of the existing lodges in their countries to join for many years . 
after the american revolution ,  independent u . s .  grand lodges developed within each state . 
the attitude of most regular anglo-american grand lodges remains that women freemasons are not legitimate masons . 
additionally ,  most grand lodges require the candidate to declare a belief in a supreme being . 
the most commonly shared rules for recognition  -lrb-  based on regularity  -rrb-  are those given by the united grand lodge of england in 1929:
the various state grand lodges did not wish to diminish their own authority by agreeing to such a body . 
freemasonry ,  as it exists in various forms all over the world ,  has a membership estimated by the united grand lodge of england at around 6 million worldwide . 
today ,  it is frequently used to refer to only the liberal jurisdictions typified by the grand orient de france . 
masonic lodges existed in iraq as early as 1917, when the first lodge under the united grand lodge of england  -lrb-  ugle  -rrb-  was opened . 
if the differences are significant ,  one grand lodge may declare the other `` irregular '' and withdraw or withhold recognition . 
exclusive jurisdiction is a concept whereby only one grand lodge will be recognised in any geographical area . 
the grand masters of both the moderns and the antients grand lodges called on prime minister william pitt  -lrb-  who was not a freemason  -rrb-  and explained to him that freemasonry was a supporter of the law and lawfully constituted authority and was much involved in charitable work . 
maria deraismes was initiated into freemasonry in 1882, then resigned to allow her lodge to rejoin their grand lodge . 
in `` progressive '' continental freemasonry ,  books other than scripture are permissible ,  a cause of rupture between grand lodges . 
after world war ii ,  the forget-me-not flower was used again as a masonic emblem in 1948 at the first annual convention of the united grand lodges of germany in 1948.
there are many reasons one grand lodge will withhold or withdraw recognition from another ,  but the two most common are `` exclusive jurisdiction '' and `` regularity '' . 
as with the rest of u . s .  freemasonry ,  prince hall freemasonry soon grew and organised on a grand lodge system for each state . 
in 2018 guidance was released by the united grand lodge of england stating that ,  in regard to transgender women ,  `` a freemason who after initiation ceases to be a man does not cease to be a freemason '' . 
master masons are also able to extend their masonic experience by taking further degrees ,  in appendant bodies approved by their own grand lodge . 
the club won the southern league twice ,  in 1905–06 and 1906–07.
2009–10 was arguably the most successful season in the club's history . 
in 2002–03, fulham spent most of the season in the lower half of the table . 
george best played 47 times for the club in the 1976–77 season . 
fulham football club  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a professional association football club based in fulham ,  west london ,  england . 
after finishing fifth ,  seventh and ninth  -lrb-  out of 22 teams  -rrb-  in their first three seasons in the third division south ,  fulham won the division in the 1931–32 season . 
coleman notched up another satisfactory performance in the 2004–05 season and guided fulham to a secure 13th-place finish . 
the aforementioned third division hiatus lasted only two seasons before the club was promoted back to the second division as runners-up in 1970–71.
in the 2008–09 season ,  fulham finished seventh ,  their highest-ever league placing ,  earning qualification for the inaugural uefa europa league ,  the second time that the club had entered a uefa competition . 
the club has spent 27 seasons in english football's top division ,  the majority of these in two spells during the 1960s and 2000s . 
then called `` fulham rugby league , ``  they played at craven cottage until moving away from the parent club in 1984.
the band's name lived on to the extent that re-issues of `` relax '' and `` the power of love '' both returned to the uk top 10 in 1993.
frankie goes to hollywood is a british band formed in liverpool ,  england in the 1980s . 
johnson's solo career at mca commenced in 1989, with a succession of high-placed singles and the number one album `` blast '' . 
in the aftermath of the group split ,  johnson was offered a solo recording agreement with mca records . 
the band aid project ,  for which johnson recorded a message for the b-side ,  meant that fgth managed only one week at the top this time before it was replaced by `` do they know it's christmas ? `` 
the group was reprised when johnson joined mark o'toole  -lrb-  bass  -rrb-  and peter `` ped '' gill to form fgth . 
fgth completed the tour ,  but johnson ultimately left the group thereafter ,  citing musical estrangement . 
the bbc lifted its ban on `` relax '' at the end of 1984 to allow the band to perform it on the christmas edition of `` top of the pops ''  -lrb-  it had been ,  aside from band aid of which holly johnson was a participant ,  the biggest-selling single of the year  -rrb-  . 
in 1998, a band calling itself alternately `` frankie goes to hollywood '' and `` the new frankie goes to hollywood featuring davey johnson '' began to tour the united states . 
in 1985 the band won the brit award for best british newcomer ,  and also received grammy award and mtv video music award nominations for best new artist . 
in 2003, the vh-1 program `` bands reunited '' brought johnson ,  rutherford ,  gill ,  nash ,  and mark o'toole together ,  in the hope of their agreeing to perform impromptu on the show . 
the group were fronted by holly johnson  -lrb-  vocals  -rrb-  ,  with paul rutherford  -lrb-  vocals  -rrb-  ,  peter gill  -lrb-  drums ,  percussion  -rrb-  ,  mark o'toole  -lrb-  bass guitar  -rrb-  ,  and brian nash  -lrb-  guitar  -rrb-  . 
 ''relax '' had made a natural decline down the charts by may 1984, but on the release of `` two tribes '' its sales began to increase again ,  to the extent that fgth held the top two spots in the uk charts during july 1984, the first active group to do so since the early 1960s . 
labor ,  not labor power ,  is the key factor of production for marx and the basis for marx's labor theory of value . 
exercise can be seen as individual factor of production ,  with an elastication larger than labor . 
how much labor is actually done depends on the importance of conflict or tensions within the labor process . 
see also returns . 
labor-power might be seen as a stock which can produce a flow of labor . 
the `` subject of labor '' refers to natural resources and raw materials ,  including land . 
neoclassical economics ,  one of the branches of mainstream economics ,  started with the classical factors of production of land ,  labor ,  and capital . 
many of its practitioners have added various further factors of production  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
marx considered the `` elementary factors of the labor-process '' or `` productive forces '' to be:
consider entrepreneurship as a factor of production ,  leaving debate aside . 
fort wayne has a mayor–council government . 
fort wayne celebrated its bicentennial in 1994.
fort wayne includes two municipal airports ,  both managed by the fort wayne–allen county airport authority . 
beginning in 1962, construction commenced for i-69 in suburban fort wayne . 
fort wayne parks and recreation maintains 86 public parks totaling  . 
fort wayne was an all-america city award recipient in 1982, 1998, and 2009.
fort wayne has the largest burmese american population in the u . s .  ,  estimated at 6,000.
fort wayne is a city in the u . s .  state of indiana and the seat of allen county ,  united states . 
fort wayne's mass transit system is managed by the fort wayne public transportation corporation  -lrb-  citilink  -rrb-  ,  providing 12 bus routes through the cities of fort wayne and new haven via downtown's central station . 
fort wayne is home to three minor league sports franchises: the echl's fort wayne komets ,  the midwest league's fort wayne tincaps ,  and the nba g league's fort wayne mad ants who are owned and operated by their parent club ,  the indiana pacers . 
fort wayne's mayor is tom henry ,  a democrat ,  who was elected in 2007.
according to the 2010 census ,  fort wayne has a total area of  ,  of which  -lrb-  or 99.81%  -rrb-  is land and  -lrb-  or 0.19%  -rrb-  is water . 
fort wayne has been designated a tree city usa since 1990.
fort wayne hosts institutions affiliated with both of indiana's major state university systems . 
fort wayne's e .  ross adair federal building and u . s . 
some notable events in sports history occurred in fort wayne . 
fort wayne is the seat of the roman catholic diocese of fort wayne–south bend ,  covering 14 counties in northern indiana ,  and the lutheran church–missouri synod indiana district ,  encompassing all of indiana and north central kentucky . 
fort wayne's urban tree canopy is 29 percent ,  double the state average of 14.5 percent and above the national average of 27.1 percent . 
the fort wayne children's zoo has been lauded as one of the nation's foremost zoos . 
unlike most cities comparable to its size ,  fort wayne does not have an urban freeway system . 
in 2017, the fort wayne metropolitan area had a gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  of $25.7 billion . 
smith field ,  in northern fort wayne ,  is used primarily for general aviation . 
fort wayne was built in 1794 by the united states army under the direction of american revolutionary war general anthony wayne ,  the last in a series of forts built near the miami village of kekionga . 
according to the trust for public land's 2017 parkscore index ,  some 56% of fort wayne residents are underserved . 
fort wayne has four sister cities as designated by sister cities international:
other cultural museums include the african/african–american historical museum ,  fort wayne firefighters museum ,  greater fort wayne aviation museum ,  and baer field heritage air park . 
fort wayne was hit by the great depression beginning in 1929, with most factories cutting their workforce . 
the mastodons had represented indiana university – purdue university fort wayne  -lrb-  ipfw  -rrb-  prior to its 2018 split into two separate institutions  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  ,  and from 2016 to 2018 were branded as the fort wayne mastodons ,  but the athletic brand was changed to `` purdue fort wayne '' shortly before the split took effect . 
as the automobile's prevalence grew ,  fort wayne became a fixture on the lincoln highway . 
fort wayne is in the east north central region of the midwestern united states ,  in northeastern indiana ,  west of ohio and south of michigan . 
fort wayne community schools  -lrb-  fwcs  -rrb-  is the largest public school district in indiana ,  enrolling 30,981 students as of the 2013–2014 academic year . 
the english word `` fart '' is one of the oldest words in the english lexicon . 
the word `` fart '' in middle english occurs in `` sumer is icumen in '' ,  where one sign of summer is `` bucke uerteþ ''  -lrb-  the buck farts  -rrb-  . 
fart is a word in the english language most commonly used in reference to flatulence . 
'fart' is often only used as a term of endearment when the subject is personally well known to the user . 
in time for the 1946 fa cup final . 
since the start of the 1994–95 season ,  the fa cup has been sponsored . 
the replay saw arsenal win the fa cup ,  2–1 after extra time . 
the first game had ended in a 0–0 draw . 
the first fa cup final to go to extra time and a replay was the 1875 final ,  between the royal engineers and the old etonians . 
in november 2012, it was ceremonially presented to royal engineers ,  after they beat wanderers 7–1 in a charity replay of the first fa cup final . 
emirates airline is the sponsor from 2015 to 2018, renaming the competition as 'the emirates fa cup' ,  unlike previous editions ,  which included 'the fa cup in association with e . on' and 'the fa cup with budweiser' . 
from 2006 to 2013, umbro supplied match balls for all fa cup matches . 
a concurrent women's tournament is also held ,  the fa women's cup . 
it was also the last fa cup game ever played at the boleyn ground . 
mitre took over for the 2018–19 season ,  beginning a three-year partnership with the fa . 
from 1980–81 to 1998–99, the semi-finals went to extra time on the day if the score after 90 minutes was a draw . 
the modern cup was beginning to be established by the 1888–89 season ,  when qualifying rounds were introduced . 
the fa cup winners qualify for the following season's uefa europa league  -lrb-  formerly named the uefa cup; from its launch in 1960 until 1998, they entered the now-defunct uefa cup winners' cup instead  -rrb-  . 
the last quarter-final to go to a replay was manchester united vs west ham united in the 2015–16 fa cup . 
following the 1914–15 edition ,  the competition was suspended due to the first world war ,  and did not resume until 1919–20.
the fa cup winners also qualify for the following season's single-match fa community shield ,  the traditional season opener played against the previous season's premier league champions  -lrb-  or the premier league runners-up if the fa cup winners also won the league – the double  -rrb-  . 
the only seasons in recent times when this pattern was not followed were 1999–2000, when most rounds were played a few weeks earlier than normal as an experiment ,  and 2010–11 and 2012–13 when the fa cup final was played before the premier league season had finished ,  to allow wembley stadium to be ready for the uefa champions league final ,  as well as in 2011–12 to allow england time to prepare for that summer's european championships . 
the park's address was originally 24 jersey street . 
april 20, 2012 marked fenway park's centennial . 
fenway park is a baseball park located in boston ,  massachusetts near kenmore square . 
the address is now 4 jersey street . 
patients may complain of bloating as abdominal distension ,  discomfort and pain from `` trapped wind '' . 
it is normal for humans to pass flatus through the rectum ,  although the volume and frequency may vary greatly between individuals . 
some patients may exhibit over-sensitivity to bad flatus smell ,  and in extreme forms ,  olfactory reference syndrome may be diagnosed . 
although flatus possesses physiological smell ,  this may be abnormally increased in some patients and cause social distress to the patient . 
as mentioned above ,  the normal range of volumes of flatus in normal individuals varies hugely  -lrb-  476–1,491 ml/24 h  -rrb-  . 
anything that causes food to be incompletely digested by the stomach or small intestine may cause flatulence when the material arrives in the large intestine ,  due to fermentation by yeast or prokaryotes normally or abnormally present in the gastrointestinal tract . 
from early on ,  it had been decided that `` the spirits within '' would be filmed entirely in english . 
the soundtrack to the film was released on july 3, 2001 by sony music . 
square pictures rendered the film using some of the most advanced processing capabilities available for film animation at the time . 
it was columbia pictures' first animated feature film since ``  '' in 1986.
the film won the `` jury prize '' at the 2002 japan media arts festival . 
john mangan from `` the age '' cited the film as an example of this phenomenon . 
final fantasy: the spirits within is a 2001 american computer-animated science fiction film directed by hironobu sakaguchi ,  creator of the `` final fantasy '' series of role-playing video games . 
director sakaguchi named the main character after his mother ,  aki ,  who died in an accident several years prior to the production of the film . 
before the film's release ,  there was already skepticism of its potential to be financially successful . 
the film has been called a box office bomb and is blamed for the demise of square pictures . 
free methodist communications is the publishing division of the free methodist church . 
the free methodist church is a methodist christian denomination within the holiness movement . 
the free methodist church was organized at pekin ,  new york ,  in 1860.
the free methodist church world ministries center is in indianapolis ,  indiana . 
the free methodist church ,  along with the united methodist church ,  shares a common heritage linked to the methodist revival in england during the 18th century . 
holiness conservatives within the free methodist church left to form the united holiness church in 1955  -lrb-  which itself joined the bible methodist connection of churches in 1994 -rrb- and also the evangelical wesleyan church in 1963.
over the years ,  as the ministry of the free methodist church expanded ,  various departments of the general church gradually moved into free methodist publishing house accommodations . 
the free methodist church has 77,000 members in the united states and 1,055,000 members worldwide in 82 nations . 
the free methodist church's highest governing body is the world conference ,  which is composed of representatives ,  both lay and clergy ,  from all countries with a free methodist general conference . 
http://llcomm . org/about/ light & life communications llcomm<nowiki></nowiki> ,  the official publishing aim of the free methodist church ,  is a not-for-profit corporation that exists to serve in partnership with its parent body ,  the free methodist church . 
as a reaction to paid musicians in the methodist episcopal church ,  early free methodists enjoyed a capella congregational hymns during worship . 
volunteers in service abroad  -lrb-  visa  -rrb-  connects volunteers from the free methodist church in the us and uk with free methodist world missions for hands-on ministry internationally . 
the free methodist church itself arose within the context of holiness movement within 19th century methodism . 
while some clergy in the free methodist church wear the pulpit robe ,  others do not wear vestments of any sort during worship . 
this all results in great embarrassment for falstaff . 
falstaff arrives in windsor very short on money . 
hal likes falstaff but makes no pretense at being like him . 
shakespeare originally named falstaff `` john oldcastle '' . 
the lord chief justice enters ,  looking for falstaff . 
black and blue ,  falstaff laments his bad luck . 
page is not concerned ,  but the jealous ford persuades the host of the garter inn to introduce him to falstaff as a 'master brook' so that he can find out falstaff's plans . 
the wives meet falstaff ,  and almost immediately the `` fairies '' attack . 
again falstaff goes to meet the women but mistress page comes back and warns mistress ford of her husband's approach again . 
falstaff appears in three of shakespeare's plays ,  `` henry iv ,  part 1 '' ,  `` henry iv ,  part 2 '' ,  and `` the merry wives of windsor '' . 
the play focuses on prince hal's journey toward kingship ,  and his ultimate rejection of falstaff . 
each team can field six players at a time on the court ,  one player being a goalkeeper . 
sweden were the first world games gold medal winners . 
the world floorball championships are an annual event where teams from across the world gather to play in a tournament in order to win the world championship . 
by the time of the first men's world championships in 1996, 20 nations played floorball ,  with 12 of them participating at the tournament . 
a field player may not enter the marked goal area and playing without stick is prohibited . 
a floor ball weighs and its diameter is  . 
10 years after the iff was founded ,  the first world championships were played ,  with a sold out final of 15,106 people at the globen in stockholm ,  sweden . 
when a player commits a foul ,  or when the ball is deemed unplayable ,  the play is resumed from a free-hit or a face-off . 
floorball is a type of floor hockey with five players and a goalkeeper in each team . 
as of 2009, the sport of floorball has been played in almost 80 countries . 
there are 20 clubs in the premier league . 
the following clubs are not competing in the premier league during the 2018–19 season ,  but competed in the premier league for at least one season . 
49 clubs have played in the premier league from its inception in 1992, up to and including the 2018–19 season . 
the following 20 clubs are competing in the premier league during the current 2018–19 season . 
the league held its first season in 1992–93.
barclays' deal with the premier league expired at the end of the 2015–16 season . 
the record of most points in a premier league season is 100 by manchester city in 2017–18.
the top flight had only been expanded to 22 teams at the start of the 1991–92 season – the year prior to the formation of the premier league . 
ultimately ,  the 2007–08 season kicked off again with 20 teams . 
in 2014–15, teams were apportioned revenues of £1.6 billion ,  rising sharply to £2.4 billion in 2016–17.
the league changed its name from the `` fa premier league '' to simply the `` premier league '' in 2007.
additionally ,  between the 1999–2000 and 2009–10 seasons ,  four premier league sides reached uefa cup or europa league finals ,  with only liverpool managing to win the competition in 2001.
during the 2000s ,  only four sides outside the `` top four '' managed to qualify for the champions league: leeds united  -lrb-  1999–2000 -rrb- ,  newcastle united  -lrb-  2001–02 and 2002–03 -rrb- ,  everton  -lrb-  2004–05 -rrb- and tottenham hotspur  -lrb-  2009–10 -rrb- – each occupying the final champions league spot ,  with the exception of newcastle in the 2002–03 season ,  who finished third . 
the top four teams in the premier league qualify for the subsequent season's uefa champions league group stage . 
cardiff were promoted again in 2017–18 but the number of welsh clubs will remain the same as swansea city were relegated from the premier league in the same season . 
in the 2015–16 season ,  the top four was breached by a non-big six side for the first time since everton in 2005.
the premier league includes some of the richest football clubs in the world . 
the premier league has the highest revenue of any football league in the world ,  with total club revenues of €2.48 billion in 2009–10.
the value of the licensing deal rose by another 70.2% in 2015, when sky and bt paid £5.136 billion to renew their contracts with the premier league for another three years up to the 2018–19 season . 
young fine gael  -lrb-  yfg  -rrb-  is the youth movement of fine gael . 
the plan was seen at being the basis of a fine gael program for government . 
young fine gael is a member of the youth of the european people's party  -lrb-  yepp  -rrb-  . 
in 2004, fine gael supported the re-election of president mary mcaleese . 
fine gael now governs ireland alone with eight independent members of the dáil . 
at the 2011 general election ,  fine gael gained 25 seats bringing them to a total of 76.
while fine gael was responsible for the initial nomination of the uncontested ,  first president of ireland ,  douglas hyde ,  a fine gael candidate has never won an election to the office of president . 
at the 2009 local elections held on 5 june 2009, fine gael won 556 seats ,  surpassing fianna fáil which won 407 seats ,  and making fine gael the largest party of local government nationally . 
fine gael was historically pro-life  -lrb-  supportive of the equal rights between fetus and the mother  -rrb-  . 
it was also revealed in december 1996 that fine gael had received some £180,000 from ben dunne in the period 1987 to 1993.
fine gael is a founding member of the european people's party and a member of the centrist democrat international . 
fine gael is generally considered to be more of a proponent of market liberalism than its traditional rival ,  fianna fáil . 
it is inferred from fine gael's relationship to european counterparts via membership of the european people's party that fg belongs on the centre-right . 
several other fine gael tds ,  notably kate o'connell ,  are prominent supporters of the pro-choice side . 
in the 1933 novel ,  `` the bride of fu manchu '' ,  fu manchu claims to hold doctorates from four western universities . 
this would have placed fu manchu in the west studying for his first doctorate in the 1860s or 1870s . 
dr .  fu manchu is described as a mysterious villain because he seldom appears on the stage . 
in 1566, frisia joined the dutch revolt against spanish rule . 
the official languages of friesland are west frisian and dutch . 
the revolt was put to an end in 1523 and frisia was incorporated into the habsburg netherlands ,  bringing an end to the frisian freedom . 
charles v ,  the holy roman emperor ,  became the first lord of the lordship of frisia . 
friesland  -lrb-  ; official ,    -rrb-  ,  also historically known as frisia ,  is a province of the netherlands located in the northern part of the country . 
in 1996 the states of friesland resolved that the official name of the province should follow the west frisian spelling rather than the dutch spelling ,  resulting in `` friesland '' being replaced by `` fryslân '' . 
with the peace of münster in 1648, frisia became a full member of the independent dutch republic . 
in the 1970s ,  the first feminist science fiction publications were created . 
virginia wolf relates to this aspect of feminist science fiction in the article `` feminist criticism and science fiction for children '' . 
one of the main debates is about the representation of women in science fiction . 
over the decades ,  sf and feminist sf authors have taken different approaches to criticizing gender and gendered society . 
feminist science fiction is a subgenre of science fiction  -lrb-  abbreviated `` sf ''  -rrb-  focused on theories that include feminist themes including but not limited to gender inequality ,  sexuality ,  race ,  economics ,  and reproduction . 
in the early 1990s ,  a new award opportunity for feminist sf authors was created . 
anti-utopian philosophies and feminist science fiction come to odds in the possibility of achieving utopia . 
 ''femspec '' is a feminist academic journal specializing in speculative fiction ,  including science fiction ,  fantasy ,  magical realism ,  mythic explorations in poetry and post-modern fiction ,  and horror . 
one common trend in feminist science fiction utopias is the existence of utopian worlds as single-gendered – most commonly female . 
feminist science fiction is sometimes taught at the university level to explore the role of social constructs in understanding gender . 
by the 1970s ,  the science fiction community was confronting questions of feminism and sexism within science fiction culture itself . 
feminist science fiction is evidenced in the globally popular mediums of comic books ,  manga ,  and graphic novels . 
perhaps the most obvious attraction of science fiction to women writers – feminist or not – is the possibilities it offers for the creation of a female hero . 
she says ,  `` the power of women in science fiction has greatly depreciated in the past few years '' . 
feminist science fiction offers authors the opportunity to imagine worlds and futures in which women are not bound by the standards ,  rules ,  and roles that exist in reality . 
fellatio is legal in most countries . 
they depicted fellatio in their ceramics . 
oral stimulation of the scrotum may also be termed `` fellatio '' ,  or colloquially as `` teabagging . `` 
fellatio can be sexually arousing for both participants ,  and may lead to orgasm for the receiving partner . 
a person who performs fellatio on someone may be referred to as the giving partner ,  and the other person as the receiving partner . 
a 2007 study suggested a correlation between oral sex and throat cancer . 
flying foxes have been observed engaging in oral sex . 
giving and receiving fellatio may happen simultaneously in sex positions like 69 and daisy chain . 
risk of sti infection ,  however ,  is generally considered significantly lower for oral sex than for vaginal or anal sex ,  with hiv transmission considered the lowest risk with regard to oral sex . 
links have been reported between oral sex and oral cancer with human papillomavirus  -lrb-  hpv  -rrb- -infected people . 
fellatio may also include the oral stimulation of the scrotum ,  whether licking ,  sucking or taking the entire scrotum into the mouth . 
yet ,  this would not mean that the muslims in that nation has to agree with that fatwā ,  or that the fatwā is religiously binding for them . 
but it can only render fatwā that are not binding on anyone . 
otherwise ,  in his view ,  they would be expected to adhere to the fatwā . 
in these cases ,  the national theocracies expect fatwā to be settled law . 
in islam ,  there are four sources from which muslim scholars extract religious law or rulings ,  and upon which they base their fatwā . 
for example ,  sunni muslims would favor a sunni fatwā whereas shiites would follow a shi'a one . 
but his fatwās are binding on no one: neither the state that appoints him ,  nor any citizen . 
in january 1985, it re-entered the billboard hot 100 at number 70, eventually reaching number 10 in march . 
upon its release in the united states ,  `` relax '' repeated its slow uk progress . 
johnson also noted: `` there's two elements in the music — an american funk line and a russian line . 
the song's title derives from the line `` when two great warrior tribes go to war '' ,  from the film `` mad max 2 ''  -lrb-  the line is also spoken by holly johnson at the beginning of the session version  -rrb-  . 
 ''two tribes '' is an anti-war song by british band frankie goes to hollywood ,  released in the uk by ztt records on 4 june 1984.
a version of `` two tribes '' was originally recorded for a bbc john peel session in october 1982.
the 12-inch a- and b-sides featured voice parts by british actor chris barrie imitating ronald reagan . 
in 2015 the song was voted by the british public as the nation's 14th favourite 1980s number one in a poll for itv . 
the title of his first film had been `` love is on the air '' . 
 '' ,  a brand-new song . 
despite the group's record label  -lrb-  ztt  -rrb-  pre-emptively promoting the single as `` their fourth number one '' ,  an achievement that would have set a new uk record for consecutive number one singles by a debuting artist ,  `` welcome to the pleasuredome '' peaked at number two in the uk singles chart ,  being kept off the top spot by the phil collins/philip bailey duet `` easy lover '' . 
it was the first release by the group not to reach number one and ,  despite representing a creditable success in its own right ,  it symbolically confirmed the end of the chart invincibility that the group had enjoyed during 1984.
the standard 7 '' mix came in a thick paper sleeve ,  whereas the `` secret '' one came in a thin paper sleeve . 
these tracks were subsequently given wider release as part of the b-side to the second 12-inch of `` the power of love '' single . 
the b-sides to `` rage hard '' were ,  for the most part ,  straight forward cover songs . 
 ''rage hard '' is the fifth single by frankie goes to hollywood . 
taking on a rockier edge ,  `` rage hard '' was the first single culled from the disc . 
liverpool is frankie goes to hollywood's second and final studio album ,  released in october 1986.
middle irish  . 
this maintained a rich spoken tradition ,  but for 300 years the language was not used in written form . 
faroese ceased to be a written language after the union of norway with denmark in 1380, with danish replacing faroese as the language of administration and education . 
theories beyond the standard model attempt to resolve these shortcomings . 
gluons mediate the strong interaction ,  which join quarks and thereby form hadrons ,  which are either baryons  -lrb-  three quarks  -rrb-  or mesons  -lrb-  one quark and one antiquark  -rrb-  . 
in the standard model ,  vector  -lrb-  spin-1 -rrb- bosons  -lrb-  gluons ,  photons ,  and the w and z bosons  -rrb-  mediate forces ,  whereas the higgs boson  -lrb-  spin-0 -rrb- is responsible for the intrinsic mass of particles . 
according to preon theory there are one or more orders of particles more fundamental than those  -lrb-  or most of those  -rrb-  found in the standard model . 
there are three weak gauge bosons: `` w '' ,  `` w '' ,  and `` z ''; these mediate the weak interaction . 
the conventional graviton is massless ,  although there exist models containing massive kaluza–klein gravitons . 
one extension of the standard model attempts to combine the electroweak interaction with the strong interaction into a single 'grand unified theory'  -lrb-  gut  -rrb-  . 
supersymmetry extends the standard model by adding another class of symmetries to the lagrangian . 
therefore ,  one can conclude that most of the visible mass of the universe consists of protons and neutrons ,  which ,  like all baryons ,  in turn consist of up quarks and down quarks . 
in the standard model ,  elementary particles are represented for predictive utility as point particles . 
technicolor theories try to modify the standard model in a minimal way by introducing a new qcd-like interaction . 
estimates of the values of quark masses depend on the version of quantum chromodynamics used to describe quark interactions . 
for example ,  the most accurately known quark mass is of the top quark  -lrb-    -rrb-  at 172.7 gev/c² or 172 700 mev/c² ,  estimated using the on-shell scheme . 
they are one of only two current mlb teams that have never won their division . 
the marlins are the only team to win a world series in their first two winning seasons  -lrb-  1997 and 2003 -rrb-; in fact ,  they are the only team to even make the playoffs in their first two winning seasons . 
they are also the only team to never lose a postseason series . 
the abc's media review show `` media watch '' featured in the show . 
also ,  multiple episodes of `` frontline '' featured `` media watch '' segments criticising the show . 
the station itself also runs other television shows referenced by `` frontline '' staff ,  such as 6 o'clock news program ,  a 3-hour news review show `` sunday forum '' ,  a sketch show `` the komedy bunch '' ,  a game show `` jackpot '' ,  a teen soap opera `` sunshine cove '' which later changed to `` rainbow island '' ,  also lesser mentioned shows such as the football show `` ball-to-ball '' ,  `` late-night oz '' ,  `` cartoon crazies '' ,  and `` vacation '' . 
the series follows the fortunes of a fictional current affairs show ,  `` frontline '' . 
thus ,  bastiat was against redistribution . 
in his `` economic harmonies '' ,  bastiat states:
bastiat was also a strong supporter of free trade . 
bastiat's most famous work is `` the law '' ,  originally published as a pamphlet in 1850.
scientifically ,  mr .  bastiat ,  you are a dead man '' . 
bastiat was elected to the national legislative assembly soon after the french revolution of 1848.
claude-frédéric bastiat  -lrb-  ; ; 29 june 1801 – 24 december 1850 -rrb- was a french economist and writer who was a prominent member of the french liberal school . 
bastiat developed the economic concept of opportunity cost and introduced the parable of the broken window . 
the sentence `` there exists a black swan '' is not a basic statement ,  but the statement `` there is a black swan on the shore of the swan river '' is a basic statement ,  it is a singular existential statement . 
popper explains
so ,  `` john saw a black swan on the shore of the swan river '' is not a basic statement . 
popper arrived at these conditions through an analysis of what one expects from basic statements . 
such a simple contradiction with a basic statement is not what popper calls a falsification . 
recall that a theory is falsifiable if it is contradicted by a basic statement . 
thus we need to distinguish between existential and universal statements and also between singular and strict statements . 
thus falsificationism has two levels . 
they are usually parsed in the form: `` for all x ,  if x is a swan ,  then x is white '' . 
existential and universal statements are built-in concepts in logic . 
some philosophers consider them as parts of popper's demarcation criterion ,  but popper viewed them only as a necessary context . 
a statement is strict or pure ,  if it does not use any individual name . 
a statement is singular if it contains an individual name or the equivalent . 
also ,  in the logical form of the theory ,  there is no notion of future experiments ,  but only a  -lrb-  formal  -rrb-  class of basic statements that contradict it . 
on the other hand ,  he strictly opposed the view that non-falsifiable statements are meaningless or otherwise inherently bad ,  and noted that falsificationism is only concerned with meaningful statements . 
in this larger picture ,  the fact that a single basic statement can contradict a strictly universal statement ,  though true logically ,  is in itself useless ,  because it cannot lead to a falsification . 
a key observation of falsificationism is thus that a criterion of demarcation is needed to distinguish those statements that can come into conflict with observation and those that cannot ,  but the criterion itself concerns only the logical form of the theory:
unlike existential and universal statements ,  singular and strict statements are not built-in concepts in logic ,  because they correspond to a specific perspective on our experience of the world . 
the very first `` freikorps '' were recruited by frederick the great during the seven years' war . 
during the war ,  eight such volunteer corps were set up:
this myth was invoked ,  in considerably different circumstances ,  in the aftermath of germany's defeat in world war i . 
in the aftermath of world war i and during the german revolution of 1918–19, `` freikorps '' consisting largely of world war i veterans were raised as right-wing paramilitary militias ,  ostensibly to fight on behalf of the government against the soviet-backed german communists attempting to overthrow the weimar republic . 
freikorps  -lrb-   ,  `` free corps ''  -rrb-  were german volunteer units that existed from the 18th to the early 20th centuries ,  which effectively fought as mercenary or private armies ,  regardless of their own nationality . 
madero appears in the films `` viva villa ! `` 
in 1893, the 20-year-old madero returned to mexico and assumed management of the madero family's hacienda at san pedro ,  coahuila . 
most zapatistas had grown suspicious of madero ,  however . 
in 1905, madero became increasingly involved in opposition to the government of porfirio díaz . 
on 7 june 1911, madero entered mexico city in triumph where he was greeted with huge crowds shouting ``  ''¡viva madero ! ``  ''
madero's book was well received ,  and widely read . 
although madero had forced porfirio díaz from power ,  he did not assume the presidency in june 1911.
mexican artist josé guadalupe posada created an etching for a broadside ,  produced on the occasion of madero's election in 1910, titled `` calavera de madero '' portraying madero as a calavera . 
in spite of the attacks by madero and his earlier statements to the contrary ,  díaz ran for re-election . 
madero was prepared to have félix díaz executed ,  but the supreme court of mexico declared that félix díaz would be imprisoned ,  but not executed . 
madero assured zapata that the land redistribution promised in the plan of san luis potosí would be carried out when madero became president . 
madero was notable for challenging mexican president porfirio díaz for the presidency in 1910 and being instrumental in sparking the mexican revolution . 
in april 1910, the anti-re-electionist party met and selected madero as their nominee for president of mexico . 
 -lrb-  3 -rrb- in october 1912, félix díaz  -lrb-  nephew of porfirio díaz  -rrb-  launched a rebellion in veracruz ,  `` to reclaim the honor of the army trampled by madero . `` 
the porfirian regime reacted to madero by placing pressure on the madero family's banking interests ,  and at one point even issued a warrant for madero's arrest on the grounds of `` unlawful transaction in rubber '' . 
besides managing rebellions ,  madero did have a number of accomplishments during his presidency:
francisco madero refused the recommendation of some of his advisors that he bring back censorship . 
some people with a diet consisting of 75% or more fruit consider themselves fruitarians . 
some notable advocates of fruitarianism ,  or of diets which may be considered fruitarian ,  or of lifestyles including such a diet ,  are:
for others ,  the appeal of a fruitarian diet comes from the challenge that the restrictive nature of this diet provides . 
a fruitarian diet is wholly unsuitable for children  -lrb-  including teens  -rrb-  ,  and several children have died due to having fruitarian diets imposed on them . 
diet author joe alexander lived for 56 days on juicy fruits . 
after the december 1979 soviet invasion ,  afghanistan's foreign policy mirrored that of the soviet union . 
afghanistan and south africa have a good bilateral foreign relation and south africa have multiple times helped the stance of afghanistan and supported them in their un resolutions
1980s soviet war ,  afghanistan pursued a policy of neutrality and nonalignment rein its foreign relations ,  being one of a few independent nations to stay neutral in both world war i and world war ii . 
in late 2011, relations between afghanistan and dominican republic were established . 
the term felony ,  in some common law countries ,  is defined as a serious crime . 
a felony is generally considered a crime of high seriousness ,  but a misdemeanor is not . 
mental health first aid is an extension of the concept of first aid to cover mental health . 
there are several types of first aid  -lrb-  and first aider  -rrb-  which require specific additional training . 
there is no universal agreement upon list for the contents of a first aid kit . 
the red cross and red crescent are still the largest provider of first aid worldwide . 
people performing a first aid role ,  whether in a professional or voluntary capacity ,  are often expected to have a high level of first aid training and are often uniformed . 
the primary goal of first aid is to prevent death or serious injury from worsening . 
certain skills are considered essential to the provision of first aid and are taught ubiquitously . 
first aid can be performed on all mammals ,  although this article relates to the care of human patients . 
the internationally accepted symbol for first aid is the white cross on a green background shown below . 
there are many situations which may require first aid ,  and many countries have legislation ,  regulation ,  or guidance which specifies a minimum level of first aid provision in certain circumstances . 
a first aid kit consists of a strong ,  durable bag or transparent plastic box . 
although commonly associated with first aid ,  the symbol of a red cross is an official protective symbol of the red cross . 
the advantage of ready-made first aid kits are that they have well organized compartments and familiar layouts . 
feudalism effectively ended by about 1500.
the adjective `` feudal '' was coined in the 17th century ,  and the noun `` feudalism '' ,  often used in a political and propaganda context ,  was not coined until the 19th century ,  from the french `` féodalité ''  -lrb-  `` feudality ''  -rrb-  ,  itself an 18th-century creation . 
according to bloch ,  other elements of society can be seen in feudal terms; all the aspects of life were centered on `` lordship '' ,  and so we can speak usefully of a feudal church structure ,  a feudal courtly  -lrb-  and anti-courtly  -rrb-  literature ,  and a feudal economy . 
the term `` feudal '' or `` feodal '' is derived from the medieval latin word `` feodum '' . 
even when the original feudal relationships had disappeared ,  there were many institutional remnants of feudalism left in place . 
the obligations and corresponding rights between lord and vassal concerning the fief form the basis of the feudal relationship . 
karl marx also used the term in the 19th century in his analysis of society's economic and political development ,  describing feudalism  -lrb-  or more usually feudal society or the feudal mode of production  -rrb-  as the order coming before capitalism . 
feudalism was a combination of legal and military customs in medieval europe that flourished between the 9th and 15th centuries . 
in the 18th century ,  adam smith ,  seeking to describe economic systems ,  effectively coined the forms `` feudal government '' and `` feudal system '' in his book `` wealth of nations ''  -lrb-  1776 -rrb- . 
once the commendation ceremony was complete ,  the lord and vassal were in a feudal relationship with agreed obligations to one another . 
before a lord could grant land  -lrb-  a fief  -rrb-  to someone ,  he had to make that person a vassal . 
the term `` feudalism '' is recent ,  first appearing in french in 1823, italian in 1827, english in 1839, and in german in the second half of the 19th century . 
in its origin ,  the feudal grant of land had been seen in terms of a personal bond between lord and vassal ,  but with time and the transformation of fiefs into hereditary holdings ,  the nature of the system came to be seen as a form of `` politics of land ''  -lrb-  an expression used by the historian marc bloch  -rrb-  . 
these are examples; depending on the period of time and location in europe ,  feudal customs and practices varied; see examples of feudalism . 
foxes are omnivores . 
a group of foxes is referred to as a skulk ,  leash ,  or earth . 
a fox's dentition ,  like all other canids ,  is i 3/3, c 1/1, pm 4/4, m 3/2 = 42.
fox species differ in fur color ,  length ,  and density . 
typically ,  they live in small family groups ,  but some  -lrb-  arctic foxes  -rrb-  are known to be solitary . 
foundationalism holds basic beliefs exist ,  which are justified without reference to other beliefs ,  and that nonbasic beliefs must ultimately be justified by basic beliefs . 
classically ,  foundationalism had posited infallibility of basic beliefs and deductive reasoning between beliefs—a strong foundationalism . 
critics of foundationalism often argue that for a belief to be justified it must be supported by other beliefs; in donald davidson's phrase ,  `` only a belief can be a reason for another belief '' . 
in the 1930s ,  debate over foundationalism revived . 
according to skepticism ,  there are no beliefs that are so obviously certain that they require support from no other beliefs . 
strong versions of the theory assert that an indirectly justified belief is completely justified by basic beliefs; more moderate theories hold that indirectly justified beliefs require basic beliefs to be justified ,  but can be further justified by other factors . 
foundationalism can take internalist and externalist forms . 
the term `` cat '' refers both to felids in general and specifically to domestic cats . 
all the non-pantherine cats are part of the felinae ,  which includes several genera and the majority of cat species . 
other groups that were highlighted as part of this broadened understanding of the folk group were non-traditional families ,  occupational groups ,  and families that pursued production of folk items through multiple generations . 
the folklorist studies the traditional artifacts of a social group and how they are transmitted . 
in this modern understanding ,  folklore is a function of shared identity within any social group . 
the folk of the 19th century ,  the social group identified in the original term `` folklore '' ,  was characterized by being rural ,  illiterate and poor . 
moving forward into the 20th century ,  in tandem with new thinking in the  ,  folklorists also revised and expanded their concept of the folk group . 
the concept of `` folk '' proves somewhat more elusive . 
having identified folk artifacts ,  the professional folklorist strives to understand the significance of these beliefs ,  customs and objects for the group . 
folklore is the expressive body of culture shared by a particular group of people; it encompasses the traditions common to that culture ,  subculture or group . 
it continues to be created ,  transmitted and in any group is used to differentiate between `` us '' and `` them '' . 
wolfgang puck is attributed as one of the pioneers of fusion cuisine ,  with some dispute . 
among these are:
fusion cuisine is cuisine that combines elements of different culinary traditions . 
 -lrb-  if formula_63 is true at time formula_64, and it can be assumed that formula_63 remains true at time formula_66, then we can conclude that formula_63 remains true  -rrb-  . 
 -lrb-  if formula_57 is true in situation formula_54, and it can be assumed that formula_57 remains true after executing action formula_60, then we can conclude that formula_57 remains true  -rrb-  . 
for example ,  the action of opening the door at time 0 is represented by the formula:
this formula works provided that suitable axioms are given about formula_51 and formula_52, e . g .  ,  a term containing the same condition twice is not a valid state  -lrb-  for example ,  formula_53 is always false for every formula_54 and formula_29 -rrb- . 
a separate condition can be stated to specify that this is actually the state at a given time ,  e . g .  ,  formula_47 means that this is the state at time formula_48.
therefore ,  formula_1 can change value ,  which is also what is enforced by the third formula . 
in the simplified example of the door and the light ,  occlusion can be formalized by two predicates formula_12 and formula_13.
for example ,  that the action formula_68 makes the door open if not locked is expressed by:
the first two formulae represent the initial situation; the third formula represents the effect of executing the action of opening the door at time 1.
for example ,  if formula_38 and formula_39 are two conditions used to denote that the action executed at time formula_29 was to open or close the door ,  respectively ,  the running example is encoded as follows . 
a domain in which the door is closed and the light off at time 0, and the door opened at time 1, can be directly represented in logic by the following formulae:
it is worth noticing that occlusion does not necessarily imply a change: for example ,  executing the action of opening the door when it was already open  -lrb-  in the formalization above  -rrb-  makes the predicate formula_24 true and makes formula_1 true; however ,  formula_1 has not changed value ,  as it was true already . 
the solution to the frame problem given in the fluent calculus is to specify the effects of actions by stating how a term representing the state changes when the action is executed . 
in 1941 sillanpää divorced his wife anna . 
in 1916 sillanpää married sigrid maria salomäki ,  whom he had met in 1914.
in 1939 his wife sigrid died of pneumonia leaving eight children with sillanpää . 
sillanpää donated the golden medal to be melted for funds to aid the war effort . 
she was a commended runner-up for both the first and third books ,  the latter in competition with her medal-winning work . 
william and christina eventually fall in love and run away from the hunt ball to london ,  hoping to marry . 
world publishing issued a us edition of the first book in 1968, retaining the ambrus illustrations . 
the friends of ted festival ,  better known as ted fest ,  has been held annually as a `` father ted '' fan convention since 2007.
in june 2018, linehan announced that `` pope ted: the father ted musical '' was nearing completion ,  with a script by linehan and mathews and music by hannon . 
 ''father ted '' ran for three series from 1995 to 1998, including a christmas special . 
father ted is a british-made sitcom that was produced by hat trick productions for channel 4.
 ''father ted '' was met with critical acclaim and is one of the most popular sitcoms in irish tv history . 
later in 2001, ardal o'hanlon returned to the role of father dougal for a series of pbs advertisements to coincide with `` father ted ''s american broadcast; these segments were included on later dvd releases as `` fundraising with father dougal '' . 
in december ,  mathews said that he and paul woodfull were developing a joshua trio musical and a show focusing on a `` father michael cleary-type character '' ,  and that the `` father ted '' musical may follow . 
in an interview with `` radio times '' in january 2015, linehan revealed that he wanted to revive `` father ted '' as a musical stage production . 
 ''father ted '' also contains references to pop culture ,  and some film parodies ,  such as the episode `` speed 3 '' . 
before the joshua trio played at gigs ,  mathews would occasionally come on-stage as father ted and tell jokes involving his great friend ,  father dougal mcguire . 
father ted crilly ,  father dougal mcguire and father jack hackett live chaotically together in craggy island's parochial house ,  along with their housekeeper mrs doyle ,  who always wants to serve them tea . 
this included `` father ted: unintelligent design '' ,  a documentary on the show's influences ,  and `` small ,  far away: the world of father ted '' ,  a documentary revisiting the show's history with the writers and many of the surviving cast  -lrb-  pauline mclynn declined to take part  -rrb-  . 
set on the fictional craggy island ,  a remote location off ireland's west coast ,  the show starred dermot morgan as the eponymous father ted crilly ,  alongside fellow priests father dougal mcguire  -lrb-  ardal o'hanlon  -rrb-  and father jack hackett  -lrb-  frank kelly  -rrb-  . 
in 2012, frank kelly made a brief appearance as father jack on an episode of `` the one show '' with graham norton . 
since the end of the series ,  several attempts to remake `` father ted '' have been reported ,  but none has yet materialised . 
foster's lager is an internationally distributed brand of lager . 
then only available in bottles ,  foster's lager was considered to be cub's premium brand . 
in australia ,  the original released dvds were released were fold out box sets which contained three discs and released as follows: season 1 and season 2 on 13 march 2002, season 3 and season 4 on 9 july 2002, season 5, 6 and 7 on 29 july 2002, season 8 on 18 march 2003, season 9 on 11 february 2004 and season 10 on 24 november 2004.
the first season introduces the six main characters: rachel ,  monica ,  phoebe ,  joey ,  chandler ,  and ross . 
the season ends with rachel waiting at the airport for ross ,  who is returning from a trip . 
season 8 begins at monica and chandler's wedding reception . 
in the season six premiere ,  ross and rachel's marriage turns out to be a drunken mistake that rachel does not remember . 
the second season begins with rachel waiting at the gate for ross so she can declare her love for him . 
season nine begins with ross and rachel living together as roommates with their daughter emma . 
season five starts with ross and emily's wedding in london . 
the show is broadcast on tv2 in new zealand . 
all ten seasons have been released on dvd individually and as a box set . 
kauffman and crane would not have signed on for an eleventh season ,  even if all the cast members had wanted to continue . 
the season ends just prior to monica and chandler's wedding ,  with phoebe and rachel finding a positive pregnancy test in the bathroom of monica and chandler's apartment . 
in the seaseon four premiere ,  ross and rachel briefly reconcile after ross pretends to read a long letter that rachel wrote for him . 
the first season was shot on stage 5 at warner bros .  studios in burbank ,  california . 
in their original contracts for the first season ,  cast members were paid $22,500 per episode . 
season three takes on a significantly greater serialized format . 
after year-long expectations that the ninth season would be the series's last ,  nbc signed a deal in late december 2002 to bring the series back for a final tenth season . 
friends is an american television sitcom ,  created by david crane and marta kauffman ,  which aired on nbc from september 22, 1994, to may 6, 2004, lasting ten seasons . 
the tenth season brings several long-running storylines to a close . 
when it was confirmed that `` friends '' would return for a ninth season ,  the news was mainly about the amount of money—$7 million per episode—that it took to bring the series back for another season . 
although the writers originally planned the big love story to be between joey and monica ,  the idea of a romantic interest between ross and rachel emerged during the period when kauffman and crane wrote the pilot script . 
28 on `` tv guides 60 best tv series of all time . 
in the `` los angeles daily news '' ,  ray richmond named the series as `` one of the brighter comedies of the new season '' ,  and the `` los angeles times '' called it `` flat-out the best comedy series of the new season . `` 
in india ,  the show is broadcast by comedy central at various times . 
rachel becomes a waitress at manhattan coffee house central perk; when not there ,  the group is usually at monica and rachel's nearby west village apartment ,  or joey and chandler's across the hall . 
of the 22, only osama bin laden was by then already listed on the fbi ten most wanted fugitives list . 
by 2006, more than four years had passed since the fbi had listed the original 22 alleged terrorists on the most wanted terrorist list . 
so ,  on january 17, 2002, the third major fbi wanted list was first released ,  which has now become known as the fbi seeking information – terrorism list . 
the information sought to be reported is not necessarily relating to any person on any of the fbi wanted lists . 
in february 2006, the fbi completed two groups of additions to the most wanted terrorists list ,  the first such additions in over four years . 
bacon was a devout anglican . 
bacon has been called the father of empiricism . 
bacon's public career ended in disgrace in 1621.
when he was 36, bacon courted elizabeth hatton ,  a young widow of 20.
bacon is the first recipient of the queen's counsel designation ,  which was conferred in 1597 when queen elizabeth reserved bacon as her legal advisor . 
the succession of james i brought bacon into greater favour . 
with others ,  bacon was appointed to investigate the charges against essex . 
the sudden death of his father in february 1579 prompted bacon to return to england . 
while rejecting occult conspiracy theories surrounding bacon and the claim bacon personally identified as a rosicrucian ,  intellectual historian paolo rossi has argued for an occult influence on bacon's scientific and religious writing . 
francis bacon was born on 22 january 1561 at york house near the strand in london ,  the son of sir nicholas bacon by his second wife ,  anne  -lrb-  cooke  -rrb-  bacon ,  the daughter of the noted humanist anthony cooke . 
in 1597 bacon became the first queen's counsel designate ,  when queen elizabeth reserved him as her legal counsel . 
after stuffing the fowl with snow ,  bacon contracted a fatal case of pneumonia . 
years later ,  bacon still wrote of his regret that the marriage to hatton had not taken place . 
throughout this period bacon managed to stay in the favour of the king while retaining the confidence of the commons . 
harvey wheeler attributed to bacon ,  in `` francis bacon's verulamiumthe common law template of the modern in english science and culture '' ,  the creation of these distinguishing features of the modern common law system:
paul h .  kocher writes that bacon is considered by some jurists to be the father of modern jurisprudence . 
the following year ,  during the course of the uneventful first parliament session ,  bacon married alice barnham . 
in 1910 newfoundland issued a postage stamp to commemorate bacon's role in establishing the colony . 
bacon stated that he had three goals: to uncover truth ,  to serve his country ,  and to serve his church . 
to console him for these disappointments ,  essex presented him with a property at twickenham ,  which bacon subsequently sold for £1,800.
in 1613 bacon was finally appointed attorney general ,  after advising the king to shuffle judicial appointments . 
on 9 april 1626, francis bacon died of pneumonia while at arundel mansion at highgate outside london . 
it is easier to predict when the ball will be snapped with 2 seconds left on the play clock ,  rather than 5 seconds . 
a muffed snap can be recovered by either team . 
the snap count is decided on in the huddle ,  usually expressed as ``  .  .  . on <number> . `` 
a snap  -lrb-  colloquially called a `` hike '' ,  `` snapback '' ,  or `` pass from center ''  -rrb-  is the backwards passing of the ball in american and canadian football at the start of play from scrimmage . 
the center is not ,  however ,  allowed to make motions simulating part of the snap action; therefore their opponents can be confident the first motion of the ball or the center's hands is the beginning of the snap . 
a synchronous fifo is a fifo where the same clock is used for both reading and writing . 
the ends of a fifo queue are often referred to as `` head '' and `` tail '' . 
a hardware fifo is used for synchronization purposes . 
read and write addresses are initially both at the first memory location and the fifo queue is `` empty '' . 
fifo is an acronym for first in ,  first out ,  a method for organizing and manipulating a data buffer ,  where the oldest  -lrb-  first  -rrb-  entry ,  or 'head' of the queue ,  is processed first . 
there are three main classifications of `` fire rated walls '': fire walls ,  fire barriers ,  and fire partitions . 
fire barrier walls are typically continuous from an exterior wall to an exterior wall ,  or from a floor below to a floor or roof above ,  or from one fire barrier wall to another fire barrier wall ,  having a fire resistance rating equal to or greater than the required rating for the application . 
in addition specialty fire-rated walls such as a high challenge fire wall would require further distinctions . 
these gods and goddesses include odin and ,  `` his wife '' ,  frigg . 
frigg is one of the twelve ásynjur in attendance . 
the prologue adds that both frigg and odin `` had the gift of prophecy '' . 
it is said that frigg heard their prayers and told odin what they asked '' . 
frigg is referenced in art and literature into the modern period . 
in germanic mythology ,  frigg  -lrb-  ; old norse  -rrb-  ,  frija  -lrb-  old high german  -rrb-  ,  frea  -lrb-  langobardic  -rrb-  ,  and frige  -lrb-  old english  -rrb-  is a goddess . 
in section 49 of `` gylfaginning '' ,  a narrative about the fate of frigg's son baldr is told . 
the connection with and possible earlier identification of the goddess freyja with frigg in the proto-germanic period  -lrb-  frigg and freyja origin hypothesis  -rrb-  is a matter of scholarly debate . 
frigg receives three mentions in the `` poetic edda '' poem `` völuspá '' . 
frigg is mentioned several times in the `` prose edda '' section `` skáldskaparmál '' . 
there ,  frigg asks this female visitor what the æsir are up to assembled at the thing . 
wankel died in heidelberg ,  aged 86.
wankel married emma `` mi '' kirin in 1936.
from 1986 the felix wankel institute cooperated with daimler benz ag . 
felix heinrich wankel  -lrb-  13 august 1902 – 9 october 1988 -rrb- was a german mechanical engineer and inventor after whom the wankel engine was named . 
he was ,  however ,  the owner of an nsu ro 80 with a wankel engine ,  which was chauffeured for him . 
true to this prediction ,  he conceived the wankel engine in 1924 and won his first patent in 1929.
in the philippines each body of the bicameral philippine congress has a minority floor leader and a majority floor leader . 
floor leaders ,  also known as a caucus leader ,  are leaders of their political parties in a body of a legislature . 
this has blurred the distinction of 4gl and 3gl . 
the concept of 4gl was developed from the 1970s through the 1990s ,  overlapping most of the development of 3gl . 
just as the 3gl offered greater power to the programmer ,  so too did the 4gl open up the development environment to a wider population . 
some researchers state that 4gls are a subset of domain-specific languages . 
in the 1980s and 1990s ,  there were efforts to develop fifth-generation programming languages  -lrb-  5gl  -rrb-  . 
