edinburgh ,  like all of scotland ,  is represented in the scottish parliament . 
lothian buses and edinburgh trams are both owned and operated by transport for edinburgh . 
edinburgh has many museums and libraries . 
the best known of these events are the edinburgh festival fringe ,  the edinburgh international festival ,  the edinburgh military tattoo and the edinburgh international book festival . 
the scottish chamber orchestra is based in edinburgh . 
edinburgh lies at the heart of the edinburgh & south east scotland city region with a population in 2014 of 1,339,380.
edinburgh television existed in the late 90's to early 2003 and stv edinburgh existed from 2015 to 2018.
edinburgh has an active inter-faith association . 
the trustees drawing academy of edinburgh ,  founded in 1760, became the edinburgh college of art in 1907.
edinburgh lies at the heart of the edinburgh and south east scotland city region comprising east lothian ,  edinburgh ,  fife ,  midlothian ,  scottish borders and west lothian . 
edinburgh has a healthy popular music scene . 
edinburgh  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  is the capital city of scotland and one of its 32 council areas . 
edinburgh trams became operational on 31 may 2014.
significant strands of this infrastructure include: the scottish arts council ,  edinburgh college of art ,  talbot rice gallery  -lrb-  university of edinburgh  -rrb-  and the edinburgh annuale . 
travel in edinburgh is undertaken predominantly by bus . 
of those edinburgh residents born in the uk ,  335,000 or 83% were born in scotland ,  with 58,000 or 14% being born in england . 
edinburgh is currently represented by three mps affiliated with the scottish national party ,  one liberal democrat mp in edinburgh west and one labour mp in edinburgh south . 
the main local newspaper is the `` edinburgh evening news '' . 
some have called edinburgh the `` athens of the north '' for a variety of reasons . 
as of the 2016 election ,  the scottish national party have three msps: ash denham for edinburgh eastern ,  ben macpherson for edinburgh northern and leith and gordon macdonald for edinburgh pentlands constituencies . 
edinburgh's old town and new town together are listed as a unesco world heritage site ,  which has been managed by edinburgh world heritage since 1999.
another well-known edinburgh resident was greyfriars bobby . 
the urban area of edinburgh is almost entirely within the city of edinburgh council boundary ,  merging with musselburgh in east lothian . 
edinburgh has two repertory cinemas ,  the edinburgh filmhouse and the cameo ,  as well as the independent dominion cinema and a range of multiplexes . 
for a list of consulates in edinburgh see list of diplomatic missions in scotland . 
edinburgh has a speedway team ,  the edinburgh monarchs ,  which ,  since the loss of its stadium in the city ,  has raced at the lothian arena in armadale ,  west lothian . 
edinburgh is also home to scottish premiership teams boroughmuir rfc ,  currie rfc ,  the edinburgh academicals ,  heriot's rugby club and watsonians rfc . 
edinburgh was also home to four other former scottish football league clubs: the original edinburgh city ,  leith athletic ,  meadowbank thistle and st bernard's . 
the edinburgh diamond devils is a baseball club which won its first scottish championship in 1991 as the `` reivers . `` 
the church of scotland claims the largest membership of any single religious denomination in edinburgh . 
edinburgh also has substantial retail parks outside the city centre . 
edinburgh is scotland's second most populous city and the seventh most populous in the united kingdom . 
in the 19th century ,  edinburgh's economy was known for banking ,  publishing and brewing . 
situated in scotland's central belt ,  edinburgh lies on the firth of forth's southern shore . 
alex cole-hamilton of the scottish liberal democrats represents edinburgh western ,  daniel johnson of the scottish labour party represents edinburgh southern constituency ,  and scottish conservative leader ruth davidson currently represents the edinburgh central constituency . 
edinburgh is the 2nd most visited city by foreign visitors in the uk after london . 
edinburgh waverley is the second-busiest railway station in scotland ,  with only glasgow central handling more passengers . 
the city of edinburgh has entered into 14 international twinning arrangements since 1954.
edinburgh has a long literary tradition ,  which became especially evident during the scottish enlightenment . 
recognised as the capital of scotland since at least the 15th century ,  edinburgh is the seat of the scottish government ,  the scottish parliament and the supreme courts of scotland . 
the church of scotland offices are in edinburgh ,  as is the assembly hall where the annual general assembly is held . 
edinburgh has three football clubs that play in the scottish professional football league  -lrb-  spfl  -rrb- : heart of midlothian ,  founded in 1874, hibernian ,  founded in 1875 and edinburgh city ,  founded in 1966.
hearts and edinburgh university hutchison vale  -lrb-  euhv  -rrb-  play in the swpl 2.
there are 18 nursery ,  94 primary and 23 secondary schools administered by the city of edinburgh council . 
edinburgh has a high proportion of young adults ,  with 19.5% of the population in their 20s  -lrb-  exceeded only by aberdeen  -rrb-  and 15.2% in their 30s which is the highest in scotland . 
edinburgh central mosque – edinburgh's main mosque and islamic centre – is in potterrow ,  on the city's southside ,  near bristo square . 
following local government reorganisation in 1996, the city of edinburgh council constitutes one of the 32 council areas of scotland . 
scotland has a rich history of science and engineering ,  with edinburgh producing a number of famous names . 
rutherford's speech in part ,  read:
rutherford performed his most famous work `` after '' receiving the nobel prize in 1908.
rutherford's mother martha thompson was a schoolteacher . 
in 1919–1920, rutherford found that nitrogen and other light elements ejected a proton  -lrb-  rutherford said `` a hydrogen atom '' rather than `` a proton ''  -rrb-  when hit with α  -lrb-  alpha  -rrb-  particles . 
ernest rutherford was the son of james rutherford ,  a farmer ,  and his wife martha thompson ,  originally from hornchurch ,  essex ,  england . 
ernest rutherford ,  1st baron rutherford of nelson ,  hfrse lld  -lrb-  30 august 1871 – 19 october 1937 -rrb- ,  was a new zealand-born british physicist who came to be known as the father of nuclear physics . 
rutherford became director of the cavendish laboratory at the university of cambridge in 1919.
in 1898, thomson recommended rutherford for a position at mcgill university in montreal ,  canada . 
this can be thought of as a variation on quantum suicide . 
mwi removes the observer-dependent role in the quantum measurement process by replacing wavefunction collapse with quantum decoherence . 
everett regarded mwi as falsifiable since any test that falsifies conventional quantum theory would also falsify mwi . 
quantum immortality refers to the subjective experience of surviving quantum suicide regardless of the odds . 
we cannot be sure that the universe is a quantum multiverse until we have a theory of everything and ,  in particular ,  a successful theory of quantum gravity . 
one of mwi's strongest advocates is david deutsch . 
if a system is composed of two or more subsystems ,  the system's state will be a superposition of products of the subsystems' states . 
some versions of the copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics proposed a process of `` collapse '' in which an indeterminate quantum system would probabilistically collapse down onto ,  or select ,  just one determinate outcome to `` explain '' this phenomenon of observation . 
in the copenhagen interpretation ,  the mathematics of quantum mechanics allows one to predict probabilities for the occurrence of various events . 
thus after three measurements ,  the system can be regarded as a quantum superposition of 8 = 2 × 2 × 2 copies of the original system s . 
mwi's main conclusion is that the universe  -lrb-  or multiverse in this context  -rrb-  is composed of a quantum superposition of very many ,  possibly even non-denumerably infinitely many ,  increasingly divergent ,  non-communicating parallel universes or quantum worlds . 
max tegmark also reports the result of a `` highly unscientific '' poll taken at a 1997 quantum mechanics workshop . 
note: epr is not a get-out here ,  as the alien's and my electrons need never have been part of the same quantum ,  i . e .  ,  entangled . 
mwi achieves this by removing wavefunction collapse ,  which is indeterministic and non-local ,  from the deterministic and local equations of quantum theory . 
the original relative state formulation is due to hugh everett in 1957.
mwi states that there is no special role ,  or need for precise definition of measurement in mwi ,  yet everett uses the word `` measurement '' repeatedly throughout its exposition . 
a 2005 poll of fewer than 40 students and researchers taken after a course on the interpretation of quantum mechanics at the institute for quantum computing university of waterloo found `` many worlds  -lrb-  and decoherence  -rrb- ``  to be the least favored . 
quantum cosmology also becomes intelligible ,  since there is no need anymore for an observer outside of the universe . 
these results are closely related to gleason's theorem ,  a mathematical result according to which the born probability measure is the only one on hilbert space that can be constructed purely from the quantum state vector . 
asher peres was an outspoken critic of mwi . 
as with the other interpretations of quantum mechanics ,  the many-worlds interpretation is motivated by behavior that can be illustrated by the double-slit experiment . 
the accepted terminology is somewhat misleading because it is incorrect to regard the universe as splitting at certain times; at any given instant there is one state in one universe . 
advocates of mwi often cite a poll of 72 `` leading cosmologists and other quantum field theorists '' conducted by the american political scientist david raub in 1995 showing 58% agreement with `` yes ,  i think mwi is true '' . 
the idea of mwi originated in everett's princeton ph . d .  thesis `` the theory of the universal wavefunction '' ,  developed under his thesis advisor john archibald wheeler ,  a shorter summary of which was published in 1957 entitled `` relative state formulation of quantum mechanics ''  -lrb-  wheeler contributed the title `` relative state ''; everett originally called his approach the `` correlation interpretation '' ,  where `` correlation '' refers to quantum entanglement  -rrb-  . 
the born rule and the collapse of the wave function have been obtained in the framework of the relative-state formulation of quantum mechanics by armando v .  d .  b .  assis . 
in everett's formulation ,  a measuring apparatus m and an object system s form a composite system ,  each of which prior to measurement exists in well-defined  -lrb-  but time-dependent  -rrb-  states . 
in everett's terminology each subsystem state was now `` correlated '' with its `` relative state '' ,  since each subsystem must now be considered relative to the other subsystems with which it has interacted . 
modern electronic commerce typically uses the world wide web for at least one part of the transaction's life cycle although it may also use other technologies such as e-mail . 
when formula_2, euler's formula evaluates to formula_3, which is known as euler's identity . 
the formula is still valid if is a complex number ,  and so some authors refer to the more general complex version as euler's formula . 
in 1856, manet opened a studio . 
manet ,  in turn ,  drew or painted each of them . 
manet depicted other popular activities in his work . 
manet painted several boating subjects in 1874.
eleven-year-old leon leenhoff ,  whose father may have been either of the manets ,  posed often for manet . 
after the death of his father in 1862, manet married suzanne leenhoff in 1863.
manet painted his wife in `` the reading '' ,  among other paintings . 
manet's public career lasted from 1861, the year of his first participation in the salon ,  until his death in 1883.
édouard manet  -lrb-  ; ; ; 23 january 1832 – 30 april 1883 -rrb- was a french modernist painter . 
manet became the friend and colleague of berthe morisot in 1868.
in january 1871, manet traveled to oloron-sainte-marie in the pyrenees . 
manet enjoyed a close friendship with composer emmanuel chabrier ,  painting two portraits of him; the musician owned 14 of manet's paintings and dedicated his `` impromptu '' to manet's wife . 
manet depicted many scenes of the streets of paris in his works . 
manet embarked on the canvas after being challenged to give the salon a nude painting to display . 
in his spare time ,  manet copied the old masters in the louvre . 
 ''music in the tuileries '' is an early example of manet's painterly style . 
his 1868 painting `` the luncheon '' was posed in the dining room of the manet house . 
the art historian beatrice farwell says manet `` has been universally regarded as the father of modernism . 
manet painted the upper class enjoying more formal social activities . 
manet's paintings of café scenes are observations of social life in 19th-century paris . 
maynard smith mathematically formalised a verbal argument made by price ,  which he read while peer-reviewing price's paper . 
evolutionarily stable strategies were defined and introduced by john maynard smith and george r .  price in a 1973 `` nature '' paper . 
some scientists even concluded that life may have begun on earth in hydrothermal vents far under the ocean's surface . 
in the 1980s and 1990s ,  biologists found that microbial life has great flexibility for surviving in extreme environments—niches that are acidic or extraordinarily hot ,  for example—that would be completely inhospitable to complex organisms . 
see also uncommon schools . 
the study also said that public school teachers are paid about 50% more than private school teachers . 
this shift to the right caused many families to seek alternatives ,  including `` charter schools ,  progressive schools ,  montessori schools ,  waldorf schools ,  afrocentric schools ,  religious schools - or teaching them at home and in their communities . `` 
the basic program was to develop `` grammar '' schools . 
spending was increased so much ,  that the school district was spending more money per student than any of the country's other 280 largest school districts . 
in the united states ,  private schools  -lrb-  independent schools  -rrb-  have long been an alternative to public education for those with the ability to pay tuition . 
education reforms did not become widespread until after organized schooling was sufficiently systematized to be 'reformed . '
it has been shown that some school districts do not use their funds in the most productive way . 
another barrier to reform is assuming that schools are like businesses—when in fact they are very different . 
discipline and labor in a lancaster school were provided by an economic system . 
states have tried to use state schools to increase state power ,  especially to make better soldiers and workers . 
the schools with which dewey himself was most closely associated  -lrb-  though the most famous ,  the `` laboratory school '' ,  was really run by his wife  -rrb-  had considerable ups and downs ,  and dewey left the university of chicago in 1904 over issues relating to the dewey school . 
before there were government-funded public schools ,  education of the lower classes was by the charity school ,  pioneered in the 19th century by protestant organizations and adapted by the roman catholic church and governments . 
lancaster schools usually lacked sufficient adult supervision . 
since most modern schools copy the prussian models ,  children start school at an age when their language skills remain plastic ,  and they find it easy to learn the national language . 
it also moved reform efforts towards issues of school accountability  -lrb-  including no child left behind  -rrb-  and the use of merit pay and other incentives . 
the administrative progressives are responsible for many features of modern american education ,  especially american high schools: counseling programs ,  the move from many small local high schools to large centralized high schools ,  curricular differentiation in the form of electives and tracking ,  curricular ,  professional ,  and other forms of standardization ,  and an increase in state and federal regulation and bureaucracy ,  with a corresponding reduction of local control at the school board level . 
in the united states ,  this lineage of democratic education reform was continued by thomas jefferson ,  who advocated ambitious reforms partly along platonic lines for public schooling in virginia . 
according to a 2005 report from the oecd ,  the united states is tied for first place with switzerland when it comes to annual spending per student on its public schools ,  with each of those two countries spending more than $11,000  -lrb-  in u . s .  currency  -rrb-  . 
a study by the fordham institute found that some labor agreements with teachers' unions may restrict the ability of school systems to implement merit pay and other reforms . 
education reform is the name given to the goal of changing public education . 
in 2012 tenure for school teachers was challenged in a california lawsuit called `` vergara v .  california '' . 
the theory is that children's guardians will naturally shop for the best schools ,  much as is already done at college level . 
encyclopedias ,  public libraries and grammar schools are examples of innovations intended to lower the cost of a classical education . 
in 1985 in kansas city ,  missouri ,  a judge ordered the school district to raise taxes and spend more money on public education . 
the `` beliefs '' of school districts are optimistic that quite literally `` all students will succeed '' ,  which in the context of high school graduation examination in the united states ,  all students in all groups ,  regardless of heritage or income will pass tests that in the introduction typically fall beyond the ability of all but the top 20 to 30 percent of students . 
in the early modern age ,  victorian schools were reformed to teach commercially useful topics ,  such as modern languages and mathematics ,  rather than classical subjects ,  such as latin and greek . 
reform has taken many forms and directions . 
with fully developed internal economies ,  lancaster schools provided a grammar-school education for a cost per student near $40 per year in 1999 u . s .  dollars . 
by 2003, the push for education reform had declined . 
because these schools operated on very small budgets and attempted to serve as many needy children as possible ,  they were designed to be inexpensive . 
many reformers focused on reforming society by reforming education on more scientific ,  humanistic ,  pragmatic or democratic principles . 
public schools are operated by ellensburg school district 401.
on the state legislative level ,  ellensburg is in the 13th district . 
the median age in the city was 23.5 years . 
in the city ,  the population was spread out with 15.8% under the age of 18, 39.3% from 18 to 24, 22.7% from 25 to 44, 12.8% from 45 to 64, and 9.4% who were 65 years of age or older . 
concerns over the state of ellensburg's historic downtown led to the formation of the ellensburg downtown association to work on revitalizing the area . 
ellensburg was officially incorporated on november 26, 1883.
there were several early newspapers in ellensburg . 
about 18.8% of families and 34.3% of the population were below the poverty line ,  including 29.0% of those under age 18 and 11.2% of those age 65 or over . 
eugene  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a city in the u . s .  state of oregon . 
the first people to settle in the eugene area were known as the kalapuyans ,  also written calapooia or calapooya . 
the first major educational institution in the area was columbia college ,  founded a few years earlier than the university of oregon . 
at this time the settlement was known by anglos as skinner's mudhole . 
according to the united states census bureau ,  the city has a total area of  ,  of which is land and is water . 
they were known as the chifin kalapuyans and called the eugene area where they lived `` chifin '' ,  sometimes recorded as `` chafin '' or `` chiffin '' . 
the university first opened in 1876 with the regents electing the first faculty and naming john wesley johnson as president . 
in july 1830, `` intermittent fever '' struck the lower columbia region and a year later ,  the willamette valley . 
mr barrett disinherited elizabeth ,  as he did each of his children who married . 
some of elizabeth barrett's family had lived in jamaica since 1655.
given this strong tradition ,  elizabeth used `` elizabeth barrett moulton barrett '' on legal documents and before she was married often signed herself `` elizabeth barrett barrett '' or `` ebb ''  -lrb-  initials which she was able to keep after her wedding  -rrb-  . 
the children all had nicknames: elizabeth was `` ba '' . 
born in county durham ,  the eldest of 12 children ,  elizabeth barrett wrote poetry from about the age of six . 
much of barrett browning's work carries a religious theme . 
between 1841 and 1844 barrett browning was prolific in poetry ,  translation and prose . 
at wimpole street barrett browning spent most of her time in her upstairs room . 
barrett browning's sister henrietta died in november 1860.
elizabeth barrett browning  -lrb-  née moulton-barrett ,  ; 6 march 1806 – 29 june 1861 -rrb- was an english poet of the victorian era ,  popular in britain and the united states during her lifetime . 
barrett browning's first known poem was written at the age of six or eight ,  `` on the cruelty of forcement to man '' . 
elizabeth barrett moulton-barrett was born on 6 march 1806, in coxhoe hall ,  between the villages of coxhoe and kelloe in county durham ,  england . 
in the 1840s elizabeth was introduced to literary society through her cousin ,  john kenyon . 
all lived to adulthood except for one girl ,  who died at the age of three ,  when elizabeth was eight . 
the date of publication of these poems is in dispute ,  but her position on slavery in the poems is clear and may have led to a rift between elizabeth and her father . 
the courtship and marriage between robert browning and elizabeth were carried out secretly ,  as she knew her father would disapprove . 
her time at hope end would inspire her in later life to write her most ambitious work ,  `` aurora leigh ''  -lrb-  1856 -rrb- ,  which went through more than 20 editions by 1900, but none between 1905 and 1978.
 -lrb-  sonnet 43, 1845 -rrb- and `` aurora leigh ``  -lrb-  1856 -rrb- . 
at about this time ,  elizabeth began to battle with illness ,  which the medical science of the time was unable to diagnose . 
enlil was associated with the constellation boötes . 
 ''enlil and ninlil ''  -lrb-  etcsl 1.2.1 -rrb- is a nearly complete 152-line sumerian poem describing the affair between enlil and the goddess ninlil . 
enlil was not represented anthropomorphically in mesopotamian iconography . 
enlil was believed to aid in the growth of plants . 
the babylonian god bel was a syncretic deity of enlil ,  marduk ,  and the dying god dumuzid . 
enlil's name is not a genitive construction ,  indicating that enlil was seen as the personification of the wind itself rather than merely the cause of wind . 
enlil ,  now appeased ,  grants utnapishtim immortality as a reward for his loyalty to the gods . 
enlil is also invoked alongside ninlil as a member of `` the mighty and firmly established gods '' . 
enlil separated an from ki and carried off the earth as his domain ,  while an carried off the sky . 
trophic levels are part of the holistic or complex systems view of ecosystems . 
organisms are subject to environmental pressures ,  but they also modify their habitats . 
ecology is not synonymous with environmentalism ,  natural history ,  or environmental science . 
the ecosystem engineering concept has stimulated a new appreciation for the influence that organisms have on the ecosystem and evolutionary process . 
ecosystems are regularly confronted with natural environmental variations and disturbances over time and geographic space . 
change in one ecological or environmental factor can concurrently affect the dynamic state of an entire ecosystem . 
fire plays a major role in the persistence and resilience of ecosystems . 
a food web is the archetypal ecological network . 
despite these limitations ,  food webs remain a valuable tool in understanding community ecosystems . 
ecosystems may be habitats within biomes that form an integrated whole and a dynamically responsive system having both physical and biological complexes . 
food webs are often limited relative to the real world . 
diffusion of carbon dioxide and oxygen is approximately 10,000 times slower in water than in air . 
turbulent forces in air and water affect the environment and ecosystem distribution ,  form and dynamics . 
the largest scale of ecological organization is the biosphere: the total sum of ecosystems on the planet . 
biodiversity means the varieties of species ,  genes ,  and ecosystems ,  enhances certain ecosystem services . 
nonetheless ,  recent studies have shown that real trophic levels do exist ,  but `` above the herbivore trophic level ,  food webs are better characterized as a tangled web of omnivores . `` 
a more recent addition to ecosystem ecology are technoecosystems ,  which are affected by or primarily the result of human activity . 
ecology surged in popular and scientific interest during the 1960–1970s environmental movement . 
ecosystems relate importantly to human ecology as they are the ultimate base foundation of global economics as every commodity ,  and the capacity for exchange ultimately stems from the ecosystems on earth . 
plants convert carbon dioxide into biomass and emit oxygen into the atmosphere . 
women such as ellen swallow richards and julia lathrop ,  among others ,  were precursors to the more popularized environmental movements after the 1950s . 
since then ,  ecologists have worked to bridge their understanding of the degradation of the planet's ecosystems with environmental politics ,  law ,  restoration ,  and natural resources management . 
the main subdisciplines of ecology ,  population  -lrb-  or community  -rrb-  ecology and ecosystem ecology ,  exhibit a difference not only of scale ,  but also of two contrasting paradigms in the field . 
the biology of life operates within a certain range of temperatures . 
food webs exhibit principles of ecological emergence through the nature of trophic relationships: some species have many weak feeding links  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  omnivores  -rrb-  while some are more specialized with fewer stronger feeding links  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  primary predators  -rrb-  . 
in so doing they modify ,  maintain and create habitats . `` 
the environment of ecosystems includes both physical parameters and biotic attributes . 
all organisms can exhibit behaviours . 
the earth was formed approximately 4.5 billion years ago . 
their gills form electrochemical gradients that mediate salt excretion in salt water and uptake in fresh water . 
food webs are a type of concept map or a heuristic device that is used to illustrate and study pathways of energy and material flows . 
the underlying concept of ecosystem can be traced back to 1864 in the published work of george perkins marsh  -lrb-  `` man and nature ''  -rrb-  . 
native north americans were among the first to influence fire regimes by controlling their spread near their homes or by lighting fires to stimulate the production of herbaceous foods and basketry materials . 
step by step lines or relations are drawn until a web of life is illustrated . 
ecosystems are dynamic entities . 
there is no single definition of what constitutes an ecosystem . 
unlike external factors ,  internal factors in ecosystems not only control ecosystem processes but are also controlled by them . 
since most terrestrial ecosystems are nitrogen-limited ,  nitrogen cycling is an important control on ecosystem production . 
anthropogenic nitrogen inputs account for about 80% of all nitrogen fluxes in ecosystems . 
decomposition rates vary among ecosystems . 
human activities are important in almost all ecosystems . 
ecosystems are controlled by external and internal factors . 
ecosystems are controlled both by external and internal factors . 
biodiversity plays an important role in ecosystem functioning . 
until modern times ,  nitrogen fixation was the major source of nitrogen for ecosystems . 
ecosystem ecology studies the processes and dynamics of ecosystems ,  and the way the flow of matter and energy through them structures natural systems . 
the addition  -lrb-  or loss  -rrb-  of species which are ecologically similar to those already present in an ecosystem tends to only have a small effect on ecosystem function . 
external factors such as climate ,  the parent material which forms the soil and topography ,  control the overall structure an ecosystem ,  but are not themselves influenced by the ecosystem . 
ecosystems continually exchange energy and carbon with the wider environment . 
when natural resource management is applied to whole ecosystems ,  rather than single species ,  it is termed ecosystem management . 
biodiversity affects ecosystem functioning ,  as do the processes of disturbance and succession . 
internal factors not only control ecosystem processes but are also controlled by them and are often subject to feedback loops . 
the number is a mathematical constant that is the base of the natural logarithm: the unique number whose natural logarithm is equal to one . 
jacob bernoulli discovered this constant in 1683 by studying a question about compound interest:
the constant was discovered by the swiss mathematician jacob bernoulli while studying compound interest . 
there are thus two ways in which to select such special numbers  . 
an example is stirling's formula for the asymptotics of the factorial function ,  in which both the numbers and enter: as a consequence , 
sometimes called euler's number after the swiss mathematician leonhard euler ,  is not to be confused with  ,  the euler–mascheroni constant ,  sometimes called simply `` euler's constant '' . 
it turns out that these two solutions for are actually `` the same '' ,  the number  . 
the constant can be characterized in many different ways . 
as opposed to some other number ,  as the base of the exponential function makes calculations involving the derivative much simpler . 
if formula_1 and formula_2 are natural numbers and formula_3 is a complex or real valued continuous function for real numbers formula_4 in the interval formula_5, then the integral
when the internal combustion engine was invented ,  the term `` motor '' was initially used to distinguish it from the steam engine—which was in wide use at the time ,  powering locomotives and other vehicles such as steam rollers . 
the watt steam engine was the first type of steam engine to make use of steam at a pressure just above atmospheric to drive the piston helped by a partial vacuum . 
however ,  rocketry uses the term rocket motor ,  even though they consume fuel . 
the working fluid can be a gas as in a stirling engine ,  or steam as in a steam engine or an organic liquid such as n-pentane in an organic rankine cycle . 
 ''combustion '' refers to burning fuel with an oxidizer ,  to supply the heat . 
in the case of the steam engine ,  the fluid changes phases between liquid and gas . 
thus a motor is a device that imparts motion . 
by the 1st century ad ,  cattle and horses were used in mills ,  driving machines similar to those powered by humans in earlier times . 
diesel engines are also 40% more fuel efficient than comparable gasoline engines . 
combustion engines are heat engines driven by the heat of a combustion process . 
medieval muslim engineers employed gears in mills and water-raising machines ,  and used dams as a source of water power to provide additional power to watermills and water-raising machines . 
according to strabo ,  a water powered mill was built in kaberia of the kingdom of mithridates during the 1st century bc . 
the european environment agency  -lrb-  eea  -rrb-  is the agency of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  which provides independent information on the environment . 
the european environment agency  -lrb-  eea  -rrb-  is the agency of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  which provides independent information on the environment . 
the member states of the union are members; however other states may become members of it by means of agreements concluded between them and the eu . 
the term erlang is used interchangeably with erlang/otp ,  or otp ,  which consists of the erlang runtime system ,  a number of ready-to-use components mainly written in erlang ,  and a set of design principles for erlang programs . 
rds continued to develop euphoria ,  culminating with the release of version 3.1.1 in august ,  2007.
version 3.1.1 remains an important milestone release ,  being the last version of euphoria which supports the dos platform . 
the euphoria interpreter was originally written in c .  with the release of version 2.5 in november 2004 the euphoria interpreter was split into two parts: a front-end parser ,  and a back-end interpreter . 
in october 2006 rds released version 3 of euphoria and announced that henceforth euphoria would be freely distributed under an open-source software licence . 
in physics ,  energy is the quantitative property that must be transferred to an object in order to perform work on ,  or to heat ,  the object . 
kinetic energy is determined by the movement of an object – or the composite motion of the components of an object – and potential energy reflects the potential of an object to have motion ,  and generally is a function of the position of an object within a field or may stored in the field itself . 
the si unit of energy rate  -lrb-  energy per unit time  -rrb-  is the watt ,  which is a joule per second . 
the si unit of energy is the joule ,  which is the energy transferred to an object by the work of moving it a distance of 1 metre against a force of 1 newton . 
in the international system of units  -lrb-  si  -rrb-  ,  the unit of energy is the joule ,  named after james prescott joule . 
for example ,  after heating an object ,  its increase in energy could be measured as a small increase in mass ,  with a sensitive enough scale . 
let formula_1 be a random variable with a finite number of finite outcomes formula_2, formula_3,  .  .  .  ,  formula_4 occurring with probabilities formula_5, formula_6,  .  .  .  ,  formula_7, respectively . 
the expectation of formula_1 is defined as
since all probabilities formula_10 add up to 1  -lrb-  formula_11 -rrb- ,  the expected value is the weighted average ,  with formula_10’s being the weights . 
if all outcomes formula_13 are equiprobable  -lrb-  that is ,  formula_14 -rrb- ,  then the weighted average turns into the simple average . 
an electric light is a device that produces visible light from electric current . 
battery-powered light is often reserved for when and where stationary lights fail ,  often in the form of flashlights ,  electric lanterns ,  and in vehicles . 
he is buried at tarzana ,  california ,  us . 
journalist and publisher c .  allen thorndike rice was also his third cousin . 
in 1913, burroughs and emma had their third and last child ,  john coleman burroughs  -lrb-  1913–1979 -rrb- ,  later known for his illustrations of his father's books . 
edgar rice burroughs  -lrb-  september 1, 1875 – march 19, 1950 -rrb- was an american fiction writer best known for his celebrated and prolific output in the adventure and science-fiction genres . 
through his rice grandmother ,  burroughs was descended from settler edmund rice ,  one of the english puritans who moved to massachusetts bay colony in the early 17th century . 
after the war ended ,  burroughs moved back to encino ,  california ,  where after many health problems ,  he died of a heart attack on march 19, 1950, having written almost 80 novels . 
for his restorations of churches and cathedrals ,  viollet-le-duc designed not only architecture ,  but new altars and furnishings . 
viollet-le-duc's work at vezelay led to a series of larger projects . 
viollet-le-duc's drawings of iron trusswork were innovative for the time . 
viollet-le-duc married elisabeth tempier in paris on 3 may 1834.
viollet-le-duc is considered by many to be the first theorist of modern architecture . 
while most of his attention was devoted to restorations ,  viollet-le-duc designed and built a number of private residences and new buildings in paris . 
restoration of the château de pierrefonds ,  reinterpreted by viollet-le-duc for napoleon iii ,  was interrupted by the departure of the emperor in 1870.
viollet-le-duc was born in paris in 1814, in the last year of the empire of napoleon bonaparte . 
throughout his career viollet-le-duc made notes and drawings ,  not only for the buildings he was working on but also on romanesque ,  gothic and renaissance buildings that were to be soon demolished . 
the writer geneviève viollet-le-duc  -lrb-  winner of the prix broquette-gonin in 1978 -rrb- was his great-granddaughter . 
in 1843, mérimée took viollet-le-duc with him to burgundy and the south of france ,  on one of his long inspection tours of possible monuments . 
napoleon iii called upon viollet-le-duc for a wide variety of archeological and architectural tasks . 
viollet-le-duc had a second career in the military ,  primarily in the defense of paris during the franco-prussian war  -lrb-  1870–71 -rrb- . 
viollet-le-duc was accused by his critics ,  in his own time and later ,  of pursuing the spirit of the gothic style in some of his restorations instead of strict historical accuracy . 
in 1874 viollet-le-duc resigned as diocesan architect of paris and was succeeded by his contemporary ,  paul abadie . 
in several unbuilt projects for new buildings ,  viollet-le-duc applied the lessons he had derived from gothic architecture ,  applying its rational structural systems to modern building materials such as cast iron . 
thanks largely to viollet-le-duc ,  the neo-gothic became the standard style for church furnishing throughout france . 
an exhibition ,  `` eugène viollet-le-duc 1814–1879 '' was presented in paris in 1965, and there was a larger ,  centennial exhibition in 1980.
the new spire was completed ,  taller and more strongly built to withstand the weather; it was decorated with statues of the apostles ,  and the face of saint thomas bore a noticeable resemblance to viollet-le-duc . 
another component in viollet-le-duc's theory was how the design of a building should start from its program and the plan ,  and end with its decorations . 
he also designed a new treasury in the gothic style to serve as the museum of the cathedral ,  replacing the residence of the archbishop ,  which had been destroyed in a riot in 1831.
in 1872 viollet-le-duc was engaged in the reconstruction of the château d'amboise ,  owned by the descendants of the former king ,  louis-philippe . 
despite this skepticism ,  ruskin expressed his admiration for the historical research and writings of viollet-le-duc . 
in february 1840 mérimée gave viollet-le-duc the mission of restoring and reconstructing the church so it would not collapse ,  while `` respecting exactly in his project of restoration all the ancient dispositions of the church '' . 
endocarditis is an inflammation of the inner layer of the heart ,  the endocardium . 
also unlike nbte ,  libman-sacks endocarditis does not seem to have a preferred location of deposition and may form on the undersurfaces of the valves or even on the endocardium . 
the conjecture represents an attempt to generalize fermat's last theorem ,  which is the special case : if  ,  then  . 
in the special case  ,  the conjecture states that if  -lrb-  under the conditions given above  -rrb-  then  . 
the special case may be described as the problem of giving a partition of a perfect power into few like powers . 
euler's conjecture was disproven by l .  j .  lander and t .  r .  parkin in 1966 when ,  through a direct computer search on a cdc 6600, they found a counterexample for  . 
the book tells how the israelites leave slavery in egypt through the strength of yahweh ,  the god who has chosen israel as his people . 
israel is elected for salvation because the `` sons of israel '' are `` the firstborn son '' of the god of israel ,  descended through shem and abraham to the chosen line of jacob whose name is changed to israel . 
god tells moses to return to egypt and lead the hebrews into canaan ,  the land promised to abraham . 
a theophany is a manifestation  -lrb-  appearance  -rrb-  of a god – in the bible ,  an appearance of the god of israel ,  accompanied by storms – the earth trembles ,  the mountains quake ,  the heavens pour rain ,  thunder peals and lightning flashes . 
 ''and all the construction of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting was finished ,  and the children of israel did according to everything that god had commanded moses '' ,  and from that time god dwelt in the tabernacle and ordered the travels of the hebrews . 
moses ascends the mountain ,  god dictates the ten commandments  -lrb-  the ritual decalogue  -rrb-  ,  and moses writes them on the tablets . 
biblical covenants ,  in contrast to eastern covenants in general ,  are between a god ,  yahweh ,  and a people ,  israel ,  instead of between a strong ruler and a weaker vassal . 
an electronic system may be a component of another engineered system or a standalone device . 
the identification of the electron in 1897, along with the invention of the vacuum tube ,  which could amplify and rectify small electrical signals ,  inaugurated the field of electronics and the electron age . 
erewhon: or ,  over the range  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a novel by samuel butler which was first published anonymously in 1872.
the greater part of the book consists of a description of erewhon . 
he recommended the novel ,  though not its sequel ,  `` erewhon revisited '' . 
in 2014, new zealand artist gavin hipkins released his first feature film ,  titled `` erewhon '' and based on butler's book . 
the same group of researchers have found speed cells in the medial entorhinal cortex of rats . 
in rodents ,  the ec is located at the caudal end of the temporal lobe . 
in 2005, it was discovered that entorhinal cortex contains a neural map of the spatial environment in rats . 
the entorhinal cortex is the first area of the brain to be affected in alzheimer's disease; a recent functional magnetic resonance imaging study has localised the area to the lateral entorhinal cortex . 
research generally highlights a useful distinction in which the medial entorhinal cortex mainly supports processing of space ,  whereas the lateral entorhinal cortex mainly supports the processing of time . 
the entorhinal cortex  -lrb-  ec  -rrb-   -lrb-  ento = interior ,  rhino = nose ,  entorhinal = interior to the rhinal sulcus  -rrb-  is an area of the brain located in the medial temporal lobe and functioning as a hub in a widespread network for memory ,  navigation and the perception of time . 
haeckel died on 9 august 1919.
ernst haeckel was born on 16 february 1834, in potsdam  -lrb-  then part of prussia  -rrb-  . 
haeckel's wife ,  agnes ,  died in 1915, and haeckel became substantially frailer ,  with a broken leg  -lrb-  thigh  -rrb-  and broken arm . 
evolutionism describes the belief in the evolution of organisms . 
in modern times ,  the term `` evolution '' is widely used ,  but the terms `` evolutionism '' and `` evolutionist '' are seldom used in the scientific community to refer to evolutionary biology ,  since the term is considered both redundant and anachronistic . 
before the question could be answered ,  the notion of `` algorithm '' had to be formally defined . 
the ``  '' is related to hilbert's tenth problem ,  which asks for an algorithm to decide whether diophantine equations have a solution . 
by the completeness theorem of first-order logic ,  a statement is universally valid if and only if it can be deduced from the axioms ,  so the ``  '' can also be viewed as asking for an algorithm to decide whether a given statement is provable from the axioms using the rules of logic . 
the non-existence of such an algorithm ,  established by yuri matiyasevich in 1970, also implies a negative answer to the entscheidungsproblem . 
einhard was from the eastern german-speaking part of the frankish kingdom . 
esters can also be derived from an inorganic acid and an alcohol . 
consequently ,  esters are more volatile than carboxylic acids of similar molecular weight . 
ester names are derived from the parent alcohol and the parent acid ,  where the latter may be organic or inorganic . 
so far an alcohol and inorganic acid are linked via oxygen atoms . 
esterification is the general name for a chemical reaction in which two reactants  -lrb-  typically an alcohol and an acid  -rrb-  form an ester as the reaction product . 
another method for the dehydration of mixtures of alcohols and carboxylic acids is the mitsunobu reaction:
carboxylic acids are esterified by treatment with epoxides ,  giving β-hydroxyesters: this reaction is employed in the production of vinyl ester resin resins from acrylic acid . 
reagents are known that drive the dehydration of mixtures of alcohols and carboxylic acids . 
these cells and the bacteria trapped inside them entered an endosymbiotic relationship ,  meaning that the bacteria lived within the eukaryotic cells . 
 ''richelia intracellularis '' is also found in `` rhizosolenia '' spp .  ,  a diatom found in oligotrophic oceans . 
in some insect groups ,  these endosymbionts live in specialized insect cells called bacteriocytes  -lrb-  also called `` mycetocytes ''  -rrb-  ,  and are maternally-transmitted ,  i . e . 
the primary endosymbionts are thought to help the host either by providing nutrients that the host cannot obtain itself or by metabolizing insect waste products into safer forms . 
less is known about secondary endosymbionts . 
among primary endosymbionts of insects ,  the best-studied are the pea aphid  -lrb-  `` acyrthosiphon pisum ''  -rrb-  and its endosymbiont `` buchnera sp . `` 
research in which a parallel phylogeny of bacteria and insects was inferred supports the belief that the primary endosymbionts are transferred only vertically  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  from the mother  -rrb-  ,  and not horizontally  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  by escaping the host and entering a new host  -rrb-  . 
other studies indicate that these subcuticular bacteria may be both abundant within their hosts and widely distributed among the echinoderms in general . 
the algae live inside the cell ,  in the cytoplasm . 
by the beginning of 1733 the french army was ready for war: all that was needed was the excuse . 
by may 1683, the ottoman threat to emperor leopold i's capital ,  vienna ,  was very real . 
events elsewhere were now to have major consequences for the war in italy . 
the nine years' war was professionally and personally frustrating for the prince . 
with the death of the infirm and childless charles ii of spain on 1 november 1700, the succession of the spanish throne and subsequent control over her empire once again embroiled europe in war—the war of the spanish succession . 
the distractions of the war against louis xiv had enabled the turks to recapture belgrade in 1690.
the battle of zenta proved to be the decisive victory in the long war against the turks . 
as head of the war council eugene was now part of the emperor's inner circle ,  and the first president since montecuccoli to remain an active commander . 
eugene returned to vienna from his recent victory at belgrade  -lrb-  before the conclusion of the turkish war  -rrb-  determined to prevent an escalation of the conflict ,  complaining that ,  `` two wars cannot be waged with one army ''; only reluctantly did the prince release some troops from the balkans for the italian campaign . 
for the next three years there was the continual threat of war between the hanover treaty powers and the austro-spanish bloc . 
the war had dispelled the immediate turkish threat to hungary ,  and was a triumph for the empire and for eugene personally . 
following the death of joseph i on 17 april 1711 his brother ,  charles ,  the pretender to the spanish throne ,  became emperor . 
several ships have been named in eugene's honour: `` prinz eugen '' ,  an austrian world war i battleship; an austrian central battery ship with the same name from 1878; the hms `` prince eugene '' ,  british royal navy world war i monitor; italian light cruiser and the german cruiser `` prinz eugen ''  -lrb-  later uss `` prinz eugen ''  -rrb-  ,  a world war ii heavy cruiser . 
eugene returned to vienna from the war of the polish succession in october 1735, weak and feeble; when maria theresa and francis stephen married in february 1736 eugene was too ill to attend . 
marlborough now favoured a bold advance along the coast to bypass the major french fortresses ,  followed by a march on paris . 
whatever the case ,  louis xiv's choice would cost him dearly twenty years later ,  for it would be precisely eugene ,  in collaboration with the duke of marlborough ,  who would defeat the french army at blenheim ,  a decisive battle which checked french military supremacy and political power . 
military honours in italy undoubtedly belonged to the french commander marshal catinat ,  but eugene ,  the one allied general determined on action and decisive results ,  did well to emerge from the nine years' war with an enhanced reputation . 
however ,  fortunately for charles vi fleury was determined to limit the scope of the war ,  and in october 1735 he granted generous peace preliminaries to the emperor . 
with the signing of the treaty of ryswick in september/october 1697, the desultory war in the west was finally brought to an inconclusive end ,  and leopold i could once again devote all his martial energies into defeating the ottoman turks in the east . 
although eugene could have gone south after the conclusion of the turkish war ,  he chose instead to conduct operations from vienna; but austria's military effort in sicily proved derisory ,  and eugene's chosen commanders ,  zum jungen ,  and later count mercy ,  performed poorly . 
eugene entered the war of the polish succession as president of the imperial war council and commander-in-chief of the army ,  but he was severely handicapped by the quality of his troops and the shortage of funds; now in his seventies ,  the prince was also burdened by rapidly declining physical and mental powers . 
yet there had been no final ,  decisive breakthrough ,  and this was to be the last year that eugene and marlborough would work together . 
the principal objectives of the war had been achieved: the task eugene had begun at zenta was complete ,  and the karlowitz settlement secured . 
of more importance was the grandiose complex of the two belvedere palaces in vienna . 
although eugene was not of austrian extraction ,  he did have habsburg antecedents . 
eugene proceeded to take the banat fortress of timișoara  -lrb-  temeswar in german  -rrb-  in mid-october 1716  -lrb-  thus ending 164 years of turkish rule  -rrb-  ,  before turning his attention to the next campaign and to what he considered the main goal of the war ,  belgrade . 
he is associated with the düsseldorf school of painting . 
that portrait was owned by hunt's brother leavitt hunt ,  a new york attorney and sometime vermont resident ,  and was shown at an exhibition devoted to william morris hunt's work at the museum of fine arts ,  boston in 1878.
in 1859, leutze returned to the united states and opened a studio in new york city . 
emanuel gottlieb leutze  -lrb-  may 24, 1816july 18, 1868 -rrb- was a german american history painter best known for his painting `` washington crossing the delaware '' . 
erasmus alberus  -lrb-  c .  1500 – 5 may 1553 -rrb- was a german humanist ,  lutheran reformer ,  and poet . 
in 1542 he published a prose satire to which luther wrote the preface ,  `` der barfusser monche eulenspiegel und alkoran , ``  a parodic adaptation of the `` liber conformitatum '' of the franciscan bartolommeo rinonico of pisa ,  in which the franciscan order is held up to ridicule . 
several of alberus's hymns ,  all of which show the influence of his master luther ,  have been retained in the german protestant hymnal . 
each state is a tuple  -lrb-  x → α • β ,  `` i ''  -rrb-  ,  consisting of
earley's algorithm is a top-down dynamic programming algorithm . 
input position 0 is the position prior to input . 
the algorithm accepts if  -lrb-  x → γ • ,  0 -rrb- ends up in s -lrb-  `` n ''  -rrb-  ,  where  -lrb-  x → γ  -rrb-  is the top level-rule and `` n '' the input length ,  otherwise it rejects . 
snacking on popcorn is also common . 
ethiopian cuisine also uses `` nug ''  -lrb-  also spelled `` noog '' ,  also known as `` niger seed ''  -rrb-  . 
 ''fit-fit '' or `` fir-fir '' is a common breakfast dish . 
 ''kita '' herb bread is also baked . 
chuko ,  barley conserved with butter ,  is traditional food of oromia region in ethiopia . 
another distinctively ethiopian dish is `` kitfo ''  -lrb-  frequently spelled `` ketfo ''  -rrb-  . 
ethiopian cuisine  -lrb-    -rrb-  characteristically consists of vegetable and often very spicy meat dishes . 
kinche  -lrb-  qinch’e  -rrb-  is a very common ethiopian breakfast ,  its equivalent of oatmeal . 
 ''mitmita ''  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a powdered seasoning mix used in ethiopian cuisine . 
chuko is mainly produced for home consumption ,  but can also be found at local markets . 
also essential is `` niter kibbeh '' ,  a clarified butter infused with ginger ,  garlic ,  and several spices . 
it is also absent from the muratorian fragment ,  the earliest known list of new testament books . 
if written by james the brother of jesus ,  it would have been written sometime before ad 69  -lrb-  or ad 62 -rrb- ,  when he was martyred . 
the epistle of james  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  the book of james ,  or simply james ,  is one of the 21 epistles  -lrb-  didactic letters  -rrb-  in the new testament . 
the united bible societies' `` greek new testament '' divides the letter into the following sections:
today ,  virtually all denominations of christianity consider this book to be a canonical epistle of the new testament . 
the holy tradition of the orthodox church teaches that the book of james was `` written not by either of the apostles ,  but by the “brother of the lord” who was the first bishop of the church in jerusalem  -lrb-  see  ,    -rrb-  . `` 
the epistle of james was included among the twenty-seven new testament books first listed by athanasius of alexandria in his `` thirty-ninth festal epistle ''  -lrb-  ad 367 -rrb- and was confirmed as a canonical epistle of the new testament by a series of councils in the fourth century . 
lutherans hold that the epistle is rightly part of the new testament ,  citing its authority in the book of concord; however ,  it remains part of the lutheran antilegomena . 
the writer refers to himself only as `` james ,  a servant of god and of the lord jesus christ . `` 
the writer of the letter of james identifying himself as `` a servant/slave of god and of the lord jesus christ '' is much the same as the author of the epistle of jude did by calling himself `` a slave of jesus christ ,  but a brother of james ''  -lrb-  jas 1:1; jude 1 -rrb- . 
jerusalem would also be the place of writing . 
in reformation times a few theologians ,  most notably martin luther in his early career ,  argued that this epistle should not be part of the canonical new testament . 
the letter of jude was one of the disputed books of the canon . 
the epistle of jude ,  often shortened to jude ,  is the penultimate book of the new testament and is traditionally attributed to jude ,  the servant of jesus and the brother of james the just . 
amort was born at bibermuhle ,  near tolz ,  in upper bavaria . 
in 1733 amort went to rome as theologian to cardinal niccolo maria lercari  -lrb-  d .  1757 -rrb- . 
this applies to the validity and efficacy of the ordination of bishops and the other sacraments ,  not only of the independent catholic churches ,  but also of all other christian churches ,  including the roman catholic church ,  oriental orthodoxy and the assyrian church of the east . 
barrett wrote that leaders `` of some esoteric movements ,  are also priests or bishops in small non-mainstream christian churches ''; he explains ,  this type of `` independent or autocephalous '' group has `` little in common with the church it developed from ,  the old catholic church ,  and even less in common with the roman catholic church '' but still claims its authority from apostolic succession . 
many ,  if not most ,  `` episcopi vagantes '' are associated with independent catholic churches . 
many `` episcopi vagantes '' claim succession from the old catholic see of utrecht ,  or from eastern orthodox ,  oriental orthodox ,  or eastern catholic churches . 
buchanan writes that based the criteria of having `` a true see '' or having `` a real church life to oversee '' ,  the bishops of most forms of the continuing anglican movement are not necessarily classified as vagantes ,  but `` are always in danger of becoming such '' . 
according to a theological view affirmed ,  for instance ,  by the international bishops' conference of the old catholic church with regard to ordinations by arnold mathew ,  an episcopal ordination is for service within a specific christian church ,  and an ordination ceremony that concerns only the individual himself does not make him truly a bishop . 
the archives of elizabeth garrett anderson are held at the women's library at the london school of economics . 
garrett anderson was also active in the women's suffrage movement . 
a secondary school for girls in islington ,  london is named after her; elizabeth garrett anderson school . 
there was no school in aldeburgh so garrett learned the three rs from her mother . 
garrett anderson worked steadily at the development of the new hospital for women ,  and  -lrb-  from 1874 -rrb- at the creation of the london school of medicine for women ,  where she served as its dean . 
elizabeth garrett anderson  -lrb-  9 june 1836 – 17 december 1917 -rrb- was an english physician and suffragist . 
the archives of the elizabeth garrett anderson hospital  -lrb-  formerly the new hospital for women  -rrb-  are held at the london metropolitan archives . 
garrett was born in whitechapel ,  london ,  the second of eleven children of newson garrett  -lrb-  1812–1893 -rrb- ,  from leiston ,  suffolk ,  and his wife ,  louisa  -lrb-  born dunnell; 1813–1903 -rrb- ,  from london . 
mass movement is an important part of the erosional process and is often the first stage in the breakdown and transport of weathered materials in mountainous areas . 
if the soil is saturated ,  or if the rainfall rate is greater than the rate at which water can infiltrate into the soil ,  surface runoff occurs . 
if the rate of erosion is higher than the rate of soil formation the soils are being destroyed by erosion . 
however ,  the term can also describe the rolling of dislodged soil particles in diameter by wind along the soil surface . 
vegetation acts as an interface between the atmosphere and the soil . 
the amount and intensity of precipitation is the main climatic factor governing soil erosion by water . 
in `` splash erosion '' ,  the impact of a falling raindrop creates a small crater in the soil ,  ejecting soil particles . 
inceptisols are common soils that form in areas of fast erosion . 
 ''valley '' or `` stream erosion '' occurs with continued water flow along a linear feature . 
 ''sheet erosion '' is the transport of loosened soil particles by overland flow . 
in such situations ,  rainfall amount rather than intensity is the main factor determining the severity of soil erosion by water . 
in earth science ,  erosion is the action of surface processes  -lrb-  such as water flow or wind  -rrb-  that removes soil ,  rock ,  or dissolved material from one location on the earth's crust ,  and then transports it to another location  -lrb-  not to be confused with weathering which involves no movement  -rrb-  . 
while erosion of soils is a natural process ,  human activities have increased by 10-40 times the rate at which erosion is occurring globally . 
for example ,  in the great plains ,  it is estimated that soil loss due to wind erosion can be as much as 6100 times greater in drought years than in wet years . 
 ''thermal erosion '' is the result of melting and weakening permafrost due to moving water . 
 ''gully erosion '' occurs when runoff water accumulates and rapidly flows in narrow channels during or immediately after heavy rains or melting snow ,  removing soil to a considerable depth . 
but a euclidean space is orientable . 
euclidean spaces have finite dimension . 
in geometry ,  euclidean space encompasses the two-dimensional euclidean plane ,  the three-dimensional space of euclidean geometry ,  and similar spaces of higher dimension . 
euclidean space were introduced by ancient greeks as an abstraction of our physical space . 
symmetries of a euclidean space are transformations which preserve the euclidean metric  -lrb-  called `` isometries ''  -rrb-  . 
euclidean spaces also generalize to higher dimensions . 
since euclidean space is a metric space ,  it is also a topological space with the natural topology induced by the metric . 
a smooth manifold is a hausdorff topological space that is locally diffeomorphic to euclidean space . 
the simplest  -lrb-  after points  -rrb-  objects in euclidean space are flats ,  or euclidean `` subspaces '' of lesser dimension . 
from the modern viewpoint ,  there is essentially only one euclidean space of each dimension . 
the group structure determines which conditions a metric space needs to satisfy to be a euclidean space:
its vectors form an inner product space  -lrb-  in fact a hilbert space  -rrb-  ,  and a normed vector space . 
now ,  this is this algebraic definition that is more often used for introducing euclidean spaces . 
a euclidean space is not technically a vector space but rather an affine space ,  on which a vector space acts by translations ,  or ,  conversely ,  a euclidean vector is the difference  -lrb-  displacement  -rrb-  in an ordered pair of points ,  not a single point . 
if one replaces the inner product of a euclidean space with an indefinite quadratic form ,  the result is a pseudo-euclidean space . 
classical greek geometry defined the euclidean plane and euclidean three-dimensional space using certain postulates ,  while the other properties of these spaces were deduced as theorems . 
this distance function is called the euclidean metric . 
cartesian coordinates are arguably the standard ,  but not the only possible option for a euclidean space . 
abbey was born in philadelphia in 1852.
edwin austin abbey  -lrb-  april 1, 1852august 1, 1911 -rrb- was an american muralist ,  illustrator ,  and painter . 
it took abbey eleven years to complete this series of murals in his england studio . 
abbey is buried in the churchyard of old st andrew's church in kingsbury ,  london . 
evolutionary psychologists argue that much of human behavior is the output of psychological adaptations that evolved to solve recurrent problems in human ancestral environments . 
just as human physiology and evolutionary physiology have worked to identify physical adaptations of the body that represent `` human physiological nature , ``  the purpose of evolutionary psychology is to identify evolved emotional and cognitive adaptations that represent `` human psychological nature . `` 
most of what is now labeled as sociobiological research is now confined to the field of behavioral ecology . 
evolutionary psychology is an approach that views human nature as the product of a universal set of evolved psychological adaptations to recurring problems in the ancestral environment . 
