as a u . s . 
the goldwater campaign spotlighted ronald reagan ,  who appeared in a campaign ad . 
the southern states ,  traditionally democratic up to that time ,  voted republican primarily as a statement of opposition to the civil rights act ,  which had been passed by johnson and the northern democrats ,  as well as the majority of republicans in congress ,  earlier that year . 
goldwater only won his home state of arizona and five states in the deep south ,  depicted in red . 
in 1963, he joined the arizona society of the sons of the american revolution . 
in 1964, goldwater ran a conservative campaign that emphasized states' rights . 
arizona's changing population also hurt goldwater . 
in the end ,  goldwater received 38% of the popular vote ,  and carried just six states: arizona  -lrb-  with 51% of the popular vote  -rrb-  and the core states of the deep south: alabama ,  georgia ,  louisiana ,  mississippi ,  and south carolina . 
in a heavily democratic state ,  goldwater became a conservative republican and a friend of herbert hoover . 
goldwater's uncle morris goldwater  -lrb-  1852–1939 -rrb- was an arizona territorial and state legislator ,  mayor of prescott ,  arizona ,  and a businessman . 
future chief justice of the united states and fellow arizonan william h .  rehnquist also first came to the attention of national republicans through his work as a legal adviser to goldwater's presidential campaign . 
however ,  goldwater's vote on the civil rights act proved devastating to his campaign everywhere outside the south  -lrb-  besides dixie ,  goldwater won only in arizona ,  his home state  -rrb-  ,  contributing to his landslide defeat in 1964.
past comments came back to haunt goldwater throughout the campaign . 
after his retirement in 1987, goldwater described the arizona governor evan mecham as `` hardheaded '' and called on him to resign ,  and two years later stated that the republican party had been taken over by a `` bunch of kooks '' . 
all this appealed to white southern democrats ,  and goldwater was the first republican to win the electoral votes of all of the deep south states  -lrb-  south carolina ,  georgia ,  alabama ,  mississippi and louisiana  -rrb-  since reconstruction  -lrb-  although dwight eisenhower did carry louisiana in 1956 -rrb- . 
barry morris goldwater  -lrb-  january 2, 1909 – may 29, 1998 -rrb- was an american politician ,  businessman and author who was a five-term senator from arizona  -lrb-  1953–1965, 1969–1987 -rrb- and the republican party nominee for president of the united states in 1964.
as a republican he won a seat in the u . s .  senate in 1952, when he upset veteran democrat and senate majority leader ernest mcfarland . 
grenier would serve as executive director of the national gop during the goldwater campaign ,  the number 2 position to party chairman dean burch of arizona . 
he gave up re-election for the senate in 1964 in favor of his presidential campaign . 
he also had a substantial impact on the libertarian movement . 
in all ,  johnson won an overwhelming 486 electoral votes ,  to goldwater's 52.
while goldwater had been depicted by his opponents in the republican primaries as a representative of a conservative philosophy that was extreme and alien ,  his voting records show that his positions were in harmony with those of his fellow republicans in the congress . 
goldwater campaign commercials included statements of support by actor raymond massey and moderate republican senator margaret chase smith . 
in the segregated city of phoenix in the 1950s ,  he had quietly supported civil rights for blacks ,  but would not let his name be used . 
 ''baralong '' sank  ,  which had been preparing to sink a nearby merchant ship ,  the `` nicosian '' . 
 ''baralong ''s crew was infuriated by the attack and by their inability to locate survivors . 
herbert sent `` baralong ''s 12 royal marines ,  under the command of a corporal collins ,  to find the surviving german sailors aboard `` nicosian '' . 
later ,  `` baralong '' sank in an incident which has been described as a war crime . 
meanwhile ,  `` nicosian ''s crew were cheering wildly from the lifeboats . 
as the submarine disappeared behind the steamship ,  herbert steered `` baralong '' on a parallel course along `` nicosian ''s starboard side . 
wegener is described by some accounts as being shot while trying to swim to the `` baralong '' . 
before `` u-27 '' came round `` nicosian ''s bow ,  `` baralong '' hauled down the american flag ,  hoisted the royal navy's white ensign ,  and unmasked her guns . 
in early 1995, acc changed its name to red hat software ,  which has subsequently been shortened to simply red hat ,  inc .  young served as red hat's ceo until 1999.
after leaving vernon ,  young founded the acc corp inc .  in 1993.
marc ewing and young co-founded open-source software company red hat  -lrb-  nyse: rht  -rrb-  . 
major plotlines include `` babylon 5 '''s involvement in a millennia-old war between powerful ,  ancient alien races ,  and its resistance against the rise of a totalitarian government on earth . 
 ''babylon 5 '' ,  set primarily between the years 2257 and 2262, depicts a future where earth has a unifying earth government and has gained the technology for faster-than-light travel . 
 ''babylon 5 '' is the last of the babylon project started by earth to form hubs for peaceful inter-species trade and diplomacy ,  but the original three stations were all destroyed before completion ,  while `` babylon 4 '' mysteriously vanished shortly after being made operational . 
in 2001 be's copyrights were sold to palm ,  inc .  for some $11 million . 
beos is an operating system for personal computers first developed by be inc .  in 1991.
these systems could dual boot either the classic mac os or beos ,  with a start-up screen offering the choice . 
after the split from palm ,  palmsource used parts of beos's multimedia framework for its failed palm os cobalt product . 
in the years that followed the demise of be inc .  a handful of projects formed to recreate beos or key elements of the os with the eventual goal of then continuing where be inc .  left off . 
zeta was a commercially available operating system based on the beos r5.1 codebase . 
due to apple's moves and the mounting debt of be inc .  ,  beos was soon ported to the intel x86 platform with its r3 release in march 1998.
 ''biome '' is a broader term than `` habitat ''; any biome can comprise a variety of habitats . 
the term was suggested in 1916 by clements ,  originally as a synonym for biotic community of möbius  -lrb-  1877 -rrb- . 
however ,  in some contexts ,  the term biome is used in a different manner . 
the biotas of the earth make up the biosphere . 
a behavior can be represented as a behavior vector . 
taking a behavior informatics perspective ,  a behavior consists of behavior actor ,  operation ,  interactions ,  and their properties . 
the battle of marathon  -lrb-    -rrb-  took place in 490 bc ,  during the first persian invasion of greece . 
from a strategic point of view ,  the athenians had some disadvantages at marathon . 
it was the first time the greeks had beaten the persians ,  proving that the persians were not invincible ,  and that resistance ,  rather than subjugation ,  was possible . 
the battle of marathon was a watershed in the greco-persian wars ,  showing the greeks that the persians could be beaten; the eventual greek triumph in these wars can be seen to have begun at marathon . 
the first theory is that the persian cavalry left marathon for an unspecified reason ,  and that the greeks moved to take advantage of this by attacking . 
since the athenians seem to have taken up a strong defensive position at marathon ,  the persian hesitance was probably a reluctance to attack the athenians head-on . 
the first persian invasion was a response to athenian involvement in the ionian revolt ,  when athens and eretria had sent a force to support the cities of ionia in their attempt to overthrow persian rule . 
the second theory is simply that the battle occurred because the persians finally moved to attack the athenians . 
the athenians and their allies chose a location for the battle ,  with marshes and mountainous terrain ,  that prevented the persian cavalry from joining the persian infantry . 
it is also possible that both theories are correct: when the persians sent the cavalry by ship to attack athens ,  they simultaneously sent their infantry to attack at marathon ,  triggering the greek counterattack . 
another tale from the conflict is of the dog of marathon . 
the defeat at marathon barely touched the vast resources of the persian empire ,  yet for the greeks it was an enormously significant victory . 
the athenians would have to hold out at marathon for the time being ,  although they were reinforced by the full muster of 1,000 hoplites from the small city of plataea; a gesture which did much to steady the nerves of the athenians ,  and won unending athenian gratitude to plataea . 
the greek army decisively defeated the more numerous persians ,  marking a turning point in the greco-persian wars . 
the first persian invasion of greece had its immediate roots in the ionian revolt ,  the earliest phase of the greco-persian wars . 
the persians sailed down the coast of attica ,  and landed at the bay of marathon ,  roughly from athens ,  on the advice of the exiled athenian tyrant hippias  -lrb-  who had accompanied the expedition  -rrb-  . 
the notion that bilateral trade deficits are bad in and of themselves is overwhelmingly rejected by trade experts and economists . 
measuring the balance of trade can be problematic because of problems with recording and collecting data . 
the term `` biosphere '' was coined by geologist eduard suess in 1875, which he defined as the place on earth's surface where life dwells . 
life forms live in every part of the earth's biosphere ,  including soil ,  hot springs ,  inside rocks at least deep underground ,  the deepest parts of the ocean ,  and at least high in the atmosphere . 
every part of the planet ,  from the polar ice caps to the equator ,  features life of some kind . 
according to biologist stephen blair hedges ,  `` if life arose relatively quickly on earth  .  .  .  then it could be common in the universe . `` 
the earliest evidence for life on earth includes biogenic graphite found in 3.7 billion-year-old metasedimentary rocks from western greenland and microbial mat fossils found in 3.48 billion-year-old sandstone from western australia . 
experimental biospheres ,  also called closed ecological systems ,  have been created to study ecosystems and the potential for supporting life outside the earth . 
red blood cells ,  or erythrocytes ,  have a unique lipid composition . 
the lipid bilayer consists of two layers- an outer leaflet and an inner leaflet . 
certain proteins and lipids rest only on one surface of the membrane and not the other . 
these types of membranes differ in lipid and protein composition . 
the phospholipid bilayer is formed due to the aggregation of membrane lipids in aqueous solutions . 
the cell membranes are different from the isolating tissues formed by layers of cells ,  such as mucous membranes ,  basement membranes ,  and serous membranes . 
for all cells ,  membrane fluidity is important for many reasons . 
the first such british high commissioner was appointed to ottawa in 1928.
the decision to release the declaration was taken by the british war cabinet on 31 october 1917.
during the period of the british war cabinet discussions leading up to the declaration ,  the war had reached a period of stalemate . 
this letter was not published ,  but was deposited at the british foreign office . 
the british foreign office actively encouraged jewish emigration to palestine ,  exemplified by charles henry churchill's 1841–1842 exhortations to moses montefiore ,  the leader of the british jewish community . 
immediately following their declaration of war on the ottoman empire in november 1914, the british war cabinet began to consider the future of palestine; within two months a memorandum was circulated to the cabinet by a zionist cabinet member ,  herbert samuel ,  proposing the support of zionist ambitions in order to enlist the support of jews in the wider war . 
the balfour declaration was a public statement issued by the british government in 1917 during world war i announcing support for the establishment of a `` national home for the jewish people '' in palestine ,  then an ottoman region with a small minority jewish population . 
the british cabinet first discussed zionism at a meeting on 9november 1914, four days after britain's declaration of war on the ottoman empire ,  of which the mutasarrifate of jerusalemoften referred to as palestinewas a component . 
zionist leader chaim weizmann ,  later president of the world zionist organisation and first president of israel ,  moved from switzerland to the uk in 1904 and met arthur balfour – who had just launched his 1905–1906 election campaign after resigning as prime minister – in a session arranged by charles dreyfus ,  his jewish constituency representative . 
the declaration was contained in a letter dated 2november 1917 from the united kingdom's foreign secretary arthur balfour to lord rothschild ,  a leader of the british jewish community ,  for transmission to the zionist federation of great britain and ireland . 
sykes went on ahead to italy and had meetings with the british ambassador and british vatican representative to prepare the way for sokolow once again . 
balfour met weizmann at the foreign office on 22 march 1917; two days later ,  weizmann described the meeting as being `` the first time i had a real business talk with him '' . 
further drafts were discussed by the british cabinet during september and october ,  with input from zionist and anti-zionist jews but with no representation from the local population in palestine . 
it was the first time in an official record that enlisting the support of jews as a war measure had been proposed . 
early british political support for an increased jewish presence in the region of palestine was based upon geopolitical calculations . 
following the united states' entry into the war on 6 april ,  the british foreign secretary led the balfour mission to washington d . c .  and new york ,  where he spent a month between mid-april and mid-may . 
prior to this point ,  no active negotiations with zionists had taken place ,  but sykes had been aware of zionism ,  was in contact with moses gaster – a former president of the english zionist federation – and may have seen samuel's 1915 memorandum . 
the organization was mentioned in the serbian parliament as the `` black hand '' in late 1911.
in august 1901, a group of lower officers headed by captain dragutin dimitrijević `` apis '' established a conspiracy group  -lrb-  called the black hand in literature  -rrb-  ,  against the dynasty . 
by this point ,  disagreeing with the black hand was dangerous ,  as political murder was one of their tools . 
two members of the black hand ,  antonije antić ,  and velimir vemić were the organization's military advisors . 
by 1911–12, narodna odbrana had established ties with the black hand ,  and the two became `` parallel in action and overlapping in membership '' . 
other names include board of directors and advisors ,  board of governors ,  board of managers ,  board of regents ,  board of trustees ,  or board of visitors . 
it may also be called `` the executive board '' and is often simply referred to as `` the board '' . 
the first balkan war had three main causes:
the balkan wars  -lrb-   ,  literally `` the balkan wars '' or `` balkan faciası '' ,  meaning `` the balkan tragedy ''  -rrb-  consisted of two conflicts that took place in the balkan peninsula in 1912 and 1913.
serbia and montenegro would attack in the theater of sandjak ,  bulgaria and serbia in macedonia and thrace . 
the second balkan war broke out on 29-lrb- 16 -rrb- june 1913 when bulgaria attacked its erstwhile allies in the first balkan war ,  serbia and greece ,  while montenegro and the ottoman empire intervened later against bulgaria ,  with romania attacking bulgaria from the north in violation of a peace treaty . 
montenegro concluded agreements between serbia and bulgaria later that year . 
the war set the stage for the balkan crisis of 1914 and thus served as a `` prelude to the first world war '' . 
romania had raised an army and declared war on bulgaria on 10 july -lrb-  27 june  -rrb-  as it had from 28-lrb- 15 -rrb- june officially warned bulgaria that it would not remain neutral in a new balkan war ,  due to bulgaria's refusal to cede the fortress of silistra as promised before the first balkan war in exchange for romanian neutrality . 
the ottoman empire's situation was difficult . 
in the late 19th and early 20th century ,  bulgaria and greece contended for ottoman macedonia and thrace . 
bulgaria ,  which had secured ottoman recognition of her independence in april 1909 and enjoyed the friendship of russia ,  also looked to annex districts of ottoman thrace and macedonia . 
bulgaria signed treaties with serbia to divide the territory of northern macedonia . 
the bulgarian attack was halted . 
when the greek army had entered thessaloniki in the first balkan war ahead of the bulgarian 7th division by only a day ,  they were asked to allow a bulgarian battalion to enter the city . 
the second balkan war was a catastrophic blow to russian policies in the balkans ,  which for centuries had focused on access to the `` warm seas '' . 
by the early 20th century ,  bulgaria ,  greece ,  montenegro and serbia had achieved independence from the ottoman empire ,  but large elements of their ethnic populations remained under ottoman rule . 
be sold around a thousand 66 mhz beboxes and 800 133 mhz beboxes . 
the bebox made its debut in october 1995  -lrb-  bebox dual603-66 -rrb- . 
neural engineering  -lrb-  also known as neuroengineering  -rrb-  is a discipline that uses engineering techniques to understand ,  repair ,  replace ,  or enhance neural systems . 
bioartificial organs ,  which use both synthetic and biological component ,  are also a focus area in research ,  such as with hepatic assist devices that use liver cells within an artificial bioreactor construct . 
in a less formal way ,  bioinformatics also tries to understand the organisational principles within nucleic acid and protein sequences . 
this role is also known as a biomedical equipment technician  -lrb-  bmet  -rrb-  or clinical engineering . 
bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field that develops methods and software tools for understanding biological data . 
the term balkan peninsula was a synonym for european turkey ,  the political borders of former ottoman empire provinces . 
the concept of the balkan peninsula was created by the german geographer august zeune in 1808, who mistakenly considered the balkan mountains the dominant mountain system of southeast europe spanning from the adriatic sea to the black sea . 
the word `` balkan '' comes from ottoman turkish ``  '' 'chain of wooded mountains'; related words are also found in other turkic languages . 
among russian travelers not so burdened by classical toponymy ,  balkan was the preferred term '' . 
the bohr model is a relatively primitive model of the hydrogen atom ,  compared to the valence shell atom . 
this atom model is disastrous ,  because it predicts that all atoms are unstable . 
a special edition of bombay gin called star of bombay was produced in 2015 for the uk market . 
bacardi also markets bombay original london dry gin  -lrb-  or bombay original dry  -rrb-  . 
bombay sapphire is a brand of gin that was first launched in 1986 by idv . 
 ''wine enthusiast '' preferred bombay sapphire . 
bombay sapphire also endorses glass artists and designers with the bombay sapphire prize ,  which is awarded every year to an outstanding design which features glass . 
considered by music authorities as the co-founder of western swing ,  he was widely known as the king of western swing  -lrb-  although spade cooley self-promoted the moniker `` king of western swing '' from 1942 to 1969 -rrb- . 
wills recalled the early days of what became known as western swing music in a 1949 interview . 
neither did he fit into the pop or middle of the road stations ,  although he played a good deal of pop music ,  and was not accepted in the pop music world . 
famous swing orchestras in california realized that many of their followers were leaving to dance to bob will's western swing . 
the country music hall of fame inducted wills in 1968 and the texas state legislature honored him for his contribution to american music . 
since there was already a `` jim '' on the show ,  the manager began calling him `` bob '' . 
the use of amplified guitars accentuates wills's claim; some bob wills recordings from the 1930s and 1940s sound similar to rock and roll records of the 1950s . 
the rock and roll hall of fame inducted wills and the texas playboys in 1999.
brown added twin fiddles ,  tenor banjo and slap bass ,  pointing the music in the direction of swing ,  which they played on local radio and at dancehalls . 
wills favored jazz-like arrangements and the band found national popularity into the 1940s with such hits as `` steel guitar rag '' ,  `` new san antonio rose '' ,  `` smoke on the water '' ,  `` stars and stripes on iwo jima '' ,  and `` new spanish two step '' . 
wills' style influenced performers buck owens ,  merle haggard ,  and the strangers and helped to spawn a style of music now known as the bakersfield sound . 
from 1974 until his 2002 death ,  waylon jennings performed a song he had written called `` bob wills is still the king '' . 
he commanded enormous fees playing dances there ,  and began to make more creative use of electric guitars to replace the big horn sections the tulsa band had boasted . 
a revival of interest in his music ,  spurred by merle haggard's 1970 album a tribute to the best damn fiddle player in the world ,  led to a 1973 reunion album ,  teaming wills ,  who could only speak with difficulty ,  with key members of the early band ,  as well as haggard . 
the manager of a popular auditorium in the la basin town of wilmington ,  california: `` although monday night dancing is frankly an experiment it was the only night of the week on which this outstanding band could be secured . `` 
wills added a trumpet to the band inadvertently when he hired everet stover as an announcer ,  not knowing that he had played with the new orleans symphony and had directed the governor's band in austin . 
in fort worth ,  wills met herman arnspiger and formed the wills fiddle band . 
badtrans then transmits the data to one of several e-mail addresses . 
among the e-mail addresses that received the keyloggers were free addresses at excite ,  yahoo ,  and ijustgotfired . com . 
barış manço was born in üsküdar ,  istanbul ,  turkey on 2 january 1943.
in 1970, he formed barış manço ve .  .  .   -lrb-  `` barış manço and .  .  . ``   -rrb-  again with foreign musicians ,  to record his first hit single ,  both in turkey and in belgium ,  `` dağlar dağlar ''  -lrb-  mountains ,  mountains ! 
manço was of partial albanian descent . 
the album remains as one of their most popular works and launched a boost of popularity for barış manço during the 1980s . 
mehmet barış manço  -lrb-  born tosun yusuf mehmet barış manço; 2 january 1943 – 31 january 1999 -rrb- ,  known by his stage name barış manço ,  was a turkish rock musician ,  singer ,  songwriter ,  composer ,  actor ,  television producer and show host . 
after the success of `` dağlar dağlar '' ,  manço recorded a couple of singles with moğollar  -lrb-  the mongols  -rrb-  ,  another influential turkish anatolian rock band . 
the music of the movie consists of a compilation of tracks composed by barış manço and kurtalan ekspres . 
 ''adam olacak çocuk '' ,  a section of his show dedicated to children ,  strengthened manço's popularity among the young generations . 
blitzmax is also the first modular version of the blitz languages ,  improving the extensibility of the command-set . 
there is no indication that blitz research will pick up the project again . 
the first blitzmax compiler was released in december 2004 for mac os x . 
see below for the same example written in blitzmax . 
blitz basic refers to the programming language dialect that was interpreted by the first blitz compilers ,  devised by new zealand-based developer mark sibly . 
in february 2003, blitz research ltd .  released blitzplus also for microsoft windows . 
a game example for blitz3d is scp – containment breach which was made with blitz3d
the four broad underlying policies of the bc system are:  bliss deliberately avoided the use of the decimal point because of his objection to dewey's system . 
the bliss bibliographic classification  -lrb-  bc  -rrb-  is a library classification system that was created by henry e .  bliss  -lrb-  1870–1955 -rrb- and published in four volumes between 1940 and 1953.
in 1967 the bliss classification association was formed . 
blood alcohol concentration is usually expressed as a percentage of ethanol in the blood in units of mass of alcohol per volume of blood or mass of alcohol per mass of blood ,  depending on the country . 
barristers are distinguished from solicitors ,  who have more direct access to clients ,  and may do transactional-type legal work . 
some solicitors avoid this by delaying delivery of the brief until it is certain the case will go to trial . 
as in common law countries in which there is a split between the roles of barrister and solicitor ,  the barrister in civil law jurisdictions is responsible for appearing in trials or pleading cases before the courts . 
in court ,  barristers are often visibly distinguished from solicitors by their apparel . 
often ,  barristers are also recognised as `` legal scholars '' . 
when pettigrew's troops approached gettysburg on june 30, they noticed union cavalry under brig . 
by early afternoon ,  the union line ran in a semicircle west ,  north ,  and northeast of gettysburg . 
the battle of gettysburg  -lrb-    -rrb-  was fought july 1–3, 1863, in and around the town of gettysburg ,  pennsylvania ,  by union and confederate forces during the american civil war . 
the union army crossed the potomac from june 25 to 27.
union maj .  gen .  george meade's army of the potomac defeated attacks by confederate gen .  robert e .  lee's army of northern virginia ,  halting lee's invasion of the north . 
the news of the union victory electrified the north . 
there were 72 medals of honor awarded for the gettysburg campaign . 
after the war ,  general pickett was asked why confederates lost at gettysburg . 
as union positions collapsed both north and west of town ,  gen .  howard ordered a retreat to the high ground south of town at cemetery hill ,  where he had left the division of brig . 
in a brief letter to maj .  gen .  henry w .  halleck written on july 7, lincoln remarked on the two major union victories at gettysburg and vicksburg . 
by june 29, lee's army was strung out in an arc from chambersburg  -lrb-   northwest of gettysburg  -rrb-  to carlisle  -lrb-   north of gettysburg  -rrb-  to near harrisburg and wrightsville on the susquehanna river . 
film records survive of two gettysburg reunions ,  held on the battlefield . 
the battle of gettysburg was depicted in the 1993 film `` gettysburg '' ,  based on michael shaara's 1974 novel `` the killer angels '' . 
general lee understood the defensive potential to the union if they held this high ground . 
gen .  george armstrong custer's michigan cavalry near hunterstown to the northeast of gettysburg . 
around 2 p . m .  ,  the confederate second corps divisions of maj .  gens . 
on november 19, president lincoln used the dedication ceremony for the gettysburg national cemetery to honor the fallen union soldiers and redefine the purpose of the war in his historic gettysburg address . 
during the advance on gettysburg ,  maj .  gen .  reynolds was in operational command of the left ,  or advanced ,  wing of the army ,  consisting of the i ,  iii ,  and xi corps . 
elements of the two armies initially collided at gettysburg on july 1, 1863, as lee urgently concentrated his forces there ,  his objective being to engage the union army and destroy it . 
the shape of the union line is popularly described as a `` fishhook '' formation . 
the union line ran from culp's hill southeast of the town ,  northwest to cemetery hill just south of town ,  then south for nearly along cemetery ridge ,  terminating just north of little round top . 
all across the battlefield ,  despite significant losses ,  the union defenders held their lines . 
thus ,  the union army had interior lines ,  while the confederate line was nearly long . 
in this view ,  gettysburg was seen as a great lost opportunity ,  in which a decisive victory by lee could have meant the end of the war in the confederacy's favor . 
hill added maj .  gen .  william dorsey pender's division to the assault ,  and the i corps was driven back through the grounds of the lutheran seminary and gettysburg streets . 
around 5 a . m .  on wednesday ,  july 1, two brigades of heth's division advanced to gettysburg . 
finally ,  about six o'clock ,  ewell sent orders to each of his division commanders to attack the union lines in his front . 
meanwhile ,  the town of gettysburg ,  with its population of just 2,400, found itself tasked with taking care of 14,000 wounded union troops and an additional 8,000 confederate prisoners . 
the army of the potomac ,  initially under maj .  gen .  joseph hooker  -lrb-  maj .  gen .  george meade replaced hooker in command on june 28 -rrb- ,  consisted of more than 100,000 men in the following organization:
after his success at chancellorsville in virginia in may 1863, lee led his army through the shenandoah valley to begin his second invasion of the north—the gettysburg campaign . 
however ,  the union enthusiasm soon dissipated as the public realized that lee's army had escaped destruction and the war would continue . 
the nature of the result of the battle of gettysburg has been the subject of controversy for years . 
bruce catton wrote ,  `` the town of gettysburg looked as if some universal moving day had been interrupted by catastrophe . `` 
general lee wished to renew the attack on friday ,  july 3, using the same basic plan as the previous day: longstreet would attack the u . s .  left ,  while ewell attacked culp's hill . 
in indycar ,  budweiser sponsored mario andretti  -lrb-  1983–1984 -rrb- ,  bobby rahal  -lrb-  1985–1988 -rrb- ,  scott pruett  -lrb-  1989–1992 -rrb- ,  roberto guerrero  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- ,  scott goodyear  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- ,  paul tracy  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- ,  christian fittipaldi  -lrb-  1996–1997 -rrb- ,  and richie hearn  -lrb-  1998–1999 -rrb- . 
in 2008, anheuser-busch had a market share in the united states of 50.9% for all beers sold . 
anheuser-busch has also placed budweiser as an official sponsor of the premier league and the presenting sponsor of the fa cup . 
budweiser brands account for about half of anheuser-busch's sales volume ,  a figure which has been steadily declining at –2% per year . 
between 2003 and 2006, budweiser was a sponsor of the bmw williams formula one team . 
budweiser  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an american-style pale lager produced by anheuser-busch ,  currently part of the transnational corporation anheuser-busch inbev . 
in 1964, vincent gaddis wrote in the pulp magazine `` argosy '' of the boundaries of the bermuda triangle ,  giving its vertices as miami; san juan ,  puerto rico; and bermuda . 
the bermuda triangle ,  also known as the devil's triangle or hurricane alley ,  is a loosely-defined region in the western part of the north atlantic ocean ,  where a number of aircraft and ships are said to have disappeared under mysterious circumstances . 
1973 -rrb-; charles berlitz  -lrb-  `` the bermuda triangle '' ,  1974 -rrb-; richard winer  -lrb-  `` the devil's triangle '' ,  1974 -rrb- ,  and many others ,  all keeping to some of the same supernatural elements outlined by eckert . 
these boroughs are divided in neighborhoods . 
the local government act 1888 established a new sort of borough – the county borough . 
see list of boroughs in quebec . 
in the united states ,  `` borough '' is pronounced  . 
in the netherlands ,  the municipalities of rotterdam and amsterdam are divided into administrative boroughs ,  or deelgemeenten ,  which have their own borough council and a borough mayor . 
while many ancient boroughs remained as municipal boroughs ,  they were disenfranchised by the reform act . 
there are 3 boroughs in the republic of trinidad and tobago:
galway was a borough from 1937 until promoted to county borough in 1985, and dún laoghaire was a borough from 1930 until merged into dún laoghaire–rathdown county in 1993.
in australia ,  a `` borough '' was once a self-governing small town ,  but this designation has all but vanished ,  except for the only remaining borough in the country ,  which is the borough of queenscliffe . 
in trinidad and tobago ,  a borough is a unit of local government . 
in australia ,  the term `` borough '' is an occasionally used term for a local government area . 
in the united states ,  a borough is a unit of local government below the level of the state . 
sometimes boroughs were governed by bailiffs or headboroughs . 
 -lrb-  see: boroughs of mexico and municipalities of mexico city  -rrb- 
boroughs proliferated in the suburban areas of the larger cities: by the 1980s there were 19 boroughs and three cities in the area that is now the city of auckland . 
it is situated south-west of bodmin moor . 
bodmin lies in the east of cornwall ,  south-west of bodmin moor . 
the upland area was formerly known as fowey moor after the river fowey ,  which rises within it . 
the name bodmin moor is relatively recent . 
bodmin moor is the source of several of cornwall's rivers: they are mentioned here anti-clockwise from the south . 
berkeley is located at  -lrb-  37.871775, −122.274603 -rrb- . 
in 1909, the citizens of berkeley adopted a new charter ,  and the town of berkeley became the city of berkeley . 
there was a strong prohibition movement in berkeley at this time . 
during the 1940s ,  many african americans migrated to berkeley . 
berkeley is served by amtrak  -lrb-  capitol corridor  -rrb-  ,  ac transit ,  bart  -lrb-  ashby ,  downtown berkeley station and north berkeley  -rrb-  and bus shuttles operated by major employers including uc berkeley and lawrence berkeley national laboratory . 
berkeley is home to the oldest campus in the university of california system ,  the university of california ,  berkeley ,  and the lawrence berkeley national laboratory ,  which is managed and operated by the university . 
berkeley has had recurring problems with parking meter vandalism . 
the 2010 united states census reported that berkeley had a population of 112,580.
a silent film of one of these early streetcars in berkeley can be seen at the library of congress website: `` a trip to berkeley ,  california '' . 
the city of berkeley has historically been a central location for homeless communities in the bay area . 
most of berkeley lies on a rolling sedimentary plain that rises gently from sea level to the base of the berkeley hills . 
the area near the university became known for a time as `` east berkeley '' . 
berkeley  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a city on the east shore of san francisco bay in northern alameda county ,  california . 
berkeley's slow growth ended abruptly with the great san francisco earthquake of 1906.
in 1950, the census bureau reported berkeley's population as 11.7% black and 84.6% white . 
in the 1990s ,  public television's frontline documentary series featured race relations at berkeley's only public high school ,  berkeley high school . 
 -lrb-  `` see '' berkeley marine corps recruiting center controversy .   -rrb- 
the berkeley population declined in the 1970s ,  partly due to an exodus to the suburbs . 
berkeley has one of the highest rates of bicycle and pedestrian commuting in the nation . 
berkeley is considered one of the most socially liberal cities in the united states . 
one of the buildings from this era was the site of the 2015 berkeley balcony collapse disaster . 
although no significant damage was reported to most of the few berkeley buildings of the time ,  the 1868 quake did destroy the vulnerable adobe home of domingo peralta in north berkeley . 
the berkeley student food collective still operates at 2440 bancroft way . 
in 2007–2008, berkeley received media attention due to demonstrations against a marine corps recruiting office in downtown berkeley and a series of controversial motions by berkeley's city council regarding opposition to marine recruiting . 
the park has become one of the few relatively safe spaces for homeless individuals to congregate in berkeley and the greater bay area . 
berkeley is traversed by the hayward fault zone ,  a major branch of the san andreas fault to the west . 
today ,  evidence of the hayward fault's `` creeping '' is visible at various locations in berkeley . 
politically ,  the area that became berkeley was initially part of a vast contra costa county . 
the modern age came quickly to berkeley ,  no doubt due to the influence of the university . 
berkeley is the location of a number of nationally prominent businesses ,  many of which have been pioneers in their areas of operation . 
the era of large public protest in berkeley waned considerably with the end of the vietnam war in 1975.
berkeley lies within telephone area code 510  -lrb-  until september 2, 1991, berkeley was part of the 415 telephone code that now covers only san francisco and marin counties  -rrb-  ,  and the postal zip codes are 94701 through 94710, 94712, and 94720 for the university of california campus . 
bolventor is the location of the famous jamaica inn coaching inn . 
bolventor  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a hamlet on bodmin moor in cornwall ,  england ,  united kingdom . 
the total area of bengal is 232,752  km—west bengal is and bangladesh  . 
north bengal is a term used for the north-western part of bangladesh and northern part of west bengal . 
west bengal is on the eastern bottleneck of india ,  stretching from the himalayas in the north to the bay of bengal in the south . 
the modern english name bengal is an exonym derived from the bengal sultanate period . 
most of the bengal region lies in the ganges-brahmaputra delta ,  but there are highlands in its north ,  northeast and southeast . 
bengal  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a geopolitical ,  cultural and historical region in south asia ,  specifically in the eastern part of the indian subcontinent at the apex of the bay of bengal . 
northeast bengal refers to the sylhet region ,  comprising sylhet division of bangladesh and the barak valley in the indian state of assam . 
newton says: `` one can find out and measure the true and absolute circular motion of the water '' . 
all observers agree that the surface of rotating water is curved . 
although the relative motion at this stage is the greatest ,  the surface of the water remains flat ,  indicating that the parts of the water have no tendency to recede from the axis of relative motion ,  despite proximity to the pail . 
in words ,  the surface of the water is parabolic in its dependence upon the radius . 
the potential energy is useful ,  for example ,  in understanding the concavity of the water surface in a rotating bucket . 
this change in shape would not be stable ,  and the water would not stay in our artificially contrived shape ,  but engage in a transient exploration of many shapes until non-ideal frictional forces introduced by sloshing ,  either against the sides of the bucket or by the non-ideal nature of the liquid ,  killed the oscillations and the water settled down to the equilibrium shape . 
the historic interest of the rotating bucket experiment is its usefulness in suggesting one can detect absolute rotation by observation of the shape of the surface of the water . 
 ''breviarium fidei ,  breviarium in psalmos ,  breviarium canonum ,  breviarium regularum '' . 
significant changes came in 1910 with the reform of the roman breviary by pope pius x . 
the latin word `` breviarium '' generally signifies `` abridgement ,  compendium '' . 
most breviaries published in the late 1950s and early 1960s used this `` pian psalter '' . 
the arrangement of the psalms in the rule of st .  benedict had a profound impact upon the breviaries used by secular and monastic clergy alike ,  until 1911 when pope st .  pius x introduced his reform of the roman breviary . 
the sarum or salisbury breviary itself was very widely used . 
finally ,  nicholas iii  -lrb-  pope 1277–1280 -rrb- adopted this version both for the curia and for the basilicas of rome ,  and thus made its position secure . 
pope pius xii introduced optional use of a new translation of the psalms from the hebrew to a more classical latin . 
in liturgical language specifically ,  `` breviary ''  -lrb-  `` breviarium ''  -rrb-  has a special meaning ,  indicating a book furnishing the regulations for the celebration of mass or the canonical office ,  and may be met with under the titles  `` breviarium ecclesiastici ordinis '' ,  or `` breviarium ecclesiæ romanæ '' . 
 -lrb-  skinner ,  1961, p .  389 -rrb- . 
skinner called his approach to the study of behavior radical behaviorism . 
modern behavioral psychologists have disputed skinner's `` superstition '' explanation for the behaviors he recorded . 
skinner's behavioral theory was largely set forth in his first book ,  `` behavior of organisms '' . 
skinner was born in susquehanna ,  pennsylvania ,  to grace and william skinner . 
noam chomsky ,  a prominent critic of skinner ,  published a review of skinner's `` verbal behavior '' two years after it was published . 
skinner called this the principle of reinforcement . 
skinner developed behavior analysis ,  the philosophy of that science he called radical behaviorism ,  and founded a school of experimental research psychology—the experimental analysis of behavior . 
however ,  in applied settings there has been a resurgence of interest in skinner's functional analysis of verbal behavior . 
the second question ,  `` how is operant behavior controlled ? `` 
in 1973, skinner was one of the signers of the humanist manifesto ii . 
 -lrb-  3 -rrb- how can very complex and seemingly novel behaviors be explained ? 
however ,  skinner recognized that a great deal of behavior ,  especially human behavior ,  cannot be accounted for by gradual shaping or the construction of response sequences . 
skinner suggests that any age-appropriate skill can be taught . 
chomsky also reviewed skinner's `` beyond freedom and dignity '' ,  using the same basic motives as his `` verbal behavior '' review . 
in 1936, skinner married yvonne  -lrb-  eve  -rrb-  blue . 
most behavior of humans cannot easily be described in terms of individual responses reinforced one by one ,  and skinner devoted a great deal of effort to the problem of behavioral complexity . 
among chomsky's criticisms were that skinner's laboratory work could not be extended to humans ,  that when it was extended to humans it represented 'scientistic' behavior attempting to emulate science but which was not scientific ,  that skinner was not a scientist because he rejected the hypothetico-deductive model of theory testing ,  and that skinner had no science of behavior . 
skinner received a phd from harvard in 1931, and remained there as a researcher until 1936.
in `` beyond freedom and dignity '' ,  skinner suggests that a technology of behavior could help to make a better society . 
writing in 1981, skinner pointed out that darwinian natural selection is ,  like reinforced behavior ,  `` selection by consequences . `` 
not only useful in teaching explicit skills ,  machines could also promote the development of a repertoire of behaviors that skinner called self-management . 
an operant conditioning chamber  -lrb-  also known as a `` skinner box ''  -rrb-  is a laboratory apparatus used in the experimental analysis of animal behavior . 
knight's all time coaching record is 902–371.
in 1971, indiana university hired knight as head coach . 
on february 4, 2008, knight announced his retirement . 
a number of knight's assistant coaches ,  players ,  and managers have gone on to be coaches . 
the 3-point shot was adopted by the ncaa in 1986, which was midway through knight's coaching career . 
knight's coaching also included a firm emphasis on academics . 
knight received a number of personal honors during and after his coaching career . 
following his dismissal from indiana ,  knight took a season off and was on the lookout for coaching vacancies . 
knight continued to live in lubbock after he retired . 
when knight came to texas tech in 2001, he gave $10,000 to the library ,  the first gift to the coach knight library fund which has now collected over $300,000.
texas tech's participation in the 2007 ncaa tournament gave knight more ncaa tournament appearances than any other coach . 
knight graduated with a degree in history and government in 1962.
knight quickly improved the program ,  which had not been to an ncaa tournament since 1996.
in 1972–73, knight's second year as coach ,  indiana won the big ten championship and reached the final four ,  but lost to ucla . 
knight's motion offense didn't take shape until he began coaching at indiana . 
mike silliman was another of knight's players at army ,  and knight was quoted as saying ,  `` mike silliman is the best player i have ever coached . `` 
knight himself appears in the movie and coaches against nolte in the film's climactic game . 
knight married the former nancy falk on april 17, 1963.
black metal is an extreme subgenre of heavy metal music . 
during the 1980s ,  several thrash metal and death metal bands formed a prototype for black metal . 
industrial black metal is a style of black metal that incorporates elements of industrial music . 
they were often speed metal or thrash metal bands . 
the second wave of black metal began in the early 1990s and was spearheaded by the norwegian black metal scene . 
symphonic black metal is a style of black metal that incorporates symphonic and orchestral elements . 
psychedelic black metal is a subgenre of black metal which employs the usage of psychedelic elements . 
the term `` black metal '' was coined by the english band venom with their second album `` black metal ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- . 
since the 1990s ,  different styles of black metal have emerged and some have melded norwegian-style black metal with other genres:
many black-metallers see `` christian black metal '' as an oxymoron and believe black metal cannot be christian . 
'unblack metal'  -lrb-  or 'christian black metal'  -rrb-  promotes christianity through its lyrics and imagery . 
the first wave of black metal refers to those bands during the 1980s who influenced the black metal sound and formed a prototype for the genre . 
black metal was originally a term for extreme metal bands with satanic lyrics and imagery . 
the imagery of black metal reflects its lyrics and ideology . 
blackened thrash metal ,  also known as black-thrash ,  is a fusion genre that combines elements of black metal and thrash metal . 
the early american black metal bands remained underground . 
melechesh and arallu perform a style they call `` mesopotamian black metal '' ,  a blend of black metal and mesopotamian folk music . 
the greek style—established by rotting christ ,  necromantia and varathron—has more traditional heavy metal and death metal traits than norwegian black metal . 
black metal tends to be misanthropic and hostile to modern society . 
the vast majority of black metal bands are not openly political ,  although there is said to be an undercurrent of romantic and ethnic nationalism in black metal . 
a wide range of political views are found in the black metal scene . 
norwegian christian band antestor adopted a black metal style in the late 1990s . 
another major influence on black metal was the swedish band bathory . 
however ,  current unblack metal bands such as crimson moonlight feel that black metal has changed from an ideological movement to a purely musical genre ,  and thus call their music 'black metal' . 
war metal  -lrb-  also known as war black metal or bestial black metal  -rrb-  is an aggressive ,  cacophonous ,  and chaotic subgenre of blackened death metal ,  described by `` rock hard '' journalist wolf-rüdiger mühlmann as `` rabid '' and `` hammering '' . 
melodic black-death  -lrb-  also known as blackened melodic death metal or melodic blackened death metal  -rrb-  is a genre of extreme metal that describes the style created when melodic death metal bands began being inspired by black metal and european romanticism . 
red and anarchist black metal  -lrb-  also known as rabm or anarchist black metal  -rrb-  promotes ideologies such as anarchism ,  green anarchism ,  or marxism . 
ambient black metal is a style of black metal which relies on heavy incorporation of atmospheric ,  sometimes dreamy textures ,  and is therefore less aggressive . 
blackened death metal is commonly death metal that incorporates musical ,  lyrical or ideological elements of black metal ,  such as an increased use of tremolo picking ,  anti-christian or satanic lyrical themes and chord progressions similar to those used in black metal . 
the controversy surrounding absurd drew attention to the german black metal scene . 
in 1996, blizzard acquired condor games ,  which had been working on the game `` diablo '' for blizzard at the time . 
shortly thereafter ,  blizzard released ``  '' . 
in july 2008 vivendi games merged with activision ,  using blizzard's name in the resulting company ,  activision blizzard . 
blizzard released its revamped battle . net service in 2009.
currently ,  blizzard has four main franchises: `` warcraft '' ,  `` diablo '' ,  `` starcraft '' ,  and `` overwatch '' . 
on november 23, 2004, blizzard released `` world of warcraft '' ,  a massively multiplayer online role-playing game . 
on november 11, 2009, blizzard required all `` world of warcraft '' accounts to switch over to battle . net accounts . 
blizzard has changed hands several times since then . 
shortly thereafter ,  blizzard shipped their breakthrough hit ``  '' . 
the warden client is known to be used with blizzard's online games such as `` diablo '' and `` world of warcraft '' ,  and the terms of service contain a clause consenting to the warden software's ram scans while a blizzard game is running . 
over the years ,  some former blizzard employees have moved on and established gaming companies of their own:
the service allows players to chat simultaneously with players from other blizzard games . 
blizzard entertainment has developed 19 games since 1991, in addition to developing 8 ports between 1992 and 1993; 11 of those games are in the `` warcraft '' ,  `` diablo '' ,  and `` starcraft '' series . 
in 2007, blizzard moved their headquarters to 16215 alton parkway in irvine ,  california . 
galileo agreed to do so . 
the next pope ,  clement viii ,  said of him ,  `` the church of god had not his equal in learning '' . 
upon the death of pope sixtus v in 1590, the count of olivares wrote to king philip iii of spain ,  `` bellarmine  .  .  .  would not do for a pope ,  for he is mindful only of the interests of the church and is unresponsive to the reasons of princes . `` 
he was a professor of theology and later rector of the roman college ,  and in 1602 became archbishop of capua . 
he entered the roman jesuit novitiate in 1560, remaining in rome three years . 
the term `` coming-of-age novel '' is sometimes used interchangeably with `` bildungsroman '' ,  but its use is usually wider and less technical . 
there are many variations and subgenres of `` bildungsroman '' that focus on the growth of an individual . 
in literary criticism ,  a bildungsroman  -lrb-  ; `` bildung '' ,  meaning `` education '' ,  and `` roman '' ,  meaning `` novel ''; english: `` novel of formation ,  education ,  culture ''; `` coming-of-age story ''  -rrb-  is a literary genre that focuses on the psychological and moral growth of the protagonist from youth to adulthood  -lrb-  coming of age  -rrb-  ,  in which character change is extremely important . 
also in the victorian era ,  the term `` confirmed bachelor '' denoted a man who was resolute to remain unmarried . 
by the later 19th century ,  the term `` bachelor '' had acquired the general sense of `` unmarried man '' . 
a bachelor is a man who is socially regarded as able to marry ,  but has not yet . 
background radiation is defined by the international atomic energy agency as `` dose or dose rate  -lrb-  or an observed measure related to the dose or dose rate  -rrb-  attributable to all sources other than the one -lrb-  s  -rrb-  specified . 
however ,  if no radiation source is specified as being of concern ,  then the total radiation dose measurement at a location is generally called the background radiation ,  and this is usually the case where an ambient dose rate is measured for environmental purposes . 
then ,  when macbeth approaches ,  banquo ,  having had dreams about macbeth's deeds ,  takes back his sword as a precaution in this case . 
many scholars see banquo as a foil and a contrast to macbeth . 
banquo is in a third of the play's scenes ,  as both a human and a ghost . 
banquo's status as a contrast to macbeth makes for some tense moments in the play . 
he appears again to macbeth in a vision granted by the three witches ,  wherein macbeth sees a long line of kings descended from banquo . 
scholars debate whether macbeth's vision of banquo is real or a hallucination . 
lord banquo  ,  the thane of lochaber ,  is a character in william shakespeare's 1606 play `` macbeth '' . 
banquo's ghost returns in a later scene ,  causing macbeth to react with alarm during a public feast . 
forty-seven british military personnel died during the war . 
the british army has seen action in major wars between the world's great powers ,  including the seven years' war ,  the napoleonic wars ,  the crimean war and the first and second world wars . 
the british army is the principal land warfare force of the united kingdom ,  a part of british armed forces . 
the british army contributed 50,000 troops to the coalition which fought iraq in the persian gulf war ,  and british forces controlled kuwait after its liberation . 
in 1982, the british army and the royal marines helped liberate the falkland islands during the conflict with argentina after that country's invasion of the british territory . 
when the first world war broke out in august 1914 the british army sent the british expeditionary force  -lrb-  bef  -rrb-  ,  consisting mainly of regular army troops ,  to france and belgium . 
after the second world war the british army was significantly reduced in size ,  although national service continued until 1960.
world war i was the most devastating in british military history ,  with nearly 800,000 men killed and over two million wounded . 
in the far east ,  the british army rallied against the japanese in the burma campaign and regained the british far eastern colonial possessions . 
 ,  the british army comprises just over 81,500 trained regular  -lrb-  full-time  -rrb-  personnel and just over 27,000 trained reserve  -lrb-  part-time  -rrb-  personnel . 
the field forces of the british army after the army 2020 reforms are organised in garrison as:
the modern british army traces back to 1707, with an antecedent in the english army that was created during the restoration in 1660.
the british army has been a volunteer force since national service ended during the 1960s . 
although the royal navy is widely regarded as vital to the rise of the british empire ,  the british army played an important role in the formation of colonies ,  protectorates and dominions in the americas ,  africa ,  asia ,  india and australasia . 
the british army historically included many units from what are now separate commonwealth `` realms '' . 
at that time there was only one english regiment of dragoons ,  and the scots greys eventually received the british army rank of 2nd dragoons . 
units raised in self-governing and crown colonies that are part of the british realm remain under uk control . 
the territorial ambitions of the french ,  however ,  led to the war of the spanish succession and the napoleonic wars . 
about 300 deaths during the conflict were attributed to the british army ,  including paramilitary troops and civilians . 
each british army unit has a set of flags ,  known as the colours—normally a regimental colour and a queen's colour  -lrb-  the union jack  -rrb-  . 
after 1700 british continental policy was to contain expansion by competing powers such as france and spain . 
mathematician pierre-simon laplace pioneered and popularised what is now called bayesian probability . 
the bayesian interpretation provides a standard set of procedures and formulae to perform this calculation . 
