there are few surviving sources on caligula and none of them paints caligula in a favourable light . 
in ad 39, relations between caligula and the roman senate deteriorated . 
in ad 38, caligula focused his attention on political and public reform . 
caligula's religious policy was a departure from that of his predecessors . 
agrippina and caligula's brother ,  nero ,  were banished in 29 ad on charges of treason . 
caligula's sister ,  agrippina the younger ,  wrote an autobiography that certainly included a detailed explanation of caligula's reign ,  but it too is lost . 
macro spoke well of caligula to tiberius ,  attempting to quell any ill will or suspicion the emperor felt towards caligula . 
following the death of tiberius ,  caligula succeeded his adoptive grandfather as emperor in ad 37.
historians describe a number of caligula's other desperate measures . 
some modern historians think that caligula suffered from hyperthyroidism . 
the history of caligula's reign is extremely problematic as only two sources contemporary with caligula have survived – the works of philo and seneca . 
a handful of other sources add a limited perspective on caligula . 
the bulk of what is known of caligula comes from suetonius and cassius dio . 
caligula responded by removing flaccus from his position and executing him . 
cluvius rufus was a senator involved in the assassination of caligula . 
in october 37 ad ,  caligula fell seriously ill ,  or perhaps was poisoned . 
at one time ,  there were detailed contemporaneous histories on caligula ,  but they are now lost . 
caligula  -lrb-  ; latin: `` gaius julius caesar augustus germanicus ''; 31 august 12 – 24 january 41 ad  -rrb-  was roman emperor from ad 37 to ad 41.
pliny the elder's `` natural history '' has a few brief references to caligula . 
in 33 ad ,  tiberius gave caligula an honorary quaestorship ,  a position he held until his rise to emperor . 
after the death of his father ,  caligula lived with his mother until her relations with tiberius deteriorated . 
seneca was almost put to death by caligula in ad 39 likely due to his associations with conspirators . 
caligula did not trust the prefect of egypt ,  aulus avilius flaccus . 
the adolescent caligula was then sent to live with his great-grandmother  -lrb-  and tiberius's mother  -rrb-  livia . 
the senate attempted to use caligula's death as an opportunity to restore the republic . 
philo describes the first seven months of caligula's reign as completely blissful . 
caligula would mock chaerea with names like `` priapus '' and `` venus '' . 
gaetulicus ,  a poet ,  produced a number of flattering writings about caligula ,  but they are lost . 
this idea was `` sharply '' criticized by church . 
rather ,  in correspondence with church  -lrb-  c .  1934–35 -rrb- ,  gödel proposed `` axiomatizing '' the notion of `` effective calculability ''; indeed ,  in a 1935 letter to kleene ,  church reported that:
thus post in his 1936 paper was also discounting kurt gödel's suggestion to church in 1934–35 that the thesis might be expressed as an axiom or set of axioms . 
in the 1930s ,  several independent attempts were made to formalize the notion of computability:
church and turing proved that these three formally defined classes of computable functions coincide: a function is λ-computable if and only if it is turing computable if and only if it is `` general recursive '' . 
but gödel offered no further guidance . 
in the course of studying the problem ,  church and his student stephen kleene introduced the notion of λ-definable functions ,  and they were able to prove that several large classes of functions frequently encountered in number theory were λ-definable . 
the process continued until all programs finished running . 
multiprogramming doesn't give any guarantee that a program will run in a timely manner . 
as a cooperatively multitasked system relies on each process regularly giving up time to other processes on the system ,  one poorly designed program can consume all of the cpu time for itself ,  either by performing extensive calculations or by busy waiting; both would cause the whole system to hang . 
in such systems a hierarchical interrupt system is coupled with process prioritization to ensure that key activities were given a greater share of available process time . 
early multitasking systems used applications that voluntarily ceded time to one another . 
cooperative multitasking is still used today on risc os systems . 
depending on the operating system ,  a task might be as large as an entire application program ,  or might be made up of smaller threads that carry out portions of the overall program . 
as multitasking greatly improved the throughput of computers ,  programmers started to implement applications as sets of cooperating processes  -lrb-  e .  g .  ,  one process gathering input data ,  one process processing input data ,  one process writing out results on disk  -rrb-  . 
conflict between chiang and li persisted . 
chiang and mao had a son ,  ching-kuo . 
chiang did not re-assume the presidency until 1 march 1950.
chiang played the soviets and americans against each other during the war . 
chiang developed relationships with other generals . 
it was said that chiang replied: `` under no circumstances ! `` 
chiang had uneasy relations with the tibetans . 
chiang kai-shek would never return to the mainland . 
chiang opposed li's plan of defense because it would have placed most of the troops still loyal to chiang under the control of li and chiang's other opponents in the central government . 
in guangdong ,  li attempted to create a new government composed of both chiang supporters and those opposed to chiang . 
chiang had absolutely no intention of ceasing the war against the communists . 
his great grandfather was chiang qi-zeng  -lrb-  jiang qizeng  -rrb-  蒋祈增 ,  his grandfather was chiang si-qian 蒋斯千 ,  his uncle was chiang zhao-hai 蔣肇海 ,  and his father was chiang zhao-cong  -lrb-  jiang zhaocong  -rrb-  蔣肇聰 . 
chiang kai-shek  -lrb-  ; 31 october 1887 – 5 april 1975 -rrb- ,  also known as generalissimo chiang or chiang chungcheng and romanized as chiang chieh-shih or jiang jieshi ,  was a politician and military leader who served as the leader of the republic of china between 1928 and 1975, first in mainland china until 1949 and then in taiwan until his death . 
 ''kai-shek ''/ ''jieshi '' soon became chiang's courtesy name  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
according to the memoirs of chen jieru ,  chiang's second wife ,  she contracted gonorrhea from chiang soon after their marriage . 
like mao ,  chiang is regarded as a controversial figure . 
however ,  he is still known as `` lord chiang ''  -lrb-  蔣公  -rrb-   -lrb-  without the title or space  -rrb-  ,  along with the name chiang chung-cheng ,  in taiwan . 
from 1928 to 1948, chiang served as the generalissimo of the national government of the republic of china  -lrb-  roc  -rrb-  . 
this is the name under which sun yat-sen knew him when chiang joined the republicans in kwangtung in the 1910s . 
in the west and in the soviet union ,  chiang kai-shek was known as the `` red general '' . 
in 1975, 26 years after chiang came to taiwan ,  he died in taipei at the age of 87.
chiang ,  as a nationalist and a confucianist ,  was against the iconoclasm of the may fourth movement . 
chiang never obtained either the photo or its negative . 
after the war ,  chiang appointed ma bufang as ambassador to saudi arabia . 
chiang personally dealt extensively with religions and power figures in china during his regime . 
in the 1950s chiang's airplanes dropped supplies to kuomintang muslim insurgents in amdo . 
chiang was succeeded as president by vice president yen chia-kan and as kuomintang party ruler by his son chiang ching-kuo ,  who retired chiang kai-shek's title of director-general and instead assumed the position of chairman . 
chiang has often been interpreted as being pro-capitalist ,  but this conclusion may be problematic . 
after chiang's resignation the vice-president of the roc ,  li zongren ,  became china's acting president . 
after chiang's death ,  the next president ,  chiang's son ,  chiang ching-kuo ,  and chiang ching-kuo's successor ,  lee teng-hui a native taiwanese ,  would ,  in the 1980s and 1990s ,  increase native taiwanese representation in the government and loosen the many authoritarian controls of the early era of roc control in taiwan . 
by this time yan was well known for his adaptability and chiang welcomed his appointment . 
in 1903, the 16-year-old chiang went to ningbo to be a student ,  and he chose a `` school name ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
in recent years ,  there has been an attempt to find a more moderate interpretation of chiang . 
these charges never resulted in a trial ,  and chiang was never jailed . 
chiang relieved li of the position as vice-president in the national assembly on march 1954.
several ,  like ma shaowu and ma hushan were loyal to chiang and kuomintang hardliners . 
finishing his schooling ,  chiang served in the imperial japanese army from 1909 to 1911.
in december ,  the manchurian warlord zhang xueliang pledged allegiance to chiang's government ,  completing chiang's nominal unification of china and ending the warlord era . 
in the united states and europe ,  chiang was often perceived negatively as the one who lost china to the communists . 
chiang kai-shek believed that these martyrs witnessed events on earth from heaven . 
chiang became a founding member of the kmt after the success  -lrb-  february 1912 -rrb- of the 1911 revolution . 
people also put portraits of chiang in their homes and in public on the streets . 
in a piston engine ,  it is the ratio between the volume of the cylinder and combustion chamber when the piston is at the bottom of its stroke ,  and the volume of the combustion chamber when the piston is at the top of its stroke . 
for example ,  a cylinder and its combustion chamber with the piston at the bottom of its stroke may contain 1000 cc of air  -lrb-  900 cc in the cylinder plus 100 cc in the combustion chamber  -rrb-  . 
the pope emerged as a figure above and out of the direct control of the holy roman emperor . 
the emperor's right to a substantial imbursement on the election of a bishop or abbot was specifically denied . 
it is accepted by the pushdown automaton formula_3 where formula_4 is defined as follows:
the language of all properly matched parentheses is generated by the grammar formula_9.
the set formula_8 is a context-sensitive language ,  but there does not exist a context-free grammar generating this language . 
however ,  if `` l '' is a context-free language and `` d '' is a regular language then both their intersection formula_27 and their difference formula_28 are context-free languages . 
further ,  for a given cfg ,  there is a direct way to produce a pushdown automaton for the grammar  -lrb-  and thereby the corresponding language  -rrb-  ,  though going the other way  -lrb-  producing a grammar given an automaton  -rrb-  is not as direct . 
see also parsing expression grammar as an alternative approach to grammar and parser . 
but there is no way to unambiguously parse strings in the  -lrb-  non-context-free  -rrb-  subset formula_8 which is the intersection of these two languages . 
caffeine is a central nervous system  -lrb-  cns  -rrb-  stimulant of the methylxanthine class . 
the project was started in july , 1984 as the flagship project of the 400-person microelectronics and computer technology corporation ,  a research consortium started by two dozen large united states based corporations `` to counter a then ominous japanese effort in ai ,  the so-called `` fifth-generation '' project . `` 
the objective of the cyc project was to codify ,  in machine-usable form ,  the millions of pieces of knowledge that compose human common sense . 
valderrama was a member of the colombia national football team from 1985 until 1998.
born in santa marta ,  colombia ,  valderrama began his career at unión magdalena of the colombian first division in 1981.
valderrama made his international debut on 27 october 1985, in a 3–0 defeat to paraguay in a 1986 world cup qualifying match ,  at the age of 24.
valderrama was the only colombian to feature in fifa's 125 top living football players list in march 2004.
some of valderrama's most impressive international performances came during the 1990 fifa world cup in italy ,  during which he served as colombia's captain . 
after spending most of his career playing club football in south america and europe ,  towards the end of his career valderrama played in major league soccer ,  joining the league in its first season . 
valderrama has also appeared in ea sports' fifa football video game series; he was named one of the ultimate team legend cards in `` fifa 15 '' . 
valderrama appeared on the cover of konami's `` international superstar soccer pro 98 '' . 
a caesar salad is a green salad of romaine lettuce and croutons dressed with lemon juice ,  olive oil ,  egg ,  worcestershire sauce ,  anchovies ,  garlic ,  dijon mustard ,  parmesan cheese ,  and black pepper . 
beaux was a member of philadelphia's the plastic club . 
eliza cecilia beaux was born on may 1, 1855 in philadelphia ,  pennsylvania . 
beaux won the mary smith prize at the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts exhibitions in 1885, 1887, 1891, and 1892.
miss beaux has done away entirely with sex gender in art . `` 
cecilia beaux died at the age of 87 on september 17, 1942, in gloucester ,  massachusetts . 
beaux was crippled after breaking her hip while walking in paris in 1924.
beaux and her art friends defended the old order ,  and many thought  -lrb-  and hoped  -rrb-  the new movement to be a passing fad ,  but it turned out to be a revolutionary turn in american art . 
though beaux was an individualist ,  comparisons to sargent would prove inevitable ,  and often favorable . 
in philadelphia ,  beaux's aunt emily married mining engineer william foster biddle ,  whom beaux would later describe as `` after my grandmother ,  the strongest and most beneficent influence in my life . `` 
beaux believed that the public ,  initially of mixed opinion about the `` new '' art ,  would ultimately reject it and return its favor to the pre-impressionists . 
1904 -rrb- was re-organized into the chrysler corporation . 
on june 10, 2009, substantially all of chrysler's assets were sold to `` new chrysler '' ,  organized as chrysler group llc . 
as a result ,  chrysler was sold to cerberus capital management and renamed chrysler llc in 2007.
imperial was folded back into the chrysler brand in 1971.
the chrysler company was founded by walter chrysler on june 6, 1925, when the maxwell motor company  -lrb-  est . 
in 1987, chrysler acquired american motors corporation  -lrb-  amc  -rrb-  ,  which brought the profitable jeep brand under the chrysler umbrella . 
chrysler struggled to adapt to the changing environment of the 1970s . 
eurostar also built the chrysler pt cruiser in 2001 and 2002.
eurostar ,  a joint venture between chrysler and steyr-daimler-puch ,  began producing the chrysler voyager in austria for european markets in 1992.
on december 16, 2014, chrysler group llc announced a name change to fca us llc . 
on january 21, 2014, fiat bought the remaining shares of chrysler owned by the veba worth $3.65 billion . 
this wider usage of `` london '' is documented as far back as 1888, when the county of london was created . 
following the battle of hastings ,  william the conqueror marched on london ``  -lrb-  reaching as far as southwark  -rrb- ``  ,  but failed to get across london bridge or to defeat the londoners . 
known as `` londinium '' ,  the roman legions established on the current site of the city of london around  43.
the city of london is a city and county that contains the historic centre and the primary central business district  -lrb-  cbd  -rrb-  of london . 
the romans built a bridge across the river ,  as early as 50 ad ,  near to today's london bridge . 
while london ,  and indeed england ,  were afterwards subjected to further periods of viking and danish raids and occupation ,  the establishment of the city of london and the kingdom of england prevailed . 
the plural forms are `` clitorises '' in english and `` clitorides '' in latin . 
subordinate females lick the clitorises of higher-ranked females as a sign of submission and obedience ,  but females also lick each other's clitorises as a greeting or to strengthen social bonds; in contrast ,  while all males lick the clitorises of dominant females ,  the females will not lick the penises of males because males are considered to be of lowest rank . 
he said the human clitoris `` could have evolved to be much more conspicuous if males had preferred sexual partners with larger brighter clitorises '' and that `` its inconspicuous design combined with its exquisite sensitivity suggests that the clitoris is important not as an object of male mate choice ,  but as a mechanism of female choice . `` 
ancient greek and roman sexuality additionally designated penetration as `` male-defined '' sexuality . 
we are living in a male society which has not sought change in women's role . `` 
because spider monkeys of south america have pendulous and erectile clitorises long enough to be mistaken for a penis ,  researchers and observers of the species look for a scrotum to determine the animal's sex; a similar approach is to identify scent-marking glands that may also be present on the clitoris . 
in may 2013, humanitarian group clitoraid launched the first annual international clitoris awareness week ,  from may 6 to may 12.
concerning other beliefs about the clitoris ,  hite  -lrb-  1976 and 1981 -rrb- found that ,  during sexual intimacy with a partner ,  clitoral stimulation was more often described by women as foreplay than as a primary method of sexual activity ,  including orgasm . 
in mammals ,  sexual differentiation is determined by the sperm that carries either an x or a y  -lrb-  male  -rrb-  chromosome . 
the male corpora cavernosa are homologous to the corpus cavernosum clitoridis  -lrb-  the female cavernosa  -rrb-  ,  the bulb of penis  -lrb-  also known as the bulb of the corpus spongiosum penis  -rrb-  is homologous to the vestibular bulbs beneath the labia minora ,  and the scrotum is homologous to the labia minora and labia majora . 
debate about whether orgasm was even necessary for women began in the victorian era ,  and freud's 1905 theory about the immaturity of clitoral orgasms  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  negatively affected women's sexuality throughout most of the 20th century . 
the most effective sexual stimulation of the organ is usually manually or orally  -lrb-  cunnilingus  -rrb-  ,  which is often referred to as direct clitoral stimulation; in cases involving sexual penetration ,  these activities may also be referred to as additional or assisted clitoral stimulation . 
while the bulbs are considered the equivalent of the male spongiosum ,  they do not completely encircle the urethra . 
the authors found that the students' belief that the inner portion of the vagina is the most sexually sensitive part of the female body correlated with negative attitudes toward masturbation and strong support for sexual myths . 
meredith l .  chivers stated that `` lloyd views female orgasm as an ontogenetic leftover; women have orgasms because the urogenital neurophysiology for orgasm is so strongly selected for in males that this developmental blueprint gets expressed in females without affecting fitness '' and this is similar to `` males having nipples that serve no fitness-related function . `` 
drugs may cause or affect clitoral priapism . 
additionally ,  the clitoris is very sensitive after orgasm ,  making further stimulation initially painful for some women . 
she reiterated that the vestibular bulbs appear to be part of the clitoris and that the distal urethra and vagina are intimately related structures ,  although they are not erectile in character ,  forming a tissue cluster with the clitoris that appears to be the location of female sexual function and orgasm . 
with regard to the y-shape of the cavernosa – crown ,  body ,  and legs – the body accounts for much more of the structure in men ,  and the legs are stubbier; typically ,  the cavernosa are longer and thicker in males than in females . 
ethologist jonathan balcombe stated that female bonobos rub their clitorises together rapidly for ten to twenty seconds ,  and this behavior ,  `` which may be repeated in rapid succession ,  is usually accompanied by grinding ,  shrieking ,  and clitoral engorgement ''; he added that ,  on average ,  they engage in this practice `` about once every two hours '' ,  and as bonobos sometimes mate face-to-face ,  `` evolutionary biologist marlene zuk has suggested that the position of the clitoris in bonobos and some other primates has evolved to maximize stimulation during sexual intercourse '' . 
research indicates that clitoral tissue extends into the vagina's anterior wall . 
general statistics indicate that 70–80 percent of women require direct clitoral stimulation  -lrb-  consistent manual ,  oral or other concentrated friction against the external parts of the clitoris  -rrb-  to reach orgasm . 
the clitoris is the human female's most sensitive erogenous zone and generally the primary anatomical source of human female sexual pleasure . 
often ,  a girl is not considered an adult in a fgm-practicing society unless she has undergone fgm ,  and the `` removal of the clitoris and labia – viewed by some as the `` male parts '' of a woman's body – is thought to enhance the girl's femininity ,  often synonymous with docility and obedience '' . 
abnormal enlargement of the clitoris may also be referred to as `` clitoromegaly '' ,  but clitoromegaly is more commonly seen as a congenital anomaly of the genitalia . 
the area near the entrance of the vagina  -lrb-  the lower third  -rrb-  contains nearly 90 percent of the vaginal nerve endings ,  and there are areas in the anterior vaginal wall and between the top junction of the labia minora and the urethra that are especially sensitive ,  but intense sexual pleasure ,  including orgasm ,  solely from vaginal stimulation is occasional or otherwise absent because the vagina has significantly fewer nerve endings than the clitoris . 
the clitoral hood projects at the front of the labia commissure ,  where the edges of the labia majora  -lrb-  outer lips  -rrb-  meet at the base of the pubic mound; it is partially formed by fusion of the upper part of the external folds of the labia minora  -lrb-  inner lips  -rrb-  and covers the glans and external shaft . 
a 2006 baskin et al . 
the ancient greeks ,  ancient romans ,  and greek and roman generations up to and throughout the renaissance ,  were aware that male and female sex organs are anatomically similar ,  but prominent anatomists ,  notably galen  -lrb-  129 – c .  200 ad  -rrb-  and vesalius  -lrb-  1514–1564 -rrb- ,  regarded the vagina as the structural equivalent of the penis ,  except for being inverted; vesalius argued against the existence of the clitoris in normal women ,  and his anatomical model described how the penis corresponds with the vagina ,  without a role for the clitoris . 
persistent genital arousal disorder  -lrb-  pgad  -rrb-  results in a spontaneous ,  persistent ,  and uncontrollable genital arousal in women ,  unrelated to any feelings of sexual desire . 
's assessment of the bulbs' anatomy ,  they conclude that the bulbs `` arch over the distal urethra ,  outlining what might be appropriately called the 'bulbar urethra' in women . `` 
he is commonly known as the `` founder of chicago '' . 
the chicago loop is the central business district ,  but chicago is also a city of neighborhoods . 
chicago has several other contemporary and jazz dance troupes ,  such as the hubbard street dance chicago and chicago dance crash . 
chicago is a major world convention destination . 
chicago  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the city of chicago ,  is the third most populous city in the united states . 
the south side contains most of the facilities of the port of chicago . 
chicago has a distinctive fine art tradition . 
academically ,  chicago has been influential through the chicago school of economics ,  which fielded some 12 nobel prize winners . 
on august 12, 1833, the town of chicago was organized with a population of about 200.
as of the 2010 census ,  there were 2,695,598 people with 1,045,560 households living in chicago . 
chicago gave its name to the chicago school and was home to the prairie school ,  two movements in architecture . 
chicago was also the site of the schwinn bicycle company . 
chicago was the first american city to have a homosexual-rights organization . 
the first two parliament of the world's religions in 1893 and 1993 were held in chicago . 
chicago has the third-largest lgbt population in the united states . 
the potawatomi were forcibly removed from their land after the treaty of chicago in 1833.
in 1983, harold washington became the first black mayor of chicago . 
today ,  chicago's skyline is among the world's tallest and densest . 
when chicago was founded in 1837, most of the early building was around the mouth of the chicago river ,  as can be seen on a map of the city's original 58 blocks . 
during its first hundred years ,  chicago was one of the fastest-growing cities in the world . 
other live-music genre which are part of the city's cultural heritage include chicago blues ,  chicago soul ,  jazz ,  and gospel . 
chicago is located in northeastern illinois on the southwestern shores of lake michigan . 
chicago also has a nationally televised thanksgiving parade that occurs annually . 
the city beautiful movement inspired chicago's boulevards and parkways . 
a 2007 report on the chicago music industry by the university of chicago cultural policy center ranked chicago third among metropolitan u . s .  areas in `` size of music industry '' and fourth among all u . s .  cities in `` number of concerts and performances '' . 
chicago contains a number of large ,  outdoor works by well-known artists . 
as in the rest of the state of illinois ,  chicago forms part of the central time zone . 
more than 400 neighborhood festivals are celebrated annually in chicago ,  most during the warm summer months . 
the chicago suburb of oak park was home to famous architect frank lloyd wright ,  who had designed the robie house located near the university of chicago . 
chicago's population declined in the latter half of the 20th century ,  from over 3.6 million in 1950 down to under 2.7 million by 2010.
the theme of the fair was technological innovation over the century since chicago's founding . 
continuing racial tensions and violence ,  such as the chicago race riot of 1919, also occurred . 
in 2016, chicago was ranked the sixth-most walkable large city in the united states . 
as a result ,  the p5 pentium significantly outperformed other cpus in the game . 
however ,  it was still considerably slower than the new and completely redesigned p5 pentium and p6 pentium pro-pentium iii fpus . 
compatibility with the pentium was improved in the 6x86mx ,  by adding a time stamp counter to support the p5 pentium's rdtsc instruction . 
the `` 6x86 ''  -lrb-  codename m1 -rrb- was released by cyrix in 1996.
the 6x86 and 6x86l weren't completely compatible with the intel p5 pentium instruction set and is not multi-processor capable . 
it is especially used in libraries in india . 
colon classification  -lrb-  cc  -rrb-  is a system of library classification developed by s .  r .  ranganathan . 
censuses have evolved in their use of technology with the latest censuses ,  the 2010 round ,  using many new types of computing . 
historical censuses used crude enumeration assuming absolute accuracy . 
an important aspect of the census process is to evaluate the quality of the data . 
unfortunately ,  many countries have outdated or inaccurate data about their populations and therefore ,  without accurate data are unable to address the needs of their population . 
several countries have used a system which is known as short form/long form . 
a particular problem here are students who often have a term time and family address . 
the cotswolds lie between the m5, m40 and m4 motorways . 
some 38 million day visits were made to the cotswold tourism area that year . 
unemployment in the cotswold district was among the lowest in the country . 
the cotswolds conservation board has the task of conserving and enhancing the aonb . 
the cotswolds  -lrb-    ,    -rrb-  is an area in south central england comprising the cotswold hills ,  a range of rolling hills which rise from the meadows of the upper thames to an escarpment ,  known as the cotswold edge ,  above the severn valley and evesham vale . 
to the south the cotswolds ,  with the characteristic uplift of the cotswold edge ,  reach beyond bath ,  and towns such as chipping sodbury and marshfield share elements of cotswold character . 
cotswold stone is a yellow oolitic jurassic limestone . 
the hills give their name to the cotswold local-government district ,  formed on 1 april 1974, which administers over half of the area . 
designated as an area of outstanding natural beauty  -lrb-  aonb  -rrb-  in 1966, the cotswolds covers and is the second largest protected landscape in england  -lrb-  second to the lake district  -rrb-  and the largest aonb . 
the area is characterised by attractive small towns and villages built of the underlying cotswold stone  -lrb-  a yellow oolitic limestone  -rrb-  . 
the cotswold way is a long-distance footpath ,  just over long ,  running the length of the aonb ,  mainly on the edge of the cotswold escarpment with views over the severn valley and the vale of evesham . 
the cotswold voluntary wardens service was established in 1968 to help conserve and enhance the area ,  and now has more than 300 wardens . 
the 2003–04 season ,  the last with delneri at the helm ,  saw chievo finish ninth . 
the 2004–05 season is remembered as one of the toughest ever in chievo's history . 
in its 2001–02, chievo's serie a debut season ,  the team was most critics' choice for an instant return to serie b . 
wins by parma ,  siena and reggina condemned chievo to serie b for the 2007–08 season after six seasons in the top flight . 
the return match ,  played on 28 september in verona ,  although won by chievo 2–1, resulted in a 3–2 aggregate loss and the club's elimination from the competition . 
in 2002–03, chievo debuted at the european level but were eliminated in the first round by red star belgrade . 
context switches are usually computationally intensive ,  and much of the design of operating systems is to optimize the use of context switches . 
the process of context switching can have a negative impact on system performance ,  although the size of this effect depends on the nature of the switch being performed . 
 ''lalance '' chakra is situated at the base of the mouth and is associated with vishuddha chakra
the more common and most studied esoteric system incorporates six major chakras along with a seventh center generally not regarded as a chakra . 
the esoteric traditions in buddhism generally teach four chakras . 
these texts teach many different chakra theories . 
rudolf steiner considered the chakra system to be dynamic and evolving . 
the chakras are traditionally considered meditation aids . 
below are the common new age description of these six chakras and the seventh point known as sahasrara . 
chakras and their importance are posited to reside in the psyche . 
many systems include myriad minor chakras throughout the body . 
the chakra theories of buddhism and hinduism differs from the historic chinese system of meridians in acupuncture . 
chakras  -lrb-  sanskrit: चक्र ,  iast: cakra ,  pali: cakka ,  lit . 
in jainism ,  the term `` chakra '' also means `` wheel '' and appears in various context in its ancient literature . 
the `` chakra '' in the sense of four or more vital energy centers appear in the medieval era hindu and buddhist texts . 
avalon translated the hindu text `` ṣaṭ-cakra-nirūpaṇa '' meaning the examination  -lrb-  nirūpaṇa  -rrb-  of the six  -lrb-  ṣaṭ  -rrb-  chakras  -lrb-  cakra  -rrb-  . 
these medieval buddhist texts mention only four chakras ,  while later hindu texts such as the `` kubjikāmata '' and `` kaulajñānanirnaya '' expanded the list to many more . 
the term clone ,  invented by j . 
molecular cloning refers to the process of making multiple molecules . 
in an ionic liquid . 
a cellulase may function to cleave the primer from the mature chain . 
cellulose contains 44.44% carbon ,  6.17% hydrogen ,  and 49.39% oxygen . 
the cellulose content of cotton fiber is 90% ,  that of wood is 40–50% ,  and that of dried hemp is approximately 57% . 
vapor bubbling of intermediate liquid cellulose produces aerosols ,  which consist of short chain anhydro-oligomers derived from the melt . 
compared to starch ,  cellulose is also much more crystalline . 
plant-derived cellulose is usually found in a mixture with hemicellulose ,  lignin ,  pectin and other substances ,  while bacterial cellulose is quite pure ,  has a much higher water content and higher tensile strength due to higher chain lengths . 
cellulose is also soluble in many kinds of ionic liquids . 
in addition ,  cellulose is represented by the difference between acid detergent fiber  -lrb-  adf  -rrb-  and acid detergent lignin  -lrb-  adl  -rrb-  . 
many properties of cellulose depend on its chain length or degree of polymerization ,  the number of glucose units that make up one polymer molecule . 
cellulose synthesis requires chain initiation and elongation ,  and the two processes are separate . 
the metropolitan state is the state that rules the colony . 
unlike a puppet state or satellite state ,  a colony has no independent international representation ,  and its top-level administration is under direct control of the metropolitan state . 
escamilla later made additional videos and embarked on lecture tours to promote his claims . 
after attending a lecture by jose escamilla ,  ufo investigator robert sheaffer wrote that `` some of his “rods” were obviously insects zipping across the field at a high angular rate '' and others appeared to be “appendages” which were birds' wings blurred by the camera exposure . 
however ,  these artifacts appear naturally in video and outdoor photography as the result of an optical illusion due to motion blur ,  especially in interlaced video recording ,  and are typically afterimage trails of flying insects and their wingbeats . 
early columns were constructed of stone ,  some out of a single piece of stone . 
some of the most elaborate columns in the ancient world were those of the persians ,  especially the massive stone columns erected in persepolis . 
one of the most important type are the papyriform columns . 
for an axially loaded straight column with any end support conditions ,  the equation of static equilibrium ,  in the form of a differential equation ,  can be solved for the deflected shape and critical load of the column . 
egyptian columns are famously present in the great hypostyle hall of karnak  -lrb-  circa 1224 bc  -rrb-  ,  where 134 columns are lined up in 16 rows ,  with some columns reaching heights of 24 metres . 
a column might also be a decorative element not needed for structural purposes; many columns are `` engaged '' ,  that is to say form part of a wall . 
carmilla and laura grow to be very close friends ,  but occasionally carmilla's mood abruptly changes . 
while the general and laura are alone in the ruined chapel ,  carmilla appears . 
during carmilla's stay ,  laura has nightmares of a large cat-like beast entering her room . 
carmilla bursts out in rage and scolds laura ,  complaining that the hymn hurts her ears . 
as with `` dracula '' ,  critics have looked for the sources used in the writing of `` carmilla '' . 
carmilla appears injured after her carriage accident ,  but her mysterious mother informs laura's father that her journey is urgent and cannot be delayed . 
this story was retold by lefanu and adapted into the thirteenth chapter of carmilla
the general explains that carmilla is also millarca ,  both anagrams for the original name of the vampire mircalla ,  countess karnstein . 
carmilla suggests that she might be descended from the karnsteins even though the family died out centuries before . 
a clitoridectomy is often done to remove malignancy or necrosis of the clitoris . 
there is a theory that the term took on its present meaning from a group of ministers formed in 1668 - the `` cabal ministry '' of king charles ii of england . 
it can also refer to a secret plot ,  or a clique of people ,  or may be used as a verb  -lrb-  to form a cabal or to conspire secretly  -rrb-  . 
cyt `` c '' . 
in the process of oxidative phosphorylation ,  a globular cytochrome c protein is involved in the electron transfer from the membrane-bound complex iii to complex iv . 
cytochromes are proteins containing heme as a cofactor . 
the album reached the top 5 in australia and new zealand . 
it topped the album chart in new zealand and made number 2 in australia and number 3 in the uk . 
 ''intriguer '' topped the australian album chart ,  reached number 3 in new zealand and number 12 in the uk . 
in 2006 neil finn asked nick seymour to play bass on his third solo album . 
neil and tim finn were each awarded an obe in june 1993 for their contributions to the music of new zealand . 
by contrast ,  the album had limited success in the us ,  only reaching number 83 on the billboard 200 album chart . 
since the band reunited ,  seymour has again designed their album covers . 
in june 1993 the new zealand government recommended that the queen award an obe to neil and tim finn for their contribution to the music of new zealand . 
the band released one album ,  2003's `` handheld torch '' ,  which was produced by seymour . 
later band members included neil finn's brother ,  tim finn ,  and americans mark hart and matt sherrod . 
in 2006, the group re-formed with drummer matt sherrod and released two further albums  -lrb-  in 2007 and 2010 -rrb- ,  each of which reached number one on australia's album chart . 
as the primary songwriter for the band ,  neil finn has always set the tone for the band's sound . 
tim finn had resumed his solo career after leaving the group in 1992 and he also worked with neil on a second finn brothers album ,  `` everyone is here '' ,  which was released in 2004.
 ''recurring dream '' contained four songs from each of the band's studio albums ,  along with three new songs . 
seymour said that after a month he contacted finn and they agreed that he would return to the band . 
in 1912 colette married henry de jouvenel ,  the editor of `` le matin '' . 
both films focus on colette's life in her twenties ,  her marriage to her first husband ,  and the publication of her first novels under his name . 
colette was most widely known for her 1944 novella `` gigi ''  -lrb-  1944 -rrb- ,  which subsequently was the basis for the film and the lerner and loewe stage production of the same name . 
colette  -lrb-  ; sidonie-gabrielle colette ,  28 january 1873 – 3 august 1954 -rrb- was a french author and woman of letters nominated for the nobel prize in literature in 1948; also known as a mime ,  actress ,  and journalist . 
by this time colette was frequently acclaimed as france's greatest woman writer . 
in 1920 colette published `` chéri '' ,  portraying love between an older woman and a much younger man . 
in 1893, colette married henry gauthier-villars  -lrb-  1859 – 1931 -rrb- ,  a well-known author and publisher who used the pen name `` willy ''  ,  and her first four novels – the four claudine stories: `` claudine à l'école ''  -lrb-  1900 -rrb- ,  `` claudine à paris ''  -lrb-  1901 -rrb- ,  `` claudine en ménage ''  -lrb-  1902 -rrb- ,  and `` claudine s'en va ''  -lrb-  1903 -rrb- – appeared under his name . 
alston also created sculptures . 
eventually alston left commercial work to focus on his own artwork . 
during the 1940s alston also took occasional art classes ,  studying under alexander kostellow . 
 ''symbol ''  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- relates to picasso's `` guernica '' ,  which was a favorite work of alston's . 
the civil rights movement of the 1960s was a major influence on alston . 
jazz was an important influence in alston's work and social life ,  which he expressed in such works as `` jazz ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- and `` harlem at night '' . 
originally hired as an easel painter ,  in 1935 alston became the first african-american supervisor to work for the wpa's federal art project  -lrb-  fap  -rrb-  in new york . 
charles henry alston was born on november 28, 1907, in charlotte ,  north carolina ,  to reverend primus priss alston and anna elizabeth  -lrb-  miller  -rrb-  alston ,  as the youngest of five children . 
in 1913 anna alston remarried ,  to harry bearden ,  brother of romare bearden's father . 
inspired by his trip south ,  alston began his `` family series '' in the 1940s . 
in 1963, alston co-founded spiral with his cousin romare bearden and hale woodruff . 
for the years 1942–43 alston was stationed in the army at fort huachuca in arizona . 
chromatin is a complex of dna ,  rna ,  and protein found in eukaryotic cells . 
chromatin relaxation occurs rapidly at the site of a dna damage . 
when the chromatin decondenses ,  the dna is open to entry of molecular machinery . 
 -lrb-  see mechanical properties of dna .   -rrb- 
in general ,  there are three levels of chromatin organization:
the acetylation of these tails would make the chromatin ends neutral ,  allowing for dna access . 
the nucleosomes bind dna non-specifically ,  as required by their function in general dna packaging . 
the basic repeat element of chromatin is the nucleosome ,  interconnected by sections of linker dna ,  a far shorter arrangement than pure dna in solution . 
this then allows recruitment of the dna repair enzyme mre11, to initiate dna repair ,  within 13 seconds . 
on the other hand ,  if the condition number is small then the error in `` x '' will not be much bigger than the error in `` b '' . 
let `` e '' be the error in `` b '' . 
the ratio of the relative error in the solution to the relative error in `` b '' is
only one producer of the cheese is now based in cheddar itself ,  the cheddar gorge cheese co . 
additionally ,  some versions of cheddar cheese are smoked . 
the cheddar cheese name is used internationally; its name does not have a pdo ,  but the use of the name `` west country farmhouse cheddar '' does . 
the slow food movement has created a cheddar presidium ,  claiming that only three cheeses should be called `` original cheddar '' . 
much of the cheddar cheese in new zealand is factory produced . 
cheddar has been produced since at least the 12th century . 
cheddar produced in orkney is registered as an eu protected geographical indication under the name `` orkney scottish island cheddar '' . 
cheddar cheese traditionally had to be made within of wells cathedral . 
the cheese originates from the village of cheddar in somerset ,  south west england . 
some processed cheeses or `` cheese foods '' are called `` cheddar flavored '' . 
compared to the other orders ,  the tuscan order looks the most solid . 
the composite order is a mixed order ,  combining the volutes of the ionic with the leaves of the corinthian order . 
the romans adapted all the greek orders and also developed two orders of their own ,  basically modifications of greek orders . 
this means that the doric order was the order of the ground floor ,  the ionic order was used for the middle story ,  while the corinthian or the composite order was used for the top story . 
sometimes the doric order is considered the earliest order ,  but there is no evidence to support this . 
both the doric and the ionic order appear to have originated in wood . 
there are three distinct orders in ancient greek architecture: doric ,  ionic ,  and corinthian . 
as a result ,  they appear lighter than the greek orders . 
there are names for all the many parts of the orders . 
the greek forms of the doric order come without an individual base . 
the doric order originated on the mainland and western greece . 
at an early age ,  catherine was considered a suitable wife for arthur ,  prince of wales ,  heir apparent to the english throne ,  due to the english ancestry she inherited from her mother . 
catherine of aragon  -lrb-  ; 16 december 1485 – 7 january 1536 -rrb- was queen of england from june 1509 until may 1533 as the first wife of king henry viii; she was previously princess of wales as the wife of henry's elder brother arthur . 
the daughter of isabella i of castile and ferdinand ii of aragon ,  catherine was three years old when she was betrothed to arthur ,  prince of wales ,  heir apparent to the english throne . 
during that time the english won the battle of flodden ,  an event in which catherine played an important part with an emotional speech about english courage . 
consequently ,  she was third cousin of her father-in-law ,  henry vii of england ,  and fourth cousin of her mother-in-law elizabeth of york . 
catherine's second wedding took place on 11 june 1509, seven years after prince arthur's death . 
but at the anode  -lrb-  positive  -rrb-  end of the tube ,  the glass of the tube itself began to glow . 
over time ,  the air was absorbed by the walls of the tube ,  and it stopped working . 
cathode rays  -lrb-  electron beam or e-beam  -rrb-  are streams of electrons observed in vacuum tubes . 
geissler tubes had enough air in them that the electrons could only travel a tiny distance before colliding with an atom . 
when they reached the anode end of the tube ,  they were traveling so fast that ,  although they were attracted to it ,  they often flew past the anode and struck the back wall of the tube . 
thus the ionized air was electrically conductive and an electric current flowed through the tube . 
these were called geissler tubes ,  similar to today's neon signs . 
cathode rays are so named because they are emitted by the negative electrode ,  or cathode ,  in a vacuum tube . 
what was happening was that as more air was pumped from the tube ,  the electrons knocked out of the cathode when positive ions struck it could travel farther ,  on average ,  before they struck a gas atom . 
the electrode through which conventional current flows the other way ,  into the device ,  is termed an anode . 
the anodic current is the flow of electrons into the anode from a species in solution . 
in an electrolytic cell ,  the cathode is where the negative polarity is applied to drive the cell . 
conventional current flow is from anode to cathode outside of the cell or device  -lrb-  with electrons moving in the opposite direction  -rrb-  ,  regardless of the cell or device type and operating mode . 
the cathodic current ,  in electrochemistry ,  is the flow of electrons from the cathode interface to a species in solution . 
in the pal system ,  the color subcarrier is 4.43 mhz above the video carrier ,  while in the ntsc system it is 3.58 mhz above the video carrier . 
chrominance is represented by the u-v color plane in pal and secam video signals ,  and by the i-q color plane in ntsc . 
in composite video signals ,  the u and v signals modulate a color subcarrier signal ,  and the result is referred to as the chrominance signal; the phase and amplitude of this modulated chrominance signal correspond approximately to the hue and saturation of the color . 
the presence of chrominance in a video signal is indicated by a color burst signal transmitted on the back porch ,  just after horizontal synchronization and before each line of video starts . 
the field separated princeton from the small nearby town . 
sometimes the lands on which company office buildings sit ,  along with the buildings ,  are called campuses . 
the word derives from a latin word for `` field '' and was first used to describe the large field adjacent nassau hall of the college of new jersey  -lrb-  now princeton university  -rrb-  in 1774.
some other american colleges later adopted the word to describe individual fields at their own institutions ,  but `` campus '' did not yet describe the whole university property . 
the `` lath '' ,  also called the `` prod '' ,  is the bow of the crossbow . 
a crossbow is essentially a bow mounted on an elongated frame  -lrb-  called a tiller or stock  -rrb-  with a built-in mechanism that holds the drawn bow string ,  as well as a trigger mechanism that allows the string to be released . 
the `` stock '' is the wooden body on which the bow is mounted ,  although the medieval `` tiller '' is also used . 
the earliest european designs featured a transverse slot in the top surface of the frame ,  down into which the string was placed . 
carbamazepine is typically used for the treatment of seizure disorders and neuropathic pain . 
regarding the person of christ and the hypostatic union ,  chalcedonian creed affirmed the notion that christ is `` one person '' ,  having `` one hypostasis '' . 
the definition defines that christ is `` acknowledged in two natures '' ,  which `` come together into one person and one hypostasis '' . 
the christological notions of `` one person ''  -lrb-  monoprosopic—having one `` prosopon ''/greek term for `` person ''  -rrb-  and `` one hypostasis ''  -lrb-  monohypostatic—having one hypostasis  -rrb-  were stated explicitly ,  in order to emphasize council's anti-nestorian positions . 
there are also approximate conservation laws . 
the total amount of some conserved quantity in the universe could remain unchanged if an equal amount were to appear at one point `` a '' and simultaneously disappear from another separate point `` b '' . 
a stronger form of conservation law requires that ,  for the amount of a conserved quantity at a point to change ,  there must be a flow ,  or `` flux '' of the quantity into or out of the point . 
where ∇⋅ is the divergence operator ,  `` ρ '' is the density of `` q ''  -lrb-  amount per unit volume  -rrb-  ,  j is the flux of `` q ''  -lrb-  amount crossing a unit area in unit time  -rrb-  ,  and `` t '' is time . 
some conservation laws are partial ,  in that they hold for some processes but not for others . 
it states that the amount of the conserved quantity at a point or within a volume can only change by the amount of the quantity which flows in or out of the volume . 
in continuum mechanics ,  the most general form of an exact conservation law is given by a continuity equation . 
car talk is a peabody award-winning radio talk show that was broadcast weekly on npr stations and elsewhere . 
at the end of the show ,  ray warned the audience ,  `` don't drive like my brother ! `` 
in 1986, npr decided to distribute their show nationally . 
in 1977, radio station wbur-fm in boston scheduled a panel of local car mechanics to discuss car repairs on one of its programs ,  but only tom magliozzi showed up . 
the show was produced from 1977 to october 2012, when the magliozzi brothers retired . 
at one point in the show ,  often after the break ,  ray usually stated that: `` support for this show is provided by , ``  followed by an absurd fundraiser . 
in 1992, `` car talk '' won a peabody award ,  saying `` each week ,  master mechanics tom and ray magliozzi provide useful information about preserving and protecting our cars . 
 ''car talk '' was presented in the form of a call-in radio show: listeners called in with questions related to motor vehicle maintenance and repair . 
the council of chalcedon  -lrb-    -rrb-  was a church council held from 8 october to 1 november ,  451, at chalcedon . 
this was reaffirmed at the first council of constantinople  -lrb-  381 -rrb- and the council of ephesus  -lrb-  431 -rrb- . 
the near-immediate result of the council was a major schism . 
the council of chalcedon was convened by emperor marcian ,  with the reluctant approval of pope leo the great ,  to set aside the 449 second council of ephesus which was named the `` latrocinium '' or `` robber council '' by pope leo . 
the eastern orthodox churches have ,  and continue to view the council as a power struggle by the church of rome ,  given the prominence in theology ,  spirituality of the oriental orthodox churches in the early church and during the first ecumenical councils . 
the subsequent fury of the west over the second council of ephesus was demonstrated in its rather impulsive description of it as a `` robber council '' . 
however ,  fearing that withholding rome's approval would be interpreted as a rejection of the entire council ,  in 453 the pope confirmed the council's canons with a protest against the 28th . 
the emperor asked leo to preside over the council ,  but leo again chose to send legates in his place . 
the council of nicaea in 325 had noted that the sees of alexandria ,  antioch ,  and rome should have primacy over other ,  lesser dioceses . 
the eastern orthodox church commemorates the `` holy fathers of the 4th ecumenical council ,  who assembled in chalcedon '' on the sunday on or after july 13;
canon 28 grants equal privileges  -lrb-  ``  ''  -rrb-  to constantinople as of rome because constantinople is the new rome as renewed by canon 36 of the quinisext council . 
in a canon of disputed validity ,  the council of chalcedon also elevated the see of constantinople to a position `` second in eminence and power to the bishop of rome '' . 
the dogmatic definitions of the council are recognized as normative by the eastern orthodox and catholic churches ,  as well by certain other western churches; also ,  most protestants agree that the council's teachings regarding the trinity and the incarnation are orthodox doctrine which must be adhered to . 
the canadian football field is long and wide ,  within which the goal areas are deep ,  and the goal lines are apart . 
the canadian field width was one rule that was not based on american rules ,  as the canadian game was played in wider fields and stadiums that were not as narrow as the american stadiums . 
play begins at the start of each half with one team place-kicking the ball from its own 35-yard line . 
at each goal line is a set of goalposts ,  which consist of two `` uprights '' joined by an crossbar which is above the goal line . 
the sides of the field are marked by white sidelines ,  the goal line is marked in white or yellow ,  and white lines are drawn laterally across the field every from the goal line . 
canadian football is played at several levels in canada; the top league is the professional nine-team canadian football league  -lrb-  cfl  -rrb-  . 
canadian football has mostly been confined to canada ,  with the united states being the only other country to have hosted high-level canadian football games . 
the cfl is the most popular and only major professional canadian football league . 
each play constitutes a `` down '' . 
great achievements in canadian football are enshrined in the canadian football hall of fame located in hamilton ,  ontario . 
the canadian major football league is the governing body for the semi-professional game . 
the calendar had a 365.2425-day year ,  identical to the gregorian calendar . 
the traditional chinese calendar  -lrb-  officially known as the rural calendar   -rrb-  ,  or former calendar  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  traditional calendar  -lrb-    -rrb-  or lunar calendar  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a lunisolar calendar which reckons years ,  months and days according to astronomical phenomena . 
these calendars are known as the six ancient calendars  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or quarter-remainder calendars ,   -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  since all calculate a year as days long . 
the present traditional calendar follows the shíxiàn calendar ,  except:
the first lunisolar calendar was the zhou calendar  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  introduced under the zhou dynasty . 
the taichu calendar established a framework for traditional calendars ,  with later calendars adding to the basic formula . 
in this calendar ,  the solar terms are 15° each along the ecliptic and it can be used as a solar calendar . 
a third version is the balanced calendar  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
