truffaut would pen more than 500 film articles for that publication over the next four years . 
françois roland truffaut  -lrb-  ; 6 february 1932 – 21 october 1984 -rrb- was a french film director ,  screenwriter ,  producer ,  actor ,  and film critic . 
truffaut was born in paris on 6 february 1932.
truffaut's mother's family disputed the findings but truffaut himself believed and embraced them . 
the film was very popular and highly influential . 
truffaut's 1973 film `` day for night '' earned him critical acclaim and several accolades ,  including the bafta award for best film and the academy award for best foreign language film . 
after starting his own film club in 1948, truffaut met andré bazin ,  who would have great effect on his professional and personal life . 
truffaut received a best director award from the cannes film festival ,  the same festival that had banned him only one year earlier . 
using most or all of a work does not bar a finding of fair use . 
this use was ultimately found not to be fair . 
this was insufficient to render the use fair . 
fair use week is an international event that celebrates fair use and fair dealing . 
likewise ,  the noncommercial purpose of a use makes it more likely to be found a fair use ,  but it does not make it a fair use automatically . 
while u . s .  fair use law has been influential in some countries ,  some countries have fair use criteria drastically different from those in the u . s .  ,  and some countries do not have a fair use framework at all . 
in general ,  the less that is used in relation to the whole ,  the more likely the use will be considered fair . 
in 2009, fair use appeared as a defense in lawsuits against filesharing . 
the term `` fair use '' originated in the united states . 
koons prevailed in part because his use was found transformative under the first fair use factor . 
the law sets up four factors ,  similar to the u . s .  fair use factors  -lrb-  see above  -rrb-  ,  for determining whether a use is fair . 
fair use was a common-law doctrine in the u . s .  until it was incorporated into the copyright act of 1976,  . 
compared to the united states ,  polish fair use distinguishes between private and public use . 
the practical effect of the fair use doctrine is that a number of conventional uses of copyrighted works are not considered infringing . 
the four factors for fair use as specified in us law are included . 
fair use rights take precedence over the author's interest . 
fair use exists in polish law and is covered by the polish copyright law articles 23 to 35.
the statutory fair use factors quoted above come from the copyright act of 1976, which is codified at  . 
fair use is decided on a case by case basis ,  on the entirety of circumstances . 
the korean copyright act was amended to include a fair use provision ,  article 35-3, in 2012.
§ 107 created a type of non-infringing use ,  fair use is `` authorized by the law '' and a copyright holder must consider the existence of fair use before sending a takedown notification under § 512-lrb- c  -rrb-  . `` 
the court rejected the defendant's fair use defense with the following explanation:
it is now similar in effect to u . s .  fair use ,  even though the frameworks are different . 
the four fair use factors similar to us law are included in the new section 35.
fair use is a doctrine in the law of the united states that permits limited use of copyrighted material without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder . 
this prompted him to invoke the fair use doctrine ,  which permits limited use of copyrighted material to provide analysis and criticism of published works . 
as of 2013, no flights had been reported . 
hiller engineers expected that this type of an aircraft would become the basis for a whole family of special-purpose aircraft . 
urban aeronautics' x-hawk is a vtol turbojet powered aircraft announced in 2006 with a first flight planned for 2009.
a flying car is a type of personal air vehicle or roadable aircraft that provides door-to-door transportation by both ground and air . 
also notable is the roadable aircraft pal-v one ,  which is an autogyro or gyrocopter that can be taken to the road ,  too . 
in the period between 1956 - 1958, ford's advanced design studio built the volante tri-athodyne ,  a 3/8 scale concept car model . 
the term `` flying car '' is also sometimes used to include hovercars . 
each film ran as long as there was film in the camera . 
the film used the first `` reverse angle '' cut in film history . 
early films were short films that were one long ,  static ,  and locked-down shot . 
before the widespread use of digital non-linear editing systems ,  the initial editing of all films was done with a positive copy of the film negative called a film workprint  -lrb-  cutting copy in uk  -rrb-  by physically cutting and pasting together pieces of film . 
in the early years of film ,  editing was considered a technical job; editors were expected to `` cut out the bad bits '' and string the film together . 
there are several editing stages and the editor's cut is the first . 
when shooting is finished ,  the director can then turn his or her full attention to collaborating with the editor and further refining the cut of the film . 
james williamson concentrated on making films taking action from one place shown in one shot to the next shown in another shot in films like `` stop thief ! `` 
wöhler is regarded as a pioneer in organic chemistry as a result of his  -lrb-  accidentally  -rrb-  synthesizing urea from ammonium cyanate in the wöhler synthesis in 1828.
wöhler had several students who became notable chemists . 
wöhler's discoveries had great influence on the theory of chemistry . 
electro funk is a hybrid of electronic music and funk . 
despite funk's popularity in modern music ,  few people have examined the work of funk women . 
funk jam is a fusion genre of music which emerged in the 1990s . 
the 1970s were the era of highest mainstream visibility for funk music . 
funk rock  -lrb-  also written as `` funk-rock '' or `` funk/rock ''  -rrb-  fuses funk and rock elements . 
the single `` renegades of funk '' followed in 1983.
rick james was the first funk musician of the 1980s to assume the funk mantle dominated by p-funk in the 1970s . 
phish ,  soul rebels brass band ,  galactic ,  soulive are all examples of funk bands that play funk jam . 
a new group of musicians began to further develop the `` funk rock '' approach . 
g-funk is a fusion genre of music which combines gangsta rap and funk . 
boogie  -lrb-  or electro-funk  -rrb-  is an electronic music mainly influenced by funk and post-disco . 
funk derivatives include the psychedelic funk of sly stone and george clinton; the avant-funk of groups such as talking heads and the pop group; boogie ,  a form of post-disco dance music; electro music ,  a hybrid of electronic music and funk; funk metal  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  living colour ,  faith no more  -rrb- ; g-funk ,  a mix of gangsta rap and funk; timba ,  a form of funky cuban popular dance music; and funk jam  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  phish  -rrb-  . 
funk music was also exported to africa ,  and it melded with african singing and rhythms to form afrobeat . 
it is also the main influence of go-go ,  a subgenre associated with funk . 
other musical groups picked up on the rhythms and vocal style developed by james brown and his band ,  and the funk style began to grow . 
from the early 1970s onwards ,  funk has developed various subgenres . 
funk is a music genre that originated in african-american communities in the mid-1960s when african-american musicians created a rhythmic ,  danceable new form of music through a mixture of soul music ,  jazz ,  and rhythm and blues  -lrb-  r&b  -rrb-  . 
since the mid-1990s the nu-funk scene ,  centered on the deep funk collectors scene ,  is producing new material influenced by the sounds of rare funk 45s . 
while george clinton and the parliament were making a harder variation of funk ,  bands such as kool and the gang ,  ohio players and earth ,  wind and fire were making disco-influenced funk music . 
funk is a major element of certain artists identified with the jam band scene of the late 1990s and 2000s . 
much of contemporary club dance music ,  drum and bass in particular has heavily sampled funk drum breaks . 
throughout the 1970s ,  top had many hits ,  and the band helped to make funk music a successful genre ,  with a broader audience . 
the word `` funk '' initially referred  -lrb-  and still refers  -rrb-  to a strong odor . 
funk creates an intense groove by using strong guitar riffs and bass lines . 
the si unit for period is the second . 
frequency is the number of occurrences of a repeating event per unit of time . 
60 rpm equals one hertz . 
the venice film festival is the oldest film festival in the world . 
some film historians ,  including jerry beck ,  do not consider film festivals official releases of film . 
the biggest independent film festival in the uk is raindance film festival . 
in the us ,  telluride film festival ,  sundance film festival ,  austin film festival ,  austin's south by southwest ,  new york city's tribeca film festival and slamdance film festival are all considered significant festivals for independent film . 
some examples include health-related film festivals and human rights films festivals . 
australia's first and longest running film festival is the melbourne international film festival  -lrb-  1952 -rrb- ,  followed by the sydney film festival  -lrb-  1954 -rrb- . 
the sundance film festival ,  tribeca film festival ,  south by southwest ,  new york film festival ,  woodstock film festival ,  montreal world film festival ,  regina international film festival and awards  -lrb-  riffa  -rrb-  and vancouver international film festival are also major north american festivals . 
this is especially so in larger film festivals ,  such as the cannes film festival ,  toronto international film festival ,  sundance film festival ,  south by southwest ,  montreal world film festival ,  and even smaller `` boutique '' festivals such as the miami international film festival ,  british urban film festival in london and mumbai women's international film festival in india . 
the havana film festival was founded in 1979 and is the oldest continuous annual film festival in the caribbean . 
the venice film festival in italy began in 1932, and is the oldest film festival still running . 
ann arbor film festival started in 1963.
most films of this period were what came to be called `` chase films '' . 
the film also used the first `` reverse angle '' cut in film history . 
his films were the first to establish the basics of coherent narrative and what became known as film language ,  or `` film grammar '' . 
films at the time were no longer than one reel ,  although some multi-reel films had been made on the life of christ in the first few years of cinema . 
in contrast to the beginning of the 1950s ,  when only 5 films were made per year ,  111 films were produced in south korea in 1959.
by 1900, their films were extended scenes of up to 5 minutes long . 
georges méliès built one of the first film studios in may 1897.
during indian cinema's 'golden age' of the 1950s ,  it was producing 200 films annually ,  while indian independent films gained greater recognition through international film festivals . 
this technique was first used in his 1901 film `` scrooge ,  or ,  marley's ghost '' . 
by 1912, the danish film companies were multiplying rapidly . 
the years of the first world war were a complex transitional period for the film industry . 
soon film production companies were established all over the world . 
the german film industry was seriously weakened by the war . 
by 1900, the first motion pictures that can be considered as `` films '' emerged ,  and film-makers began to introduce basic editing techniques and film narrative . 
later ,  with the birth of film ,  illustrated songs were used as filler material preceding films and during reel changes . 
eventually ,  the sale and rental of films on home video became a significant `` second venue '' for exhibition of films ,  and an additional source of revenue for the film industries . 
in 2003 there was a revival in 3d film popularity the first being james cameron's `` ghosts of the abyss '' which was released as the first full-length 3-d imax feature filmed with the reality camera system . 
after 1914, cross cutting between parallel actions came to be used more so in american films than in european ones . 
during the 1980s ,  audiences began increasingly watching films on their home vcrs . 
the most notorious film is guy debord's `` howls for sade '' of 1952.
james williamson concentrated on making films taking action from one place shown in one shot to the next shown in another shot in films like `` stop thief ! 
shots taken using such a `` panning '' head were also referred to as 'panoramas' in the film catalogues . 
jacksonville was especially important to the african american film industry . 
 ,  the largest film industries by number of feature films produced were those of india ,  the united states ,  china ,  nigeria and japan . 
the first successful permanent theatre showing only films was `` the nickelodeon '' ,  which was opened in pittsburgh in 1905.
1939, a major year for american cinema ,  brought such films as `` the wizard of oz '' and `` gone with the wind '' . 
the documentary film also rose as a commercial genre for perhaps the first time ,  with the success of films such as `` march of the penguins '' and michael moore's `` bowling for columbine '' and `` fahrenheit 9/11 '' . 
in documentary film the sixties saw the blossoming of direct cinema ,  an observational style of film making as well as the advent of more overtly partisan films like `` in the year of the pig '' about the vietnam war by emile de antonio . 
after james cameron's 3d film `` avatar '' became the highest-grossing film of all time ,  3d films gained brief popularity with many other films being released in 3d ,  with the best critical and financial successes being in the field of feature film animation such as universal pictures/illumination entertainment's `` despicable me '' and dreamworks animation's `` how to train your dragon '' ,  `` shrek forever after '' and `` megamind '' . 
griffith followed this up with the even bigger `` intolerance ''  -lrb-  1916 -rrb- ,  but ,  due to the high quality of film produced in the us ,  the market for their films was high . 
 ''limelight '' is probably a unique film in at least one interesting respect . 
in 2001, the `` harry potter '' film series began ,  and by its end in 2011, it had become the highest-grossing film franchise of all time until the marvel cinematic universe passed it in 2015.
the pathé company in france also made imitations and variations of smith and williamson's films from 1902 onwards using cuts between the shots ,  which helped to standardize the basics of film construction . 
these hong kong action trends were later adopted by many hollywood action films in the 1990s and 2000s . 
the most popular indian film of all time was `` sholay ''  -lrb-  1975 -rrb- ,  a `` masala '' film inspired by a real-life dacoit as well as kurosawa's `` seven samurai '' and the spaghetti westerns . 
while the musical film genre had declined in hollywood by this time ,  musical films were quickly gaining popularity in the cinema of india ,  where the term `` bollywood '' was coined for the growing hindi film industry in bombay  -lrb-  now mumbai  -rrb-  that ended up dominating south asian cinema ,  overtaking the more critically acclaimed bengali film industry in popularity . 
in 1952 `` umberto d '' was released ,  usually considered the last film of this type . 
films were increasingly longer ,  and began to feature proper plots and development . 
by 1917 chaplin was also introducing more dramatic plot into his films ,  and mixing the comedy with sentiment . 
with the worldwide film boom ,  yet more countries now joined britain ,  france ,  germany and the united states in serious film production . 
the earliest films were in black and white ,  under a minute long and without recorded sound . 
unfortunately ,  a fire that destroyed producer federico valle's film studio incinerated the only known copies of the movies ,  and they are now considered as lost films . 
overall ,  from about 1910, american films had the largest share of the market in all european countries except france ,  and even in france ,  the american films had just pushed the local production out of first place on the eve of world war i . 
the use of different camera speeds also appeared around 1900 in the films of robert w .  paul and hepworth . 
the most important of the new film producers at the time was joe may ,  who made a series of thrillers and adventure films through the war years ,  but ernst lubitsch also came into prominence with a series of very successful comedies and dramas . 
a lot of attempts were made before the success of `` the jazz singer '' ,  that can be seen in the list of film sound systems . 
the onset of us involvement in world war ii also brought a proliferation of films as both patriotism and propaganda . 
the first motion picture made in technicolor and the first feature-length color movie produced in the united states ,  the gulf between ,  was also filmed on location in jacksonville in 1917.
in britain ,  the cinematograph act 1909 was the first primary legislation to specifically regulate the film industry . 
during the 1890s films became several minutes long and started to consist of several shots . 
there has been an increasing globalization of cinema during this decade ,  with foreign-language films gaining popularity in english-speaking markets . 
in 2011, the film `` intouchables '' became the most watched film in france  -lrb-  including the foreign films  -rrb-  . 
during this period ,  french commercial film also made a name for itself . 
the french national and regional governments involve themselves in film production . 
the french cinema comprises the art of film and creative movies made within the nation of france or by french filmmakers abroad . 
france installed an import quota of 1:7, meaning for every seven foreign films imported to france ,  one french film was to be produced and shown in french cinemas . 
set in paris in 1828, it was voted best french film of the century in a poll of 600 french critics and professionals in the late 1990s . 
in 2012, with 226 million admissions  -lrb-  1,900 million usd  -rrb-  in the world for french films  -lrb-  582 films released in 84 countries  -rrb-  ,  including 82 million admissions in france  -lrb-  700 million usd  -rrb-  ,  2012 was the fourth best year since 1985.
after world war i ,  the french film industry suffered because of a lack of capital ,  and film production decreased as it did in most other european countries . 
in 2015 french cinema sold 106 million tickets and grossed €600 million outside of the country . 
its $193 million gross in france puts it just behind `` titanic '' as the most successful film of all time in french theaters . 
the 2008 rural comedy `` bienvenue chez les ch'tis '' drew an audience of more than 20 million ,  the first french film to do so . 
cinema of france refers to the film industry based in france . 
recently ,  messerlin and parc  -lrb-  2014, 2017 -rrb- described the effect of subsidies in the french film industry . 
a study in april 2014 showed the positive image which french cinema maintains around the world ,  being the most appreciated cinema after american cinema . 
france is the most successful film industry in europe in terms of number of films produced per annum ,  with a record-breaking 300 feature-length films produced in 2015.
the highest-grossing film was `` taken 3 ''  -lrb-  €261.7 million  -rrb-  and the largest territory in admissions was china  -lrb-  14.7 million  -rrb-  . 
it appeared on soviet screens in 1918.
newsreels ,  as documentaries ,  were the other major form of earliest soviet cinema . 
one of the most popular films released in the 1930s was `` circus '' . 
in the late 1950s and early 1960s soviet cinema produced `` ballad of a soldier '' ,  which won the 1961 bafta award for best film ,  and `` the cranes are flying '' . 
upon the establishment of the russian soviet socialist republic  -lrb-  rsfsr  -rrb-  on november 7, 1917  -lrb-  although the union of soviet socialist republics did not officially come into existence until december 30, 1922 -rrb- ,  what had formerly been the russian empire began quickly to come under the domination of a soviet reorganization of all its institutions . 
italian films of this period are usually grouped together as exploitation films . 
 -lrb-  1932 -rrb- ,  which was the first italian film shot entirely on location ,  and blasetti's 1942 film ,  `` four steps in the clouds '' . 
the cinema of italy comprises the films made within italy or by italian directors . 
between the late 1970s and mid 1980s ,  italian cinema was in crisis; `` art films '' became increasingly isolated ,  separating from the mainstream italian cinema . 
the italian film industry took shape between 1903 and 1908, led by three major organizations: cines ,  based in rome; and the turin-based companies ambrosio film and itala film . 
during this time ,  commedia sexy all'italiana films ,  described as `` trash films '' ,  were popular in italy . 
most peplum films were in color ,  whereas previous italian efforts had often been black and white . 
the italian film industry struggled against rising foreign competition in the years following world war i . 
with the release of 1958's `` hercules '' ,  starring american bodybuilder steve reeves ,  the italian film industry gained entree to the american film market . 
italy is the birthplace of art cinema and the stylistic aspect of film has been the most important factor in the history of italian movies . 
due to the success of the james bond film series the italian film industry made large amounts of imitations and spoofs in the eurospy genre from 1964-1967.
while italy's fascist government provided financial support for the nation's film industry ,  most notably the construction of the cinecittà studios  -lrb-  the largest film studio in europe  -rrb-  ,  it also engaged in censorship ,  and thus many italian films produced in the late 1930s were propaganda films . 
many films are still shot entirely in cinecittà . 
among the notable italian films of the late silent era were mario camerini's `` rotaio ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- and alessandro blasetti's `` sun ''  -lrb-  1929 -rrb- . 
historical films such as blasetti's `` 1860 ''  -lrb-  1934 -rrb- and carmine gallone's ``  ''  -lrb-  1937 -rrb- were also popular during this period . 
following the 1960s boom of shockumentary `` mondo films '' such as gualtiero jacopetti's `` mondo cane '' ,  during the late 1970s and early 1980s ,  italian cinema became internationally synonymous with violent horror films . 
a series of black-and-white films based on don camillo character created by the italian writer and journalist giovannino guareschi were made between 1952 and 1965.
while neorealism exploded after the war ,  and was incredibly influential at the international level ,  neorealist films made up only a small percentage of italian films produced during this period ,  as postwar italian moviegoers preferred escapist comedies starring actors such as totò and alberto sordi . 
these films differed from traditional westerns by being filmed in europe on limited budgets ,  but featured vivid cinematography . 
it was one of the first anti-nazi films in history being both avant-garde and documentary film . 
by the mid 1950s ,  following the end of stalinism in poland ,  film production was organised into film groups . 
among prominent annual film festivals taking place in poland are: warsaw international film festival ,  camerimage ,  international festival of independent cinema off camera ,  new horizons film festival as well as gdynia film festival and polish film awards . 
in 2015, polish filmmaker paweł pawlikowski received this award for his film `` ida '' . 
during the world war i the polish cinema crossed borders . 
the industry used imported cameras and film stocks . 
a later version of `` the captain's daughter '' was one of the first talkie films . 
unlike in the west ,  silent films were still being produced in japan well into the 1930s . 
the first successful japanese film in late 1897 showed sights in tokyo . 
akira kurosawa made his feature film debut with `` sugata sanshiro '' in 1943.
the first japanese film production studio was built in 1909 by the yoshizawa shōten company in tokyo . 
the pure film movement was central in the development of the gendaigeki and scriptwriting . 
japanese films gained popularity in the mid-1920s against foreign films ,  in part fueled by the popularity of movie stars and a new style of jidaigeki . 
it is also the first film to reach  . 
the film industry continued to develop after 1945.
cinema was introduced in china in 1896 and the first chinese film ,  `` the battle of dingjunshan '' ,  was made in 1905, with the film industry being centered on shanghai in the first decades . 
chinese films grossed  -lrb-    -rrb-  in foreign markets in 2016.
in 2010, chinese cinema was the third largest film industry by number of feature films produced annually . 
 ''a wedding in the dream ''  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- ,  by the same director ,  was the first chinese color film . 
the biggest cinema chains in 2014 by box office gross were: wanda cinema line  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  china film stellar  -lrb-  393.35 million  -rrb-  ,  dadi theater circuit  -lrb-  378.17 million  -rrb-  ,  shanghai united circuit  -lrb-  355.07 million  -rrb-  ,  guangzhou jinyi zhujiang  -lrb-  335.39 million  -rrb-  ,  china film south cinema circuit  -lrb-  318.71 million  -rrb-  ,  zhejiang time cinema  -lrb-  190.53 million  -rrb-  ,  china film group digital cinema line  -lrb-  177.42 million  -rrb-  ,  hengdian cinema line  -lrb-  170.15 million  -rrb-  and beijing new film association  -lrb-  163.09 million  -rrb-  . 
after the article was revealed to be penned by mao zedong ,  the film was banned ,  a film steering committee was formed to `` re-educate '' the film industry and within two years ,  these private studios were all incorporated into the state-run shanghai film studio . 
recent cinema has seen chinese cinematographers direct some acclaimed films . 
after the end of the war ,  a second golden age took place ,  with production in shanghai resuming ,  with films such as `` spring in a small town ''  -lrb-  1948 -rrb- ,  named the best chinese-language film at the 24th hong kong film awards . 
 ''lost in thailand ''  -lrb-  2012 -rrb- was the first chinese film to reach at the chinese box office ,  `` monster hunt ''  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- was the first to reach  ,  `` the mermaid ''  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- was the first to and `` wolf warrior 2 ''  -lrb-  2017 -rrb- is currently the highest-grossing film in china . 
during the cultural revolution ,  the film industry was severely restricted . 
china is the home of the largest movie & drama production complex and film studios in the world ,  the oriental movie metropolis and hengdian world studios ,  and in 2010 it had the third largest film industry by number of feature films produced annually . 
the post-1990 period saw the rise of the sixth generation and post-sixth generation ,  both mostly making films outside the main chinese film system and played mostly on the international film festival circuit . 
one of the production bases in the middle of all the transition was the changchun film studio . 
he ping is a director of mostly western-like films set in chinese locale . 
another successful commercial film was `` murder in 405 ''  -lrb-  405谋杀案 ,  1980 -rrb- ,  a murder thriller . 
the cinema of mainland china is one of three distinct historical threads of chinese-language cinema together with the cinema of hong kong and the cinema of taiwan . 
the most famous of these ,  the classic `` havoc in heaven ''  -lrb-  two parts ,  1961, 4 -rrb- ,  was made by wan laiming of the wan brothers and won outstanding film award at the london international film festival . 
by the early 2011, `` let the bullets fly '' had become the highest grossing domestic film in china's history . 
the british film institute has produced a poll ranking what they consider to be the 100 greatest british films of all time ,  the bfi top 100 british films . 
a study by the british film institute published in december 2013 found that of the 613 tracked british films released between 2003 and 2010 only 7% made a profit . 
however ,  some british film makers ,  such as michael powell ,  learnt their craft making such films . 
all were filmed at leavesden studios in england . 
the film industry remains an important earner for the british economy . 
in 1980, only 31 british films were made ,  a 50% decline from the previous year and the lowest number since 1914, and production fell again in 1981 to 24 films . 
in 1902 the earliest colour film in the world was made; like other films made at the time ,  it is of everyday events . 
soon several british film companies had opened to meet the demand for new films ,  such as mitchell and kenyon in blackburn . 
in 1913 stage director maurice elvey began directing british films ,  becoming britain's most prolific film director ,  with almost 200 by 1957.
the first decade of the 21st century was a relatively successful one for the british film industry . 
like the 1960s ,  this decade saw plenty of british films directed by imported talent . 
in 1911 the ideal film company was founded in soho ,  london ,  distributing almost 400 films by 1934, and producing 80.
the british film `` this is not a love song ''  -lrb-  2003 -rrb- was the first to be streamed live on the internet at the same time as its cinema premiere . 
by the mid-1920s the british film industry was losing out to heavy competition from the united states ,  which was helped by its much larger home market — in 1914 25% of films shown in the uk were british ,  but by 1926 this had fallen to 5% . 
the annual bafta awards hosted by the british academy of film and television arts are considered to be the british equivalent of the academy awards . 
however it was usually through domestically funded features throughout the decade that british directors and films won awards at the top international film festivals . 
these problems were mostly compensated by polygram filmed entertainment ,  a film studio whose british subsidiary working title films released a richard curtis-scripted comedy `` four weddings and a funeral ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- . 
on 26 july 2010 it was announced that the uk film council ,  which was the main body responsible for the development of promotion of british cinema during the 2000s ,  would be abolished ,  with many of the abolished body's functions being taken over by the british film institute . 
at the top end of budgets for the british industry ,  under a fifth of films that cost £10million went into profit . 
in the 1970s and 1980s ,  british studios established a reputation for great special effects in films such as `` superman ''  -lrb-  1978 -rrb- ,  `` alien ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- ,  and `` batman ''  -lrb-  1989 -rrb- . 
the british new wave film makers attempted to produce social realist films  -lrb-  see also 'kitchen sink realism'  -rrb-  attempted in commercial feature films released between around 1959 and 1963 to convey narratives about a wider spectrum of people in britain than the country's earlier films had done . 
the new decade saw a major new film series in the harry potter films ,  beginning with `` harry potter and the philosopher's stone '' in 2001.
ukfc invested $1.6m for a 34% share of net profits ,  a valuable stake that will pass to the british film institute . 
the united kingdom has had a significant film industry for over a century . 
after a six-year hiatus for legal reasons the james bond films returned to production with the 17th bond film ,  `` goldeneye '' . 
just as the british film commission has played a crucial role in attracting the biggest and best international studios to produce their films here ,  so we must incentivise uk producers to chase new markets both here and overseas . `` 
compared to the 1980s ,  investment in film production rose dramatically . 
elstree  -lrb-  strictly speaking almost all the studios were in neighboring borehamwood  -rrb-  became the center of the british film industry ,  with six film complexes over the years all in close proximity to each other . 
these were joffé's first two feature films and were amongst those produced by puttnam . 
it prompted a cycle of period films – some with a large budget for a british film ,  such as david lean's final film `` a passage to india ''  -lrb-  1984 -rrb- ,  alongside the lower-budget merchant ivory adaptations of the works of e .  m .  forster ,  such as `` a room with a view ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- . 
 ''blowup ''  -lrb-  also 1966 -rrb- ,  and later `` women in love ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- ,  showed female and then male full-frontal nudity on screen in mainstream british films for the first time . 
feminist film theory is a theoretical film criticism derived from feminist politics and feminist theory . 
beginning in the early 1980s feminist film theory began to look at film through a more intersectional lens . 
in the paper ,  mulvey calls for a destruction of modern film structure as the only way to free women from their sexual objectification in film . 
the development of feminist film theory was influenced by second wave feminism and women's studies in the 1960s and 1970s . 
rich goes on to say that because of this feminist theory needs to focus on how film by women are being received . 
b .  ruby rich argues that feminist film theory should shift to look at films in a broader sense . 
also ,  according to cynthia a .  freeland in `` feminist frameworks for horror films , ``  feminist studies of horror films have focused on psychodynamics where the chief interest is `` on viewers' motives and interests in watching horror films '' . 
considering the way that films are put together ,  many feminist film critics have pointed to what they argue is the `` male gaze '' that predominates classical hollywood filmmaking . 
today ,  it is a major theory of film study . 
formalist film theory is a theory of film study that is focused on the formal ,  or technical ,  elements of a film: i . e .  ,  the lighting ,  scoring ,  sound and set design ,  use of color ,  shot composition ,  and editing . 
film theory is not to be confused with general film criticism ,  or film history ,  though these three disciplines interrelate . 
although film theory originated from linguistics and literary theory ,  it also overlaps with the philosophy of film . 
in `` critical cinema: beyond the theory of practice ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- ,  clive meyer suggests that 'cinema is a different experience to watching a film at home or in an art gallery' ,  and argues for film theorists to re-engage the specificity of philosophical concepts for cinema as a medium distinct from others . 
the 1940s and 1950s are generally regarded as the `` classic period '' of american `` film noir '' . 
film noir is often described as essentially pessimistic . 
the film plays with an awareness not only of classic noir but also of neo-noir reflexivity itself . 
film noir has been parodied many times in many manners . 
most of the hollywood films considered to be classic noirs fall into the category of the `` b movie '' . 
the clichés of film noir have inspired parody since the mid-1940s . 
in addition ,  mexico experienced a vibrant film noir period from roughly 1946 to 1952, which was around the same time film noir was blossoming in the united states . 
the term `` film noir '' ,  french for `` black film ''  -lrb-  literal  -rrb-  or `` dark film ''  -lrb-  closer meaning  -rrb-  ,  was first applied to hollywood films by french critic nino frank in 1946, but was unrecognized by most american film industry professionals of that era . 
released the month before lang's `` m '' ,  `` city streets '' has a claim to being the first major film noir; both its style and story had many noir characteristics . 
while many critics refer to film noir as a genre itself ,  others argue that it can be no such thing . 
its visual intricacy and complex ,  voiceover narrative structure are echoed in dozens of classic film noirs . 
the questions of what defines film noir ,  and what sort of category it is ,  provoke continuing debate . 
fincher's feature debut was `` alien 3 ''  -lrb-  1992 -rrb- ,  which evoked the classic noir jail film `` brute force '' . 
some critics regard classic film noir as a cycle exclusive to the united states; alain silver and elizabeth ward ,  for example ,  argue ,  `` with the western ,  film noir shares the distinction of being an indigenous american form  .  .  .  a wholly american film style . `` 
in their original 1955 canon of film noir ,  raymond borde and etienne chaumeton identified twenty-two hollywood films released between 1941 and 1952 as core examples; they listed another fifty-nine american films from the period as significantly related to the field of noir . 
nor does film noir rely on anything as evident as the monstrous or supernatural elements of the horror film ,  the speculative leaps of the science fiction film ,  or the song-and-dance routines of the musical . 
edeson later photographed `` the maltese falcon ''  -lrb-  1941 -rrb- ,  widely regarded as the first major film noir of the classic era . 
anime television series with science fiction noir themes include `` noir ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- and `` cowboy bebop ''  -lrb-  1998 -rrb- . 
while the inceptive noir ,  `` stranger on the third floor '' ,  was a b picture directed by a virtual unknown ,  many of the film noirs still remembered were a-list productions by well-known film makers . 
the film now most commonly cited as the first `` true '' `` film noir '' is `` stranger on the third floor ''  -lrb-  1940 -rrb- ,  directed by latvian-born ,  soviet-trained boris ingster . 
scholar andrew spicer argues that british film noir evidences a greater debt to french poetic realism than to the expressionistic american mode of noir . 
noir parodies come in darker tones as well . 
the film also demonstrates how neo-noir's polychrome palette can reproduce many of the expressionistic effects of classic black-and-white noir . 
while it is hard to draw a line between some of the noir films of the early 1960s such as `` blast of silence ''  -lrb-  1961 -rrb- and `` cape fear ''  -lrb-  1962 -rrb- and the noirs of the late 1950s ,  new trends emerged in the post-classic era . 
film noir is often associated with an urban setting ,  and a few cities—los angeles ,  san francisco ,  new york ,  and chicago ,  in particular—are the location of many of the classic films . 
the proposed raising of `` *o '' has been alternately interpreted instead as a lowering `` *u '' → `` *o '' in samoyedic  -lrb-  pu * ''lumi '' → `` *lomə '' → proto-samoyedic `` *jom ''  -rrb-  . 
one argument in favor of the finno-ugric grouping has come from loanwords . 
janhunen  -lrb-  2007, 2009 -rrb- notes a number of derivational innovations in finno-ugric ,  including `` *ńoma '' `` hare '' → `` *ńoma-la '' ,   -lrb-  vs .  samoyedic `` *ńomå ''  -rrb-  ,  `` *pexli '' `` side '' → `` *peel-ka '' → `` *pelka '' `` thumb '' ,  though involving proto-uralic derivational elements . 
the relation of the finno-permic and the ugric groups is adjudged remote by some scholars . 
the finno-ugric group is not typologically distinct from uralic as a whole: the most widespread structural features among the group all extend to the samoyedic languages as well . 
the validity of finno-ugric as a genetic grouping is under challenge ,  with some feeling that the finno-permic languages are as distinct from the ugric languages as they are from the samoyedic languages spoken in siberia ,  or even that none of the finno-ugric ,  finno-permic ,  or ugric branches has been established . 
latin freestyle ,  or freestyle music ,  is a form of electronic dance music that emerged in the new york metropolitan area in the 1980s . 
the new sound rejuvenated the funk ,  soul and hip hop club scenes in new york city . 
the first freestyle hit is largely attributed to `` let the music play '' by shannon . 
tazmania closed in the late 1990s ,  while viper-7 is now known as the viper music network and covers a broad spectrum of music genres . 
 ''let the music play '' by shannon ,  is often named as the genre's first hit ,  and its sound ,  called `` the shannon sound '' ,  as the foundation of the genre . 
in march 2013, radio city music hall hosted the very first freestyle concert . 
freestyle continues to have a strong following in new york . 
it was showcased alongside house music in various toronto nightclubs ,  but by the mid-1990s was replaced almost entirely by house music . 
as latin freestyle in the late 1980s and early 1990s gradually became superseded with house music ,  dance-pop ,  and regular hip hop on one front and spanish-language pop music with marginal latin freestyle influences on another ,  `` harder strain '' of house music originating in new york city was known to incorporate elements of latin freestyle and the old school hip hop sound . 
freestyle music developed in the early 1980s ,  primarily in the hispanic communities of upper manhattan and the bronx and the italian-american communities in brooklyn ,  the bronx ,  and other boroughs of new york city ,  later spreading throughout new york's five boroughs and into new jersey . 
deluxe's `` this brutal house , ``  fusing latin percussion and the new york electro sound of man parrish with brash house music ,  proved to have an impact on the united kingdom's club music scene ,  presaging the early 1990s british rave scene . 
for freud ,  sexuality is linked from the very beginning to an object of fantasy . 
“the finding of an object is in fact a re-finding of it . ” it is in the movement and constant restaging away from the instinct that desire is constituted and mobilized . 
melanie klein extended freud's concept of fantasy to cover the developing child's relationship to a world of internal objects . 
in everyday life ,  individuals often find their thoughts pursue a series of fantasies concerning things they wish they could do or wish they had done .  .  . fantasies of control or of sovereign choice .  .  . daydreams' . 
another ,  more basic meaning of fantasy is something which is not 'real , ' as in perceived explicitly by any of the senses ,  but exists as an imagined situation of object to subject . 
fantasy ,  when pushed to the extreme ,  is a common trait of narcissistic personality disorder; and certainly 'vaillant found that not one person who used fantasy a lot had any close friends' . 
lacan engaged from early on with 'the phantasies revealed by melanie klein .  .  . the `` imago '' of the mother .  .  . this shadow of the `` bad internal objects ''' — with the imaginary . 
children typically use their fathers' last names only . 
there are some province offices where a married woman can use only her birth name ,  and some others where she has to use the complete name ,  for legal purposes . 
if eva duarte and juan perón had a child named juan ,  he might be misidentified if he were called `` juan perón '' ,  but not if he was known as juan perón duarte . 
1 luxembourgish franc was equal to 1 belgian franc . 
a separate  -lrb-  franc cfp  -rrb-  circulates in france's pacific territories ,  worth €0.0084  -lrb-  formerly 0.055 french franc  -rrb-  . 
as banknotes ,  only french franc bills existed . 
the saar franc ,  linked at par to the french franc ,  was introduced in the saar protectorate in 1948.
the french franc was the name of a gold coin issued in france from 1360 until 1380, then a silver coin issued between 1575 and 1641.
like the french franc ,  the belgo-luxemburgish franc ceased to exist on 1 january 1999, when it became fixed at 1 eur = 40.3399 bef/luf ,  thus a franc was worth €0.024789.
fourteen african countries use the franc cfa  -lrb-  in west africa ,  `` communauté financière africaine ''; in equatorial africa ,  `` coopération financière en afrique centrale ''  -rrb-  ,  originally  -lrb-  1945 -rrb- worth 1.7 french francs and then from 1948, 2 francs  -lrb-  from 1960: 0.02 new franc  -rrb-  but after january 1994 worth only 0.01 french franc . 
one franc is typically divided into 100 centimes . 
the federal reserve system  -lrb-  also known as the federal reserve or simply the fed  -rrb-  is the central banking system of the united states of america . 
today the federal reserve system has responsibilities in addition to ensuring the stability of the financial system . 
francium-221 has a half-life of 4.8 minutes . 
francium-221 then decays into astatine-217 by alpha decay  -lrb-  6.457 mev decay energy  -rrb-  . 
bulk francium has never been viewed . 
francium is a chemical element with symbol fr and atomic number 87.
nearly all francium salts are water-soluble . 
francium is one of the most unstable of the naturally occurring elements: its longest-lived isotope ,  francium-223, has a half-life of only 22 minutes . 
francium-223 and francium-221 are the only isotopes that occur in nature ,  though the former is far more common . 
francium was discovered by marguerite perey in france  -lrb-  from which the element takes its name  -rrb-  in 1939.
francium-223 then decays into radium-223 by beta decay  -lrb-  1.149 mev decay energy  -rrb-  ,  with a minor  -lrb-  0.006%  -rrb-  alpha decay path to astatine-219  -lrb-  5.4 mev decay energy  -rrb-  . 
francium coprecipitates with several caesium salts ,  such as caesium perchlorate ,  which results in small amounts of francium perchlorate . 
fermium is a synthetic element with symbol fm and atomic number 100.
because of the short half-life of all isotopes of fermium ,  any primordial fermium ,  that is fermium that could be present on the earth during its formation ,  has decayed by now . 
fermium is produced by the bombardment of lighter actinides with neutrons in a nuclear reactor . 
the transuranic elements from americium to fermium did occur naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at oklo ,  but no longer do so . 
fermium was first discovered in the fallout from the 'ivy mike' nuclear test  -lrb-  1 november 1952 -rrb- ,  the first successful test of a hydrogen bomb . 
there are 20 isotopes of fermium listed in n 2016, with atomic weights of 241 to 260, of which fm is the longest-lived with a half-life of 100.5 days . 
because of this impediment in forming heavier isotopes ,  these short-lived isotopes fm constitute the so-called `` fermium gap . `` 
after production ,  the fermium must be separated from other actinides and from lanthanide fission products . 
all the music is derived from that of chopin . 
all of chopin's compositions include the piano . 
chopin was reportedly unimpressed with the composition . 
at the end of november ,  chopin returned to paris . 
numerous recordings of chopin's works are available . 
chopin was born fryderyk franciszek chopin in the duchy of warsaw and grew up in warsaw ,  which in 1815 became part of congress poland . 
in the spring of 1834, chopin attended the lower rhenish music festival in aix-la-chapelle with hiller ,  and it was there that chopin met felix mendelssohn . 
the warsaw chopin society organizes the `` grand prix du disque de f .  chopin '' for notable chopin recordings ,  held every five years . 
chopin's études are largely in straightforward ternary form . 
two polish friends in paris were also to play important roles in chopin's life there . 
in 1841, léon escudier wrote of a recital given by chopin that year ,  `` one may say that chopin is the creator of a school of piano and a school of composition . 
the two mature piano sonatas  -lrb-  no . 
chopin's disease and the cause of his death have been a matter of discussion . 
she also took a collection of two hundred letters from sand to chopin; after 1851 these were returned to sand ,  who destroyed them . 
during 1824–28 chopin spent his vacations away from warsaw ,  at a number of locales . 
with his health further deteriorating ,  chopin desired to have a family member with him . 
there are numerous biographies of chopin in english  -lrb-  see bibliography for some of these  -rrb-  . 
from 1842 onwards ,  chopin showed signs of serious illness . 
improvisation stands at the centre of chopin's creative processes . 
with his mazurkas and polonaises ,  chopin has been credited with introducing to music a new sense of nationalism . 
chopin's music remains very popular and is regularly performed ,  recorded and broadcast worldwide . 
chopin's life and his relations with george sand have been fictionalized in numerous films . 
all his known works involve the piano ,  and only a few range beyond solo piano music ,  as either piano concertos ,  songs or chamber music . 
over 230 works of chopin survive; some compositions from early childhood have been lost . 
in london chopin took lodgings at dover street ,  where the firm of broadwood provided him with a grand piano . 
some of chopin's well-known pieces have acquired descriptive titles ,  such as the `` revolutionary '' étude  -lrb-  op . 
the institute site also lists nearly 1,500 performances of chopin works on youtube  . 
the last opus number that chopin himself used was 65, allocated to the cello sonata in g minor . 
chopin was educated in the tradition of beethoven ,  haydn ,  mozart and clementi; he used clementi's piano method with his own students . 
chopin published his music in france ,  england and the german states due to the copyright laws of the time . 
the 21 nocturnes are more structured ,  and of greater emotional depth ,  than those of field  -lrb-  whom chopin met in 1833 -rrb- . 
chopin has figured extensively in polish literature ,  both in serious critical studies of his life and music and in fictional treatments . 
during the 1990s ,  the fdp won between 6.2 and 11 percent of the vote in bundestag elections . 
the fdp first took it to the opposition . 
the fdp is led by christian lindner . 
in the 1965 federal elections the fdp gained 9.5 percent . 
in march 2012, the fdp lost all their seats in saarland . 
the fdp voted in parliament at the end of 1950 against the cdu- and spd- introduced de-nazification process . 
in 1998, the cdu/csu - fdp coalition lost the federal election ,  which ended the fdp's nearly 30-year reign in government . 
at other times ,  for example after the 2002 federal election ,  a coalition between the fdp and cdu/csu was impossible primarily because of the weak results of the fdp . 
in the 2017 federal election ,  the fdp regained its representation in the bundestag ,  receiving 10.6% of the vote . 
the current fdp guidelines are anchored in the 'karlsruhe freiheitsthesen' . 
from 1969 to 1974 the fdp supported the spd chancellor willy brandt ,  who was succeeded by helmut schmidt . 
young fdp members who did not agree with the politics of the fdp youth organization young democrats founded in 1980 the young liberals  -lrb-  julis  -rrb-  . 
in the 2009 european parliament elections ,  the fdp received 11% of the national vote  -lrb-  2,888,084 votes in total  -rrb-  and returned 12 meps . 
in the 2014 european parliament elections ,  the fdp received 3.36% of the national vote  -lrb-  986,253 votes in total  -rrb-  and returned 3 meps . 
the economic policy of the fdp is based on liberal and social market economics . 
fdp leader guido westerwelle became the unofficial leader of the opposition by virtue of the fdp's position as the largest opposition party in the bundestag . 
the fdp supports lgbt rights based on support of individual liberty . 
however ,  within the fdp ,  the conflicts and contrasts were always greater . 
in the spiegel affair ,  the fdp withdrew their ministers from the federal government . 
fax classes denote the way fax programs interact with fax hardware . 
this type of faxing is not related to the e-mail to fax service that still uses fax modems at least one way . 
itu-t t . 30 allows fax machines to negotiate one of two options of the t . 85 `` fax profile '':
the limited number of lines is two for 'standard' resolution faxes ,  and four for 'fine' resolution faxes . 
they are negotiated during the fax-modem handshake ,  and the fax devices will use the highest data rate that both fax devices support ,  usually a minimum of 14.4 kbit/s for group 3 fax . 
utilizing a fax service provider does not require paper ,  a dedicated fax line ,  or consumable resources . 
the most basic fax mode transfers in black and white only . 
there is a standard called itu-t30e  -lrb-  formally itu-t recommendation t . 30 annex e   -rrb-  for faxing in color; however ,  it is not widely supported ,  so many of the color fax machines can only fax in color to machines from the same manufacturer . 
group 3 faxes have the suffix codice_1 and the mime type image/g3fax . 
convenience-store fax machines commonly print the slightly re-sized content of the sent fax in the electronic confirmation-slip ,  in a4 paper size . 
another alternative to a physical fax machine is to make use of computer software which allows people to send and receive faxes using their own computers ,  utilizing fax servers and unified messaging . 
some of the lesser known capabilities of the xerox fax technologies included their ethernet enabled fax services on their 8000 workstations in the early 1980s . 
computer modems are often designated by a particular fax class ,  which indicates how much processing is offloaded from the computer's cpu to the fax modem . 
several different telephone line modulation techniques are used by fax machines . 
in many corporate environments ,  freestanding fax machines have been replaced by fax servers and other computerized systems capable of receiving and storing incoming faxes electronically ,  and then routing them to users on paper or via an email  -lrb-  which may be secured  -rrb-  . 
one of the advantages of inkjet printing is that inkjets can affordably print in color; therefore ,  many of the inkjet-based fax machines claim to have color fax capability . 
one popular alternative is to subscribe to an internet fax service ,  allowing users to send and receive faxes from their personal computers using an existing email account . 
a film director is a person who directs the making of a film . 
the film director gives direction to the cast and crew and creates an overall vision through which a film eventually becomes realized ,  or noticed . 
death anxiety is multidimensional; it covers `` fears related to one's own death ,  the death of others ,  fear of the unknown after death ,  fear of obliteration ,  and fear of the dying process ,  which includes fear of a slow death and a painful death '' . 
an irrational fear is called a phobia . 
although many fears are learned ,  the capacity to fear is part of human nature . 
fear is affected by cultural and historical context . 
the survey found a negative correlation between fear of death and `` religious concern '' . 
people develop specific fears as a result of learning . 
the yale philosopher shelly kagan examined fear of death in a 2007 yale open course by examining the following questions: is fear of death a reasonable appropriate response ? 
this suggests that fear can develop in both conditions ,  not just simply from personal history . 
such teams could be selected to play in a match against an opposing team ,  to represent a football club ,  group ,  state or nation ,  an all-star team or even selected as a hypothetical team  -lrb-  such as a dream team or team of the century  -rrb-  and never play an actual match . 
a football team is a group of players selected to play together in the various team sports known as football . 
f  -lrb-  named `` ef ''   -rrb-  is the sixth letter in the modern english alphabet and the iso basic latin alphabet . 
the roman alphabet forms the basis of the alphabet used today for english and many other languages . 
the origin of 'f' is the semitic letter `` vâv ''  -lrb-  or `` waw ''  -rrb-  that represented a sound like or  . 
irradiation of food is the exposure of food to ionizing radiation . 
pasteurization is a process for preservation of liquid food . 
many processes designed to preserve food involve more than one food preservation method . 
some methods of food preservation are known to create carcinogens . 
pickling is a method of preserving food in an edible ,  antimicrobial liquid . 
cooling preserves food by slowing down the growth and reproduction of microorganisms and the action of enzymes that causes the food to rot . 
boiling liquid food items can kill any existing microbes . 
food preservation may also include processes that inhibit visual deterioration ,  such as the enzymatic browning reaction in apples after they are cut during food preparation . 
high-pressure food preservation or pascalization refers to the use of a food preservation technique that makes use of high pressure . 
food may be preserved by cooking in a material that solidifies to form a gel . 
in chemical pickling ,  the food is placed in an edible liquid that inhibits or kills bacteria and other microorganisms . 
preservative food additives can be `` antimicrobial ''—which inhibit the growth of bacteria or fungi ,  including mold—or `` antioxidant '' ,  such as oxygen absorbers ,  which inhibit the oxidation of food constituents . 
sodium hydroxide  -lrb-  lye  -rrb-  makes food too alkaline for bacterial growth . 
national and international expert bodies have declared food irradiation as `` wholesome ''; organizations of the united nations ,  such as the world health organization and food and agriculture organization ,  endorse food irradiation . 
irradiation may allow lower-quality or contaminated foods to be rendered marketable . 
modifying atmosphere is a way to preserve food by operating on the atmosphere around it . 
food preservation prevents the growth of microorganisms  -lrb-  such as yeasts  -rrb-  ,  or other microorganisms  -lrb-  although some methods work by introducing benign bacteria or fungi to the food  -rrb-  ,  as well as slowing the oxidation of fats that cause rancidity . 
freezing is also one of the most commonly used processes ,  both commercially and domestically ,  for preserving a very wide range of foods ,  including prepared foods that would not have required freezing in their unprepared state . 
heating to temperatures which are sufficient to kill microorganisms inside the food is a method used with perpetual stews . 
the integral of such a signal is:
where formula_4, formula_5 being the sensitivity of the frequency modulator and formula_6 being the amplitude of the modulating signal or baseband signal . 
if the information to be transmitted  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  the baseband signal  -rrb-  is formula_1 and the sinusoidal carrier is formula_2, where `` f '' is the carrier's base frequency ,  and `` a '' is the carrier's amplitude ,  the modulator combines the carrier with the baseband data signal to get the transmitted signal:
it deals with the relationship between faith and reason . 
some have asserted that martin luther taught that faith and reason were antithetical in the sense that questions of faith could not be illuminated by reason . 
the result of the work of the holy spirit is faith . `` 
the view that faith underlies all rationality holds that rationality is dependent on faith for its coherence . 
believers in faith — for example those who believe salvation is possible through faith alone — frequently suggest that everyone holds beliefs arrived at by faith ,  not reason . 
pope benedict xvi's 12 september 2006 regensburg lecture was about faith and reason . 
some see this as meaning that a person is not strictly bound to choose between faith and reason . 
from at least the days of the greek philosophers ,  the relationship between faith and reason has been hotly debated . 
the wave is termed the `` f wave '' due to its initial recording in the muscles of the foot . 
this reflected stimulus evokes small proportion of the muscle fibers causing a small ,  second cmap called the f wave . 
a fruit results from maturation of one or more flowers ,  and the gynoecium of the flower -lrb-  s  -rrb-  forms all or part of the fruit . 
fruits are the means by which angiosperms disseminate seeds . 
however ,  in botany ,  a `` fruit '' is the ripened ovary or carpel that contains seeds ,  a `` nut '' is a type of fruit and not a seed ,  and a `` seed '' is a ripened ovule . 
since other parts of the flower may contribute to the structure of the fruit ,  it is important to study flower structure to understand how a particular fruit forms . 
february is the second and shortest month of the year in the julian and gregorian calendar with 28 days in common years and 29 days in leap years ,  with the quadrennial 29th day being called the `` leap day '' . 
this year february 28 days . 
having only 28 days in common years ,  february is the only month of the year that can pass without a single full moon . 
february is the third and last month of meteorological winter in the northern hemisphere . 
first friday: february 1  first saturday: february 2 first sunday: february 3  first monday: february 4 first week of february  -lrb-  first monday ,  ending on sunday  -rrb- : february 4-10 second saturday: february 9 second sunday: february 10 11th sunday before pascha  -lrb-  eastern christianity  -rrb- : february 10  second monday: february 11 second tuesday: february 12  third friday: february 15 63 days before pascha  -lrb-  eastern christianity  -rrb- : february 16
these days do not correspond to the modern gregorian calendar . 
near the end of her husband's presidency ,  clinton became the first first lady to run for political office . 
 ,  there are four living former first ladies ,  as identified below . 
since the 1790s ,  the role of first lady has changed considerably . 
despite the significant responsibilities usually handled by the first lady ,  the first lady does not receive a salary . 
some first ladies have garnered attention for their dress and style . 
many first ladies became significant fashion trendsetters . 
 ,  the only former first lady who has run for or held public office is hillary clinton . 
while the title was not in general use until much later ,  martha washington ,  the wife of george washington ,  the first u . s .  president  -lrb-  1789–1797 -rrb- ,  is considered to be the inaugural first lady of the united states . 
herbert began researching `` dune '' in 1959.
1984 was a tumultuous year in herbert's life . 
frank herbert was born on october 8, 1920, in tacoma ,  washington ,  to frank patrick herbert ,  sr .  and eileen  -lrb-  mccarthy  -rrb-  herbert . 
beverly herbert died on february 7, 1984, the same year that `` heretics of dune '' was published; in his afterword to 1985's ``  '' ,  frank herbert wrote a eulogy for her . 
 ''dune '' was not an immediate bestseller . 
herbert was a strong critic of the soviet union . 
in 1949 herbert and his wife moved to california to work on the santa rosa `` press-democrat '' . 
herbert's change in fortune was shadowed by tragedy . 
a further subgenre of alien languages are those that are visual ,  rather than auditory . 
a notable subgenre of fictional languages are alien languages ,  the ones that are used or might be used by putative extraterrestrial life forms . 
fictional languages are intended to be the languages of a fictional world and are often designed with the intent of giving more depth and an appearance of plausibility to the fictional worlds with which they are associated ,  and to have their characters communicate in a fashion which is both alien and dislocated . 
by analogy with the word `` conlang , ``  the term `` conworld '' is used to describe these fictional worlds ,  inhabited by fictional constructed cultures . 
while in many cases an alien language is but an element of a fictional reality ,  in a number of science fiction works the core of the plot involves linguistic and psychological problems of communication between various alien species . 
