in 2006, daniel ortega was elected president with 38% of the vote . 
in 2017 ortega reaffirmed nicaragua's diplomatic relations with taiwan . 
bolanos ended up with 56.3 percent of the vote ,  and ortega won 42.3 percent . 
ortega was born in la libertad ,  department of chontales ,  nicaragua . 
ortega married rosario murillo in 1979 in a secret ceremony . 
ortega was elected with 287 to ruiz's 147 votes ,  and the dl secured the most dominant role in the fsln . 
ortega adopted stepdaughter zoilamérica narváez in 1986, through a court case . 
ortega was re-elected president with a vote on november 6 and confirmation on november 16, 2011.
in nicaragua ,  reviews of ortega's presidency have not always been glowing ,  with many considering him a dictator . 
the 2018 protests are symbolic of these tensions with nearly 70% of nicaraguans thinking ortega should resign . 
in 1998, daniel ortega's adopted stepdaughter zoilamérica narváez released a 48-page report describing how ,  she alleged ,  ortega had systematically sexually abused her from 1979, when she was 9, until 1990.
the fsln came to dominate the junta ,  robelo and chamorro resigned ,  and in 1981 ortega became the coordinator of the junta . 
ortega was an unsuccessful candidate for president in 1996 and 2001, before winning the 2006 presidential election . 
on september 9, 1994, ortega gained more power after taking over sergio ramirez's seat in the asamblea sandinista  -lrb-  sandinista assembly  -rrb-  . 
at the fourth ordinary congress of the fsln ,  held march 17–18, 2002, ortega eliminated the national directorate  -lrb-  dn  -rrb-  . 
ortega was arrested for political activities at the age of 15, and quickly joined the then-underground sandinista national liberation front  -lrb-  fsln  -rrb-  . 
in august 2016, ortega chose his wife ,  rosario murillo ,  as his vice-presidential running-mate for re-election . 
with no peaceful solution in sight ,  ortega clings to power despite the growing unrest . 
the constitutional reforms also gave ortega the sole power to appoint military and police commanders . 
ortega attended the swearing-in ceremony of nicolás maduro for his second term on 10 january 2019.
another forerunner of the torpedo boat destroyer was the japanese torpedo boat  -lrb-  `` falcon ''  -rrb-  ,  built in 1885.
four torpedo reloads were carried . 
the first vessel designed for the explicit purpose of hunting and destroying torpedo boats was the torpedo gunboat . 
the french navy ,  an extensive user of torpedo boats ,  built its first torpedo boat destroyer in 1899, with the 'torpilleur d'escadre' . 
these torpedo boat destroyers all featured a turtleback  -lrb-  i . e . 
by the end of the 1890s torpedo gunboats were made obsolete by their more successful contemporaries ,  the torpedo boat destroyers ,  which were much faster . 
fernando villaamil ,  second officer of the ministry of the navy of spain ,  designed his own torpedo gunboat to combat the threat from the torpedo boat . 
navies originally built torpedo boat destroyers to protect against torpedo boats ,  but admirals soon appreciated the flexibility of the fast ,  multi-purpose vessels that resulted . 
at first ,  the threat of a torpedo boat attack to a battle fleet was considered to exist only when at anchor; but as faster and longer-range torpedoes were developed ,  the threat extended to cruising at sea . 
the first ships to bear the formal designation `` torpedo boat destroyer ''  -lrb-  tbd  -rrb-  were the of two ships and of two ships of the royal navy . 
in terms of gunnery ,  speed and dimensions ,  the specialised design to chase torpedo boats and her high seas capabilities ,  `` destructor '' was an important precursor to the torpedo boat destroyer . 
by 1910 the steam-driven displacement  -lrb-  that is ,  not hydroplaning  -rrb-  torpedo boat had become redundant as a separate type . 
although the term `` destroyer '' had been used interchangeably with `` tbd '' and `` torpedo boat destroyer '' by navies since 1892, the term `` torpedo boat destroyer '' had been generally shortened to simply `` destroyer '' by nearly all navies by the first world war . 
once destroyers became more than just catchers guarding an anchorage ,  it was realized that they were also ideal to take over the role of torpedo boats themselves ,  so they were fitted with torpedo tubes as well as guns . 
the later of 1931 further improved the torpedo armament by storing its reload torpedoes close at hand in the superstructure ,  allowing reloading within 15 minutes . 
in 1898 by the us navy officially classified  ,  a long all steel vessel displacing 165 tons ,  as a `` torpedo boat '' . 
these ships had the size and displacement of the original torpedo boat destroyers that the contemporary destroyer had evolved from . 
three destroyer divisions attacked the russian fleet in port ,  firing a total of 18 torpedoes . 
parker eventually separated from her husband ,  divorcing in 1928.
parker was listed as a communist by the publication `` red channels '' in 1950.
parker died on june 7, 1967, of a heart attack at the age of 73.
following campbell's death ,  parker returned to new york city and the volney residential hotel . 
parker published her first volume of poetry ,  `` enough rope '' ,  in 1926.
the next 15 years were parker's greatest period of productivity and success . 
some of parker's most popular work was published in `` the new yorker '' in the form of acerbic book reviews under the byline `` constant reader '' . 
in 1932 parker met alan campbell ,  an actor with aspirations to become a screenwriter . 
toward the end of this period ,  parker began to become more politically aware and active . 
when harold ross founded `` the new yorker '' in 1925, parker and benchley were part of a board of editors established by ross to allay concerns of his investors . 
from a conflicted and unhappy childhood ,  parker rose to acclaim ,  both for her literary works published in such magazines as `` the new yorker '' and as a founding member of the algonquin round table . 
her mother died in west end in july 1898, when parker was a month shy of turning five . 
by late september 1945 the thomases had left wales and were living with various friends in london . 
constantine fitzgibbon ,  thomas's first in-depth biographer ,  wrote `` no major english poet has ever been as welsh as dylan '' . 
thomas's work and stature as a poet have been much debated by critics and biographers since his death . 
thomas's fellow poet and long-time friend vernon watkins wrote `` the times '' obituary . 
thomas's widow ,  caitlin ,  died in 1994 and was buried alongside him . 
it was the time that thomas's reputation for heavy drinking developed . 
many critics have argued that thomas's work is too narrow and that he suffers from verbal extravagance . 
thomas's refusal to align with any literary group or movement has made him and his work difficult to categorise . 
 ''our country ''  -lrb-  1945 -rrb- was a romantic tour of britain set to thomas's poetry . 
the publication of brinnin's 1955 biography `` dylan thomas in america '' cemented thomas's legacy as the `` doomed poet ''; brinnin focuses on thomas's last few years and paints a picture of him as a drunk and a philanderer . 
although thomas wrote exclusively in the english language ,  he has been acknowledged as one of the most important welsh poets of the 20th century . 
caitlin thomas's autobiographies ,  `` caitlin thomas – leftover life to kill ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- and `` my life with dylan thomas: double drink story ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- ,  describe the destructive effect of alcohol on the poet and on their relationship . 
despite criticism by sections of academia ,  thomas's work has been embraced by readers more so than many of his contemporaries ,  and is one of the few modern poets whose name is recognised by the general public . 
in 1933, thomas visited london for probably the first time . 
though fitzgibbon asserts that thomas's negativity towards welsh nationalism was fostered by his father's hostility towards the welsh language . 
olson continued that in a postmodern age that continually attempted to demand that poetry have social reference ,  none could be found in thomas's work ,  and that his work was so obscure that critics could not explicate it . 
thomas's last collection `` collected poems ,  1934–1952 '' ,  published when he was 38, won the foyle poetry prize . 
by the late 1930s ,  thomas was embraced as the `` poetic herald '' for a group of english poets ,  the new apocalyptics . 
in 2014, to celebrate the centenary of thomas's birth ,  the british council wales undertook a year-long programme of cultural and educational works . 
when thomas travelled in america ,  he recited hardy's work in his readings . 
thomas's elder son ,  llewelyn ,  died in 2000, his daughter ,  aeronwy in 2009 and his youngest son colm in 2012.
thomas's verbal style played against strict verse forms ,  such as in the villanelle `` do not go gentle into that good night '' . 
the poem uses internal half rhyme and full rhyme as well as end rhyme . 
fern hill  -lrb-  1945 -rrb- is a poem by dylan thomas ,  first published in the october ,  1945, horizon magazine ,  with its first book publication as the last poem in `` deaths and entrances '' . 
87 in the uk charts . 
a music video for `` where are we now ? `` 
recordings from the tour made up the live album `` stage '' ,  released the same year . 
3 and went gold in the uk . 
it brought the total number of bowie albums concurrently on the uk chart to six . 
 ''a reality tour '' ,  a double album of live material from the 2003 concert tour ,  was released in january 2010.
bowie and visconti continued their collaboration ,  producing a new album of completely original songs instead: the result of the sessions was the 2002 album `` heathen '' . 
released as a single ,  the song became a top 40 hit in the uk and us . 
 '' ''heroes '' ''  -lrb-  1977 -rrb- and `` lodger ''  -lrb-  1979 -rrb- followed; each album reached the uk top five and received lasting critical praise . 
he remained musically active until he died of liver cancer two days after the release of his final album ,  `` blackstar ''  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- . 
 ''blackstar '' also debuted at number one on album charts around the world ,  including australia ,  france ,  germany ,  italy ,  new zealand ,  and the us `` billboard '' 200.
it was his last release for two years . 
after completing `` low '' and ``  ''heroes '' '' ,  bowie spent much of 1978 on the isolar ii world tour ,  bringing the music of the first two berlin trilogy albums to almost a million people during 70 concerts in 12 countries . 
the wins marked bowie's first ever in musical categories . 
on 10 january 2016, two days after his 69th birthday and the release of the album `` blackstar '' ,  bowie died from liver cancer in his new york city apartment . 
after a break in philadelphia ,  where bowie recorded new material ,  the tour resumed with a new emphasis on soul . 
released shortly before his death ,  `` lazarus ''—from his final album ,  `` blackstar ''—began with the words ,  `` look up here ,  i'm in heaven '' while the rest of the album deals with other matters of mysticism and mortality . 
the album `` tin machine '' took a more direct stance against fascism and neo-nazism ,  and was criticised for being too preachy . 
new information was released in september 2014 regarding his next compilation album ,  `` nothing has changed '' ,  which was released in november . 
the performance marked the last time bowie performed his music on stage . 
on 8 january 2013, his 66th birthday ,  his website announced a new album ,  to be titled `` the next day '' and scheduled for release 8 march for australia ,  12 march for the united states ,  and 11 march for the rest of the world . 
in 1998 during an interview with michael kimmelman for the new york times he said `` art was ,  seriously ,  the only thing i'd ever wanted to own . 
on 7 january 2017 the bbc broadcast the 90-minute documentary `` david bowie: the last five years '' ,  taking a detailed look at bowie's last albums ,  `` the next day '' and `` blackstar '' ,  and his play `` lazarus '' . 
 ''absolute beginners ''  -lrb-  1986 -rrb- ,  a rock musical film adapted from colin macinnes's book of the same name about life in late 1950s london ,  featured bowie's music and presented him with a minor acting role . 
bowie's second album followed in november; originally issued in the uk as `` david bowie '' ,  it caused some confusion with its predecessor of the same name ,  and the early us release was instead titled `` man of words/man of music ''; it was reissued internationally in 1972 by rca records as `` space oddity '' . 
tin machine toured again ,  but after the live album ``  '' failed commercially ,  the band drifted apart ,  and bowie ,  though he continued to collaborate with gabrels ,  resumed his solo career . 
after uneven commercial success in the late 1970s ,  bowie had uk number ones with the 1980 single `` ashes to ashes '' ,  its parent album `` scary monsters  -lrb-  and super creeps  -rrb- ``  ,  and `` under pressure '' ,  a 1981 collaboration with queen . 
featuring philosophical post-hippie lyrics on peace ,  love ,  and morality ,  its acoustic folk rock occasionally fortified by harder rock ,  the album was not a commercial success at the time of its release . 
he was inducted into the rock and roll hall of fame in 1996.
from the time of his earliest recordings in the 1960s ,  bowie employed a wide variety of musical styles . 
on 25 june 2000, bowie made his second appearance at the glastonbury festival in england ,  playing 30 years after his first . 
he contributed backing vocals on tv on the radio's song `` province '' for their album `` return to cookie mountain '' ,  made a commercial with snoop dogg for xm satellite radio and joined with lou reed on danish alt-rockers kashmir's 2005 album `` no balance palace '' . 
bowie contributed backing vocals ,  keyboards ,  and guitar to reed's 1972 solo breakthrough `` transformer '' ,  co-producing the album with mick ronson . 
a david bowie walking tour through brixton was also launched ,  and other events marking his birthday weekend included concerts in new york ,  los angeles ,  sydney ,  and tokyo . 
the studio sessions continued and resulted in bowie's third album ,  `` the man who sold the world ''  -lrb-  1970 -rrb- ,  which contained references to schizophrenia ,  paranoia ,  and delusion . 
hopper was married five times:
hopper had several artistic pursuits beyond film . 
hopper had two brothers ,  marvin and david . 
in 2013, harper collins published `` hopper: a journey into the american dream '' ,  a biography on hopper by american writer tom folsom . 
hopper also began a prolific and acclaimed photography career in the 1960s . 
hopper was reported to have an uncredited role in `` johnny guitar '' in 1954 but he has stated that he was not in hollywood when this film was made . 
 ''dennis hopper: photographs 1961–1967 '' was published in february 2011, by taschen . 
after filming was finally completed ,  hathaway allegedly told hopper that his career in hollywood was finished . 
hopper was unable to capitalize on his `` easy rider '' success for several years . 
hopper began working as a painter and a poet as well as a collector of art in the 1960s as well ,  particularly pop art . 
hopper made his directorial film debut with `` easy rider ''  -lrb-  1969 -rrb- ,  which he and co-star peter fonda wrote with terry southern . 
dennis lee hopper  -lrb-  may 17, 1936 – may 29, 2010 -rrb- was an american actor ,  director ,  writer ,  film editor ,  photographer and artist . 
between the 1931–32 and 1965–66 seasons ,  the red wings missed the playoffs only four times . 
during the 1995–96 season ,  they won an nhl record 62 games . 
for the 1930–31 and 1931–32 seasons the team was called the detroit falcons ,  and in 1932 changed their name to the red wings . 
the red wings did not play in the 2004–05 season due to the lockout ,  which cancelled the entire nhl season . 
during the season ,  the red wings won an nhl-record 23 consecutive home games . 
the red wings opened the 2006–07 season with nicklas lidstrom as the new captain . 
the red wings' jerseys  -lrb-  traditionally known in hockey as `` sweaters ''  -rrb-  have been more or less the same since the 1930s – a white or red base with red or white piping . 
during the 1979–80 season ,  the red wings left the olympia for joe louis arena . 
the red wings began the 2009–10 nhl season in stockholm ,  losing both games to the st .  louis blues 4–3 and 5–3 respectively . 
the red wings became only the second nhl team to lose the stanley cup at home in game 7.
the detroit red wings are a professional ice hockey team based in detroit . 
in 1959, the red wings missed the playoffs for the first time in 21 years . 
the red wings lost game 7 to the sharks by a score of 3–2 and were eliminated . 
since 1983–84, the red wings have tallied six regular season first-place finishes and have won the stanley cup four times  -lrb-  1997, 1998, 2002, and 2008 -rrb- . 
the 1954–55 season ended a run of seven straight regular season titles ,  an nhl record . 
a healthier red wings team finished the 2010–11 nhl season with a 47–25–10 record and 104 points to win the central division title . 
the red wings won their last game at joe louis arena 4–1 on april 9, 2017, against the new jersey devils . 
the red wings played their first regular season game at little caesars arena on october 5, 2017, winning 4–2 over the minnesota wild . 
the team won their final four games of the 2012–13 season to earn the seventh seed of the playoffs . 
in 1946, one of the greatest players in hockey history came into the nhl with the red wings . 
when adidas became the uniform outfitter starting with the 2017–18 season ,  the red wings kept the same basic look . 
on april 9, 2016, despite the red wings losing 3–2 to the new york rangers ,  the ottawa senators defeated the boston bruins 6–1 as the red wings narrowly made the playoffs and extended their streak to a 25th season . 
in his second season ,  the lockout-shortened 1994–95 nhl season ,  bowman guided detroit to its first finals appearance in 29 years ,  only to be swept by the new jersey devils . 
the following season ,  the red wings acquired brendan shanahan and larry murphy . 
for he said ,  'i am god and there is no other god beside me , ' for he is ignorant of his strength ,  the place from which he had come . 
catharism apparently inherited their idea of satan as the creator of the evil world from gnosticism . 
psalm 82 begins  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  `` god stands in the assembly of el  -lrb-  the septuagint here says the assembly of gods  -rrb-  ,  in the midst of the gods he renders judgment '' ,  indicating a plurality of gods ,  although it does not indicate that these gods were co-actors in creation . 
of note here is the remark concerning the second hypostasis or creator and third hypostasis or world soul . 
according to marcion ,  the title god was given to the demiurge ,  who was to be sharply distinguished from the higher good god . 
the demiurge of neoplatonism is the `` nous ''  -lrb-  mind of god  -rrb-  ,  and is one of the three ordering principles:
gnosticism presents a distinction between the highest ,  unknowable god or supreme being and the demiurgic `` creator '' of the material . 
whereas plato's demiurge is good wishing good on his creation ,  gnosticism contends that the demiurge is not only the originator of evil but is evil as well . 
the first and highest aspect of god is described by plato as the one  -lrb-  τὸ ἕν ,  `` to hen ''  -rrb-  ,  the source ,  or the monad . 
but yaldabaoth ,  the demiurge ,  with the material world ,  will be cast into the lower depths . 
the angelic name `` ariel ''  -lrb-  meaning `` the lion of god '' in hebrew  -rrb-  has also been used to refer to the demiurge and is called his `` perfect '' name; in some gnostic lore ,  ariel has been called an ancient or original name for ialdabaoth . 
in this most common form of gnosticism the demiurge had an inferior though not intrinsically evil function in the universe as the head of the animal ,  or psychic world . 
gnosticism attributed falsehood or evil to the concept of the demiurge or creator ,  though in some gnostic traditions the creator is from a fallen ,  ignorant ,  or lesser—rather than evil—perspective ,  such as that of valentinius . 
the valentinian heracleon interpreted the devil as the `` principle '' of evil ,  that of `` hyle ''  -lrb-  matter  -rrb-  . 
plotinus argues of the disconnect or great barrier that is created between the `` nous '' or mind's noumenon  -lrb-  see heraclitus  -rrb-  and the material world  -lrb-  phenomenon  -rrb-  by believing the material world is evil . 
the devil resides in this lower world ,  of which he is the prince ,  the demiurge in the heavens; his mother sophia in the middle region ,  above the heavens and below the pleroma . 
in the theoretic of plotinus ,  `` nous '' produces nature through intellectual mediation ,  thus the intellectualizing gods are followed by a triad of psychic gods . 
in the `` apocryphon of john ''  ad 120–180, the demiurge arrogantly declares that he has made the world by himself:
doubravka of bohemia  -lrb-   ,  ; ca . 
doubravka's date of birth is not known . 
doubravka marriage cemented the alliance of mieszko i with bohemia ,  which continued even after her death . 
nothing is known about doubravka's childhood and youth . 
two independent sources attribute to doubravka an important role in the conversion to christianity of mieszko i and poland . 
cooper have turned up from 1978-2017:
schaffner conveyed cooper's instructions to the pilots in the cockpit; when she returned ,  cooper was wearing dark sunglasses . 
no trace of cooper ,  nor any of the equipment presumed to have left the aircraft with him ,  was found . 
at 5:24 p . m .  pst ,  cooper was informed that his demands had been met ,  and at 5:39 p . m .  the aircraft landed at seattle-tacoma airport . 
an faa official requested a face-to-face meeting with cooper aboard the aircraft ,  which was denied . 
after takeoff ,  cooper told mucklow to join the rest of the crew in the cockpit and remain there with the door closed . 
schaffner recalled that cooper appeared familiar with the local terrain; at one point he remarked ,  `` looks like tacoma down there , ``  as the aircraft flew above it . 
at approximately 7:40 p . m .  ,  the boeing 727 took off with only five people onboard: cooper ,  pilot scott ,  flight attendant mucklow ,  copilot rataczak ,  and flight engineer h .  e .  anderson . 
once the delivery was completed ,  cooper ordered all passengers ,  schaffner ,  and senior flight attendant alice hancock to leave the plane . 
the suspect purchased his airline ticket using the alias dan cooper ,  but because of a news media miscommunication he became known in popular lore as `` d .  b .  cooper '' . 
the aircraft circled puget sound for approximately two hours to allow seattle police and the fbi sufficient time to assemble cooper's parachutes and ransom money ,  and to mobilize emergency personnel . 
chesterton summed up his distributist views in the phrase `` three acres and a cow '' . 
distributists usually use just war theory in determining whether a war should be fought or not . 
the family is ,  then ,  vitally important to the very core of distributist thought . 
similar views are presented by g .  k .  chesterton in his 1910 book `` what’s wrong with the world '' . 
pivotal among belloc's and chesterton's other works regarding distributism are `` the servile state '' ,  and `` outline of sanity '' . 
this rejection of this new program was due to the direct influence of the ideas of hilaire belloc over american distributists . 
co-operative economist race mathews argues that such a system is key to bringing about a just social order . 
the kind of economic order envisaged by the early distributist thinkers would involve the return to some sort of guild system . 
according to distributists ,  property ownership is a fundamental right ,  and the means of production should be spread as widely as possible ,  rather than being centralized under the control of the state  -lrb-  state capitalism/state socialism  -rrb-  ,  a few individuals  -lrb-  plutocracy  -rrb-  ,  or corporations  -lrb-  corporatocracy  -rrb-  . 
distributism sees the family of two parents and their child or children as the central and primary social unit of human ordering and the principal unit of a functioning distributist society and civilization . 
a few distributists were influenced by the economic ideas of proudhon and his mutualist economic theory ,  thus the lesser-known anarchist branch of distributism of dorothy day and the catholic worker movement could be considered a form of free-market libertarian socialism due to their opposition to both state capitalism and state socialism . 
pope pius xi further stated ,  again in `` quadragesimo anno '' ,  `` every social activity ought of its very nature to furnish help to the members of the body social ,  and never destroy and absorb them '' . 
both belloc and chesterton opposed british imperialism in general ,  as well as specifically opposing the second boer war ,  but supported british involvement in world war i . 
dhea is a weak estrogen . 
dhea does not bind to or activate the progesterone ,  glucocorticoid ,  or mineralocorticoid receptors . 
as a neurosteroid and neurotrophin ,  dhea has important effects in the central nervous system . 
dehydroepiandrosterone  -lrb-  dhea  -rrb-  ,  also known as androstenolone ,  is an endogenous steroid hormone . 
however ,  it has also been said that inhibition of g6pdh activity by dhea `` in vivo '' has not been observed and that the concentrations required for dhea to inhibit g6pdh `` in vitro '' are very high ,  thus making the possible contribution of g6pdh inhibition to the effects of dhea uncertain . 
in mathematics ,  the discrete fourier transform  -lrb-  dft  -rrb-  converts a finite sequence of equally-spaced samples of a function into a same-length sequence of equally-spaced samples of the discrete-time fourier transform  -lrb-  dtft  -rrb-  ,  which is a complex-valued function of frequency . 
if the original sequence is one cycle of a periodic function ,  the dft provides all the non-zero values of one dtft cycle . 
starting with any given polyhedron ,  the dual of its dual is the original polyhedron . 
the dual of an isotoxal polyhedron  -lrb-  having equivalent edges  -rrb-  is also isotoxal . 
slap-style bass is sometimes used in bluegrass bass playing . 
the double bass is sometimes confusingly called the violone ,  bass violin or bass viol . 
7, for double bass and orchestra ,  dates from 1992.
an upright bass was the standard bass instrument in traditional country western music . 
 -lrb-  1979 -rrb- ,  for soprano ,  percussion ,  and 30 double basses . 
traditionally ,  the double bass is a transposing instrument . 
in jazz ,  blues ,  rockabilly and other genres outside of classical music ,  this instrument is commonly called the upright bass ,  standup bass or acoustic bass to distinguish it from the electric bass guitar . 
dragonetti wrote ten concertos for the double bass and many solo works for bass and piano . 
new hybrid basses range from $3,000 to $6,400 usd . 
 -lrb-  for more information on slapping ,  see the sections below on modern playing styles ,  double bass in bluegrass music ,  double bass in jazz ,  and double bass in popular music  -rrb-  . 
in the genre of string quintets ,  there are a few works for string quartet with double bass . 
in his `` a new history of the double bass '' ,  paul brun asserts ,  with many references ,  that the double bass has origins as the true bass of the violin family . 
the double bass ,  or simply the bass  -lrb-  and numerous other names  -rrb-  ,  is the largest and lowest-pitched bowed string instrument in the modern symphony orchestra . 
the double bass is played with a bow  -lrb-  arco  -rrb-  or by plucking the strings  -lrb-  pizzicato  -rrb-  . 
bluegrass bassist mark schatz ,  who teaches slap bass in his `` intermediate bluegrass bass '' dvd acknowledges that slap bass ``  .  .  . has not been stylistically very predominant in the music i have recorded . `` 
the string bass is the most commonly used bass instrument in bluegrass music and is almost always plucked ,  though some modern bluegrass bassists have also used a bow . 
frank proto has written a trio for violin ,  viola and double bass  -lrb-  1974 -rrb- ,  2 duos for violin and double bass  -lrb-  1967 and 2005 -rrb- ,  and `` the games of october '' for oboe/english horn and double bass  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
in 1951, leo fender released his precision bass ,  the first commercially successful electric bass guitar . 
performing on bass can be physically demanding ,  because the strings are large and thick . 
many upright bass players have contributed to the evolution of jazz . 
a person who plays this instrument is called a `` bassist '' ,  `` double bassist '' ,  `` double bass player '' ,  `` contrabassist '' ,  `` contrabass player '' or `` bass player '' . 
the terms for the instrument among classical performers are contrabass  -lrb-  which comes from the instrument's italian name ,  contrabbasso  -rrb-  ,  string bass  -lrb-  to distinguish it from brass bass instruments in a concert band ,  such as tubas  -rrb-  ,  or simply bass . 
the double bass stands around from scroll to endpin . 
the wolf tone often occurs with the note g on the bass . 
the soundpost and bass bar are components of the internal construction . 
while orchestral bass solos are somewhat rare ,  there are some notable examples . 
when writing solo passages for the bass in orchestral or chamber music ,  composers typically ensure the orchestration is light so it does not obscure the bass . 
major professional orchestras typically have an assistant principal bass player ,  who plays solos and leads the bass section if the principal is absent . 
the double bass is generally regarded as a modern descendant of the string family of instruments that originated in europe in the 15th century ,  and as such has been described as a `` bass violin . `` 
the upright bass is different from the acoustic bass guitar ,  which is a guitar-family instrument that is built like an acoustic guitar  -lrb-  although the acoustic bass guitar typically has four strings ,  tuned e–a–d–g and a sturdier construction  -rrb-  . 
if the double bass were to have a flat bridge ,  it would be impossible to bow the a and d strings individually . 
bassists playing in a big band must also be able to read written-out bass lines ,  as some arrangements have written bass parts . 
two significant recent works written for solo bass include ,  mario davidovsky's synchronisms no . 11 for double bass and electronic sounds and elliott carter's figment iii ,  for solo double bass . 
the electric bass was able to provide the huge ,  highly amplified stadium-filling bass tone that the pop and rock music of this era demanded ,  and the upright bass receded from the limelight of the popular music scene . 
like other violin and viol-family string instruments ,  the double bass is played either with a bow  -lrb-  arco  -rrb-  or by plucking the strings  -lrb-  pizzicato  -rrb-  . 
in jazz ,  blues ,  and related genres ,  the bass is frequently amplified . 
french and english basses from famous makers are also sought out by players . 
the double bass bow comes in two distinct forms  -lrb-  shown below  -rrb-  . 
double bass professor larry hurst argues that the `` modern double bass is not a true member of either the violin or viol families . `` 
bassists who play in styles that use a bass amp ,  such as blues ,  rockabilly ,  or jazz ,  may use a stompbox-format electronic tuner ,  which mutes the bass pickup during tuning . 
the double bass as a solo instrument enjoyed a period of popularity during the 18th century and many of the most popular composers from that era wrote pieces for the double bass . 
in the largest orchestras ,  bass sections may have as many as ten or twelve players ,  but modern budget constraints make bass sections this large unusual . 
when choosing a bass with a fifth string ,  the player may decide between adding a higher-pitched string  -lrb-  a high c string  -rrb-  or a lower-pitched string  -lrb-  typically a low b  -rrb-  . 
in rockabilly and psychobilly ,  percussively slapping the strings against the fingerboard is an important part of the bass playing style . 
in the early 1950s ,  the upright bass was the standard bass instrument in the emerging style of rock and roll music ,  marshall lytle of bill haley & his comets being but one example . 
deicide is an american death metal band formed in 1987 by drummer steve asheim and guitarist brothers eric and brian hoffman as `` carnage '' ,  then hiring bassist/vocalist glen benton and becoming `` amon '' . 
in june 2010, glen benton revealed that the next deicide album was to be titled `` to hell with god '' . 
in 1992, deicide was on tour in europe with atrocity from germany and gorefest ,  a dutch death metal band . 
guitarist kevin quirion of order of ennead joined the band in the summer of 2009.
the new band ,  called amon ,  consisted of benton  -lrb-  bass and vocals  -rrb-  ,  hoffman ,  hoffman's brother eric  -lrb-  guitars  -rrb-  and steve asheim  -lrb-  drums  -rrb-  . 
in spite of this ,  deicide's eighth studio album `` the stench of redemption '' album received rave reviews . 
by november 2007, deicide began work on its ninth studio album at florida's morrisound studios . 
in november 2016, it was apparent that guitarist jack owen had been replaced by monstrosity guitarist mark english without an official announcement made by the band . 
the division of labour is the motive for trade and the source of economic interdependence . 
the division of labour is the separation of tasks in any system so that participants may specialize . 
division of labour generally also increases both producer and individual worker productivity . 
additionally ,  marx argued that division of labour creates less-skilled workers . 
often division of labour and division of work are both part of the economic activity within an industrial nation or organization . 
the 14th-century scholar ibn khaldun emphasised the importance of the division of labour in the production process . 
in plato's `` republic '' ,  the origin of the state lies in the natural inequality of humanity ,  which is embodied in the division of labour . 
durkheim’s work enabled social science to progress more efficiently `` in … the understanding of human social behavior . `` 
since durkheim’s division of labour applied to all organisms ,  he considered it a `` natural law '' and worked to determine whether it should be embraced or resisted by first analysing its functions . 
babbage wrote a seminal work `` on the economy of machinery and manufactures '' analyzing perhaps for the first time the division of labour in factories . 
the lamp consists of a wick lamp with the flame enclosed inside a mesh screen . 
a modern-day equivalent of the davy lamp is the protector garforth gr6s flame safety lamp which is the approved lamp for firedamp testing in all uk coal mines . 
the davy lamp is a safety lamp for use in flammable atmospheres ,  invented in 1815 by sir humphry davy . 
the lamp also provided a test for the presence of gases . 
another reason for the increase in accidents was the unreliability of the lamps themselves . 
despite his lack of scientific knowledge ,  engine-wright george stephenson devised a lamp in which the air entered via tiny holes ,  through which the flames of the lamp could not pass . 
in 1816, the cumberland pacquet reported a demonstration of the davy lamp at william pit ,  whitehaven . 
the dlr has of tracks ,  with 45 stations . 
the north and west london light railway is a plan for an orbital railway serving the other side of london . 
in addition to the three-car station extensions ,  part of which was funded from the 2012 olympics budget ,  a line was opened from canning town to stratford and stratford international railway station along the former north london line of the national railway system ,  with additional stations . 
the dlr has been successful ,  as have other recent light rail systems . 
between limehouse and tower gateway ,  the dlr runs parallel to the london ,  tilbury and southend railway . 
on 11 november 2015 the mayor of london announced that all stations on this line would be rezoned from zone 3 to zone 2/3.
poplar was rebuilt to give cross-platform interchange between the stratford and beckton lines ,  with a new grade-separated junction built east of the station at the divergence of the stratford and beckton lines . 
there are barriers at bank ,   ,  woolwich arsenal ,  west ham and  ,  where the dlr platforms are within a london underground or national rail barrier line . 
the docklands light railway  -lrb-  dlr  -rrb-  is an automated light metro system opened in 1987 to serve the redeveloped docklands area of east london ,  england . 
in 2008, 87% of the population of north woolwich were in favour of the dlr . 
the system is part of the london fare zone system ,  and travelcards that cover the appropriate zones are valid . 
on 3 july 2007, dlr officially launched an art programme called dlr art ,  similar to that on the london underground ,  art on the underground . 
other interchanges with national rail are at limehouse ,  greenwich and west ham ,  while out of station interchanges for oyster card holders exist between shadwell dlr station and london overground's station of the same name ,  and between fenchurch street and the dlr's western termini tower gateway and bank . 
the initial system comprised two routes ,  from and stratford to  . 
it reaches north to stratford ,  south to lewisham across the river thames ,  west to and in the city of london financial district ,  and east to beckton ,  london city airport ,  and to woolwich arsenal south of the river . 
the system was lightweight ,  with stations designed for trains of only a single articulated vehicle . 
most stations are elevated ,  with others at street level ,  in cutting or underground . 
dundee is one of 32 council areas of scotland ,  and is represented by the dundee city council – a local council composed of 29 elected councillors . 
scotland returns two labour meps ,  two snp meps ,  one conservative and unionist mep and one ukip mep ,  to the european parliament . 
scotland's longest-serving councillor ,  ian borthwick ,  sits on the council . 
under the name of `` dundee city ''  -lrb-  officially the `` city of dundee ''  -rrb-  ,  it forms one of the 32 council areas used for local government in scotland . 
elections to the council are normally on a four-year cycle . 
dundee was said to be built on the 'three js': jute ,  jam and journalism . 
for elections to the british house of commons at westminster ,  the city area and portions of the angus council area are divided in two constituencies . 
dundee was granted royal burgh status on the coronation of john balliol as king of scotland in 1292.
all three constituencies are within the north east scotland electoral region: shona robison  -lrb-  snp  -rrb-  is the member of the scottish parliament  -lrb-  msp  -rrb-  for the dundee east constituency; joe fitzpatrick  -lrb-  snp  -rrb-  is the current msp for the dundee west constituency and graeme dey  -lrb-  snp  -rrb-  is the current msp for the angus south constituency . 
it included early appearances of denise coffey ,  david jason ,  eric idle ,  terry jones ,  and michael palin; the last three became members of the monty python comedy troupe soon afterwards . 
one long-running feature of the show was `` captain fantastic '' ,  a superhero parody featuring david jason in improbable and even macabre adventures against villainess mrs .  black  -lrb-  coffey  -rrb-  . 
three weeks later ,  echols and baldwin went on trial . 
the west memphis three are three men who – while teenagers – were tried and convicted ,  in 1994, of the 1993 murders of three boys in west memphis ,  arkansas . 
on august 19, 2011, misskelley ,  along with baldwin and echols ,  entered an alford plea . 
baldwin and echols were acquainted with misskelley from school ,  but were not close friends with him . 
in 1994, a memorial was erected for the three murder victims . 
the families of the three victims are divided in their opinions as to the guilt or innocence of the west memphis three . 
the court sentenced echols to death and baldwin to life in prison . 
all three defendants pleaded not guilty . 
on august 19, 2011, echols ,  along with baldwin and misskelley ,  entered an alford plea ,  while asserting their innocence . 
misskelley was tried separately ,  and echols and baldwin were tried together in 1994.
misskelley specifically said he was `` scared of the police '' during this confession . 
charles jason baldwin  -lrb-  born april 11, 1977 -rrb- along with misskelley and echols ,  entered an alford plea on august 19, 2011.
following their convictions ,  echols ,  misskelley ,  and baldwin submitted imprints of their teeth . 
jessie misskelley jr .   -lrb-  born july 10, 1975 -rrb- was arrested in connection to the murders of may 5, 1993.
shortly after misskelley's first confession ,  police arrested echols and his close friend baldwin . 
in may 1994, the three defendants appealed their convictions; the convictions were upheld on direct appeal . 
at the time of their arrests ,  jessie misskelley ,  jr .  was 17 years old ,  jason baldwin was 16 years old ,  and damien echols was 18 years old . 
in june 1996, misskelley's lawyer ,  dan stidham ,  was preparing an appeal to the u . s .  supreme court . 
john mark byers said that christopher byers may not have taken his prescription on may 5, 1993.
as part of the plea deal ,  the three men cannot pursue civil action against the state for wrongful imprisonment . 
upon further examination ,  it was concluded that if the marks were bite marks ,  they did not match the teeth of any of the three convicted . 
on june 3, the police interrogated jessie misskelley ,  jr . 
after weeks of negotiations ,  on august 19, 2011, echols ,  baldwin and misskelley were released from prison as part of a plea deal ,  making the hearings ordered by the arkansas supreme court unnecessary . 
the justices also instructed the lower court to examine claims of misconduct by the jurors who sentenced damien echols to death and jessie misskelley and jason baldwin to life in prison . 
the song is about the west memphis three ,  with 100% of the proceeds going to their benefit foundation for their release . 
in august 2011, white light productions announced that the west memphis three would be featured on their new program `` wrongfully convicted '' . 
three eight-year-old boys—steve branch ,  michael moore ,  and christopher byers—were reported missing on may 5, 1993.
on february 5, 1994, misskelley was convicted by a jury of one count of first-degree murder and two counts of second-degree murder . 
this ruling was in turn thrown out by the arkansas supreme court as to all three defendants on november 4, 2010.
the citing of a black male as a possible alternate suspect was implied during the beginning of the misskelley trial . 
celebrities and musicians have held fundraisers in the belief that the three young men convicted of the crime are innocent . 
though he was informed of his miranda rights ,  misskelley later claimed he did not fully understand them . 
in october 2003, vicki hutcheson ,  who had played a part in the arrests of misskelley ,  echols ,  and baldwin ,  gave an interview to the `` arkansas times '' in which she stated that every word she had given to the police was a fabrication . 
dewar's work for the scottish parliament has led him to be called the `` father of the nation '' . 
the first elections to the scottish parliament were held on 6 may 1999, with dewar leading the scottish labour party against their main opponents ,  the scottish national party led by alex salmond . 
dewar was born in glasgow on 21 august 1937 as the only child of alasdair  -lrb-  1897–1973 -rrb- and mary dewar  -lrb-  `` née '' bennett  -rrb-  . 
donald campbell dewar  -lrb-  21 august 1937 – 11 october 2000 -rrb- was a scottish politician ,  the inaugural first minister of scotland and an advocate of scottish devolution . 
in january 1998, he confirmed that he would stand for a seat in the scottish parliament . 
the first scotrail class 334 train `` 334001 '' was named `` donald dewar '' in his memory . 
dewar gained a parliamentary platform as chairman of the scottish affairs select committee . 
having led the labour campaign in the run up to the first scottish parliament election ,  he subsequently became the member of the scottish parliament  -lrb-  msp  -rrb-  for glasgow anniesland on 6 may 1999, and was appointed leader of the scottish labour party a day later and became the first scottish first minister as the head of a devolved coalition government with the liberal democrats . 
dewar first entered politics as the labour member of parliament  -lrb-  mp  -rrb-  for aberdeen south following the 1966 general election . 
dewar became a partner in ross harper murphy ,  in 1975.
dewar spent much of the 1970s looking for another parliamentary seat . 
on 10 october 2000 around lunchtime ,  dewar sustained a fall . 
there are currently over 1300 digimon . 
the games released in north america are: `` digimon world '' ,  `` digimon world 2 '' ,  `` digimon world 3 '' ,  `` digimon world 4 '' ,  `` digimon digital card battle '' ,  `` digimon rumble arena '' ,  `` digimon rumble arena 2 '' ,  `` digimon battle spirit '' ,  `` digimon battle spirit 2 '' ,  `` digimon racing '' ,  `` digimon world ds '' ,  `` digimon world data squad '' ,  `` digimon world dawn and dusk '' ,  `` digimon world championship '' ,  and `` digimon masters '' . 
the digimon collectible card game is a card game based on digimon ,  first introduced in japan in 1997 and published by bandai . 
digimon first appeared in narrative form in the one-shot manga `` c'mon digimon '' ,  released in the summer of 1997.
versions of the card game are also included in some of the digimon video games including `` digital card battle '' and `` digimon world 3 '' . 
digimon hatch from types of eggs which are called  . 
funimation entertainment has online streaming rights to subtitled versions of `` digimon adventure 02 '' and `` digimon tamers '' . 
 ''digimon adventure '' and its two sequels ,  `` digimon adventure 02 '' and `` digimon tamers '' ,  were added to the netflix instant streaming service in 2013 and 2014 with japanese audio and english subtitles . 
 ''c'mon digimon '' spawned the popular `` digimon adventure v-tamer 01 '' manga ,  written by hiroshi izawa ,  which began serialization on november 21, 1998.
beatty took command of the cruiser in the mediterranean fleet in november 1903 and then commanded the cruiser in the mediterranean fleet from october 1904.
under beatty's command the grand fleet maintained its dominance of the north sea until the end of the war . 
in any case beatty's actions succeeded in drawing the german high seas fleet into action against the british grand fleet . 
after the war a report of the battle was prepared by the admiralty under first sea lord rosslyn wemyss . 
in may 1902 he was passed fit for sea duty and was appointed captain of the cruiser on 2 june ,  spending two months in exercises with the channel fleet under admiral sir arthur wilson before joining the mediterranean fleet . 
admiral of the fleet david richard beatty ,  1st earl beatty  -lrb-  17 january 1871 – 11 march 1936 -rrb- was a royal navy officer . 
while first sea lord ,  he was involved in negotiating the washington naval treaty of 1922 in which it was agreed that the united states ,  britain and japan should set their navies in a ratio of 5:5:3, with france and italy maintaining smaller ratio fleets of 1.75 each . 
on the eve of the first world war in 1914, beatty was appointed a knight commander of the order of the bath and promoted to acting vice-admiral in february 1915 and given command of the battle cruiser fleet a month later . 
ethel decided not to be left behind so rented the capua palace on malta ,  home port of the mediterranean fleet ,  where she became part of the island's high society . 
beatty also at this time pressed hard for the return of responsibility for naval aviation from the newly formed royal air force to the royal navy . 
beatty escorted the german high seas fleet to internment at scapa flow in november 1918 giving the order from his flagship that `` the german flag will be hauled down at sunset and will not be raised again without permission '' . 
beatty was promoted to substantive full admiral on 1 january 1919 and to admiral of the fleet on 1 may 1919.
he was the second son of five children born to captain david longfield beatty and katherine  -lrb-  or katrine  -rrb-  edith beatty  -lrb-  née sadleir  -rrb-  ,  both from ireland: david longfield had been an officer in the fourth hussars where he formed a relationship with katrine ,  the wife of another officer . 
on inheriting and following the death of his wife at 'the mount' ,  david longfield returned to ireland abandoning the training business . 
the dictum of kenilworth was later incorporated into the statute of marlborough . 
the result ,  known as the dictum of kenilworth ,  was made public on 31 october 1266.
the primary point of the dictum was the re-establishment of royal authority . 
hostilities did not end with the publication of the dictum . 
the rebels had previously been completely disinherited ,  and their land taken into the king's hands . 
london docklands is the riverfront and former docks in london . 
further development projects are being proposed and put into practice within the london dockland area ,  such as:
in roman and medieval times ,  ships arriving in the river thames tended to dock at small quays in the present-day city of london or southwark ,  an area known as the pool of london . 
the lddc originally requested a full london underground line ,  but the government refused to fund it . 
to address this problem ,  in 1981 the secretary of state for the environment ,  michael heseltine ,  formed the london docklands development corporation  -lrb-  lddc  -rrb-  to redevelop the area . 
the first of the georgian docks was the west india  -lrb-  opened in 1802 -rrb- ,  followed by the london  -lrb-  1805 -rrb- ,  the east india  -lrb-  also 1805 -rrb- ,  the surrey  -lrb-  1807 -rrb- ,  the regent's canal dock  -lrb-  1820 -rrb- ,  st katharine  -lrb-  1828 -rrb- and the west india south  -lrb-  1829 -rrb- . 
the lddc also contributed to the development of london city airport  -lrb-  iata airport code lcy  -rrb-  ,  opened in october 1987 on the spine of the royal docks . 
it also served as the development planning authority for the area . 
the numbers of several london buses routes are prefixed `` d '' for docklands; all run on the north bank of the river thames as part of the london bus network ,  and act as feeder buses to the dlr . 
docklands buses operates all routes apart from route d3, which is run by stagecoach london . 
the revival of the docklands has had major effects in run-down surrounding areas . 
a diesel multiple unit or dmu is a multiple-unit train powered by on-board diesel engines . 
a type of diesel multiple units in the u . s .  was the budd rail diesel car  -lrb-  rdc  -rrb-  . 
these br `` first generation '' dmus were built between 1956 and 1963.
as a result ,  several types of lightweight dmus have been used:
diesel multiple units are in constant use in croatia ,  operated by national operator croatian railways . 
the rdc was a single passenger car with two diesel engines and two sets of controls . 
in the united states only fra-compliant dmu systems are permitted on freight rail corridors . 
the diesel engine may be located above the frame in an engine bay or under the floor . 
the power to weight ratio also tends to be worse . 
in the republic of ireland the córas iompair éireann  -lrb-  cié  -rrb-  ,  which controlled the republic's railways between 1945 and 1986, introduced dmus in the mid-1950s and they were the first diesel trains on many main lines . 
wollheim left ace in 1971.
wollheim edited the first science fiction anthology to be mass-marketed ,  `` the pocket book of science fiction ''  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- . 
 ''the encyclopedia of science fiction ''  -lrb-  first edition ,  1979 -rrb- calls wollheim `` one of the first and most vociferous sf fans . `` 
in 1952 wollheim left avon to work for a . 
in a 2006 interview ,  betsy wollheim said:
in 1977 scholar robert scholes named wollheim `` one of the most important editors and publishers of science fiction . `` 
wollheim was a member of the new york science fiction league ,  one of the clubs established by hugo gernsback to promote science fiction . 
wollheim organized the first science fiction convention ,  when a group from new york met with a group from philadelphia on october 22, 1936 in philadelphia . 
ursula k .  le guin called wollheim `` the tough ,  reliable editor of ace books ,  in the late pulpalignean era ,  1966 and ’67, ``  which is when he published her first two novels ,  in an ace double . 
donald allen wollheim  -lrb-  october 1, 1914 – november 2, 1990 -rrb- was an american science fiction editor ,  publisher ,  writer ,  and fan . 
the theoretical resolution of 35 mm film is greater than that of 2k digital cinema . 
event cinema is defined more by the frequency of events rather than by the content itself . 
at the end of 2017, virtually all of the world's cinema screens were digital  -lrb-  98%  -rrb-  . 
digital cinemas can deliver live broadcasts from performances or events . 
event cinema currently accounts for on average between 1-3% of overall box office for cinemas worldwide but anecdotally it's been reported that some cinemas attribute as much as 25% ,  48% and even 51%  -lrb-  the rio bio cinema in stockholm  -rrb-  of their overall box office . 
digital cinema refers to the use of digital technology to distribute or project motion pictures as opposed to the historical use of reels of motion picture film ,  such as 35 mm film . 
paul thomas anderson recently was able to create 70-mm film prints for his film `` the master ''  . 
first installation in europe is in arena sihlcity cinema in zürich . 
a number of high-profile film directors ,  including christopher nolan ,  paul thomas anderson ,  david o .  russell and quentin tarantino have publicly criticized digital cinema and advocated the use of film and film prints . 
film critic roger ebert criticized the use of dcps after a cancelled film festival screening of brian depalma's film `` passion '' at new york film festival as a result of a lockup due to the coding system . 
the cost savings and ease ,  together with the ability to store film rather than having to send a print on to the next cinema ,  allows a larger scope of films to be screened and watched by the public; minority and small-budget films that would not otherwise get such a chance . 
in asia ,  on july 13, 2017, an led screen for digital cinema developed by samsung electronics was publicly demonstrated on one screen at lotte cinema world tower in seoul . 
the playback of the content is controlled by the server using a `` playlist '' . 
digital cinema initiatives  -lrb-  dci  -rrb-  ,  a joint venture of the six major studios ,  published the first version  -lrb-  v1.0 -rrb- of a system specification for digital cinema in july 2005.
the electronic transferring of digital film ,  from central servers to servers in cinema projection booths ,  is an inexpensive process of supplying copies of newest releases to the vast number of cinema screens demanded by prevailing saturation-release strategies . 
china has maintained a hostile position toward the dpp . 
the dpp denies the existence of the 1992 consensus between china and taiwan and demand a greater democratic opening of communist china . 
the incumbent president and former leader of the dpp ,  tsai ing-wen ,  is the second member of the dpp to hold the office . 
however ,  the dpp share of the aboriginal vote has been on the increase . 
at the other end of the political spectrum ,  the acceptance by the dpp of the symbols of the republic of china is opposed by the taiwan solidarity union . 
the dpp's roots were in opposition to kuomintang one-party authoritarian rule . 
the dpp supported reform of the constitution that would make it official that republic of china's national government represented only the people of republic of china and made no claims to territory in mainland china or mongolia . 
founded in 1986, the dpp is one of two major parties in taiwan ,  along with the historically dominant kuomintang . 
the dpp vowed to reflect on public misgivings towards the party . 
the first years of the dpp as the ruling party drew accusations from the opposition that ,  as a self-styled taiwanese nationalist party ,  the dpp was itself inadequately sensitive to the ethnographic diversity of taiwan's population . 
its distribution within the americas and north africa ,  however ,  is most likely restricted to the united states ,  mexico and southern canada in north america ,  and tunisia in africa where the highest species diversity occurs . 
for elements `` g '' and `` h '' of a group `` g '' ,  the commutator of `` g '' and `` h '' is formula_1.
for some natural number formula_23, where the `` g '' and `` h '' are elements of `` g '' . 
an element of `` g '' which is of the form formula_2 for some `` g '' and `` h '' is called a commutator . 
in general ,  formula_4.
geisel attended dartmouth college ,  graduating in 1925.
frith and geisel chose the name in honor of geisel's second wife audrey ,  whose maiden name was stone . 
geisel was born and raised in springfield ,  massachusetts ,  the son of henrietta  -lrb-  `` née '' seuss  -rrb-  and theodor robert geisel . 
geisel also felt that traveling helped his creativity . 
after the war ,  geisel and his wife moved to la jolla ,  california ,  where he returned to writing children's books . 
in 1956, dartmouth awarded geisel with an honorary doctorate ,  finally justifying the `` dr . ``  in his pen name . 
audrey oversaw geisel's estate until her death on december 19, 2018, at the age of 97.
in 1942, geisel turned his energies to direct support of the u . s .  war effort . 
after the war ,  though ,  geisel overcame his feelings of animosity ,  using his book `` horton hears a who ! `` 
after the war ,  geisel returned to writing children's books ,  writing classics like `` if i ran the zoo ''  -lrb-  1950 -rrb- ,  `` horton hears a who ! `` 
geisel's wife helen had a long struggle with illnesses ,  including cancer and emotional pain over geisel's affair with audrey stone dimond . 
this is often suggested as one of the reasons that geisel's writing was so well received . 
geisel's first work signed `` dr .  seuss '' was published in `` judge '' about six months after he started working there . 
geisel adopted the name `` dr .  seuss '' as an undergraduate at dartmouth college and as a graduate student at lincoln college ,  oxford . 
this was followed by `` horton hatches the egg '' in 1940, in which geisel returned to the use of poetry
geisel died of oral cancer on september 24, 1991 at his home in la jolla at the age of 87.
the basic operation used in digital compositing is known as 'alpha blending' ,  where an opacity value ,  'α' ,  is used to control the proportions of two input pixel values that end up a single output pixel . 
this refined dandyism continued to be regarded as an essential strand of male englishness . `` 
the origin of the word is uncertain . 
the beginnings of dandyism in france were bound to the politics of the french revolution; the initial stage of dandyism ,  the gilded youth ,  was a political statement of dressing in an aristocratic style in order to distinguish its members from the sans-culottes . 
wilde wrote that ,  `` one should either be a work of art ,  or wear a work of art . `` 
jules amédée barbey d'aurevilly wrote `` on dandyism and george brummell '' ,  an essay devoted ,  in great measure ,  to examining the career of beau brummell . 
in 1836 thomas carlyle wrote: a dandy is a clothes-wearing man ,  a man whose trade ,  office and existence consists in the wearing of clothes . 
in the twenty-first century ,  the word `` dandy '' is a jocular ,  often sarcastic adjective meaning `` fine '' or `` great ''; when used in the form of a noun ,  it refers to a well-groomed and well-dressed man ,  but often to one who is also self-absorbed . 
previous manifestations of the `` petit-maître ''  -lrb-  french for `` small master ''  -rrb-  and the muscadin have been noted by john c .  prevost ,  but the modern practice of dandyism first appeared in the revolutionary 1790s ,  both in london and in paris . 
