the convention established the european court of human rights  -lrb-  ecthr  -rrb-  . 
the eureka rebellion was a rebellion in 1854, instigated by gold miners in ballarat ,  victoria ,  australia ,  who revolted against the colonial authority of the united kingdom . 
during the battle ,  trooper john king the police constable ,  took down the eureka flag . 
the eureka flag was commonly referred to at the time as the australian flag ,  and as the southern cross ,  with `` the age '' variously reporting ,  on 28 november: `` the australian flag shall triumphantly wave in the sunshine of its own blue and peerless sky ,  over thousands of australia's adopted sons ''; the day after the battle: `` they assembled round the australian flag ,  which has now a permanent flag-staff ''; and during the 1855 eureka trials ,  that it was sworn that the eureka flag was also known as the `` digger's flag '' and also as `` the southern cross '' . 
 ''the argus '' newspaper of 4 december 1854 reported that the union jack `` had '' to be hoisted underneath the eureka flag at the stockade ,  and that both flags were by then in the possession of the foot police . 
professor geoffrey blainey has advanced the view ,  that the white cross behind the stars on the eureka flag `` really is an irish cross rather than being a configuration of the southern cross '' . 
the first trial relating to the rebellion was a charge of sedition against henry seekamp of the `` ballarat times '' . 
the diggers were further angered by the arrest of another seven of their number for the eureka hotel fire . 
as such ,  the eureka rebellion is controversially identified with the birth of democracy in australia and interpreted by some as a political revolt . 
on 7 october 1854, scottish miner james scobie was murdered at bentley's eureka hotel . 
gregory black ,  military historian and author of `` eureka stockade: a ferocious and bloody battle '' ,  concedes two flags may have been flown on the day of the battle ,  as the miners were claiming to be defending their british rights ,  with a further article in `` the argus '' on 9 december 1854, reporting that constable hugh king had found a union jack like flag being carried by a prisoner; and ,  according to `` the eureka encyclopedia '' ,  sergeant john mcneil at the time shredded a flag at the spencer street barracks in melbourne ,  which was said to be the eureka flag ,  but which may well have been a union jack . 
while it has been thought all the deaths at eureka were men ,  research by historian clare wright details that at least one woman lost her life in the massacre . 
it is certain that irish-born people were strongly represented at the eureka stockade . 
the official register of deaths in the ballarat district register shows 27 names associated with the stockade battle at eureka . 
the white and blue eureka flag ,  said to be designed by a canadian miner ,  captain henry ross ,  and bearing nothing but the southern cross ,  was then flown for the first  -lrb-  recorded  -rrb-  occasion; according to `` the ballarat times '' ,  which first mentioned the flag a week earlier on 24 november 1854, at `` about eleven o'clock the 'southern cross' was hoisted ,  and its maiden appearance was a fascinating object to behold . `` 
following the battle ,  rebel leader ,  irish australian peter lalor ,  wrote in a statement to the colonists of victoria ,  `` there are two things connected with the late outbreak  -lrb-  eureka  -rrb-  which i deeply regret . 
 '' ,  with the 'eureka oath' being sworn by peter lalor to the affirmation of his fellow demonstrators ,  who encamped themselves around the flag to resist further licence hunts and harassment by the authorities: `` we swear by the southern cross to stand truly by each other and fight to defend our rights and liberties . `` 
in setting its goals ,  the ballarat reform league used the first five of the british chartist movement's principles as set out in the people's charter of 1838.
 ''escape from new york '' opened in new york and los angeles july 10, 1981.
 ''escape from new york '' was released on laserdisc 13 times between 1983 and 1998.
 ''escape from new york '' was released numerous times on vhs during the 1980s and 1990s . 
snake just walks off answering ,  `` i don't need the competition '' . 
snake is lifted to safety ,  and the micro-explosives in his neck are neutralized . 
 ''escape from new york '' was released in the united states on july 10, 1981.
marvel comics released the one-shot `` the adventures of snake plissken '' in january 1997.
snake is sent into manhattan in a stealth glider ,  landing atop the world trade center . 
escape from new york is a 1981 american post-apocalyptic science-fiction action film co-written ,  co-scored and directed by john carpenter . 
he did not agree with this film's philosophy but liked how it conveyed `` the sense of new york as a kind of jungle ,  and i wanted to make a science fiction film along these lines '' . 
released a crossover comics miniseries between snake and jack burton titled `` big trouble in little china / escape from new york '' in october 2016.
the plant hormone ethylene is a combatant for salinity in most plants . 
the corolla of a plant refers to its set of petals . 
ethylene serves as a hormone in plants . 
a large portion of the soil has been affected by over salinity and it has been known to limit the growth of many plants . 
plants can be induced to flower either by treatment with the gas in a chamber ,  or by placing a banana peel next to the plant in an enclosed area . 
it can also be used to hasten fruit ripening ,  as well as a welding gas . 
the name ethylene was used in this sense as early as 1852.
over generations ,  many plant genes have adapted ,  allowing plants’ phenotypes to change and built different mechanisms to counter salinity effects . 
mutations in these pathways can cause lack of ethylene signaling ,  causing stunt in plant growth and development . 
commercial growers of bromeliads ,  including pineapple plants ,  use ethylene to induce flowering . 
ethylene's role in this developmental scenario is to move the plant away from a state of attracting pollinators ,  so it also aids in decreasing the production of these volatiles . 
dna sequences for ethylene receptors have also been identified in many other plant species and an ethylene binding protein has even been identified in cyanobacteria . 
ethylene  -lrb-  iupac name: ethene  -rrb-  is a hydrocarbon which has the formula or hc=ch . 
in 1935, crocker proposed that ethylene was the plant hormone responsible for fruit ripening as well as senescence of vegetative tissues . 
ethylene has been used since the ancient egyptians ,  who would gash figs in order to stimulate ripening  -lrb-  wounding stimulates ethylene production by plant tissues  -rrb-  . 
nevertheless ,  use of the name ethylene for hc=ch is still prevalent among chemists in north america . 
in 2005, eiffel became an iso-standardized language . 
the design of the language is closely connected with the eiffel programming method . 
ezra  -lrb-  ;  ,  '; fl . 
the canonical book of ezra and book of nehemiah are the oldest sources for the activity of ezra ,  whereas many of the other books ascribed to ezra  -lrb-  first esdras ,  3–6 ezra  -rrb-  are later literary works dependent on the canonical books of ezra and nehemiah . 
ezra is seen as a new moses in this book . 
ezra ,  known as `` ezra the scribe '' in chazalic literature ,  is a highly respected figure in judaism . 
scholars are divided over the chronological sequence of the activities of ezra and nehemiah . 
the first-century jewish historian josephus deals with ezra in his `` antiquities of the jews '' . 
according to jewish tradition ,  ezra was the writer of the books of chronicles ,  and is the same prophet known also as malachi . 
there is also another work ,  thought to be influenced by this one ,  known as the `` greek apocalypse of ezra '' . 
jezebel ,  enraged that elijah had ordered the deaths of her priests ,  threatens to kill elijah . 
when ahab confronts elijah ,  he refers to him as the `` troubler of israel . `` 
elijah ,  in company with elisha ,  approaches the jordan . 
three years after this vision elijah was `` translated . `` 
thus ,  a cup was left for the arrival of elijah . 
elijah appears with moses during the transfiguration of jesus . 
elijah's story continues now from ahab to an encounter with ahaziah . 
elijah pronounced his malediction ,  `` i curse you in the name of the lord . 
elijah proposes a direct test of the powers of baal and the jewish god . 
yet another name for elijah is `` angel of the covenant ''
elijah is mentioned once more in  ,  which will be his final mention in the hebrew bible . 
elijah sends obadiah back to ahab to announce his return to israel . 
the apostles' answer includes elijah among others . 
traditionally ,  the cup is viewed as elijah's and is used for no other purpose . 
the elijah of legend did not lose any of his ability to afflict the comfortable . 
elijah encounters ahab again in  ,  after ahab has acquired possession of a vineyard by murder . 
elijah speaks with sharp irony about the religious ambivalence of israel . 
elijah agreed ,  with the condition that elisha would see him be `` taken '' . 
according to rabbinic tradition ,  elijah's words were patently untrue  -lrb-   and   -rrb-  ,  and since elijah accused israel of failing to uphold the covenant ,  god would require elijah to be present at every covenant of circumcision . 
elijah not only challenges baal on behalf of god himself ,  but he also challenges jezebel ,  her priests ,  ahab and the people of israel . 
from the time of malachi ,  who says of elijah that god will send him before `` the great and dreadful day ''  -lrb-  mal . 
in the same cave where god once appeared to moses and revealed himself as gracious and merciful ,  elijah was summoned to appear before god . 
ahaziah sends out three groups of soldiers to arrest elijah . 
however jesus' ministry had little in common with that of elijah; in particular ,  he preached the forgiveness of one's enemies ,  while elijah killed his . 
as told in the hebrew bible ,  elijah's challenge is bold and direct . 
as elijah is lifted up ,  his mantle falls to the ground and elisha picks it up . 
broca's  -lrb-  expressive  -rrb-  aphasia is a type of non-fluent aphasia in which an individual’s speech is halting and effortful . 
typically ,  people with expressive aphasia can understand speech and read better than they can produce speech and write . 
severity of expressive aphasia varies among patients . 
expressive aphasia ,  also known as broca's aphasia ,  is a type of aphasia characterized by partial loss of the ability to produce language  -lrb-  spoken ,  manual ,  or written  -rrb-  ,  although comprehension generally remains intact . 
expressive aphasia also differs from apraxia of speech which is a motor disorder characterized by an inability to create and sequence motor plans for speech . 
ephesus came under egyptian rule between 263 and 197 bc . 
after alexander's death in 323 bc ,  ephesus in 290 bc came under the rule of one of alexander's generals ,  lysimachus . 
the city flourished after it came under the control of the roman republic in 129 bc . 
the seleucid king antiochus iii the great tried to regain the greek cities of asia minor and recaptured ephesus in 196 bc but he then came into conflict with rome . 
when alexander the great defeated the persian forces at the battle of granicus in 334 bc ,  the greek cities of asia minor were liberated . 
the city was famed for the nearby temple of artemis  -lrb-  completed around 550 bc  -rrb-  ,  one of the seven wonders of the ancient world . 
in 356 bc the temple of artemis was burnt down ,  according to legend ,  by a lunatic called herostratus . 
about 650 bc ,  ephesus was attacked by the cimmerians who razed the city ,  including the temple of artemis . 
after lysimachus had destroyed the nearby cities of lebedos and colophon in 292 bc ,  he relocated their inhabitants to the new city . 
javascript also supports anonymous functions . 
javascript has become one of the most popular programming languages on the web . 
javascript is almost entirely object-based . 
all popular modern web browsers support javascript with built-in interpreters . 
but tamarin and actionscript 3 were too different from web javascript to converge ,  as was realized by the parties in 2007 and 2008.
the terms `` vanilla javascript '' and `` vanilla js '' refer to javascript not extended by any frameworks or additional libraries . 
javascript has a small number of built-in objects ,  including function and date . 
the result was a proliferation of comprehensive frameworks and libraries ,  improved javascript programming practices ,  and increased usage of javascript outside web browsers ,  as seen by the proliferation of server-side javascript platforms . 
the vast majority of websites use it ,  and all major web browsers have a dedicated javascript engine to execute it . 
scripts written in vanilla js are plain javascript code . 
alongside html and css ,  javascript is one of the three core technologies of the world wide web . 
 ''javascript '' is a trademark of oracle corporation in the united states . 
a wealthy citizen who moves to a jurisdiction with lower taxes is termed a `` tax exile '' . 
citizen's decision to move to singapore and renounce his citizenship spurred a bill in the u . s .  senate ,  the ex-patriot act ,  which would have forced such wealthy `` tax exiles '' to pay a special tax in order to re-enter the united states . 
relegation was a milder form of deportation ,  which preserved the subject's citizenship and property . 
the elbląg canal ,  built in 1825–44 under prussia ,  is a tourist site of elbląg . 
elbląg is not a deep-water port . 
the old town  -lrb-    -rrb-  is located on the river elbląg connecting lake drużno to the vistula lagoon ,  about from the lagoon and from gdańsk . 
it was then that the famous elbląg canal was commissioned . 
elbląg is one of the oldest cities in the province . 
until world war ii there were many gothic ,  renaissance and baroque houses in elbląg's old town; some of them are reconstructed . 
after the expulsion of most of the german population ,  the city was repopulated and given the polish name `` elbląg '' . 
the german-language `` elbinger rechtsbuch '' ,  written in elbing ,  prussia documented among other laws for the first time polish common law . 
after world war ii the city again became part of poland . 
elbląg is located about south-east of gdańsk and south-west of kaliningrad ,  russia . 
the city was transferred to prussia after the first partition of poland in 1772.
elbląg  -lrb-  ; ; old prussian: `` elbings ''  -rrb-  is a city in northern poland on the eastern edge of the żuławy region with 121,191 inhabitants  -lrb-  31 december 2016 -rrb- . 
the elbląg canal  -lrb-  `` kanał elbląski ''  -rrb-  connecting lake drużno with drwęca river and lake jeziorak is a popular tourist site . 
the city became part of poland in 1945 and was repopulated with polish citizens . 
the town came again under occupation by russia from 1758-1762 during the seven years' war . 
previously it was the capital of elbląg voivodeship  -lrb-  1975–1998 -rrb- and a county seat within gdańsk voivodeship  -lrb-  1945–1975 -rrb- . 
the city was handed over to polish king augustus ii in 1712.
along with tricity and szczecin ,  elbląg was the scene of rioting in the coastal cities in 1970  -lrb-  see also polish 1970 protests  -rrb-  . 
the war casualties were catastrophic ,  especially the severe destruction of the old town district ,  one of the grandest and most beautiful in east prussia . 
georg steenke ,  an engineer from königsberg ,  connected elbing near the baltic sea with the southern part of prussia by building the oberländischer kanal  -lrb-  elbląg canal  -rrb-  . 
regionalists have long been represented in the european parliament . 
the efa also recognises friends of the efa ,  a special status for regionalist parties outside of the european union . 
co-operation between the efa and the greens continued . 
since 1999 the efa and the european green party  -lrb-  egp  -rrb-  have joined forces within greens–european free alliance  -lrb-  greens/efa  -rrb-  group in the european parliament ,  albeit some efa members have joined other groups from time to time . 
the efa's youth wing is the european free alliance youth  -lrb-  efay  -rrb-  ,  founded in 2000.
the european free alliance  -lrb-  efa  -rrb-  is a european political party that consists of various regionalist political parties in europe . 
following the 1999 european parliament election ,  in which efa parties did quite well ,  efa elected meps formed a joint group with the european green party ,  under the name the greens–european free alliance  -lrb-  greens/efa  -rrb-  . 
 ,  alde is represented in european union institutions ,  with 68 meps and 5 members of the european commission . 
prior to the 2004 european election the party had been represented through its own group ,  the european liberal democrats and reformists  -lrb-  eldr  -rrb-  group . 
in the 7th european parliament the epp group remains the largest parliamentary group with 275 meps . 
the european people's party group  -lrb-  epp group  -rrb-  is the political group in the european parliament consisting of deputies  -lrb-  meps  -rrb-  from the member parties of the european people's party  -lrb-  epp  -rrb-  . 
nevertheless ,  the consolidation held through the 1990s ,  assisted by the group being renamed to the `` european people's party – european democrats ''  -lrb-  epp-ed  -rrb-  group ,  and after the 1999 european elections the epp-ed reclaimed its position as the largest group in the parliament from the party of european socialists  -lrb-  pes  -rrb-  group . 
the european people's party was officially founded as a european political party in 1976.
in 1995, the enlargement of the european union led to the creation of the nordic green left group of parties . 
european united left–nordic green left  -lrb-   ,  gue/ngl  -rrb-  is a left-wing political group in the european parliament established in 1995.
the group comprises political parties of socialist and communist orientation . 
the group also publishes reports on various topics . 
it supplanted the earlier european conservative group . 
it adopted the european democrats group name in september 1980, later becoming the european conservatives group in 2014.
this announcement ended the 30-year existence of the european democrats in the european parliament . 
the european democrats continued to exist as a political group in the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe  -lrb-  pace  -rrb-  until 2014, when it became the european conservatives group . 
the first verse in the letter identifies paul as its author . 
however ,  many critical scholars have questioned the authorship of the letter and suggest that it may have been written between ad 80 and 100.
according to tradition ,  the apostle paul wrote the letter while he was in prison in rome  -lrb-  around ad 62 -rrb- . 
if paul was the author of the letter ,  then it was probably written from rome during paul's first imprisonment  -lrb-  ; ;   -rrb-  ,  and probably soon after his arrival there in the year 62, four years after he had parted with the ephesian elders at miletus . 
while early lists of new testament books ,  including marcion's canon and the muratorian fragment ,  attribute the letter to paul ,  more recently there have been challenges to pauline authorship on the basis of the letter's characteristically non-pauline syntax ,  terminology ,  and eschatology . 
a `` remote exploit '' works over a network and exploits the security vulnerability without any prior access to the vulnerable system . 
there are several methods of classifying exploits . 
many exploits are designed to provide superuser-level access to a computer system . 
exploits against client applications also exist ,  usually consisting of modified servers that send an exploit if accessed with a client application . 
a `` local exploit '' requires prior access to the vulnerable system and usually increases the privileges of the person running the exploit past those granted by the system administrator . 
the erg is a unit of energy and work equal to 10 joules . 
unit of energy '' . 
everway is a fantasy role-playing game first published by wizards of the coast under their alter ego brand in the mid-1990s . 
the game's box also had three books of source material and game-playing tips: a player's guide ,  game master's guide ,  and guide to the fortune deck . 
as two 3u cards are shorter than a 6u card  -lrb-  by 33.35 mm  -rrb-  ,  it is possible to install two 3u cards in one slot of a 6u subrack ,  with a mid-height structure for proper support . 
this dimension refers to the subrack in which the card is to be mounted ,  rather than the card itself . 
atoms that do not obey their rule are called `` electron-deficient '' when they have too few electrons to achieve a `` noble gas configuration '' ,  or `` hypervalent '' when they have too many electrons . 
it is also known that the work produced by the system is the difference between the heat absorbed from the hot reservoir and the heat given up to the cold reservoir:
through the efforts of clausius and kelvin ,  it is now known that the maximum work that a heat engine can produce is the product of the carnot efficiency and the heat absorbed from the hot reservoir:
there are many thermodynamic properties that are functions of state . 
the second law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of an isolated system never decreases . 
in the carnot cycle ,  the working fluid returns to the same state it had at the start of the cycle ,  hence the line integral of any state function ,  such as entropy ,  over this reversible cycle is zero . 
the statistical mechanics description of the behavior of a system is necessary as the definition of the properties of a system using classical thermodynamics becomes an increasingly unreliable method of predicting the final state of a system that is subject to some process . 
in the field of education there is a potential `` expert blind spot ''  -lrb-  see also dunning–kruger effect  -rrb-  in newly practicing educators who are experts in their content area . 
the word expertise is used to refer also to expert determination ,  where an expert is invited to decide a disputed issue . 
expertise characteristics ,  skills and knowledge of a person  -lrb-  that is ,  expert  -rrb-  or of a system ,  which distinguish experts from novices and less experienced people . 
in law ,  an expert witness must be recognized by argument and authority . 
studies have investigated the factors that enable experts to be fast and accurate . 
an expert is someone who has a prolonged or intense experience through practice and education in a particular field . 
tourism in afghanistan was at its peak in 1977.
the current trade between afghanistan and other countries is at us$5 billion a year . 
each year about 20,000 foreign tourists visit afghanistan . 
afghanistan embarked on a modest economic development program in the 1930s . 
trade in goods smuggled into pakistan once constituted a major source of revenue for afghanistan . 
wheat and cereal production is afghanistan's traditional agricultural mainstay . 
afghanistan's important resource in the past has been natural gas ,  which was first tapped in 1967.
afghanistan signed a copper deal with china  -lrb-  metallurgical corp .  of china ltd .   -rrb-  in 2008, which is to a large-scale project that involves the investment of $2.8 billion by china and an annual income of about $400 million to the afghan government . 
in 2010, afghanistan and pakistan signed into law a new afghanistan–pakistan transit trade agreement  -lrb-  aptta  -rrb-  ,  which allows their shipping trucks to transit goods within both nations . 
much of afghanistan's livestock was removed from the country by early waves of refugees who fled to neighboring pakistan and iran . 
the economy of afghanistan has had significant improvement in the last decade due to the infusion of billions of dollars in international assistance and remittances from afghan expatriates . 
it is estimated to hold at least 11 million tonnes or us$33 billion worth of copper . 
infrontier manages a $30 million dedicated afghanistan private equity fund afghanistan fund backed by some of europe's leading financial investors - co-founded by benj conway and felix von schubert . 
afghanistan's timber has been greatly depleted ,  and since the mid-1980s ,  only about 3% of the land area has been forested ,  mainly in the east . 
ancient afghanistan was one of the most prosperous countries in the world owing to its vibrant trade with greater india that extended till bangladesh and beyond . 
in the eighteenth century ,  german romanticist writers were influenced by this notion of the elf ,  and reimported the english word `` elf '' into the german language . 
the word `` elf '' is found throughout the germanic languages and seems originally to have meant 'white being' . 
evil is sometimes perceived as the dualistic antagonistic binary opposite to good ,  in which good should prevail and evil should be defeated . 
evil ,  in a general sense ,  is the opposite or absence of good . 
some religions and philosophies deny evil's existence and usefulness in describing people . 
further ,  `` men of old have handed it down as paul's ,  but who wrote the epistle god only knows '' . 
the epistle to the hebrews ,  or letter to the hebrews ,  or in the greek manuscripts ,  simply to the hebrews  -lrb-   πρὸς ἑβραίους  -rrb-  is one of the books of the new testament . 
donald guthrie’s commentary `` the letter to the hebrews ''  -lrb-  1983 -rrb- mentions priscilla by name as a suggested author . 
at present ,  neither modern scholarship nor church teaching ascribes hebrews to paul . 
in the 4th century ,  jerome and augustine of hippo supported paul's authorship: the church largely agreed to include hebrews as the fourteenth letter of paul ,  and affirmed this authorship until the reformation . 
although the writer's style reflects some characteristics of paul's writing ,  there are some differences . 
the epistle presents jesus with the titles `` pioneer '' or `` forerunner '' ,  `` son '' and `` son of god '' ,  `` priest '' and `` high priest '' . 
the theme of the epistle is the doctrine of the person of christ and his role as mediator between god and humanity . 
others later suggested luke the evangelist ,  apollos ,  or his teacher priscilla as possible authors . 
by the end of the first century there was no consensus on the author’s identity . 
esther is described in the book of esther as a jewish queen of the persian king ahasuerus  -lrb-  commonly identified as xerxes i  -rrb-  . 
 ''esther '' may be derived from the theonym ishtar . 
the status of esther as a canonical book of the bible has historically been under dispute . 
esther is also commemorated as a matriarch in the calendar of saints of the lutheran church–missouri synod on may 24.
dianne tidball argues that while vashti is a `` feminist icon '' ,  esther is a post-feminist icon . 
 ''esther before ahasuerus '' is one of the mostly commonly depicted parts of the story . 
entamoeba is a genus of amoebozoa found as internal parasites or commensals of animals . 
certain other genera of symbiotic amoebae ,  such as `` endamoeba '' ,  might prove to be synonyms of `` entamoeba '' but this is still unclear . 
many other species of `` entamoeba '' have been described ,  and it is likely that many others remain to be found . 
england failed to qualify for the world cup in 1974, 1978 and 1994.
at first ,  england had no permanent home stadium . 
england have occasionally had a third kit . 
in the 2014 fifa world cup ,  england were eliminated at the group stage for the first time since the 1958 world cup ,  and the first time at a major tournament since euro 2000.
since first entering the tournament in 1950, england has qualified for the fifa world cup fifteen times . 
england were beaten by belgium for a second time ,  2–0, in the third place match . 
the england national football team is the joint-oldest in the world; it was formed at the same time as scotland . 
england first appeared at the 1950 fifa world cup ,  and have subsequently qualified for a total of 15 fifa world cup finals tournaments ,  tied for sixth best by number of appearances . 
for the world cup in 1986 england had a third kit of pale blue ,  imitating that worn in mexico sixteen years before and england retained pale blue third kits until 1992, but they were rarely used . 
england won all but one of their qualifying games for the 2010 fifa world cup ,  but at the tournament itself ,  england drew their opening two games; this led to questions about the team's spirit ,  tactics and ability to handle pressure . 
they next went on to achieve their second best result in the 1990 fifa world cup by finishing fourth – losing again to west germany in a semi-final finishing 1–1 after extra time ,  then 3–4 in england's first penalty shoot-out . 
although england's first away kits were blue ,  england's traditional away colours are red shirts ,  white shorts and red socks . 
england qualified for the 1970 fifa world cup in mexico as reigning champions ,  and reached the quarter-finals ,  where they were knocked out by west germany . 
in the city ,  the population was spread out with 31.9% under the age of 18, 5.7% from 18 to 24, 34.4% from 25 to 44, 19.5% from 45 to 64, and 8.5% 65 years of age or older . 
the median age in the city was 37.1 years . 
for every 100 females age 18 and over ,  there were 89.6 males . 
out of the total population ,  3.1% of those under the age of 18 and 5.9% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . 
eureka was incorporated as a fourth-class city on april 7, 1954.
in mathematical form ,  this can be stated as:
equations of state can also describe solids ,  including the transition of solids from one crystalline state to another . 
boyle's law was perhaps the first expression of an equation of state . 
also unresolved is whether the author and narrator of kohelet are one and the same person . 
after the introduction come the words of kohelet . 
the kohelet discusses the meaning of life and the best way to live . 
the title `` ecclesiastes '' is a latin transliteration of the greek translation of the hebrew kohelet ,  the pseudonym used by the author of the book . 
the author does not use his own `` voice '' throughout the book again until the final verses  -lrb-  12:9–14 -rrb- ,  where he gives his own thoughts and summarises what `` the kohelet '' has spoken . 
the book concludes with the injunction: `` fear god ,  and keep his commandments; for that is the whole duty of everyone ''  -lrb-  12:13 -rrb- . 
 ''in short ,  we do not know why or how this book found its way into such esteemed company , ``  summarizes martin a .  shields in his 2006 book `` the end of wisdom: a reappraisal of the historical and canonical function of ecclesiastes ''
ecclesiastes  -lrb-  ; greek: ἐκκλησιαστής ,  `` ekklēsiastēs '' ,   ,  `` qōheleṯ ''  -rrb-  is one of 24 books of the tanakh or hebrew bible ,  where it is classified as one of the `` ketuvim ''  -lrb-  or `` writings ''  -rrb-  . 
the original ending of the book was probably the words: `` the end of the matter ''  -lrb-  12:13 -rrb- but the text we have continues: `` fear god ''  -lrb-  a phrase used often in kohelet's speech  -rrb-  `` and keep his commandments ''  -lrb-  which he never uses  -rrb-  ,  `` for god will bring every deed to judgement . `` 
ezekiel  -lrb-  ; `` y'ḥezqēl ''   -rrb-  is the central protagonist of the book of ezekiel in the hebrew bible . 
each elf file is made up of one elf header ,  followed by file data . 
the elf header is 52 or 64 bytes long for 32-bit and 64-bit binaries respectively . 
the elf header defines whether to use 32- or 64-bit addresses . 
the first announcement opportunity for midex was issued in march 1995, and the first launch under this new program was fuse in 1999.
excluding the launches ,  the midex program has a current mission cap cost of in 2018, with future midex missions being capped at $350 million . 
by mid 1990s ,  nasa initiated the medium-class explorer  -lrb-  midex  -rrb-  program to enable more frequent flights . 
the explorer missions were at first managed by the small explorer project office at nasa's goddard space flight center  -lrb-  gsfc  -rrb-  . 
the explorers program is a united states space exploration program that provides flight opportunities for physics ,  geophysics ,  heliophysics ,  and astrophysics investigations from space . 
oscillators are often characterized by the frequency of their output signal:
there are two types:
a societas europaea  -lrb-  se; ; latin for `` european society '' or `` company ''; plural: societates europaeae  -rrb-  is a public company registered in accordance with the corporate law of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  ,  introduced in 2004 with the council regulation on the statute for a european company . 
if the two input signals are both sinusoids of specified frequencies f and f ,  then the output of the mixer will contain two new sinusoids that have the sum f + f frequency and the difference frequency absolute value |f - f| . 
an ideal multiplicative mixer produces an output signal equal to the product of the two input signals . 
an electronic mixer is a device that combines two or more electrical or electronic signals into one or two composite output signals . 
he is famous for his paradoxes . 
eubulides was a pupil of euclid of megara ,  the founder of the megarian school . 
eta declared ceasefires in 1989, 1996, 1998 and 2006.
during the spanish transition to democracy which began following franco's death ,  eta split into two separate groups: eta political-military or eta -lrb-  pm  -rrb-  ,  and eta military or eta -lrb-  m  -rrb-  . 
it has to be noted that almost in any spanish jail there is a group of eta prisoners ,  as the number of eta prisoners makes it difficult to disperse them . 
the former political party batasuna ,  disbanded in 2003, pursued the same political goals as eta and did not condemn eta's use of violence . 
even within batasuna voters ,  at least 48% rejected eta's violence . 
eta members and supporters routinely claim torture at the hands of spanish police forces . 
with ever-increasing frequency ,  attempted eta actions have been frustrated by spanish security forces . 
after a two-month truce ,  eta adopted even more radical positions . 
eta's intention was to disperse its members and reduce the impact of detentions . 
the years 1978–80 were to prove eta's most deadly ,  with 68, 76, and 98 fatalities ,  respectively . 
the judicial investigation currently states that there is no relationship between eta and the madrid bombings . 
many members of eta started their collaboration with the group as participants in the `` kale borroka '' . 
while eta pledged to refrain from a violent separatist movement ,  the separatist movement was not denounced . 
eta ,  for its part ,  issued a statement endorsing the 2017 catalan independence referendum . 
thus ,  this ngo has included eta in its watchlist `` predators of press freedom '' . 
on 5 september 2010, eta declared a new ceasefire ,  its third ,  after two previous ceasefires were ended by the group . 
the euskobarometro ,  the survey carried out by the universidad del país vasco  -lrb-  university of the basque country  -rrb-  ,  asking about the views of eta within the basque population ,  obtained these results in may 2009: 64% rejected eta totally ,  13% identified themselves as former eta sympathisers who no longer support the group . 
critics of eta cite only 56 members of that organisation killed by state forces since 1975.
in january 2008, eta stated that its call for independence is similar to that of the kosovo status and scotland . 
eta's ceasefire video ended with the assertion that the struggle for the basque homeland continues . 
in september 2016, french police stated that they did not believe eta had made progress in giving up arms . 
in the context of negotiation with the spanish government ,  eta has declared what it has described as `` truce '' a number of times since its creation . 
eta reacted to these actions by placing three major car bombs in less than 24 hours in northern spain . 
eta viii ,  after a brief period of independent activity ,  eventually integrated into eta -lrb-  m  -rrb-  . 
some sources attribute the 1960 bombing of the amara station in donostia-san sebastian  -lrb-  which killed a 22-month-old child  -rrb-  to eta ,  but statistics published by the spanish ministry of the interior have always showed that eta's first victim was killed in 1968.
among its members ,  eta distinguished between `` legales/legalak ''  -lrb-  `` legal ones ''  -rrb-  ,  those members who did not have police records and lived apparently normal lives; `` liberados ''  -lrb-  `` liberated ''  -rrb-  members known to the police that were on eta's payroll and working full-time for eta; and `` apoyos ''  -lrb-  `` support ''  -rrb-  who just gave occasional help and logistics support to the group when required . 
however ,  on 23 march 2011, the spanish supreme court banned sortu from registering as a political party on the grounds that it was linked to eta . 
eta also began to menace leaders of other parties besides rival basque nationalist parties . 
eta was initially blamed for the 2004 madrid bombings by the outgoing government and large sections of the press . 
the french police found 3.5 tonnes of weapons on 8 april ,  the following day ,  at the caches handed over by eta . 
the cells that synthesize these hormones are rich in smooth er . 
liver cells are another example of specialized cells that contain an abundance of smooth er . 
muscle cells have another specialized function of smooth er . 
vesicles sent off by the er containing proteins are further altered at the golgi apparatus and then prepared for secretion from the cell or transport to other parts of the cell . 
the plasma membrane of a cell has multiple functions . 
in plant cells ,  vacuoles cover anywhere from 30% to 90% of the total cell volume . 
this is converted to glucose-6-phosphate and then an enzyme of the liver cell's smooth er removes the phosphate from the glucose ,  so that it can then leave the cell . 
there are two distinct ,  though connected ,  regions of er that differ in structure and function: smooth er and rough er . 
many types of cells export proteins produced by ribosomes attached to the rough er . 
in the great majority of cells ,  smooth er regions are scarce and are often partly smooth and partly rough . 
the er has a central role in producing ,  processing ,  and transporting biochemical compounds for use inside and outside of the cell . 
the plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer membrane that separates the cell from its environment and regulates the transport of molecules and signals into and out of the cell . 
the er is involved in cotranslational sorting of proteins . 
in plant cells ,  the golgi produces pectins and other polysaccharides needed by the plant structure . 
the last function of a lysosome is to digest the cell itself through autolysis . 
among the goals of ethnology have been the reconstruction of human history ,  and the formulation of cultural invariants ,  such as the incest taboo and culture change ,  and the formulation of generalizations about `` human nature '' ,  a concept which has been criticized since the 19th century by various philosophers  -lrb-  hegel ,  marx ,  structuralism ,  etc .   -rrb-  . 
important figures in this movement have included lévi-strauss ,  paul rivet ,  marcel griaule ,  germaine dieterlen ,  and jean rouch . 
cultural ,  social ,  or sociocultural anthropology  -rrb-  . 
 ''espagnole '' is the french word for `` spanish '' ,  but the sauce's origin story is argued by french cooks . 
hundreds of other derivatives are in the classical french repertoire . 
espagnole sauce  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a basic brown sauce ,  and is one of auguste escoffier's five mother sauces of classic french cooking . 
the input port can be idealized as either being a voltage input ,  which takes no current ,  with the output proportional to the voltage across the port; or a current input ,  with no voltage across it ,  in which the output is proportional to the current through the port . 
in principle ,  an amplifier is an electrical two-port network that produces a signal at the output port that is a replica of the signal applied to the input port ,  but increased in magnitude . 
an amplifier is a circuit that has a power gain greater than one . 
each type of amplifier in its ideal form has an ideal input and output resistance that is the same as that of the corresponding dependent source:
today ,  use of vacuum tubes is limited for some high power applications ,  such as radio transmitters . 
the first practical device that could amplify was the triode vacuum tube ,  invented in 1906 by lee de forest ,  which led to the first amplifiers around 1912.
of the 151 aircraft carriers built in the u . s .  during world war ii ,  122 were escort carriers . 
in the interim ,  before escort carriers could be supplied ,  they also brought in merchant aircraft carriers that could operate four aircraft . 
meanwhile ,  the u . s .  discovered their own use for the escort carriers . 
escort carriers also served as backup aircraft transports for fleet carriers and ferried aircraft of all military services to points of delivery . 
in all ,  130 allied escort carriers were launched or converted during the war . 
the attack on pearl harbor brought up an urgent need for aircraft carriers ,  so some t3 tankers were converted to escort carriers ,  is example of how a t3 tanker hull ao-33 was rebuilt to be an escort carrier . 
one of these escort carriers ,   ,  was instrumental in the capture of off north africa in 1944.
the table below lists escort carriers and similar ships performing the same missions . 
in this case ,  the aircraft cargo could be doubled by storing aircraft on the flight deck as well as in the hangar . 
in addition ,  six escort carriers were produced by the british during the war  -lrb-  all converted from other vessels  -rrb-  . 
in the pacific theater ,  escort carriers lacked the speed to sail with fast carrier attack groups ,  so were often tasked to escort the landing ships and troop carriers during the island-hopping campaign . 
in the battle of the atlantic ,  escort carriers were used to protect convoys against u-boats . 
action sports ,  adventure sports or extreme sports are activities perceived as involving a high degree of risk . 
while the exact definition and what is included as extreme sport is debatable ,  some attempted to make classification for extreme sports . 
whilst traditional sporting judgment criteria may be adopted when assessing performance  -lrb-  distance ,  time ,  score ,  etc . 
in a traditional sporting event ,  athletes compete against each other under controlled circumstances . 
in 936 henry the fowler died and his eldest son otto ,  edith's husband ,  was crowned king at aachen cathedral . 
edith of england ,  also spelt eadgyth or ædgyth  -lrb-   ,  ; 910 – 26 january 946 -rrb- ,  a member of the house of wessex ,  was german queen from 936 until her death ,  by her marriage with king otto i . 
edith was born to the reigning english king edward the elder by his second wife ,  ælfflæd ,  and hence was a granddaughter of king alfred the great . 
the kingdom of the east saxons  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  today referred to as the kingdom of essex  ,  was one of the seven traditional kingdoms of the anglo-saxon heptarchy . 
it is not known when æthelberht became a christian . 
a law code from æthelberht's reign also survives . 
the traditions for æthelberht's reign ,  then ,  would imply that æthelberht married bertha before either 560 or 565.
æthelberht  -lrb-  ; also æthelbert ,  aethelberht ,  aethelbert or ethelbert; ; 550 – 24 february 616 -rrb- was king of kent from about 589 until his death . 
there is little documentary evidence about the nature of trade in æthelberht's kent . 
bede does not state that æthelberht had a palace in canterbury ,  but he does refer to canterbury as æthelberht's `` metropolis '' ,  and it is clear that it is æthelberht's seat . 
whether or not eadbald became a joint king with æthelberht ,  there is no question that æthelberht had authority throughout the kingdom . 
the dates of æthelberht's birth and accession to the throne of kent are both matters of debate . 
æthelberht was the son of eormenric ,  succeeding him as king ,  according to the `` chronicle '' . 
the king's servants retained these rights for centuries after æthelberht's time . 
he was the first english king to convert to christianity . 
the main towns of the two kingdoms were rochester ,  for west kent ,  and canterbury ,  for east kent . 
according to bede ,  æthelberht was descended directly from hengist . 
the later history of kent shows clear evidence of a system of joint kingship ,  with the kingdom being divided into east kent and west kent ,  although it appears that there generally was a dominant king . 
bede describes æthelberht's relationship with rædwald ,  king of east anglia ,  in a passage that is not completely clear in meaning . 
gregory of tours ,  in his `` historia francorum '' ,  writes that bertha ,  daughter of charibert ,  king of the franks ,  married the son of the king of kent . 
at the latest ,  æthelberht must have converted before 601, since that year gregory wrote to him as a christian king . 
schrödinger stayed in dublin until retiring in 1955.
he is also known for his `` schrödinger's cat '' thought-experiment . 
in 1911, schrödinger became an assistant to exner . 
schrödinger's cat is named in his honour ,  see also: list of things named after erwin schrödinger . 
schrödinger was not entirely comfortable with the implications of quantum theory . 
on 4 january 1961, schrödinger died of tuberculosis ,  aged 73, in vienna . 
in 1914 erwin schrödinger achieved habilitation  -lrb-  `` venia legendi ''  -rrb-  . 
on 6 april 1920, schrödinger married annemarie  -lrb-  anny  -rrb-  bertel . 
in 1944, he wrote `` what is life ? 
schrödinger fathered two further daughters by two different women during his time in ireland . 
easywriter was a word processor first written for the apple ii series computer in 1979, the first word processor for that platform . 
it was later ported to the ibm pc and released with the new computer in august 1981 as a launch title . 
he reported that it `` performs smoothly ,  will handle most any routine writing and printing job ,  and is easy to learn and operate '' ,  and that if ibm had released 1.10 first easywriter would likely have become the standard pc word processor . 
 ''time '' in 1955 stated that sullivan resembled
in 1948, marlo lewis ,  a producer ,  got the cbs network to hire sullivan to do a weekly sunday-night tv variety show ,  `` toast of the town '' ,  which later became `` the ed sullivan show '' . 
in 1996, sullivan was ranked number 50 on `` tv guide '''s `` 50 greatest tv stars of all time '' . 
edward vincent sullivan was born on september 28, 1901 in harlem ,  new york city ,  the son of elizabeth f .   -lrb-  née smith  -rrb-  and peter arthur sullivan ,  a customs house employee ,  and grew up in port chester ,  new york . 
vigée le brun created some 660 portraits and 200 landscapes . 
vigée le brun painted portraits of many of the nobility . 
élisabeth louise vigée le brun  -lrb-  16 april 1755 – 30 march 1842 -rrb- ,  also known as madame lebrun or madame le brun ,  was a prominent french portrait painter of the late eighteenth century . 
between 1835 and 1837, when vigée le brun was in her eighties ,  she published her memoirs in three volumes  -lrb-  `` souvenirs ''  -rrb-  . 
as her career blossomed ,  vigée le brun was granted patronage by marie antoinette . 
on 31 may 1783, vigée le brun was received as a member of the académie royale de peinture et de sculpture . 
vigée le brun's membership in the académie dissolved after the french revolution because female academicians were abolished . 
the first retrospective exhibition of vigée le brun's work was held in 1982 at the kimbell art museum in fort worth ,  texas . 
the north galatian view holds that the epistle was written very soon after paul's second visit to galatia  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
if it was written to the believers in south galatia ,  it would likely have been written in 49.
this puts it during the lifetime of paul himself . 
paul's letter is addressed `` to the churches of galatia ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  but the location of these churches is a matter of debate . 
moreover ,  paul's possible description of the council of jerusalem  -lrb-    -rrb-  gives a different point of view from the description in  ,  if it is ,  in fact ,  describing the jerusalem council . 
no original of the letter is known to survive . 
a third theory is that galatians 2:1–10 describes paul and barnabas' visit to jerusalem described in acts 11:30 and 12:25.
1.1–2 -rrb- . 
the letter begins in standard form for an ancient hellenistic letter structure ,  with author – or senders – first ,  then recipients with a greeting  -lrb-  phil . 
although some consider that the letter was written from ephesus in 52–55 ad or caesarea maritima in 57–59, the most likely city of provenance was rome ,  which would make the date of the letter around 62 ad ,  about 10 years after paul's first visit to philippi . 
there has been ongoing debate regarding where paul was when he wrote this letter  -lrb-  and therefore the date of the letter's composition  -rrb-  . 
the letter may have been written by paul at rome during his first imprisonment . 
the letter's authors claim to be paul and timothy ,  but authorship began to be authoritatively questioned during the 19th century . 
scholars have increasingly questioned paul's authorship and attributed the letter to an early follower instead . 
advocates of pauline authorship defend the differences that there are between elements in this letter and those commonly considered the genuine work of paul  -lrb-  e . g . 
the first letter to the thessalonians was likely the first of paul's letters ,  probably written by the end of ad 52.
4:13–18.
paul urges them to go on working quietly while waiting in hope for the return of christ . 
most new testament scholars believe paul the apostle wrote this letter from corinth ,  although information appended to this work in many early manuscripts  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  codices alexandrinus ,  mosquensis ,  and angelicus  -rrb-  state that paul wrote it in athens after timothy had returned from macedonia with news of the state of the church in thessalonica  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  . 
scholars who believe paul wrote `` titus '' date its composition from the circumstance that it was written after paul's visit to crete  -lrb-  titus 1:5 -rrb- . 
in `` titus 1:9 '' paul describes some among the jewish christians as false teachers . 
the author of `` titus '' identifies himself as `` paul ,  a servant of god and an apostle of jesus christ . `` 
the epistle of paul to titus ,  usually referred to simply as titus ,  is one of the three pastoral epistles  -lrb-  along with 1 timothy and 2 timothy  -rrb-  in the new testament ,  historically attributed to paul the apostle . 
the 1956 contest was won by the host nation ,  switzerland . 
the logo was used for the first time in the 2015 eurovision song contest ,  the 60th anniversary of the contest . 
the first contest was held in the town of lugano ,  switzerland ,  on 24 may 1956.
the voting system used in the contest has changed over the years . 
after the first two contests were hosted by switzerland and germany ,  it was decided that henceforth the winning country would host the contest the next year . 
in 2005, lebanon intended to participate in the contest . 
in late 2011, the ebu had begun archiving all the contests since the first edition in 1956 to be finalised before the 2015 contest ,  for the 60th anniversary . 
the following are the scrutineers and executive supervisors of the eurovision song contest appointed by the ebu:
since the 2002 contest ,  slogans have been introduced in the show  -lrb-  2009 being the only exception  -rrb-  . 
when asked to change the lyrics of the song ,  the georgian broadcaster gpb withdrew from the 2009 contest . 
the eurovision song contest grand finals are traditionally on a saturday evening in may ,  at 19:00 utc  -lrb-  15:00 edt ,  20:00 bst/ist ,  or 21:00 cest  -rrb-  . 
the slogan is decided by the host broadcaster and is then used to develop a visual design for the contest . 
this means that 50% of the result is already decided before the live contests have taken place . 
 ,  holds the record for the highest number of wins ,  having won the contest seven times . 
however ,  this has yet to happen and since 1981, all contests have been held in the country which won the previous year . 
however ,  in the minds of the public ,  the name `` eurovision '' is most closely associated with the song contest . 
the first edition ever of the eurovision song contest in 1956 was broadcast live ,  but not recorded ,  so only a sound recording of the radio transmission has survived from the original broadcast . 
they also did not participate in the following 5 years' of contests  -lrb-  2014–18 -rrb- for similar reasons ,  as well as stating their opposition to the 50/50 jury and televoting system that began being applied in the final of the 2009 contest . 
as one of the largest financial contributors to the ebu ,  their non-participation in the contest brought about a funding issue ,  which the ebu would have to consider . 
the most notable rules which affect the format and presentation of the contest have changed over the years ,  and are highlighted here . 
the eurovision song contest  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  often simply called eurovision ,  is an international song competition held primarily among the member countries of the european broadcasting union . 
the term `` eurovision week '' is used to refer to the week during which the contest takes place . 
the broadcaster must have paid the ebu a participation fee in advance of the deadline specified in the rules of the contest for the year in which they wish to participate . 
if an ebu active member wishes to participate they must fulfil conditions as laid down by the rules of the contest . 
in contrast ,  `` every '' participating country in a particular year may vote in the saturday grand final – whether their song qualified for the final or not . 
since 2004, the first rehearsals have commenced on the sunday almost two weeks before the grand final . 
the ten highest-placed non-big four countries in the `` grand final '' were guaranteed a place in the following year's grand final ,  without having to qualify . 
the swedish-language version of the song was originally selected at melodifestivalen 1965, but it was later translated into english for the eurovision contest . 
as national broadcasters join and leave the eurovision feed transmitted by the ebu ,  the ebu/eurovision network logo ident  -lrb-  not to be confused with the song contest logo  -rrb-  is displayed . 
because the contest is a live television programme ,  a reasonable time limit must be imposed on the duration of the show . 
it was first used in the final of the 2009 edition ,  and extended the following year to the semi-finals . 
