in 2013, the writers guild of america ranked it as the eighth best written tv series and `` tv guide '' ranked it #11 on their list of the 60 greatest shows of all time . 
after she appears in two episodes in season five ,  she becomes a recurring character ,  and later featured as a permanent one for season ten  -lrb-  1991–92 -rrb- . 
all of these are examples of imitative counterpoint . 
in `` fifth species '' counterpoint ,  sometimes called `` florid counterpoint '' ,  the other four species of counterpoint are combined within the added parts . 
}  \new staff { d , 1 f g f e d » </score> short example of `` third species '' counterpoint
» </score> short example of `` florid '' counterpoint
}  \new staff { d , 1 f g f e d} » </score> short example of `` second species '' counterpoint
in `` third species '' counterpoint ,  four  -lrb-  or three ,  etc .   -rrb- 
in `` second species '' counterpoint ,  two notes in each of the added parts work against each longer note in the given part . 
» </score>short example of `` fourth species '' counterpoint
this group ,  known as the cyano group ,  consists of a carbon atom triple-bonded to a nitrogen atom . 
the most hazardous compound is hydrogen cyanide ,  which is a gas and kills by inhalation . 
among its many uses ,  prussian blue gives the blue color to blueprints ,  bluing ,  and cyanotypes . 
the formation of prussian blue is a positive result for cyanide . 
a cyanide is a chemical compound that contains the group c≡n . 
gaseous hydrogen cyanide may be dissolved in aqueous sodium hydroxide solution to produce sodium cyanide . 
the word is derived from the greek `` kyanos '' ,  meaning dark blue ,  as a result of its being first obtained by the heating of the pigment known as prussian blue . 
in inorganic cyanides ,  the cyanide group is present as the anion cn . 
cyanide is also used in jewelry-making and certain kinds of photography such as sepia toning . 
cyanide salts are used for killing ants ,  and have in some places been used as rat poison  -lrb-  the less toxic poison arsenic is more common  -rrb-  . 
poisoning by hydrogen cyanide gas within a gas chamber  -lrb-  as a salt of hydrocyanic acid is dropped into a strong acid ,  usually sulfuric acid  -rrb-  is one method of executing a condemned prisoner as the condemned prisoner eventually breathes the lethal fumes . 
some nitriles ,  which occur naturally as cyanohydrins ,  release hydrogen cyanide . 
the principal process used to manufacture cyanides is the andrussow process in which gaseous hydrogen cyanide is produced from methane and ammonia in the presence of oxygen and a platinum catalyst . 
cyanide is also used in electroplating ,  where it stabilizes metal ions in the electrolyte solution prior to their deposition . 
hydrogen cyanide is produced by the combustion or pyrolysis of certain materials under oxygen-deficient conditions . 
among the most important cyanide coordination compounds are the octahedrally coordinated compounds potassium ferrocyanide and the pigment prussian blue ,  which are both essentially nontoxic due to the tight binding of the cyanides to a central iron atom . 
the carbonate ion is the simplest oxocarbon anion . 
in chemistry ,  a carbonate is a salt of carbonic acid  -lrb-  hco  -rrb-  ,  characterized by the presence of the carbonate ion ,  a polyatomic ion with the formula of  . 
carbonated water is formed by dissolving co in water under pressure . 
it is the conjugate base of the hydrogen carbonate  -lrb-  bicarbonate  -rrb-  ion ,   ,  which is the conjugate base of  ,  carbonic acid . 
in geology and mineralogy ,  the term `` carbonate '' can refer both to carbonate minerals and carbonate rock  -lrb-  which is made of chiefly carbonate minerals  -rrb-  ,  and both are dominated by the carbonate ion ,   . 
the term is also used as a verb ,  to describe carbonation: the process of raising the concentrations of carbonate and bicarbonate ions in water to produce carbonated water and other carbonated beverageseither by the addition of carbon dioxide gas under pressure ,  or by dissolving carbonate or bicarbonate salts into the water . 
a catalyst works by providing an alternative reaction pathway to the reaction product . 
although the catalyst is consumed by reaction  ,  it is subsequently produced by reaction  ,  so it does not occur in the overall reaction equation: as a catalyst is regenerated in a reaction ,  often only small amounts are needed to increase the rate of the reaction . 
an added substance which does reduce the reaction rate is not considered a catalyst but a reaction inhibitor  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
in the catalyzed elementary reaction ,  catalysts do not change the extent of a reaction: they have no effect on the chemical equilibrium of a reaction because the rate of both the forward and the reverse reaction are both affected  -lrb-  see also thermodynamics  -rrb-  . 
because of this ,  only very small amounts of catalyst are required to alter the reaction rate in principle . 
kinetically ,  catalytic reactions are typical chemical reactions; i . e . 
in effect ,  the reaction accelerates itself or is autocatalyzed . 
the following is a typical reaction scheme ,  where c represents the catalyst ,  x and y are reactants ,  and z is the product of the reaction of x and y:
in tandem catalysis two or more different catalysts are coupled in a one-pot reaction . 
the catalyst does usually appear in the rate equation . 
catalysts generally react with one or more reactants to form intermediates that subsequently give the final reaction product ,  in the process regenerating the catalyst . 
in general ,  chemical reactions occur faster in the presence of a catalyst because the catalyst provides an alternative reaction mechanism with a lower activation energy than the non-catalyzed mechanism . 
some so-called catalysts are really precatalysts . 
although catalysts are not consumed by the reaction itself ,  they may be inhibited ,  deactivated ,  or destroyed by secondary processes . 
catalysts can be heterogeneous or homogeneous ,  depending on whether a catalyst exists in the same phase as the substrate . 
catalysis is the process of increasing the rate of a chemical reaction by adding a substance known as a catalyst  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  which is not consumed in the catalyzed reaction and can continue to act repeatedly . 
in autocatalysis ,  the catalyst `` is '' a product of the overall reaction ,  in contrast to all other types of catalysis considered in this article . 
more precisely ,  we have where again formula_12 is the length of the semi-major axis and formula_13 is the eccentricity formula_14
the above formula can be rearranged to solve for the circumference:
one such approximation ,  due to euler  -lrb-  1773 -rrb- ,  for the canonical ellipse ,   is  some lower and upper bounds on the circumference of the canonical ellipse with formula_5 are
here the upper bound formula_9 is the circumference of a circumscribed concentric circle passing through the endpoints of the ellipse's major axis ,  and the lower bound formula_10 is the perimeter of an inscribed rhombus with vertices at the endpoints of the major and minor axes . 
the region corresponding to the body's configuration at time formula_20 is labeled formula_21.
any differential area formula_36 with normal vector formula_35 of a given internal surface area formula_38, bounding a portion of the body ,  experiences a contact force formula_39 arising from the contact between both portions of the body on each side of formula_38, and it is given by
to start modelling define that: formula_1 measure distance  -lrb-  in km  -rrb-  along the highway; formula_2 is time  -lrb-  in minutes  -rrb- ; formula_3 is the density of cars on the highway  -lrb-  in cars/km in the lane  -rrb- ; and formula_4 is the flow velocity  -lrb-  average velocity  -rrb-  of those cars 'at' position formula_1.
thus the basic continuum model for car traffic is the pde for the car density formula_3 on the highway . 
where formula_42 is the `` surface traction '' ,  also called `` stress vector '' ,  `` traction '' ,  or `` traction vector '' . 
it is not a vector field because it depends not only on the position formula_34 of a particular material point ,  but also on the local orientation of the surface element as defined by its normal vector formula_35.
the total contact force on the particular internal surface formula_38 is then expressed as the sum  -lrb-  surface integral  -rrb-  of the contact forces on all differential surfaces formula_36:
in the case of gravitational forces ,  the intensity of the force depends on ,  or is proportional to ,  the mass density formula_47 of the material ,  and it is specified in terms of force per unit mass  -lrb-  formula_48 -rrb- or per unit volume  -lrb-  formula_49 -rrb- . 
continuum mechanics models begin by assigning a region in three-dimensional euclidean space to the material body formula_19 being modeled . 
formula_26 needs to be: for the mathematical formulation of the model ,  formula_27 is also assumed to be twice continuously differentiable ,  so that differential equations describing the motion may be formulated . 
the common law and the civil law jurisdictions do not share the same constitutional law underpinnings . 
the doctrine of the rule of law dictates that government must be conducted according to law . 
human rights law in these countries is as a result ,  largely built on legal precedent in the courts' interpretation of constitutional law ,  whereas that of civil law countries is almost exclusively composed of codified law ,  constitutional or otherwise . 
for example ,  most law students in the united states are required to take a class in constitutional law during their first year ,  and several law journals are devoted to the discussion of constitutional issues . 
constitutional law is a major focus of legal studies and research . 
dicey’s rule of law formula consists of three classic tenets . 
in 2010, there were more than 1.4 million speakers of celtic languages . 
welsh is the only celtic language not classified as `` endangered '' by unesco . 
the celtic languages  -lrb-    ,    -rrb-  are a group of related languages descended from proto-celtic ,  or `` common celtic ''; a branch of the greater indo-european language family . 
there may also be more than three color dimensions in other color spaces ,  such as in the cmyk color model ,  wherein one of the dimensions relates to a color's colorfulness  -rrb-  . 
additive color is light created by mixing together light of two or more different colors . 
individual colors have a variety of cultural associations such as national colors  -lrb-  in general described in individual color articles and color symbolism  -rrb-  . 
this effect is known as color constancy . 
structural colors are colors caused by interference effects rather than by pigments . 
because of this ,  and because the `` primaries '' in color printing systems generally are not pure themselves ,  the colors reproduced are never perfectly saturated spectral colors ,  and so spectral colors cannot be matched exactly . 
two different light spectra that have the same effect on the three color receptors in the human eye will be perceived as the same color . 
when an artist uses a limited color scheme|color palette ,  the human eye|eye tends to compensate by seeing any gray or neutral color as the color which is missing from the color wheel . 
some examples of necessarily non-spectral colors are the achromatic colors  -lrb-  black ,  gray ,  and white  -rrb-  and colors such as pink ,  tan  -lrb-  color  -rrb- |tan ,  and magenta . 
similarly ,  most human color perceptions can be generated by a mixture of three colors called `` primaries '' . 
the science of color is sometimes called chromatics ,  colorimetry ,  or simply color science . 
the colors depicted depend on the color space of the device on which you are viewing the image ,  and therefore may not be a strictly accurate representation of the color at a particular position ,  and especially not for monochromatic colors . 
the human eye can distinguish about 10 million different colors . 
there are many color perceptions that by definition cannot be pure spectral colors due to saturation  -lrb-  color theory  -rrb- |desaturation or because they are purples  -lrb-  mixtures of red and violet light ,  from opposite ends of the spectrum  -rrb-  . 
different colors have been demonstrated to have effects on cognition . 
the ventral stream is responsible for color perception . 
red ,  green ,  and blue are the additive primary colors normally used in additive color systems such as projectors and computer terminals . 
if one or more types of a person's color-sensing cones are missing or less responsive than normal to incoming light ,  that person can distinguish fewer colors and is said to be `` color deficient '' or `` color blindness|color blind ''  -lrb-  though this latter term can be misleading; almost all color deficient individuals can distinguish at least some colors  -rrb-  . 
light ,  no matter how complex its composition of wavelengths ,  is reduced to three color components by the eye . 
first ,  a mathematical dynamical system formula_1 with discrete time and discrete state space; second ,  a computational setup formula_2, which is made up of a theoretical part formula_3, and a real part formula_4; third ,  an interpretation formula_5, which links the dynamical system formula_1 with the setup formula_7.
gualtiero piccinini's summary of this account states that a physical system can be said to perform a specific computation when there is a mapping between the state of that system to the computation such that the “microphysical states of the system mirror the state transitions between the computational states . ”
a rule ,  in this sense ,  provides a mapping among inputs ,  outputs ,  and internal states of the physical computing system . 
clowns international claims to be the oldest clown society in the world . 
they are also distinguished as the `` sad clown ''  -lrb-  blanc  -rrb-  and `` happy clown ''  -lrb-  auguste  -rrb-  . 
the most prevalent character clown in the american circus is the `` hobo '' ,  `` tramp '' or `` bum '' clown . 
red skelton's dodo the clown in `` the clown ''  -lrb-  1953 -rrb- ,  depicts the circus clown as a tragicomic stock character ,  `` a funny man with a drinking problem '' . 
the circus clown developed in the 19th century . 
there are two major types of clowns with `` whiteface '' makeup: the classic `` white clown '' is derived from the pierrot character . 
other circus performers may also temporarily stand in for a clown and perform their skills in clown costume . 
the `` white clown '' ,  or `` clown blanc '' from the original french ,  is a sophisticated character ,  as opposed to the clumsy auguste . 
there are different types of clowns portrayed around the world . 
the `` fear of clowns , ``  circus clowns in particular as a psychiatric condition has become known by the term coulrophobia . 
the world clown association  -lrb-  wca  -rrb-  is a worldwide organization for clowns ,  jugglers ,  magicians ,  and face painters . 
shows are the overall production that a clown is a part of ,  it may or may not include elements other than clowning ,  such as in a circus show . 
in the 18th-century english harlequinade ,  harlequin was now paired with clown . 
clowns of america international  -lrb-  established 1984 -rrb- and world clown association  -lrb-  established 1987 -rrb- are associations of semi-professionals and professional performers . 
there are over 120 species of `` coffea '' ,  which is grown from seed . 
new species of `` coffea '' are still being identified in the 2000s . 
the two most popular are `` coffea arabica ''  -lrb-  commonly known simply as `` arabica ''  -rrb-  ,  which accounts for 60–80% of the world's coffee production ,  and `` coffea canephora ''  -lrb-  known as `` robusta ''  -rrb-  ,  which accounts for about 20–40% . 
coffea is a genus of flowering plants in the family rubiaceae . 
cycling ,  also called biking or bicycling ,  is the use of bicycles for transport ,  recreation ,  exercise or sport . 
the drivetrain components of the bike should also be considered . 
road bikes tend to have a more upright shape and a shorter wheelbase ,  which make the bike more mobile but harder to ride slowly . 
in many countries ,  the most commonly used vehicle for road transport is a utility bicycle . 
much simpler fixed wheel bikes are also available . 
being measured for a bike and taking it for a test ride are recommended before buying . 
bicycles are considered a sustainable mode of transport ,  especially suited for urban use and relatively shorter distances when used for transport  -lrb-  compared to recreation  -rrb-  . 
since cycling can be used for the practical purpose of transportation ,  there can be less need for self-discipline to exercise . 
they are the principal means of transportation in many parts of the world . 
in the past decade ,  mountain bike racing has also reached international popularity and is even an olympic sport . 
bicycles are used for recreation at all ages . 
in europe ,  denmark and the netherlands have the most bicycles per capita and most often use bicycles for everyday transport . 
today ,  over 50 percent of the human population knows how to ride a bike . 
germany used bicycles again in world war ii ,  while the british employed airborne `` cycle-commandos '' with folding bikes . 
bicycles are often used by people seeking to improve their fitness and cardiovascular health . 
the bicycle has been used as a method of reconnaissance as well as transporting soldiers and supplies to combat zones . 
many road bikes ,  along with mountain bikes ,  include clipless pedals to which special shoes attach ,  via a cleat ,  enabling the rider to pull on the pedals as well as push . 
beyond simply riding ,  another skill is riding efficiently and safely in traffic . 
in the netherlands ,  many roads have one or two separate cycleways alongside them ,  or cycle lanes marked on the road . 
in shanghai ,  where bicycles were once the dominant mode of transport ,  bicycle travel on a few city roads was banned temporarily in december 2003.
starch and sugars are the most important carbohydrates in human diet . 
while the scientific nomenclature of carbohydrates is complex ,  the names of the monosaccharides and disaccharides very often end in the suffix -ose ,  as in the monosaccharides fructose  -lrb-  fruit sugar  -rrb-  and glucose  -lrb-  starch sugar  -rrb-  and the disaccharides sucrose  -lrb-  cane or beet sugar  -rrb-  and lactose  -lrb-  milk sugar  -rrb-  . 
the term is most common in biochemistry ,  where it is a synonym of 'saccharide' ,  a group that includes sugars ,  starch ,  and cellulose . 
some of these terms ,  specially `` carbohydrate '' and `` sugar '' ,  are also used with other meanings . 
formaldehyde cho and inositol  -lrb-  cho  -rrb-   -rrb-  . 
 ''virginia '' retired to the gosport naval yard at portsmouth ,  virginia ,  and remained in drydock for repairs until april 4, 1862.
the battle of hampton roads began on march 8, 1862, when `` virginia '' engaged the blockading union fleet . 
when the commonwealth of virginia seceded from the union in 1861, one of the important federal military bases threatened was gosport navy yard  -lrb-  now norfolk naval shipyard  -rrb-  in portsmouth ,  virginia . 
 ''virginia '' did not emerge from the battle unscathed ,  however . 
in the following month ,  the crew of `` virginia '' were unsuccessful in their attempts to break the union blockade . 
after raising ,  restoration ,  and outfitting as an ironclad warship ,  the confederacy bestowed on her the name `` virginia '' . 
on may 8, 1862, `` virginia '' and the james river squadron ventured out when the union ships began shelling the confederate fortifications near norfolk ,  but the union ships retired under the shore batteries on the north side of the james river and on rip raps island . 
leaders of the lds church assert that the lds church is the only true church and that other churches do not have the authority to act in jesus' name . 
the church teaches that it is a continuation of the church of christ established in 1830 by joseph smith . 
the church requests that the official name be used when possible or ,  if necessary ,  shortened to `` the church '' or `` the church of jesus christ '' . 
these groups have no affiliation with the lds church . 
church congregations are organized geographically . 
the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints ,  often informally known as the lds church or mormon church ,  is a nontrinitarian ,  christian restorationist church that is considered by its members to be the restoration of the original church founded by jesus christ . 
the church reports a worldwide membership of 16 million; this is the church's own accounting ,  based on membership records . 
nevertheless ,  the lds church differs from the many other churches within contemporary christianity ,  and many people do not accept the church as part of christianity . 
in 1887, the lds church was legally dissolved in the united states by the edmunds–tucker act because of the church's practice of polygamy . 
however ,  they tend to disagree to varying degrees with the lds church concerning doctrine and church leadership . 
on august 30, 2010, church leaders announced that they were making significant progress on `` regularized operations for the church in china . `` 
young incorporated the lds church as a legal entity ,  and initially governed both the church and the state as a theocratic leader . 
due to the differences in lifestyle promoted by church doctrine and history ,  members of the church have developed a distinct culture . 
the lds church ,  originally called the church of christ ,  was formally organized by joseph smith on april 6, 1830, in western new york . 
the lds church does not accept baptisms performed in any other churches ,  as it teaches that baptism is only valid when it is conducted through proper priesthood authority . 
the official church stance on staying out of politics does not include if there are instances of what church leaders deem to be moral issues . 
in addition ,  the church employs an independent audit department that provides its certification at each annual general conference that church contributions are collected and spent in accordance with church policy . 
because of some of the doctrinal differences ,  catholic ,  orthodox ,  and several protestant churches consider the church to be distinct and separate from mainstream christianity . 
church members believe joseph smith is the first modern-day prophet . 
the church says that this baptism policy is designed to protect children . 
the lds church shares various teachings with other branches of christianity . 
the church receives significant funds from tithes and fast offerings . 
the lds church stresses the importance of worldwide humanitarian service . 
jewish groups criticized the lds church in 1995 after discovering that vicarious baptisms for the dead for victims of the holocaust had been performed by members of the church . 
according to bloomberg businessweek ,  the lds church's worth at $40 billion as of 2012.
the church continues to seek recognition in regions where it has had little or no influence . 
the lds church is organized in a hierarchical priesthood structure administered by men . 
due to doctrinal differences ,  the lds church is generally considered to be distinct and separate from mainstream christianity by catholic ,  orthodox ,  and protestant churches ,  which express differences with one another but consider each other's churches to be christian . 
the structure of chemical thermodynamics is based on the first two laws of thermodynamics . 
most identities in chemical thermodynamics arise from application of the first and second laws of thermodynamics ,  particularly the law of conservation of energy ,  to these state functions . 
in this manner ,  lewis ,  randall ,  and guggenheim are considered as the founders of modern chemical thermodynamics because of the major contribution of these two books in unifying the application of thermodynamics to chemistry . 
in 2010 this was written into the church's `` handbook '' ,  which directs official church policy and programs . 
many of these materials were initially published in church periodicals in the early days of the church . 
the four books of the standard works are:
the standard works of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  are the four books that currently constitute its open scriptural canon . 
the lds church's doctrine and covenants is a collection of revelations ,  policies ,  letters ,  and statements given to the modern church by past church presidents . 
there are several instances of this happening in the lds church:
according to his record ,  joseph smith translated the book of mormon by gift and power of god through the urim and thummim . 
 -lrb-  roberts ,  comprehensive history of the church ,  3:318 -rrb- . 
in 1856-1858, the church underwent what is commonly called the mormon reformation . 
on april 6, 1830, in western new york ,  smith organized the religion's first legal church entity ,  the church of christ . 
in the meantime ,  the church's headquarters remained in kirtland from 1831 to 1838; and there the church built its first temple and continued to grow in membership from 680 to 17,881.
in 1857-1858, the church was involved in an armed conflict with the u . s .  government ,  entitled the utah war . 
the second manifesto did not annul existing plural marriages within the church ,  and the church tolerated some degree of polygamy into at least the 1930s . 
however ,  modern critics of the church and popular writers often attribute a formal doctrine of blood atonement to the church . 
in the 1890s soon after the 1890 manifesto ,  the lds church was in a dire financial condition . 
the church's modern era began soon after it renounced polygamy in 1890.
the history of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  -lrb-  lds church  -rrb-  is typically divided into three broad time periods:
following the death of joseph smith ,  brigham young stated that the church should be led by the quorum of the twelve apostles  -lrb-  see succession crisis  -rrb-  . 
the church had attempted unsuccessfully to institute the united order numerous times ,  most recently during the mormon reformation . 
in response to these hearings ,  president of the church joseph f .  smith issued a second manifesto denying that any post-manifesto marriages had the church's sanction ,  and announcing that those entering such marriages in the future would be excommunicated . 
toward the end of his presidency ,  the church even began to discipline church members who had taken benson's earlier hardline right-wing speeches too much to heart ,  some of whom claimed that the church had excommunicated them for adhering too closely to benson's right-wing ideology . 
during the 20th century ,  the church grew substantially and became an international organization . 
after smith's death ,  a succession crisis ensued ,  and the majority voted to accept the quorum of the twelve ,  led by brigham young ,  as the church's leading body . 
posttribulationists hold that christ will not return until the end of the tribulation . 
his commentary on daniel 7:25 contains a 1260-year period commencing in 755 ad and ending in 2015.
amillennialism holds that while christ's reign during the millennium is spiritual in nature ,  at the end of the church age ,  christ will return in final judgment and establish a permanent reign in the new heaven and new earth . 
postmillennialism is an interpretation of chapter 20 of the book of revelation which sees christ's second coming as occurring `` after '' the `` millennium '' ,  a golden age in which christian ethics prosper . 
their interpretation of christian eschatology resulted in the founding of the seventh-day adventist church . 
christian eschatology is a major branch of study within christian theology dealing with the `` last things . `` 
irenaeus mentions that the apocalypse was seen `` no very long time ago but almost in our own age ,  toward the end of the reign of domitian '' . 
preterism holds that ancient israel finds its continuation or fulfillment in the christian church at the destruction of jerusalem in ad 70.
christian eschatology looks to study and discuss matters such as death and the afterlife ,  heaven and hell ,  the second coming jesus ,  the resurrection of the dead ,  the rapture ,  the tribulation ,  millennialism ,  the end of the world ,  the last judgment ,  and the new heaven and new earth in the world to come . 
eschatology is an ancient branch of study in christian theology ,  informed by biblical texts such as the olivet discourse ,  the sheep and the goats ,  and other discourses of end times by jesus ,  with the doctrine of the second coming discussed by paul of tarsus and ignatius of antioch  -lrb-  c .  35–107 ad  -rrb-  ,  then given more consideration by the christian apologist ,  justin martyr  -lrb-  c .  100–165 -rrb- . 
idealism  -lrb-  also called the spiritual approach ,  the allegorical approach ,  the nonliteral approach ,  and many other names  -rrb-  in christian eschatology is an interpretation of the book of revelation that sees all of the imagery of the book as symbols . 
in futurism ,  parallels may be drawn with historical events ,  but most eschatological prophecies are chiefly referring to events which have not yet been fulfilled ,  but will take place at the end of the age and the end of the world . 
the term subsumes several similar views of the end times ,  and it stands in contrast to premillennialism and ,  to a lesser extent ,  amillennialism . 
this was the first trade between the white sox and cubs since the 2006 season . 
the white sox were fairly successful in the 1990s and early 2000s ,  with 12 winning seasons between 1990–2005.
the chicago white sox are an american professional baseball team based in chicago ,  illinois . 
the white sox went on to sweep the houston astros in the 2005 world series ,  giving the sox their first world championship in 88 years . 
rick renteria ,  the 2016 white sox bench coach ,  was promoted to the role of manager . 
the franchise ,  now known as the chicago white sox ,  made its first world series appearance in 1906, beating the crosstown cubs in six games . 
after the 1909 season ,  the sox moved 5 blocks to the north to play in the new comiskey park ,  while the 39th street grounds became the home of the chicago american giants of the negro leagues . 
the sox would win the west division in 1993, and were in first place in 1994 when the season was cancelled due to the 1994 mlb strike . 
the white sox did not finish in the upper half of the american league again until after club founder charles comiskey died and passed ownership of the club to his son ,  j .  louis comiskey . 
the less a given case is like the paradigm ,  the weaker the justification is for treating that case `` like '' the paradigmatic case . 
casuistry is a `` method '' of case reasoning especially useful in treating cases that involve moral dilemmas . 
by drawing parallels between paradigms ,  or so-called `` pure cases '' ,  and the case at hand ,  a casuist tries to determine a moral response appropriate to a particular case . 
typically ,  casuistic reasoning begins with a clear-cut paradigmatic case . 
for the casuist ,  the circumstances of a case are essential for evaluating the proper response . 
while a principle-based approach might claim that lying is always morally wrong ,  the casuist would argue that ,  depending upon the details of the case ,  lying might or might not be illegal or unethical . 
some jesuit theologians ,  in view of promoting personal responsibility and the respect of freedom of conscience ,  stressed the importance of the 'case by case' approach to personal moral decisions and ultimately developed and accepted a casuistry  -lrb-  the study of `` cases of consciences ''  -rrb-  where at the time of decision ,  individual inclinations were more important than the moral law itself . 
the word `` casuistry '' derives from the latin noun `` casus ''  -lrb-  `` case '' or `` occurrence ''  -rrb-  . 
chinese input methods are methods that allow a computer user to input chinese characters . 
chinese input methods predate the computer . 
chu bong-foo invented a common input method in 1976 with his cangjie input method ,  which assigns different `` roots '' to each key on a standard computer keyboard . 
with a population of 2,078,725, it is ohio's second-largest metropolitan area . 
columbus is home to one of the most competitive intercollegiate programs in the nation ,  the ohio state buckeyes of the ohio state university . 
the ohio history connection is headquartered in columbus ,  with its flagship museum ,  the ohio history center ,  north of downtown . 
columbus  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the state capital of and the most populous city in the u . s .  state of ohio . 
the juneteenth ohio festival is held each year at franklin park on father's day weekend . 
the ohio state buckeyes are a member of the ncaa's big ten conference ,  and the football team plays home games at ohio stadium . 
along with the museum is ohio village ,  a replica of a village around the time of the american civil war . 
the age distribution is 24.2% under the age of 18, 14.0% from 18 to 24, 35.1% from 25 to 44, 17.9% from 45 to 64, and 8.9% who were 65 years of age or older . 
the ohio aviators were based in obetz ,  ohio and began play in the only pro rugby season before the league folded . 
on january 7, 1857, the ohio statehouse finally opened after 18 years of construction . 
by the early 1990s ,  columbus had grown to become ohio's largest city in land area and in population . 
columbus has several notable buildings ,  including the greek revival state capitol ,  the art-deco ohio judicial center and the peter eisenman-designed wexner center and greater columbus convention center . 
also in the zoo complex is the zoombezi bay water park and amusement park . 
in 1948, the town and country shopping center opened in suburban whitehall ,  and it is now regarded as one of the first modern shopping centers in the united states . 
today the ohio state's theater department has a performance center named in his honor ,  and his youthful home near the discovery district is on the national register of historic places . 
after the american revolution ,  the virginia military district became part of ohio country as a territory of virginia . 
after ohio achieved statehood in 1803, political infighting among prominent ohio leaders led to the state capital moving from chillicothe to zanesville and back again . 
completed in 1993, the convention center was designed by architect peter eisenman ,  who also designed the wexner center . 
annual festivities in columbus include the ohio state fair—one of the largest state fairs in the country—as well as the columbus arts festival and the jazz and ribs festival ,  both of which occur on the downtown riverfront . 
the annual all american quarter horse congress ,  the world's largest single breed horse show ,  attracts approximately 500,000 visitors to the ohio expo center each october . 
easton town center was built in 1999, and polaris fashion place in 2001.
by virtue of the morrill land-grant colleges act ,  the ohio agricultural and mechanical college  -lrb-  which became the ohio state university  -rrb-  founded in 1870 on the former estate of william and hannah neil . 
the 1763 treaty of paris ceded the ohio country to the british empire . 
during memorial day weekend ,  the asian festival is held in franklin park . 
the park includes a large audubon nature center focused on the excellent bird watching the area is known for . 
the median age in the city was 31.2 years . 
it is at the intersection of broad and high streets in downtown columbus . 
the area including modern-day columbus once comprised the ohio country ,  under the nominal control of the french colonial empire through the viceroyalty of new france from 1663 until 1763.
academy award-winning movies filmed in columbus and the central ohio area include steven soderbergh's `` traffic '' in 2000.
the area found itself frequently caught between warring factions ,  including american indian and european interests . 
established in 1848, green lawn cemetery is one of the largest cemeteries in the midwestern united states . 
in 2009, `` parents '' magazine named cosi one of the ten best science centers for families in the country . 
the columbus and franklin county metropolitan park district includes inniswood metro gardens ,  a collection of public gardens; highbanks metro park; battelle-darby creek metro park; as well as many others . 
cleveland residents are called `` clevelanders '' . 
cleveland also has the jack cleveland casino . 
cleveland incorporated as a city in 1836.
cleveland's downtown architecture is diverse . 
the cleveland indians won the world series in 1920 and 1948.
between 1920 and 1960, the black population of cleveland increased from 35,000 to 251,000.
future productions in the cleveland area are the responsibility of the greater cleveland film commission . 
there are two main art museums in cleveland . 
the ahl cleveland monsters won the 2016 calder cup ,  becoming the first cleveland pro sports team to do so since the 1964 cleveland barons . 
the cleveland open is currently held annually . 
cleveland has often doubled for other locations in the film . 
the city is also home to the cleveland pops orchestra ,  the cleveland youth orchestra ,  the contemporary youth orchestra the cleveland youth wind symphony ,  and the biennial cleveland international piano competition which has ,  in the past ,  often featured the cleveland orchestra . 
in 1999, cleveland was identified as an emerging global city . 
cleveland is also home to the rock and roll hall of fame . 
cleveland's current major professional sports teams include the cleveland indians  -lrb-  major league baseball  -rrb-  ,  cleveland browns  -lrb-  national football league  -rrb-  ,  and cleveland cavaliers  -lrb-  national basketball association  -rrb-  . 
cleveland is noted in the world of celebrity food culture . 
several chess championships have taken place in cleveland . 
businesses proclaimed that cleveland was the `` best location in the nation '' . 
the city is also host to the cleveland gladiators of the arena football league ,  cleveland fusion of the women's football alliance and cleveland sc of the national premier soccer league . 
cleveland's location on the cuyahoga river and lake erie has been key to its growth . 
cleveland is home to the cleveland orchestra ,  widely considered one of the world's finest orchestras ,  and often referred to as the finest in the united states . 
ohio city remained an independent municipality until its annexation by cleveland in 1854.
in earlier nfl history ,  the cleveland bulldogs won the nfl championship in 1924, and the cleveland rams won the nfl championship in 1945 before relocating to los angeles . 
cleveland has served as the setting for several major studio and independent films . 
the cleveland clinic is the city's largest private employer with a workforce of over 37,000  . 
the cleveland state university poetry center serves as an academic center for poetry . 
downtown cleveland is centered on public square and includes a wide range of districts . 
because of its significant growth ,  cleveland was known as the `` sixth city '' of the us during this period . 
the church of england  -lrb-  c of e  -rrb-  is the established church of england . 
the church of ireland and the church in wales separated from the church of england in 1869 and 1920 respectively and are autonomous churches in the anglican communion; scotland's national church ,  the church of scotland ,  is presbyterian but the scottish episcopal church is in the anglican communion . 
by the fifth article of the union with ireland 1800, the church of england and church of ireland were united into `` one protestant episcopal church ,  to be called ,  the united church of england and ireland '' . 
article xix  -lrb-  'of the church'  -rrb-  of the 39 articles defines the church as follows:
the church of england set up the church urban fund in the 1980s to tackle poverty and deprivation . 
the church of england has ,  as one of its distinguishing marks ,  a breadth and `` open-mindedness '' . 
the church of england has been discussing same-sex marriages and lgbt clergy . 
since the english reformation ,  the church of england has used a liturgy in english . 
additionally ,  the church's own statistics reveal that 9.7 million people visit at least one of its churches every year and 1 million students are educated at church of england schools  -lrb-  which number 4,700 -rrb- . 
despite the various disruptions of the reformation and the english civil war ,  the church of england considers itself to be the same church which was more formally organised by augustine . 
the british monarch has the constitutional title of supreme governor of the church of england . 
for example ,  one report from the church mission society suggested that the church open up `` a pagan church where christianity is very much in the centre '' to reach out to spiritual people . 
while embracing some themes of the protestant reformation ,  the church of england also maintains catholic traditions of the ancient church and teachings of the church fathers ,  unless these are considered contrary to scripture . 
the use of hymns and music in the church of england has changed dramatically over the centuries . 
the church of england has 18,000 active ordained clergy and 10,000 licensed lay ministers . 
approximately 30 church of england parish churches are declared `` closed for regular public worship ''  -lrb-  previously termed `` redundant ''  -rrb-  each year . 
in addition to england ,  the jurisdiction of the church of england extends to the isle of man ,  the channel islands and a few parishes in flintshire ,  monmouthshire ,  powys and radnorshire in wales which voted to remain with the church of england rather than joining the church in wales . 
in 2015 the church of england admitted that it was embarrassed to be paying staff under the living wage . 
the canon law of the church of england identifies the christian scriptures as the source of its doctrine . 
in 2010, for the first time in the history of the church of england ,  more women than men were ordained as priests  -lrb-  290 women and 273 men  -rrb-  . 
some active use is made of about half of the closed churches . 
in most accounts ulysses only demands this for his own men . 
she would take his manhood unless he had her swear by the names of the gods that she would not . 
most of the account deals with the son's later quest for and accidental killing of his father ,  drawing the moral that only evil can come of the use of sorcery . 
circe was also taken as the archetype of the predatory female until her cause was taken up by women authors ,  who raised the question of whether this view had more to do with male fantasies than with the truth . 
circe was also taken as the archetype of the predatory female until her cause was taken up by women authors ,  who raised the question of whether this view had more to do with male fantasies than with the truth . 
she also advised odysseus to go to the underworld and gave him directions . 
the theme of turning men into a variety of animals was elaborated by later writers ,  especially in latin . 
odysseus followed hermes' advice ,  freeing his men and then remained on the island for one year ,  feasting and drinking wine . 
later traditions tell of her leaving or even destroying the island and moving to italy ,  where she was identified with cape circeo . 
fragments of anaxilas also mention the transformation and one of the characters complains of the impossibility of scratching his face now that he is a pig . 
the cpr acquired the quebec central railway on 14 december 1912.
the cpr had built a railway that operated mostly in the wilderness . 
the canadian pacific railway  -lrb-  cpr  -rrb-  ,  also known formerly as cp rail between 1968 and 1996, is a historic canadian class i railroad incorporated in 1881.
independent railways and subsidiaries that were eventually merged into the cpr in connection with this route were the shuswap and okanagan railway ,  the kaslo and slocan railway ,  the columbia and kootenay railway ,  the columbia and western railway and various others . 
the cpr acquired several smaller railways via long-term leases in 1912.
the cpr also leased the new brunswick railway in 1891 for 991 years ,  and built the international railway of maine ,  connecting montreal with saint john ,  new brunswick ,  in 1889.
as well ,  22 of the cpr's ships went to war ,  12 of which were sunk . 
by 1883, railway construction was progressing rapidly ,  but the cpr was in danger of running out of funds . 
the cpr ran a number of trains that transported members of the canadian royal family when they have toured the country . 
in 2001, the cpr's parent company ,  canadian pacific limited ,  spun off its five subsidiaries ,  including the cpr ,  into independent companies . 
in 1884, cpr began purchasing sailing ships as part of a railway supply service on the great lakes . 
during the first decade of the 20th century ,  the cpr continued to build more lines . 
in 2015-16 canadian pacific sought to merge with american railway norfolk southern . 
building the railway took over four years . 
via eventually took almost all of its passenger trains ,  including `` the canadian '' ,  off cp's lines . 
the cpr also made many of their older 2-8-0s ,  built in the turn of the century ,  into 2-8-2s . 
during this time the railway land grants were formalized . 
before the cpr line ,  messages to the west could be sent only via the united states . 
in 1996, cp rail moved its head office to calgary from montreal and changed its name back to canadian pacific railway . 
in 2006, the canadian government issued a formal apology to the chinese population in canada for their treatment both during and following the construction of the cpr . 
a network of affiliates carried the cpr radio network's broadcasts in the first half of the 1930s ,  but the takeover of cnr's radio service by the new canadian radio broadcasting commission removed cpr's need to have a network for competitive reasons and cpr's radio service was discontinued in 1935.
2860, was restored by the british columbia government and used in excursion service on the british columbia railway between 1974 and 1999.
the canadian pacific railway lake and river service  -lrb-  british columbia lake and river service  -rrb-  developed slowly and in spurts of growth . 
canadian pacific airlines ,  also called cp air ,  operated from 1942 to 1987 and was the main competitor of canadian government-owned air canada . 
in 1949, the cpr acquired 13 baldwin-designed locomotives from the canadian locomotive company for its isolated esquimalt and nanaimo railway and vancouver island was quickly dieselized . 
hotels were likewise crucial to the cpr's growth by attracting travellers . 
however ,  had these shortcuts not been taken ,  it is conceivable that the cpr might have had to default financially ,  leaving the railway unfinished . 
cpr coo keith creel said cpr was in a growth position in 2014 thanks to the increased alberta crude oil ,  western canadian select wcs ,  transport that will account for one-third of cpr's new revenue gains through 2018 `` aided by improvements at oil-loading terminals and track in western canada . `` 
in 1929, the cpr received its first 2-10-4 selkirk locomotives ,  the largest steam locomotives to run in canada and the british empire . 
the last steam locomotives that the cpr received ,  in 1949, were selkirks ,  numbered 5930–5935.
many thousands of navvies worked on the railway . 
in 1952, the cpr became the first north american railway to introduce intermodal or `` piggyback '' freight service ,  where truck trailers are carried on flat cars . 
in 2017, cp ran the cp canada 150 train from port moody to ottawa to celebrate canada's 150th year since confederation . 
the canadian pacific railway coast service  -lrb-  british columbia coast steamships or bccs  -rrb-  was established when the cpr acquired in 1901 canadian pacific navigation company  -lrb-  no relation  -rrb-  and its large fleet of ships that served 72 ports along the coast of british columbia including on vancouver island . 
canadian pacific car and passenger transfer company was formed by other interest in 1888 linking the cpr in prescott ,  ontario ,  and the nyc in ogdensburg ,  new york . 
cp was the first railway in north america to pioneer ac traction diesel-electric locomotives ,  in 1984.
from the 1920s to the 1950s ,  the main approach to psychology was behaviorism . 
the ability to attend to one conversation in the face of many is known as the cocktail party effect . 
metacognition ,  in a broad sense ,  is the thoughts that a person has about their own thoughts . 
one major focal point relating to attention within the field of cognitive psychology is the concept of divided attention . 
the main focus of cognitive psychologists is on the mental processes that affect behavior . 
modern conceptions of memory are usually about long-term memory and break it down into three main sub-classes . 
these three classes are somewhat hierarchical in nature ,  in terms of the level of conscious thought related to their use . 
the two main types of memory are short-term memory and long-term memory; however ,  short-term memory has become better understood to be working memory . 
current perspectives on perception within cognitive psychology tend to focus on particular ways in which the human mind interprets stimuli from the senses and how these interpretations affect behavior . 
27 manx comets were found from 2013 to 2017.
this happened in 2007 to comet holmes . 
in 1996, comets were found to emit x-rays . 
 '' -lrb-  see also fate of comets ,  above  -rrb- `` 
some authorities use the term `` periodic comet '' to refer to any comet with a periodic orbit  -lrb-  that is ,  all short-period comets plus all long-period comets  -rrb-  ,  whereas others use it to mean exclusively short-period comets . 
there are at least 18 comets that fit this category . 
the appearance of a comet is called an apparition . 
comets 42p/neujmin and 53p/van biesbroeck appear to be fragments of a parent comet . 
periodic comets or short-period comets are generally defined as those having orbital periods of less than 200 years . 
jupiter-family comets and long-period comets appear to follow very different fading laws . 
prior to the early 20th century ,  most comets were simply referred to by the year when they appeared ,  sometimes with additional adjectives for particularly bright comets; thus ,  the `` great comet of 1680 '' ,  the `` great comet of 1882 '' ,  and the `` great january comet of 1910 '' . 
after edmund halley demonstrated that the comets of 1531, 1607, and 1682 were the same body and successfully predicted its return in 1759 by calculating its orbit ,  that comet became known as halley's comet . 
if a comet is traveling fast enough ,  it may leave the solar system . 
at the shorter orbital period extreme ,  encke's comet has an orbit that does not reach the orbit of jupiter ,  and is known as an encke-type comet . 
approximately once a decade ,  a comet becomes bright enough to be noticed by a casual observer ,  leading such comets to be designated as great comets . 
some comets have been observed to break up during their perihelion passage ,  including great comets west and ikeya–seki . 
the nucleus of some comets may be fragile ,  a conclusion supported by the observation of comets splitting apart . 
similarly ,  although the literal meaning of `` non-periodic comet '' is the same as `` single-apparition comet '' ,  some use it to mean all comets that are not `` periodic '' in the second sense  -lrb-  that is ,  to also include all comets with a period greater than 200 years  -rrb-  . 
a sungrazing comet is a comet that passes extremely close to the sun at perihelion ,  generally within a few million kilometres . 
these perturbations can deflect long-period comets into shorter orbital periods . 
a number of periodic comets discovered in earlier decades or previous centuries are now lost comets . 
single-apparition or non-periodic comets are similar to long-period comets because they also have parabolic or slightly hyperbolic trajectories when near perihelion in the inner solar system . 
the solid ,  core structure of a comet is known as the nucleus . 
most comets are small solar system bodies with elongated elliptical orbits that take them close to the sun for a part of their orbit and then out into the further reaches of the solar system for the remainder . 
as a comet approaches the inner solar system ,  solar radiation causes the volatile materials within the comet to vaporize and stream out of the nucleus ,  carrying dust away with them . 
later ,  periodic comets were usually named after their discoverers ,  but comets that had appeared only once continued to be referred to by the year of their appearance . 
compost  -lrb-   or   -rrb-  is organic matter that has been decomposed in a process called composting . 
compost is rich in nutrients . 
with the proper mixture of water ,  oxygen ,  carbon ,  and nitrogen ,  micro-organisms are able to break down organic matter to produce compost . 
the most efficient composting occurs with an optimal carbon:nitrogen ratio of about 25:1.
because of corundum's hardness  -lrb-  pure corundum is defined to have 9.0 on the mohs scale  -rrb-  ,  it can scratch almost every other mineral . 
the toughness of corundum is sensitive to surface roughness and crystallographic orientation . 
the name `` corundum '' is derived from the tamil word `` kurundam '' ,  which in turn derives from the sanskrit `` kuruvinda '' . 
corundum for abrasives is mined in zimbabwe ,  pakistan ,  afghanistan ,  russia ,  sri lanka ,  and india . 
by the 1920s ,  capoeira repression had declined . 
playing capoeira is both a game and a method of practicing the application of capoeira movements in simulated combat . 
in mestre bimba's capoeira regional ,  batizado was the first time a new student would play capoeira following the sound of the berimbau . 
in a `` roda '' every cultural aspect of capoeira is present ,  not only the martial side . 
capoeira's history begins with the beginning of african slavery in brazil . 
capoeira nowadays is not only a martial art ,  but an active exporter of brazilian culture all over the world . 
by 1940, capoeira finally lost its criminal connotation and was legalized . 
capoeira  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an afro-brazilian martial art that combines elements of dance ,  acrobatics ,  and music . 
during the game most capoeira moves are used ,  but capoeiristas usually avoid using punches or elbow strikes unless it's a very aggressive game . 
out of 4,303 arrests in rio police jail in 1862, 404 detainees—nearly 10%—had been arrested for capoeira . `` 
capoeira presentations ,  normally theatrical ,  acrobatic and with little martiality ,  are common sights around the world . 
it is this combination of attacks ,  defense and mobility that gives capoeira its perceived `` fluidity '' and choreography-like style . 
capoeira is a fast and versatile martial art that is historically focused on fighting outnumbered or in technological disadvantage . 
in both cases ,  capoeira was still seen by authorities as a dangerous pastime which was punishable; however during the military regime it was tolerated as an activity for university students  -lrb-  which by this time is the form of capoeira that is recognised today  -rrb-  . 
even though apelidos or these nicknames are not necessary any more ,  the tradition is still very alive not only in capoeira but in many aspects of brazilian culture . 
registries of capoeira practices existed since the 18th century in rio de janeiro ,  salvador and recife . 
through most of its history in brazil ,  capoeira commonly featured weapons and weapon training ,  given its street fighting nature . 
increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide means increase in global temperature . 
tupper's wife ,  lady tupper died in may 1912.
tupper was born in amherst ,  nova scotia to the rev . 
during the 1878 election tupper again led the conservative campaign in nova scotia . 
tupper was born in amherst ,  nova scotia ,  to charles tupper ,  sr .  ,  and miriam lowe ,  lockhart . 
tupper became the provincial secretary . 
tupper set himself up as a physician in amherst ,  nova scotia and opened a drugstore . 
by 1860, tupper supported a union of all the colonies of british north america . 
tupper led the nova scotia campaign for the liberal-conservative party during the canadian federal election of 1872.
tupper's 68 days is the shortest term of all prime ministers . 
tupper continued practicing medicine during this period . 
for tupper's work on the joint commission ,  joseph chamberlain arranged for tupper to become a baronet of the united kingdom ,  and the tupper baronetcy was created on september 13, 1888.
during the 1887 federal election ,  tupper again presented the pro-confederation argument to the people of nova scotia ,  and again the conservatives won 14 of nova scotia's 21 seats in the 6th canadian parliament . 
tupper followed howe to london where he successfully lobbied british politicians against allowing nova scotia to secede . 
during his time as high commissioner ,  tupper vigorously defended canada's rights . 
tupper maintained that lord aberdeen's actions were unconstitutional . 
sir charles tupper ,  1st baronet ,   -lrb-  july 2, 1821 – october 30, 1915 -rrb- was a canadian father of confederation: as the premier of nova scotia from 1864 to 1867, he led nova scotia into confederation . 
in the run-up to the 1859 nova scotia election ,  tupper had been unwilling to commit to the idea of a union with the other british north american colonies . 
as a result ,  the league was dissolved in 1893, for which some people blamed tupper . 
during the 1882 election ,  tupper campaigned only in nova scotia  -lrb-  he normally campaigned throughout the country  -rrb- : he was again successful ,  with the conservatives winning 14 of nova scotia's 21 seats in the 5th canadian parliament . 
the 1882 election was personally significant for tupper because it saw his son ,  charles hibbert tupper ,  elected as mp for pictou . 
sir john a .  macdonald's death in 1891 opened the possibility of tupper's replacing him as prime minister of canada ,  but tupper enjoyed life in london and decided against returning to canada . 
johnston retired from politics in may 1864 when he was appointed as a judge ,  and tupper was chosen as his successor as premier of nova scotia . 
a rift developed between tupper and macdonald in 1879 over sandford fleming ,  whom tupper supported but whom macdonald wanted removed as chief engineer of the cpr . 
the leader of the conservative party of nova scotia ,  james william johnston ,  a fellow baptist and family friend of the tuppers ,  encouraged charles tupper to enter politics . 
tupper's motto as minister of railways and canals was `` develop our resources . `` 
the 1874 election was disastrous for the conservatives ,  and in nova scotia ,  tupper was one of only two conservative mps returned to the 3rd canadian parliament . 
tupper was outraged and petitioned the british government ,  asking them to recall mulgrave . 
following the passage of the british north america act in 1867, tupper resigned as premier of nova scotia and began a career in federal politics . 
in nova scotia ,  tupper organized a confederation party to combat the activities of the anti-confederation party organized by joseph howe and successfully led nova scotia into confederation . 
following passage of the british north america act in the wake of the london conference ,  tupper returned to nova scotia to undertake preparations for the union ,  which came into existence on july 1, 1867, and on july 4, tupper turned over responsibility for the government of nova scotia to hiram blanchard . 
this filibuster resulted in tupper's abandoning the bill and asking for a dissolution . 
tupper remains the oldest person ever to become canadian prime minister ,  at age 74.
tupper believed that a form of limited federation was possible and desirable . 
tupper now organized supporters of confederation into a confederation party to push for the union . 
the crtc was originally known as the canadian radio-television commission . 
the crtc also regulates which channels broadcast distributors must or may offer . 
the canadian radio-television and telecommunications commission  -lrb-  crtc;   -rrb-  is a public organization in canada with mandate as a regulatory agency for broadcasting and telecommunications . 
the crtc's simultaneous substitution rules require that when a canadian network licences a television show from a us network and shows it in the same time slot ,  upon request by the canadian broadcaster ,  canadian broadcast distributors must replace the show on the us channel with the broadcast of the canadian channel ,  along with any overlays and commercials . 
the crtc regulates all canadian broadcasting and telecommunications activities and enforces rules it creates to carry out the policies assigned to it; the best-known of these is probably the canadian content rules . 
the crtc also regulates radio in canada ,  including community radio ,  where the crtc requires that at least 15% of each station's output must be locally produced spoken work content . 
complaints against broadcasters ,  such as concerns around offensive programming ,  are dealt with by the canadian broadcast standards council  -lrb-  cbsc  -rrb-  ,  an independent broadcast industry association ,  rather than by the crtc ,  although cbsc decisions can be appealed to the crtc if necessary . 
while landline and mobile telephone providers must also be majority-owned by canadians under the federal telecommunications act ,  the crtc is not responsible for enforcement of this provision . 
thus first lignite  -lrb-  also called `` brown coal ''  -rrb-  ,  then sub-bituminous coal ,  bituminous coal ,  and lastly anthracite  -lrb-  also called `` hard coal '' or `` black coal ''  -rrb-  may be formed . 
there are several international standards for coal . 
sometimes coal seams  -lrb-  also known as coal beds  -rrb-  are interbedded with other sediments in a cyclothem . 
fossils and amber may be found in coal . 
the largest consumer and importer of coal is china . 
coal is composed of macerals ,  minerals and water . 
a grade between bituminous coal and anthracite was once known as 'steam coal' as it was widely used as a fuel for steam locomotives . 
however the most important distinction is between thermal coal  -lrb-  also known as steam coal  -rrb-  ,  which is burnt to generate electricity via steam; and metallurgical coal  -lrb-  also known as coking coal  -rrb-  ,  which is burnt at high temperature to make steel . 
finely ground bituminous coal ,  known in this application as sea coal ,  is a constituent of foundry sand . 
cannel coal  -lrb-  sometimes called `` candle coal ''  -rrb-  is a variety of fine-grained ,  high-rank coal with significant hydrogen content ,  which consists primarily of liptinite . 
coke is a solid carbonaceous residue derived from coking coal  -lrb-  a low-ash ,  low-sulfur bituminous coal ,  also known as metallurgical coal  -rrb-  ,  which is used in manufacturing steel and other iron products . 
some iron and steel making and other industrial processes burn coal . 
