east pakistan was home to 55% of pakistan's population . 
east pakistan is an inseparable and inseverable part of pakistan '' . 
east pakistan seceded with the help of india . 
east pakistan's districts are listed in the following . 
general yaqub mobilised the entire major forces in east pakistan ,  and were re-deployed in east pakistan . 
on 16 december 1971, east pakistan was liberated from pakistan as the newly independent state of bangladesh . 
the news spread like a fire in both east and west pakistan ,  and the struggle for independence began in east pakistan . 
east pakistan inherited 18 districts from british bengal . 
the indian air force dismantled the capability of pakistan air force in east pakistan . 
bloody guerrilla warfare ensued in east pakistan . 
east pakistan was the eastern provincial wing of pakistan between 1955 and 1971, covering the territory of the modern country bangladesh . 
the discrimination occurred despite fact that east pakistan generated a major share of pakistan's exports . 
in this view ,  the east pakistan's economy was quickly centralized and all major economic planning shifted to west pakistan . 
a small armenian and jewish minority resided in east pakistan . 
the east pakistan provincial assembly was the legislative body of the territory . 
in 1965, pakistan implemented the kaptai dam hydroelectric project in the southeastern part of east pakistan with american assistance . 
the annual rate of growth of the gross domestic product per capita was 4.4% in the west pakistan versus 2.6% in east pakistan from 1960 to 1965.
dacca was declared as the `` second capital '' of pakistan in 1962.
from 1956 until 1996 wilson was part of the faculty of harvard . 
wilson was born in birmingham ,  alabama . 
there are ,  wilson suggests in the chapter ,  limits on just how much influence social and environmental factors can have in altering human behavior . 
edward osborne wilson  -lrb-  born june 10, 1929 -rrb- ,  usually cited as e .  o .  wilson ,  is an american biologist ,  theorist ,  naturalist and author . 
wilson wrote in his 1978 book `` on human nature '' ,  `` the evolutionary epic is probably the best myth we will ever have . `` 
just after completing is phd in 1955, wilson started supervising stuart a .  altmann on the social behavior of rhesus macaques ,  which gave wilson a first impetus to imagine sociobiology as a global theory of animal social behavior . 
wilson used sociobiology and evolutionary principles to explain the behavior of social insects and then to understand the social behavior of other animals ,  including humans ,  thus established sociobiology as a new scientific field . 
wilson has said in reference to ants `` karl marx was right ,  socialism works ,  it is just that he had the wrong species '' . 
wilson became a special lecturer at duke university as part of the agreement . 
wilson ,  along with bert hölldobler ,  carried out a systematic study of ants and ant behavior ,  culminating in the 1990 encyclopedic work `` the ants '' . 
wilson has argued that the unit of selection is a gene ,  the basic element of heredity . 
armstrong hall at columbia was named in his honor . 
in 1940, rca offered armstrong $1,000,000 for a non-exclusive ,  royalty-free license to use his fm patents . 
in 1955, marion armstrong founded the armstrong memorial research foundation ,  and participated in its work until her death in 1979 at the age of 81.
armstrong has been called `` the most prolific and influential inventor in radio history '' . 
 -lrb-  during both world wars ,  armstrong gave the u . s .  military free use of his patents .   -rrb- 
 -lrb-  he is of no known relation to apollo astronaut neil armstrong .   -rrb- 
in 1917, armstrong was the first recipient of the ire's  -lrb-  now ieee  -rrb-  medal of honor . 
armstrong had a standing agreement to give rca the right of first refusal to his patents . 
philosophy hall ,  the columbia building where armstrong developed fm ,  was declared a national historic landmark . 
fcc studies comparing the apex station transmissions with armstrong's fm system concluded that his approach was superior . 
armstrong was born in the chelsea district of new york city ,  the oldest of john and emily  -lrb-  smith  -rrb-  armstrong's three children . 
armstrong began working on his first major invention while still an undergraduate at columbia . 
the regeneration legal battle had one serendipitous outcome for armstrong . 
during world war i ,  armstrong served in the signal corps as a captain and later a major . 
marion armstrong was able to formally establish armstrong as the inventor of fm following protracted court proceedings over five of his basic fm patents ,  with a series of successful suits ,  which lasted until 1967, against other companies that were found guilty of infringement . 
in early 1928 armstrong began researching the capabilities of frequency modulation . 
armstrong graduated from columbia in 1913, earning an electrical engineering degree . 
armstrong was buried in locust grove cemetery ,  merrimac ,  massachusetts . 
while growing up armstrong had experimented with the early ,  temperamental ,  `` gassy '' audions . 
it has spawned a number of spin-off media including books and video games ,  as well a sequel ,  `` everquest ii '' ,  which launched in 2004.
many of the elements in `` everquest '' have been drawn from text-based mud  -lrb-  multi-user dungeon  -rrb-  games ,  particularly dikumuds ,  which in turn were inspired by traditional role-playing games such as `` dungeons & dragons '' . 
 ''everquest '' allows players to interact with other people through role-play ,  joining player guilds ,  and dueling other players  -lrb-  in restricted situations – `` everquest '' only allows player versus player  -lrb-  pvp  -rrb-  combat on the pvp-specific server ,  specified arena zones and through agreed upon dueling  -rrb-  . 
 ''homo sapiens '' is the only extant species of its genus ,  `` homo '' . 
 ''homo habilis '' lived from about 2.8 to 1.4 ma . 
the word `` homo '' ,  the name of the biological genus to which humans belong ,  is latin for `` human '' . 
as modern humans spread out from africa ,  they encountered other hominins such as `` homo neanderthalensis '' and the so-called denisovans ,  who may have evolved from populations of `` homo erectus '' that had left africa around  . 
the earliest member of the genus `` homo '' is `` homo habilis '' which evolved around  . 
also proposed as `` homo sapiens heidelbergensis '' or `` homo sapiens paleohungaricus '' . 
the early phase of `` homo erectus '' ,  from 1.8 to 1.25 ma ,  is considered by some to be a separate species ,  `` homo ergaster '' ,  or as `` homo erectus ergaster '' ,  a subspecies of `` homo erectus '' . 
in may 2010, a new species ,  `` homo gautengensis '' ,  was discovered in south africa . 
around 50,000 bp ,  modern human culture started to evolve more rapidly . 
they argue that when most of the oldowan tools were found in association with human fossils ,  `` homo '' was always present ,  but `` paranthropus '' was not . 
 ''homo neanderthalensis '' ,  alternatively designated as `` homo sapiens neanderthalensis '' ,  lived in europe and asia from 400,000 to about 28,000 years ago . 
the flow of genes from neanderthal populations to modern human was not all one way . 
recent evidence suggests that humans may have left africa half a million years earlier than previously thought . 
the human species eventually developed a much larger brain than that of other primates—typically in modern humans ,  nearly three times the size of a chimpanzee or gorilla brain . 
however ,  evidence for archaic admixture in modern humans ,  both in africa and later ,  throughout eurasia has recently been suggested by a number of studies . 
 ''h .  sapiens '' interbred with archaic humans both in africa and in eurasia ,  in eurasia notably with neanderthals and denisovans . 
debate continues as to whether a `` revolution '' led to modern humans  -lrb-  `` the big bang of human consciousness ''  -rrb-  ,  or whether the evolution was more `` gradual '' . 
the earliest transitional fossils between `` h .  ergaster/erectus '' and archaic `` h .  sapiens '' are from africa ,  such as `` homo rhodesiensis '' ,  but seemingly transitional forms were also found at dmanisi ,  georgia . 
the fossils were dated close to 250,000 years ago ,  and thus are not a direct ancestor but a contemporary with the first appearance of larger-brained anatomically modern humans . 
this unique anatomical feature separates humans from apes and other nonhuman primates ,  and is not seen in human fossils older than 1.8 million years . 
although the brain was small  -lrb-  410 cm  -rrb-  ,  its shape was rounded ,  unlike that of chimpanzees and gorillas ,  and more like a modern human brain . 
from the fossil beds of olduvai and lake turkana they amassed specimens of the early hominins: the australopithecines and `` homo '' species ,  and even `` homo erectus '' . 
all of these traits convinced dart that the taung child was a bipedal human ancestor ,  a transitional form between apes and humans . 
with larger populations ,  social and technological innovations were easier to fix in human populations ,  which may have all contributed to the fact that modern homo sapiens replaced the neanderthal populations by 28,000 bp . 
alleles thought to have originated in neanderthals and denisovans have been identified at several genetic loci in the genomes of modern humans outside of africa . 
furthermore ,  it is argued that hybridization was an essential creative force in the emergence of modern humans . 
the evidence suggests that the neanderthal populations interbred with modern humans possibly 100,000 years ago ,  probably somewhere in the near east . 
in africa in the early pleistocene ,  1.5–1 ma ,  some populations of `` homo habilis '' are thought to have evolved larger brains and to have made more elaborate stone tools; these differences and others are sufficient for anthropologists to classify them as a new species ,  `` homo erectus ''—in africa . 
up until the genetic evidence became available there were two dominant models for the dispersal of modern humans . 
the earliest documented representative of the genus `` homo '' is `` homo habilis '' ,  which evolved around  ,  and is arguably the earliest species for which there is positive evidence of the use of stone tools . 
furthermore ,  the changes in the structure of human brains may be even more significant than the increase in size . 
the earliest fossils of anatomically modern humans are from the middle paleolithic ,  about 200,000 years ago such as the omo remains of ethiopia; later fossils from es skhul cave in israel and southern europe begin around 90,000 years ago  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
it also allowed for extended periods of social learning and language acquisition in juvenile humans ,  beginning as much as 2 million years ago . 
the shortening of the pelvis and smaller birth canal evolved as a requirement for bipedalism and had significant effects on the process of human birth which is much more difficult in modern humans than in other primates . 
the genus `` australopithecus '' evolved in eastern africa around 4 million years ago before spreading throughout the continent and eventually becoming extinct 2 million years ago . 
this suggests many modern human adaptations represent phylogenetically deep traits and that the behavior and morphology of chimpanzees may have evolved subsequent to the split with the common ancestor they share with humans . 
 ''h .  heidelbergensis ''  -lrb-  `` heidelberg man ''  -rrb-  lived from about 800,000 to about 300,000 years ago . 
the specific study of the origin and life of humans is anthropology ,  particularly paleoanthropology which focuses on the study of human prehistory . 
this migration out of africa is estimated to have begun about 70,000 years bp and modern humans subsequently spread globally ,  replacing earlier hominins either through competition or hybridization . 
a famous example of `` homo erectus '' is peking man; others were found in asia  -lrb-  notably in indonesia  -rrb-  ,  africa ,  and europe . 
analyses have shown a greater diversity of dna patterns throughout africa ,  consistent with the idea that africa is the ancestral home of mitochondrial eve and y-chromosomal adam ,  and that modern human dispersal out of africa has only occurred over the last 55,000 years . 
nearly all modern non-african humans have 1% to 4% of their dna derived from neanderthal dna ,  and this finding is consistent with recent studies indicating that the divergence of some human alleles dates to one ma ,  although the interpretation of these studies has been questioned . 
human evolution from its first separation from the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees is characterized by a number of morphological ,  developmental ,  physiological ,  and behavioral changes . 
evliya çelebi was born in constantinople  -lrb-  now istanbul  -rrb-  in 1611 to a wealthy family from kütahya . 
derviş mehmed zillî  -lrb-  25 march 1611 – 1682 -rrb- ,  known as evliya çelebi  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was an ottoman explorer who travelled through the territory of the ottoman empire and neighboring lands over a period of forty years ,  recording his commentary in a travelogue called the `` seyahatname ''  -lrb-  `` book of travel ''  -rrb-  . 
individual egyptians also prayed to gods and gave them private offerings . 
the egyptians had elaborate beliefs about death and the afterlife . 
among the significant egyptian myths were the creation myths . 
ancient egyptian religion was a complex system of polytheistic beliefs and rituals that formed an integral part of ancient egyptian society . 
the egyptians used oracles to ask the gods for knowledge or guidance . 
the most important of all egyptian myths was the osiris myth . 
the beliefs and rituals now referred to as `` ancient egyptian religion '' were integral within every aspect of egyptian culture . 
nevertheless ,  for the most part the two belief systems remained separate ,  and the egyptian deities remained egyptian . 
during the new kingdom the pharaoh akhenaten abolished the official worship of other gods in favor of the sun-disk aten . 
in this new egyptian state ,  personal piety grew more important and was expressed more freely in writing ,  a trend that continued in the new kingdom . 
while it persisted among the populace for some time ,  egyptian religion slowly faded away . 
egyptian religion produced the temples and tombs which are ancient egypt's most enduring monuments ,  but it also influenced other cultures . 
the egyptians also commonly used objects believed to be imbued with heka of their own ,  such as the magically protective amulets worn in great numbers by ordinary egyptians . 
people also sought to affect the gods' behavior to their own benefit through magical rituals . 
by the beginning of the new kingdom even the pharaohs were buried in such tombs ,  and they continued to be used until the decline of the religion itself . 
individuals could interact with the gods for their own purposes ,  appealing for help through prayer or compelling the gods to act through magic . 
the egyptians believed that the phenomena of nature were divine forces in and of themselves . 
egyptian myths were metaphorical stories intended to illustrate and explain the gods' actions and roles in nature . 
the state dedicated enormous resources to egyptian rituals and to the construction of the temples . 
this iconography was not fixed ,  and many of the gods could be depicted in more than one form . 
before the amarna period ,  popular religion had trended toward more personal relationships between worshippers and their gods . 
many gods were associated with particular regions in egypt where their cults were most important . 
the characteristics of the gods who populated the divine realm were inextricably linked to the egyptians' understanding of the properties of the world in which they lived . 
the egyptians produced numerous prayers and hymns ,  written in the form of poetry . 
he also found that students differ in process of problem solving in their approach and attitude toward the problem . 
jean piaget  -lrb-  1896–1980 -rrb- was one of the most powerful researchers in the area of developmental psychology during the 20th century . 
many colleges and high schools are starting to teach students how to teach students in the classroom . 
he also stated that material should be relative to the student's own experience . 
the authors explain that learning technology also allows for students with social- emotional disabilities to participate in distance learning . 
piaget proposed a developmental theory of moral reasoning in which children progress from a naïve understanding of morality based on behavior and outcomes to a more advanced understanding based on intentions . 
the 5 steps that teachers should use are:
however ,  school psychologists are generally more individual-oriented towards students . 
technology is essential to the field of educational psychology ,  not only for the psychologist themselves as far as testing ,  organization ,  and resources ,  but also for students . 
rudolf steiner's model of child development interrelates physical ,  emotional ,  cognitive ,  and moral development in developmental stages similar to those later described by piaget . 
developmental theories are sometimes presented not as shifts between qualitatively different stages ,  but as gradual increments on separate dimensions . 
now being its own academic discipline ,  educational psychology has proven to be helpful for social science researchers . 
gage founded the stanford center for research and development in teaching ,  which contributed research on teaching as well as influencing the education of important educational psychologists . 
the four stages are sensorimotor stage ,  pre-operational stage ,  concrete operational stage and formal operational stage . 
often represented as stages through which people pass as they mature ,  developmental theories describe changes in mental abilities  -lrb-  cognition  -rrb-  ,  social roles ,  moral reasoning ,  and beliefs about the nature of knowledge . 
most of the research on piagetian theory was carried out by american educational psychologists . 
developmental psychology ,  and especially the psychology of cognitive development ,  opens a special perspective for educational psychology . 
motivational theories also explain how learners' goals affect the way they engage with academic tasks . 
for example ,  educational psychologists have conducted research on the instructional applicability of jean piaget's theory of development ,  according to which children mature through four stages of cognitive capability . 
research on classroom management and pedagogy is conducted to guide teaching practice and form a foundation for teacher education programs . 
educational psychologists are working side by side with psychiatrists ,  social workers ,  teachers ,  speech and language therapists ,  and counselors in attempt to understand the questions being raised when combining behavioral ,  cognitive ,  and social psychology in the classroom setting . 
johann pestalozzi  -lrb-  1746–1827 -rrb- ,  a swiss educational reformer ,  emphasized the child rather than the content of the school . 
these cards are accepted by merchants who accept credit cards and are processed through the eftpos terminal in the same way as credit cards . 
store cards and proprietary cards were shut out of the new system . 
australian financial institutions provide their customers with a plastic card ,  which can be used as a debit card or as an atm card ,  and sometimes as a credit card . 
for eftpos ,  usa based systems allow the use of debit cards or credit cards . 
the main difference with regular debit cards is that these cards can be used outside australia where the respective credit card is accepted . 
those merchants that enter the eftpos payment system must accept debit cards issued by any australian bank ,  and some also accept various credit cards and other cards . 
the discover card is accepted in australia as a diners club card  . 
australian debit cards cannot be used for online and telephone banking transactions ,  unless they are also a credit card . 
each australian bank has given a different name to its debit cards ,  such as:
australian debit cards normally cannot be used outside australia . 
debit and credit cards are embossed plastic cards complying with iso/iec 7810 id-1 standard . 
these can vary between merchants and on the type of card being used ,  and generally are not imposed on debit card transactions ,  and widely not on mastercard and a visa credit card transactions . 
the cards have an embossed bank card number conforming with the iso/iec 7812 numbering standard . 
for credit cards to be accepted by a merchant a separate agreement must be entered into with each credit card company ,  each of which has its own flexible merchant fee rate . 
both providers run an interconnected financial network that allows the processing of not only of debit cards at point of sale terminals but also credit cards and charge cards . 
those who read here `` letter written to the laodiceans '' presume that ,  at the time that the epistle to the colossians was written ,  paul also had written an epistle to the laodicean church . 
the epistle to the laodiceans is a lost letter of paul the apostle ,  the original existence of which is inferred from an instruction to the church in colossae to send their letter to the church in laodicea ,  and likewise obtain a copy of the letter `` from laodicea ''  -lrb-   ,  `` ek laodikeas ''  -rrb-  . 
paul ,  the earliest known christian author ,  wrote several letters  -lrb-  or epistles  -rrb-  in greek to various churches . 
some ancient sources ,  such as hippolytus ,  and some modern scholars consider that the epistle `` from laodicea '' was never a lost epistle ,  but simply paul re-using one of his other letters  -lrb-  the most common candidate is the contemporary epistle to the ephesians  -rrb-  ,  just as he asks for the copying and forwarding of the letter to colossians to laodicea . 
the nazis distinguished between extermination and concentration camps ,  although the terms `` extermination camp ''  -lrb-  `` vernichtungslager ''  -rrb-  and `` death camp ''  -lrb-  `` todeslager ''  -rrb-  were interchangeable ,  each referring to camps whose primary function was genocide . 
extermination camp research is difficult because of extensive attempts by the ss and nazi regime to conceal the existence of the extermination camps . 
  -rrb-  ,  nazi photographs and films of the killings ,  and camp administration records . 
the estimates for the jadovno concentration camp generally offer a range of 10,000 – 72,000 deaths at the camp over a period of 122 days  -lrb-  may to august 1941 -rrb- . 
whereas the auschwitz ii  -lrb-  auschwitz–birkenau  -rrb-  and majdanek camps were parts of a labor camp complex ,  the operation reinhard camps and the chełmno camp were built exclusively for the quick extermination of entire communities of people  -lrb-  primarily jews  -rrb-  within hours of their arrival . 
death camps differed from concentration camps located in germany proper ,  such as bergen-belsen ,  oranienburg ,  ravensbrück ,  and sachsenhausen ,  which were prison camps set up prior to world war ii for people defined as 'undesirable' . 
the jasenovac concentration camp complex of five sub-camps replaced jadovno . 
some nazi camps ,  such as auschwitz and majdanek ,  served a dual purpose before the end of the war in 1945: extermination by poison gas ,  but also through extreme work under starvation conditions . 
auschwitz camp commandant rudolf höss reported that the first time zyklon b pellets were used on the jews ,  many suspected they were to be killed – despite having been deceived into believing they were to be deloused and then returned to the camp . 
the sajmište concentration camp operated by the nazis in yugoslavia had a gas van stationed for use from march to june 1942.
irrespective of round-ups for extermination camps ,  the nazis abducted millions of foreigners for slave labour in other types of camps ,  which provided perfect cover for the extermination programme . 
nazi germany built extermination camps  -lrb-  also called death camps or killing centers  -rrb-  during the holocaust in world war ii ,  to systematically kill millions of jews ,  slavs ,  roma ,  soviet pows ,  political opponents and others whom the nazis considered `` untermenschen ''  -lrb-  `` subhumans ''  -rrb-  . 
initially ,  the victims were buried in mass graves ,  but were later cremated during `` sonderaktion 1005 '' in all camps of operation reinhard . 
 '' ,  he replied ,  `` they were normal concentration camps ,  from the point of view of the department of eichmann . `` 
the jadovno concentration camp was located in a secluded area about from the town of gospić . 
the estimated total number of people executed in the nazi extermination camps in the table below is over three million: the nazis attempted to either partially or completely dismantle the extermination camps in order to hide any evidence that people had been murdered there . 
these can delegate a priest to act on their behalf . 
 -lrb-  see canon 915 -rrb- . 
within the catholic church ,  there are differences between the discipline of the majority latin church regarding excommunication and that of the eastern catholic churches . 
the amish have also been known to excommunicate members that were either seen or known for breaking rules ,  or questioning the church . 
the first fuel cells were invented in 1838.
a secondary cell ,  commonly referred to as a `` rechargeable battery '' is an electrochemical cell that can be run as both a galvanic cell or as an electrolytic cell . 
the fuel cell market is growing ,  and in 2013 pike research estimated that the stationary fuel cell market will reach 50 gw by 2020.
a `` fuel cell '' is an electrochemical cell that converts the chemical energy from a fuel into electricity through an electrochemical reaction of hydrogen fuel with oxygen or another oxidizing agent . 
fuel cells can produce electricity continuously for as long as fuel and oxygen are supplied . 
an electrochemical cell consists of two half-cells . 
as the cell is discharged ,  the concentration of the reactants decreases and the cell potential also decreases . 
an electrolytic cell is an electrochemical cell that drives a non-spontaneous redox reaction through the application of electrical energy . 
the remnants of the old ,  empty exoskeleton are called exuviae . 
complete regeneration may require a series of moults ,  the stump becoming a little larger with each moult until it is a normal ,  or near normal ,  size . 
in the  ,  ebor's zone had a population of 166.
the local sports ground is home of the ebor campdraft . 
ebor has a noted problem with speeding vehicles . 
the main tourist attraction is the twin ebor falls . 
ebor is a village on waterfall way on the northern tablelands in new south wales ,  australia . 
ebor's post office opened on 2 march 1868, closed in 1869 and reopened in 1910.
there are several smaller ivc colonies to be found in afghanistan . 
bactria had a special position in old afghanistan ,  being the capital of a vice-kingdom . 
the medes ,  a western persian people ,  arrived from what is today kurdistan sometime around the 700s bc and came to dominate most of ancient afghanistan . 
afghanistan seems in prehistory ,  as well as in ancient and modern times ,  to have been connected by culture and trade with the neighbouring regions . 
in 2010, reports stated that about 42 buddhist relics have been discovered in the logar province of afghanistan ,  which is south of kabul . 
while they made large inroads into the modern-day territory of afghanistan ,  about 100 years later another indo-european group from the north—the kushans  -lrb-  a subgroup of the tribe called the yuezhi by the chinese  -rrb- —entered the region of afghanistan and established an empire lasting almost four centuries ,  which would dominate most of the afghanistan region . 
in the middle of the 3rd century bc ,  an independent ,  hellenistic state was declared in bactria and eventually the control of the seleucids and mauryans was overthrown in western and southern afghanistan . 
archaeological exploration of the pre-islamic period of afghanistan began in afghanistan in earnest after world war ii and proceeded until the late 1970s when the nation was invaded by the soviet union . 
median domination of parts of far off afghanistan would last until the persians challenged and ultimately replaced them from rule . 
between 2000–1200 bc ,  a branch of indo-european-speaking tribes known as the aryans began migrating into the region . 
in a case such as this ,  where the gravitational field is uniform ,  the change in wavelength is given by
in the latter case the 'clock' is the frequency of the photon and a lower frequency is the same as a longer  -lrb-  `` redder ''  -rrb-  wavelength . 
these instances of british troops killing irish civilians would later be highly controversial in ireland . 
some rebel commanders ,  particularly james connolly ,  did not believe that the british would shell the 'second city' of the british empire . 
it had taken nearly nine hours for the british to advance  . 
barricades were erected on the streets to hinder british army movement . 
they remained there for the rest of the week ,  exchanging fire with british forces . 
more than 2,600 were wounded; including at least 2,200 civilians and rebels ,  at least 370 british soldiers and 29 policemen . 
on the morning of monday 24 april ,  about 1,200 members of the irish volunteers and irish citizen army mustered at several locations in central dublin . 
by the following morning ,  british forces had re-captured city hall and taken the rebels prisoner . 
the acts of union 1800 united the kingdom of great britain and the kingdom of ireland as the united kingdom of great britain and ireland ,  abolishing the irish parliament and giving ireland representation in the british parliament . 
heuston had been ordered to hold his position for a few hours ,  to delay the british ,  but had held on for three days . 
british troops also took casualties in unsuccessful frontal assaults on the marrowbone lane distillery . 
by the time british reinforcements arrived in the west ,  the rising there had already disintegrated . 
two of them were escorted by the british to arbour hill prison ,  where pearse confirmed the surrender order . 
the supreme council of the irb met on 5 september 1914, just over a month after the british government had declared war on germany . 
the rebels had failed to take either of dublin's two main railway stations or either of its ports ,  at dublin port and kingstown . 
the british military were caught totally unprepared by the rebellion and their response of the first day was generally un-coordinated . 
this was the first radio broadcast in ireland . 
with much greater numbers and heavier weapons ,  the british army suppressed the rising . 
the rebel position at the south dublin union  -lrb-  site of the present day st .  james's hospital  -rrb-  and marrowbone lane ,  further west along the canal ,  also inflicted heavy losses on british troops . 
the easter rising  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as the easter rebellion ,  was an armed insurrection in ireland during easter week ,  april 1916.
most of those arrested were held at richmond barracks ,  dublin . 
the third home rule bill was introduced by british prime minister h .  h .  asquith in 1912.
the idea was that irb members within the organisation would know these were orders to begin the rising ,  while men such as macneill and the british authorities would take it at face value . 
city hall was taken from the rebel unit that had attacked dublin castle on tuesday morning . 
the only substantial combat of the first day of the rising took place at the south dublin union where a piquet from the royal irish regiment encountered an outpost of éamonn ceannt's force at the northwestern corner of the south dublin union . 
eschrichtiidae or the gray whales is a family of baleen whale  -lrb-  suborder mysticeti  -rrb-  with a single extant species ,  the gray whale  -lrb-  `` eschrichtius robustus ''  -rrb-  . 
fossil eschrichtiids from before the holocene are rare compared to other fossil mysticetes . 
today ,  gray whales are only present in the northern pacific ,  but a population was also present in the northern atlantic before being driven to extinction by european whalers three centuries ago . 
edmund was succeeded as king by his brother eadred ,  king from 946 until 955.
edmund's sons later ruled england as:
edmund i  -lrb-   ,  pronounced ; 921 – 26 may 946 -rrb- was king of the english from 939 until his death . 
all chemical reactions involve both the breaking of existing and the making of new chemical bonds . 
an endothermic process is any process which requires or absorbs energy from its surroundings ,  usually in the form of heat . 
page was born in grafton ,  new south wales . 
page was a keen adopter of new technologies . 
page was the first chancellor of the university of new england ,  which was established in 1954.
earle christmas grafton page was born in grafton ,  new south wales ,  on 8 august 1880.
their grandchildren include don page ,  who was active in new south wales state politics ,  and geoff page ,  a poet . 
page was predeceased by his first wife and his oldest son . 
page married ethel blunt on 18 september 1906.
page began his schooling at grafton public school ,  where he excelled academically . 
page continued his professional medical practice . 
in 1940 page and menzies patched up their differences for the sake of the war effort ,  and page returned to the cabinet as minister for commerce . 
page then began negotiations with hughes' successor as leader of the nationalists ,  stanley bruce . 
ephrem also wrote verse homilies  -lrb-   ,  `` mêmrê ''  -rrb-  . 
the third category of ephrem's writings is his prose work . 
he was declared a doctor of the church in the catholic church in 1920.
ephrem is especially beloved in the syriac orthodox church ,  and counted as a venerable father  -lrb-  i . e .  ,  a sainted monk  -rrb-  in the eastern orthodox church . 
ephrem is popularly credited as the founder of the school of nisibis ,  which ,  in later centuries ,  was the centre of learning of the syriac orthodox church . 
other ecs models were the amiga 500+ in 1991 and lastly the amiga 600 in 1992.
ecs was followed by the third generation aga chipset with the launch of the amiga 4000 in 1992.
the european space operations centre  -lrb-  esoc  -rrb-  serves as the main mission control centre for the european space agency  -lrb-  esa  -rrb-  and is located in darmstadt ,  germany . 
the european space agency  -lrb-  esa;  ,  ase;   -rrb-  is an intergovernmental organisation of 22 member states dedicated to the exploration of space . 
according to farkas the mouthpiece should have upper lip and lower lip  -lrb-  french horn  -rrb-  ,  lower lip and upper lip  -lrb-  trumpet and cornet  -rrb-  ,  and more latitude for lower brass  -lrb-  trombone ,  baritone ,  and tuba  -rrb-  . 
embouchure or lipping is the use of the lips ,  facial muscles ,  tongue ,  and teeth in playing a wind instrument . 
all three stressed that the mouthpiece should be placed higher on the top lip for a more free vibration of the lips . 
while performing on a brass instrument ,  the sound is produced by the player buzzing his or her lips into a mouthpiece . 
to play with an extended range one should use a pivot ,  tongue arch and lip to lip compression . 
in this text ,  farkas also recommends that the lower jaw be protruded so that the upper and lower teeth are aligned . 
with the woodwinds ,  aside from the flute ,  piccolo ,  and recorder ,  the sound is generated by a reed and not with the lips . 
the teeth will be about apart and the teeth are parallel or the jaw slightly forward . 
he also recommended there must be a gap of or so between the teeth so that the air flows freely . 
the lips are placed on the mouthpiece and the player blows utilizing the weight of the horn in establishing a sound . 
doss had moved to athens ,  georgia where he joined hart and mangum in synthetic flying machine ,  which became the olivia tremor control . 
the collective was founded in denver ,  colorado by childhood friends robert schneider ,  bill doss ,  will cullen hart and jeff mangum ,  along with founding apples in stereo members jim mcintyre and hilarie sidney . 
they are marked by a shared admiration of 1960s pop music . 
in 2008, the elephant 6 logo was also used when julian koster released his long-awaited music tapes for clouds and tornadoes under the name the music tapes . 
both the evangelical and high church movements sponsored missionaries . 
new charismatic groups such as the association of vineyard churches and newfrontiers trace their roots to this period  -lrb-  see also british new church movement  -rrb-  . 
evangelicalism was a major force in the anglican church from about 1800 to the 1860s . 
during the 17th century ,  pietism emerged in europe as a movement for the revival of piety and devotion within the lutheran church . 
the movement gained great momentum during the 18th and 19th centuries with the great awakenings in great britain and the united states . 
high church anglicanism also exerted influence on early evangelicalism . 
this usage is reflected in the names of protestant denominations ,  such as the evangelical church in germany  -lrb-  a union of lutheran and reformed churches  -rrb-  and the evangelical lutheran church in america . 
the second great awakening  -lrb-  which actually began in 1790 -rrb- was primarily an american revivalist movement and resulted in substantial growth of the methodist and baptist churches . 
in nigeria the evangelical church winning all  -lrb-  formerly `` evangelical church of west africa ''  -rrb-  is the largest church organization with five thousand congregations and over three million members . 
the post-war period also saw growth of the ecumenical movement and the founding of the world council of churches ,  which the evangelical community generally regarded with suspicion . 
 ''christian conscience '' was used by the british evangelical movement to promote social activism . 
the movement has had a long presence in the anglosphere before spreading further afield in the 19th ,  20th and early 21st centuries . 
in great britain ,  evangelicals are represented mostly in the methodist church ,  baptist communities ,  and among evangelical anglicans . 
there are also evangelical anglicans . 
in the early 20th century ,  evangelical influence declined within mainline protestantism and christian fundamentalism developed as a distinct religious movement . 
the east african revival was a renewal movement within evangelical churches in east africa during the late 1920s and 1930s that began at a church missionary society mission station in the belgian territory of ruanda-urundi in 1929, and spread to: uganda ,  tanzania and kenya during the 1930s and 1940s contributing to the significant growth of the church in east africa through the 1970s and had a visible influence on western missionaries who were observer-participants of the movement . 
the term `` open evangelical '' refers to a particular christian school of thought or churchmanship ,  primarily in great britain  -lrb-  especially in the church of england  -rrb-  . 
by the late 19th to early 20th century ,  most american protestants were evangelicals . 
the closing years of the 20th century saw controversial postmodern influences entering some parts of evangelicalism ,  particularly with the emerging church movement . 
south korea has been referred as an `` evangelical superpower '' for being the home to some of the largest and most dynamic christian churches in the world; south korea is also second to the u . s .  in the number of missionaries sent abroad . 
one large evangelical church that originated from brasil is the universal church of the kingdom of god  -lrb-  iurd  -rrb-  ,  a neo‐pentecostal denomination begun in 1977.
in 1947 harold ockenga coined the term `` neo-evangelicalism '' to identify a distinct movement within self-identified fundamentalist christianity at the time ,  especially in the english-speaking world . 
these `` generic evangelicals '' are usually theologically and socially conservative ,  but their churches often present themselves as nondenominational  -lrb-  or ,  if a denominational member ,  strongly de-emphasizing its ties to such ,  such as a church name which excludes the denominational name  -rrb-  within the broader evangelical movement . 
in the english-speaking world ,  `` evangelical '' was commonly applied to describe the series of revival movements that occurred in britain and north america during the late 18th and early 19th centuries . 
evangelicals have been socially active throughout us history ,  a tradition dating back to the abolitionist movement of the antebellum period and the prohibition movement . 
protestantism in brazil largely originated with german immigrants and british and american missionaries in the 19th century ,  following up on efforts that began in the 1820s . 
evangelicalism  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  evangelical christianity ,  or evangelical protestantism ,  is a worldwide ,  transdenominational movement within protestant christianity which maintains the belief that the essence of the gospel consists of the doctrine of salvation by grace through faith in jesus christ's atonement . 
the `` clapham sect '' was a group of church of england evangelicals and social reformers based in clapham ,  london; they were active 1780s–1840s  -rrb-  . 
according to sébastien fath of cnrs ,  in 2016, there are 619 million evangelicals in the world ,  one in four christians . 
john wesley  -lrb-  1703–1791 -rrb- was an anglican cleric and theologian who ,  with his brother charles wesley  -lrb-  1707–1788 -rrb- and fellow cleric george whitefield  -lrb-  1714 – 1770 -rrb- ,  founded methodism . 
the philippine council of evangelical churches  -lrb-  pcec  -rrb-  ,  an organization of more than seventy evangelical and mainline protestant churches ,  and more than 210 para-church organizations in the philippines ,  counts more than 11 million members as of 2011.
as pietism spread ,  the movement's ideals and aspirations influenced and were absorbed into early evangelicalism . 
operation world estimates the number of evangelicals at 550 million . 
evangelicalism did not take recognizable form until the 18th century ,  first in britain and its north american colonies . 
another form of the marching euphonium is the convertible euphonium . 
the euphonium is in the family of brass instruments ,  more particularly low-brass instruments with many relatives . 
the euphonium may be played in bass clef as a non-transposing instrument or in treble clef as a transposing instrument . 
modern day euphonium makers have been working to further enhance the construction of the euphonium . 
the euphonium is not traditionally an orchestral instrument and has not been common in symphony orchestras . 
each band requires two euphoniums  -lrb-  principal and second  -rrb-  and consequently there are considerable opportunities for euphonium players . 
the compensating euphonium is common among professionals . 
the euphonium has historically been exclusively a `` band '' instrument  -lrb-  rather than an `` orchestra '' or `` jazz '' instrument  -rrb-  ,  whether of the `` wind '' or `` brass '' variety ,  where it is frequently featured as a solo instrument . 
the euphonium ,  like the tenor trombone ,  is pitched in concert b . 
the term 'five-valve euphonium' does not refer to variations of the double bell euphonium made by various brass instrument companies during the same time period . 
as a baritone-voiced brass instrument ,  the euphonium traces its ancestry to the ophicleide and ultimately back to the serpent . 
in continental european band music ,  parts for the euphonium may be written in the bass clef as a b transposing instrument sounding a major second lower than written . 
jazz euphoniums are most likely to be found in tuba-euphonium groups ,  though modern funk or rock bands occasionally feature a brass player doubling on euphonium ,  and this trend is growing . 
a transcendental entire function is an entire function that is not a polynomial . 
lyric essays are an important form of descriptive essays . 
the word `` essay '' derives from the french infinitive `` essayer '' ,  `` to try '' or `` to attempt '' . 
an essay has been defined in a variety of ways . 
she also suggests that while critical essays have more brain than the heart ,  and personal essays have more heart than brain ,  familiar essays have equal measures of both . 
longer essays may also contain an introductory page that defines words and phrases of the essay's topic . 
a film essay  -lrb-  or `` cinematic essay ''  -rrb-  consists of the evolution of a theme or an idea rather than a plot per se ,  or the film literally being a cinematic accompaniment to a narrator reading an essay . 
these three poles  -lrb-  or worlds in which the essay may exist  -rrb-  are: huxley adds that the most satisfying essays ``  .  .  . make the best not of one ,  not of two ,  but of all the three worlds in which it is possible for the essay to exist . `` 
an economic essay can start with a thesis ,  or it can start with a theme . 
david winks gray's article `` the essay film in action '' states that the `` essay film became an identifiable form of filmmaking in the 1950s and '60s '' . 
as with the novel ,  essays existed in japan several centuries before they developed in europe with a genre of essays known as `` zuihitsu '' — loosely connected essays and fragmented ideas . 
this section describes the different forms and styles of essay writing . 
the concept of an `` essay '' has been extended to other media beyond writing . 
while brevity usually defines an essay ,  voluminous works like john locke's `` an essay concerning human understanding '' and thomas malthus's `` an essay on the principle of population '' are counterexamples . 
each argument of argumentative essay should be supported with sufficient evidence ,  relevant to the point . 
 ''error correction '' is the detection of errors and reconstruction of the original ,  error-free data . 
some codes can also be suitable for a mixture of random errors and burst errors . 
error detection techniques allow detecting such errors ,  while error correction enables reconstruction of the original data in many cases . 
in mathematics ,  more specifically in ring theory ,  a euclidean domain  -lrb-  also called a euclidean ring  -rrb-  is an integral domain that can be endowed with a euclidean function which allows a suitable generalization of the euclidean division of the integers . 
it is important to compare the class of euclidean domains with the larger class of principal ideal domains  -lrb-  pids  -rrb-  . 
and that have `` r '' < `` r '' . 
since `` r '' is a common divisor of `` a '' and `` b '' ,  `` r '' ≤ `` g '' . 
after all the remainders `` r '' ,  `` r '' ,  etc . 
to demonstrate that `` r '' divides both `` a '' and `` b ''  -lrb-  the first step  -rrb-  ,  `` r '' divides its predecessor `` r ''
where the magnitude of `` r '' is strictly less than that of `` r '' . 
the euclidean algorithm calculates the greatest common divisor  -lrb-  gcd  -rrb-  of two natural numbers `` a '' and `` b '' . 
in other words ,  multiples of the smaller number `` r '' are subtracted from the larger number `` r '' until the remainder `` r '' is smaller than `` r '' . 
at every step `` k '' ,  the euclidean algorithm computes a quotient `` q '' and remainder `` r '' from two numbers `` r '' and `` r ''
each step begins with two nonnegative remainders `` r '' and `` r '' . 
the greatest common divisor `` g '' of `` a '' and `` b '' is the unique  -lrb-  positive  -rrb-  common divisor of `` a '' and `` b '' that is divisible by any other common divisor `` c '' . 
 ''r '' also divides its next predecessor `` r ''
the euclidean algorithm is one of the oldest algorithms in common use . 
substituting these formulae for `` r '' and `` r '' into the first equation yields `` g '' as a linear sum of the remainders `` r '' and `` r '' . 
for illustration ,  the euclidean algorithm can be used to find the greatest common divisor of `` a '' = 1071 and `` b '' = 462.
in the initial step  -lrb-  `` k '' = 0 -rrb- ,  the remainders `` r '' and `` r '' equal `` a '' and `` b '' ,  the numbers for which the gcd is sought . 
if `` a '' is smaller than `` b '' ,  the first step of the algorithm swaps the numbers . 
the variables `` a '' and `` b '' alternate holding the previous remainders `` r '' and `` r '' . 
let `` g '' = gcd -lrb-  `` a '' ,  `` b ''  -rrb-  . 
thus ,  `` r '' is smaller than its predecessor `` r '' for all `` k '' ≥ 0.
these two conclusions are inconsistent unless `` r '' = `` g '' . 
in the second step ,  any natural number `` c '' that divides both `` a '' and `` b ''  -lrb-  in other words ,  any common divisor of `` a '' and `` b ''  -rrb-  divides the remainders `` r '' . 
in euclid's original version of the algorithm ,  the quotient and remainder are found by repeated subtraction; that is ,  `` r '' is subtracted from `` r '' repeatedly until the remainder `` r '' is smaller than `` r '' . 
it operates one of the largest supercomputer complexes in europe and the world's largest archive of numerical weather prediction data . 
ebu members are public service broadcasters whose output is made ,  financed and controlled by the public ,  for the public . 
the european broadcasting union  -lrb-  ebu;   -rrb-  is an alliance of public service media organisations ,  established on 12 february 1950.
furthermore ,  it can be integrated into current gun systems . 
the xm-291 is the best existing example of a working electrothermal-chemical gun . 
the ability of etc technology to be applied to existing gun designs means that for future gun upgrades there's no longer the necessity to redesign the turret to include a larger breech or caliber gun barrel . 
despite these daunting tasks flare has been seen as the most plausible igniter for future application on etc guns . 
tests of this gun have been performed using `` precision ignition '' technology ,  which may refer to etc ignition . 
production ended in 1992 after 68 aircraft had been built . 
the first usaf e-3 was delivered in march 1977, and during the next seven years ,  a total of 34 aircraft were manufactured . 
the raf had also joined the usaf in adding rsip to upgrade the e-3's radars . 
the radar system improvement program  -lrb-  rsip  -rrb-  was a joint us/nato development program . 
testing on the first production e-3 began in october 1975.
the united kingdom and france are not part of the nato e-3a component ,  instead procuring e-3 aircraft through a joint project . 
between 1977 and 1992, a total of 68 e-3s were built . 
nato acquired 18 e-3as and support equipment for a nato air defense force . 
upgrading nato's e-3 fleet is complicated by the heterogeneity of the fleet's equipment . 
because the boeing 707 is no longer in production ,  the e-3 mission package has been fitted into the boeing e-767 for the japan air self defense forces . 
the airplanes themselves can be flown to 2050 with appropriate maintenance ,  but as the worldwide fleet of 707 aircraft dwindles ,  supporting the e-3 becomes more difficult . 
on 1 october 2011, the `` blended '' wing construct of the 116th air control wing  -lrb-  116 acw  -rrb-  ,  combining air national guard and regular air force personnel in a single unit was discontinued . 
the northrop grumman e-8 joint surveillance target attack radar system  -lrb-  joint stars  -rrb-  is a united states air force airborne ground surveillance ,  battle management and command and control aircraft . 
the 93d air control wing ,  which activated 29 january 1996, accepted its first aircraft ,  11 june 1996, and deployed in support of operation joint endeavor in october . 
on 1 october 2002, the 93d air control wing  -lrb-  93 acw  -rrb-  was `` blended '' with the 116th bomb wing in a ceremony at robins air force base ,  georgia . 
in december 2008, an e-8c test aircraft took its first flight with the new engines . 
during the fiscal 2019 budget rollout briefing it was announced that the air force will not move forward with an e-8c replacement aircraft . 
the information helps air and land commanders to control the battlespace . 
on 2 march 2017, northrop grumman announced the submittal of its proposal to the u . s .  air force for the joint stars recapitalization program . 
these joint stars developmental aircraft also participated in operation joint endeavor ,  a nato peacekeeping mission ,  in december 1995.
the e-8c is an aircraft modified from the boeing 707-300 series commercial airliner . 
the air force began an analysis of alternatives  -lrb-  aoa  -rrb-  in march 2010 for its next generation ground moving target indication  -lrb-  gmti  -rrb-  radar aircraft fleet . 
on 17 january 2011, northrop grumman's e-8c joint surveillance target attack radar system  -lrb-  joint stars  -rrb-  test bed aircraft recently completed the second of two deployments to naval air station point mugu ,  california ,  in support of the u . s .  navy joint surface warfare joint capability technology demonstration to test its network-enabled weapon architecture . 
cheney's company was originally known as eric cheney designs ,  then changed to inter-moto ,  now known as cheney racing . 
after the demise of bsa in 1972, cheney joined with former bsa factory rider john banks to develop and campaign a highly successful bsa powered motocross bike . 
some of cheney's motorcycle designs are now famous in their own right ,  such as the competition bsa gold stars of jerry scott and keith hickman and the john banks replica which used a bsa b50 engine specially tuned by cheney . 
the unknown parameters formula_2 and formula_3 can be estimated . 
this relationship is represented in a linear regression where the change in unemployment rate  -lrb-  formula_1 -rrb- is a function of an intercept  -lrb-  formula_2 -rrb- ,  a given value of gdp growth multiplied by a slope coefficient formula_3 and an error term ,  formula_4:
econometrics may use standard statistical models to study economic questions ,  but most often they are with observational data ,  rather than in controlled experiments . 
observational data may be subject to omitted-variable bias and a list of other problems that must be addressed using causal analysis of simultaneous-equation models . 
a basic tool for econometrics is the multiple linear regression model . 
a basic tool for econometrics is the multiple linear regression model . 
van langen was born in oldenzaal ,  overijssel . 
van langen later explained the secret of her success . 
at the 1992 olympic games in barcelona ,  van langen won the olympic title in the 800 metres in a time of 1:55.54, a time which is still the dutch national record . 
 ''byte-compiling '' can make emacs lisp code execute faster . 
emacs lisp is most closely related to maclisp ,  with some later influence from common lisp . 
emacs lisp is also termed elisp ,  although there is also an older ,  unrelated lisp dialect with that name . 
in order to do this ,  the user writes the following emacs lisp code ,  in either an existing emacs lisp source file or an empty emacs buffer:
the lisp dialect used in emacs differs substantially from the more modern common lisp and scheme dialects used for applications programming . 
emacs lisp code is stored in filesystems as plain text files ,  by convention with the filename suffix ``  . el '' . 
users of emacs commonly write emacs lisp code to customize and extend emacs . 
when the user saves their changes ,  customize simply writes the necessary emacs lisp code to the user's config file ,  which can be set to a special file that only customize uses ,  to avoid the possibility of altering the user's own file . 
they had two children ,  lady emily elizabeth bulwer-lytton  -lrb-  1828–1848 -rrb- ,  and  -lrb-  edward  -rrb-  robert lytton bulwer-lytton ,  1st earl of lytton  -lrb-  1831–1891 -rrb- who became governor-general and viceroy of british india  -lrb-  1876–1880 -rrb- . 
edward george earle lytton bulwer-lytton ,  1st baron lytton ,  pc  -lrb-  25 may 1803 – 18 january 1873 -rrb- was an english writer and politician . 
bulwer-lytton began his career as a follower of jeremy bentham . 
bulwer-lytton reached the height of his popularity with the publication of `` godolphin ''  -lrb-  1833 -rrb- . 
he had two older brothers ,  william earle lytton bulwer  -lrb-  1799–1877 -rrb- and henry  -lrb-  1801–1872 -rrb- ,  later lord dalling and bulwer . 
on 20 february 1844, in accordance with his mother's will ,  he changed his surname from 'bulwer' to 'bulwer-lytton' and assumed the arms of lytton by royal licence . 
against his wishes ,  bulwer-lytton was honoured with a burial in westminster abbey . 
bulwer-lytton was born on 25 may 1803 to general william earle bulwer of heydon hall and wood dalling ,  norfolk and elizabeth barbara lytton ,  daughter of richard warburton lytton of knebworth house ,  hertfordshire . 
 ''the last days of pompeii '' was inspired by karl briullov's painting ,  `` the last day of pompeii '' ,  which bulwer-lytton saw in milan . 
bulwer-lytton's literary career began in 1820, with the publication of a book of poems ,  and spanned much of the 19th century . 
there was a proposal to make esperanto its official language . 
many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the esperanto movement . 
the declaration of boulogne  -lrb-  1905 -rrb- limited changes to esperanto . 
the cold war ,  especially in the 1950s and 1960s ,  put a damper on the esperanto movement as well ,  as there were fears on both sides that esperanto could be used for enemy propaganda . 
l .  l .  zamenhof developed esperanto in the 1870s and 80s and published the first publication about it ,  `` unua libro '' ,  in 1887.
fascist italy ,  on the other hand ,  made some efforts of promoting tourism in italy through esperanto leaflets and appreciated the similarities of italian and esperanto . 
after the spanish civil war ,  francoist spain cracked down on the anarchists and catalan nationalists among whom the speaking of esperanto had been quite widespread; but in the 1950s ,  the esperanto movement was tolerated again ,  with francisco franco accepting the honorary patronage of the madrid world esperanto congress . 
he proposed a declaration on founding principles of the esperanto movement ,  which the attendees of the congress endorsed . 
esperanto is a constructed language . 
esperanto uses the latin alphabet with six additional lettersĉ ,  ĝ ,  ĥ ,  ĵ ,  ŝ ,  and ŭand does not use the letters q ,  w ,  x ,  or y . 
 ''esperanto '' is the magazine used by the world esperanto association to inform its members about everything happening in the esperanto community . 
the poem `` la espero '' is the esperanto anthem ,  and most esperanto speakers know it by heart . 
native esperanto speakers are people who have acquired esperanto as one of their native languages . 
there are over 25,000 esperanto books  -lrb-  originals and translations  -rrb-  as well as over a hundred regularly distributed esperanto magazines . 
  -rrb-  ,  as esperanto is an option for fulfilling mandatory foreign-language requirements in hungarian schools ,  and the creator of esperanto came from poland  -lrb-  see statistics at world congress of esperanto  -rrb-  . 
esperanto has had an influence on certain religious traditions  -lrb-  oomoto ,  bahá'í faith ,  etc .  ,  see esperanto and religion  -rrb-  . 
many more films ,  cartoons and documentaries that aren't esperanto originals are simply subtitled in esperanto and put up on youtube . 
some esperanto periodicals ,  such as `` monato '' include recipes from time to time . 
many people did indeed do this in order to recruit more esperanto speakers . 
australia is the hotspot of much of the organization behind esperanto television . 
whether or not one enjoys the lyrics ,  the song is in general something that ties all esperanto speakers together — as it's been around since esperanto's early days ,  is known at least in tune to every esperanto speaker ,  and is a general tradition . 
shame and pride can motivate behaviors that help one maintain one's standing in a community ,  and self-esteem is one's estimate of one's status . 
one implication is that all cases of ,  for example ,  fear are not identical but instead bear a family resemblance to one another . 
one view is that emotions facilitate adaptive responses to environmental challenges . 
they also found evidence for boredom ,  confusion ,  interest ,  pride ,  and shame facial expressions ,  as well as contempt ,  interest ,  relief ,  and triumph vocal expressions . 
the cognitive activity involved in the interpretation of an emotional context may be conscious or unconscious and may or may not take the form of conceptual processing . 
according to one dictionary ,  the earliest precursors of the word likely dates back to the very origins of language . 
the modern word emotion is heterogeneous
one line of research looks at the meaning of the word emotion in everyday language and finds that this usage is rather different from that in academic discourse . 
research on social emotion also focuses on the physical displays of emotion including body language of animals and humans  -lrb-  see affect display  -rrb-  . 
the word `` emotion '' dates back to 1579, when it was adapted from the french word `` émouvoir '' ,  which means `` to stir up '' . 
the content states are established by verbal explanations of experiences ,  describing an internal state . 
the classification of emotions has mainly been researched from two fundamental viewpoints . 
finally ,  some theorists place emotions within a more general category of `` affective states '' where affective states can also include emotion-related phenomena such as pleasure and pain ,  motivational states  -lrb-  for example ,  hunger or curiosity  -rrb-  ,  moods ,  dispositions and traits . 
emotions can be occurrences  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  panic  -rrb-  or dispositions  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  hostility  -rrb-  ,  and short-lived  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  anger  -rrb-  or long-lived  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  grief  -rrb-  . 
the essence of divinity is goodness; we have all good that could be given to us . 
we have no power over external things ,  and the good that ought to be the object of our earnest pursuit ,  is to be found only within ourselves . 
by rejecting these opinions ,  and seeking good and evil in the power of choice alone ,  we may confidently achieve peace of mind in every condition of life . 
reason alone is good ,  the irrational is evil ,  and the irrational is intolerable to the rational . 
epictetus teaches that the preconceptions  -lrb-  `` prolepsis ''  -rrb-  of good and evil are common to all . 
this process is greatly facilitated because the mind and the works of the mind are alone in our power ,  whereas all external things that aid life are beyond our control . 
both the `` discourses '' and the `` enchiridion '' begin by distinguishing between those things in our power  -lrb-  `` prohairetic '' things  -rrb-  and those things not in our power  -lrb-  `` aprohairetic '' things  -rrb-  . 
the first object of philosophy ,  therefore ,  is to purify the mind . 
an example of a typical lear limerick:
lear suffered from lifelong health afflictions . 
lear is buried in the cemetery foce in san remo . 
lear's self-description in verse ,  `` how pleasant to know mr .  lear , ``  ends with this stanza ,  a reference to his own mortality:
lear's most fervent and painful friendship was with franklin lushington . 
lear's funeral was said to be a sad ,  lonely affair by the wife of dr .  hassall ,  lear's physician ,  none of lear's many lifelong friends being able to attend . 
lear's nonsense books were quite popular during his lifetime ,  but a rumour developed that `` edward lear '' was merely a pseudonym ,  and the books' true author was the man to whom lear had dedicated the works ,  his patron the earl of derby . 
indeed ,  lear's attempts at male companionship were not always successful; the very intensity of lear's affections may have doomed these relationships . 
in lear's limericks ,  the first and last lines usually end with the same word rather than rhyming . 
arden tried another series in the fall of 1957, `` the eve arden show '' ,  but it was canceled in spring of 1958 after 26 episodes . 
arden published an autobiography ,  `` the three phases of eve '' ,  in 1985.
eve arden  -lrb-  born eunice mary quedens ,  april 30, 1908 – november 12, 1990 -rrb- was an american film ,  radio ,  stage ,  and television actress ,  and comedian . 
arden was one of many actresses to take on the title roles in `` hello ,  dolly ! `` 
arden would go on to earn an academy award nomination for best supporting actress for her role in `` mildred pierce ''  -lrb-  1945 -rrb- . 
kaye's show lasted one season ,  but arden's display of comic talent and timing set the stage for her to be cast in her best-known role ,  madison high school english teacher connie brooks in `` our miss brooks '' . 
her film career began in earnest in 1937 when she signed a contract with rko radio pictures ,  and appeared in the films `` oh doctor '' and `` stage door '' . 
in mathematics ,  an elementary function is a function of one variable which is the composition of a finite number of arithmetic operations  ,  exponentials ,  logarithms ,  constants ,  and solutions of algebraic equations  -lrb-  a generalization of `` n ''th roots  -rrb-  . 
