asteroids are minor planets ,  especially of the inner solar system . 
asteroids are differentiated from comets and meteoroids . 
the united nations declared 30 june as international asteroid day to educate the public about asteroids . 
the right to make a plea in mitigation is absolute . 
the right of victims to speak at sentencing is also sometimes referred to as allocution . 
an allocution ,  or allocutus ,  is a formal statement made to the court by the defendant who has been found guilty prior to being sentenced . 
affidavits may be written in the first or third person ,  depending on who drafted the document . 
in indian law ,  although an affidavit may be taken as proof of the facts stated therein ,  the courts have no jurisdiction to admit evidence by way of affidavit . 
affidavits are typically included in the response to interrogatories . 
therefore ,  an affidavit cannot ordinarily be used as evidence in absence of a specific order of the court . 
ngc 678 and ngc 680 are a pair of galaxies in aries that are only about 200,000 light-years apart . 
aries has its share of variable stars ,  including r and u arietis ,  mira-type variable stars ,  and t arietis ,  a semi-regular variable star . 
aries contains several stars with extrasolar planets . 
there are between 39 and 49 sx arietis variable stars currently known; ten are noted as being `` uncertain '' in the general catalog of variable stars . 
171,000 light-years in diameter ,  ngc 673 is 235 million light-years from earth . 
most of the other stars in aries visible to the naked eye have magnitudes between 3 and 5. δ ari ,  called boteïn ,  is a star of magnitude 4.35, 170 light-years away . 
γ arietis ,  with a common name of mesarthim ,  is a binary star with two white-hued components ,  located in a rich field of magnitude 8–12 stars . 
ngc 821 is an e6 elliptical galaxy . 
with a proper motion of 5.1 arcseconds per year ,  it is the 24th closest star to earth overall . 
β arietis ,  also known as sheratan ,  is a blue-white star with an apparent visual magnitude of 2.64.
ζ aquarii is an f2 spectral type double star; both stars are white . 
hd 215152 c also orbits further from the star than hd 215152 b ,  0.0852 au compared to 0.0652.
δ aquarii ,  also known as skat or scheat is a blue-white a2 spectral type star of magnitude 3.27 and luminosity of  . 
λ aquarii ,  also called hudoor or ekchusis ,  is an m2 spectral type star of magnitude 3.74 and luminosity of  . 
at apparent magnitude 2.9, beta aquarii is the brightest star in the constellation . 
π aquarii ,  also called seat ,  is a b0 spectral type star with an apparent magnitude of 4.66 and an absolute magnitude of -4.1.
ξ aquarii ,  also called bunda ,  is an a7 spectral type star with an apparent magnitude of 4.69 and an absolute magnitude of 2.4.
γ aquarii ,  also called sadachbia ,  is a white main sequence star of spectral type star of spectral type a0v that is between 158 and 315 million years old and is around two and a half times the sun's mass ,  and double its radius . 
ε aquarii ,  also known as albali ,  is a blue-white a1 spectral type star with an apparent magnitude of 3.77, an absolute magnitude of 1.2, and a luminosity of  . 
two well-known planetary nebulae are also located in aquarius: the saturn nebula  -lrb-  ngc 7009 -rrb- ,  to the southeast of μ aquarii; and the famous helix nebula  -lrb-  ngc 7293 -rrb- ,  southwest of δ aquarii . 
the two brightest stars ,  alpha and beta aquarii ,  are luminous yellow supergiants ,  of spectral types g0ib and g2ib respectively ,  that were once hot blue-white b-class main sequence stars 5 to 9 times as massive as the sun . 
there are also less-prominent systems in aquarius . 
anime films represent a large part of the highest-grossing japanese films yearly in japan ,  with 6 out of the top 10 in 2014, in 2015 and also in 2016.
japan external trade organization  -lrb-  jetro  -rrb-  valued the domestic anime market in japan at  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  including from licensed products ,  in 2005.
by the 1930s animation was well established in japan as an alternative format to the live-action industry . 
in english ,  `` anime ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is more restrictively used to denote a `` japanese-style animated film or television entertainment '' or as `` a style of animation created in japan '' . 
the word `` anime '' has also been criticised ,  e . g . 
as a direct result ,  various interests surrounding japan has increased . 
hair in anime is often unnaturally lively and colorful or uniquely styled . 
while often used in a pornographic context ,  the terms can also be used broadly in a wider context to describe or focus on the themes or the development of the relationships themselves . 
these mass imports influenced anime popularity in south american ,  arabic and german markets . 
the word `` anime '' is the japanese term for `` animation '' ,  which means all forms of animated media . 
while no one art style predominates anime as a whole ,  they do share some similar attributes in terms of animation technique and character design . 
the first format of anime was theatrical viewing which originally began with commercial productions in 1917.
the first anime television series was `` otogi manga calendar '' ,  aired from 1961 to 1964.
anime differs greatly from other forms of animation by its diverse art styles ,  methods of animation ,  its production ,  and its process . 
anime productions have also been nominated and won awards not exclusively for anime ,  like the academy award for best animated feature or the golden bear . 
a number of anime media franchises have gained considerable global popularity ,  and are among the world's highest-grossing media franchises . 
ankara had a population of 75,000 in 1927.
in 2013, ankara province had a population of 5,045,083.
ankara  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  historically known as ancyra and angora ,  is the capital of turkey . 
suluhan is a historical inn in ankara . 
ankara's urban population reached 4,587,558 in 2014, while the population of ankara province reached 5,150,072 in 2015.
timur defeated bayezid i at the battle of ankara in 1402 and took the city ,  but in 1403 ankara was again under ottoman control . 
the orthography of the name ankara has varied over the ages . 
the alâeddin mosque is the oldest mosque in ankara . 
the ankara central station is a major rail hub in turkey . 
the roman road of ankara or `` cardo maximus '' was found in 1995 by turkish archaeologist cevdet bayburtluoğlu . 
it is the largest ottoman mosque in ankara and was built by the famous architect sinan in the 16th century . 
the saint clement church is the only structure survived from the byzantine era in ankara . 
theodotus of ancyra is also venerated as a saint . 
ankara hosts the ostim industrial zone ,  turkey's largest industrial park . 
ankara is a very old city with various hittite ,  phrygian ,  hellenistic ,  roman ,  byzantine ,  and ottoman archaeological sites . 
the citadel was depicted in various turkish banknotes during 1927–1952 and 1983–1989.
it was founded in the ulus quarter near the ankara citadel and was constructed by the ahi fraternity during the late 14th and early 15th centuries . 
a few days earlier ,  ankara had officially replaced constantinople as the new turkish capital city ,  on 13 october 1923.
the foundations of the ankara castle and citadel were laid by the galatians on a prominent lava outcrop  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  and the rest was completed by the romans . 
esenboğa international airport ,  located in the north-east of the city ,  is ankara's main airport . 
by that time the city also took its name ἄγκυρα  -lrb-  `` ánkyra '' ,  meaning `` anchor '' in greek  -rrb-  which ,  in slightly modified form ,  provides the modern name of `` ankara '' . 
there are also sections about mustafa kemal atatürk ,  the founder of modern turkey; vehbi koç ,  rahmi koç's father and one of the first industrialists of turkey ,  and ankara city . 
on 23 april 1920 the grand national assembly of turkey was established in ankara ,  which became the headquarters of atatürk and the turkish national movement during the turkish war of independence . 
the average amount of time people spend commuting on public transit in ankara on a weekday is 71 minutes . 
no later than 1696, the catholic church also established a latin rite titular archbishopric of ancyra . 
when ankara became the capital of the republic of turkey in 1923, it was designated as a planned city for 500,000 future inhabitants . 
the town was reincorporated into the roman empire under emperor aurelian in 272.
at present ,  modern standard arabic  -lrb-  msa  -rrb-  is also used in modernized versions of literary forms of the quran . 
the basic rules for modern standard arabic are:
there are also two diphthongs: and  . 
modern standard arabic has six pure vowels  -lrb-  while most modern dialects have eight pure vowels which includes the long vowels   -rrb-  ,  with short and corresponding long vowels  . 
examples:' 'book' ,  ' 'writer' ,  ' 'desk' ,  ' 'desks' ,  ' 'library'  -lrb-  but ' 'library' in short pronunciation  -rrb-  ,  '  -lrb-  modern standard arabic  -rrb-  'they wrote' = '  -lrb-  dialect  -rrb-  ,  '  -lrb-  modern standard arabic  -rrb-  'they wrote it' = '  -lrb-  dialect  -rrb-  ,  '  -lrb-  modern standard arabic  -rrb-  'they  -lrb-  dual ,  fem  -rrb-  wrote' ,  '  -lrb-  modern standard arabic  -rrb-  'i wrote' = '  -lrb-  short form or dialect  -rrb-  . 
also ,  the pronunciation of modern standard arabic differs significantly from region to region . 
some of the differences between classical arabic  -lrb-  ca  -rrb-  and modern standard arabic  -lrb-  msa  -rrb-  are as follows:
arabic is classified as a macrolanguage comprising 30 modern varieties ,  including its standard form ,  modern standard arabic ,  which is derived from classical arabic . 
the quran introduced a new way of writing to the world . 
this is the pronunciation used by speakers of modern standard arabic in extemporaneous speech ,  i . e . 
note that in modern standard ,  the energetic mood  -lrb-  in either long or short form ,  which have the same meaning  -rrb-  is almost never used . 
at times ,  the chapters of the quran only have the rhythm in common . 
most of these changes are present in most or all modern varieties of arabic . 
other changes may also have happened . 
even during muhammad's lifetime ,  there were dialects of spoken arabic . 
the quran is written in a language that is simple and understandable by people . 
 ''literary arabic '' and `` standard arabic ''  -lrb-   ``   -rrb-  are less strictly defined terms that may refer to modern standard arabic or classical arabic . 
as the modern written language ,  modern standard arabic is widely taught in schools and universities ,  and is used to varying degrees in workplaces ,  government ,  and the media . 
the restriction on final long vowels does not apply to the spoken dialects ,  where original final long vowels have been shortened and secondary final long vowels have arisen from loss of original final `` -hu/hi '' . 
msa uses much classical vocabulary  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  ' 'to go'  -rrb-  that is not present in the spoken varieties ,  but deletes classical words that sound obsolete in msa . 
vowels and consonants can be phonologically short or long . 
arabic is written with the arabic alphabet ,  which is an abjad script and is written from right to left ,  although the spoken varieties are sometimes written in ascii latin from left to right with no standardized orthography . 
 -lrb-  in less formal pronunciations of modern standard arabic ,  superheavy syllables are common at the end of words or before clitic suffixes such as ``  '' 'us ,  our' ,  due to the deletion of final short vowels .   -rrb- 
 ''arabic '' usually designates one of three main variants: classical arabic ,  modern standard arabic and `` colloquial '' or `` dialectal '' arabic . 
word stress is not phonemically contrastive in standard arabic . 
the only variety of modern arabic to have acquired official language status is maltese ,  which is spoken in  -lrb-  predominantly catholic  -rrb-  malta and written with the latin script . 
in practice ,  however ,  modern authors almost never write in pure classical arabic ,  instead using a literary language with its own grammatical norms and vocabulary ,  commonly known as modern standard arabic  -lrb-  msa  -rrb-  . 
it is clear that the orthography of the qur'an was not developed for the standardized form of classical arabic; rather ,  it shows the attempt on the part of writers to record an archaic form of old higazi . 
while the influence of the quran on arabic poetry is explained and defended by numerous writers ,  some writers such as al- baqillani believe that poetry and the quran are in no conceivable way related due to the uniqueness of the quran . 
the final short vowels  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  the case endings `` -a -i -u '' and mood endings `` -u -a ''  -rrb-  are often not pronounced in this language ,  despite forming part of the formal paradigm of nouns and verbs . 
there are also two participles  -lrb-  active and passive  -rrb-  and a verbal noun ,  but no infinitive . 
the study of the pauses in the quran as well as other rhetoric allow it to be approached in a multiple ways . 
in moroccan arabic ,  also have emphatic allophones and  ,  respectively . 
classical arabic is the language of poetry and literature  -lrb-  including news  -rrb- ; it is also mainly the language of the quran . 
although the quran is known for its fluency and harmony ,  the structure can be best described as chaotic . 
this is the most formal level actually used in speech . 
they are often used in informal spoken media ,  such as soap operas and talk shows ,  as well as occasionally in certain forms of written media such as poetry and printed advertising . 
hitchcock appears briefly in most of his own films . 
 ''family plot ''  -lrb-  1976 -rrb- was hitchcock's last film . 
selznick lent hitchcock to the larger studios more often than producing hitchcock's films himself . 
hitchcock's films were extensively storyboarded to the finest detail . 
the film is lost; hitchcock called it `` a very bad movie '' . 
from 1955 to 1965, hitchcock was the host of the television series `` alfred hitchcock presents '' . 
 ''saboteur ''  -lrb-  1942 -rrb- is the first of two films that hitchcock made for universal during the decade . 
hitchcock experimented with 3d cinematography for `` dial m '' . 
the film was not well received . 
hitchcock released two spy thrillers in 1936.
hitchcock planned his scripts in detail with his writers . 
in `` frenzy '' ,  hitchcock allowed nudity for the first time . 
in 1933 hitchcock was once again working for michael balcon at gaumont british . 
after the scene was filmed ,  the publicity department asked hitchcock to make storyboards to promote the film ,  and hitchcock in turn hired an artist to match the scenes in detail . 
david o .  selznick signed hitchcock to a seven-year contract beginning in march 1939, and the hitchcocks moved to hollywood . 
hitchcock was nominated for best director ,  his first of five such nominations . 
in 1955 hitchcock became a united states citizen . 
 ''shadow of a doubt ''  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- was hitchcock's personal favourite and the second of the early universal films . 
on 13 august 1962, hitchcock's 63rd birthday ,  the french director françois truffaut began a 50-hour interview of hitchcock ,  filmed over eight days at universal studios ,  during which hitchcock agreed to answer 500 questions . 
the alfred hitchcock collection is housed at the academy film archive in hollywood ,  california . 
hitchcock again filmed extensively on location ,  this time in the northern california city of santa rosa . 
after the war ,  hitchcock began dabbling in creative writing . 
hitchcock became known for having remarked that `` actors are cattle . `` 
both films received mixed reviews . 
by 1939 hitchcock was a filmmaker of international importance ,  and film producer david o .  selznick persuaded him to move to hollywood . 
 ''an elastic affair '' is one of the lost films . 
at the same time ,  selznick complained about hitchcock's `` goddamn jigsaw cutting '' ,  which meant that the producer had to follow hitchcock's vision of the finished product . 
the film was the most profitable of hitchcock's career; he personally earned well in excess of $15 million  -lrb-  equivalent to $ million in   -rrb-  . 
hitchcock followed `` vertigo '' with three more successful films ,  which are also recognised as among his best: `` north by northwest ''  -lrb-  1959 -rrb- ,  `` psycho ''  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- and `` the birds ''  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- . 
hitchcock's next film ,  `` vertigo ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- again starred james stewart ,  this time with kim novak and barbara bel geddes . 
at this time ,  hitchcock also became notorious for pranks against the cast and crew . 
anacondas are a group of large snakes of the genus `` eunectes '' . 
the name commonly used for the anaconda in brazil is `` sucuri '' ,  `` sucuriju '' or `` sucuriuba '' . 
because of this ,  most modern linguists do not accept the altaic family . 
the ainu languages shows the least connection with altaic . 
the original altaic family came to be known as the ural–altaic . 
roy andrew miller's 1971 book `` japanese and the other altaic languages '' convinced most altaicists that japanese also belonged to altaic . 
von strahlenberg's classification was the first attempt to classify a large number of languages ,  some of which are altaic . 
in the `` ural–altaic '' nomenclature ,  finno-ugric and samoyedic are `` uralic '' ,  whereas turkic ,  mongolic ,  and tungusic are `` altaic '' ,  as are korean and japanese if they are included at all . 
in 2003, `` an etymological dictionary of the altaic languages '' was published by starostin ,  dybo ,  and mudrak . 
in his view ,  there were three possibilities:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- korean did not belong with the other three genealogically ,  but had been influenced by an altaic substratum;  -lrb-  2 -rrb- korean was related to the other three at the same level they were related to each other;  -lrb-  3 -rrb- korean had split off from the other three before they underwent a series of characteristic changes . 
as originally formulated by castrén ,  altaic included not only turkic ,  mongolian ,  and manchu-tungus  -lrb-  =tungusic  -rrb-  ,  but also finno-ugric and samoyed . 
the earliest known texts in a turkic language are the orkhon inscriptions ,  720–735 ad . 
altogether ,  starostin concluded that the altaic grouping was substantiated ,  though `` older than most other language families in eurasia ,  such as indo-european or finno-ugric ,  and this is the reason why the modern altaic languages preserve few common elements '' . 
austrian german  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  austrian standard german ,  standard austrian german  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or austrian high german  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is the variety of standard german written and spoken in austria . 
as german is a pluricentric language ,  austrian german is merely one among several varieties of standard german . 
because of the german language's pluricentric nature ,  german dialects in austria should not be confused with the variety of standard german spoken by most austrians ,  which is distinct from that of germany or switzerland . 
thus standard austrian german has the same geographic origin as the standard german of germany  -lrb-  `` bundesdeutsches hochdeutsch '' ,  also `` deutschländisches deutsch ''  -rrb-  and swiss high german  -lrb-  `` schweizer hochdeutsch '' ,  not to be confused with the alemannic swiss german dialects  -rrb-  . 
as a result ,  standard german is replacing it in government and administrative texts . 
there are many official terms that differ in austrian german from their usage in most parts of germany . 
the axiom of global choice follows from the axiom of limitation of size . 
this has been used as an argument against the use of the axiom of choice . 
the axiom of choice is not the only significant statement which is independent of zf . 
there are important statements that ,  assuming the axioms of zf but neither ac nor ¬ac ,  are equivalent to the axiom of choice . 
these are equivalent in the sense that ,  in the presence of other basic axioms of set theory ,  they imply the axiom of choice and are implied by it . 
in that case ,  the axiom of choice must be invoked . 
there are many other equivalent statements of the axiom of choice . 
in mathematics ,  the axiom of choice ,  or ac ,  is an axiom of set theory equivalent to the statement that `` the cartesian product of a collection of non-empty sets is non-empty '' . 
the axiom of constructibility and the generalized continuum hypothesis each imply the axiom of choice and so are strictly stronger than it . 
not every situation requires the axiom of choice . 
the pieces in this decomposition ,  constructed using the axiom of choice ,  are non-measurable sets . 
a cause for this difference is that the axiom of choice in type theory does not have the extensionality properties that the axiom of choice in constructive set theory does . 
each choice function on a collection `` x '' of nonempty sets is an element of the cartesian product of the sets in `` x '' . 
such conditional statements are provable in zf when the original statements are provable from zf and the axiom of choice . 
attila  -lrb-  ; fl . 
attila responded with a campaign in 443.
in 447, attila again rode south into the eastern roman empire through moesia . 
when the turkish armed forces invaded cyprus in 1974, the operations were named after attila  -lrb-  `` the attila plan ''  -rrb-  . 
attila grew up in a rapidly changing world . 
the `` polish chronicle '' represents attila's name as `` aquila '' . 
attila decided to fight the romans on plains where he could use his cavalry . 
attila interfered in a succession struggle after the death of a frankish ruler . 
attila then took the throne for himself ,  becoming the sole ruler of the huns . 
therefore ,  it was more profitable for attila to conclude peace and retreat to his homeland . 
the roman emperors ,  both east and west ,  were generally from the theodosian family in attila's lifetime  -lrb-  despite several power struggles  -rrb-  . 
by the end of the 12th century the royal court of hungary proclaimed their descent from attila . 
lupus ,  bishop of troyes ,  is also credited with saving his city by meeting attila in person . 
in modern hungary and in turkey ,  `` attila '' and its turkish variation `` atilla '' are commonly used as a male first name . 
attila's many children and relatives are known by name and some even by deeds ,  but soon valid genealogical sources all but dried up ,  and there seems to be no verifiable way to trace attila's descendants . 
 ''der spiegel '' commented on november 6, 1948, that the sword of attila was hanging menacingly over austria . 
american writer cecelia holland wrote `` the death of attila ''  -lrb-  1973 -rrb- ,  a historical novel in which attila appears as a powerful background figure whose life and death deeply impact the protagonists ,  a young hunnic warrior and a germanic one . 
the death of rugila  -lrb-  also known as rua or ruga  -rrb-  in 434 left the sons of his brother mundzuk ,  attila and bleda ,  in control of the united hun tribes . 
marcian was the successor of theodosius ,  and he had ceased paying tribute to the huns in late 450 while attila was occupied in the west . 
the 1954 universal international film `` sign of the pagan '' starred jack palance as attila . 
the gifts and diplomatic efforts of geiseric ,  who opposed and feared the visigoths ,  may also have influenced attila's plans . 
many scholars have argued that attila derives from east germanic origin; `` attila '' is formed from the gothic or gepidic noun `` atta '' ,  `` father '' ,  by means of the diminutive suffix `` -ila '' ,  meaning `` little father '' . 
the word `` archipelago '' was originally applied specifically to the aegean sea and its islands . 
the aegean sea covers about in area ,  and measures about longitudinally and latitudinally . 
the aegean sea  -lrb-   or ; `` aigaío pélagos '' ;   -rrb-  is an elongated embayment of the mediterranean sea located between the greek and anatolian peninsulas i . e . 
the aegean islands are within the sea and some bound it on its southern periphery ,  including crete and rhodes . 
the black sea outflow moves westward along the northern aegean sea ,  then flows southwards along the east coast of greece . 
the international hydrographic organization defines the limits of the aegean sea as follows:
the subsequent bronze age civilizations of greece and the aegean sea have given rise to the general term `` aegean civilization '' . 
alex is convicted of murder and sentenced to 14 years in prison . 
although the prison chaplain accuses the state of stripping alex of free will ,  the government officials on the scene are pleased with the results and alex is released from prison . 
alex returns to his parents' flat ,  only to find that they are letting his room to a lodger . 
alex coyly feigns illness to his parents to stay out of school the next day . 
alex is a 15-year-old living in near-future dystopian england who leads his gang on a night of opportunistic ,  random `` ultra-violence '' . 
in the final chapter ,  alex finds himself halfheartedly preparing for yet another night of crime with a new gang  -lrb-  lenn ,  rick ,  bully  -rrb-  . 
amsterdam has more than of canals ,  most of which are navigable by boat . 
amsterdam is intensely urbanised ,  as is the amsterdam metropolitan area surrounding the city . 
amsterdam's average annual precipitation is  ,  more than what is measured at amsterdam schiphol airport . 
amsterdam has a rich architectural history . 
amsterdam's prosperity declined during the 18th and early 19th centuries . 
there are three other smaller financial districts in amsterdam . 
amsterdam contains many other museums throughout the city . 
amsterdam fans out south from the amsterdam centraal railway station and damrak ,  the main street off the station . 
amsterdam was granted city rights in either 1300 or 1306.
amsterdam is the financial and business capital of the netherlands . 
van gogh lived in amsterdam for a short while and there is a museum dedicated to his work . 
the van gogh museum is the second most visited museum in amsterdam ,  with 1.4 million annual visitors . 
parks and nature reserves make up 12% of amsterdam's land area . 
also ,  the headquarters of the dutch sbs broadcasting group is located in amsterdam . 
amsterdam experienced an influx of religions and cultures after the second world war . 
also ,  near to amsterdam is the nekkeveld estate conservation project . 
amsterdam is connected to the north sea through the long north sea canal . 
the amsterdam canal system is the result of conscious city planning . 
amsterdam  -lrb-   ,  ;   -rrb-  is the capital city and most populous municipality of the netherlands . 
amsterdam is much younger than dutch cities such as nijmegen ,  rotterdam ,  and utrecht . 
the required large-scale demolitions began in amsterdam's former jewish neighbourhood . 
the 17th century is considered amsterdam's `` golden age '' ,  during which it became the wealthiest city in the western world . 
the most important museums of amsterdam are located on the museumplein  -lrb-  museum square  -rrb-  ,  located at the southwestern side of the rijksmuseum . 
amsterdam has many parks ,  open spaces ,  and squares throughout the city . 
in the 16th and 17th century non-dutch immigrants to amsterdam were mostly huguenots ,  flemings ,  sephardi jews and westphalians . 
the tallest building in amsterdam ,  the rembrandt tower ,  is situated there ,  as is the headquarters of philips . 
after the development of amsterdam's canals in the 17th century ,  the city did not grow beyond its borders for two centuries . 
the first mass immigration in the 20th century were by people from indonesia ,  who came to amsterdam after the independence of the dutch east indies in the 1940s and 1950s . 
the port of amsterdam is the fourth largest port in europe ,  the 38th largest port in the world and the second largest port in the netherlands by metric tons of cargo . 
catholic churches in amsterdam have been constructed since the restoration of the episcopal hierarchy in 1853.
by 1991, audi had the four-cylinder audi 80, the 5-cylinder audi 90 and audi 100, the turbocharged audi 200 and the audi v8.
the next major model change came in 1995 when the audi a4 replaced the audi 80.
after the launch of the audi 100 of 1968, the audi 80/fox  -lrb-  which formed the basis for the 1973 volkswagen passat  -rrb-  followed in 1972 and the audi 50  -lrb-  later rebadged as the volkswagen polo  -rrb-  in 1974.
after the final few audis were delivered in 1939 the `` audi '' name disappeared completely from the new car market for more than two decades . 
in 1932, audi merged with horch ,  dkw ,  and wanderer ,  to form auto union ag ,  chemnitz . 
audi cars of that era were luxurious cars equipped with special bodywork . 
the first audi automobile ,  the audi type a 10/ sport-phaeton ,  was produced in the same year ,  followed by the successor type b 10/28ps in the same year . 
the former audi factory in zwickau restarted assembly of the pre-war-models in 1949.
after relaunching the audi brand with the 1965 introduction of the audi f103 series ,  volkswagen merged auto union with nsu motorenwerke in 1969, thus creating the present day form of the company . 
in 1985, with the auto union and nsu brands effectively dead ,  the company's official name was now shortened to simply audi ag . 
the new merged company was incorporated on 1 january 1969 and was known as audi nsu auto union ag ,  with its headquarters at nsu's neckarsulm plant ,  and saw the emergence of audi as a separate brand for the first time since the pre-war era . 
however ,  the a2 was discontinued in 2005 and audi decided not to develop an immediate replacement . 
neckarsulm from that point onward would produce audi's higher end models . 
audi's sales grew strongly in the 2000s ,  with deliveries to customers increasing from 653,000 in 2000 to 1,003,000 in 2008.
in the mid-to-late 1990s ,  audi introduced new technologies including the use of aluminum construction . 
in may 2012, audi reported a 10% increase in its sales—from 408 units to 480 in the last year alone . 
the neckarsulm factory is also home of the `` quattro gmbh ''  -lrb-  from november 2016 `` audi sport gmbh ''  -rrb-  ,  a subsidiary responsible for development and production of audi high-performance models: the r8 and the `` rs '' model range . 
the forerunner of the fixed-wing aircraft is the kite . 
aircraft may be classified by different criteria ,  such as lift type ,  aircraft propulsion ,  usage and others . 
wing-in-ground-effect vehicles are not considered aircraft . 
with powered lift ,  the aircraft directs its engine thrust vertically downward . 
an aircraft is a machine that is able to fly by gaining support from the air . 
a variable geometry aircraft can change its wing configuration during flight . 
when the weight of this is added to the weight of the aircraft structure ,  it adds up to the same weight as the air that the craft displaces . 
aerodynamic lift involving wings is the most common ,  with fixed-wing aircraft being kept in the air by the forward movement of wings ,  and rotorcraft by spinning wing-shaped rotors sometimes called rotary wings . 
in 2001, alfred nobel's great-great-nephew ,  peter nobel  -lrb-  b . 
born in stockholm ,  alfred nobel was the third son of immanuel nobel  -lrb-  1801–1872 -rrb- ,  an inventor and engineer ,  and carolina andriette  -lrb-  ahlsell  -rrb-  nobel  -lrb-  1805–1889 -rrb- . 
petrogradskaya embankment is the street where the nobel's family lived until 1859.
nobel invented a detonator in 1863, and in 1865 designed the blasting cap . 
his name also survives in modern-day companies such as dynamit nobel and akzonobel ,  which are descendants of mergers with companies nobel himself established . 
this request added to the controversy over whether the bank of sweden prize in economic sciences in memory of alfred nobel is actually a legitimate `` nobel prize '' . 
nobel's third and longest-lasting relationship was with sofie hess from vienna ,  whom he met in 1876.
as a young man ,  nobel studied with chemist nikolai zinin; then ,  in 1850, went to paris to further the work . 
nobel was elected a member of the royal swedish academy of sciences in 1884, the same institution that would later select laureates for two of the nobel prizes ,  and he received an honorary doctorate from uppsala university in 1893.
bell's patent 174,465, was issued to bell on march 7, 1876, by the u . s .  patent office . 
some of bell's kites are on display at the alexander graham bell national historic site . 
alexander bell was born in edinburgh ,  scotland ,  on march 3, 1847.
bell was in boston on february 14 and did not arrive in washington until february 26.
this led him and bell to the development of practical hydrofoil watercraft . 
in 1875, bell developed an acoustic telegraph and drew up a patent application for it . 
bell's father ,  grandfather ,  and brother had all been associated with work on elocution and speech and both his mother and wife were deaf ,  profoundly influencing bell's life's work . 
emperor pedro ii of brazil was the first person to buy stock in bell's company ,  the bell telephone company . 
bell was connected with the eugenics movement in the united states . 
the aea was first formed as bell shared the vision to fly with his wife ,  who advised him to seek `` young '' help as bell was at the age of 60.
bell's preoccupation with his mother's deafness led him to study acoustics . 
although bell was ,  and still is ,  accused of stealing the telephone from gray ,  bell used gray's water transmitter design only after bell's patent had been granted ,  and only as a proof of concept scientific experiment ,  to prove to his own satisfaction that intelligible `` articulate speech ''  -lrb-  bell's words  -rrb-  could be electrically transmitted . 
in 1870, aged 23, bell ,  together with bell's brother's widow ,  caroline margaret ottaway ,  and his parents travelled on the ss `` nestorian '' to canada . 
in january 1915, bell made the first ceremonial transcontinental telephone call . 
bell denied in an affidavit that he ever gave wilber any money . 
mabel and bell mobilized the community to help victims in halifax . 
in 1891, bell had begun experiments to develop motor-powered heavier-than-air aircraft . 
on july 11, 1877, a few days after the bell telephone company was established ,  bell married mabel hubbard  -lrb-  1857–1923 -rrb- at the hubbard estate in cambridge ,  massachusetts . 
continuing his experiments in brantford ,  bell brought home a working model of his telephone . 
the value of the bell patent was acknowledged throughout the world ,  and patent applications were made in most major countries ,  but when bell delayed the german patent application ,  the electrical firm of siemens & halske  -lrb-  s&h  -rrb-  set up a rival manufacturer of bell telephones under their own patent . 
bell is also credited with developing one of the early versions of a metal detector in 1881.
during his world tour of 1910–11, bell and baldwin met with forlanini in france . 
they had four children: the bell family home was in cambridge ,  massachusetts ,  until 1880 when bell's father-in-law bought a house in washington ,  d . c . ; in 1882 he bought a home in the same city for bell's family ,  so they could be with him while he attended to the numerous court cases involving patent disputes . 
bell worked extensively in medical research and invented techniques for teaching speech to the deaf . 
the bell telephone company was created in 1877, and by 1886, more than 150,000 people in the u . s .  owned telephones . 
as a young child ,  bell ,  like his brothers ,  received his early schooling at home from his father . 
by way of reply ,  bell signed `` no .  .  . ``  ,  lost consciousness ,  and died shortly after . 
bell and his partners ,  hubbard and sanders ,  offered to sell the patent outright to western union for $100,000.
after setting up his workshop ,  bell continued experiments based on helmholtz's work with electricity and sound . 
returning to boston in fall 1873, bell made a fateful decision to concentrate on his experiments in sound . 
some modern scholars do not agree with the claims that bell's work on the telephone was influenced by meucci's inventions . 
the official name of this inland region is the eastern anatolia region . 
along with the çoruh ,  these rivers are the longest in anatolia . 
most archeological sources consider the boundary of anatolia to be turkey's eastern border . 
the eastern border of anatolia is traditionally held to be a line between the gulf of alexandretta and the black sea ,  bounded by the armenian highland to the east and mesopotamia to the southeast . 
the macintosh would need to be replaced by a new platform or reworked to run on more powerful hardware . 
in may of the same year ,  apple's market cap exceeded that of competitor microsoft for the first time since 1989.
the magazine `` macaddict '' named the period between 1989 and 1991 as the `` first golden age '' of the macintosh . 
in 1984, apple launched the macintosh ,  the first personal computer to be sold without a programming language . 
later that year ,  apple introduced three lower cost models ,  the macintosh classic ,  macintosh lc and macintosh iisi ,  all of which saw significant sales due to pent-up demand . 
the same year ,  apple introduced the power macintosh ,  the first of many apple computers to use motorola's powerpc processor . 
two years later ,  the itunes store was the world's largest music retailer . 
the macintosh was particularly powerful in the desktop publishing market due to its advanced graphics capabilities ,  which had necessarily been built in to create the intuitive macintosh gui . 
to aid users in migrating from mac os 9, the new operating system allowed the use of os 9 applications within mac os x via the classic environment . 
at the 1997 macworld expo ,  jobs announced that apple would join microsoft to release new versions of microsoft office for the macintosh ,  and that microsoft had made a $150million investment in non-voting apple stock . 
the macintosh initially sold well ,  but follow-up sales were not strong due to its high price and limited range of software titles . 
its online services include the itunes store ,  the ios app store and mac app store ,  apple music ,  and icloud . 
ultimately ,  none of these products helped and apple's market share and stock prices continued to slide . 
apple's success during this period was evident in its stock price . 
on august 15, 1998, apple introduced a new all-in-one computer reminiscent of the macintosh 128k: the imac . 
the apple ii ,  also invented by wozniak ,  was introduced on april 16, 1977, at the first west coast computer faire . 
aztlan underground is a band from los angeles ,  california that combines hip-hop ,  punk rock ,  jazz ,  and electronic music with chican@ and native american themes ,  and indigenous instrumentation . 
the band is also the subject of a chapter in the book `` it's not about a salary '' ,  by brian cross . 
the american civil war was among the earliest industrial wars . 
the american civil war  -lrb-  also known by other names  -rrb-  was a war fought in the united states from 1861 to 1865.
the southern economy nearly collapsed during the war . 
the south ignored the warnings: southerners did not realize how ardently the north would fight to hold the union together . 
the south argued that just as each state had decided to join the union ,  a state had the right to secede—leave the union—at any time . 
but in the face of overwhelming union superiority and the union's ironclad warships ,  they were unsuccessful . 
west virginia then joined them as an additional border state after it separated from virginia and became a state of the union in 1863.
in both the north and south ,  the draft laws were highly unpopular . 
after the war ,  the u . s .  demanded that britain pay for the damage done ,  and britain paid the u . s .  $15 million in 1871.
pamphleteers north and south rarely mentioned the tariff . 
west virginia provided about 20,000–22,000 soldiers to both the confederacy and the union . 
at the start of the civil war ,  a system of paroles operated . 
while the south moved towards a southern nationalism ,  leaders in the north were also becoming more nationally minded ,  and they rejected any notion of splitting the union . 
among the 34 u . s .  states in february 1861, secessionist partisans in seven southern slave states declared state secessions from the country and unveiled their defiant formation of a confederate states of america in rebellion against the u . s . 
they faced secessionists of the confederate states in the south ,  who advocated for states' rights to uphold slavery . 
by one estimate ,  the war claimed the lives of 10 percent of all northern men 20–45 years old ,  and 30 percent of all southern white men aged 18–40.
union leaders incorrectly assumed that only a minority of southerners were in favor of secession and that there were large numbers of southern unionists that could be counted on . 
maryland ,  delaware ,  missouri ,  and kentucky were slave states that were opposed to both secession and coercing the south . 
worse ,  europe developed other cotton suppliers ,  which they found superior ,  hindering the south's recovery after the war . 
in april 1861, lincoln announced the union blockade of all southern ports; commercial ships could not get insurance and regular traffic ended . 
the election of lincoln caused the legislature of south carolina to call a state convention to consider secession . 
the civil war was a contest marked by the ferocity and frequency of battle . 
as southerners resigned their seats in the senate and the house ,  republicans were able to pass bills for projects that had been blocked by southern senators before the war . 
the civil war occurred during the early stages of the industrial revolution . 
fort sumter was located in the middle of the harbor of charleston ,  south carolina . 
historians have debated whether economic differences between the mainly industrial north and the mainly agricultural south helped cause the war . 
the southern states believed slaveholding was a constitutional right because of the fugitive slave clause of the constitution . 
in the first year of the war ,  both sides had far more volunteers than they could effectively train and equip . 
warhol had this to say about coca-cola:
when warhol was 13, his father died in an accident . 
the shooting had a profound effect on warhol's life and art . 
warhol was born on august 6, 1928, in pittsburgh ,  pennsylvania . 
these latter `` warhol '' films starred joe dallesandro—more of a morrissey star than a true warhol superstar . 
this symposium set the tone for warhol's reception . 
a 2009 article in `` the economist '' described warhol as the `` bellwether of the art market '' . 
in the early 1970s ,  most of the films directed by warhol were pulled out of circulation by warhol and the people around him who ran his business . 
warhol also had an appreciation for intense hollywood glamour . 
some of warhol's work ,  as well as his own personality ,  has been described as being keatonesque . 
as a teenager ,  warhol graduated from schenley high school in 1945.
on june 3, 1968, radical feminist writer valerie solanas shot warhol and mario amaya ,  art critic and curator ,  at warhol's studio . 
in the period just before his death ,  warhol was working on `` cars '' ,  a series of paintings for mercedes-benz . 
by this period ,  warhol was being criticized for becoming merely a `` business artist '' . 
in 1979, along with his longtime friend stuart pivar ,  warhol founded the new york academy of art . 
new york city's museum of modern art hosted a symposium on pop art in december 1962 during which artists such as warhol were attacked for `` capitulating '' to consumerism . 
the multiplication of images evoked warhol's seminal silk-screen works of the early 1960s . 
warhol has been the subject of numerous retrospective exhibitions ,  books ,  and feature and documentary films . 
in 1989, after warhol's death ,  reed and john cale re-united for the first time since 1972 to write ,  perform ,  record and release the concept album `` songs for drella '' ,  a tribute to warhol . 
as an advertisement illustrator in the 1950s ,  warhol used assistants to increase his productivity . 
it was indicated that warhol spent only a total of 23 minutes to paint the entire car . 
warhol's first portrait of `` basquiat ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- is a black photo-silkscreen over an oxidized copper `` piss painting '' . 
after the death of his father ,  alp arslan succeeded him as governor of khorasan in 1059.
alp arslan's strength lay in the military realm . 
after manzikert ,  the dominion of alp arslan extended over much of western asia . 
emperor romanos iv was himself taken prisoner and conducted into the presence of alp arslan . 
alp arslan is widely regarded as having begun anatolianism ,  although unintentionally . 
from 2002 to july 2008 under turkmen calendar reform ,  the month of august was named after alp arslan . 
afi moved its presentation of first-run and auteur films from the kennedy center to the historic afi silver theatre and cultural center ,  which hosts the afi docs film festival ,  making afi the largest nonprofit film exhibitor in the world . 
the film training program grew into the afi conservatory ,  an accredited graduate school . 
the american film institute  -lrb-  afi  -rrb-  is an american film organization that educates filmmakers and honors the heritage of the motion picture arts in the united states . 
two film awards have also been named in kurosawa's honor . 
kurosawa nevertheless continued to work . 
kurosawa's style is marked by a number of devices and techniques which kurosawa introduced in his films over the decades . 
kurosawa employed a number of recurring major themes in his films . 
akira kurosawa  -lrb-   ,  `` kurosawa akira ''; march 23, 1910 – september 6, 1998 -rrb- was a japanese film director and screenwriter ,  who directed 30 films in a career spanning 57 years . 
in the last of kurosawa's films as an assistant director for yamamoto ,  `` horse ''  -lrb-  `` uma '' ,  1941 -rrb- ,  kurosawa took over most of the production ,  as his mentor was occupied with the shooting of another film . 
at the 64th sydney film festival ,  there was a retrospective of akira kurosawa where films of his were screened to remember the great legacy he has created from his work . 
kurosawa decided to write the script for a film that would be both censor-friendly and less expensive to produce . 
shortly before his marriage ,  kurosawa was pressured by the studio against his will to direct a sequel to his debut film . 
after finishing `` scandal '' ,  kurosawa was approached by daiei studios ,  which asked the director to make another film for them . 
after his accident ,  kurosawa's health began to deteriorate . 
kurosawa agreed ,  and the kurosawa production company was established in april 1959, with toho as majority shareholder . 
kurosawa entered the japanese film industry in 1936, following a brief stint as a painter . 
anaheim university in cooperation with the kurosawa family established the anaheim university akira kurosawa school of film to offer online and blended learning programs on akira kurosawa and filmmaking . 
in 1981, the kurosawa film studio was opened in yokohama; two additional locations have since been launched in japan . 
filming did not begin until december 1983 and lasted more than a year . 
kurosawa production co .  ,  established in 1959, continues to oversee many of the aspects of kurosawa's legacy . 
the two men would go on to collaborate on another 15 films . 
many celebrated directors have been influenced by kurosawa and have expressed admiration for his work . 
his career boosted by his sudden international fame ,  kurosawa ,  now reunited with his original film studio ,  toho  -lrb-  which would go on to produce his next 11 films  -rrb-  ,  set to work on his next project ,  `` ikiru '' . 
his second film of 1949, also produced by film art association and released by shintoho ,  was `` stray dog '' . 
the film is considered a precursor to the contemporary police procedural and buddy cop film genres . 
kurosawa quickly moved on to his next project ,  `` red beard '' . 
kurosawa's three consecutive movies after `` seven samurai '' had not managed to capture japanese audiences in the way that that film had . 
however ,  it would be kurosawa's second film of 1950, `` rashomon '' ,  that would ultimately win him ,  and japanese cinema ,  a whole new international audience . 
patrick frater writing for `` variety '' magazine in may 2017 stated that another two unfinished films by kurosawa were planned ,  with `` silvering spear '' to start filming in 2018.
when asked to list his favorite directors ,  russian director andrei tarkovsky cited kurosawa as one of his favorites and named `` seven samurai '' as one of his ten favorite films . 
a significant number of full-length and short documentaries concerning the life and films of kurosawa were made during his lifetime and after his death . 
although the plan was for the four directors to create a film each ,  it has been suggested that the real motivation for the other three directors was to make it easier for kurosawa to successfully complete a film ,  and therefore find his way back into the business . 
the film was a moderate financial success in japan ,  but a larger one abroad and ,  as he had done with `` kagemusha '' ,  kurosawa embarked on a trip to europe and america ,  where he attended the film's premieres in september and october . 
worst of all ,  the japanese film industry—and perhaps the man himself—began to suspect that he would never make another film . 
according to his personal assistant anthony frewin ,  stanley kubrick `` thought kurosawa was one of the great film directors and followed him closely . 
