a copula is often a verb or a verb-like word ,  though this is not universally the case . 
in linguistics ,  a copula  -lrb-  plural: copulas or copulae; abbreviated   -rrb-  is a word used to link the subject of a sentence with a predicate  -lrb-  a subject complement  -rrb-  ,  such as the word `` is '' in the sentence `` the sky is blue . `` 
the principal use of a copula is to link the subject of a clause to the predicate . 
the predicative expression accompanying the copula ,  also known as the complement of the copula ,  may take any of several possible forms: it may be a noun or noun phrase ,  an adjective or adjective phrase ,  a prepositional phrase  -lrb-  as above  -rrb-  or another adverb or adverbial phrase expressing time or location . 
the anniversary of columbus's 1492 landing in the americas is usually observed on 12 october in spain and throughout the americas ,  except canada . 
on 30 may 1498, columbus left with six ships from sanlúcar ,  spain ,  for his third trip to the new world . 
he was eventually freed and allowed to return to the new world ,  but not as governor . 
henceforth nicolás de ovando y cáceres was to be the new governor of the west indies . 
the scholar amerigo vespucci ,  who sailed to america in the years following columbus's first voyage ,  was the first to speculate that the land was not part of asia but in fact constituted some wholly new continent previously unknown to eurasians . 
among the ruins were the corpses of 11 of the 39 spaniards who had stayed behind as the first colonists in the new world . 
he also had a sister named bianchinetta . 
columbus would make three further voyages to the new world ,  exploring the lesser antilles in 1493, trinidad and the northern coast of south america in 1498, and the eastern coast of central america in 1502.
 ''columbus's claim to fame isn't that he got there first , ``  explains historian martin dugard ,  `` it's that he stayed . `` 
he also named the islands of virgin gorda  -lrb-  `` fat virgin ''  -rrb-  ,  tortola ,  and peter island  -lrb-  `` san pedro ''  -rrb-  . 
with an eastern sea route to asia apparently at hand ,  king john was no longer interested in columbus's far-fetched project . 
based on primary accounts and on what one would expect from the geographic positions of the islands given columbus's course ,  the prime candidates are san salvador island  -lrb-  so named in 1925 on the theory that it was columbus's san salvador  -rrb-  ,  samana cay ,  and plana cays . 
columbus first sailed to the canary islands ,  which belonged to castile . 
one of the first skirmishes between native americans and europeans since the time of the vikings occurred on 14 november ,  when at saint croix ,  columbus's men rescued two native boys from several cannibalistic island caribs . 
columbus's soldiers killed and enslaved with impunity at every landing . 
there is also documentation that they were overworked . 
in his later years ,  columbus demanded that the spanish crown give him 10 percent of all profits made in the new lands ,  as stipulated in the capitulations of santa fe . 
columbus's refusal to accept that the lands he had visited and claimed for spain were not part of asia might explain ,  in part ,  why the american continent was named after the florentine explorer amerigo vespucci and not after columbus . 
in the april 1492 `` capitulations of santa fe '' ,  king ferdinand and queen isabella promised columbus that if he succeeded he would be given the rank of admiral of the ocean sea and appointed viceroy and governor of all the new lands he could claim for spain . 
in october 1499, he sent two ships to spain ,  asking the court of spain to appoint a royal commissioner to help him govern . 
columbus's project ,  though far-fetched ,  held the promise of such an advantage . 
when natives on hispaniola began fighting back against their oppressors in 1495, columbus's men captured 1,500 arawak men ,  women ,  and children in a single raid . 
pedro de las casas ,  father of the priest bartolomé de las casas ,  also accompanied columbus on this voyage . 
by this time ,  accusations of tyranny and incompetence on the part of columbus had also reached the court . 
word of his finding new lands rapidly spread throughout europe . 
columbus's strained relationship with the spanish crown and its appointed colonial administrators in america led to his arrest and removal from hispaniola in 1500, and later to protracted litigation over the benefits that he and his heirs claimed were owed to them by the crown . 
on 13 january 1493, columbus made his last stop of this voyage in the new world ,  in the bay of rincón at the eastern end of the samaná peninsula in northeast hispaniola . 
in poor health ,  columbus returned to hispaniola on 19 august ,  only to find that many of the spanish settlers of the new colony were in rebellion against his rule ,  claiming that columbus had misled them about the supposedly bountiful riches of the new world . 
according to the abstract of columbus's journal made by bartolomé de las casas ,  the objective of the third voyage was to verify the existence of a continent that king john ii of portugal suggested was located to the southwest of the cape verde islands . 
it was their considered opinion that columbus's estimation of a travel distance of was ,  in fact ,  far too low . 
the arawaks attempted to fight back against columbus's men but lacked their armor ,  guns ,  swords ,  and horses . 
columbus also explored the northeast coast of cuba ,  where he landed on 28 october . 
columbus also sighted the chain of the virgin islands ,  which he named `` islas de santa úrsula y las once mil vírgenes '' ,  `` islands of saint ursula and the 11,000 virgins ''  -lrb-  shortened ,  both on maps of the time and in common parlance ,  to `` islas vírgenes ''  -rrb-  . 
columbus then sailed more than eastwards along the northern coast of hispaniola ,  establishing a new settlement ,  which he called la isabela ,  in the present-day dominican republic . 
on 20 may 1506, aged probably 54, columbus died in valladolid ,  spain . 
loewen laments that while `` haiti under the spanish is one of the primary instances of genocide in all human history '' ,  only one major history text he reviewed mentions columbus's role in it . 
he explored that island from 4 to 10 november . 
columbus's early life is somewhat obscure ,  but scholars generally agree that he was born in the republic of genoa and spoke a dialect of ligurian as his first language . 
during a violent storm on his first return voyage ,  columbus ,  then 41, suffered an attack of what was believed at the time to be gout . 
he then touched the mainland of south america at the paria peninsula . 
the level of supervision given to that chemist also varies in a similar manner ,  with factors similar to those that affect the tasks demanded for a particular chemist . 
the word 'chemist' is also used to address pharmacists in commonwealth english . 
in comparison ,  chemists who have obtained a master of science  -lrb-  m . s .   -rrb- 
in addition to all the training usually given to chemical technologists in their respective degree  -lrb-  or one given via an associate degree  -rrb-  ,  a chemist is also trained to understand more details related to chemical phenomena so that the chemist can be capable of more planning on the steps to achieve a distinct goal via a chemistry-related endeavor . 
their third album ``  '' was released in 1995, the album was certified platinum by the riaa . 
also in 2012, cypress hill collaborated with deadmau5 on his sixth studio album `` album title goes here '' ,  lending vocals on `` failbait '' . 
cypress hill is an american hip hop group from south gate ,  california . 
cypress hill commenced its rise up tour in philadelphia on april 10, 2010.
cypress hill also contributed a track `` i wanna get high '' to the high times sponsored `` hempilation '' album to support norml . 
cypress hill recorded `` just another victim '' for wwe as a theme song for tazz . 
in august 2009, a new song by cypress hill ,  titled `` get 'em up '' ,  was made available on itunes . 
 ''black sunday '' ,  the group's second album ,  debuted at number one on the `` billboard '' 200 in 1993, recording the highest soundscan for a rap group up until that time . 
on september 28, 2018, cypress hill released the album elephants on acid ,  which saw the return of dj muggs as main composer and producer . 
however ,  carbon ,  carbon monoxide ,  and/or hydroxide are the products instead of carbon dioxide . 
in most industrial applications and in fires ,  air is the source of oxygen  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
a more complete set of equations for the combustion of a hydrocarbon in the air ,  therefore ,  requires an additional calculation for the distribution of oxygen between the carbon and hydrogen in the fuel . 
incomplete combustion will occur when there is not enough oxygen to allow the fuel to react completely to produce carbon dioxide and water . 
the amount of nox is also a function of oxygen excess . 
carbon monoxide is one of the products from incomplete combustion . 
however ,  in practice ,  the air used is 2-3x that of theoretical air . 
partially oxidized compounds are also a concern; partial oxidation of ethanol can produce harmful acetaldehyde ,  and carbon can produce toxic carbon monoxide . 
nitrogen is not considered to be a combustible substance when oxygen is the oxidant ,  but small amounts of various nitrogen oxides  -lrb-  commonly designated species  -rrb-  form when the air is the oxidant . 
cyrillic script spread throughout the east slavic and some south slavic territories ,  being adopted for writing local languages ,  such as old east slavic . 
with the accession of bulgaria to the european union on 1 january 2007, cyrillic became the third official script of the european union ,  following latin and greek . 
contrasting with consonants are vowels . 
in some other languages ,  such as finnish ,  `` y '' only represents a vowel sound . 
that is ,  phonetically they are consonants ,  but phonemically they behave as vowels . 
the word consonant is also used to refer to a letter of an alphabet that denotes a consonant sound . 
many slavic languages allow the trill and the lateral as syllabic nuclei  -lrb-  see words without vowels  -rrb-  . 
costume jewelry can be characterized by the period in history in which it was made . 
in the retro period ,  designers struggled with the art versus mass production dilemma . 
according to schiffer ,  some of the characteristics of the costume jewelry in the art deco period were:
according to schiffer ,  some of the characteristics of the costume jewelry in the art modern period were:
in the art modern period following world war ii ,  jewelry designs became more traditional and understated . 
the art deco movement died with the onset of the great depression and the outbreak of world war ii . 
according to schiffer ,  some of the characteristics of the costume jewelry in the retro period were:
with the advent of the mod period came ``  ''body jewelry '' '' . 
the two major islands are jersey and guernsey . 
the isle of wight ,  for example ,  is not a `` channel island ''  -lrb-  though ,  being in the channel ,  it remains a `` channel island ''  -rrb-  . 
four are part of the bailiwick of jersey:
a parody or spoof film is a comedy that satirizes other film genres or classic films . 
it was not uncommon for the early romantic comedy film to also be a screwball comedy film . 
comedy is a genre of film in which the main emphasis is on humour . 
fantasy comedy films are types of films that uses magic ,  supernatural and or mythological figures for comic purposes . 
films in this sub-genre blend comic antics and action where the film stars combine with and one-liners with a thrilling plot and daring stunts . 
comedy horror is a type of film in which the usual dark themes and `` scare tactics '' attributed to horror films are treated with a humorous approach . 
when sound films became more prevalent during the 1920s ,  comedy films took another swing ,  as laughter could result from burlesque situations but also dialogue . 
a cult film or cult movie ,  also commonly referred to as a cult classic ,  is a film that has acquired a cult following . 
cult films can create their own subculture . 
like cult films themselves ,  magazines and websites dedicated to cult films revel in their self-conscious offensiveness . 
the transgressive nature of cult films can lead to their censorship . 
cult films can also drive tourism ,  even when it is unwanted . 
films that are influenced by unpopular styles or genres can become cult films . 
since the late 1970s ,  cult films have become increasingly popular . 
academic bob batchelor ,  writing in `` cult pop culture '' ,  states that the internet has democratized cult culture and destroyed the line between cult and mainstream . 
cult films have existed since the early days of cinema . 
modern cult films grew from 1960s counterculture and underground films ,  popular among those who rejected mainstream hollywood films . 
academics have written of how transgressive themes in cult films can be regressive . 
in 2008, `` cineaste '' asked a range of academics for their definition of a cult film . 
despite their oppositional nature ,  cult films can produce celebrities . 
films which do not attract enough controversy may be ridiculed and rejected when suggested as cult films . 
as major hollywood studios and audiences both become savvy to cult films ,  productions once limited to cult appeal have instead become popular hits ,  and cult directors have become hot properties known for more mainstream and accessible films . 
in the 9th and 10th centuries ,  constantinople had a population of between 500,000 and 800,000.
the emperor justinian i  -lrb-  527–565 -rrb- was known for his successes in war ,  for his legal reforms and for his public works . 
byzantium took on the name of `` kōnstantinoupolis ''  -lrb-  `` city of constantine '' ,  `` constantinople ''  -rrb-  after its refoundation under roman emperor constantine i ,  who transferred the capital of the roman empire to byzantium in 330 and designated his new capital officially as `` nova roma ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  'new rome' . 
constantine laid out a new square at the centre of old byzantium ,  naming it the augustaeum . 
constantinople  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  was the capital city of the roman/byzantine empire  -lrb-  330–1204 and 1261–1453 -rrb- ,  and also of the brief crusader state known as the latin empire  -lrb-  1204–1261 -rrb- ,  until finally falling to the ottoman empire  -lrb-  1453–1923 -rrb- . 
justinian also had anthemius and isidore demolish and replace the original church of the holy apostles built by constantine with a new church under the same dedication . 
the latins took over at least 20 churches and 13 monasteries ,  most prominently the hagia sophia ,  which became the cathedral of the latin patriarch of constantinople . 
the origins of the name of `` byzantion '' ,  more commonly known by the later latin `` byzantium '' ,  are not entirely clear ,  though some suggest it is of thraco-illyrian origin . 
in 980, the emperor basil ii received an unusual gift from prince vladimir of kiev: 6,000 varangian warriors ,  which basil formed into a new bodyguard known as the varangian guard . 
constantinople was founded by the roman emperor constantine i  -lrb-  272–337 -rrb- in 324 on the site of an already-existing city ,  byzantium ,  which was settled in the early days of greek colonial expansion ,  in around 657 bc ,  by colonists of the city-state of megara . 
according to pliny the elder in his `` natural history '' ,  the first known name of a settlement on the site of constantinople was `` lygos '' ,  a settlement likely of thracian origin founded between the 13th and 11th centuries bc . 
according to n . h .  baynes  -lrb-  `` byzantium ,  an introduction to east roman civilization ''  -rrb- :
in 1261, constantinople was captured from its last latin ruler ,  baldwin ii ,  by the forces of the nicaean emperor michael viii palaiologos . 
he would later rebuild byzantium towards the end of his reign ,  in which it would be briefly renamed `` augusta antonina '' ,  fortifying it with a new city wall in his name ,  the severan wall . 
the wealth of the eastern mediterranean and western asia flowed into constantinople . 
after the victory ,  in 534, the temple treasure of jerusalem ,  looted by the romans in ad 70 and taken to carthage by the vandals after their sack of rome in 455, was brought to constantinople and deposited for a time ,  perhaps in the church of st .  polyeuctus ,  before being returned to jerusalem in either the church of the resurrection or the new church . 
chariot-racing had been important in rome for centuries . 
these controversies contributed to the deterioration of relations between the western and the eastern churches . 
the city provided a defence for the eastern provinces of the old roman empire against the barbarian invasions of the 5th century . 
in arabic ,  the city was sometimes called `` rūmiyyat al-kubra ''  -lrb-  great city of the romans  -rrb-  and in persian as `` takht-e rum ''  -lrb-  throne of the romans  -rrb-  . 
in the 8th and 9th centuries ,  the iconoclast movement caused serious political unrest throughout the empire . 
this was presumably a calque on a greek phrase such as  -lrb-  `` vasileos polis ''  -rrb-  ,  'the city of the emperor king' . 
the name `` constantinople '' is still used by members of the eastern orthodox church in the title of one of their most important leaders ,  the orthodox patriarch based in the city ,  referred to as `` his most divine all-holiness the archbishop of constantinople new rome and ecumenical patriarch . `` 
in time the city came to be known as istanbul and its variations in most world languages . 
see also cornish literature
cornwall is the homeland of the cornish people and the cultural and ethnic origin of the cornish diaspora . 
the north and south coasts have different characteristics . 
there are regular flights between st mary's and land's end airport ,  near st just ,  and newquay airport; during the summer season ,  a service is also provided between st mary's and exeter airport ,  in devon . 
in the 2010–15 parliament of the united kingdom ,  four cornish mps ,  andrew george ,  mp for st ives ,  dan rogerson ,  mp for north cornwall ,  steve gilbert ,  mp for st austell and newquay ,  and sarah newton ,  mp for truro and falmouth repeated their parliamentary oaths in cornish . 
in the cornish language ,  cornwall is known as kernow which stems from a similar linguistic background . 
the cornish flag is an exact reverse of the former breton national flag  -lrb-  black cross  -rrb-  and is known by the same name `` kroaz du '' . 
this is home to rare plants ,  such as the cornish heath ,  which has been adopted as the county flower . 
saint piran's flag is the national flag and ancient banner of cornwall ,  and an emblem of the cornish people . 
cornwall  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is a county in south west england in the united kingdom . 
cornwall is one of the sunniest areas in the uk . 
also on the south coast ,  the picturesque fishing village of polperro ,  at the mouth of the pol river ,  and the fishing port of looe on the river looe are both popular with tourists . 
until four new parishes were created for the st austell area on 1 april 2009 st austell was the largest settlement in cornwall . 
cornwall borders the county of devon at the river tamar . 
cornwall has a border with only one other county ,  devon ,  which is formed almost entirely by the river tamar ,  and the remainder  -lrb-  to the north  -rrb-  by the marsland valley . 
historically tin mining was important in the cornish economy; it was increasingly significant during the high middle ages ,  and expanded greatly during the 19th century ,  when rich copper mines were also in production . 
however ,  no monarch has done so since 1708, and it is widely believed that this and many of the monarch's other political powers are lapsed powers . 
today ,  the role of the british monarch is by convention effectively ceremonial . 
instead ,  the british parliament and the government – chiefly in the office of prime minister of the united kingdom – exercise their powers under `` royal  -lrb-  or crown  -rrb-  prerogative '': on behalf of the monarch and through powers still formally possessed by the monarch . 
in the united kingdom ,  a frequent debate centers on when it is appropriate for a british monarch to act . 
with few exceptions ,  the monarch is bound by constitutional convention to act on the advice of the government . 
although queen anne was the last monarch to veto an act of parliament when ,  on 11 march ,  1708, she blocked the scottish militia bill ,  hanoverian monarchs continued to selectively dictate government policies . 
in addition to acting as a visible symbol of national unity ,  a constitutional monarch may hold formal powers such as dissolving parliament or giving royal assent to legislation . 
constitutional monarchy may refer to a system in which the monarch acts as a non-party political head of state under the constitution ,  whether written or unwritten . 
in nearly all cases ,  the monarch is still the nominal chief executive ,  but is bound by convention to act on the advice of the cabinet . 
these so-called laws include:
clarke's first law was proposed in the 1962 edition of the essay ,  as `` clarke's law '' in `` profiles of the future '' . 
the second law is offered as a simple observation in the same essay but its status as clarke's second law was conferred by others . 
friedrich was a prolific artist who produced more than 500 attributed works . 
friedrich settled permanently in dresden in 1798.
friedrich suffered depressive episodes in 1799, 1803–1805, c . 1813, in 1816 and between 1824 and 1826.
friedrich said ,  `` the artist should paint not only what he sees before him ,  but also what he sees within him . 
friedrich completed the first of his major paintings in 1808, at the age of 34.
both friedrich's life and art have at times been perceived by some to have been marked with an overwhelming sense of loneliness . 
until 1890, and especially after his friends had died ,  friedrich's work lay in near-oblivion for decades . 
symbols of death appeared in his other work from this period . 
friedrich's modern revival gained momentum in 1906, when thirty-two of his works were featured in an exhibition in berlin of romantic-era art . 
by 1838, he was capable only of working in a small format . 
friedrich was born in the town of greifswald on the baltic sea in what was at the time swedish pomerania . 
the contemporary artist christiane pooley gets inspired by friedrich's work for her landscapes reinterpreting the history of chile . 
this statement marked the only time friedrich recorded a detailed interpretation of his own work ,  and the painting was among the few commissions the artist ever received . 
friedrich's reputation steadily declined over the final fifteen years of his life . 
during the 1930s ,  friedrich's work was used in the promotion of nazi ideology ,  which attempted to fit the romantic artist within the nationalistic `` blut und boden '' . 
at the turn of the 20th century ,  friedrich was rediscovered by the norwegian art historian andreas aubert  -lrb-  1851–1913 -rrb- ,  whose writing initiated modern friedrich scholarship ,  and by the symbolist painters ,  who valued his visionary and allegorical landscapes . 
alongside other romantic painters ,  friedrich helped position landscape painting as a major genre within western art . 
the jury ,  however ,  found in love's favor . 
love has been a long-standing supporter of lgbt causes . 
but what courtney love does ,  i'd never heard a girl do that . `` 
after 2012, love decided to drop the hole name and perform as a solo artist . 
love told `` billboard '' at the time that she had recorded eight songs in the studio . 
critics have noted that love's later musical work is more lyrically introspective . 
in january 2016, love released a clothing line in collaboration with sophia amoruso titled `` love ,  courtney '' ,  featuring eighteen pieces reflecting love's style over the course of her career . 
sometime in late 1991, love and cobain became reacquainted through jennifer finch ,  one of love's longtime friends and former bandmates . 
love later said she had been influenced by the fashion of chrissy amphlett of the divinyls . 
in december 1995, love was parodied by molly shannon in a `` saturday night live '' skit entitled `` the courtney love show , ``  in which shannon  -lrb-  as love  -rrb-  recklessly interviews julie andrews  -lrb-  portrayed by christine baranski  -rrb-  . 
love has had a notable impact on female-fronted alternative acts and performers . 
in 2009, fashion designer dawn simorangkir brought a libel suit against love concerning a defamatory post love made on her twitter account ,  which was settled for $450,000.
on march 17, 2004, love appeared on the `` late show with david letterman '' to promote her recent solo album . 
love has been depicted in popular culture across various mediums: artist barbara kruger used one of love's quotes on her new york city bus project ,  and the indie pop punk band the muffs named their second album `` blonder and blonder ''  -lrb-  1995 -rrb- after a quote by love ,  while a recording of her talking about a stolen dress appears as the track `` love '' on the band's 2000 compilation album `` hamburger '' . 
there is also a band named after her . 
for the band's impending tour ,  love recruited canadian bassist melissa auf der maur . 
in early 1991, love sent gordon a personal letter asking her to produce the record for the band ,  to which she agreed . 
love refused to pay bozza for the work he had done ,  and he sued her in 2015 for lack of payment . 
love also performed electric versions of two new hole songs ,  `` doll parts '' and `` miss world , ``  both written for the band's upcoming second album . 
in june 2009, `` nme '' published an article detailing love's plan to reunite hole and release a new album ,  `` nobody's daughter '' . 
in 1972, love's mother divorced rodriguez ,  remarried ,  and moved the family to nelson ,  new zealand . 
decades later ,  in 2009, love introduced the band's frontman gavin friday at a carnegie hall event ,  and performed a song with him . 
the album's subject matter was largely centered on love's tumultuous life between 2003 and 2007, and featured a polished folk rock sound ,  and more acoustic guitar work than previous hole albums . 
during this time ,  love dated her `` people vs .  larry flynt '' co-star edward norton ,  with whom she remained until 1999.
courtney michelle love  -lrb-  ; born july 9, 1964 -rrb- is an american singer ,  songwriter ,  actress ,  and visual artist . 
human cannibalism is the act or practice of humans eating the flesh or internal organs of other human beings . 
the wechuge is a demonic ,  cannibalistic creature that seeks out human flesh . 
solzhenitsyn said of the siege of leningrad  -lrb-  1941–1944 -rrb-: `` those who consumed human flesh ,  or dealt with the human liver trading from dissecting rooms  .  .  .  were accounted as the political criminals '' . 
in some cases ,  flesh was cut from living people . 
among modern humans ,  cannibalism has been practiced by various groups . 
notably ,  the urapmin also had a system of food taboos wherein dogs could not be eaten and they had to be kept from breathing on food ,  unlike humans who could be eaten and with whom food could be shared . 
in the camp sevzheldorlag  -lrb-  chief: colonel klyuchkin  -rrb-  in 1946–47 there were many cases of cannibalism: they cut human bodies ,  cooked and ate . `` 
the aghoris are indian ascetics who believe that eating human flesh confers spiritual and physical benefits ,  such as prevention of aging . 
the zuni people tell the story of the átahsaia – a giant who cannibalizes his fellow demons and seeks out human flesh . 
it's said to be half monster and half human like ,  however it has many shapes and forms . 
prior to 1931, `` the new york times '' reporter william buehler seabrook ,  in the interests of research ,  obtained from a hospital intern at the sorbonne a chunk of human meat from the body of a healthy human killed in an accident ,  then cooked and ate it . 
 .  .  .  just yesterday ,  one body part was found under two crossed logs . 
it is also called `` anthropophagy '' . 
on july 23, 1988, rick gibson ate the flesh of another person in public . 
flesh pills were used by tibetan buddhists . 
after the massacre at nyangwe ,  lutete `` hid himself in his quarters ,  appalled by the sight of thousands of men smoking human hands and human chops on their camp fires ,  enough to feed his army for many days . `` 
the victims' flesh would be cut from their bodies and distributed to members of the society . 
in gough's cave ,  england ,  remains of human bones and skulls ,  around 14,700 years old ,  suggest that cannibalism took place amongst the people living in or visiting the cave ,  and that they may have used human skulls as drinking vessels . 
cannibalism has also been reported in several recent african conflicts ,  including the second congo war ,  and the civil wars in liberia and sierra leone . 
the story of tantalus also parallels this . 
māori warriors fighting the new zealand government in titokowaru's war in new zealand's north island in 1868–69 revived ancient rites of cannibalism as part of the radical hauhau movement of the pai marire religion . 
both types of cannibalism can also be fueled by the belief that eating a person's flesh or internal organs will endow the cannibal with some of the characteristics of the deceased . 
according to dhanis's medical officer ,  captain hinde ,  their town of ngandu had `` at least 2,000 polished human skulls '' as a `` solid white pavement in front '' of its gates ,  with human skulls crowning every post of the stockade . 
the roast ,  from which i cut and ate a central slice ,  was tender ,  and in color ,  texture ,  smell as well as taste ,  strengthened my certainty that of all the meats we habitually know ,  veal is the one meat to which this meat is accurately comparable . `` 
researchers have found physical evidence of cannibalism in ancient times . 
the korowai tribe of south-eastern papua could be one of the last surviving tribes in the world engaging in cannibalism . 
in 2001, armin meiwes from essen ,  germany killed and ate the flesh of a willing victim ,  bernd jürgen brandis ,  as part of a sexual fantasy between the two . 
cannibalism has been said to test the bounds of cultural relativism because it challenges anthropologists `` to define what is or is not beyond the pale of acceptable human behavior '' . 
the atomic number of an element is equal to the number of protons in each atom ,  and defines the element . 
carbon atoms may have different numbers of neutrons; atoms of the same element having different numbers of neutrons are known as isotopes of the element . 
a chemical element is a species of atom having the same number of protons in their atomic nuclei  -lrb-  that is ,  the same atomic number ,  or `` z ''  -rrb-  . 
iron is the most abundant element  -lrb-  by mass  -rrb-  making up earth ,  while oxygen is the most common element in the earth's crust . 
118 elements have been identified ,  of which the first 94 occur naturally on earth with the remaining 24 being synthetic elements . 
that is why the atomic number ,  rather than mass number or atomic weight ,  is considered the identifying characteristic of a chemical element . 
in francophone canada of a canadian dollar is officially known as a `` cent ''  -lrb-  pronounced /sɛnt/  -rrb-  in both english and french . 
in the canadian french vernacular `` sou '' ,  `` sou noir ''  -lrb-  `` noir '' means `` black '' in french  -rrb-  ,  `` cenne '' ,  and `` cenne noire '' are all widely known ,  used ,  and accepted monikers when referring to either of a canadian dollar or the 1¢ coin  -lrb-  colloquially known as a `` penny '' in north american english  -rrb-  . 
the islamic calendar is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 months in a year of 354 or 355 days . 
the calendar year can be divided into four quarters ,  often abbreviated as q1, q2, q3, and q4.
both cfa francs have a fixed exchange rate to the euro: 100 cfa francs = 1 former french  -lrb-  nouveau  -rrb-  franc = 0.152449 euro; or 1 € = 6.55957 frf = 655.957 cfa francs exactly . 
the cfa franc  -lrb-  in french: `` franc cfa ''  ,  or colloquially `` franc ''  -rrb-  is the name of two currencies ,  the west african cfa franc ,  used in eight west african countries ,  and the central african cfa franc ,  used in six central african countries . 
the iso currency codes are xaf for the central african cfa franc and xof for the west african cfa franc . 
to most philosophers ,  the word `` consciousness '' connotes the relationship between the mind and the world . 
consciousness may have a determinative role in quantum mechanics . 
there are some brain states in which consciousness seems to be absent ,  including dreamless sleep ,  coma ,  and death . 
medical conditions that inhibit consciousness are considered disorders of consciousness . 
william lycan ,  for example ,  argued in his book `` consciousness and experience '' that at least eight clearly distinct types of consciousness can be identified  -lrb-  organism consciousness; control consciousness; consciousness `` of ''; state/event consciousness; reportability; introspective consciousness; subjective consciousness; self-consciousness  -rrb- —and that even this list omits several more obscure forms . 
and ``  ''the fact of awareness by the mind of itself and the world . ``  ''
the medical approach to consciousness is practically oriented . 
opinions are divided as to where in biological evolution consciousness emerged and about whether or not consciousness has any survival value . 
also ,  bioethicists may be concerned with the ethical implications of consciousness in medical cases of patients such as the karen ann quinlan case ,  while neuroscientists may study patients with impaired consciousness in hopes of gaining information about how the brain works . 
the topic of animal consciousness is beset by a number of difficulties . 
the philosophy of mind has given rise to many stances regarding consciousness . 
philosophers and non-philosophers differ in their intuitions about what consciousness is . 
the reason is the structural continuity between avian and reptilian brains ,  meaning that the phylogenetic origin of consciousness may be earlier than suggested by many leading neuroscientists . 
some philosophers believe that block's two types of consciousness are not the end of the story . 
several brain imaging techniques ,  such as eeg and fmri ,  have been used for physical measures of brain activity in these studies . 
phenomenology is a method of inquiry that attempts to examine the structure of consciousness in its own right ,  putting aside problems regarding the relationship of consciousness to the physical world . 
in 2013, an experimental procedure was developed to measure degrees of consciousness ,  the procedure involving stimulating the brain with a magnetic pulse ,  measuring resulting waves of electrical activity ,  and developing a consciousness score based on the complexity of the brain activity . 
although verbal report is in practice the `` gold standard '' for ascribing consciousness ,  it is not the only possible criterion . 
issues of concern in the philosophy of consciousness include whether the concept is fundamentally coherent; whether consciousness can ever be explained mechanistically; whether non-human consciousness exists and if so how it can be recognized; how consciousness relates to language; whether consciousness can be understood in a way that does not require a dualistic distinction between mental and physical states or properties; and whether it may ever be possible for computing machines like computers or robots to be conscious ,  a topic studied in the field of artificial intelligence . 
assuming that not only humans but even some non-mammalian species are conscious ,  a number of evolutionary approaches to the problem of neural correlates of consciousness open up . 
whereas the philosophical approach to consciousness focuses on its fundamental nature and its contents ,  the medical approach focuses on the amount of consciousness a person has: in medicine ,  consciousness is assessed as a `` level '' ranging from coma and brain death at the low end ,  to full alertness and purposeful responsiveness at the high end . 
verbal report is widely considered to be the most reliable indicator of consciousness ,  but it raises a number of issues . 
the purpose of the buddhist practice of mindfulness is to understand the inherent nature of the consciousness and its characteristics . 
research conducted on the effects of partial epileptic seizures on consciousness found that patients who suffer from partial epileptic seizures experience altered states of consciousness . 
consciousness is of concern to patients and physicians ,  especially neurologists and anesthesiologists . 
it has been disputed ,  however ,  whether there is enough evidence to count these as physiologically distinct states of consciousness . 
another idea that has drawn attention for several decades is that consciousness is associated with high-frequency  -lrb-  gamma band  -rrb-  oscillations in brain activity . 
karl popper develops in the book `` the self and its brain '' a similar evolutionary argument . 
the degree of consciousness is measured by standardized behavior observation scales such as the glasgow coma scale . 
these factors led to the metal itself being the store of value: first silver ,  then both silver and gold ,  and at one point also bronze . 
no country has an enforceable gold standard or silver standard currency system . 
most major economies using coinage had several tiers of coins ,  using a mix of copper ,  silver and gold . 
by 1900, most of the industrializing nations were on some form of gold standard ,  with paper notes and silver coins constituting the circulating medium . 
at that time ,  both silver and gold were considered legal tender ,  and accepted by governments for taxes . 
however ,  the rarity of gold consistently made it more valuable than silver ,  and likewise silver was consistently worth more than copper . 
but there were also disadvantages . 
major nations established mints to print money and mint coins ,  and branches of their treasury to collect taxes and hold gold and silver stock . 
the advantages of paper currency were numerous: it reduced the need to transport gold and silver ,  which was risky; it facilitated loans of gold or silver at interest ,  since the underlying specie  -lrb-  gold or silver  -rrb-  never left the possession of the lender until someone else redeemed the note; and it allowed a division of currency into credit and specie backed forms . 
in premodern china ,  the need for credit and for a medium of exchange that was less physically cumbersome than large numbers of copper coins led to the introduction of paper money ,  i . e . 
a currency  -lrb-  from  ,  `` in circulation '' ,  from   -rrb-  ,  in the most specific use of the word ,  refers to money in any form when in actual use or circulation as a medium of exchange ,  especially circulating banknotes and coins . 
functions of a central bank may include:
chlorine forms four oxoacids: hypochlorous acid  -lrb-  hocl  -rrb-  ,  chlorous acid  -lrb-  hoclo  -rrb-  ,  chloric acid  -lrb-  hoclo  -rrb-  ,  and perchloric acid  -lrb-  hoclo  -rrb-  . 
chlorine is widely used for purifying water ,  especially potable water supplies and water used in swimming pools . 
when used at specified levels for water disinfection ,  the reaction of chlorine with water is not a major concern for human health . 
even small water supplies are now routinely chlorinated . 
when chlorine is inhaled at concentrations greater than 30 ppm ,  it reacts with water and cellular fluid ,  producing hydrochloric acid  -lrb-  hcl  -rrb-  and hypochlorous acid  -lrb-  hclo  -rrb-  . 
it hydrolyses in water to give a mixture of chloric and perchloric acids: the analogous reaction with anhydrous hydrogen fluoride does not proceed to completion . 
dichlorine heptoxide  -lrb-  clo  -rrb-  is the anhydride of perchloric acid  -lrb-  hclo  -rrb-  and can readily be obtained from it by dehydrating it with phosphoric acid at −10 °c and then distilling the product at −35 °c and 1 mmhg . 
although it is a weak ligand ,  weaker than water ,  a few compounds involving coordinated are known . 
given that e° -lrb-  o/ho  -rrb-  = +1.229 v ,  which is less than +1.395 v ,  it would be expected that chlorine should be able to oxidise water to oxygen and hydrochloric acid . 
it will also react exothermically and violently with compounds containing –oh and –nh groups ,  such as water:
the simplest chlorine compound is hydrogen chloride ,  hcl ,  a major chemical in industry as well as in the laboratory ,  both as a gas and dissolved in water as hydrochloric acid . 
chlorine is usually used  -lrb-  in the form of hypochlorous acid  -rrb-  to kill bacteria and other microbes in drinking water supplies and public swimming pools . 
hydrochloric acid forms an azeotrope with boiling point 108.58 °c at 20.22 g hcl per 100 g solution; thus hydrochloric acid cannot be concentrated beyond this point by distillation . 
when added in small amounts to pool water or industrial water systems ,  the chlorine atoms hydrolyze from the rest of the molecule forming hypochlorous acid  -lrb-  hocl  -rrb-  ,  which acts as a general biocide ,  killing germs ,  micro-organisms ,  algae ,  and so on . 
deuterium chloride ,  dcl ,  may be produced by reacting benzoyl chloride with heavy water  -lrb-  do  -rrb-  . 
at room temperature ,  hydrogen chloride is a colourless gas ,  like all the hydrogen halides apart from hydrogen fluoride ,  since hydrogen cannot form strong hydrogen bonds to the larger electronegative chlorine atom; however ,  weak hydrogen bonding is present in solid crystalline hydrogen chloride at low temperatures ,  similar to the hydrogen fluoride structure ,  before disorder begins to prevail as the temperature is raised . 
the most common compound of chlorine ,  sodium chloride  -lrb-  common salt  -rrb-  ,  has been known since ancient times . 
chlorine has two stable isotopes ,  cl and cl . 
other materials present in the water may generate disinfection by-products that are associated with negative effects on human health . 
arsenic pentafluoride and antimony pentafluoride form ionic adducts of the form clfmf  -lrb-  m = as ,  sb  -rrb-  and water reacts vigorously as follows:
increasingly ,  chloramine itself is being directly added to drinking water for purposes of disinfection ,  a process known as chloramination . 
the colour fades at low temperatures ,  so that solid chlorine at −195 °c is almost colourless . 
although dichlorine is a strong oxidising agent with a high first ionisation energy ,  it may be oxidised under extreme conditions to form the cation . 
this may also be achieved by thermal decomposition or disproportionation as follows:
chlorine trifluoride  -lrb-  clf  -rrb-  is a volatile colourless molecular liquid which melts at −76.3 °c and boils at 11.8 °c . 
this method also produces very pure sodium  -lrb-  or potassium  -rrb-  hydroxide but has the disadvantage of requiring very pure brine at high concentrations . 
elemental chlorine solutions dissolved in chemically basic water  -lrb-  sodium and calcium hypochlorite  -rrb-  were first used as anti-putrefaction agents and disinfectants in the 1820s ,  in france ,  long before the establishment of the germ theory of disease . 
chloride and chlorate may comproportionate to form chlorine as follows:
labarraque's research resulted in the use of chlorides and hypochlorites of lime  -lrb-  calcium hypochlorite  -rrb-  and of sodium  -lrb-  sodium hypochlorite  -rrb-  in the `` boyauderies . `` 
common chemical theory at that time held that an acid is a compound that contains oxygen  -lrb-  remnants of this survive in the german and dutch names of oxygen: `` sauerstoff '' or `` zuurstof '' ,  both translating into english as `` acid substance ''  -rrb-  ,  so a number of chemists ,  including claude berthollet ,  suggested that scheele's `` dephlogisticated muriatic acid air '' must be a combination of oxygen and the yet undiscovered element ,  `` muriaticum '' . 
by far the most common isotope of calcium in nature is ca ,  which makes up 96.941% of all natural calcium . 
calcium is a chemical element with symbol ca and atomic number 20.
calcium isotope fractionation during mineral formation has led to several applications of calcium isotopes . 
apart from the practically stable ca ,  the longest lived radioisotope of calcium is ca . 
excess intake of calcium may cause hypercalcaemia . 
calcium is an essential element needed in large quantities . 
the chemistry of calcium is that of a typical heavy alkaline earth metal . 
calcium is the most abundant metal and the fifth-most abundant element in the human body . 
because calcium reacts exothermically with water and acids ,  calcium metal coming into contact with bodily moisture results in severe corrosive irritation . 
calcium provides a link between tectonics ,  climate ,  and the carbon cycle . 
calcium is the first  -lrb-  lightest  -rrb-  element to have six naturally occurring isotopes . 
calcium sulfite is used as a bleach in papermaking and as a disinfectant ,  calcium silicate is used as a reinforcing agent in rubber ,  and calcium acetate is a component of liming rosin and is used to make metallic soaps and synthetic resins . 
as a result ,  comparisons with strontium and barium are more germane to calcium chemistry than comparisons with magnesium . 
the two main products of chromium ore refining are ferrochromium and metallic chromium . 
chromium is a member of group 6, of the transition metals . 
while chromium metal and cr -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  ions are not considered toxic ,  hexavalent chromium  -lrb-  cr -lrb-  vi  -rrb-   -rrb-  is both toxic and carcinogenic . 
there is disagreement on chromium's status as an essential nutrient . 
chromium also has two metastable nuclear isomers . 
chromium is also famous for its reflective ,  metallic luster when polished . 
for the production of pure chromium ,  the iron must be separated from the chromium in a two step roasting and leaching process . 
many chromium -lrb-  0 -rrb- compounds are currently known; however ,  most of these compounds are derivatives of the compounds chromium hexacarbonyl or bis -lrb-  benzene  -rrb- chromium . 
although rare ,  deposits of native chromium exist . 
the +3 and +6 states occur the most commonly within chromium compounds; charges of +1, +4 and +5 for chromium are rare ,  but do nevertheless occasionally exist . 
the creation of metal alloys account for 85% of the available chromium's usage . 
chromium is a chemical element with symbol cr and atomic number 24.
several chromium compounds are used as catalysts for processing hydrocarbons . 
chromium has an unusually high specular reflection in comparison to that of other transition metals . 
chromium metal treated in this way readily dissolves in weak acids . 
chromium ,  unlike such metals as iron and nickel ,  does not suffer from hydrogen embrittlement . 
the remainder of chromium is used in the chemical ,  refractory ,  and foundry industries . 
recovery and reuse ,  direct/indirect recycling ,  use of less chromium ,  or `` chrome-less '' tanning are practiced to better manage chromium in tanning . 
trivalent chromium occurs in trace amounts in foods ,  wine and water . 
the efsa of the european union however ,  does not consider chromium to be an essential nutrient; chromium is the only mineral for which the united states and the european union disagree . 
given the evidence for chromium deficiency causing problems with glucose management in the context of intravenous nutrition products formulated without chromium ,  research interest turned to whether chromium supplementation for people who have type 2 diabetes but are not chromium deficient could benefit . 
chromium salts  -lrb-  chromates  -rrb-  are also the cause of allergic reactions in some people . 
in present day ,  nearly all chromium is commercially extracted from the only viable ore for extensiveness and predicted long term use ,  being chromite ,  which is iron chromium oxide  -lrb-  fecro  -rrb- ; chromite is now the principal source of chromium for use in pigments . 
still ,  this oxide layer that was found on the weapons was not pure chromium metal or chrome plating as it is commonly produced today ,  but a mere 10-15 μm layer of chromium oxide molecules at up to 2% chromium was discovered ,  which turned out to be enough to protect the bronze from corroding . 
abandoned chromium production sites often require environmental cleanup . 
chromium minerals as pigments came to the attention of the west in the 18th century . 
the isotopes of chromium range in atomic mass from 43 u  -lrb-  cr  -rrb-  to 67 u  -lrb-  cr  -rrb-  . 
chromium oxides are also used as a green pigment in the field of glassmaking and also as a glaze for ceramics . 
stainless steel and chrome plating  -lrb-  electroplating with chromium  -rrb-  together comprise 85% of the commercial use . 
another use of cymbals is the suspended cymbal . 
crash cymbals evolved into the low-sock and from this to the modern hi-hat . 
ancient cymbals or tuned cymbals are much more rarely called for . 
the profile affects the pitch of the cymbal: higher profile cymbals have higher pitch . 
a player of cymbals is known as a cymbalist . 
a cymbal is a common percussion instrument . 
the potential for cadmium yellow as pigment was recognized in the 1840s ,  but the lack of cadmium limited this application . 
cadmium makes up about 0.1 ppm of earth's crust . 
the stabilizing effect of cadmium chemicals like the carboxylates cadmium laurate and cadmium stearate on pvc led to an increased use of those compounds in the 1970s and 1980s . 
cadmium is a chemical element with symbol cd and atomic number 48.
naturally occurring cadmium is composed of 8 isotopes . 
cadmium has 8 known meta states ,  with the most stable being cd  -lrb-  `` t '' = 14.1 years  -rrb-  ,  cd  -lrb-  `` t '' = 44.6 days  -rrb-  ,  and cd  -lrb-  `` t '' = 3.36 hours  -rrb-  . 
about 20 radioisotopes and 7 nuclear isomers between cm and cm are known for curium ,  and no stable isotopes . 
curium has peculiar magnetic properties . 
the longest-lived isotope of curium ,  cm ,  has a half-life of 15.6 million years . 
these three curium phases are also referred to as cm i ,  ii and iii . 
metallic curium is obtained by reduction of its compounds . 
curium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with symbol cm and atomic number 96.
the curium-242 isotope was produced in july–august 1944 by bombarding pu with α-particles to produce curium with the release of a neutron:
curium is produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors ,  and by now only kilograms of it have been accumulated for the cm and cm and grams or even milligrams for heavier isotopes . 
most curium is produced by bombarding uranium or plutonium with neutrons in nuclear reactors – one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 20 grams of curium . 
curium ions in solution almost exclusively assume the oxidation state of +3, which is the most stable oxidation state for curium . 
curium metal was produced only in 1951 by reduction of cmf with barium . 
curium-247 would be highly suitable ,  having a half-life 647 times that of plutonium-239.
twenty radioisotopes of californium have been characterized ,  the most stable being californium-251 with a half-life of 898 years ,  californium-249 with a half-life of 351 years ,  californium-250 with a half-life of 13.08 years ,  and californium-252 with a half-life of 2.645 years . 
californium exhibits oxidation states of 4, 3, or 2.
californium is only water-soluble as the californium -lrb-  iii  -rrb-  cation . 
californium-250 is made by bombarding berkelium-249  -lrb-    -rrb-  with neutrons ,  forming berkelium-250  -lrb-    -rrb-  via neutron capture  -lrb-  n , γ  -rrb-  which ,  in turn ,  quickly beta decays  -lrb-  β  -rrb-  to californium-250  -lrb-    -rrb-  in the following reaction: bombardment of californium-250 with neutrons produces californium-251 and californium-252.
californium is the heaviest actinide to exhibit covalent properties ,  as is observed in the californium borate . 
californium is one of the few transuranium elements that have practical applications . 
the isotopes of californium range in mass number from 237 to 256.
californium is produced in nuclear reactors and particle accelerators . 
prolonged irradiation of americium ,  curium ,  and plutonium with neutrons produces milligram amounts of californium-252 and microgram amounts of californium-249.
californium-249 is formed from the beta decay of berkelium-249, and most other californium isotopes are made by subjecting berkelium to intense neutron radiation in a nuclear reactor . 
californium-252 has a number of specialized applications as a strong neutron emitter ,  and each microgram of fresh californium produces 139 million neutrons per minute . 
californium is a radioactive chemical element with symbol cf and atomic number 98.
two years later ,  in 1960, burris cunningham and james wallman of the lawrence radiation laboratory of the university of california created the first californium compounds—californium trichloride ,  californium oxychloride ,  and californium oxide—by treating californium with steam and hydrochloric acid . 
in the 2003 bavarian state election ,  the csu won 60.7% of the vote and 124 of 180 seats in the state parliament . 
since its formation ,  the csu has been more conservative than the cdu . 
the csu is the sister party of the christian democratic union  -lrb-  cdu  -rrb-  . 
the csu forms after bavarian state election ,  2018 on october 14, 2018 a new government with partner free voters of bavaria . 
american companies are generally led by a chief executive officer  -lrb-  ceo  -rrb-  . 
every corporation incorporated in california must have a chairman of the board or a president  -lrb-  or both  -rrb-  ,  as well as a secretary and a chief financial officer . 
the board of directors is technically not part of management itself ,  although its chairman may be considered part of the corporate office if he or she is an executive chairman . 
 ''shikko yakuin '' are considered employees of the company that follow the decisions of the board of directors ,  although in some cases directors may have the `` shikko yakuin '' title as well . 
legally ,  japanese and korean companies are only required to have a board of directors with at least one representative director . 
vp of marketing  -rrb-  ,  and `` general managers '' or `` directors '' of various divisions  -lrb-  such as director of marketing  -rrb- ; the latter may or may not imply membership of the `` board of directors '' . 
the highest-level executives in senior management usually have titles beginning with `` chief '' forming what is often called the `` c-suite '' . 
cambridge  -lrb-     -rrb-  is a city in middlesex county ,  massachusetts ,  and part of the boston metropolitan area . 
the museum of fine arts ,  boston and the sandwich glass museum on cape cod also have a few pieces . 
in 1636, the newe college  -lrb-  later renamed harvard college after benefactor john harvard  -rrb-  was founded by the colony to train ministers . 
situated directly north of boston ,  across the charles river ,  it was named in honor of the university of cambridge in england ,  an important center of the puritan theology embraced by the town's founders . 
cambridge grew slowly as an agricultural village by road from boston ,  the colony's capital . 
by 1920, cambridge was one of new england's main industrial cities ,  with nearly 120,000 residents . 
in the late 19th century ,  various schemes for annexing cambridge to boston were pursued and rejected . 
dexter was born in stamford ,  lincolnshire ,  to alfred and dorothy dexter . 
in 2005 dexter became a fellow by special election of st cross college ,  oxford . 
as with `` morse '' ,  dexter occasionally made cameo appearances in `` lewis '' and `` endeavour '' . 
on 21 march 2017 dexter's publisher ,  macmillan ,  said in a statement `` with immense sadness ,  macmillan announces the death of colin dexter who died peacefully at his home in oxford this morning . `` 
a college  -lrb-  latin: `` collegium ''  -rrb-  is an educational institution or a constituent part of one . 
the university was founded in 1829 following a donation by william chalmers ,  a director of the swedish east india company . 
at least in the western world ,  the main alternative to the paged codex format for a long document is the continuous scroll ,  which was the dominant book form in the ancient world . 
a codex  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  from the latin `` caudex '' for `` trunk of a tree '' or `` block of wood '' ,  `` book ''  -rrb-  ,  plural `` codices ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a book constructed of a number of sheets of paper ,  vellum ,  papyrus ,  or similar materials . 
the term `` calf '' is also used for some other species . 
the term `` calf '' is also used for some other species . 
 ''calf '' is the term used from birth to weaning ,  when it becomes known as a `` weaner '' or `` weaner calf '' ,  though in some areas the term `` calf '' may be used until the animal is a yearling . 
by a week old the calf is able to follow the mother all the time . 
a calf  -lrb-  plural ,  calves  -rrb-  is the young of domestic cattle . 
a commercial steer or bull calf is expected to put on about per month . 
shannon was born in petoskey ,  michigan and grew up in gaylord ,  michigan . 
shannon's mother ,  mabel wolf shannon  -lrb-  1890–1945 -rrb- ,  was a language teacher ,  and also served as the principal of gaylord high school . 
the process of learning to adopt the behavior patterns of the community is called socialization . 
one such breakdown is as follows:
a community isn’t just a small audience either; it has a social density that audiences lack . `` 
a community is a small or large social unit  -lrb-  a group of living things  -rrb-  that has something in common ,  such as norms ,  religion ,  values ,  or identity . 
socialization is influenced primarily by the family ,  through which children first learn community norms . 
in archaeological studies of social communities the term `` community '' is used in two ways ,  paralleling usage in other areas . 
but socialization also includes adults moving into a significantly different environment ,  where they must learn a new set of behaviors . 
although communities are usually small relative to personal social ties  -lrb-  micro-level  -rrb-  ,  `` community '' may also refer to large group affiliations  -lrb-  or macro-level  -rrb-  ,  such as national communities ,  international communities ,  and virtual communities . 
this is based on the assumption that people or households will share more similarities in the types and styles of their material goods with other members of a social community than they will with outsiders . 
the word college can also refer to a private high school in quebec . 
the former is also known as a technical college . 
they may also work with local businesses to ensure students are being prepared for the local workforce . 
in australia ,  the term `` community college '' refers to small private businesses running short  -lrb-  e . g . 
in other parts of canada the term advanced degree is used to indicate a 3- or 4-year college program . 
in the philippines ,  a community school functions as elementary or secondary school at daytime and towards the end of the day convert into a community college . 
a formative trend was the merging of the then separate vocational training and adult education  -lrb-  night school  -rrb-  institutions . 
in the united kingdom ,  except for scotland ,  a community college is a school which not only provides education for the school-age population  -lrb-  11–18 -rrb- of the locality ,  but also additional services and education to adults and other members of the community . 
the civil rights memorial was dedicated in 1989.
the 41 names included in the civil rights memorial are those of: `` the forgotten '' are 74 men and women who are identified in a display at the civil rights memorial center . 
the memorial is sponsored by the southern poverty law center . 
