one of the first competitions he won was the junior mr .  europe contest in 1965.
in 1970, at age 23, he captured his first mr .  olympia title in new york ,  and would go on to win the title a total of seven times . 
his bodybuilding victories included five mr .  universe wins  -lrb-  4 – nabba england ,  1 – ifbb usa  -rrb-  ,  and seven mr .  olympia wins ,  a record which would stand until lee haney won his eighth consecutive mr .  olympia title in 1991.
after the 1975 mr .  olympia contest ,  schwarzenegger announced his retirement from professional bodybuilding . 
the story of the film was supposed to be set 30 years after the first ,  with some inspiration from clint eastwood's `` unforgiven '' . 
schwarzenegger came out of retirement ,  however ,  to compete in the 1980 mr .  olympia . 
his next film ,  the comedy drama `` true lies ''  -lrb-  1994 -rrb- ,  was a popular spy film and saw schwarzenegger reunited with james cameron . 
schwarzenegger's breakthrough film was the sword-and-sorcery epic `` conan the barbarian '' in 1982, which was a box-office hit . 
the series will also mark as schwarzenegger's first major scripted tv role . 
schwarzenegger gained worldwide fame as a hollywood action film icon . 
schwarzenegger's goal was to become the greatest bodybuilder in the world ,  which meant becoming mr .  olympia . 
however ,  schwarzenegger came back in 1970 and won the competition ,  making him the youngest ever mr .  olympia at the age of 23, a record he still holds to this day . 
he would come in second in the mr .  universe competition ,  not having the muscle definition of american winner chester yorton . 
schwarzenegger won two weightlifting contests in 1964 and 1965, as well as two powerlifting contests in 1966 and 1968.
his film appearances after becoming governor of california included a three-second cameo appearance in `` the rundown '' ,  and the 2004 remake of `` around the world in 80 days '' . 
during the 1980s ,  audiences had an appetite for action films ,  with both schwarzenegger and sylvester stallone becoming international stars . 
he was announced to star and produce in a film about the ruins of sanxingdui called `` the guest of sanxingdui '' ,  as an ambassador . 
in 1980 the greek ministry of transport and communications reported that shipwrecks from the battle of actium had been located at actium near the entrance to the ambracian gulf . 
there was also an ancient festival named actia ,  celebrated here in honour of the god . 
amway china launched in 1995.
in 1964, the amway sales corporation ,  amway services corporation ,  and amway manufacturing corporation merged to form the amway corporation . 
amway's espring water filter was introduced in 2000.
yager ,  interviewed on `` 60 minutes '' in 1983, admitted that he promotes christianity through his amway group ,  but stated that this might not be the case in other amway groups . 
amway and its sister companies under alticor reported sales of $8.6 billion in 2017.
amway combines direct selling with a multi-level marketing strategy . 
in june 2007 it was announced that the quixtar brand would be phased out over an 18- to 24-month period in favor of a unified amway brand  -lrb-  amway global  -rrb-  worldwide . 
amway bought controlling interest of nutrilite in 1972 and full ownership in 1994.
its successor ,  the amway center ,  was opened in 2010, and the older arena was demolished in 2012.
in 2006, amway china had a reported 180,000 sales representatives ,  140 stores ,  and $2 billion in annual sales . 
cspi later reported that amway had agreed to changing product labels by the end of 2014.
in 2017, nutrition and weight management products accounted for 50 percent of amway’s sales . 
since 2012, amway has been the title sponsor of the canadian championship ,  an annual soccer tournament . 
in 2008, the state government of andhra pradesh enacted a ban on amway media advertisements . 
the economic value of the settlement ,  including the changes amway made to its business model ,  totals $100 million . 
following the 1994 election ,  myrick maintained `` close ties to amway and yager '' ,  and raised $100,000 from amway sources ,  `` most notably through fundraisers at the homes of big distributors '' ,  in the 1997–98 election cycle . 
a revision plea moved by the two amway officials against the framed charges was dismissed in 2018.
in 2011, nutrilite brand of vitamins and dietary supplements led amway's sales ,  totaling almost $4.7 billion . 
amway's artistry products include skin care ,  cosmetics ,  and anti-aging creams and serums . 
according to the skeptic's dictionary ,  `` in the united states ,  the federal trade commission requires amway to label its products with the message that 54% of amway recruits make nothing and the rest earn on average $65 a month . `` 
in 2014, a russian loyalty card program called `` alfa-amway '' was created when amway joined with alfa-bank . 
several sources have commented on the promotion of christian conservative ideology within the amway organization . 
sociologist david g .  bromley calls amway a `` quasi-religious corporation '' having sectarian characteristics . 
in 2001 a regional court ruled in favor of network 21; however ,  in 2004 the warsaw regional court dismissed amway's civil lawsuit . 
on january 14, 2015, amway announced that it had acquired xs energy ,  a california-based brand of energy drinks and snacks . 
harvard business school ,  which described amway as `` one of the most profitable direct selling companies in the world '' ,  noted that amway founders van andel and devos `` accomplished their success through the use of an elaborate pyramid-like distribution system in which independent distributors of amway products received a percentage of the merchandise they sold and also a percentage of the merchandise sold by recruited distributors '' . 
in the 1990s ,  the amway organization was a major contributor to the republican party  -lrb-  gop  -rrb-  and to the election campaigns of various gop candidates . 
in 2015, it was reported that according to china confidential consumer brands survey ,  amway nutrilite was the most popular vitamin and dietary supplement brand in china . 
indeed ,  smith wrote:
those who regard that statement as smith's central message also quote frequently smith's dictum:
adam smith resided at panmure house from 1778 to 1790.
smith has been celebrated by advocates of free-market policies as the founder of free-market economics ,  a view reflected in the naming of bodies such as the adam smith institute in london ,  the adam smith society and the australian adam smith club ,  and in terms such as the adam smith necktie . 
on his deathbed ,  smith expressed disappointment that he had not achieved more . 
smith was born in kirkcaldy ,  in the county of fife ,  scotland . 
although `` the wealth of nations '' is widely regarded as smith's most influential work ,  smith himself is believed to have considered `` the theory of moral sentiments '' to be a superior work . 
shortly before his death ,  smith had nearly all his manuscripts destroyed . 
o'rourke describes smith as the `` founder of free market economics '' . 
in 1750, smith met the philosopher david hume ,  who was his senior by more than a decade . 
while smith was not adept at public speaking ,  his lectures met with success . 
smith published `` the theory of moral sentiments '' in 1759, embodying some of his glasgow lectures . 
smith also fell to pressure in supporting some tariffs in support for national defence . 
smith laid the foundations of classical free market economic theory . 
smith entered the university of glasgow when he was 14 and studied moral philosophy under francis hutcheson . 
smith also explained the relationship between growth of private property and civil government:
smith was also a close friend of david hume ,  who was commonly characterised in his own time as an atheist . 
in 1762, the university of glasgow conferred on smith the title of doctor of laws  -lrb-  ll . d .   -rrb-  . 
smith's library went by his will to david douglas ,  lord reston  -lrb-  son of his cousin colonel robert douglas of strathendry ,  fife  -rrb-  ,  who lived with smith . 
a large-scale memorial of smith by alexander stoddart was unveiled on 4 july 2008 in edinburgh . 
additionally ,  smith outlined the proper expenses of the government in `` the wealth of nations ,  book v ,  ch . 
classical economists presented competing theories of those of smith ,  termed the `` labour theory of value '' . 
not much is known about smith's personal views beyond what can be deduced from his published articles . 
a bust of smith is in the hall of heroes of the national wallace monument in stirling . 
 -lrb-  `` the wealth of nations , ``  i . i . 10 -rrb-
smith considered the teaching at glasgow to be far superior to that at oxford ,  which he found intellectually stifling . 
considerable scholarly debate has occurred about the nature of smith's religious views . 
the interpretation of water as a compound explained the inflammable air generated from dissolving metals in acids  -lrb-  hydrogen produced when water decomposes  -rrb-  and the reduction of calces by inflammable air  -lrb-  combination of gas from calx with oxygen to form water  -rrb-  . 
he concluded that this was just a pure form of common air ,  and that it was the air itself `` undivided ,  without alteration ,  without decomposition '' which combined with metals on calcination . 
here he lived and worked between 1775 and 1792.
lavoisier recognized that black's fixed air was identical with the air evolved when metal calces were reduced with charcoal and even suggested that the air which combined with metals on calcination and increased the weight might be black's fixed air ,  that is ,  co . 
he additionally was interested in air quality ,  and spent some time studying the health risks associated with gunpowder's effect on the air . 
after returning from paris ,  priestley took up once again his investigation of the air from mercury calx . 
during 1773 lavoisier determined to review thoroughly the literature on air ,  particularly `` fixed air , ``  and to repeat many of the experiments of other workers in the field . 
he also pushed for public education in the sciences . 
he held that all acids contained oxygen and that oxygen was therefore the acidifying principle . 
in 1769, he worked on the first geological map of france . 
the relationship between combustion and respiration had long been recognized from the essential role which air played in both processes . 
he also attempted to introduce reforms in the french monetary and taxation system to help the peasants . 
once a part of the academy ,  lavoisier also held his own competitions to push the direction of research towards bettering the public and his own work . 
this was the project that interested lavoisier in the chemistry of water and public sanitation duties . 
lavoisier's work was recognized as an international historic chemical landmark by the american chemical society ,  académie des sciences de l'institut de france and the société chimique de france in 1999.
three years later in 1768, he focused on a new project to design an aqueduct . 
this unpopularity was to have consequences for him during the french revolution . 
he established the consistent use of the chemical balance ,  used oxygen to overthrow the phlogiston theory ,  and developed a new system of chemical nomenclature which held that oxygen was an essential constituent of all acids  -lrb-  which later turned out to be erroneous  -rrb-  . 
 -lrb-  it would also contribute to his demise during the reign of terror many years later .   -rrb- 
in 1772, he performed a study on how to reconstruct the hôtel-dieu hospital ,  after it had been damaged by fire ,  in a way that would allow proper ventilation and clean air throughout . 
they had four children . 
in 1842, he became an assistant to robert bunsen at the philipps-universität marburg . 
he was survived by four children . 
in 1853, he married charlotte ,  the daughter of general-major wilhelm von bardeleben . 
bachchan was born in allahabad . 
bachchan's father died in 2003, and his mother in 2007.
amitabh bachchan  -lrb-  ; born inquilaab srivastava; 11 october 1942 -rrb- is an indian film actor ,  film producer ,  television host ,  occasional playback singer and former politician . 
likewise ,  the allomorph does not appear after stem-final because the earlier clause for the allomorph takes priority; the allomorph does not appear after stem-final voiceless phoneme because the preceding clause for the takes priority . 
the allomorph does not appear after stem-final although the latter is voiceless is then explained by appearing in that environment ,  together with the fact that the environments are ordered . 
for example ,  in northern sami ,  there is the causative verb suffix `` -hit ''/ ''-ahttit '' ,  where `` -hit '' is selected when it would be the third syllable  -lrb-  and the preceding verb has two syllables  -rrb-  ,  and `` -ahttit '' is selected when it would be the third and fourth syllable  -lrb-  and the preceding verb has three syllables  -rrb- : the same applies to inflectional patterns in the sami languages as well ,  which are divided into even stems and odd stems . 
for example ,  english has both oral and nasal allophones of its vowels . 
allophones of english may be noticed if the 'light' of `` leaf '' is contrasted with the 'dark' of `` feel ''  . 
however ,  there may be several such allophones ,  or the linguist may prefer greater precision than that allows . 
there are many examples for allophones in languages other than english . 
on the other hand  -lrb-  as in `` dolor ''   -rrb-  and  -lrb-  as in `` nada ''   -rrb-  are allophones for the phoneme in spanish ,  while these two are considered to be different phonemes in english . 
therefore ,  by the `` elsewhere '' convention ,  the oral allophones are considered basic ,  and nasal vowels in english are considered to be allophones of oral phonemes . 
since phonemes are abstractions of speech sounds ,  not the sounds themselves ,  they have no direct phonetic transcription . 
 ''prefix '' and `` suffix '' may be subsumed under the term `` adfix '' ,  in contrast to `` infix . `` 
in linguistics ,  an affix is a morpheme that is attached to a word stem to form a new word or word form . 
in sentence  -lrb-  2 -rrb- ,  `` baby '' does not appear as a free noun . 
the lexical suffixes of these languages often show little to no resemblance to free nouns with similar meanings . 
lexical suffixes ,  when compared with free nouns ,  often have a more generic or general meaning . 
since meaningful stories are nearly always applicable to larger issues ,  allegories may be read into many stories which the author may not have recognised . 
it is important to note that while allegoresis may make discovery of allegory in any work ,  not every resonant work of modern fiction is allegorical ,  and some are clearly not intended to be viewed this way . 
among the best-known examples of allegory ,  plato's allegory of the cave ,  forms a part of his larger work `` the republic . `` 
the debate is complex ,  since it demands we observe the distinction between two often conflated uses of the greek verb `` allēgoreīn , ``  which can mean both `` to speak allegorically '' and `` to interpret allegorically . `` 
in classical literature two of the best-known allegories are the cave in plato's `` republic ''  -lrb-  book vii  -rrb-  and the story of the stomach and its members in the speech of menenius agrippa  -lrb-  livy ii . 
i think that many confuse applicability with allegory ,  but the one resides in the freedom of the reader ,  and the other in the purposed domination of the author . `` 
like allegorical stories ,  allegorical poetry has two meanings – a literal meaning and a symbolic meaning . 
allotropy or allotropism  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the property of some chemical elements to exist in two or more different forms ,  in the same physical state ,  known as `` allotropes '' of the elements . 
for some elements ,  allotropes have different molecular formulae despite difference in phase; for example ,  two allotropes of oxygen  -lrb-  dioxygen ,  o ,  and ozone ,  o  -rrb-  can both exist in the solid ,  liquid and gaseous states . 
conversely ,  some elements do not maintain distinct allotropes in different phases; for example ,  phosphorus has numerous solid allotropes ,  which all revert to the same p form when melted to the liquid state . 
agathocles  -lrb-   ,  `` agathoklḗs ''; 361–289 bc  -rrb-  was a greek tyrant of syracuse  -lrb-  317–289 bc  -rrb-  and king of sicily  -lrb-  304–289 bc  -rrb-  . 
in 310 bc he made a desperate effort to break through the blockade and attack the enemy in africa . 
following several victories he was at last completely defeated  -lrb-  307 bc  -rrb-  and fled secretly to sicily . 
he had further descendants from his second and third marriage . 
another factor determining the viability of oil extraction from the oil sands was the price of oil . 
 ,  alberta's generating capacity was 16,261 mw ,  and alberta has about of transmission lines . 
in 1947 a major oil field was discovered near edmonton . 
alberta has vast coal resources and 70 per cent of canada's coal reserves are located in alberta . 
alberta's economy was negatively impacted by the 2015-2016 oil glut with a record high volume of worldwide oil inventories in storage ,  with global crude oil collapsing at near ten-year low prices . 
oil sands are found in the northeast ,  especially around fort mcmurray  -lrb-  the athabasca oil sands  -rrb-  . 
since the early 1940s ,  alberta had supplied oil and gas to the rest of canada and the united states . 
alberta has always been an export-oriented economy . 
over 1800 mines have operated in alberta since then . 
much of that coal is burned in alberta for electricity generation . 
beginning in june 2014 the record high volume of worldwide oil inventories in storage—referred to as a global oil glut—caused crude oil prices to collapse at near ten-year low prices . 
for example ,  in the 1980 both cities claimed to be the `` oil capital of canada '' . 
as of late 2006 there were over $100 billion in oil sands projects under construction or in the planning stages in northeastern alberta . 
alberta is the largest producer of conventional crude oil ,  synthetic crude ,  natural gas and gas products in the country . 
on lagrange's advice ,  augustin-louis was enrolled in the école centrale du panthéon ,  the best secondary school of paris at that time ,  in the fall of 1802.
cauchy married aloise de bure in 1818.
although cauchy took his mission very seriously ,  he did this with great clumsiness ,  and with surprising lack of authority over the duke . 
after finishing school in 1810, cauchy accepted a job as a junior engineer in cherbourg ,  where napoleon intended to build a naval base . 
soon  -lrb-  early 1852 -rrb- the president made himself emperor of france ,  and took the name napoleon iii . 
the confounded membership of the bureau lasted until the end of 1843, when cauchy was finally replaced by poinsot . 
in 1819 the couple's first daughter ,  marie françoise alicia ,  was born ,  and in 1823 the second and last daughter ,  marie mathilde . 
in november 1839 cauchy was elected to the bureau ,  and discovered immediately that the matter of the oath was not so easily dispensed with . 
cauchy's first two manuscripts  -lrb-  on polyhedra  -rrb-  were accepted; the third one  -lrb-  on directrices of conic sections  -rrb-  was rejected . 
the story of the golden crown does not appear in the known works of archimedes . 
a coating of tar would have been commonplace on ships in the classical era . 
the works of archimedes were written in doric greek ,  the dialect of ancient syracuse . 
the show concluded that a more likely effect of the mirrors would have been blinding ,  dazzling ,  or distracting the crew of the ship . 
he proposed a number system using powers of a myriad of myriads  -lrb-  100 million  -rrb-  and concluded that the number of grains of sand required to fill the universe would be 8 vigintillion ,  or 8.
 ''mythbusters '' also pointed out that conventional weaponry ,  such as flaming arrows or bolts from a catapult ,  would have been a far easier way of setting a ship on fire at short distances . 
in `` the sand reckoner '' ,  archimedes set out to calculate the number of grains of sand that the universe could contain . 
the standard versions of the life of archimedes were written long after his death by the historians of ancient rome . 
if the first term in this series is the area of the triangle ,  then the second is the sum of the areas of two triangles whose bases are the two smaller secant lines ,  and so on . 
the world's first seagoing steamship with a screw propeller was the ss `` archimedes '' ,  which was launched in 1839 and named in honor of archimedes and his work on the screw . 
he referred to conon of samos as his friend ,  while two of his works  -lrb-  `` the method of mechanical theorems '' and the `` cattle problem ''  -rrb-  have introductions addressed to eratosthenes . 
this may include use of known toxic substances ,  such as use of the poison lead in traditional chinese medicine . 
alternative therapies may be credited for perceived improvement through placebo effects ,  decreased use or effect of medical treatment  -lrb-  and therefore either decreased side effects; or nocebo effects towards standard treatment  -rrb-  ,  or the natural course of the condition or disease . 
in 1999, 7.7% of us hospitals reported using some form of cam therapy; this proportion had risen to 37.7% by 2008.
use of standard-of-care treatment in addition to an alternative technique being tested may produce confounded or difficult-to-interpret results . 
complementary medicine  -lrb-  cm  -rrb-  or integrative medicine  -lrb-  im  -rrb-  is when alternative medicine is used together with functional medical treatment ,  in a belief that it improves the effect of treatments . 
however ,  the cam review used the more developed 2004 cochrane database ,  while the conventional review used the initial 1998 cochrane database . 
none of these energies have any evidence to support that they effect the body in any positive or health promoting way . 
by 2001 some form of cam training was being offered by at least 75 out of 125 medical schools in the us . 
alternative or complementary medicine is dangerous because it may discourage people from getting the best possible treatment ,  and may lead to a false understanding of the body and of science . 
both terms refer to use of alternative medical treatments alongside conventional medicine ,  an example of which is use of acupuncture  -lrb-  sticking needles in the body to influence the flow of a supernatural energy  -rrb-  ,  along with using science-based medicine ,  in the belief that the acupuncture increases the effectiveness or `` complements '' the science-based medicine . 
the meaning of the term `` alternative '' in the expression `` alternative medicine '' ,  is not that it is an effective alternative to medical science ,  although some alternative medicine promoters may use the loose terminology to give the appearance of effectiveness . 
loose terminology may also be used to suggest meaning that a dichotomy exists when it does not ,  e . g .  ,  the use of the expressions `` western medicine '' and `` eastern medicine '' to suggest that the difference is a cultural difference between the asiatic east and the european west ,  rather than that the difference is between evidence-based medicine and treatments that do not work . 
similarly ,  the public information website maintained by the national health and medical research council  -lrb-  nhmrc  -rrb-  of the commonwealth of australia uses the acronym `` cam '' for a wide range of health care practices ,  therapies ,  procedures and devices not within the domain of conventional medicine . 
in `` general guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation of traditional medicine '' ,  published in 2000 by the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  ,  complementary and alternative medicine were defined as a broad set of health care practices that are not part of that country's own tradition and are not integrated into the dominant health care system . 
the danish national board of health's `` council for alternative medicine ''  -lrb-  sundhedsstyrelsens råd for alternativ behandling  -lrb-  srab  -rrb-   -rrb-  ,  an independent institution under the national board of health  -lrb-  danish: `` sundhedsstyrelsen ''  -rrb-  ,  uses the term `` alternative medicine '' for:
it was used to describe the traditional european practice of heroic medicine ,  but later continued to be used to describe anything that was not homeopathy . 
here the `` vertex configuration '' refers to the type of regular polygons that meet at any given vertex . 
in geometry ,  an archimedean solid is one of the 13 solids first enumerated by archimedes . 
for example ,  a vertex configuration of  -lrb-  4,6,8 -rrb- means that a square ,  hexagon ,  and octagon meet at a vertex  -lrb-  with the order taken to be clockwise around the vertex  -rrb-  . 
as faces ,  it has the two `` n ''-gonal bases and ,  connecting those bases ,  2 ''n '' isosceles triangles . 
in the case of a regular `` n ''-sided base ,  one usually considers the case where its copy is twisted by an angle  . 
it is found nowhere outside africa . 
game reserves have ,  however ,  been established in south africa ,  british central africa ,  british east africa ,  somaliland ,  etc .  ,  while measures for the protection of wild animals were laid down in an international convention signed in may 1900.
the vegetation of africa follows very closely the distribution of heat and moisture . 
the natural history of africa encompasses some of the well known megafauna of that continent . 
of the grasses of africa alfa is very abundant in the plateaus of the atlas range . 
s .  on the west coast . 
africa is thus mainly composed of two segments at right angles ,  the northern running from east to west ,  and the southern from north to south . 
asu has two radio stations . 
as of spring 2017, more than 25,000 students were enrolled through asu online . 
the rival to arizona state university is university of arizona . 
 ,  asu's libraries held 4.5 million volumes . 
in 2015, the thunderbird school of global management became the fifth asu campus ,  as the thunderbird school of global management at asu . 
asu's tempe campus is in downtown tempe ,  arizona ,  about east of downtown phoenix . 
arizona state university  -lrb-  commonly referred to as asu or arizona state  -rrb-  is a public metropolitan research university on four campuses across the phoenix metropolitan area ,  and four regional learning centers throughout arizona . 
asu enrolls 10,268 international students ,  14.3% of the total student population . 
associated students of arizona state university  -lrb-  asasu  -rrb-  is the student government at arizona state university . 
asu's school of sustainability was the first school in the united states to introduce degrees in the field of sustainability . 
the arizona board of regents governs arizona state university as well as the state's other public universities; university of arizona and northern arizona university . 
asu also offers courses and degrees through asu online and at the asu colleges at lake havasu city in western arizona ,  and offers regional learning programs in thatcher ,  yuma and tucson . 
students at these centers can choose from several asu degree and certificate programs . 
asu is also involved with nasa in the field of space exploration . 
the residence hall association  -lrb-  rha  -rrb-  of arizona state university is the student government for every asu student living on-campus . 
asu is one of the nation's most successful universities in terms of creating start-up companies through research . 
in 2016, mayo clinic and asu formed a new platform for health care education and research: the mayo clinic and arizona state university alliance for health care . 
arizona state university has produced over 400,000 alumni worldwide . 
the lantern walk is one of the oldest traditions at asu and dates back to 1917.
asu is also home to the sustainability consortium which was founded by jay golden in 2009.
 ,  asu was the top institution of higher education in the united states for solar generating capacity . 
the 16th asu president is michael m .  crow ,  who has served since july 1, 2002.
the arizona board of regents reports the asu facilities inventory totals more than 23 million gross square feet . 
nearly 600 asu scholar-athletes compete across 26 varsity-level sports . 
arizona state university has an active extracurricular involvement program . 
asu's academic programs are spread across four distinct campuses in the phoenix metropolitan area; however ,  unlike most multi-campus institutions ,  asu describes itself as `` one university in many places , ``  inferring there is `` not a system with separate campuses ,  and not one main campus with branch campuses . `` 
arizona state university offers undergraduate student housing on four metropolitan phoenix campuses  -lrb-  tempe ,  polytechnic ,  downtown phoenix ,  and west  -rrb-  ,  plus the asu colleges at lake havasu city . 
asu is a nasa designated national space-grant institute and a member of the universities research association . 
by the end of his nine-year tenure ,  asu had more than doubled enrollment ,  reporting 23,000 in 1969.
asu consistently ranks among the top 20 universities—without a traditional medical school—for research expenditures . 
in addition to pat tillman ,  asu has had many renowned athletes attend the school . 
the curriculum evolved over the years and the name was changed several times; the institution was also known as tempe normal school of arizona  -lrb-  1889–1903 -rrb- ,  tempe normal school  -lrb-  1903–1925 -rrb- ,  tempe state teachers college  -lrb-  1925–1929 -rrb- ,  arizona state teachers college  -lrb-  1929–1945 -rrb- ,  arizona state college  -lrb-  1945–1958 -rrb- and ,  by a 2–1 margin of the state's voters ,  arizona state university in 1958.
matthews also conceived of a self-supported summer session at the school at arizona state teachers college ,  a first for the school . 
asu sun devils hockey competed with ncaa division 1 schools for the first time in 2012, largely due to the success of the program . 
arizona state sun devils football was founded in 1896 under coach fred irish . 
by the late 1800s ,  22% of astoria's population was chinese . 
the city is served by the deepwater port of astoria . 
astoria was incorporated by the oregon legislative assembly on october 20, 1876.
astoria is a port city and the seat of clatsop county ,  oregon ,  united states . 
from 1921 to 1966, a ferry route across the columbia river connected astoria with pacific county ,  washington . 
the first u . s .  post office west of the rocky mountains was established in astoria in 1847 and official state incorporation in 1876.
the bridge completed u . s .  route 101 and linked astoria with washington on the opposite shore of the columbia ,  replacing the ferry service . 
the lewis and clark expedition spent the winter of 1805–1806 at fort clatsop ,  a small log structure south and west of modern-day astoria . 
it was a four-time winner of the charles roberts/origins award ,  winning `` best amateur adventure gaming magazine '' in 1984, `` best amateur game magazine '' in 1999, and `` best amateur game periodical '' in 2000 and 2001.
the 1992 role-playing game `` over the edge '' was inspired by discussions in `` a&e '' . 
in jarry's later work `` ubu roi '' ,  père heb would develop into ubu ,  one of the most monstrous and astonishing characters in french literature . 
alfred jarry  -lrb-  ; 8 september 1873 – 1 november 1907 -rrb- was a french symbolist writer who is best known for his play `` ubu roi ''  -lrb-  1896 -rrb- ,  a pataphysical work which depicts the bourgeoisie as the super-mediocre . 
with franc-nohain and claude terrasse he co-founded the théatre des pantins ,  which in 1898 was the site of marionette performances of `` ubu roi '' . 
the play brought fame to the 23-year-old jarry ,  and he immersed himself in the fiction he had created . 
at the time ,  only the dress rehearsal and opening night performance were held ,  and the play was not revived until after jarry's death . 
however ,  impetuous theater director aurélien-marie lugné-poe took the risk ,  producing the play at his théâtre de l'œuvre . 
on opening night  -lrb-  10 december 1896 -rrb- ,  with traditionalists and the avant-garde in the audience ,  king ubu  -lrb-  played by firmin gémier  -rrb-  stepped forward and intoned the opening word ,  `` merdre ! `` 
he was the father of three future rulers of jerusalem ,  sibylla ,  baldwin iv ,  and isabella i . 
now jerusalem was surrounded by hostile enemies . 
the capture of ascalon by baldwin iii made the conquest of egypt more feasible . 
amalric  -lrb-  ; ; 113611 july 1174 -rrb- was king of jerusalem from 1163, and count of jaffa and ascalon before his accession . 
meanwhile ,  nur ad-din sent shirkuh back to egypt as well ,  and upon his arrival amalric retreated . 
in january 1169 shirkuh had shawar assassinated . 
amalric returned to egypt in 1164 and besieged shirkuh in bilbeis until shirkuh retreated to damascus . 
through her children agnes would exert much influence in jerusalem for almost 20 years . 
al-adil ceded jaffa and ramleh to the kingdom of jerusalem and simplified the christian pilgrims' visits in jerusalem and nazareth . 
aimery's second wife ,  isabella i of jerusalem ,  was the only daughter of amalric i of jerusalem and maria komnene . 
saladin ,  the ayyubid sultan of egypt and syria ,  launched a campaign against the kingdom of jerusalem on 29 september 1183.
aimery supported his brother ,  guy ,  even after guy had lost his claim to the kingdom of jerusalem according to most barons of the realm ,  because of the death of sibylla and their two daughters . 
his six-year-old son ,  hugh i ,  succeeded him in cyprus; and his widow continued to rule the kingdom of jerusalem . 
aimery was first mentioned as constable of jerusalem on 24 february 1182.
runciman and other modern historians erroneously refer to him as amalric ii of jerusalem ,  because they confused his name with that of amalric `` i '' of jerusalem . 
after participating in a rebellion against henry ii of england in 1168, he went to the holy land and settled in the kingdom of jerusalem . 
aimery remained a loyal supporter of his brother even after guy had lost his claim to the kingdom of jerusalem with the death of sybilla and their two daughters in the autumn of 1190, according to most barons of the realm . 
guy of lusignan died in may 1194, and bequeathed cyprus to his elder brother ,  geoffrey . 
aimery's youngest brother ,  guy ,  married baldwin iv's widowed sister ,  sibylla ,  in april 1180.
the cypriot army fought for the kingdom of jerusalem during aimery's rule ,  but otherwise he administered his two realms separately . 
this work was later known to arab mathematicians such as alhazen . 
he is also said to have repaired the flood defenses at daras . 
absalon was born around 1128 near sorø ,  zealand . 
absalon was a close counsellor of valdemar ,  and chief promoter of the danish crusades against the wends . 
rügen was then subjected to absalon's bishopric of roskilde . 
absalon never neglected his ecclesiastical duties . 
absalon or axel  -lrb-  21 march 1201 -rrb- was a danish archbishop and statesman ,  who was the bishop of roskilde from 1158 to 1192 and archbishop of lund from 1178 until his death . 
absalon was interred at sorø abbey ,  and was succeeded as archbishop of lund by anders sunesen . 
at the council of clermont in 1095, adhemar showed great zeal for the crusade  -lrb-  there is evidence that urban ii had conferred with adhemar before the council  -rrb-  . 
adhemar most likely met pope urban ii ,  when in august 1095 pope urban the second visited puy . 
following this delay adhemar ,  eventually was able to regroup with the crusaders . 
alphonse or alfonso  -lrb-  11 november 122021 august 1271 -rrb- was the count of poitou from 1225 and count of toulouse  -lrb-  as alphonse ii  -rrb-  from 1249.
in 1252, on the death of his mother ,  blanche of castile ,  alphonse was joint regent with charles of anjou until the return of louis ix . 
since she was raymond's only child ,  they became rulers of toulouse at raymond's death in 1249.
as count of toulouse ,  he also governed the marquisate of provence . 
alfonso finally arrived at acre in 1148.
alfonso jordan  -lrb-    -rrb-   -lrb-  1103–1148 -rrb- was the count of tripoli  -lrb-  1105–09 -rrb- ,  count of rouergue  -lrb-  1109–48 -rrb- and count of toulouse ,  margrave of provence and duke of narbonne  -lrb-  1112–48, as alfons i  -rrb-  . 
alfonso's father died when he was two years old and he remained under the guardianship of his cousin ,  william jordan ,  count of cerdagne ,  until he was five . 
the poem is known to us only through one vatican manuscript ,  and long escaped the notice of historians . 
books 2–6 of the `` itinerarium regis ricardi '' ,  a latin prose narrative of the same events apparently compiled by richard ,  a canon of holy trinity ,  london ,  are closely related to ambroise's poem . 
the art deco style appeared early in the graphic arts ,  in the years just before world war i . 
the art style known as cubism appeared in france between 1907 and 1912, influencing the development of art deco . 
in the 1930s ,  during the great depression ,  the art deco style became more subdued . 
in the 21st century ,  modern variants of art deco ,  called neo art deco  -lrb-  or neo-art deco  -rrb-  ,  have appeared in some american cities ,  inspired by the classic art deco buildings of the 1920s and 1930s . 
art deco ,  sometimes referred to as deco ,  is a style of visual arts ,  architecture and design that first appeared in france just before world war i . 
art deco was not a single style ,  but a collection of different and sometimes contradictory styles . 
streamline was a variety of art deco which emerged during the mid-1930s . 
in decoration ,  many different styles were borrowed and used by art deco . 
the cubist style continued within art deco ,  even as deco branched out in many other directions . 
she painted portraits in a realistic ,  dynamic and colorful art deco style . 
the chrysler building and other skyscrapers of new york built during the 1920s and 1930s are monuments of the art deco style . 
ocean liners also adopted a style of art deco ,  known in french as the `` style paquebot '' ,  or `` ocean liner style '' . 
art deco buildings can be found throughout central america . 
in 1971, hillier organized an exhibition at the minneapolis institute of arts ,  which he details in his book about it ,  `` the world of art deco '' . 
wellington has retained a sizeable number of art deco buildings . 
in the 1930s a dramatic new form of art deco painting appeared in the united states . 
decoration in the art deco period went through several distinct phases . 
art deco took its name ,  short for `` arts décoratifs '' ,  from the exposition internationale des arts décoratifs et industriels modernes held in paris in 1925, though the diverse styles that characterize art deco had already appeared in paris and brussels before world war i . 
perret and sauvage became the leading art deco architects in paris in the 1920s . 
many early art deco sculptures were small ,  designed to decorate salons . 
art deco artists produced a wide variety of practical objects in the art deco style ,  made of industrial materials from traditional wrought iron to chrome-plated steel . 
art deco gained currency as a broadly applied stylistic label in 1968 when historian bevis hillier published the first major academic book on the style: `` art deco of the 20s and 30s '' . 
in many cities ,  efforts have been made to protect the remaining art deco buildings . 
many of the best surviving examples of art deco are movie theaters built in the 1920s and 1930s . 
art deco was a pastiche of many different styles ,  sometimes contradictory ,  united by a desire to be modern . 
like the art nouveau period before it ,  art deco was an exceptional period for fine glass and other decorative objects ,  designed to fit their architectural surroundings . 
between 1925 and 1928 he constructed the new art deco facade of the la samaritaine department store in paris . 
the base of the tower ,  thirty-three stories above the street ,  was decorated with colorful art deco friezes ,  and the lobby was decorated with art deco symbols and images expressing modernity . 
american skyscrapers marked the summit of the art deco style; they became the tallest and most recognizable modern buildings in the world . 
 -lrb-  for a comprehensive of existing buildings by country ,  see list of art deco architecture .   -rrb- 
throughout the art deco period ,  and particularly in the 1930s ,  the motifs of the decor expressed the function of the building . 
in the united states ,  art deco buildings are found from coast to coast ,  in all the major cities . 
the art deco style was not limited to buildings on land; the ocean liner ss `` normandie '' ,  whose first voyage was in 1935, featured art deco design ,  including a dining room whose ceiling and decoration were made of glass by lalique . 
spain and portugal have some striking examples of art deco buildings ,  particularly movie theaters . 
most art deco buildings in africa were built during european colonial rule ,  and often designed by italian and french architects . 
in the late 1930s ,  a new variety of art deco architecture became common; it was called streamline moderne or simply streamline ,  or ,  in france ,  the style paqueboat ,  or ocean liner style . 
ascii art was also used in early e-mail when images could not be embedded . 
 ''studies in perception i '' by ken knowlton and leon harmon from 1966 shows some examples of their early ascii art . 
some mergers found in most varieties of both american and british english include:
british english also differs from american english in that `` schedule '' can be pronounced with either sk or ʃ . 
compared with english as spoken in england ,  north american english is more homogeneous ,  and any north american accent that exhibits a majority of the most common phonological features is known as `` general american '' . 
the use of english in the united states is a result of english and british colonization of the americas . 
american english also favors the double quotation mark over single . 
american english  -lrb-  ame ,  ae ,  ameng ,  useng ,  en-us  -rrb-  ,  sometimes called united states english or u . s .  english ,  is the set of varieties of the english language native to the united states . 
american english has always shown a marked tendency to use nouns as verbs . 
american english and british english  -lrb-  bre  -rrb-  often differ at the levels of phonology ,  phonetics ,  vocabulary ,  and ,  to a much lesser extent ,  grammar and orthography . 
studies on historical usage of english in both the united states and the united kingdom suggest that spoken american english did not simply deviate away from period british english ,  but retained certain now-archaic features contemporary british english has since lost . 
the adjectives `` mad '' meaning `` angry '' ,  `` smart '' meaning `` intelligent '' ,  and `` sick '' meaning `` ill '' are also more frequent in american  -lrb-  and irish  -rrb-  english than british english . 
below ,  nine major american english regional accents are defined by their particular combinations of certain characteristics:
organizer of baseball's first round-the-world tour in 1888. ''
he also wrote the first set of official baseball rules . 
he died of a stroke on september 9, 1915, in san diego ,  one week after his 66th birthday . 
having played baseball throughout his youth ,  spalding first played competitively with the rockford pioneers ,  a youth team ,  which he joined in 1865.
after his retirement as a player ,  spalding remained active with the chicago white stockings as president and part-owner . 
in the months after signing for chicago ,  hulbert and spalding organized the national league by enlisting the two major teams in the east and the four other top teams in what was then considered to be the west ,  also known as the jungle . 
in 1886, with spalding as president of the franchise ,  the chicago white stockings  -lrb-  today's chicago cubs  -rrb-  ,  began holding spring training in hot springs ,  arkansas ,  which subsequently has been called the `` birthplace '' of spring training baseball . 
in 1876, spalding won 47 games as the prime pitcher for the white stockings and led them to win the first-ever national league pennant by a wide margin . 
the african alphabet was used ,  with the international phonetic alphabet ,  as a basis for the world orthography . 
it was one of the most popular games in the 1960s 3m bookshelf game series ,  and the only one still published in the united states . 
australian english is no exception . 
the wine–whine merger is complete in australian english . 
the primary way in which australian english is distinctive from other varieties of english is through its unique pronunciation . 
the vowels of australian english can be divided according to length . 
australian english  -lrb-  aue; en-au  -rrb-  is the set of varieties of the english language native to australia . 
in addition ,  a number of words in australian english have different meanings from those ascribed in other varieties of english . 
although australian english is relatively homogeneous ,  there are some regional variations . 
australian english began to diverge from british english after the first settlers ,  who set up the colony of new south wales ,  arrived in 1788.
there are numerous other examples ,  including `` biscuit '' which refers in australian and british english to what in american english is `` cookie '' or `` cracker '' but to a savoury cake in american english; `` asian '' ,  which in australian and american english commonly refers to people of east asian heritage ,  as opposed to british english ,  in which it commonly refers to people of south asian descent; and ``  -lrb-  potato  -rrb-  chips '' which refers both to british english `` crisps ''  -lrb-  which is not commonly used in australian english  -rrb-  and to american english `` french fries ''  -lrb-  which is used alongside `` hot chips ''  -rrb-  . 
australian english ,  in common with several british english dialects  -lrb-  for example ,  cockney ,  scouse ,  glaswegian and geordie  -rrb-  ,  uses the word `` mate '' . 
australian spelling is closer to british than american spelling . 
in addition ,  some australians speak creole languages derived from australian english ,  such as australian kriol ,  torres strait creole and norfuk . 
as with new zealand english ,  the weak-vowel merger is complete in australian english: unstressed is merged into  -lrb-  schwa  -rrb-  ,  unless it is followed by a velar consonant . 
australian english is non-rhotic; that is ,  the sound does not appear at the end of a syllable or immediately before a consonant . 
the earliest form of australian english was spoken by the children of the colonists in early new south wales . 
differences in stress ,  weak forms and standard pronunciation of isolated words occur between australian english and other forms of english ,  which while noticeable do not impair intelligibility . 
australian aboriginal english is made up of a range of forms which developed differently in different parts of australia ,  and are said to vary along a continuum ,  from forms close to standard australian english to more non-standard forms . 
academic research has shown that the most notable variation within australian english is largely sociocultural . 
like most dialects of english it is distinguished primarily by its vowel phonology . 
the hijackers on american airlines flight 77 were led by hani hanjour ,  who piloted the aircraft into the pentagon . 
in all ,  there were 189 deaths at the pentagon site ,  including the 125 in the pentagon building in addition to the 64 on board the aircraft . 
the american airlines flight 77 aircraft was a boeing 757-223  -lrb-  registration the aircraft was built and had its first flight in 1991.
he felt the impact from the crash at his home near the pentagon . 
the hijackers crashed the aircraft into the western side of the pentagon at 09:37 edt . 
during a press conference held inside the pentagon at 18:42, rumsfeld announced ,  `` the pentagon's functioning . 
according to the 9/11 commission report ,  as flight 77 was west-southwest of the pentagon ,  it made a 330-degree turn . 
they stayed with hanjour . 
on the side where the plane hit ,  the pentagon is bordered by interstate 395 and washington boulevard . 
approaching the pentagon ,  he saw the impact site on the building's west side and reported to reagan control ,  `` looks like that aircraft crashed into the pentagon ,  sir . `` 
debris from the pentagon was taken to the pentagon's north parking lot for more detailed search for remains and evidence . 
various pieces of aircraft debris were found within the wreckage at the pentagon . 
the 9/11 commission estimated that the flight was hijacked between 08:51 and 08:54, shortly after american airlines flight 11 struck the world trade center and not too long after united airlines flight 175 had been hijacked . 
the pentagon memorial ,  located just southwest of the pentagon in arlington county ,  virginia ,  is a permanent outdoor memorial to the 184 people who died as victims in the building and on american airlines flight 77 during the september 11 attacks . 
the site is located in section 64, on a slight rise ,  which gives it a view of the pentagon . 
at the moment of impact ,  secretary of defense donald rumsfeld was in his office on the other side of the pentagon ,  away from the crash site . 
flight 77 left the gate on time and took off from runway 30 at dulles at 08:20.
hanjour first came to the united states in 1990.
arab tribes during muhammad's era also used ambush tactics . 
the raid was unsuccessful . 
another famous ambush was that sprung by germanic warchief arminius against the romans at battle of the teutoburg forest . 
theoretically ,  a single well-armed and concealed soldier could ambush other troops in a surprise attack . 
the abzyme does more than bind to the site ,  it catalytically destroys the site ,  rendering the virus inert ,  and then can attack other hiv viruses . 
a single abzyme molecule can destroy thousands of hiv viruses . 
because this protein gp120 is necessary for hiv to attach ,  it does not change across different strains and is a point of vulnerability across the entire range of the hiv variant population . 
in evolutionary biology ,  adaptive radiation is a process in which organisms diversify rapidly from an ancestral species into a multitude of new forms ,  particularly when a change in the environment makes new resources available ,  creates new challenges ,  or opens new environmental niches . 
the concentration of gel affects the resolution of dna separation . 
the gels may also be used for blotting techniques . 
the movement of the dna may be affected by the conformation of the dna molecule ,  for example ,  supercoiled dna usually moves faster than relaxed dna because it is tightly coiled and hence more compact . 
once the gel has set ,  the comb is removed ,  leaving wells where dna samples can be loaded . 
the dna samples are loaded using a pipette . 
agarose gel electrophoresis can be used to resolve circular dna with different supercoiling topology . 
ethidium bromide which intercalates into circular dna can change the charge ,  length ,  as well as the superhelicity of the dna molecule ,  therefore its presence in gel during electrophoresis can affect its movement . 
dna damage due to increased cross-linking will also reduce electrophoretic dna migration in a dose-dependent way . 
the rate at which the various forms move however can change using different electrophoresis conditions ,  and the mobility of larger circular dna may be more strongly affected than linear dna by the pore size of the gel . 
agarose gel has large pore size and good gel strength ,  making it suitable as an anticonvection medium for the electrophoresis of dna and large protein molecules . 
the buffer used in the gel is the same as the running buffer in the electrophoresis tank ,  which is why electrophoresis in the submarine mode is possible with agarose gel . 
an allele  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a variant form of a given gene . 
a null allele is a gene variant that lacks the gene's normal function because it either is not expressed ,  or the expressed protein is inactive . 
if the alleles are different ,  they and the organism are heterozygous with respect to that gene . 
hence an individual with `` type a '' blood may be an ao heterozygote ,  an aa homozygote ,  or an aa heterozygote with two different `` a '' alleles .   -rrb- 
ampicillin is used to treat infections by many gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria . 
for iv and im injections ,  ampicillin is kept as a powder that must be reconstituted . 
in newborns ,  ampicillin has a longer half-life and lower plasma protein binding . 
when administered separately ,  aminoglycosides and ampicillin can potentiate each other instead . 
ampicillin used to also be used to treat gonorrhea ,  but there are now too many strains resistant to penicillins . 
bacteria with resistance to antibiotics predate medical use of antibiotics by humans . 
however ,  widespread antibiotic use has made more bacteria resistant through the process of evolutionary pressure . 
calls for new antibiotic therapies have been issued ,  but new drug development is becoming rarer . 
antigens are `` targeted '' by antibodies . 
antigen presenting cells present antigens in the form of peptides on histocompatibility molecules . 
in immunology ,  antigens  -lrb-  ag  -rrb-  are structures  -lrb-  aka substances  -rrb-  specifically bound by antibodies  -lrb-  ab  -rrb-  or a cell surface version of ab ~ b cell antigen receptor  -lrb-  bcr  -rrb-  . 
in most cases ,  an adapted antibody can only react to and bind one specific antigen; in some instances ,  however ,  antibodies may cross-react and bind more than one antigen . 
autosomes still contain sexual determination genes even though they are not sex chromosomes . 
unlike single gene disorders ,  diseases caused by aneuploidy are the result of improper gene dosage ,  not nonfunctional gene product . 
partial aneuploidy can also occur as a result of unbalanced translocations during meiosis . 
al-qaeda operates as a network of islamic extremists and salafist jihadists . 
following the death of bin laden in 2011, the group has been led by egyptian ayman al-zawahiri . 
al-qaeda has carried out many attacks on targets which it considers `` kafir '' . 
volta's remains were buried in camnago volta . 
volta retired in 1819 to his estate in camnago ,  a frazione of como ,  italy ,  now named `` camnago volta '' in his honour . 
this may be called volta's law of the electrochemical series . 
in honour of his work ,  volta was made a count by napoleon bonaparte in 1810.
in the years between 1776 and 1778, volta studied the chemistry of gases . 
the battery made by volta is credited as one of the first electrochemical cells . 
volta was raised as a catholic and for all of his life continued to maintain his belief . 
volta was born in como ,  a town in present-day northern italy ,  on 18 february 1745.
argo navis  -lrb-  the ship argo  -rrb-  ,  or simply argo ,  was a large constellation in the southern sky that has since been divided into the three constellations of carina ,  puppis and vela . 
the final breakup and abolition of argo navis was proposed by sir john herschel in 1841 and again in 1844.
argo navis was long-known to greek observers ,  who are believed to have derived it from egypt around 1000 bc . 
in greek mythology ,  andromeda was the daughter of cepheus and cassiopeia ,  king and queen of the african kingdom of aethiopia . 
in greek mythology ,  andromeda  -lrb-  ; greek: ἀνδρομέδα ,  `` androméda '' or ἀνδρομέδη ,  `` andromédē ''  -rrb-  is the daughter of the aethiopian king cepheus and his wife cassiopeia . 
andromeda was the daughter of the king and queen of aethiopia  -lrb-  αἰθιοπία  -rrb-  modern day ethiopia ; aethiopia roughly translates to `` country of burnt faces '' ,  so one might conclude that andromeda was black . 
andromeda is chained to a rock as a sacrifice to sate the monster ,  but is saved from death by perseus . 
after andromeda's death ,  as euripides had promised athena at the end of his `` andromeda '' ,  produced in 412 bc ,  the goddess placed her among the constellations in the northern sky ,  near perseus and cassiopeia; the constellation andromeda ,  so known since antiquity ,  is named after her . 
antlia is a faint constellation; its brightest star is alpha antliae ,  an orange giant that is a suspected variable star ,  ranging between apparent magnitudes 4.22 and 4.29.
hd 93083 is an orange dwarf star of spectral type k3v that is smaller and cooler than the sun . 
two star systems with known exoplanets ,  hd 93083 and wasp-66, lie within antlia ,  as do ngc 2997, a spiral galaxy ,  and the antlia dwarf galaxy . 
although visible to the ancient greeks ,  antlia's stars were too faint to have been included in any ancient constellations . 
lacaille gave nine stars bayer designations ,  labelling them alpha through to theta ,  combining two stars next to each other as zeta . 
just shading alpha arae ,  beta arae is the brightest star in the constellation . 
unlike most depictions ,  the smoke from blaeu's ara rises northward ,  represented by alpha arae . 
alpha arae is a blue-white main sequence star of magnitude 2.95, that is 270 ± 20 light-years from earth . 
the orange supergiant beta arae is the brightest star in the constellation ,  with an apparent magnitude of 2.85—marginally brighter than the blue-white alpha arae . 
delta arae is a blue-white main sequence star of spectral type b8vn and magnitude 3.6, 198 ± 4 light-years from earth . 
