as of 2012 80% of all fda approved drugs are available in generic form . 
hence ,  materials like polytetrafluoroethylene  -lrb-  teflon  -rrb-  are not ,  and cannot be ,  considered as fda approved ,  rather ,  they are `` fda compliant '' or `` fda acceptable '' . 
new drugs receive extensive scrutiny before fda approval in a process called a new drug application  -lrb-  nda  -rrb-  . 
the center for drug evaluation and research uses different requirements for the three main drug product types: new drugs ,  generic drugs ,  and over-the-counter drugs . 
the fda is led by the commissioner of food and drugs ,  appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate . 
the term off-label refers to drug usage for indications other than those approved by the fda . 
the fda does not approve applied coatings used in the food processing industry . 
the center for veterinary medicine  -lrb-  cvm  -rrb-  is the branch of the fda that regulates food additives and drugs that are given to animals . 
the fda has its headquarters in unincorporated white oak ,  maryland . 
cosmetics are regulated by the center for food safety and applied nutrition ,  the same branch of the fda that regulates food . 
in june 2018, the fda released a statement regarding new guidelines to help food and drug manufacturers `` implement protections against potential attacks on the u . s .  food supply '' . 
the fda was empowered by the united states congress to enforce the federal food ,  drug ,  and cosmetic act ,  which serves as the primary focus for the agency; the fda also enforces other laws ,  notably section 361 of the public health service act and associated regulations ,  many of which are not directly related to food or drugs . 
in 1989, a major scandal erupted involving the procedures used by the fda to approve generic drugs for sale to the public . 
the regulation of food and dietary supplements by the u . s .  food and drug administration is governed by various statutes enacted by the united states congress and interpreted by the fda . 
as of 2017, 3/4th of the fda budget  -lrb-  approximately $700 million  -rrb-  is funded by the pharmaceutical companies due to the prescription drug user fee act . 
after nda approval ,  the sponsor must review and report to the fda every patient adverse drug experience it learns of . 
the fda's federal budget request for fiscal year  -lrb-  fy  -rrb-  2012 totaled $4.36 billion ,  while the proposed 2014 budget is $4.7 billion . 
generic drugs are chemical equivalents of name-brand drugs whose patents have expired . 
the drug advertising regulation contains two broad requirements:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- a company may advertise or promote a drug only for the specific indication or medical use for which it was approved by fda . 
a subfield of a field `` l '' is a subset `` k '' of `` l '' that is a field with respect to the field operations inherited from `` l '' . 
for case #1, the painter paints  -lrb-  fills  -rrb-  the pixel the painter is standing upon and stops the algorithm . 
paint the pixel the painter is standing upon and move in the direction of the open path . 
if both are empty ,  then the current pixel can be painted and the painter can move following the right-hand rule . 
if the painter encounters the mark but is going in a different direction ,  then some sort of loop has occurred ,  which caused the painter to return to the mark . 
the mark is removed for future use . 
the algorithm trades time for memory . 
if we already created such a `` mark '' ,  then we preserve our previous mark and move to the next pixel following the right-hand rule . 
he is also considered the patron saint: against dying alone; patron saint against fire; patron saint of animal welfare societies; patron saint of animals; patron saint of assisi ,  italy; patron saint of birds; patron saint of catholic action; patron saint of colorado; patron saint of denver ,  colorado ,  archdiocese of; patron saint of ecologists; patron saint of ecology; patron saint of environment; patron saint of environmentalism; patron saint of environmentalists; patron saint of families; patron saint of franciscan order; patron saint of freising ,  germany; patron saint of italy; patron saint of kottapuram ,  india ,  diocese of; patron saint of lace makers; patron saint of lace workers; patron saint of lancaster ,  england ,  diocese of; patron saint of massa ,  italy; patron saint of merchants; patron saint of metuchen ,  new jersey ,  diocese of; patron saint of nambe indian pueblo; patron saint of needle workers; patron saint of peace; patron saint of quibdo ,  choco ,  colombia; patron saint of salina ,  kansas ,  diocese of; patron saint of san francisco ,  california ,  archdiocese of; patron saint of san pawl il-bahar ,  malta; patron saint of santa fe ,  new mexico; patron saint of santa fe ,  new mexico ,  archdiocese of; patron saint of sorbo ,  italy ; patron saint of tapestry workers; patron saint of zoos . 
the third order is now titled the secular franciscan order . 
saint francis' feast day is observed on october 4.
on july 16, 1228, he was pronounced a saint by pope gregory ix  -lrb-  the former cardinal ugolino di conti ,  friend of saint francis and cardinal protector of the order  -rrb-  . 
on june 18, 1939, pope pius xii named francis a joint patron saint of italy along with saint catherine of siena with the apostolic letter `` licet commissa '' . 
from then on ,  the new order grew quickly with new vocations . 
the evangelical church in germany ,  however ,  commemorates saint francis' feast day on his death day ,  october 3.
st .  francis is the patron of animals ,  merchants & ecology . 
at his first audience on 16 march 2013, pope francis told journalists that he had chosen the name in honor of saint francis of assisi ,  and had done so because he was especially concerned for the well-being of the poor . 
pope pius also mentioned the two saints in the laudative discourse he pronounced on may 5, 1949, in the church of santa maria sopra minerva . 
this became the first monastery of the second franciscan order ,  now known as poor clares . 
on 13 march 2013, upon his election as pope ,  archbishop and cardinal jorge mario bergoglio of argentina chose francis as his papal name in honor of saint francis of assisi ,  becoming pope francis . 
saint pope john paul ii concluded that section of the document with these words ,  `` it is my hope that the inspiration of saint francis will help us to keep ever alive a sense of 'fraternity' with all those good and beautiful things which almighty god has created . `` 
the turkish air force acquired its first f-16s in 1987.
on 18 june 1992, a greek mirage f-1 crashed during a dogfight with a turkish f-16.
the f-16 had been scheduled to remain in service with the u . s .  air force until 2025.
the royal netherlands air force ,  belgian air force ,  royal danish air force ,  royal norwegian air force ,  pakistan air force ,  and venezuela air force have flown the f-16 on combat missions . 
on 8 february 1995, a turkish f-16 crashed into the aegean after being intercepted by greek mirage f1 fighters . 
a turkish air force f-16 shot down a russian air force sukhoi su-24 on the turkey-syria border on 24 november 2015.
the u . s .  air force ,  including the air force reserve and the air national guard ,  flew the f-16 in combat during operation desert storm in 1991 and in the balkans later in the 1990s . 
in 2011, air force f-16s took part in the intervention in libya . 
in 1980, the first aircraft were delivered to the royal norwegian air force by sabca and to the royal danish air force by fokker . 
five days before the incident ,  a turkish f-16 pilot was doing dangerous maneuvers ,  while being intercepted by greek f-16 fighters ,  attempting to hit a greek fighter . 
israeli air force f-16s were credited with 44 air-to-air kills during the conflict . 
the f-16 is being used by the active duty usaf ,  air force reserve ,  and air national guard units ,  the usaf aerial demonstration team ,  the u . s .  air force thunderbirds ,  and as an adversary-aggressor aircraft by the united states navy at the naval strike and air warfare center . 
the f-16 is a single-engine ,  highly maneuverable ,  supersonic ,  multi-role tactical fighter aircraft . 
in 2014, the usaf issued a rfi to slep 300 f-16 c/ds . 
in addition to active duty in the u . s .  air force ,  air force reserve command ,  and air national guard units ,  the aircraft is also used by the usaf aerial demonstration team ,  the u . s .  air force thunderbirds ,  and as an adversary/aggressor aircraft by the united states navy . 
air force f-x proponents remained hostile to the concept because they perceived it as a threat to the f-15 program . 
on 23 may 2006, two greek f-16s intercepted a turkish rf-4 reconnaissance aircraft and two f-16 escorts off the coast of the greek island of karpathos ,  within the athens fir . 
however ,  due to delays in the f-35 program ,  all usaf f-16s will receive service life extension upgrades . 
the following year ,  during the 1982 lebanon war israeli f-16s engaged syrian aircraft in one of the largest air battles involving jet aircraft ,  which began on 9 june and continued for two more days . 
the f-16's weight was increased by 25% over the yf-16 by these modifications . 
f-16 models are denoted by increasing block numbers to denote upgrades . 
during the late 1980s and 1990s ,  turkish aerospace industries  -lrb-  tai  -rrb-  produced 232 block 30/40/50 f-16s on a production line in ankara under license for the turkish air force . 
during the soviet-afghan war between may 1986 and january 1989, pakistan air force f-16s shot down at least eight intruders from afghanistan . 
since peter ,  the bishop of alexandria ,  was not present ,  the presidency over the council was given to meletius as bishop of antioch . 
when meletius died shortly after the opening of the council ,  gregory was selected to lead the council . 
the first council of constantinople  -lrb-   commonly known as  ,  `` second ecumenical ''; or   -rrb-  was a council of christian bishops convened in constantinople in ad 381 by the roman emperor theodosius i . 
in the spring of 381 they convened the second ecumenical council in constantinople . 
the council of nicaea in 325 had not ended the arian controversy which it had been called to clarify . 
the egyptian and macedonian bishops who had supported maximus's ordination arrived late for the council . 
it met from may to july 381 in the church of hagia irene and was affirmed as ecumenical in 451 at the council of chalcedon . 
the fourth council of constantinople was held in 879–880.
it has been accepted by handful eastern orthodox as an eighth ecumenical council . 
at the time that these councils were being held ,  this division was not entirely apparent . 
however ,  photius enjoined the support of the emperor and responded by calling a council and excommunicating the pope . 
friedrich august von hayek was born in vienna to august von hayek and felicitas hayek  -lrb-  `` née '' von juraschek  -rrb-  . 
during this time ,  hayek also survived the 1918 flu pandemic . 
on his mother's side ,  hayek was second cousin to the philosopher ludwig wittgenstein . 
surname hayek is german spelling of czech surname hájek . 
hayek displayed an intellectual and academic bent from a very young age . 
hayek was appointed a companion of honour in 1984 for `` services to the study of economics '' . 
brooks joined ibm in 1956, working in poughkeepsie ,  new york and yorktown ,  new york . 
in addition to `` the mythical man-month '' ,  brooks is also known for the paper `` no silver bullet – essence and accident in software engineering '' . 
a few years after leaving ibm he wrote `` the mythical man-month '' being triggered to do so by thomas watson jr .  who asked him in his exit-interview why it is so much harder to manage software projects than hardware projects . 
the `` washington times '' described mailer's new word as referring to `` something that looks like a fact ,  could be a fact ,  but in fact is not a fact '' . 
a factoid is either a false statement presented as a fact or a true ,  but brief or trivial item of news or information . 
this new sense of a factoid as a trivial but interesting fact was popularized by the cnn headline news tv channel ,  which ,  during the 1980s and 1990s ,  often included such a fact under the heading `` factoid '' during newscasts . 
since its creation in 1973, the term has evolved ,  now often being used to describe a brief or trivial item of news or information . 
the phrase is often shortened to `` continuo '' ,  and the instrumentalists playing the continuo part are called the `` continuo group '' . 
here ,  the bass note is a c ,  and the numbers 4 and 6 indicate that notes a fourth and a sixth above it should be played ,  that is an f and an a . 
a part notated with figured bass consists of a bass line notated with notes on a musical staff plus added numbers and accidentals  -lrb-  or in some cases  -lrb-  back  -rrb- slashes added to a number  -rrb-  beneath the staff to indicate what intervals above the bass notes should be played ,  and therefore which inversions of which chords are to be played . 
figured bass is closely associated with basso continuo ,  a historically improvised accompaniment used in almost all genres of music in the baroque period of classical music  -lrb-  1600–1750 -rrb- ,  though rarely in modern music . 
figured bass ,  or thoroughbass ,  is a kind of musical notation in which numerals and symbols  -lrb-  often accidentals  -rrb-  indicate intervals ,  chords ,  and non-chord tones that a musician playing piano ,  harpsichord ,  organ ,  lute  -lrb-  or other instruments capable of playing chords  -rrb-  play in relation to the bass note that these numbers and symbols appear above or below . 
one can regard the system of sporting various fashions as a fashion language incorporating various fashion statements using a grammar of fashion . 
the terms `` fashionista '' and `` fashion victim '' refer to someone who slavishly follows current fashions . 
the fashion industry consists of four levels:
fashion trends change daily ,  it can not stay unchanged
the media plays a significant role when it comes to fashion . 
runway show is a reflection of fashion trend and a designer's thought . 
fashion relates to social and cultural context of an environment . 
videos in general have been very useful in promoting the fashion industry . 
this trend was called hippie and it is still affecting current fashion trend . 
although aspects of fashion can be feminine or masculine ,  some trends are androgynous . 
there has been great debate about politics' place in fashion and traditionally ,  the fashion industry has maintained a rather apolitical stance . 
specific fashion brands have been featured in film ,  not only as product placement opportunities ,  but as bespoke items that have subsequently led to trends in fashion . 
the notion of global fashion industry is a product of the modern age . 
not only did political events make a huge impact on fashion trends but also the political figure played a critical role in forecasting the fashion trend . 
the four major current fashion capitals are acknowledged to be paris ,  milan ,  new york city ,  and london ,  which are all headquarters to the greatest fashion companies and are renowned for their major influence on global fashion . 
but if one disapproves of a fashion ,  one can attempt to dismiss it as a mere fad . 
clothing is much more than fashion ,  it is a style of life an expression of ones self . 
moreover ,  political movement built an impressive relationship with fashion trend . 
one fashion cause is trashion ,  which is using trash to make clothes ,  jewelery ,  and other fashion items in order to promote awareness of pollution . 
at the beginning of the 20th century ,  fashion magazines began to include photographs of various fashion designs and became even more influential than in the past . 
military technology has played an important role in the fashion industry . 
through the capitalization and commoditisation of clothing ,  accessories ,  and shoes ,  etc .  ,  what once constituted anti-fashion becomes part of fashion as the lines between fashion and anti-fashion are blurred . 
furthermore ,  political revolution also made much impact on the fashion trend . 
high-flying trendsetters in fashion can aspire to the label `` haute couture '' . 
there is clearly a trend in the next 5 years that the domestic fashion market will show an increase . 
the decomposition process itself is called a fourier transformation . 
fourier transformation is also useful as a compact representation of a signal . 
fourier analysis grew from the study of fourier series ,  and is named after joseph fourier ,  who showed that representing a function as a sum of trigonometric functions greatly simplifies the study of heat transfer . 
the fat man was retired in 1950.
the feasibility of a plutonium bomb was questioned in 1942.
the mark iii fat man was retired in 1950.
the gun-type and implosion-type designs were codenamed `` thin man '' and `` fat man '' respectively . 
 ''fat man '' was the codename for the nuclear bomb that was detonated over the japanese city of nagasaki by the united states on 9 august 1945.
the early y-1222 model fat man was assembled with some 1,500 bolts . 
the mark iii mod 0 fat man was ordered into production in mid-1946.
after the war ,  two y-1561 fat man bombs were used in the operation `` crossroads '' nuclear tests at bikini atoll in the pacific . 
a nuclear strike would have been a formidable undertaking in the post-war 1940s due to the limitations of the mark iii fat man . 
the act prohibits:
the government recovered $38.9 billion under the false claims act between 1987 and 2013 and of this amount ,  $27.2 billion or 70% was from qui tam cases brought by relators . 
 ''qui tam '' laws have history dating back to the middle ages in england . 
the false claims act ,  also called the `` lincoln law '' is an american federal law that imposes liability on persons and companies  -lrb-  typically federal contractors  -rrb-  who defraud governmental programs . 
in 1996, marvel launched `` fantastic four 2099 '' . 
the fantastic four have been adapted into other media ,  including four animated series and four live-action films . 
in 2004, marvel launched `` ultimate fantastic four '' . 
as part of marvel now ! 
the release of `` the fantastic four '' #1  -lrb-  nov .  1961 -rrb- was an unexpected success . 
the fantastic four is a fictional superhero team appearing in american comic books published by marvel comics . 
the fantastic four's characterization was initially different from all other superheroes at the time . 
while there have been a number of lineup changes to the group ,  the four characters who debuted in `` fantastic four '' #1 remain the core and most frequent lineup . 
in 2008, marvel also launched `` marvel adventures: fantastic four '' ,  an out-of-continuity series aimed at younger readers . 
simonson ,  who had been writing the team comic `` the avengers '' ,  had gotten approval for reed and sue to join that team after engelhart had written them out of `` fantastic four '' . 
in the graphic novel `` fantastic four: season one '' ,  the fantastic four is given an updated origin story set in the present day instead of the 1960s . 
despite their bickering ,  the fantastic four consistently prove themselves to be `` a cohesive and formidable team in times of crisis . `` 
sue richards' pregnancy was announced in `` fantastic four annual '' #5  -lrb-  1967 -rrb- ,  and the richards' son ,  franklin richards was born in `` fantastic four annual '' #6  -lrb-  1968 -rrb- in a story which introduced annihilus as well . 
in november 2011, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the fantastic four and of marvel comics ,  the company published the 100-page `` fantastic four '' #600  -lrb-  cover-dated jan .  2012 -rrb- ,  which returned the title to its original numbering and featured the return of the human torch . 
a new volume for the fantastic four was released in august 2018, written by dan slott ,  as part of marvel's fresh start event . 
writers and artists over many years have created a variety of characters to challenge the fantastic four . 
with issue #16  -lrb-  july 1963 -rrb- ,  the cover title dropped its `` the '' and became simply `` fantastic four '' . 
marvel filed for a trademark for `` fantastic four '' in 1967 and the united states patent and trademark office issued the registration in 1970.
the fantastic four was the first superhero team created by editor/co-plotter stan lee and artist/co-plotter jack kirby ,  who developed a collaborative approach to creating comics with this title that they would use from then on . 
the fantastic four is formed after four civilian astronauts are exposed to cosmic rays during an unauthorized outer space test flight in an experimental rocket ship designed by dr .  reed richards . 
filtration is any of various mechanical ,  physical or biological operations that separate solids from fluids  -lrb-  liquids or gases  -rrb-  by adding a medium through which only the fluid can pass . 
ben confides to sally that his life is empty . 
the younger ben and buddy softly call to their `` girls upstairs '' ,  and the follies end . 
buddy warns phyllis that sally is still in love with ben ,  and she is shaken by how the past threatens to repeat itself . 
phyllis begins wondering at her younger self ,  who worked so hard to become the socialite that ben needed . 
as the guests reminisce ,  the stories of ben ,  phyllis ,  buddy and sally unfold . 
amidst a deafening discord ,  ben screams at all the figures from his past and collapses as he cries out for phyllis . 
there are several distinct grammatical frameworks that employ a functional approach . 
in one  -lrb-  spatial  -rrb-  dimension ,  the law is:
prior to the colonial era ,  `` far east '' referred to anything further east than the middle east . 
the far east is a geographical term in english that usually refers to east asia  -lrb-  including northeast asia  -rrb-  ,  the russian far east  -lrb-  part of north asia  -rrb-  ,  and southeast asia . 
 ''far east '' in its usual sense is comparable to terms such as `` the orient '' ,  which means east; the `` eastern world ''; or simply the `` east '' . 
sybil fawlty ,  played by prunella scales ,  is basil's wife . 
much of the time ,  basil is an unfortunate victim of circumstance . 
like manuel ,  she has a room of her own at the hotel . 
when interacting with manuel ,  basil displays a rudimentary ability with spanish  -lrb-  basil states that he `` learned classical spanish ,  not the strange dialect he manuel seems to have picked up ''  -rrb- ; this ability also is ridiculed ,  as in the first episode in which a guest ,  whom basil has immediately dismissed as working-class ,  communicates fluently with manuel in spanish after basil is unable to do so . 
the guests at the hotel typically are comic foils to basil's anger and outbursts . 
the show was broadcast on 30 may 1971.
basil usually turns to manuel or polly to help him with his schemes ,  while trying his best to keep sybil from discovering them . 
the second album ,  titled `` second sitting '' ,  was released in 1981 and contained audio from `` basil the rat ''  -lrb-  as `` the rat ''  -rrb-  and `` the builders '' . 
manuel's exaggerated spanish accent is part of the humour of the show . 
basil longs for a touch of class ,  sometimes by playing recordings of classical music . 
he is intimidated by his wife sybil fawlty . 
in `` the anniversary '' she snaps and refuses to help basil out when he wants her to impersonate sybil in the semi-darkness of her bedroom in front of the fawltys' friends ,  basil having dug himself into a hole by claiming sybil was ill instead of admitting she had stormed out earlier in annoyance with him . 
as such ,  basil's efforts tend to be counter-productive ,  with guests leaving the hotel in disgust and his marriage  -lrb-  and sanity  -rrb-  stretching to breaking point . 
in the 2008 gala performance `` we are most amused , ``  cleese breaks into character as basil for a cameo appearance by sachs as an elderly manuel . 
he is released just in time to go back on the plane with sybil . 
prunella scales speculated in an interview for `` the complete fawlty towers '' dvd box set that sybil married basil because his origins were of a higher social class than hers . 
at the end of some episodes ,  basil succeeds in annoying  -lrb-  or at least bemusing  -rrb-  the guests and frequently gets his comeuppance . 
the character of sybil was used by permission of john cleese . 
basil fawlty ,  played by john cleese ,  is a cynical and snobbish misanthrope who is desperate to belong to a higher social class . 
in australia ,  the show originally was broadcast on abc television ,  the first series in 1976 and the second series in 1980.
despite her part-time employment  -lrb-  during meal times  -rrb-  ,  polly frequently is saddled with many other duties ,  including manager in `` the germans '' when sybil and basil are incapacitated . 
the series focuses on the exploits and misadventures of short-fused hotelier basil fawlty and his acerbic wife sybil ,  as well as their employees: porter and waiter manuel ,  maid polly sherman ,  and ,  in the second series ,  chef terry . 
in 2016, cleese reprised his role as basil in a series of tv adverts for high street optician chain specsavers . 
the italian word `` confetti ''  -lrb-  sugared almonds  -rrb-  has acquired a new meaning in english ,  french and dutch; in italian ,  the corresponding word is `` coriandoli '' . 
the danish word `` frokost '' means lunch ,  the norwegian word `` frokost '' means breakfast . 
pseudo-anglicisms are new words formed from english morphemes independently from an analogous english construct and with a different intended meaning . 
english and japanese also have diverse false friends ,  many of them being `` wasei-eigo '' and `` gairaigo '' words . 
an example is the english `` embarrassed '' and the spanish `` embarazada ''  -lrb-  which means `` pregnant ''  -rrb-  ,  or the word `` sensible '' ,  which means `` reasonable '' in english ,  but `` sensitive '' in french and spanish . 
english and spanish ,  both of which have borrowed from greek and latin ,  have multiple false friends . 
 ''actualise ''  -lrb-  or 'actualize'  -rrb-  in english means 'to make a reality of' . 
even though false cognates lack a common root ,  there may still be an indirect connection between them  -lrb-  for example by phono-semantic matching or folk etymology  -rrb-  . 
investors can use one or both of these complementary methods for stock picking . 
there are two basic methodologies investors rely upon when the objective of the analysis is to determine what stock to buy and at what price ,  :
frasier hosts `` the dr .  frasier crane show '' ,  a call-in psychiatry show on talk radio station kacl . 
frasier and the others often visit the local coffee shop ,  café nervosa . 
a new fgu website appeared in july 2006 offering the company's back catalog . 
in 1991, fantasy games unlimited inc .  was dissolved as a new york corporation . 
where formula_4 is some other function . 
where formula_10 is some other function . 
for a multivariate function formula_1, functional decomposition generally refers to a process of identifying a set of functions formula_2 such that
thus ,  for example ,  if we can obtain a decomposition of formula_11 into a hierarchical composition of functions formula_12 such that formula_13, formula_14, formula_15, as shown in the figure at right ,  this would probably be considered a highly valuable decomposition . 
moreover ,  interventions to influence formula_36 can be taken directly on formula_39, and nothing additional can be gained by intervening on variables formula_44, since these only act through formula_39 in any case . 
this process is intrinsically hierarchical in the sense that we can  -lrb-  and often do  -rrb-  seek to further decompose the functions formula_7 into a collection of constituent functions formula_8such that
a basic example of functional decomposition is expressing the four binary arithmetic operations of addition ,  subtraction ,  multiplication ,  and division in terms of the two binary operations of addition formula_16 and multiplication formula_17 and the two unary operations of additive inversion formula_18 and multiplicative inversion formula_19 subtraction can then be realized as the composition of addition and additive inversion ,  formula_20 and division can be realized as the composition of multiplication and multiplicative inverse ,  formula_21 this simplifies the analysis of subtraction and division ,  and also makes it easier to axiomatize these operations in the notion of a field ,  as there are only two binary and two unary operations ,  rather than four binary operations . 
he resigned in 1905, never to work for a museum again . 
this view resonated with boas's experiences on baffin island and drew him towards anthropology . 
some scholars ,  like boas's student alfred kroeber ,  believed that boas used his research in physics as a model for his work in anthropology . 
boas's interest in indigenous communities grew as he worked at the royal ethnological museum in berlin ,  where he was introduced to members of the nuxalk nation of british columbia ,  which sparked a lifelong relationship with the first nations of the pacific northwest . 
boas lived and worked closely with the inuit peoples on baffin island ,  and he developed an abiding interest in the way people lived . 
while on baffin island he began to develop his interest in studying non-western cultures  -lrb-  resulting in his book ,  `` the central eskimo '' ,  published in 1888 -rrb- . 
historians working in the humboldtian tradition developed ideas that would become central in boasian anthropology . 
although context and history were essential elements to boas's understanding of anthropology as `` geisteswissenschaften '' and `` geschichtswissenschaften '' ,  there is one essential element that boasian anthropology shares with `` naturwissenschaften '': empiricism . 
in 1949, boas's student ,  alfred kroeber summed up the three principles of empiricism that define boasian anthropology as a science:
humboldt founded the university of berlin in 1809, and his work in geography ,  history ,  and psychology provided the milieu in which boas's intellectual orientation matured . 
although kant considered these two interests of reason to be objective and universal ,  the distinction between the natural and human sciences was institutionalized in germany ,  through the organization of scholarly research and teaching ,  following the enlightenment . 
many others ,  however—including boas's student alexander lesser ,  and later researchers such as marian w .  smith ,  herbert s .  lewis ,  and matti bunzl—have pointed out that boas explicitly rejected physics in favor of history as a model for his anthropological research . 
in gymnasium ,  he was most proud of his research on the geographic distribution of plants . 
 -lrb-  winkelband's student heinrich rickert elaborated on this distinction in `` the limits of concept formation in natural science : a logical introduction to the historical sciences ''; boas's students alfred kroeber and edward sapir relied extensively on this work in defining their own approach to anthropology .   -rrb- 
after a short residence at göttingen ,  bopp gained ,  on the recommendation of humboldt ,  appointment to the chair of sanskrit and comparative grammar at berlin in 1821, which he occupied for the rest of his life . 
in the library ,  bopp had access not only to the rich collection of sanskrit manuscripts  -lrb-  mostly brought from india by jean françois pons in the early 18th century  -rrb-  ,  but also to the sanskrit books that had been issued from the calcutta and serampore presses . 
his chief activity ,  however ,  centered on the elaboration of his `` comparative grammar '' ,  which appeared in six parts at considerable intervals  -lrb-  berlin ,  1833, 1835, 1842, 1847, 1849, 1852 -rrb- ,  under the title `` vergleichende grammatik des sanskrit ,  zend ,  griechischen ,  lateinischen ,  litthauischen ,  altslawischen ,  gotischen und deutschen ''  -lrb-  `` comparative grammar of sanskrit ,  zend avestan ,  greek ,  latin ,  lithuanian ,  old slavonic ,  gothic and german ''  -rrb-  . 
in 1827, he published his `` ausführliches lehrgebäude der sanskritsprache ''  -lrb-  `` detailed system of the sanskrit language ''  -rrb-  ,  on which he had worked since 1821.
it was the last of kubrick's films to be released during his lifetime . 
kubrick's daughter vivian kubrick ,  under the alias `` abigail mead '' ,  wrote the film's score . 
the film also omits the death of the character rafterman . 
kubrick contacted michael herr ,  author of the vietnam war memoir `` dispatches ''  -lrb-  1977 -rrb- ,  in the spring of 1980 to discuss working on a film about the holocaust ,  but he eventually discarded that in favor of a film about the vietnam war . 
canby concluded: `` full metal jacket '' was `` a film of immense and very rare imagination '' . 
kubrick's daughter vivian—who appears uncredited as a news-camera operator at the mass grave—shadowed the filming of `` full metal jacket . `` 
for film continuity ,  each recruit had to have his head shaved once a week . 
it did not go well ,  and hasford did not meet with kubrick again . 
the film was released on blu-ray on october 23, 2007, in the us and other countries . 
full metal jacket is a 1987 war film directed ,  co-written ,  and produced by stanley kubrick and starring matthew modine ,  r .  lee ermey ,  vincent d'onofrio and adam baldwin . 
herr says the director was not interested in making an anti-war film ,  but `` he wanted to show what war is like '' . 
over the next four weeks the film opened in a further 194 theaters to its widest release of 1,075 theaters before closing two weeks later with a total gross of $46,357,676, making it the number 23 highest-grossing film of 1987.  ,  the film had grossed $120 million worldwide , 
jim hall ,  writing for film4 in 2010, awarded the film 5 out of 5 stars and added to the praise for ermey ,  saying his `` performance as the foul-mouthed hartman is justly celebrated and it's difficult to imagine the film working anything like as effectively without him '' . 
of the five awards won ,  four were awarded to kubrick . 
the film omits the book's showing his eventual domination over animal mother . 
 ''full metal jacket '' received critical acclaim and an academy award nomination for best adapted screenplay for kubrick ,  herr ,  and hasford . 
during filming ,  hasford contemplated taking legal action over the writing credits . 
the film often has a more tragic tone than the book ,  which relies on callous humor . 
this use was highly popular during the 19th and early 20th centuries . 
in order to bond and/or to express sexual interest ,  people flirt . 
the origin of the word `` flirt '' is obscure . 
the word `` fleurette '' was used in the 16th century in some sonnets ,  and some other texts . 
flirting or coquetry is a social and sexual behavior involving verbal or written communication ,  as well as body language ,  by one person to another ,  either to suggest interest in a deeper relationship with the other person ,  or if done playfully ,  for amusement . 
in southern france ,  some usage were yet used in 1484, in french ,  some other words more or less related are derived from the word fleur: for instance `` effleurer ''  -lrb-  english: lightly touch  -rrb-  from 13th century `` esflourée ''; `` déflorer ''  -lrb-  english: deflower  -rrb-  from 13th century `` desflorer '' or  -lrb-  fleuret  -lrb-  english foil  -rrb-  18th century  -rrb-  . 
schaffner was president of the directors guild of america from 1987 until his death in 1989.
franklin james schaffner  -lrb-  may 30, 1920july 2, 1989 -rrb- was an american film director . 
schaffner died on july 2, 1989, at the age of 69.
schaffner married helen jane gilchrist in 1948.
on one occasion ,  the use of the word `` niggardly '' led to the resignation of a us public official because it sounded similar to the unrelated word `` nigger '' . 
an urban legend has it that the phrase refers to an old english law under which a man could legally beat his wife with a stick no thicker than his thumb . 
in the united states ,  some of these scandalous legends have had to do with racism and slavery; common words such as `` picnic '' ,  `` buck '' ,  and `` crowbar '' have been alleged to stem from derogatory terms or racist practices . 
fossil remains of true finches are rare ,  and those that are known can mostly be assigned to extant genera at least . 
the subfamily carduelinae includes 18 extinct hawaiian honeycreepers and the extinct bonin grosbeak . 
the finches have a near-global distribution ,  being found across the americas ,  eurasia and africa ,  as well as some island groups such as the hawaiian islands . 
the true finches are small to medium-sized passerine birds in the family fringillidae . 
an unidentifable finch fossil from the messinian age ,  around 12 to 7.3 million years ago  -lrb-  ma  -rrb-  during the late miocene subepoch ,  has been found at polgárdi in hungary . 
oxygen binds with red blood cells in the blood stream . 
bind to and diffuse along the dna contour and not in the cytosol . 
carbon monoxide has a facilitated diffusion process similar to that of oxygen . 
the form of transport through a cell membrane in which a metabolite is modified is called group translocation transportation . 
these initial aircraft carried the hughes aircraft  -lrb-  now raytheon  -rrb-  apg-63 radar . 
the f-15 was favored by customers such as the israel and japan air arms . 
the largest operator of the f-15 is the united states air force . 
all f-15 aircraft were grounded by the usaf after a missouri air national guard f-15c came apart in flight and crashed on 2 november 2007.
over half of f-15 kills have been achieved by israeli air force pilots . 
the usaf introduced the f-15 as `` the first dedicated usaf air-superiority fighter since the north american f-86 sabre '' . 
when the proposals were studied in july 1966, the aircraft were roughly the size and weight of the tfx f-111, and like that aircraft ,  were designs that could not be considered an air-superiority fighter . 
the f-15 can trace its origins to the early vietnam war ,  when the u . s .  air force and the u . s .  navy fought each other over future tactical aircraft . 
a variety of air-to-air weaponry can be carried by the f-15.
the apg-63-lrb- v  -rrb- 2 active electronically scanned array  -lrb-  aesa  -rrb-  radar has been retrofitted to 18 u . s .  air force f-15c aircraft . 
in 1979, mcdonnell douglas and f-15 radar manufacturer ,  hughes ,  teamed to privately develop a strike fighter version of the f-15.
the first kill by an f-15 was scored by israeli air force ace moshe melnik in 1979.
as part of this policy ,  the usaf and navy had embarked on the tfx  -lrb-  f-111 -rrb- program ,  aiming to deliver a medium-range interdiction aircraft for the air force that would also serve as a long-range interceptor aircraft for the navy . 
more than 400 f-15cs and f-15es will have the system installed . 
this point was reinforced after the loss of two republic f-105 thunderchief aircraft to obsolete mig-15s or mig-17s on 4 april 1965.
the f-15 has a combined air-to-air combat record of 104 kills to no losses  . 
meanwhile ,  the air force chose the a-7 over the f-5 for the support role on 5 november 1965, giving further impetus for an air superiority design as the a-7 lacked any credible air-to-air capability . 
acc also recommended release of other u . s .  f-15a/b/c/d aircraft . 
royal saudi air force f-15c pilots reportedly shot down two iranian air force f-4e phantom iis in a skirmish on 5 june 1984.
the mcdonnell douglas f-15 eagle is an american twin-engined ,  all-weather tactical fighter aircraft designed by mcdonnell douglas  -lrb-  now boeing  -rrb-  to gain and maintain air supremacy in all aspects of aerial combat . 
the final variant of the f-14 was the f-14d super tomcat . 
some of the f-14a aircraft underwent engine upgrades to the ge f110-400 in 1987.
while the f-14 had been developed as a lightweight alternative to the f-111b ,  the f-14 was still the heaviest and most expensive fighter of its time . 
it was designed to improve on the f-4 phantom's air combat performance in most respects . 
the grumman f-14 tomcat is an american supersonic ,  twin-engine ,  two-seat ,  twin-tail ,  variable-sweep wing fighter aircraft . 
while upgrades had kept the f-14 competitive with modern fighter aircraft technology ,  cheney called the f-14 1960s technology . 
iran had an estimated 44 f-14s in 2009 according to combat aircraft . 
over 160 of the u . s .  aircraft were destroyed in accidents . 
the f-14 first flew on 21 december 1970 and made its first deployment in 1974 with the u . s .  navy aboard  ,  replacing the mcdonnell douglas f-4 phantom ii . 
the f-14 was the first of the american teen series fighters ,  which were designed incorporating air combat experience against mig fighters during the vietnam war . 
on 26 january 2012, an iranian f-14 crashed three minutes after takeoff . 
the f-14 received its first of many major upgrades in march 1987 with the f-14a plus  -lrb-  or f-14a+  -rrb-  . 
the f-14 was also fitted with an internal 20 mm m61 vulcan gatling-type cannon . 
the tactical airborne reconnaissance pod system  -lrb-  tarps  -rrb-  was developed in the late 1970s for the f-14.
the first `` f-14b '' was to be an improved version of the f-14a with more powerful `` advanced technology engine '' f401 turbofans . 
the f-14 tomcat was designed as both an air superiority fighter and a long-range naval interceptor ,  which enabled it to both serve as escort attack aircraft when armed with sparrow missiles and fleet air defense loitering interceptor role when armed with phoenix missiles . 
the f-14 also achieved its final kill in us service ,  a mi-8 `` hip '' helicopter ,  with an aim-9 sidewinder . 
the last two f-14 squadrons ,  the vf-31 tomcatters ,  and the vf-213 black lions conducted their last fly-in at naval air station oceana on 10 march 2006.
a total of 712 f-14s were built from 1969 to 1991.
in the 1990s ,  with the pending retirement of the a-6 intruder ,  the f-14 air-to-ground program was resurrected . 
the f-14 began replacing the f-4 phantom ii in u . s .  navy service starting in september 1974 with squadrons vf-1 `` wolfpack '' and vf-2 `` bounty hunters '' aboard and participated in the american withdrawal from saigon . 
the f-14's fuselage and wings allow it to climb faster than the f-4, while the twin-tail arrangement offers better stability . 
the f-117 has a radar cross-section of about  . 
some of the aircraft are flown periodically . 
one f-117  -lrb-  af ser . 
the operational aircraft was officially designated `` f-117a '' . 
the u . s .  air force retired the f-117 in 2008, primarily due to the fielding of the f-22 raptor . 
the f-117 has been used several times in war . 
the f-117a program demonstrates that a stealth aircraft can be designed for reliability and maintainability . `` 
each of the 558 air force pilots who have flown the f-117 has a bandit number ,  such as `` bandit 52 '' ,  that indicates the sequential order of their first flight in the f-117.
the nighthawk was the first operational aircraft to be designed around stealth technology . 
the f-117 was based on the `` have blue '' technology demonstrator . 
this was unimportant in the case of this aircraft since it was designed to be a bomber . 
in late 2006, the air force closed the f-117 formal training unit  -lrb-  ftu  -rrb-  ,  and announced the retirement of the f-117.
five aircraft were placed in museums ,  including the first four yf-117as and some remains of the f-117 shot down over serbia . 
with the last aircraft retired ,  the 410th was inactivated in a ceremony on 1 august 2008.
the vought f4u corsair is an american fighter aircraft that saw service primarily in world war ii and the korean war . 
corsair deployment aboard u . s .  carriers was delayed until late 1944, by which time the last of the carrier landing problems ,  relating to the corsair's long nose ,  had been tackled by the british . 
 -lrb-  these corsairs’ wings could still be manually folded .   -rrb- 
the corsair's aerodynamics were an advance over those of contemporary naval fighters . 
at the time ,  the u . s .  navy also had the grumman f6f hellcat ,  which did not have the performance of the f4u ,  but was a better deck landing aircraft . 
the corsair bore the brunt of u . s .  fighter-bomber missions ,  delivering of bombs during the war  -lrb-  70% of total bombs dropped by u . s .  fighters during the war  -rrb-  . 
the corsair was not considered fit for carrier use until the wing stall problems and the deck bounce could be solved . 
the performance of the corsair was superior to most of its contemporaries . 
at war's end ,  corsairs were ashore on okinawa ,  combating the `` kamikaze '' ,  and also were flying from fleet and escort carriers . 
u . s .  figures compiled at the end of the war indicate that the f4u and fg flew 64,051 operational sorties for the u . s .  marines and u . s .  navy through the conflict  -lrb-  44% of total fighter sorties  -rrb-  ,  with only 9,581 sorties  -lrb-  15%  -rrb-  flown from carrier decks . 
its 1942-53 production run was the longest of any u . s .  piston-engined fighter . 
from the first prototype delivery to the u . s .  navy in 1940, to final delivery in 1953 to the french ,  12,571 f4u corsairs were manufactured in 16 separate models . 
the increasing need for fighter protection against `` kamikaze '' attacks resulted in more corsair units being moved to carriers . 
the films `` the heineken kidnapping ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- and `` kidnapping freddy heineken ''  -lrb-  2015 -rrb- are based on this incident . 
heineken was born on 4 november 1923 in amsterdam in the netherlands . 
a film of the kidnapping `` de heineken ontvoering '' ,  with rutger hauer playing freddy heineken ,  was released in october 2011.
the series was staged as the formula 3000 european championship in 1985, as the formula 3000 intercontinental championship in 1986 and 1987 and then as the formula 3000 international championship from 1988 to 2004.
formula 3000 replaced formula two ,  and was so named because the engines used were limited to 3000cc maximum capacity . 
the formula 3000 international championship was a motor racing series created by the fédération internationale de l'automobile  -lrb-  fia  -rrb-  in 1985 to become the final preparatory step for drivers hoping to enter the formula one championship . 
three past f3000 champions  -lrb-  müller ,  junqueira and wirdheim  -rrb-  have never been entered in an f1 race . 
three past f3000 champions have won an f1 grand prix: alesi ,  panis and montoya  -lrb-  who also won the indy 500 -rrb- . 
flunitrazepam is classed as a nitro-benzodiazepine . 
flunitrazepam impairs cognitive functions . 
flunitrazepam is a drug that is frequently involved in drug intoxication ,  including overdose . 
it was concluded that flunitrazepam and nitrazepam might be more toxic than other benzodiazepines . 
flunitrazepam produces a decrease in delta wave activity . 
flunitrazepam as with other benzodiazepines can lead to drug dependence and benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome . 
flunitrazepam is a schedule iii drug under the international convention on psychotropic substances of 1971.
flunitrazepam has a long half-life of 18–26 hours ,  which means that flunitrazepam's effects after nighttime administration persist throughout the next day . 
extreme caution should be exercised by drivers after taking flunitrazepam . 
in studies in sweden ,  flunitrazepam was the second most common drug used in suicides ,  being found in about 16% of cases . 
the first fuel cells were invented in 1838.
the fuel cell he made used similar materials to today's phosphoric-acid fuel cell . 
design features in a fuel cell include:
fuel cells can produce electricity continuously for as long as fuel and oxygen are supplied . 
in addition to this pure hydrogen type ,  there are hydrocarbon fuels for fuel cells ,  including diesel ,  methanol  -lrb-  `` see: '' direct-methanol fuel cells and indirect methanol fuel cells  -rrb-  and chemical hydrides . 
a fuel cell is an electrochemical cell that converts the potential energy from a fuel into electricity through an electrochemical reaction of hydrogen fuel with oxygen or another oxidizing agent . 
the term means `` to become like finland '' referring to the influence of the soviet union on finland's policies during the cold war . 
finland signed an agreement of friendship ,  cooperation ,  and mutual assistance with the soviet union in april 1948, under which finland was obliged to resist armed attacks by `` germany or its allies '' against finland ,  or against the soviet union through finland ,  and ,  if necessary ,  ask for soviet military aid to do so . 
only after the ascent of mikhail gorbachev to soviet leadership in 1985 did mass media in finland gradually begin to criticise the soviet union more . 
the reason finland engaged in finlandization was primarily realpolitik: to survive . 
later ,  after the fall of the soviet union ,  the term has been used in finland for the post-1968 radicalisation in the latter half of the urho kekkonen era . 
after the paris peace treaty of 1947, finland succeeded in retaining democracy and parliamentarism ,  despite the heavy political pressure on finland's foreign and internal affairs by the soviet union . 
in october 1967, singer wrote an article for `` the washington post '' from the perspective of 2007.
the public debates in which singer has received most criticism have been about second-hand smoke and global warming . 
singer was one of the first scientists to urge the launching of earth satellites for scientific observation during the 1950s . 
in a 2003 letter to the `` financial times '' ,  singer wrote that `` there is no convincing evidence that the global climate is actually warming . `` 
singer wrote the `` leipzig declaration on global climate change in the u . s . ``  in 1995, updating it in 1997 to rebut the kyoto protocol . 
in 1990 singer set up the science & environmental policy project  -lrb-  sepp  -rrb-  to argue against preventive measures against global warming . 
singer has had a varied career ,  serving in the armed forces ,  government ,  and academia . 
 ''time '' magazine wrote in 1969 that singer had had a lifelong fascination with phobos and mars's second moon ,  deimos . 
in a january 1960 presentation to the american physical society ,  singer sketched out his vision of what the environment around the earth might consist of ,  extending up to into space . 
singer was born in vienna ,  austria ,  to a jewish family ,  where his father was a jeweler and his mother a homemaker . 
in november 1957 singer and other scientists at the university successfully designed and fired three new `` oriole '' rockets off the virginia capes . 
siegfried fred singer  -lrb-  born september 27, 1924 -rrb- is an austrian-born american physicist and emeritus professor of environmental science at the university of virginia . 
according to david biello and john pavlus in `` scientific american '' ,  singer is best known for his denial of the health risks of passive smoking . 
singer moved back to the united states in 1953, where he took up an associate professorship in physics at the university of maryland ,  and at the same time served as the director of the center for atmospheric and space physics . 
pohl was married five times . 
pohl won the hugo award for best fan writer in 2010, for his blog ,  `` the way the future blogs '' . 
the family settled in brooklyn when pohl was around seven . 
pohl was the son of frederik  -lrb-  originally friedrich  -rrb-  george pohl  -lrb-  a salesman of germanic descent  -rrb-  and anna jane mason . 
pohl began writing in the late 1930s ,  using pseudonyms for most of his early works . 
in the 1970s ,  pohl re-emerged as a novel writer in his own right ,  with books such as `` man plus '' and the `` heechee '' series . 
pohl's work has been an influence on a wide variety of other science fiction writers ,  some of whom appear in the 2010 anthology ,  `` gateways: original new stories inspired by frederik pohl '' ,  edited by elizabeth anne hull . 
in the mid-1970s ,  pohl acquired and edited novels for bantam books ,  published as `` frederik pohl selections ''; these included samuel r .  delany's `` dhalgren '' and joanna russ's `` the female man '' . 
after world war ii ,  pohl worked as an advertising copywriter and then as a copywriter and book editor for `` popular science '' . 
from 1984 until his death ,  pohl was married to science-fiction expert and academic elizabeth anne hull . 
ackerman had one sibling ,  a younger brother ,  alden lorraine ackerman ,  who was killed at the battle of the bulge . 
ackerman was born forrest james ackerman  -lrb-  though he would refer to himself from the early 1930s on as `` forrest j ackerman '' with no period after the middle initial  -rrb-  ,  on november 24, 1916, in los angeles ,  to carroll cridland  -lrb-  née wyman; 1883–1977 -rrb- and william schilling ackerman  -lrb-  1892–1951 -rrb- . 
in 2003, ackerman said ,  `` i aim at hitting 100 and becoming the george burns of science fiction '' . 
they had no children of their own by choice ,  but wahrman did have a son by an earlier marriage ,  michael porges ,  who did not get along with ackerman and would not live in ackerman's home . 
in 2007, roadhouse films of canada released a documentary ,  `` famous monster: forrest j ackerman '' . 
during his career as a literary agent ,  ackerman represented such science fiction authors as ray bradbury ,  isaac asimov ,  a . e . 
ackerman is interred at forest lawn memorial park  -lrb-  glendale  -rrb-  with his wife . 
in the 1960s ,  ackerman organized the publication of an english translation in the u . s .  of the german science fiction series `` perry rhodan '' ,  the longest-running science fiction series in history . 
ackerman appeared extensively on-screen discussing his life and the history of science fiction fandom in the 2006 documentary film `` finding the future '' . 
in 1961, ackerman narrated the record `` music for robots '' created by frank allison coe . 
ackerman was a board member of the seattle science fiction museum and hall of fame ,  where many items of his collection are now displayed . 
in 2013, the science fiction author jason v brock released a feature-length documentary about ackerman called `` the ackermonster chronicles ! 
in the era of silent film ,  the earliest fantasy films were those made by french film pioneer georges méliès from 1903.
what follows are some notable fantasy films . 
disney's 1951 animated film `` alice in wonderland '' is also a fantasy classic . 
for a more complete list see: list of fantasy films
fantasy films have a history almost as old as the medium itself . 
films with live action and animation such as disney's `` mary poppins '' ,  `` pete's dragon '' ,  `` enchanted '' ,  and the robert zemeckis film `` who framed roger rabbit '' are also fantasy films although are more often referred to as live action/animation hybrids  -lrb-  2 of those are also classified as musicals  -rrb-  . 
fantasy films often have an element of magic ,  myth ,  wonder ,  escapism ,  and the extraordinary . 
fantasy films set in the afterlife ,  called bangsian fantasy ,  are less common ,  although films such as the 1991 albert brooks comedy `` defending your life '' would likely qualify . 
high fantasy films tend to feature a more richly developed fantasy world ,  and may also be more character-oriented or thematically complex . 
 ''highlander '' ,  a film about immortal scottish swordsmen ,  was released the same year . 
the 1940s then saw several full-color fantasy films produced by alexander korda ,  including `` the thief of bagdad ''  -lrb-  1940 -rrb- ,  a film on par with `` the wizard of oz '' ,  and `` jungle book ''  -lrb-  1942 -rrb- . 
as noted above ,  superhero movies and fairy tale films might each be considered subgenres of fantasy films ,  although most would classify them as altogether separate movie genres . 
that is ,  the power set of a finite set is finite ,  with cardinality 2.
all finite sets are countable ,  but not all countable sets are finite . 
for example ,  the set {5,6,7} is a 3-set – a finite set with three elements – and {6,7} is a 2-subset of it . 
in mathematics ,  a finite set is a set that has a finite number of elements . 
any subset of a finite set is finite . 
the free semilattice over a finite set is the set of its non-empty subsets ,  with the join operation being given by set union . 
the set of values of a function when applied to elements of a finite set is finite . 
in zf set theory without the axiom of choice ,  the following concepts of finiteness for a set `` s '' are distinct . 
georg cantor initiated his theory of sets in order to provide a mathematical treatment of infinite sets . 
tolkien dedicated `` farmer giles of ham '' to cyril hackett wilkinson  -lrb-  1888-1960 -rrb- ,  a don he knew at oxford university . 
farmer giles of ham is a comic medieval fable written by j .  r .  r .  tolkien in 1937 and published in 1949.
farmer giles  -lrb-  `` ægidius ahenobarbus julius agricola de hammo '' ,  `` giles bronze-beard julius farmer of ham ''  -rrb-  is not a hero . 
tolkien insists ,  tongue in cheek ,  that the village of thame originally referred to the tame dragon housed in it ,  and that `` tame with an h is a folly without warrant . `` 
named to honor 1965 nobel prize winner in physics ,  richard feynman ,  the foresight institute feynman prize in nanotechnology was started in 1993, with two prizes being awarded for theory and experimentation every year since 1997.
the feynman prize in nanotechnology is an award given by the foresight institute for significant advances in nanotechnology . 
in may 2005, the foresight institute changed its name to `` foresight nanotech institute '' . 
in 2004, x-prize foundation founder peter diamandis was selected to chair the feynman grand prize committee . 
though some are just living at the water margins ,  still ,  they can live in the completely submerged habitat . 
the taxonomy of most plant genera is not final . 
fonni  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a town and `` comune '' in sardinia ,  in the province of nuoro  -lrb-  italy  -rrb-  . 
the unmarried girls wear white kerchiefs ,  the married women black . 
the fasces typically appeared in a context reminiscent of the roman republic and of the roman empire . 
numerous governments and other authorities have used the image of the `` fasces '' as a symbol of power since the end of the roman empire . 
while it is used widely by french officials ,  this symbol never was officially adopted by the government . 
another part of the symbolism developed in republican rome was the inclusion of just a single-headed axe in the fasces ,  with the blade projecting from the bundle . 
it also has been used to hearken back to the roman republic ,  particularly by those who see themselves as modern-day successors to the old republic or its ideals . 
the `` fasces lictoriae ''  -lrb-  `` bundles of the lictors ''  -rrb-  symbolised power and authority  -lrb-  `` imperium ''  -rrb-  in ancient rome ,  beginning with the early roman kingdom and continuing through the republican and imperial periods . 
italian fascism ,  which derives its name from the `` fasces '' ,  arguably used this symbolism the most in the twentieth century . 
the four ships of the were 53,000 tons at full load ,  796 feet overall length ,  and carried two boeing vertol ch-46 sea knight helicopters . 
while fasa corporation still manages the fasa ip and brands ,  fasa games ,  inc .  has announced its intention to develop new games under the fasa banner . 
fasa games inc .  works alongside ral partha europe ,  also a subsidiary of fasa corporation ,  to bring out new editions of existing properties such as earthdawn and demonworld ,  and to develop new properties within the fasa cosmology . 
when microsoft acquired the fasa interactive subsidiary ,  babcock went with that company . 
microsoft officially closed the fasa team in the company's gaming division on september 12, 2007.
