codd introduced the concept of normalization and what is now known as the first normal form  -lrb-  1nf  -rrb-  in 1970.
the objectives of normalization beyond 1nf  -lrb-  first normal form  -rrb-  were stated as follows by codd:
codd went on to define the second normal form  -lrb-  2nf  -rrb-  and third normal form  -lrb-  3nf  -rrb-  in 1971, and codd and raymond f .  boyce defined the boyce-codd normal form  -lrb-  bcnf  -rrb-  in 1974.
a basic objective of the first normal form defined by codd in 1970 was to permit data to be queried and manipulated using a `` universal data sub-language '' grounded in first-order logic . 
database normalization is the process of structuring a relational database in accordance with a series of so-called normal forms in order to reduce data redundancy and improve data integrity . 
as of the year 2000, the order desmothoracida contained five genera with a total of 10 species . 
the student union building serves as the main student activity centre . 
the student body of dalhousie is currently represented by two student unions; the dalhousie student union ,  which represents the general student population ,  and the dalhousie association for graduate students ,  which represents the interests of graduate students specifically . 
canadian students may apply for financial aid such as the nova scotia student assistance program and canada student loans and grants through the federal and provincial governments . 
dalhousie has three campuses within the halifax peninsula and a fourth ,  the agricultural campus ,  in bible hill ,  nova scotia . 
dalhousie has a number of athletic facilities open to varsity teams and students . 
in addition to the efforts made by the dalhousie student union  -lrb-  dsu  -rrb-  council ,  dalhousie students have created and participated in over 320 clubs/societies . 
they operate as non-accredited organizations and are not recognized by the dalhousie student union . 
the university's student population operates a number of media outlets . 
dalhousie university  -lrb-  commonly known as dal  -rrb-  is a public research university in nova scotia ,  canada ,  with three campuses in halifax ,  a fourth in bible hill ,  and medical teaching facilities in saint john ,  new brunswick . 
in terms of research performance ,  high impact universities 2010 ranked dalhousie 239th out of 500 universities ,  and 12th in canada . 
dalhousie was founded as the lieutenant governor of nova scotia george ramsay ,  9th earl of dalhousie desired a non-denominational college in halifax . 
heeact had also ranked dalhousie 86th in the world and fourth nationally for research performance in geoscience in its 2010 rankings . 
on 1 september 2012 the nova scotia agricultural college merged into dalhousie to form a new faculty of agriculture ,  located in bible hill ,  nova scotia . 
a number of student societies are also active in sustainability issues from on-campus gardening and food security to environmental law . 
in 2011, the secondary school average for incoming first-year undergraduate students was 85 percent . 
dalhousie is a coeducational university with more than 18,000 students and 130,000 alumni from within canada and from european cities such as lille ,  the hague and liverpool . 
in 2008, the college of sustainability ,  the office of sustainability ,  and the dalhousie student union sustainability office were formed . 
the first woman appointed to the supreme court of canada ,  bertha wilson ,  was a graduate from dalhousie law school . 
of mass transport mechanisms ,  molecular diffusion is known as a slower one . 
diffusion is part of the transport phenomena . 
in a phase with uniform temperature ,  absent external net forces acting on the particles ,  the diffusion process will eventually result in complete mixing . 
consider ,  for example ,  the forms of the noun `` girl '':
in modern english ,  the system of declensions is very simple compared to some other languages ,  so much so that the term `` declension '' is rarely applied to english in practice . 
the dragon 32 and dragon 64 are home computers that were built in the 1980s . 
as a result of these limitations ,  the dragon was not a commercial success ,  and dragon data collapsed in june 1984.
the dragon was also unable to display lower-case letters easily . 
a broad range of peripherals exist for the dragon 32/64, and on top of this there are add-ons such as the dragon's claw which give the dragons access to the bbc micro's large range of accessories  -lrb-  a particularly important factor in the uk home market  -rrb-  . 
the dragon is built around the motorola mc6809e processor running at 0.89 mhz . 
although both dark matter and ordinary matter are matter ,  they do not behave in the same way . 
the constituents of cold dark matter are unknown . 
the hypothesis of dark matter has an elaborate history . 
in particular ,  there is a lot of non-luminous matter  -lrb-  dark matter  -rrb-  in the outskirts of the galaxy . 
no known particles can be categorized as warm dark matter . 
thus ,  dark matter constitutes 85% of total mass ,  while dark energy plus dark matter constitute 95% of total mass–energy content . 
thus ,  observed neutrinos cannot explain dark matter . 
mention of dark matter is made in works of fiction . 
none-the-less research and theories proposing that dense dark matter account for dark matter continue as of 2018, including approaches to dark matter cooling ,  and the question remains unsettled . 
dark matter can be divided into `` cold '' ,  `` warm '' ,  and `` hot '' categories . 
dark matter is a hypothetical form of matter that is thought to account for approximately 85% of the matter in the universe ,  and about a quarter of its total energy density . 
dark matter provides a solution to this problem because it is unaffected by radiation . 
generally ,  these three methods are in reasonable agreement that dark matter outweighs visible matter by approximately 5 to 1.
however ,  zwicky did correctly infer that the bulk of the matter was dark . 
there are various hypotheses about what dark matter could consist of ,  as set out in the table below . 
cold dark matter offers the simplest explanation for most cosmological observations . 
because dark matter remains to be conclusively identified ,  many other hypotheses have emerged aiming to explain the observational phenomena that dark matter was conceived to explain . 
dark matter can refer to any substance that interacts predominantly via gravity with visible matter  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  stars and planets  -rrb-  . 
warm dark matter comprises particles with an fsl comparable to the size of a protogalaxy . 
this is the focus for dark matter research ,  as hot dark matter does not seem capable of supporting galaxy or galaxy cluster formation ,  and most particle candidates slowed early . 
an alternative approach to the detection of dark matter particles in nature is to produce them in a laboratory . 
directional dark matter experiments include dmtpc ,  drift ,  newage and mimac . 
the first peak mostly shows the density of baryonic matter ,  while the third peak relates mostly to the density of dark matter ,  measuring the density of matter and the density of atoms . 
such descriptions are often inconsistent with the hypothesized properties of dark matter in physics and cosmology . 
because dark matter has not yet been observed directly ,  if it exists ,  it must barely interact with ordinary baryonic matter and radiation ,  except through gravity . 
mixtures of the above are also possible: a theory of mixed dark matter was popular in the mid-1990s ,  but was rejected following the discovery of dark energy . 
hot dark matter consists of particles whose fsl is much larger than the size of a protogalaxy . 
however ,  multiple lines of evidence suggest the majority of dark matter is not made of baryons:
currently there has been no well-established claim of dark matter detection from a direct detection experiment ,  leading instead to strong upper limits on the mass and interaction cross section with nucleons of such dark matter particles . 
ducati motor holding s . p . a .  is the motorcycle-manufacturing division of italian company ducati ,  headquartered in bologna ,  italy . 
by 1954, ducati meccanica spa had increased production to 120 bikes a day . 
in 1926 antonio cavalieri ducati and his three sons ,  adriano ,  marcello ,  and bruno cavalieri ducati founded `` società scientifica radio brevetti ducati '' in bologna to produce vacuum tubes ,  condensers and other radio components . 
took 0.33 μs ,  mul 2.2 μs ,  div 3.19 μs ,  isz 1.32 μs ,  fad 5.17 μs ,  fmmd 11.66 μs . 
the nova 1200 executed core memory access instructions  -lrb-  lda and sta  -rrb-  in 2.55 microseconds  -lrb-  μs  -rrb-  . 
several orthodox reformed and liberal churches did not merge into the new church . 
the polity of the protestant church in the netherlands is a hybrid of presbyterian and congregationalist church governance . 
it was founded 1 may 2004 as the merger of the vast majority of dutch reformed church ,  the vast majority of the reformed churches in the netherlands and the evangelical lutheran church in the kingdom of the netherlands . 
it is estimated that the christian church numbered about 12,000 by 1830.
the name ,  disciples of christ ,  is shared by three other groups ,  the churches of christ ,  the independent christian churches and churches of christ ,  and the christian congregation . 
under the design ,  all churches in the 1968 yearbook of christian churches  -lrb-  disciples of christ  -rrb-  were automatically recognized as part of the christian church  -lrb-  disciples of christ  -rrb-  . 
many of those congregations became part of the christian churches and churches of christ . 
it is often referred to as the christian church ,  the disciples of christ ,  or as the disciples . 
this became one important factor leading to the separation of the churches of christ from the christian church  -lrb-  disciples of christ  -rrb-  . 
by mid century ,  the cooperative christian churches and the independent christian churches were following different paths . 
after the division ,  disciples churches used `` christian church '' as the dominant designation for congregations . 
at the general church level ,  the council on christian unity coordinates the ecumenical activities of the church . 
the regional churches of the christian church provide resources for leadership development and opportunities for christian fellowship beyond the local congregation . 
congregations of the christian church are self-governing in the tradition of congregational polity . 
the christian church  -lrb-  disciples of christ  -rrb-  is a protestant christian denomination in the united states in the reformed tradition with historical ties to the restoration movement . 
the christian church was a charter participant in the formation of the world council of churches  -lrb-  wcc  -rrb-  and of the federal council of churches  -lrb-  now the national council of churches  -rrb-  ,  and it continues to be engaged in ecumenical conversations . 
as an integral part of worship in most christian church  -lrb-  disciples of christ  -rrb-  congregations members celebrate the lord's supper . 
these different congregations  -lrb-  disciples of christ ,  church of christ ,  and independent church  -rrb-  share many of the same beliefs and practices but there are ,  in fact ,  some differences . 
atchison was elected to the missouri house of representatives in 1834.
atchison's senate term expired on march 3, 1855.
atchison was admitted to the kentucky bar in 1829.
atchison continued to serve through the end of 1861.
atchison was born to william atchison in frogtown  -lrb-  later kirklevington  -rrb-  ,  which is now part of lexington ,  kentucky . 
atchison was very popular with his fellow senate democrats . 
naturally ,  his suggested route went through atchison . 
atchison continued as president pro tempore until december 1854.
atchison and a .  w .  doniphan would fall out over the politics preceding the civil war and on which direction missouri should proceed . 
during the secession crisis in missouri at the beginning of the american civil war ,  atchison sided with missouri's pro-confederate governor ,  claiborne jackson . 
atchison's men had made it a crime to publish anti-slavery newspapers in kansas . 
according to fahrenheit's 1724 article ,  he determined his scale by reference to three fixed points of temperature . 
fahrenheit came up with the idea that mercury boils around 300 degrees on this temperature scale . 
it is because of the scale's redefinition that normal body temperature today is taken as 98.6 degrees ,  whereas it was 96 degrees on fahrenheit's original scale . 
it is a 32-bit processor with 32-bit internal and external address bus  -lrb-  24-bit external address bus for ez and vz variants  -rrb-  and 32-bit data bus . 
it was extended to 33 mhz ,  5.4 mips for the dragonball vz  -lrb-  mc68vz328 -rrb- model ,  and 66 mhz ,  10.8 mips for the dragonball super vz  -lrb-  mc68sz328 -rrb- . 
if one illuminates two parallel slits ,  the light from the two slits again interferes . 
where λ is the wavelength of the light . 
where d is the distance between the two slits . 
diffraction explains the pattern as being the result of the interference of light waves from the slit . 
the difference in phase between the two waves is determined by the difference in the distance travelled by the two waves . 
in the double-slit experiment ,  the two slits are illuminated by a single laser beam . 
the path difference between two waves travelling at an angle is given by:
much of the behaviour of light can be modelled using classical wave theory . 
the total intensity of the far-field double-slit pattern is shown to be reduced or enhanced as a function of the wavelength of the incident light beam . 
it was shown experimentally in 1972 that in a double-slit system where only one slit was open at any time ,  interference was nonetheless observed provided the path difference was such that the detected photon could have come from either slit . 
the experimental conditions were such that the photon density in the system was much less than unity . 
in 1967, pfleegor and mandel demonstrated two-source interference using two separate lasers as light sources . 
electrons were fired by an electron gun and passed through one or two slits of 62 nm wide × 4 μm tall . 
daniel singer `` dan '' bricklin  -lrb-  born 16 july 1951 -rrb- ,  often referred to as “the father of the spreadsheet” ,  is the american co-creator ,  with bob frankston ,  of the visicalc spreadsheet program . 
the new generation dect  -lrb-  ng-dect  -rrb-  standard was first published in 2007; it was developed by etsi with guidance from the home gateway initiative through the dect forum . 
the dect ultra low energy  -lrb-  dect ule  -rrb-  standard was announced in january 2011 and the first commercial products were launched later that year by dialog semiconductor . 
the dect standard was developed by etsi in several phases ,  the first of which took place between 1988 and 1992 when the first round of standards were published . 
dect was originally intended for fast roaming between networked base stations and the first dect product was net wireless lan . 
 ''new generation dect ''  -lrb-  ng-dect  -rrb-  standard ,  marketed as cat-iq by the dect forum ,  provides a common set of advanced capabilities for handsets and base stations . 
donn is said to dwell in tech duinn  -lrb-  the `` house of donn '' or `` house of the dark one ''  -rrb-  . 
in irish mythology ,  donn  -lrb-  `` the dark one '' ,  from   -rrb-  is an ancestor of the gaels and is believed to have been a god of the dead . 
folklore about donn survived into the early modern era . 
data compression ratio is defined as the ratio between the `` uncompressed size '' and `` compressed size '':
when the uncompressed data rate is known ,  the compression ratio can be inferred from the compressed data rate . 
for signals of indefinite size ,  such as streaming audio and video ,  the compression ratio is defined in terms of uncompressed and compressed data rates instead of data sizes:
club djs ,  commonly referred as djs in general ,  play music at musical events ,  such as parties at music venues or bars ,  music festivals ,  corporate and private events . 
the title `` dj '' is also commonly used by djs in front of their real names or adopted pseudonyms or stage names as a title to denote their profession  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  dj jazzy jeff ,  dj qbert ,  dj shadow and dj yoda  -rrb-  . 
turntablists ,  also called battle djs ,  use turntables and dj mixer to manipulate recorded sounds in order to produce new music . 
djs use equipment that can play at least two sources of recorded music simultaneously and mix them together . 
detroit has a mexican-american population . 
the `` detroit city code '' is the codification of detroit's local ordinances . 
in 2001, 103,000 jews ,  or about 1.9% of the population ,  were living in the detroit area ,  in both detroit and ann arbor . 
detroit's lowest elevation is along the detroit river ,  at a surface height of  . 
detroit has a variety of neighborhood types . 
detroit is mentioned as a city of renaissance . 
belle isle park is a island park in the detroit river ,  between detroit and windsor ,  ontario . 
about half of all murders in michigan in 2015 occurred in detroit . 
the detroit salt mine run by the detroit salt company has over of roads within . 
detroit has struggled with high crime for decades . 
beginning with its incorporation in 1802, detroit has had a total of 74 mayors . 
from 1805 to 1847, detroit was the capital of michigan  -lrb-  first the territory ,  then the state  -rrb-  . 
detroit's courts are state-administered and elections are nonpartisan . 
an important civic sculpture in detroit is `` the spirit of detroit '' by marshall fredericks at the coleman young municipal center . 
the detroit tigers have won four world series titles . 
detroit is cited as the birthplace of techno music in the early 1980s . 
known as the world's automotive center ,  `` detroit '' is a metonym for that industry . 
nearly half of detroit's adults are functionally illiterate . 
two new downtown stadiums for the detroit tigers and detroit lions opened in 2000 and 2002, respectively ,  returning the lions to the city proper . 
the `` detroit free press '' and `` the detroit news '' are the major daily newspapers ,  both broadsheet publications published together under a joint operating agreement called the detroit newspaper partnership . 
the city provides law enforcement through the detroit police department and emergency services through the detroit fire department . 
detroit is the principal city in metro detroit and southeast michigan situated in the midwestern united states and the great lakes region . 
detroit is served by various private schools ,  as well as parochial roman catholic schools operated by the archdiocese of detroit . 
as of 2002 there are four areas in detroit with significant asian and asian american populations . 
detroit is home to the only floating post office in the united states . 
detroit metropolitan wayne county airport  -lrb-  dtw  -rrb-  ,  the principal airport serving detroit ,  is located in nearby romulus . 
detroit was finally recaptured by the united states later that year . 
the city proceeded with a major reorganization of the detroit police department . 
the graystone international jazz museum documents jazz in detroit . 
detroit is a major port located on the detroit river ,  one of the four major straits that connect the great lakes system to the saint lawrence seaway . 
by 2000 troy had the largest asian american population in the tricounty area ,  surpassing detroit . 
the shift of population and jobs eroded detroit's tax base . 
the gasoline crises of 1973 and 1979 also affected detroit and the u . s .  auto industry . 
among the city's prominent structures are united states' largest fox theatre ,  the detroit opera house ,  and the detroit institute of arts . 
detroit remains one of the most racially segregated cities in the united states . 
there are three active major sports venues in the city: comerica park  -lrb-  home of the major league baseball team detroit tigers  -rrb-  ,  ford field  -lrb-  home of the nfl's detroit lions  -rrb-  ,  and little caesars arena  -lrb-  home of the nhl's detroit red wings and the nba's detroit pistons  -rrb-  . 
detroit's 713,777 residents represent 269,445 households ,  and 162,924 families residing in the city . 
detroit is best known as the center of the u . s .  automobile industry ,  and the `` big three '' auto manufacturers general motors ,  ford ,  and chrysler are all headquartered in metro detroit . 
after world war ii ,  many people from appalachia settled in detroit . 
the university of detroit mercy school of law is located downtown across from the renaissance center . 
detroit is the only u . s .  city to have its four major sports teams play within its downtown district . 
in 2016 there were 302 homicides in detroit ,  a 2.37% increase in the number of murder victims from the preceding year . 
in southwest detroit and western detroit there are smaller ,  scattered asian communities including an area in the westside adjacent to dearborn and redford township that has a mostly indian asian population ,  and a community of vietnamese and laotians in southwest detroit . 
about 80,500 people work in downtown detroit ,  comprising one-fifth of the city's employment base . 
in 2013, detroit became the largest u . s .  city to file for bankruptcy ,  which it successfully exited in december 2014, when the city government regained control of detroit's finances . 
detroit averaged 1.15 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.
the city is governed pursuant to the `` home rule charter of the city of detroit '' . 
it will be a part of the district in detroit ,  a group of places owned by olympia entertainment inc .  ,  including comerica park and the detroit opera house ,  among others . 
little caesars arena ,  a new home for the detroit red wings and the detroit pistons with attached residential ,  hotel ,  and retail use opened on september 5, 2017.
the city of detroit has a higher than average percentage of households without a car . 
seen in panorama ,  detroit's waterfront shows a variety of architectural styles . 
areas of the city closer to the detroit river are also patrolled by the united states border patrol . 
with about 66,000 public school students  -lrb-  2011–12 -rrb- ,  the detroit public schools  -lrb-  dps  -rrb-  district is the largest school district in michigan . 
the thousands of african americans who came to detroit were part of the great migration of the 20th century . 
in 1993 young retired as detroit's longest-serving mayor ,  deciding not to seek a sixth term . 
while african-americans comprised only 13 percent of michigan's population in 2010, they made up nearly 82 percent of detroit's population . 
in the 1940s the world's `` first urban depressed freeway '' ever built ,  the davison ,  was constructed in detroit . 
the local soccer team is called the detroit city football club and was founded in 2012.
detroit is one of 13 u . s .  metropolitan areas that are home to professional teams representing the four major sports in north america . 
metro detroit has an extensive toll-free network of freeways administered by the michigan department of transportation . 
within the deccan traps at least 95% of the lavas are tholeiitic basalts . 
the deccan traps began forming 66.25 million years ago ,  at the end of the cretaceous period . 
mantle xenoliths have been described from kachchh  -lrb-  northwestern india  -rrb-  and elsewhere in the western deccan . 
it is postulated that the deccan traps eruption was associated with a deep mantle plume . 
there is some evidence to link the deccan traps eruption to the asteroid impact that created the chicxulub crater in the mexican state of yucatán . 
the deccan traps are a large igneous province located on the deccan plateau of west-central india  -lrb-  17°–24°n ,  73°–74°e  -rrb-  and are one of the largest volcanic features on earth . 
the repeal act established a process for ending the dadt policy . 
newt gingrich called for an extensive review of dadt's repeal . 
dadt was upheld by five federal courts of appeal . 
during obama's state of the union address on january 27, 2010, he said that he would work with congress and the military to enact a repeal of the gay ban law and for the first time set a timetable for repeal . 
once certification was given ,  dadt would be lifted after a 60-day waiting period . 
president obama signed the repeal into law on december 22, 2010.
following passage of the don't ask ,  don't tell repeal act of 2010, the justice department asked the ninth circuit to suspend lcr's suit in light of the legislative repeal . 
the full name of the policy at the time was `` don't ask ,  don't tell ,  don't pursue '' . 
democrats in both houses of congress first attempted to end dadt by amending the defense authorization act . 
following the implementation of dadt's repeal ,  a panel of three judges of the ninth circuit court of appeals vacated the phillips ruling . 
a pentagon spokesman said that service members discharged under dadt would be able to re-apply to rejoin the military then . 
that same month ,  the human rights campaign launched its `` repeal dadt now campaign '' to mobilize grassroots support and target swing states . 
on september 20, air force officials announced that 22 air force instructions were `` updated as a result of the repeal of dadt '' . 
marking the first anniversary of the passage of the repeal act ,  television news networks reported no incidents in the three months since dadt ended . 
the study included surveys of 553 generals and admirals who had opposed repeal ,  experts who supported dadt ,  and more than 60 heterosexual ,  gay ,  lesbian and bisexual active duty service personnel . 
congress rushed to enact the existing gay ban policy into federal law ,  outflanking clinton's planned repeal effort . 
on october 20, 2010, lt .  daniel choi ,  an openly gay man honorably discharged under dadt ,  re-enlisted in the u . s .  army . 
conservative critics of dadt were disappointed that he failed to withdraw the `` don't ask '' directives and return the military to its earlier complete ban on service by gays and lesbians . 
this statement was quickly followed up by defense secretary robert gates and joint chiefs chairman michael mullen voicing their support for a repeal of dadt . 
beginning in the early 2000s ,  several legal challenges to dadt were filed ,  and legislation to repeal dadt was enacted in december 2010, specifying that the policy would remain in place until the president ,  the secretary of defense ,  and the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff certified that repeal would not harm military readiness ,  followed by a 60-day waiting period . 
chaplain groups and religious organizations took various positions on dadt . 
during the 2008 presidential election campaign ,  senator barack obama advocated a full repeal of the laws barring gays and lesbians from serving in the military . 
president obama ,  secretary of defense leon panetta ,  and admiral mike mullen ,  chairman of the joint chiefs of staff ,  sent the certification required by the repeal act to congress on july 22, 2011, setting the end of dadt for september 20, 2011.
after the policy was introduced in 1993, the military discharged over 13,000 troops from the military under dadt . 
in november 2007, 28 retired generals and admirals urged congress to repeal the policy ,  citing evidence that 65,000 gay men and women were serving in the armed forces and that there were over a million gay veterans . 
since dadt ended in 2011, persons who are openly homosexual and bisexual have been able to serve . 
in 1993, `` time '' reported that 44% of those polled supported openly gay servicemembers ,  and in 1994, a cnn poll indicated 53% of americans believed gays and lesbians should be permitted to serve openly . 
in february 2005, the government accountability office released estimates of the cost of dadt . 
mitt romney said that the winding down of military operations in iraq and afghanistan obviated his opposition to the repeal and said he was not proposing any change to policy . 
the palm center ,  a think tank that studies issues of sexuality and the military ,  released a study in september 2012 that found no negative consequences ,  nor any effect on military effectiveness from dadt repeal . 
the disadvantage to seers was that only direct yes-or-no questions could be answered . 
that role fell to the seers  -lrb-  `` μάντεις '' in greek  -rrb-  . 
seers were not in direct contact with the gods; instead ,  they were interpreters of signs provided by the gods . 
at battle ,  generals would frequently ask seers at both the campground  -lrb-  a process called the `` hiera ''  -rrb-  and at the battlefield  -lrb-  called the `` sphagia ''  -rrb-  . 
if the seer gave consistent answers ,  the advice was considered valid . 
divination was a central component of ancient mesoamerican religious life . 
important to protestantism were the diets of 1522  -lrb-  `` first diet of nuremberg ''  -rrb-  ,  1524  -lrb-  `` second diet of nuremberg ''  -rrb-  and 1532  -lrb-  `` third diet of nuremberg ''  -rrb-  . 
apart from that ,  a number of other diets were held there . 
the diets of nuremberg ,  also called the imperial diets of nuremberg ,  took place at different times between the middle ages and the 17th century . 
kubrick said:
in 1994, the film was rereleased . 
during the filming of `` dr .  strangelove '' ,  stanley kubrick learned that `` fail safe '' ,  a film with a similar theme ,  was being produced . 
kubrick used these takes in the final film ,  causing scott to swear never to work with kubrick again . 
kahn educated kubrick on the concept of the semirealistic `` cobalt-thorium g '' doomsday machine ,  and then kubrick used the concept for the film . 
sellers and kubrick got on famously during the film's production and shared a love of photography . 
so ,  as kubrick later said ,  'it was a disaster of homeric proportions . ' ''
in 2000, readers of `` total film '' magazine voted it the 24th greatest comedic film of all time . 
kubrick and others have said that the scene had already been cut before preview night because it was inconsistent with the rest of the film . 
kubrick then recruited pickens ,  whom he knew from his brief involvement in a marlon brando western film project that was eventually filmed as `` one-eyed jacks '' . 
among the titles that kubrick considered for the film were `` dr .  doomsday or: how to start world war iii without even trying '' ,  `` dr .  strangelove's secret uses of uranus '' ,  and `` wonderful bomb '' . 
during the filming ,  kubrick and scott had different opinions regarding certain scenes ,  but kubrick got scott to conform largely by repeatedly beating him at chess ,  which they played frequently on the set . 
the end of the film shows dr .  strangelove exclaiming ,  ``  ''mein führer , ``  i can walk ! `` 
the film is loosely based on peter george's thriller novel `` red alert ''  -lrb-  1958 -rrb- . 
in 1989, the united states library of congress included `` dr .  strangelove '' in the first group of films selected for preservation in the national film registry . 
for the war room ,  ken adam first designed a two-level set which kubrick initially liked ,  only to decide later that it was not what he wanted . 
 ''dr .  strangelove '' is kubrick's highest rated film on rotten tomatoes ,  holding a 99% approval rating  -lrb-  based on 76 reviews  -rrb-  with an average rating of 9.1/10.
kubrick argued that `` fail safe ''s own source novel `` fail-safe ''  -lrb-  1960 -rrb- had been plagiarized from peter george's `` red alert '' ,  to which kubrick owned creative rights . 
kubrick's biographer john baxter explained ,  in the documentary `` inside the making of dr .  strangelove '':
scott ,  a skilled player himself ,  later said that while he and kubrick may not have always seen eye to eye ,  he respected kubrick immensely for his skill at chess . 
the use of the footage prompted kubrick to call benson to complain . 
it was originally planned for the film to end with a scene that depicted everyone in the war room involved in a pie fight . 
dna ligase is used in both dna repair and dna replication  -lrb-  see `` mammalian ligases ''  -rrb-  . 
purified dna ligase is used in gene cloning to join dna molecules together to form recombinant dna . 
the activity of e .  coli dna ligase can be enhanced by dna polymerase at the right concentrations . 
the first electronic version of `` dewey '' was created in 1993.
dewey himself held copyright in editions 1 to 6  -lrb-  1876–1919 -rrb- . 
the dewey decimal classification  -lrb-  ddc  -rrb-  ,  colloquially the dewey decimal system ,  is a proprietary library classification system first published in the united states by melvil dewey in 1876.
melvil dewey  -lrb-  1851–1931 -rrb- was an american librarian and self-declared reformer . 
melvil dewey edited the first three editions of the classification system and oversaw the revisions of all editions until his death in 1931.
one of the innovations of the dewey decimal system was that of positioning books on the shelves in relation to other books on similar topics . 
dewey's was not the only library classification available ,  although it was the most complete . 
the second edition of the dewey decimal system ,  published in 1885 with the title ``  '' ,  comprised 314 pages ,  with 10,000 index entries . 
dukkha  -lrb-  ; pāli; sanskrit: `` duḥkha ''; tibetan: སྡུག་བསྔལ་ `` sdug bsngal '' ,  pr . 
contemporary translators have used a variety of english words to translate the term `` dukkha '' ,  and many translators prefer to leave the term untranslated . 
the darwin awards are a tongue-in-cheek honor ,  originating in usenet newsgroup discussions around 1985.
a 2006 comedy film ,  `` the darwin awards '' ,  written and directed by finn taylor ,  was based on the website and many of the darwin awards stories . 
the darwin awards books state that an attempt is made to disallow known urban legends from the awards ,  but some older `` winners '' have been `` grandfathered '' to keep their awards . 
the origin of the darwin awards can be traced back to posts on usenet group discussions as early as 1985.
dance – human movement either used as a form of expression or presented in a social ,  spiritual or performance setting . 
the dkw munga was built by auto union in ingolstadt . 
their first car was the f89 using the body from the prototype f9 made before the war and the two-cylinder two-stroke engine from the last f8.
the last dkw was the f102, coming into production in 1964 as a replacement for the old-looking au1000.
this van used the same engine as the last f8 made before the war . 
the f93 was produced until 1959, and was replaced by the auto-union 1000.
about 100 engines were built for testing purposes and 13 dkw f102 and some mungas were fitted with the v6 engine in the 1960s . 
dkw cars were made from 1928 until 1966, apart from an interruption caused by the second world war . 
dkw  -lrb-  dampf-kraft-wagen ,   ,  also deutsche kinder-wagen  . 
in 1939, dkw made a prototype with the first three-cylinder engine ,  with a displacement of 900 cc and producing  . 
its successor ,  the four-stroke f103, was marketed under the audi brand ,  another auto union marque . 
mipps swore loyalty to syn from that time onward . 
later ,  when his crew refused to let syn leave ,  syn and mipps slipped away in one of the ship's boats; unknown to syn ,  mipps had arranged a convenient `` accident '' in the ship's powder magazine with an exploding barrel of gunpowder ,  eliminating witnesses of syn's piratical acts . 
after this ,  syn decided that he could only protect his people by becoming their leader . 
after imogene's death in syn's arms  -lrb-  during which she revealed to him that he had a son by her who was missing somewhere in america  -rrb-  ,  syn fought a final duel with tappitt in his jail cell ,  defeating him . 
syn made him the village sexton upon condition that mipps `` remember to forget ''  -lrb-  that syn had been clegg and that they had known each other before  -rrb-  ,  and that mipps never get involved with the local smugglers . 
with mipps at his side ,  syn turned to piracy and became a great success . 
 ''christopher syn '' became the basis for the 1962 disney production  -lrb-  see below  -rrb- ; there was also a novelization of the disney theatrical version ,  titled `` doctor syn ,  alias the scarecrow '' and written by vic crume . 
the output from the benchmark is the number of dhrystones per second  -lrb-  the number of iterations of the main code loop per second  -rrb-  . 
coremark is a small benchmark released by the non-profit embedded microprocessor benchmark consortium  -lrb-  eembc  -rrb-  in 2009, that targets the cpu core ,  similar to dhrystone . 
coremark also has established rules for running the benchmark and for reporting the results . 
the dhrystone benchmark contains no floating point operations ,  thus the name is a pun on the then-popular whetstone benchmark for floating point operations . 
winer's fellowship ended in june 2004.
winer suspended its service in january 2008.
winer was born on may 2, 1955, in queens ,  new york city ,  the son of eve winer ,  ph . d .  ,  a school psychologist ,  and leon winer ,  ph . d .  ,  a former professor of the columbia university graduate school of business . 
winer has been given `` credit for the invention of the podcasting model . `` 
winer founded userland software in 1988 and served as the company's ceo until 2002.
dave winer  -lrb-  born may 2, 1955 in queens ,  new york city  -rrb-  is an american software developer ,  entrepreneur ,  and writer who resides in new york city . 
in 2010 winer was appointed visiting scholar at new york university's arthur l .  carter journalism institute . 
in february 2002 winer was named one of the `` top ten technology innovators '' by infoworld . 
winer opened his self-described `` commons for sharing outlines ,  feeds ,  and taxonomy '' in may 2006.
winer's `` scripting news '' ,  described as `` one of the web's oldest blogs , ``  launched in february 1997 and earned him titles such as `` protoblogger '' and `` forefather of blogging . `` 
japanese-canadian taiko began in 1979 with katari taiko ,  and was inspired by the san jose taiko group . 
taiko can also be categorized by the context in which they are used . 
taiko groups in australia began forming in the 1990s . 
while some classify `` tsuzumi '' as a type of taiko ,  others have described them as a drum entirely separate from taiko . 
kodo is one of the most recognized taiko groups both in japan and worldwide . 
seidō kobayashi is the leader of the tokyo-based taiko group oedo sukeroku taiko as of december 2014.
is a taiko tradition originating on the island of hachijō-jima . 
in 1968, seiichi tanaka founded the san francisco taiko dojo and is regarded as the grandfather of taiko and primary developer of taiko performance in the united states . 
taiko emerged in the united states in the late 1960s . 
several companies specialize in the production of taiko . 
the system of fundamentals `` japan taiko '' put forward was not widely adopted because taiko performance varied substantially across japan . 
taiko performance is generally taught orally and through demonstration . 
estimates of the number of taiko groups in japan vary up to 5000 active in japan ,  but more conservative assessments place the number closer to 800 based on membership in the nippon taiko foundation ,  the largest national organization of taiko groups . 
historians regard her performance as the mythological creation of taiko music . 
taiko are categorized into three types based on construction process . 
many taiko in noh are also featured in kabuki performance and are used in a similar manner . 
there are no official counts or estimates of the number of active taiko groups in the united states or canada ,  as there is no governing body for taiko groups in either country . 
taiko may be either tunable or non-tunable depending on the system used . 
the brazilian association of taiko  -lrb-  abt  -rrb-  suggests that there are about 150 taiko groups in brazil and that about 10–15% of players are non-japanese; izumo honda ,  coordinator of a large annual festival in são paulo ,  estimated that about 60% of all taiko performers in brazil are women . 
taiko performance has frequently been viewed as an art form dominated by men . 
voiced calls or shouts called kakegoe and kiai are also common in taiko performance . 
oguchi founded the first `` kumi-daiko '' group called osuwa daiko in 1951, and facilitated the popularization of taiko performance groups in japan . 
there is a wide variety of traditional clothing that players wear during taiko performance . 
with few exceptions ,  taiko have a drum shell with heads on both sides of the body ,  and a sealed resonating cavity . 
kata is a term used to describe the posture and movement associated with taiko performance . 
some physical parts of taiko ,  like the drum body ,  its skin ,  and the tacks also hold symbolic significance in buddhism . 
parton was honored in 2003 with a tribute album called `` just because i'm a woman: songs of dolly parton . `` 
parton has received 47 grammy nominations . 
in 1999, parton was inducted into the country music hall of fame . 
parton also was inducted into the country music hall of fame in 1999.
parton's songwriting has been featured prominently in several films . 
in late 1981, parton began filming her second film ,  the musical film `` the best little whorehouse in texas ''  -lrb-  1982 -rrb- . 
parton wrote the score  -lrb-  and patricia resnick wrote the book  -rrb-  for ``  '' ,  a musical-theater adaptation of parton's feature film `` 9 to 5 ''  -lrb-  1980 -rrb- . 
 ''dolly parton's coat of many colors '' ,  a made-for-tv film based on parton's song of the same name ,  and featuring narration by parton ,  aired on nbc in december 2015, with child actress alyvia alyn lind portraying the young parton . 
parton is one of the most-honored female country performers of all time . 
during her career ,  parton has gained induction into numerous halls of fame . 
at the american music awards ,  she has won three awards out of 18 nominations . 
parton's recorded music during the mid- to late-1990s remained steady and somewhat eclectic . 
in june 2018, parton announced an eight-part netflix series ,  featuring her music career . 
in 1999, parton received country music's highest honor ,  an induction into the country music hall of fame . 
parton went on to say that she writes something every day ,  be it a song or an idea . 
the couple have no children of their own ,  but parton is the godmother of performer miley cyrus . 
parton and dean helped raise several of parton's younger siblings in nashville ,  leading her nieces and nephews to refer to her as `` aunt granny , ``  a moniker that later lent its name to one of parton's dollywood restaurants . 
parton's music includes 25 recording industry association of america  -lrb-  riaa  -rrb- -certified gold ,  platinum and multi-platinum awards . 
as a songwriter ,  parton has twice been nominated for an academy award for best original song ,  for `` 9 to 5 '' and `` travelin' thru ''  -lrb-  2005 -rrb- from the transgender-themed film `` transamerica '' . 
in 2011, parton voiced the character dolly gnome in the animated film `` gnomeo & juliet '' . 
on march 6, 2016, parton announced that she would be embarking on a tour in support of her new album ,  `` pure & simple '' . 
parton earned her second academy award nomination for best original song for `` travelin' thru , ``  which she wrote specifically for the feature film `` transamerica . `` 
in 2014, parton embarked on the blue smoke world tour in support of her 42nd studio album ,  `` blue smoke '' . 
parton's first solo single for rca victor ,  `` just because i'm a woman '' ,  was released in the summer of 1968 and was a moderate chart hit ,  reaching number 17.
 ''diprotodon '' was named by owen  -lrb-  1838 -rrb- . 
until recently it was unknown how many species of `` diprotodon '' had existed . 
the taxonomic implication is that owen’s original `` diprotodon optatum '' is the only valid species . 
the closest surviving relatives of `` diprotodon '' are the wombats and the koala . 
 ''diprotodon '' superficially resembled a rhinoceros without a horn . 
diprotodon ,  meaning `` two forward teeth '' ,  is the largest known marsupial to have ever lived . 
benedict's film debut was in the 1972 film `` georgia ,  georgia '' . 
in 1993, benedict starred in `` shadow force '' . 
benedict also appeared as jake barnes in the 1996 action-adventure film `` alaska '' . 
benedict starred in the 1989 tv movie `` trenchcoat in paradise '' . 
in 2000, benedict wrote and directed his first screenplay ,  `` cahoots '' . 
benedict also made a cameo appearance in the 2010 film adaptation of `` the a-team '' as pensacola prisoner milt . 
for waves that propagate in a medium ,  such as sound waves ,  the velocity of the observer and of the source are relative to the medium in which the waves are transmitted . 
the doppler effect  -lrb-  or the doppler shift  -rrb-  is the change in frequency or wavelength of a wave in relation to an observer who is moving relative to the wave source . 
the distance between successive wave fronts is then increased ,  so the waves `` spread out '' . 
integrating gives an expression for δ ''t '' against time . 
terrestrial time is a theoretical uniform time scale ,  defined to provide continuity with the former ephemeris time  -lrb-  et  -rrb-  . 
universal time is a time scale based on the earth's rotation ,  which is somewhat irregular over short periods  -lrb-  days up to a century  -rrb-  ,  thus any time based on it cannot have an accuracy better than 1 in 10.
 .  .  .  laid the foundations of the quantum theory of computation ,  and has subsequently made or participated in many of the most important advances in the field ,  including the discovery of the first quantum algorithms ,  the theory of quantum logic gates and quantum computational networks ,  the first quantum error-correction scheme ,  and several fundamental quantum universality results . 
he is a proponent of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics . 
with the nazi party in charge of organizing the `` volkssturm '' ,  each `` gauleiter '' ,  or nazi party district leader ,  was charged with the leadership ,  enrollment ,  and organization of the `` volkssturm '' in their district . 
the volkssturm  -lrb-   ,  `` people's storm ''  -rrb-  was a national militia established by nazi germany during the last months of world war ii . 
director's cuts of film are not generally released to the public ,  because on most films the director does not have a final cut privilege . 
traditionally ,  the `` director's cut '' is not ,  by definition ,  the director's ideal or preferred cut . 
 ''director's cuts '' in music are rarely released . 
'cut' explicitly refers to the process of film editing; in preparing a film for release ,  the director's cut is preceded by the assembly and rough editor's cut and usually followed by the final cut meant for the public film release . 
some directors explicitly dislike the phrase `` director's cut '' because it implies that they disapprove of the theatrically released cut . 
a director's cut is an edited version of a film  -lrb-  or television episode ,  music video ,  commercial ,  or video game  -rrb-  that is supposed to represent the director's own approved edit . 
with the rise of home video ,  the phrase became more generically used as a marketing term  -lrb-  including things such as comic books and music albums ,  neither of which actually have directors  -rrb-  ,  and the most commonly seen form of director's cut is a cut where extra scenes and characters are added in ,  often making the director's cut considerably longer than the final cut . 
in 2011 british singer kate bush released the album titled `` director's cut '' . 
the trend of releasing alternate cuts of films for artistic reasons became prominent in the 1970s; in 1974, the `` director's cut '' of `` the wild bunch '' was shown theatrically in los angeles to sold-out audiences . 
this is called the color depth of the video . 
this example video has the following properties:
the digitized and processed video information was then converted back to standard analog video for output . 
digital video can be copied with no degradation in quality . 
the most important properties are `` bit rate '' and `` video size '' . 
digital video is an electronic representation of moving visual images  -lrb-  video  -rrb-  in the form of encoded digital data . 
the bind 4 and bind 8 releases both had serious security vulnerabilities . 
the acronym `` bind '' is for `` berkeley internet name domain '' ,  from a technical paper published in 1984.
 ,  the internet systems consortium maintains ,  updates ,  and writes new versions of bind . 
versions of bind through 4.8.3 were maintained by the computer systems research group  -lrb-  csrg  -rrb-  at uc berkeley . 
bind  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  or named  -lrb-  pronounced `` name-dee '' ,  short for `` name daemon '':   -rrb-  ,  is the most widely used domain name system  -lrb-  dns  -rrb-  software on the internet . 
 ,  djbdns's tinydns component was the second most popular dns server in terms of the number of domains for which it was the authoritative server ,  and third most popular in terms of the number of dns hosts running it . 
as of march 2009, there are a number of forks ,  one of which is dbndns  -lrb-  part of the debian project  -rrb-  ,  and more than a dozen patches to modify the released version . 
the dylan language was code-named ralph . 
many of them come from dylan's lisp heritage . 
the harlequin implementation is now named open dylan and is maintained by a group of volunteers ,  the dylan hackers . 
dylan uses an algol-like syntax designed by michael kahl . 
the original set of 15 classic metadata terms ,  known as the dublin core metadata element set  -lrb-  dcmes  -rrb-  ,  is endorsed in the following standards documents:
the dublin core metadata initiative  -lrb-  dcmi  -rrb-  provides an open forum for the development of interoperable online metadata standards for a broad range of purposes and of business models . 
dublin core metadata may be used for multiple purposes ,  from simple resource description to combining metadata vocabularies of different metadata standards ,  to providing interoperability for metadata vocabularies in the linked data cloud and semantic web implementations . 
these versions of the dom became known as the `` intermediate dom . `` 
to render a document such as a html page ,  most web browsers use an internal model similar to the dom . 
after the standardization of ecmascript ,  the w3c dom working group began drafting a standard dom specification . 
web browsers rely on layout engines to parse html into a dom . 
when a web page is loaded ,  the browser creates a document object model of the page ,  which is an object oriented representation of an html document ,  that acts as an interface between javascript and the document itself and allows the creation of dynamic web pages:
a design pattern is the re-usable form of a solution to a design problem . 
an organized collection of design patterns that relate to a particular field is called a pattern language . 
dmt is illegal in most countries . 
dmt can be inhaled using an e-cigarette . 
it appears that dmt can produce a hallucinogenic experience . 
a standard dose for vaporized dmt is 20–40 mg . 
the structure of dmt occurs within some important biomolecules like serotonin and melatonin ,  making them structural analogs of dmt . 
dmt ,  like most psychedelics ,  is considered to be neither addictive ,  nor toxic . 
dmt is classified as a schedule i drug under the united nations 1971 convention on psychotropic substances ,  meaning that international trade in dmt is supposed to be closely monitored; use of dmt is supposed to be restricted to scientific research and medical use . 
dmt has a rapid onset ,  intense effects and a relatively short duration of action . 
natural materials containing dmt ,  including ayahuasca ,  are not regulated under the 1971 psychotropic convention . 
in the 1990s ,  rick strassman and his colleagues conducted a five-year-long dmt study at the university of new mexico . 
taking a maoi prior to vaporizing or injecting dmt prolongs and potentiates the effects . 
a dominatrix is typically a paid professional  -lrb-  `` pro-domme ''  -rrb-  as the term `` dominatrix '' is little-used within the non-professional bdsm scene . 
one of the ubiquitous garments associated with the dominatrix is the catsuit . 
a dominatrix  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  plural dominatrices  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  is a woman who takes the dominant role in bdsm activities . 
to differentiate women who identify as a dominatrix but do not offer paid services ,  non-professional dominants are occasionally referred to as a `` lifestyle '' dominatrix or mistress . 
the term was taken up shortly after by the myron kosloff title `` dominatrix ''  -lrb-  with art by eric stanton  -rrb-  in 1968, and entered more popular mainstream knowledge following the 1976 film `` dominatrix without mercy '' . 
the term `` dominatrix '' is mostly used to describe a female professional dominant  -lrb-  or `` pro-domme ''  -rrb-  who is paid to engage in bdsm play with a submissive . 
tight ,  leather corsets are another staple garment of the dominatrix signification . 
women who engage in female domination typically promote and title themselves under the terms `` dominatrix '' ,  `` mistress '' ,  `` lady '' ,  `` madame '' ,  `` herrin '' or `` goddess '' . 
the history of the dominatrix is argued to date back to rituals of the goddess inanna  -lrb-  or ishtar as she was known in akkadian  -rrb-  ,  in ancient mesopotamia . 
 ''dominatrix '' is the feminine form of the latin `` dominator '' ,  a ruler or lord ,  and was originally used in a non-sexual sense . 
neck corsets may also be worn . 
both flags are identical . 
the tails are the length of the flag '' . 
these countries have their own official flags . 
from 1842, it was used as the flag of the entire army . 
some areas in denmark have unofficial flags ,  listed below . 
the flag holds the world record of being the oldest continuously used national flag . 
denmark reserves official recognition to official flags and regional flags  -lrb-  `` områdeflag ''  -rrb-  from other jurisdictions . 
used as maritime flag since the 16th century ,  the dannebrog was introduced as regimental flag in the danish army in 1785, and for the militia  -lrb-  landeværn  -rrb-  in 1801.
the flag of denmark  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is red with a white scandinavian cross that extends to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side . 
in the 12th century ,  it was also used as war flag by the holy roman empire . 
a tradition recorded in the 16th century traces the origin of the flag to the campaigns of  valdemar ii of denmark  -lrb-  r .  1202–1241 -rrb- . 
dharma  -lrb-  ;  ,  ;  ,  translit . 
the antonym of dharma is `` adharma '' . 
dennett is referred to as one of the `` four horsemen of new atheism '' ,  along with richard dawkins ,  sam harris ,  and the late christopher hitchens . 
dennett's previous book was `` consciousness explained ''  -lrb-  1991 -rrb- . 
the book was a finalist for the 1995 national book award in non-fiction and the 1996 pulitzer prize for general non-fiction . 
dennett taught an undergraduate seminar at tufts university on darwin and philosophy ,  which included most of the ideas in the book . 
his 2007 book `` i am a strange loop '' won the los angeles times book prize for science and technology . 
since 1988, hofstadter has been the college of arts and sciences distinguished professor of cognitive science and comparative literature at indiana university in bloomington ,  where he directs the center for research on concepts and cognition which consists of himself and his graduate students ,  forming the `` fluid analogies research group ''  -lrb-  farg  -rrb-  . 
at the university of michigan and indiana university ,  he co-authored ,  with melanie mitchell ,  a computational model of `` high-level perception '' – copycat – and several other models of analogy-making and cognition ,  including the tabletop project ,  co-developed with robert m .  french . 
king agaja ,  houegbadja's grandson ,  came to the throne in 1708 and began significant expansion of the kingdom of dahomey . 
tegbesu ,  also spelled as tegbessou ,  was king of dahomey ,  in present-day benin ,  from 1740 until 1774.
the kingdom was reduced and made a french protectorate in 1894.
the kingdom of dahomey  -lrb-    -rrb-  was an african kingdom  -lrb-  located within the area of the present-day country of benin  -rrb-  that existed from about 1600 until 1894, when the last king ,  béhanzin ,  was defeated by the french ,  and the country was annexed into the french colonial empire . 
from 1868 to 1918 the austro-hungarian dragoons numbered 15 regiments . 
there are three dragoon regiments in the canadian forces: the royal canadian dragoons and two reserve regiments ,  the british columbia dragoons and the saskatchewan dragoons . 
in 1930, three spanish dragoon regiments were still in existence . 
prior to the war of 1812 the u . s .  organized the regiment of light dragoons . 
two regiments of the imperial guard were designated as dragoons . 
in the present-day british army regular army ,  four regiments are designated as dragoons: the 1st the queen's dragoon guards ,  the royal scots dragoon guards ,  the royal dragoon guards ,  and the light dragoons . 
squadron of the uusimaa dragoon battalion . 
in 1803 the dragoon regiments were renamed as ``  ''caballería ligera '' ''  -lrb-  light cavalry  -rrb-  . 
the unit crest of the 48th infantry designated the unit as dragoons . 
dragoon regiments were established in most european armies during the late 17th and early 18th centuries . 
in 1803, the regiments of dragoons began to be called light cavalry  -lrb-  c ''azadores ''  -rrb-  and dragoons disappeared from the spanish army shortly after 1815.
this regiment is known as the `` dragões da independência ''  -lrb-  independence dragoons  -rrb-  . 
in 1861 the two existing u . s .  dragoon regiments were re-designated as the 1st and 2nd cavalry . 
this derives from its formation as the band ,  first regiment of dragoons on july 8, 1840.
the brazilian president's honor guard is provided  -lrb-  amongst other units  -rrb-  by a regiment of dragoons: the 1st guards cavalry regiment of the brazilian army . 
in 1704, the spanish dragoons were reorganised into regiments by philip v ,  as were the rest of the tercios . 
the royal danish army includes amongst its historic regiments the jutish dragoon regiment ,  which was raised in 1670.
until 1918 dragoner  -lrb-  en: dragoon  -rrb-  was the designation given to the lowest ranks in the dragoon regiments of the austro-hungarian and imperial german armies . 
the royal canadian mounted police were accorded the formal status of a regiment of dragoons in 1921.
the portuguese army still maintains two units which are descended from former regiments of dragoons . 
another modern united states army unit ,  informally known as the 2nd dragoons ,  is the 2nd cavalry regiment . 
the military counterpart ,  that of the 15th reinforced regiment `` dragoons '' is now as of 2010 the 4th armored brigade `` chorrillos '' based in punta arenas as the 6th armored cavalry squadron `` dragoons '' ,  and form part of the 5th army division . 
this marked the official end of dragoons in the u . s .  army ,  although certain modern units trace their origins back to the historic dragoon regiments . 
the `` dutch west india company '' was organized similarly to the dutch east india company  -lrb-  voc  -rrb-  . 
the wic had 15 ships to carry trade and plied the west african coast and brazil . 
dutch west india company  -lrb-   ,  or ;   -rrb-  was a chartered company  -lrb-  known as the `` wic ''  -rrb-  of dutch merchants as well as foreign investors . 
the main focus of the wic now went to brazil . 
in 1612, a dutch fortress was built in mouree  -lrb-  present day ghana  -rrb-  ,  along the dutch gold coast . 
because of the ongoing war in brazil ,  the situation for the wic in 1645, at the end of the charter ,  was very bad . 
only in 1630 did the west india company manage to conquer a part of brazil . 
from 1624 to 1654, the wic held portuguese territory in northeast brazil ,  but they were ousted from dutch brazil following fierce resistance . 
with ball ,  arnaz founded desilu productions . 
arnaz and lucille ball were married on november 30, 1940.
arnaz and ball subsequently had two children ,  actress lucie arnaz  -lrb-  born 1951 -rrb- and actor desi arnaz ,  jr .   -lrb-  born 1953 -rrb- . 
arnaz also played guitar for xavier cugat . 
arnaz appeared in several movies in the 1940s such as `` bataan ''  -lrb-  1943 -rrb- . 
arnaz was deeply patriotic about the united states . 
family home video later aired on television showed ball and arnaz playing together with their grandson simon shortly before arnaz's death . 
desiderio alberto arnaz y de acha iii  -lrb-  march 2, 1917 – december 2, 1986 -rrb- ,  better known as desi arnaz or desi arnaz ,  sr .  ,  was a cuban-born american actor ,  musician ,  and television producer . 
he was also renowned for leading his latin music band ,  the desi arnaz orchestra . 
a dna virus is a virus that has dna as its genetic material and replicates using a dna-dependent dna polymerase . 
orders within this group are defined on the basis of morphology rather than dna sequence similarity . 
notable diseases like smallpox ,  herpes ,  and the chickenpox are caused by such dna viruses . 
