the alvar aalto museum ,  designed by aalto himself ,  is located in what is regarded as his home city jyväskylä . 
aino aalto died of cancer in 1949.
hugo alvar henrik aalto  -lrb-  ; 3 february 1898 – 11 may 1976 -rrb- was a finnish architect and designer . 
hugo alvar henrik aalto was born in kuortane ,  finland . 
aalto glassware  -lrb-  aino as well as alvar  -rrb-  is manufactured by iittala . 
with increasing works in the finnish capital ,  the aaltos' office moved again in 1933 to helsinki . 
in 1926, the young aaltos designed and had built for themselves a summer cottage in alajärvi ,  villa flora . 
in 1978 the museum of finnish architecture in helsinki arranged a major exhibition of aalto's works . 
when aalto was 5 years old ,  the family moved to alajärvi ,  and from there to jyväskylä in central finland . 
on october 6, 1924, aalto married architect aino marsio; their honeymoon journey to italy was aalto's first trip there ,  though aino had previously made a study trip there . 
since the death of elissa aalto the office has continued to operate as the alvar aalto academy ,  giving advice on the restoration of aalto buildings and organising the vast archive material . 
both bre and ame use the expression `` i couldn't care less '' to mean the speaker does not care at all . 
however ,  use of many other british words such as `` naff ''  -lrb-  slang but commonly used to mean `` not very good ''  -rrb-  are unheard of in american english . 
words such as `` bill '' and `` biscuit '' are used regularly in both ame and bre but can mean different things in each form . 
linguist braj kachru ,  quoted by the `` christian science monitor '' in 1996, stated that `` american english is spreading faster than british english '' . 
most speakers of ame are aware of some bre terms ,  although they may not generally use them or may be confused as to whether someone intends the american or british meaning  -lrb-  such as for `` biscuit ''  -rrb-  . 
though the use of a british word would be acceptable in ame  -lrb-  and vice versa  -rrb-  ,  most listeners would recognize the word as coming from the other form of english and treat it much the same as a word borrowed from any other language . 
similarly ,  the word `` hockey '' in bre refers to field hockey and in ame ,  `` hockey '' means ice hockey . 
a number of english idioms that have essentially the same meaning show lexical differences between the british and the american version; for instance:
in ame the word `` pissed '' means being annoyed whereas in bre it is a coarse word for being drunk  -lrb-  in both varieties ,  `` pissed off '' means irritated  -rrb-  . 
over the past 400 years ,  the form of the language used in the americas—especially in the united states—and that used in the united kingdom have diverged in a few minor ways ,  leading to the versions now occasionally referred to as american english and british english . 
a read/write register r stores a value and is accessed by two basic operations: read and write -lrb-  v  -rrb-  . 
the antarctic circumpolar current  -lrb-  acc  -rrb-  is an ocean current that flows clockwise from west to east around antarctica . 
the clipper route ,  which is the fastest sailing route around the world ,  follows the acc around three continental capes – cape agulhas  -lrb-  africa  -rrb-  ,  south east cape  -lrb-  australia  -rrb-  ,  and cape horn  -lrb-  south america  -rrb-  . 
arbour day is celebrated on november 22.
arbor day has been observed in australia since 20 june 1889.
arbor day  -lrb-  or arbour; from the latin `` arbor '' ,  meaning `` tree ''  -rrb-  is a holiday in which individuals and groups are encouraged to plant trees . 
the arbor day  -lrb-  dia da árvore  -rrb-  is celebrated on september 21.
ayer died on 27 june 1989.
ayer was closely associated with the british humanist movement . 
ayer was married four times to three women . 
ayer and tyson then began to talk ,  while naomi campbell slipped out . 
during the second world war ayer was a special operations executive and mi6 agent . 
ayer also had a daughter with hollywood columnist sheilah graham westbrook . 
ayer was a strong critic of the german philosopher martin heidegger . 
instead ,  ayer concludes that ethical concepts are `` mere pseudo-concepts '':
after graduation from oxford university ayer spent a year in vienna ,  returned to england and published his first book ,  `` language ,  truth and logic '' in 1936.
ayer is best known for popularising the verification principle ,  in particular through his presentation of it in `` language ,  truth ,  and logic ''  -lrb-  1936 -rrb- . 
the philosopher simone weil was his sister . 
indian  -lrb-  hindu  -rrb-  thought had great influence on weil . 
both aspects of weil's work have steadily developed into substantial theories . 
weil was elected foreign member of the royal society  -lrb-  formemrs  -rrb-  in 1966.
weil was in finland when world war ii broke out; he had been traveling in scandinavia since april 1939.
later greek myths also say helen had spent the time of the trojan war in egypt ,  and not at troy ,  and that after troy the greeks went there to recover her . 
they then moved into the region later called achaea . 
the homeric `` long-haired achaeans '' would have been a part of the mycenaean civilization that dominated greece from circa 1600 bc until 1100 bc . 
the achaeans  -lrb-  ; `` akhaioí , ``  `` the achaeans '' or `` of achaea ''  -rrb-  constitute one of the collective names for the greeks in homer's `` iliad ''  -lrb-  used 598 times  -rrb-  and `` odyssey '' . 
the city-states of this region later formed a confederation known as the achaean league ,  which was influential during the 3rd and 2nd centuries bc . 
selberg had two children ,  ingrid selberg and lars selberg . 
selberg was born in langesund ,  norway ,  the son of teacher anna kristina selberg and mathematician ole michael ludvigsen selberg . 
ingrid selberg is married to playwright mustapha matura . 
for his fundamental accomplishments during the 1940s ,  selberg received the 1950 fields medal . 
during world war ii ,  selberg worked in isolation due to the german occupation of norway . 
the concluding satyr play was `` the sphinx '' . 
he won his first victory at the city dionysia in 484 bc . 
the persian wars played a large role in the playwright's life and career . 
only the titles and assorted fragments of aeschylus's other plays have come down to us . 
the `` prometheus bound '' appears to have been the first play in a trilogy called the `` prometheia '' . 
this play was based on books 9 and 16 in homer's `` iliad '' . 
with the exception of this last play – the success of which is uncertain – all of aeschylus's extant tragedies are known to have won first prize at the city dionysia . 
salamis holds a prominent place in `` the persians '' ,  his oldest surviving play ,  which was performed in 472 bc and won first prize at the dionysia . 
that his plays inspired the athenians to be brave and virtuous . 
these are the remaining 71 plays ascribed to aeschylus which are known to us:
the final play of `` the oresteia '' addresses the question of orestes' guilt . 
the satyr play following this trilogy was titled `` amymone '' ,  after one of the danaids . 
xerxes appears at the end of the play ,  not realizing the cause of his defeat ,  and the play closes to lamentations by xerxes and the chorus . 
the earliest of his plays to survive is `` the persians ''  -lrb-  `` persai ''  -rrb-  ,  performed in 472 bc and based on experiences in aeschylus's own life ,  specifically the battle of salamis . 
it also marks the first known appearance in aeschylus's work of a theme which would continue through his plays ,  that of the polis  -lrb-  the city  -rrb-  being a key development of human civilization . 
together ,  these plays tell the bloody story of the family of agamemnon ,  king of argos . 
in the play ,  a messenger tells how achilles ,  perhaps reconciled to agamemnon and the greeks ,  slew hector . 
aeschylus  -lrb-   ,  ; `` aiskhylos '' ,  ; c .  525/524 – c .  456/455 bc  -rrb-  was an ancient greek tragedian . 
the only complete trilogy of greek plays by any playwright still extant  -lrb-  save a few missing lines in several spots  -rrb-  is the `` oresteia ''  -lrb-  458 bc  -rrb-  ,  although the satyr play that originally followed it ,  `` proteus '' ,  is lost except for some fragments . 
only seven of his estimated seventy to ninety plays have survived ,  and there is a long-standing debate regarding his authorship of one of these plays ,  `` prometheus bound '' ,  which some believe his son euphorion actually wrote . 
the amber road was an ancient trade route for the transfer of amber from coastal areas of the north sea and the baltic sea to the mediterranean sea . 
there is a tourist route stretching along the baltic coast from kaliningrad to latvia called `` amber road '' . 
routes connecting the amber finding locations in northern spain and in the pyrenees were a trading route to the mediterranean sea . 
amber roads connect amber finding locations to customer sites in europe ,  in the middle east regions and in the far east . 
the school was founded in 1949 under the name united baptist bible training school  -lrb-  ubbts  -rrb-  ,  and served as both a secondary school and a bible school . 
crandall is operated by the canadian baptists of atlantic canada . 
the `` atlantic baptist university act '' was passed by the legislative assembly of new brunswick in 2008.
wiles's proof of fermat's last theorem has stood up to the scrutiny of the world's other mathematical experts . 
wiles states that he came across fermat's last theorem on his way home from school when he was 10 years old . 
sir andrew john wiles  -lrb-  born 11 april 1953 -rrb- is a british mathematician and a royal society research professor at the university of oxford ,  specialising in number theory . 
in may 2018 he was appointed regius professor of mathematics at oxford ,  the first in the university's history . 
the modularity theorem involved elliptic curves ,  which was also wiles's own specialist area . 
during the summer of 1845, the brontës were at home with their father . 
four more children followed: charlotte ,   -lrb-  1816–1855 -rrb- ,  patrick branwell  -lrb-  1817–1848 -rrb- ,  emily ,   -lrb-  1818–1848 -rrb- and anne  -lrb-  1820–1849 -rrb- . 
aged 15, it was anne's first time away from home ,  and she made few friends at roe head . 
in 2011, the brontë society installed a new plaque at anne brontë's grave . 
anne brontë  -lrb-   ,  ; 17 january 1820 – 28 may 1849 -rrb- was an english novelist and poet ,  the youngest member of the brontë literary family . 
the daughter of patrick brontë ,  a poor irish clergyman in the church of england ,  anne brontë lived most of her life with her family at the parish of haworth on the yorkshire moors . 
in april 1820, the brontës moved into the five-roomed haworth parsonage which became their home for the rest of their lives . 
on her return to haworth ,  she met william weightman  -lrb-  1814–1842 -rrb- ,  her father's new curate ,  who started work in the parish in august 1839.
anne and branwell taught at thorp green for the next three years . 
anne's father ,  patrick brontë  -lrb-  1777–1861 -rrb- ,  was born in a two-room cottage in emdale ,  loughbrickland ,  county down ,  ireland . 
reading fed the children's imagination . 
partly because the re-publication of `` the tenant of wildfell hall '' was prevented by charlotte brontë after anne's death ,  she is not as well known as her sisters . 
in 2016, lucy mangan championed anne brontë in the bbc's being the brontës ,  declaring that `` her time has come '' . 
anne ,  the youngest of the brontë children ,  was born on 17 january 1820, on the outskirts of bradford where her father was curate and she was baptised there on 25 march 1820.
charlotte wrote to her father who took anne home where she remained while she recovered . 
anne's second novel ,  `` the tenant of wildfell hall '' ,  was published in the last week of june 1848.
her strong methodist faith attracted patrick brontë because his own leanings were similar . 
though from considerably different backgrounds ,  within three months patrick brontë and maria branwell were married on 29 december 1812.
anne would have seen weightman on her holidays at home ,  particularly during the summer of 1842 when her sisters were away . 
anne obtained a second post as governess to the children of the reverend edmund robinson and his wife lydia ,  at thorp green hall ,  a comfortable country house near york . 
the sin of adam is inherited by all human beings . 
augustine is recognized as a saint in the catholic church ,  the eastern christian church ,  and the anglican communion and as a preeminent doctor of the church . 
augustine taught that god orders all things while preserving human freedom . 
he also wrote `` on free choice of the will ''  -lrb-  `` de libero arbitrio ''  -rrb-  ,  addressing why god gives humans free will that can be used for evil . 
 ''husbands ,  love your wives ,  as christ loved the church and gave himself up for her . `` 
in his book ,  `` the city of god '' ,  he presents the development of slavery as a product of sin and as contrary to god's divine plan . 
however ,  he also stated that baptism ,  while it does not confer any grace when done outside the church ,  does confer grace as soon as one is received into the catholic church . 
from this incident he concluded the human person is naturally inclined to sin ,  and in need of the grace of christ . 
among his most important works are `` the city of god '' ,  `` on christian doctrine '' and `` confessions . `` 
later ,  in response to pelagius ,  augustine said that the sin of pride consists in assuming that `` we are the ones who choose god or that god chooses us  -lrb-  in his foreknowledge  -rrb-  because of something worthy in us '' ,  and argued that god's grace causes individual act of faith . 
augustine taught that the sin of adam and eve was either an act of foolishness  -lrb-  `` insipientia ''  -rrb-  followed by pride and disobedience to god or that pride came first . 
augustine held that `` the timing of the infusion of the soul was a mystery known to god alone '' . 
augustine followed cyprian in teaching that the bishops and priests of the church are the successors of the apostles ,  and that their authority in the church is god-given . 
the catholic church considers augustine's teaching to be consistent with free will . 
his work `` the city of god '' was written to console his fellow christians shortly after the visigoths had sacked rome in 410.
augustine's ecclesiology was more fully developed in `` city of god '' . 
the mediaeval catholic church built its system of eschatology on augustinian amillennialism ,  where christ rules the earth spiritually through his triumphant church . 
included in augustine's earlier theodicy is the claim that god created humans and angels as rational beings possessing free will . 
it arouses the mind ,  but it does not follow through what it has begun and arouse the body also ''  -lrb-  `` city of god '' 14.16 -rrb- . 
in opposition to that ,  augustine pointed out the apparent disobedience of the flesh to the spirit ,  and explained it as one of the results of original sin ,  punishment of adam and eve's disobedience to god . 
in `` city of god '' ,  augustine rejected both the immortality of the human race proposed by pagans ,  and contemporary ideas of ages  -lrb-  such as those of certain greeks and egyptians  -rrb-  that differed from the church's sacred writings . 
augustine was one of the first christian ancient latin authors with a very clear vision of theological anthropology . 
augustine was canonized by popular acclaim ,  and later recognized as a doctor of the church in 1298 by pope boniface viii . 
although earlier christian authors taught the elements of physical death ,  moral weakness ,  and a sin propensity within original sin ,  augustine was the first to add the concept of inherited guilt  -lrb-  `` reatus ''  -rrb-  from adam whereby an infant was eternally damned at birth . 
this concept countered the donatist claim that only those in a state of grace were the `` true '' or `` pure '' church on earth ,  and that priests and bishops who were not in a state of grace had no authority or ability to confect the sacraments . 
in 395, he was made coadjutor bishop of hippo ,  and became full bishop shortly thereafter ,  hence the name `` augustine of hippo ''; and he gave his property to the church of thagaste . 
augustine of hippo  -lrb-   ,   ,  or ; ; 13 november 354 – 28 august 430 ad  -rrb-  ,  also known as `` saint augustine '' ,  `` saint austin '' ,  is known by various cognomens throughout the christian world across its many denominations including `` blessed augustine '' ,  and the `` doctor of grace ''  -lrb-    -rrb- 
augustine developed his doctrine of the church principally in reaction to the donatist sect . 
augustine had served as a `` hearer '' for the manichaeans for about nine years ,  who taught that the original sin was carnal knowledge . 
however ,  after 412 ce ,  augustine exchanged the traditional christian defense of divine foreknowledge of human free will choices to explain predestination for a more stoic and gnostic/manichaean view of deterministic predestination wherein the will was not free except to sin . 
saint augustine of hippo  -lrb-  ; 13 november 354 – 28 august 430 ad  -rrb-  was a roman african ,  early christian theologian and philosopher from numidia whose writings influenced the development of western christianity and western philosophy . 
although augustine's anti-pelagian defense of original sin was confirmed at numerous councils ,  `` i . e . `` 
augustine proposes as a solution to sin a type of cognitive reimagining of one's situation ,  where slaves `` may themselves make their slavery in some sort free ,  by serving not in crafty fear ,  but in faithful love , ``  until the end of the world eradicated slavery for good: `` until all unrighteousness pass away ,  and all principality and every human power be brought to nothing ,  and god be all in all . `` 
apart from those ,  augustine is probably best known for his `` confessions '' ,  which is a personal account of his earlier life ,  and for `` de civitate dei ''  -lrb-  `` the city of god '' ,  consisting of 22 books  -rrb-  ,  which he wrote to restore the confidence of his fellow christians ,  which was badly shaken by the sack of rome by the visigoths in 410.
depending on what an actor is doing ,  his or her heart rate will vary . 
the more experienced an actor is ,  the more stable their heart rate will be while performing ,  but will still experience elevated heart rates . 
this can be seen not only in actors but also with public speaking and musicians . 
there is a correlation between heart-rate and stress when actors' are performing in front of an audience . 
improvisation is also used to cover up if an actor or actress makes a mistake . 
in a 2017 study on american university students ,  actors of various experience levels all showed similarly elevated heart rates throughout their performances; this agrees with previous studies on professional and amateur actors' heart rates -lrb-  konijin , 1993 -rrb- . 
amateur actors are those who do not receive payment for performances . 
simply put ,  while public performances cause extremely high stress levels in actors  -lrb-  more so amateur ones  -rrb-  ,  the stress actually improves the performance ,  supporting the idea of `` positive stress in challenging situations ''
a professional actor is someone who is paid to act . 
a critical audience with evaluative spectators is known to induce stress on actors during performance ,   -lrb-  see bode & brutten  -rrb-  and an actor will typically rate the quality of their performance higher than their spectators . 
it only lasted until 431 bc ,  when the peloponnesian war broke out . 
war with the persians continued . 
reverses followed peace with persia in 449 bc . 
by 454 bc ,  the delian league could be fairly characterised as an athenian empire; a key event of 454 bc was the moving of the treasury of the delian league from delos to athens . 
by 431 bc ,  athens's heavy-handed control of the delian league prompted the outbreak of the peloponnesian war; the league was dissolved upon the war's conclusion in 404 bc under the direction of lysander ,  the spartan commander . 
soon ,  war with the peloponnesians broke out . 
the greco-persian wars had their roots in the conquest of the greek cities of asia minor ,  and particularly ionia ,  by the achaemenid persian empire of cyrus the great shortly after 550 bc . 
the first member of the league to attempt to secede was the island of naxos in c .  471 bc . 
athens's empire was not very stable and after 27 years of war ,  the spartans ,  aided by the persians and athenian internal strife ,  were able to defeat it . 
in 465 bc ,  athens founded the colony of amphipolis on the strymon river . 
in 454 bc ,  the athenian general pericles moved the delian league's treasury from delos to athens ,  allegedly to keep it safe from persia . 
xanthippus ,  the athenian commander at mycale ,  had furiously rejected this; the ionian cities had been athenian colonies ,  and the athenians ,  if no-one else ,  would protect the ionians . 
the first horch automobile was built in 1901.
consequently ,  horch named his new company `` audi automobilwerke gmbh '' in 1910, `` audi '' being the latinization of horch . 
aircraft have means of automatically controlling flight . 
in the 1970s ,  the average aircraft had more than 100 cockpit instruments and controls . 
avionics are the electronic systems used on aircraft ,  artificial satellites ,  and spacecraft . 
on‑board communications are provided by public-address systems and aircraft intercoms . 
to help avoid controlled flight into terrain  -lrb-  cfit  -rrb-  ,  aircraft use systems such as ground-proximity warning systems  -lrb-  gpws  -rrb-  ,  which use radar altimeters as a key element . 
in order to overcome this weakness ,  modern aircraft use a terrain awareness warning system  -lrb-  taws  -rrb-  . 
weather systems such as weather radar  -lrb-  typically arinc 708 on commercial aircraft  -rrb-  and lightning detectors are important for aircraft flying at night or in instrument meteorological conditions ,  where it is not possible for pilots to see the weather ahead . 
aircraft communication can also take place using hf  -lrb-  especially for trans-oceanic flights  -rrb-  or satellite communication . 
smaller aircraft may use simpler traffic alerting systems such as tpas ,  which are passive  -lrb-  they do not actively interrogate the transponders of other aircraft  -rrb-  and do not provide advisories for conflict resolution . 
ares  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` áres ''   -rrb-  is the greek god of war . 
it is not known if he was worshipped in the form of an arabian god  -lrb-  or which one  -rrb-  or if he was worshipped in his greek form . 
his value as a war god is placed in doubt: during the trojan war ,  ares was on the losing side ,  while athena ,  often depicted in greek art as holding nike  -lrb-  victory  -rrb-  in her hand ,  favoured the triumphant greeks . 
according to herodotus' `` histories '' ,  the scythians worshipped a god he equated with the greek ares; unlike most other scythian gods ,  he does not offer the indigenous name for this deity . 
inscriptions as early as mycenaean times ,  and continuing into the classical period ,  attest to enyalios as another name for the god of war . 
the earliest attested form of the name is the mycenaean greek  ,  `` a-re '' ,  written in the linear b syllabic script . 
deimos  -lrb-  `` terror '' or `` dread ''  -rrb-  ,  and phobos  -lrb-  `` fear ''  -rrb-  ,  are his companions in war . 
although ares received occasional sacrifice from armies going to war ,  the god had a formal temple and cult at only a few sites . 
the counterpart of ares among the roman gods is mars ,  who as a father of the roman people was given a more important and dignified place in ancient roman religion as a guardian deity . 
grothendieck was born in weimar germany . 
grothendieck's early mathematical work was in functional analysis . 
grothendieck was very close to his mother to whom he dedicated his dissertation . 
grothendieck was born in berlin to anarchist parents . 
grothendieck began his productive and public career as a mathematician in 1949.
in may 1939, grothendieck was put on a train in hamburg for france . 
it is ,  however ,  in algebraic geometry and related fields where grothendieck did his most important and influential work . 
in 1988 grothendieck declined the crafoord prize with an open letter to the media . 
grothendieck is considered by many to be the greatest mathematician of the 20th century . 
in 1958 grothendieck was installed at the institut des hautes études scientifiques  -lrb-  ihés  -rrb-  ,  a new privately funded research institute that ,  in effect ,  had been created for jean dieudonné and grothendieck . 
born in germany ,  grothendieck was raised and lived primarily in france . 
on 13 november 2014, aged 86, grothendieck died in the hospital of saint-girons ,  ariège . 
this program culminated in the proofs of the weil conjectures ,  the last of which was settled by grothendieck's student pierre deligne in the early 1970s after grothendieck had largely withdrawn from mathematics . 
in 1991, grothendieck moved to a new address which he did not provide to his previous contacts in the mathematical community . 
during this period ,  grothendieck also gave his consent to publishing some of his drafts for ega on bertini-type theorems  -lrb-  `` ega '' v ,  published in ulam quarterly in 1992-1993 and later made available on the grothendieck circle web site in 2004 -rrb- . 
by the 1970s ,  grothendieck's work was seen as influential not only in algebraic geometry ,  and the allied fields of sheaf theory and homological algebra ,  but influenced logic ,  in the field of categorical logic . 
biology interested grothendieck much more than physics ,  and he organized some seminars on biological topics . 
grothendieck devoted the next three years to this group and served as the main editor of its bulletin . 
grothendieck wrote that ,  of these themes ,  the largest in scope was topoi ,  as they synthesized algebraic geometry ,  topology ,  and arithmetic . 
after leaving the ihés ,  grothendieck became a temporary professor at collège de france for two years . 
in 2006, aa counted 1,867,212 members and 106,202 aa groups worldwide . 
32% of aa's membership was introduced to it through a treatment facility . 
aa's program is an inheritor of counter-enlightenment philosophy . 
aa's program extends beyond abstaining from alcohol . 
are independent of aa world services in new york . 
aa's new york general service office regularly surveys aa members in north america . 
as this tension is an integral part of aa ,  rudy and greil argue that aa is best described as a `` quasi-religious organization '' . 
aa is served entirely by alcoholics ,  except for seven `` nonalcoholic friends of the fellowship '' of the 21-member aa board of trustees . 
it does not accept donations from people or organizations outside of aa . 
many aa meetings take place in treatment facilities . 
studies of aa's efficacy have produced inconsistent results . 
aa meetings are `` quasi-ritualized therapeutic sessions run by and for ,  alcoholics '' . 
the same survey showed that aa received 32% of its membership from other members ,  another 32% from treatment facilities ,  30% were self-motivated to attend aa ,  12% of its membership from court–ordered attendance ,  and only 1% of aa members decided to join based on information obtained from the internet . 
in 1949, the hazelden treatment center was founded and staffed by aa members ,  and since then many alcoholic rehabilitation clinics have incorporated aa's precepts into their treatment programs . 
the full text of each of these two books is available on the aa website at no charge . 
where formula_2 is the result of the operation ,  formula_3 is the color of the pixel in element a ,  formula_4 is the color of the pixel in element b ,  and formula_5 and formula_6 are the alpha of the pixels in elements a and b respectively . 
if an alpha channel is used in an image ,  there are two common representations that are available: straight  -lrb-  unassociated  -rrb-  alpha ,  and premultiplied  -lrb-  associated  -rrb-  alpha . 
with straight alpha ,  the rgb components represent the color of the object or pixel ,  disregarding its opacity . 
however ,  if this pixel uses premultiplied alpha ,  all of the rgb values  -lrb-  0, 0.7, 0 -rrb- are multiplied by 0.5 and then the alpha is appended to the end to yield  -lrb-  0, 0.35, 0, 0.5 -rrb- . 
if it is assumed that all color values are premultiplied by their alpha values  -lrb-  formula_7 -rrb- ,  we can rewrite the equation for output color as:
it is often said that associativity is an advantage of premultiplied alpha blending over straight alpha blending ,  but both are associative . 
the simplest type of data structure is a linear array ,  also called one-dimensional array . 
in computer science ,  an array data structure ,  or simply an array ,  is a data structure consisting of a collection of `` elements ''  -lrb-  values or variables  -rrb-  ,  each identified by at least one `` array index '' or `` key '' . 
an index `` maps '' the array value to a stored object . 
the memory address of the first element of an array is called first address or foundation address . 
array types are often implemented by array structures; however ,  in some languages they may be implemented by hash tables ,  linked lists ,  search trees ,  or other data structures . 
arrays are among the oldest and most important data structures ,  and are used by almost every program . 
 ''advance australia fair '' is the national anthem of australia . 
until 1974 `` god save the queen '' was australia's national anthem . 
before its adoption as australia's national anthem ,  `` advance australia fair '' had considerable use elsewhere . 
other songs and marches have been influenced by `` advance australia fair '' ,  such as the australian vice-regal salute . 
 ''advance australia fair '' received 43.29% of the vote ,  defeating the three alternatives ,  `` waltzing matilda ''  -lrb-  28.28%  -rrb-  ,  `` song of australia ''  -lrb-  9.65%  -rrb-  and the existing national anthem ,  `` god save the queen ''  -lrb-  18.78%  -rrb-  . 
the lyrics of `` advance australia fair '' were officially adopted in 1984 as follows:
where a payphone does not have any number listed on the unit ,  the number can be discovered by calling an anac service . 
regardless ,  if one were to call one of these numbers ,  listen for the number confirmation and hang up ,  they would in effect be using this system as if it were an anac . 
a technician calls the local telephone number of the automatic number announcement service . 
automatic number announcement systems are based on automatic number identification ,  and meant for phone company technicians ,  the anac system works with unlisted numbers ,  numbers with caller id blocking ,  and numbers with no outgoing calls allowed . 
anac numbers can also appear in the `` 958 '' range ,  but there is no requirement that they reside there . 
formerly ,  some companies changed their anac number every month for secrecy; this is still the case with a few numbers . 
the list is presented by area code ,  number and location . 
vespucci was a cousin of the husband of simonetta vespucci . 
vespucci's expeditions became known in europe after two accounts attributed to vespucci were published between 1502 and 1503.
two letters attributed to vespucci were published during his lifetime . 
it is possible that vespucci was not aware that waldseemüller had named the continent after him . 
not long after his return to spain ,  vespucci became a spanish citizen . 
amerigo vespucci was born and raised in florence on the italian peninsula . 
the letter ,  to lorenzo di pierfrancesco de' medici ,  claims that vespucci determined his longitude celestially
the two disputed letters claim that vespucci made four voyages to america ,  while at most two can be verified from other sources . 
it came to be termed `` the americas '' ,  a name derived from `` americus '' ,  the latin version of vespucci's first name . 
maillol was born in banyuls-sur-mer ,  roussillon . 
maillol's first major sculpture ,  `` a seated woman '' ,  was modeled after his wife . 
gauguin encouraged his growing interest in decorative art ,  an interest that led maillol to take up tapestry design . 
josep pla said of maillol ,  `` these archaic ideas ,  greek ,  were the great novelty maillol brought into the tendency of modern sculpture . 
canova arrived in rome ,  on 28 december 1780.
by 1800, canova was the most celebrated artist in europe . 
in 1757, antonio canova was born in the venetian republic city of possagno to pietro canova ,  a stonecutter . 
while in rome ,  canova spent time studying and sketching the works of michelangelo . 
 ''napoleon as mars the peacemaker '' had its inception after canova was hired to make a bust of napoleon in 1802.
the monument secured canova's reputation as the pre-eminent living artist . 
in 1781, girolamo zulian – the venetian ambassador to rome – hired canova to sculpt `` theseus and the minotaur '' . 
claudel and rodin parted in 1898.
it is one of rodin's best-known and most acclaimed works . 
rodin's focus was on the handling of clay . 
by 1900, rodin's artistic reputation was entrenched . 
rodin had enormous artistic influence . 
françois auguste rené rodin  -lrb-  12 november 1840 – 17 november 1917 -rrb- ,  known as auguste rodin  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  ,  was a french sculptor . 
these include `` camille claudel '' ,  a 1988 film in which gérard depardieu portrays rodin ,  `` camille claudel 1915 '' from 2013, and `` rodin '' ,  a 2017 film starring vincent lindon as rodin . 
henry moore acknowledged rodin's seminal influence on his work . 
the ballet is dedicated to the life and work of auguste rodin and camille claudel . 
although busy with `` the gates of hell '' ,  rodin won other commissions . 
the next opportunity for rodin in america was the 1893 chicago world's fair . 
rodin saw suffering and conflict as hallmarks of modern art . 
during one absence ,  rodin wrote to beuret ,  `` i think of how much you must have loved me to put up with my caprices .  .  . i remain ,  in all tenderness ,  your rodin . `` 
the committee was incensed by the untraditional proposal ,  but rodin would not yield . 
in 1889, the paris salon invited rodin to be a judge on its artistic jury . 
sculptural fragments to rodin were autonomous works ,  and he considered them the essence of his artistic statement . 
rilke stayed with rodin in 1905 and 1906, and did administrative work for him; he would later write a laudatory monograph on the sculptor . 
in brussels ,  rodin created his first full-scale work ,  `` the age of bronze '' ,  having returned from italy . 
rodin willed to the french state his studio and the right to make casts from his plasters . 
rodin was born in 1840 into a working-class family in paris ,  the second child of marie cheffer and jean-baptiste rodin ,  who was a police department clerk . 
rodin's sister maria ,  two years his senior ,  died of peritonitis in a convent in 1862, and rodin was anguished with guilt because he had introduced her to an unfaithful suitor . 
a modern critic ,  indeed ,  indicates that `` balzac '' is one of rodin's masterpieces . 
often lacking a clear conception of his major works ,  rodin compensated with hard work and a striving for perfection . 
art critics concerned about authenticity have argued that taking a cast does not equal reproducing a rodin sculpture – especially given the importance of surface treatment in rodin's work . 
rodin was a naturalist ,  less concerned with monumental expression than with character and emotion . 
gambetta spoke of rodin in turn to several government ministers ,  likely including  ,  the undersecretary of the ministry of fine arts ,  whom rodin eventually met . 
rodin's intent had been to show balzac at the moment of conceiving a work – to express courage ,  labor ,  and struggle . 
several films have been made featuring rodin as a prominent character or presence . 
ann arbor is home to the university of michigan . 
ann arbor has a council-manager form of government . 
the university of michigan shapes ann arbor's economy significantly . 
in about 1774, the potawatomi founded two villages in the area of what is now ann arbor . 
following a 1956 vote ,  the city of east ann arbor merged with ann arbor to encompass the eastern sections of the city . 
ann arbor municipal airport ,  which is south of the city at  ,  has an elevation of  . 
ann arbor has become increasingly gentrified in recent years . 
a person from ann arbor is called an `` ann arborite '' ,  and many long-time residents call themselves `` townies '' . 
ann arbor is represented in the npsl by semi-pro soccer team afc ann arbor ,  a club founded in 2014 who call themselves the mighty oak . 
ann arbor was founded in 1824, named for wives of the village's founders ,  both named ann ,  and the stands of bur oak trees . 
ann arbor is a city in the u . s .  state of michigan and the county seat of washtenaw county . 
the act of settlement is an act of the parliament of england that was passed in 1701 to settle the succession to the english and irish crowns on protestants only . 
under the act of settlement anyone who became a roman catholic ,  or who married one ,  became disqualified to inherit the throne . 
the disqualification arising from marriage to a roman catholic was removed by the succession to the crown act 2013.
powell concluded that a roman catholic crown would be the destruction of the church of england because `` it would contradict the essential character of that church '' . 
challenges have been made against the act of settlement ,  especially its provisions regarding roman catholics and preference for males . 
with the announcement in 2007 of the engagement of peter phillips to autumn kelly ,  a roman catholic and a canadian ,  discussion about the act of settlement was revived . 
as well as being part of the law of the united kingdom ,  the act of settlement was received into the laws of all the countries and territories over which the british monarch reigned . 
eight additional provisions of the act would only come into effect upon the death of both william and anne:
he was restored to the line of succession in 2015 when the succession to the crown act 2013 came into force ,  and became 34th in line . 
the act of settlement was ,  in many ways ,  the major cause of the union of scotland with england and wales to form the kingdom of great britain . 
in canada ,  where the act of settlement  -lrb-    -rrb-  is now a part of canadian constitutional law ,  tony o'donohue ,  a canadian civic politician ,  took issue with the provisions that exclude roman catholics from the throne ,  and which make the monarch of canada the supreme governor of the church of england ,  requiring him or her to be an anglican . 
the act played a key role in the formation of the kingdom of great britain . 
english pressure on scotland to accept the act of settlement was one factor leading to the parliamentary union of the two countries in 1707.
by virtue of article ii of the treaty of union ,  which defined the succession to the throne of great britain ,  the act of settlement became part of scots law as well . 
from time to time there has been debate over repealing the clause that prevents roman catholics ,  or those who marry one ,  from ascending to the british throne . 
aircraft hijacking  -lrb-  also called skyjacking ,  plane jacking ,  air robbery ,  air piracy ,  or aircraft piracy ,  with the latter term being used within the special aircraft jurisdiction of the united states and in the us state of mississippi and florida  -rrb-  is the unlawful seizure of an aircraft by an individual or a group . 
because it is widely considered an act of terrorism and how it can seriously endanger the lives of those upon the aircraft and others ,  aircraft hijacking is often treated as an extremely serious crime . 
around 500 bc the `` hekatompedon '' was dismantled to make place for a new grander building ,  the `` older parthenon ''  -lrb-  often referred to as the `` pre-parthenon '' ,  `` early parthenon ''  -rrb-  . 
while there is evidence that the hill was inhabited as far back as the fourth millennium bc ,  it was pericles  -lrb-  c .  495 – 429 bc  -rrb-  in the fifth century bc who coordinated the construction of the site's most important present remains including the parthenon ,  the propylaia ,  the erechtheion and the temple of athena nike . 
a temple to `` athena polias '' ,  the tutelary deity of the city ,  was erected between 570–550 bc . 
during the byzantine period ,  the parthenon was used as a church ,  dedicated to the virgin mary . 
the parthenon and the other buildings were damaged seriously during the 1687 siege by the venetians during the morean war when gunpowder being stored in the parthenon was hit by a cannonball and exploded . 
the dominant feature during the ottoman period was a mosque inside the parthenon ,  complete with a minaret . 
restoration of the temple of athena nike was completed in 2010.
all the valuable ancient artifacts are situated in the acropolis museum ,  which resides on the southern slope of the same rock ,  280 metres from the parthenon . 
there ,  a new robe of woven wool  -lrb-  `` peplos ''  -rrb-  was placed on either the statue of athena polias in the erechtheum  -lrb-  during a regular panathenaea  -rrb-  or on the statue of athena parthenos in the parthenon  -lrb-  during the great panathenaea ,  held every four years  -rrb-  . 
on 1 may 1776 johann adam weishaupt founded the `` illuminati '' in the electorate of bavaria . 
the birth of adam weishaupt '' even though this reference is actually incorrect as weishaupt was born in 1748.
adam weishaupt is referred to repeatedly in `` the illuminatus ! 
adam weishaupt was born on 6 february 1748 in ingolstadt in the electorate of bavaria . 
johann adam weishaupt  -lrb-   6 february 1748 – 18 november 1830 -rrb- was a german philosopher ,  professor ,  and founder of the order of the illuminati ,  a secret society . 
weishaupt lost his position at the university of ingolstadt and fled bavaria . 
weishaupt's radical rationalism and vocabulary were not likely to succeed . 
this behaviour was the same as on the bbc micro . 
the acorn electron was a budget version of the bbc micro educational/home computer made by acorn computers ltd . 
like the bbc micro ,  the electron was constrained by limited memory resources . 
it also used up 20 kb of ram for the graphics display rather than the 1 kb of a hardware mode 7.
 -lrb-  the bbc micro ,  courtesy of all its ports ,  exposed all lines .   -rrb- 
of the 32 kb ram ,  3½ kb was allocated to the os at startup and at least 10 kb was taken up by the display buffer in contiguous display modes . 
of the capabilities present in the bbc micro but absent from the electron ,  the teletext-style `` mode 7 '' was particularly conspicuous because of the very low memory usage in that mode  -lrb-  just less than 1 kb  -rrb-  and the high number of bbc programs that used it . 
it has 32 kilobytes of ram ,  and its rom includes bbc basic v2 along with its operating system . 
there are also two known fpga based recreations of the acorn electron hardware . 
this enabled the electron to achieve the same functionality as that provided by the expansion-rom slots under the keyboard and on the bottom-left of the bbc micro b keyboard . 
for a short period ,  the electron was reportedly the best selling micro in the united kingdom . 
in order to keep track of its position within the display ,  the electron maintains an internal display address counter . 
notable enterprises which produced discs of such software are bbc pd ,  electron user group and headfirst pd . 
the hardware of the bbc micro was emulated by a single customized ula chip designed by acorn in conjunction with ferranti . 
by providing extra storage this modification also allowed some games and applications intended for the bbc micro to function on the electron despite the lack of a native mode 7.
this meant the electron had a lifespan not much shorter than those more popular micros and much longer than competitors such as the oric-1 and dragon 32.
despite this ,  several features that would later be associated with bbc master and archimedes were first features of electron expansion units ,  including rom cartridge slots and the advanced disc filing system ,  a hierarchical improvement to the bbc's original disc filing system . 
electron software is predominantly archived in the uef file format . 
the edge-connector on the rear of the electron exposed almost all the bus lines ,  but not all . 
while its speed was acceptable compared to the commodore and competing computers the electron was ,  however ,  much slower than the bbc micro; `` popular computing weekly '' reported ,  for example ,  that bbc micro games ran `` at less than half the speed ,  with very significant effects on their appeal '' . 
the most basic solution was a pure software system supplied on a rom cartridge that drew a low resolution approximation of the mode 7 display in a graphics mode . 
as a games machine the electron shared the same failing as the sinclair spectrum in not having a joystick port . 
notable popular games particularly associated with the electron include:
during its decline ,  master ram boards were added to every electron in an attempt to increase sales . 
 ''a fire upon the deep '' shared the 1993 hugo award for best novel with `` doomsday book '' . 
all humans in the novel  -lrb-  except pham  -rrb-  are descended from nyjoran stock . 
 ''a fire upon the deep '' won the hugo award in 1993, sharing it with `` doomsday book '' by connie willis . 
before the mission is launched ,  the blight attacks relay and concurrently kills old one . 
the book was nominated for the 1992 nebula award for best novel ,  the 1993 john w .  campbell memorial award for best science fiction novel ,  and the 1993 locus award for best science fiction novel . 
as old one dies ,  it downloads what information it can into pham to defeat the blight ,  and pham ,  ravna and the skroderiders barely escape relay's destruction in the `` out of band ii '' . 
vinge expands on pham's backstory in `` a deepness in the sky '' . 
however ,  shortly before the blight's final `` flowering '' ,  two self-aware entities created similarly to the blight plot to aid the humans before the blight can escape . 
the modern era of lighter-than-air flight began early in the 17th century with galileo's experiments in which he showed that air has weight . 
the science of aerodynamics deals with the motion of air and the way that it interacts with objects in motion ,  such as an aircraft . 
the chinese also constructed small hot air balloons ,  or lanterns ,  and rotary-wing toys . 
the first flight ended in disaster and the approach has seldom been used since . 
in an attempt the next year to provide both endurance and controllability ,  de rozier developed a balloon having both hot air and hydrogen gas bags ,  a design which was soon named after him as the `` rozière . `` 
he was the first true scientific aerial investigator to publish his work ,  which included for the first time the underlying principles and forces of flight . 
aeronautics is the science or art involved with the study ,  design ,  and manufacturing of air flight capable machines ,  and the techniques of operating aircraft and rockets within the atmosphere . 
the lifting medium for his balloon would be an `` aether '' whose composition he did not know . 
when the internal explosion engines were invented ,  small enough to be able to propel a flying device with them ,  a race started between two flight possibilities: the lighter than the air  -lrb-  dirigibles  -rrb-  and the heavier than the air  -lrb-  aeroplanes  -rrb-   . 
as a result of these exploits ,  the hot-air balloon became known as the `` montgolfière '' type and the hydrogen balloon the `` charlière '' . 
this first film shows workers leaving the lumière factory . 
the lumière brothers saw film as a novelty and had withdrawn from the film business in 1905.
they went on to develop the first practical photographic colour process ,  the lumière autochrome . 
they also made the first steps towards comedy film with the slapstick of `` l'arroseur arrosé '' . 
the first public screening of films at which admission was charged was a program by the skladanowsky brothers that was held on 1 november 1895, in berlin . 
the mission to the gentiles is promoted from antioch and confirmed at meeting in jerusalem between paul and the leadership of the jerusalem church . 
thus paul is depicted as a moderating presence between the church and the roman empire . 
the second key element is the roles of peter and paul ,  the first representing the jewish christian church ,  the second the mission to the gentiles . 
the gospel of luke and acts make up a two-volume work which scholars call luke–acts . 
acts and the gospel of luke make up a two-part work ,  luke–acts ,  by the same anonymous author ,  usually dated to around 80–90 ad . 
as the second part of the two-part work luke–acts ,  acts has significant links to the gospel of luke . 
one issue debated by scholars is luke’s political vision regarding the relationship between the early church and the roman empire . 
they then proceed to do so ,  in the order outlined: first jerusalem ,  then judea ,  then samaria ,  then the entire  -lrb-  roman  -rrb-  world . 
his `` salvation history '' stretches from the creation to the present time of his readers ,  in three ages: first ,  the time of `` the law and the prophets ''  -lrb-  luke 16:16 -rrb- ,  the period beginning with genesis and ending with the appearance of john the baptist  -lrb-  luke 1:5–3:1 -rrb-; second ,  the epoch of jesus ,  in which the kingdom of god was preached  -lrb-  luke 3:2–24:51 -rrb-; and finally the period of the church ,  which began when the risen christ was taken into heaven ,  and would end with his second coming . 
the romans never move against jesus or his followers unless provoked by the jews ,  in the trial scenes the christian missionaries are always cleared of charges of violating roman laws ,  and acts ends with paul in rome proclaiming the christian message under roman protection; at the same time ,  luke makes clear that the romans ,  like all earthly rulers ,  receive their authority from satan ,  while christ is ruler of the kingdom of god . 
an assyrian calendar has been revived . 
the old assyrian empire is one of four periods into which the history of assyria is divided ,  the other three being: the early assyrian period ,  the middle assyrian period and the new assyrian period . 
by 150 bc ,  assyria was largely under the control of the parthian empire . 
assyria once more began to expand with the rise of adad-nirari ii in 911 bc . 
 ''assyria '' can also refer to the geographic region or heartland where assyria ,  its empires and the assyrian people were  -lrb-  and still are  -rrb-  centered . 
the assyrian church structure thrived during the period of 600–1300, and is regarded as a golden age for assyrians . 
the period from the 1940s through to 1963 was a period of respite for the assyrians in northern iraq and north east syria . 
it was in 5th century bc assyria that the syriac language and syriac script evolved . 
assyria  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also called the assyrian empire ,  was a mesopotamian kingdom and empire of the ancient near east and the levant . 
assyria was initially ruled by the short-lived median empire  -lrb-  609–549 bc  -rrb-  after its fall . 
however ,  the king list is the only information from assyria for this period . 
the earliest neolithic sites in what will be assyria were the jarmo culture c .  7100 bc ,  the halaf culture c .  6100 bc ,  and the hassuna culture c .  6000 bc . 
after the medes were overthrown by the persians as the dominant force in ancient iran ,  assyria was ruled by the persian achaemenid empire  -lrb-  as athura  -rrb-  from 549 bc to 330 bc  -lrb-  see achaemenid assyria  -rrb-  . 
the assyrians also sided with the british during the iraqi revolt against the british . 
the city of aššur ,  together with a number of other assyrian cities ,  seem to have been established by 2600 bc . 
when the seleucids lost control of assyria proper ,  the name `` syria '' survived but was erroneously applied not only to the land of assyria itself ,  but also now to aramea  -lrb-  also known as eber nari  -rrb-  to the west that had once been part of the assyrian empire ,  but apart from the north eastern corner ,  had never been a part of assyria itself ,  nor inhabited by assyrians . 
however ,  in 116, under trajan ,  assyria and its independent states were briefly taken over by rome as the province of assyria . 
the indigenous modern eastern aramaic-speaking assyrian christian ethnic minority in northern iraq ,  north east syria ,  southeast turkey and northwest iran are the descendants of the ancient assyrians  -lrb-  see assyrian continuity  -rrb-  . 
nabopolassar ,  still pinned down in southern mesopotamia by assyrian forces ,  was completely uninvolved in this major breakthrough against assyria . 
the middle assyrian period was marked by the long wars fought that helped build assyria into a warrior society . 
assyria seems to have recovered dramatically ,  and flourished during this period . 
during the aftermath ,  egypt ,  along with remnants of the assyrian army ,  suffered a defeat at the battle of carchemish ,  in 605 bc ,  but the assyrian troops did not participate to this battle as the army of the assyrian state because certainly by 609 bc at the very latest ,  assyria had been destroyed as an independent political entity ,  although it was to launch major rebellions against the achaemenid empire in 546 bc and 520 bc ,  and remained a geo-political region ,  ethnic entity and colonised province . 
it is from this period that the later `` syria '' vs `` assyria '' naming controversy arises ,  the seleucids applied the name 'syria' which is a 9th-century bc indo-anatolian derivation of 'assyria'  -lrb-  see etymology of syria  -rrb-  not only to assyria itself ,  but also to the levantine lands to the west  -lrb-  historically known as aram and eber nari  -rrb-  ,  which had been part of the assyrian empire but ,  the north east corner aside ,  never a part of assyria proper . 
in 226, assyria was largely taken over by the sasanian empire . 
in 332 bc ,  assyria fell to alexander the great ,  the macedonian emperor ,  who called the inhabitants `` assyrioi '' . 
of the early history of the kingdom of assyria ,  little is known . 
in the neo-assyrian period ,  the aramaic language became increasingly common ,  more so than akkadian—this was thought to be largely due to the mass deportations undertaken by assyrian kings ,  in which large aramaic-speaking populations ,  conquered by the assyrians ,  were relocated to assyria and interbred with the assyrians ,  and due to the fact that tiglath-pileser ii made it the lingua franca of assyria and its empire in the 8th century bc . 
the persians had spent centuries under assyrian domination  -lrb-  their first ruler achaemenes and his successors ,  having been vassals of assyria  -rrb-  ,  and assyrian influence can be seen in achaemenid art ,  infrastructure and administration . 
it is estimated that nearly 60 percent of iraqi assyrians have fled . 
the assyrians ,  like the rest of the mesopotamian peoples ,  followed ancient mesopotamian religion ,  with their national god ashur having the most importance to them during the assyrian empire . 
etymologically ,  `` assyria '' is connected to the name of `` syria '' ,  with both being ultimately derived from the akkadian  . 
during the akkadian empire  -lrb-  2334–2154 bc  -rrb-  ,  the assyrians ,  like all the akkadian-speaking mesopotamians  -lrb-  and also the sumerians  -rrb-  ,  became subject to the dynasty of the city state of akkad ,  centered in central mesopotamia . 
assyria is named for its original capital ,  the ancient city of aššur ,  which dates to c .  2600 bc ,  originally one of a number of akkadian city states in mesopotamia . 
most of assyria briefly became part of the neo-sumerian empire  -lrb-  or 3rd dynasty of ur  -rrb-  founded in c .  2112 bc . 
in 2014, isil attacked assyrian towns and villages in the assyrian homelands of northern iraq and north east syria ,  and assyrians forced from their homes in cities such as mosul had their houses and possessions stolen ,  both by isil and also by their own former arab muslim neighbours . 
egypt's 26th dynasty ,  which had been installed by the assyrians as vassals ,  quietly detached itself from assyria ,  although it was careful to retain friendly relations . 
eriba-adad i  -lrb-  1392–1366 bc  -rrb-  ,  a son of ashur-bel-nisheshu ,  ascended the throne in 1392 bc and finally broke the ties to the mitanni empire ,  and instead began to exert assyrian influence on the mitanni . 
after the reign of adad-nirari iii ,  assyria entered a period of instability and decline ,  losing its hold over most of its vassal and tributary territories by the middle of the 8th century bc ,  until the reign of tiglath-pileser iii  -lrb-  745–727 bc  -rrb-  . 
these freedoms were accompanied by a major assyrian cultural revival ,  and temples to the assyrian national gods ashur ,  sin ,  hadad ,  ishtar ,  ninurta ,  tammuz and shamash were once more dedicated throughout assyria and upper mesopotamia during this period . 
the land was known as asōristān  -lrb-  the sassanid persian name meaning `` land of the assyrians ''  -rrb-  during this period ,  and became the birthplace of the distinct church of the east  -lrb-  now split into the assyrian church of the east ,  ancient church of the east and chaldean catholic church  -rrb-  and a centre of the syriac orthodox church ,  with a flourishing syriac  -lrb-  assyrian  -rrb-  christian culture which exists there to this day . 
during the sasanian period ,  much of what had once been babylonia in southern mesopotamia was incorporated into assyria ,  and in effect the whole of mesopotamia came to be known as asōristān . 
assyria was also sometimes known as subartu and `` azuhinum '' prior to the rise of the city-state of ashur ,  after which it was aššūrāyu ,  and after its fall ,  from 605 bc through to the late seventh century ad variously as achaemenid assyria ,  and also referenced as atouria ,  ator ,  athor ,  and sometimes as `` syria '' which etymologically derives from assyria according to strabo ,  `` syria ''  -lrb-  greek  -rrb-  ,  `` assyria ''  -lrb-  latin  -rrb-  and asōristān  -lrb-  middle persian  -rrb-  . 
assyria is named after its original capital ,  the ancient city of aššur ,  which dates to c .  2600 bc ,  originally one of a number of akkadian-speaking city states in mesopotamia . 
the syriac language also emerged in assyria during the 5th century bc ,  and during the christian era ,  syriac literature and syriac script were to become hugely influential . 
recent classification schemes adopting this approach ,  such as the `` boston-neoclassical model '' ,  also group these classical aphasia subtypes into two larger classes: the nonfluent aphasias  -lrb-  which encompasses broca's aphasia and transcortical motor aphasia  -rrb-  and the fluent aphasias  -lrb-  which encompasses wernicke's aphasia ,  conduction aphasia and transcortical sensory aphasia  -rrb-  . 
there is no one treatment proven to be effective for all types of aphasias . 
progressive jargon aphasia is a fluent or receptive aphasia in which the person's speech is incomprehensible ,  but appears to make sense to them . 
aphasia is most often caused by stroke ,  but any disease or damage to the parts of the brain that control language can cause aphasia . 
there are three classifications of primary progressive aphasia : progressive nonfluent aphasia  -lrb-  pnfa  -rrb-  ,  semantic dementia  -lrb-  sd  -rrb-  ,  and logopenic progressive aphasia  -lrb-  lpa  -rrb- 
following are some precautions that should be taken to avoid aphasia ,  by decreasing the risk of stroke ,  the main cause of aphasia:
the severity of the type of aphasia varies depending on the size of the stroke . 
when addressing wernicke's aphasia ,  according to bakheit et al . 
these schemes also identify several further aphasia subtypes ,  including: anomic aphasia ,  which is characterized by a selective difficulty finding the names for things; and global aphasia ,  where both expression and comprehension of speech are severely compromised . 
primary progressive aphasia  -lrb-  ppa  -rrb-  ,  while its name can be misleading ,  is actually a form of dementia that has some symptoms closely related to several forms of aphasia . 
perhaps due to the relative rareness of conduction aphasia ,  few studies have specifically studied the effectiveness of therapy for people with this type of aphasia . 
the aorta  -lrb-     -rrb-  is the main artery in the human body ,  originating from the left ventricle of the heart and extending down to the abdomen ,  where it splits into two smaller arteries  -lrb-  the common iliac arteries  -rrb-  . 
apart from the king  -lrb-  or kings  -rrb-  of gerar ,  the bible also records this name for:
the name or title `` abimelech '' is formed from hebrew words for `` father '' and `` king , ``  and may be interpreted in a variety of ways ,  including `` father-king '' ,  `` my father is king , ``  or `` father of a king . `` 
he is the author of and a contributor to the samba file server ,  and co-inventor of the rsync algorithm . 
for his phd dissertation ,  he co-developed rsync ,  including the rsync algorithm ,  a highly efficient file transfer and synchronisation tool . 
there is no dedicated command in applesoft basic for printer output . 
applesoft is similar to commodore's basic 2.0 aside from features inherited from integer basic . 
while applesoft basic is slower than integer basic ,  it has many features that the older basic lacks: conversely ,  applesoft lacked the codice_9  -lrb-  remainder  -rrb-  operator that had been present in integer basic . 
applesoft basic was supplied by microsoft and its name is derived from the names of both apple and microsoft . 
microsoft licensed a basic compatible with applesoft to vtech for its laser 128 clone . 
applesoft basic can be extended by two means: the ampersand  -lrb-  &  -rrb-  command and the usr -lrb-    -rrb-  function . 
applesoft lacks several commands and functions common to most of the non-6502 microsoft basic interpreters ,  such as:
applesoft basic is a dialect of microsoft basic ,  developed by marc mcdonald and ric weiland ,  supplied with the apple ii series of computers . 
there are a few minor differences such as applesoft's lack of bitwise operators; otherwise most basic programs that do not utilize hardware-dependent features will run on both basics . 
unlike in integer basic ,  applesoft basic variable names are significant only to two letters; they can be made longer ,  but only the first two letters are used . 
asterix or the adventures of asterix  -lrb-   or `` astérix le gaulois ''   -rrb-  is a series of french comics . 
uderzo's first sketches portrayed asterix as a huge and strong traditional gaulish warrior . 
numbers 1–24, 32 and 34 are by goscinny and uderzo . 
 ''asterix conquers rome '' is a comics adaptation of the animated film `` the twelve tasks of asterix '' . 
for explanations of some of the other names ,  see list of `` asterix '' characters . 
 ,  it has not been translated into english . 
the ninth `` asterix '' volume ,  when first released in 1967, sold 1.2 million copies in two days . 
in 2016, the publisher french hachette along with anne goscinny and albert uderzo decided to make the special issue album `` the xii tasks of asterix '' for the 40th anniversary of the film `` the twelve tasks of asterix '' . 
as of 2017, 370million copies of `` asterix '' books have been sold worldwide ,  with co-creators rené goscinny and albert uderzo being france's best-selling authors abroad . 
in 1996, a tribute album in honour of albert uderzo was released titled `` uderzo croqué par ses amis '' ,  a volume containing 21 short stories with uderzo in ancient gaul . 
in december 2008, uderzo sold his stake to hachette ,  which took over the company . 
uderzo decided to sell these rights to hachette instead of albert-rené ,  but the publishing rights on new albums were still owned by albert uderzo  -lrb-  40%  -rrb-  ,  sylvie uderzo  -lrb-  20%  -rrb-  and anne goscinny  -lrb-  40%  -rrb-  . 
many of the asterix adventures take place in other countries aside from their homeland ,  gaul . 
the cardinals are the only nfl team who have never lost a playoff game at home ,  with a 5–0 record: the 1947 nfl championship game ,  two postseason victories during the aforementioned 2008–09 nfl playoffs ,  one during the 2009–10 playoffs ,  and one during the 2015–16 playoffs . 
the cardinals' first home game in arizona ,  in 1988, saw them play in red jerseys . 
both the red and white jerseys have the option of red or white pants . 
after their historic 2008 season ,  the cardinals posted a 10–6 record in 2009, their first season with 10 wins in arizona . 
the cardinals wore white at home for the first time in a regular season game at state farm stadium against the houston texans on october 11,  . 
the team was established in chicago in 1898 as an amateur football team and joined the nfl as a charter member on september 17, 1920.
the franchise has won two nfl championships ,  both while it was based in chicago . 
in  ,  the team unveiled its first major changes in a century . 
atlanta leads the series 52–48.
the only two winning seasons in their first twelve years were and
the falcons finished the 2001 season with a record of 7–9 and missed the playoffs . 
the falcons finished the 2008 regular season with a record of 11–5, and the #5 seed in the playoffs . 
the falcons defeated the tampa bay buccaneers 20–10 in the final game of the season to improve their record to 9–7.
in the falcons' 25th and final season in the georgia dome ,  atlanta lost their week 1 game to the buccaneers 24–31.
the falcons had their first monday night football game in atlanta during the 1970 season ,  a 20–7 loss to the miami dolphins . 
in the 1978 season ,  the falcons qualified for the playoffs for the first time and won the wild card game against the eagles 14–13.
the falcons moved into their new home ,  the mercedes-benz stadium ,  this season . 
dan quinn's first season saw a 5–0 start ,  the team's best start in four years . 
the team then had losing seasons for the next eight years . 
the team finished the 1960s with twelve wins in four seasons . 
in their last regular season game at the georgia dome ,  the falcons defeated the new orleans saints ,  and secured an 11–5 record and a first round bye . 
the falcons finished the season 13–3, and clinched the number one seed in the nfc playoffs . 
the falcons lead the series 27–17.
in every season except for their debut season ,  the falcons have shared a division with the new orleans saints  -lrb-  first the nfc west ,  and now the nfc south  -rrb-  . 
the falcons ended the year with a dismal 4–12 record . 
the falcons again fell short of achieving back-to-back winning seasons in  ,  going 8–8.
in 2000, the falcons suffered through another horrendous season finishing 4–12 and once again missing the playoffs . 
the falcons' inaugural season was in 1966, and their first preseason game was on august 1, a loss to the philadelphia eagles . 
although they failed to make the playoffs in 2009 the team rallied to win their final three regular season games to record back-to-back winning seasons for the first time in franchise history . 
ásatrú grew steadily in the united states during the 1960s . 
there are notable differences of emphasis between `` ásatrú '' as practiced in the us and in scandinavia . 
some groups identifying as ásatrú have been associated with national socialist and white nationalist movements . 
within the community it is sometimes stated that the term `` ásatrú '' pertains to groups which are not racially focused ,  while `` odinism '' is the term preferred by racially oriented groups . 
in the 1990s ,  mcnallen founded the ásatrú folk assembly  -lrb-  afa  -rrb-  ,  an ethnically oriented heathen group headquartered in california . 
although the term `` heathenry '' is often employed to cover the entire religious movement ,  different heathen groups within the united states often prefer the term `` ásatrú '' or `` odinism '' as self-designations . 
ásatrú organizations have memberships which span the entire political and spiritual spectrum . 
ursula k .  le guin coined the word `` ansible '' in her 1966 novel `` rocannon's world '' . 
in her subsequent works ,  le guin continued to develop the concept of the ansible:
a few years after his martyrdom ,  adalbert was canonized as st .  adalbert of prague . 
in 981 st .  adalbert of magdeburg died ,  and his young protege adalbert returned to bohemia . 
the one thousandth anniversary of st .  adalbert's martyrdom was on 23 april 1997.
another famous biographer of st .  adalbert was st .  bruno of querfurt who wrote a hagiography of him in 1001-4.
the one in gniezno was stolen in 1923.
the young vojtěch took his tutor's name `` adalbert '' at his confirmation . 
ælfheah was the first archbishop of canterbury to die a violent death . 
ælfheah  -lrb-  c .  953 – 19 april 1012 -rrb- was an anglo-saxon bishop of winchester ,  later archbishop of canterbury . 
the account of ælfheah's death appears in the e version of the `` anglo-saxon chronicle '':
purportedly born in weston on the outskirts of bath ,  ælfheah became a monk early in life . 
pope gregory vii canonised ælfheah in 1078, with a feast day of 19 april . 
we will also assume that all rings are unital ,  and all ring homomorphisms are unital . 
let `` r '' be a fixed commutative ring  -lrb-  so `` r '' could be a field  -rrb-  . 
if `` a '' itself is commutative  -lrb-  as a ring  -rrb-  then it is called a commutative `` r ''-algebra . 
the most basic example is a ring itself; it is an algebra over its center or any subring lying in the center . 
see also: generic matrix ring . 
a homomorphism between two `` r ''-algebras is an `` r ''-linear ring homomorphism . 
let `` a '' be a set ,  and apply the axiom of regularity to { ''a ''} ,  which is a set by the axiom of pairing . 
given the other axioms of zermelo–fraenkel set theory ,  the axiom of regularity is equivalent to the axiom of induction . 
let `` x '' and `` y '' be sets . 
in mathematics ,  the axiom of regularity  -lrb-  also known as the axiom of foundation  -rrb-  is an axiom of zermelo–fraenkel set theory that states that every non-empty set `` a '' contains an element that is disjoint from `` a '' . 
suppose `` x '' is any set . 
urelements are objects that are not sets ,  but which can be elements of sets . 
the axiom of regularity was also shown to be independent from the other axioms of zf -lrb-  c  -rrb-  ,  assuming they are consistent . 
in the presence of the axiom schema of separation ,  russell's paradox becomes a proof that there is no set of all sets . 
hence ,  the axiom of regularity is equivalent ,  given the axiom of dependent choice ,  to the alternative axiom that there are no downward infinite membership chains . 
the last version of ps/2 aix is 1.3.
unlike aix 7.1, aix 7.2 is only supported on systems based on power7 or later processors . 
aix is based on unix system v with 4.3bsd-compatible extensions . 
aix ps/2  -lrb-  also known as aix/386 -rrb- was developed by locus computing corporation under contract to ibm . 
in 1988, ibm announced aix/370, also developed by locus computing . 
aix version 1, introduced in 1986 for the ibm rt pc workstation ,  was based on unix system v releases 1 and 2.
support for ps/2 aix ended in march 1995.
it is currently supported on ibm power systems alongside ibm i and linux . 
among other variants ,  ibm later produced aix version 3  -lrb-  also known as aix/6000 -rrb- ,  based on system v release 3, for their power-based rs/6000 platform . 
in developing aix ,  ibm and interactive systems corporation  -lrb-  whom ibm contracted  -rrb-  also incorporated source code from 4.2 and 4.3 bsd unix . 
zip was the protocol by which appletalk network numbers were associated with zone names . 
an appletalk address was a 4-byte quantity . 
appletalk was at that time the most used networking system in the world ,  with over three times the installations of any other vendor . 
name binding protocol was a dynamic ,  distributed system for managing appletalk names . 
besides appletalk and tcp/ip ,  any ethernet network could also simultaneously carry other protocols such as decnet and ipx . 
the `` tops teleconnector '' ms-dos networking system over appletalk system enabled ms-dos pcs to communicate over appletalk network hardware; it comprised an appletalk interface card for the pc and a suite of networking software allowing such functions as file ,  drive and printer sharing . 
appletalk was released in 1985, and was the primary protocol used by apple devices through the 1980s and 1990s . 
aep  -lrb-  appletalk echo protocol  -rrb-  is a transport layer protocol designed to test the reachability of network nodes . 
appletalk support was also available in most networked printers  -lrb-  especially laser printers  -rrb-  ,  some file servers ,  and a number of routers . 
the apple filing protocol  -lrb-  afp  -rrb-  ,  formerly appletalk filing protocol ,  is the protocol for communicating with appleshare file servers . 
aarp resolves appletalk addresses to link layer ,  usually mac ,  addresses . 
appletalk is a discontinued proprietary suite of networking protocols developed by apple inc .  for their macintosh computers . 
appletalk's ddp corresponds closely to the network layer of the open systems interconnection  -lrb-  osi  -rrb-  communication model . 
nevertheless ,  many portions of the appletalk system have direct analogs in xns . 
afp is still in use in macos ,  even though most other appletalk protocols have been deprecated . 
the main advantage of appletalk was that it was completely maintenance-free . 
the windows server operating systems supported appletalk starting with windows nt and ending after windows server 2003.
a significant re-design was released in 1989 as appletalk phase ii . 
the appletalk design rigorously followed the osi model of protocol layering . 
with the purchase of next and subsequent development of mac os x ,  appletalk was strictly a legacy system . 
appletalk support was finally removed from the macos in mac os x v10.6 in 2009.
one key differentiation for appletalk was it contained two protocols aimed at making the system completely self-configuring . 
the relatively slow speed of appletalk allowed further reductions in cost . 
the original apple ii was discontinued at the start of 1981, having been superseded by the ii+ . 
the apple ii was first sold on june 10, 1977.
the iie ram was configured as if it were a 48 kb apple ii plus with a language card . 
while compatible with earlier apple ii systems ,  the ii was in closer competition with the atari st and amiga . 
the apple iie was the most popular machine in the apple ii series . 
the apple ii series had a keyboard built into the motherboard shell ,  with the exception of the apple ii which featured an external keyboard . 
rod holt designed the apple ii's power supply . 
the final apple ii model was the apple iic plus introduced in 1988.
the apple ii ,  released on september 15, 1986, was the last model in the apple ii line ,  and radical departure from the prior computers in the line . 
the original apple ii operating system was in rom along with integer basic . 
apple ran the first advertisement for the apple ii ,  a two-page spread ad titled `` introducing apple ii '' ,  in `` byte '' in july 1977.
the apple iie is the longest-produced computer in the apple ii line ,  and by apple overall; it was the last surviving apple ii model upon its discontinuation in november 1993.
after the success of the first apple ii in the united states ,  apple expanded its market to include europe ,  australia and the far east in 1979, with the apple ii europlus  -lrb-  europe ,  australia  -rrb-  and the apple ii j-plus  -lrb-  japan  -rrb-  . 
although not an extension of the apple ii line ,  in 1990 the apple iie card ,  an expansion card for the lc line of macintosh computers ,  was released . 
the apple ii introduction ad was later run in the september 1977 issue of `` scientific american '' . 
eventually ,  apple ii accelerator cards were created to double or quadruple the computer's speed . 
unlike the apple ii ,  the disk iii controller is part of the logic board . 
along with the built-in floppy drive ,  the apple iii can also handle up to three additional external disk iii floppy disk drives . 
microsoft and apple each developed their own versions of basic for the apple iii . 
earlier apple iii units came with a built-in real time clock . 
according to wozniak ,  the apple iii `` had 100 percent hardware failures '' . 
development stopped and the apple iii was discontinued on april 24, 1984, and its last successor ,  the iii plus ,  was dropped from the apple product line in september 1985.
owners of the apple iii could purchase individual iii plus upgrades ,  like the clock and interlacing feature ,  and obtain the newer logic board as a service replacement . 
management believed that `` once the apple iii was out ,  the apple ii would stop selling in six months '' ,  wozniak said . 
avl trees are often compared with red–black trees because both support the same set of operations and take formula_2 time for the basic operations . 
besides hydrogen ,  other elements can be bound to the carbon chain ,  the most common being oxygen ,  nitrogen ,  sulfur ,  and chlorine . 
