roman epigrams owe much to their greek predecessors and contemporaries . 
though modern epigrams are usually thought of as very short ,  greek literary epigram was not always as short as later examples ,  and the divide between `` epigram '' and `` elegy '' is sometimes indistinct  -lrb-  they share a characteristic metre ,  elegiac couplets  -rrb-  . 
martial ,  however ,  is considered to be the master of the latin epigram . 
greek epigram was actually much more diverse ,  as the milan papyrus now indicates . 
babieca or bavieca was el cid's warhorse . 
his name is mentioned in several tales and historical documents about el cid ,  including `` the lay of el cid '' . 
terrified after his crushing defeat ,  alfonso recalled el cid . 
el cid's final years were spent fighting the almoravid berbers . 
the exile was not the end of el cid ,  either physically or as an important figure . 
along the way to valencia ,  el cid also conquered other towns ,  many of which were near valencia ,  such as el puig and quart de poblet . 
this is the generally given reason for el cid's exile ,  although several others are plausible and may have been contributing factors: jealous nobles turning alfonso against el cid ,  alfonso's own animosity towards el cid and an accusation of pocketing some of the tribute from seville . 
el cid gradually came to have more influence on valencia ,  then ruled by  ,  of berber hawwara dhunnunid dynasty . 
regardless ,  babieca became a great warhorse ,  famous to the christians ,  feared by el cid's enemies ,  and loved by el cid ,  who allegedly requested that babieca be buried with him in the monastery of san pedro de cardeña . 
el cid found work fighting for the muslim rulers of zaragoza ,  whom he defended from its traditional enemy ,  aragon . 
el cid and his wife jimena díaz lived peacefully in valencia for five years until the almoravids besieged the city . 
 ''endymion '' by john keats ,  lines 2–4: closely related to enjambment is the technique of `` broken rhyme '' or `` split rhyme '' which involves the splitting of an individual word ,  typically to allow a rhyme with one or more syllables of the split word . 
even in couplets ,  the closed or heroic couplet was a late development; older is the open couplet ,  where rhyme and enjambed lines co-exist . 
in english verse ,  broken rhyme is used almost exclusively in light verse ,  such as to form a word that rhymes with `` orange '' ,  as in this example by willard espy ,  in his poem `` the unrhymable word: orange '': the clapping game `` miss susie '' ,  which uses the break ``  .  .  .  hell / -o operator '' to allude to the taboo word `` hell '' ,  then replaces it with the innocuous `` hello '' . 
states may however restrict this right with respect to nationals residing abroad . 
it also provides that a state shall not discriminate amongst its nationals on the basis of whether they hold their nationality by birth or acquired it subsequently . 
it also requires to `` facilitate '' the acquisition of nationality by certain persons ,  including spouses of nationals ,  children of its nationals born abroad ,  children one of whose parents has acquired the nationality ,  children adopted by a national ,  persons lawfully and habitually resident for a period before the age of eighteen ,  and stateless persons and refugees lawfully and habitually resident on its territory . 
english has some words that can be written with accent marks . 
some letters in english provide information about the pronunciation of `` other '' letters in the word . 
the spelling of english continues to evolve . 
some words contain silent letters ,  which do not represent any sound in modern english pronunciation . 
the following are recorded throughout englishes of the world:
commercial advertisers have also had an effect on english spelling . 
however ,  unlike some orthographies ,  english orthography often represents a very abstract underlying representation  -lrb-  or morphophonemic form  -rrb-  of english words . 
letters in english orthography usually represent a particular sound  -lrb-  phoneme  -rrb-  . 
it is ,  however ,  not the shortage of letters which makes english spelling irregular . 
inconsistencies and irregularities in english pronunciation and spelling have gradually increased in number throughout the history of the english language . 
see american and british english spelling differences for details . 
for example ,  the word `` cat '' consists of three letters  ,   ,  and  ,  in which represents the sound  ,  the sound  ,  and the sound  . 
english orthography is the system of writing conventions used to represent spoken english in written form that allows readers to connect spelling to sound to meaning . 
in the word `` ditch '' ,  the trigraph represent the sound  . 
attempts to regularize or reform the spelling of english have usually failed . 
in the mill on the floss  -lrb-  1860 -rrb- ,  english novelist george eliot satirized the attitude of the english rural gentry of the 1820s towards orthography:
on the other hand ,  it also adds to the discrepancy between the way english is written and spoken in any given location . 
like the orthography of most world languages ,  english orthography has a broad degree of standardization . 
 ''note: in the following discussion ,  only one or two common pronunciations of american and british english varieties are used in this article for each word cited . 
æthelred ii  -lrb-  old english: `` æþelræd '' ,  ;  966 – 23 april 1016 -rrb- ,  known as the unready ,  was king of the english from 978 to 1013 and again from 1014 until his death . 
in 997, danish raids began again . 
æthelred was the son of king edgar and queen ælfthryth . 
it harried england until it was bought off by £48,000 in april 1012.
this was the first of a series of crushing defeats felt by the english: beaten first by danish raiders ,  and later by organised danish armies . 
another of his sons ,  edward the confessor ,  became king in 1042.
however ,  in august of that same year ,  a sizeable danish fleet began a sustained campaign in the south-east of england . 
england had experienced a period of peace after the reconquest of the danelaw in the mid-10th century by king edgar ,  æthelred's father . 
æthelred's notorious nickname ,  old english `` unræd '' ,  is commonly translated into present-day english as `` the unready ''  -lrb-  less often ,  though less inaccurately ,  as `` the redeless ''  -rrb-  . 
æthelred ordered the massacre of all danish men in england to take place on 13 november 1002, st brice's day . 
however ,  edmund died on 30 november and cnut became king of the whole country . 
edward reigned for only three years before he was murdered by members of his brother's household . 
after the cello concerto ,  elgar completed no more large-scale works . 
in his final years ,  elgar experienced a musical revival . 
elgar was devastated by the loss of his wife . 
the violin concerto was elgar's last popular triumph . 
from 1926 onwards ,  elgar made a series of recordings of his own works . 
the house in lower broadheath where elgar was born is now the elgar birthplace museum ,  devoted to his life and work . 
elgar conducted a recording of the work for the gramophone company . 
elgar's best-known works were composed within the twenty-one years between 1899 and 1920.
elgar has been described as the first composer to take the gramophone seriously . 
among elgar's admirers there is disagreement about which of his works are to be regarded as masterpieces . 
elgar took full advantage of the opportunity to hear unfamiliar music . 
although in the 1920s elgar's music was no longer in fashion ,  his admirers continued to present his works when possible . 
elgar was knighted in 1904, and in 1911 he was appointed a member of the order of merit . 
towards the end of the war ,  elgar was in poor health . 
elgar himself thought `` falstaff '' the highest point of his purely orchestral work . 
in his fifties ,  elgar composed a symphony and a violin concerto that were immensely successful . 
in a `` musical times '' 1957 centenary symposium on elgar led by vaughan williams ,  by contrast ,  several contributors share eric blom's view that `` falstaff '' is the greatest of all elgar's works . 
elgar's principal large-scale early works were for chorus and orchestra for the three choirs and other festivals . 
perhaps the best-known work depicting elgar is ken russell's 1962 bbc television film `` elgar '' ,  made when the composer was still largely out of fashion . 
although rather solitary and introspective by nature ,  elgar thrived in worcester's musical circles . 
on 1 january 1999, the euro  -lrb-  with the code eur and symbol €  -rrb-  replaced the ecu ,  at the value €1 = 1 ecu . 
the ecu was conceived on 13 march 1979 as an internal accounting unit . 
the european currency unit  -lrb-  ₠ or ecu  -rrb-  was a basket of the currencies of the european community member states ,  used as the unit of account of the european community before being replaced by the euro on 1 january 1999, at parity . 
in 1951, the british virgin islands adopted the british west indies dollar which at that time operated in conjunction with the sterling coinage ,  and in 1959 they changed over officially to the u . s .  dollar . 
the other two associate members of the oecs do not use the eastern caribbean dollar as their official currency: the british virgin islands and martinique . 
erythromycin is an antibiotic useful for the treatment of a number of bacterial infections . 
erythromycin can be used to treat bacteria responsible for causing infections of the skin and upper respiratory tract ,  including `` streptococcus '' ,  `` staphylococcus '' ,  `` haemophilus '' and `` corynebacterium '' genera . 
notwithstanding early analogues ,  the concept of `` environmental law '' as a separate and distinct body of law is a twentieth-century development . 
environmental law ,  also known as environmental and natural resources law ,  is a collective term describing the network of treaties ,  statutes ,  regulations ,  common and customary laws addressing the effects of human activity on the natural environment . 
eurostar trains do not currently call at  ,  originally intended to be the london stop for the regional eurostars . 
in 1995, eurostar was achieving an average end-to-end speed of between london and paris . 
the difficulties that eurostar faces in expanding its services would also be faced by any potential competitors to eurostar . 
on 5 june 2000 a eurostar train travelling from paris to london derailed on the lgv nord high-speed line while traveling at  . 
however ,  in 2013, eurostar claimed that its 'business would be hit' by stopping trains there . 
there have been several minor incidents with a few eurostar services . 
until the opening on 2 june 1996, of the first phase of the belgian high speed line ,  eurostar trains were routed via the belgian railway line 94.
eurostar trains from london will also call at antwerp centraal and schiphol airport ,  although trains from amsterdam will miss out antwerp on the journey back to london . 
in may 2009 eurostar announced that a formal connection to switzerland had been established in a partnership between eurostar and lyria ,  which will operate tgv services from lille to the swiss alps for eurostar connection . 
ashford international station was the original station for eurostar services in kent . 
the trains will be delivered from 2013.
on 30 july 2003, a eurostar train set a new british speed record of on the first section of the `` high speed 1 '' railway through the channel tunnel ,  two months before official services began running . 
since 14 november 2007, all eurostar trains have been routed via high speed 1 to or from the redeveloped london terminus at st pancras international ,  which at a cost of £800 million was extensively rebuilt and extended to cope with long eurostar trains . 
eurostar claims to have good and well-funded security measures . 
on 20 september 2007, eurostar broke another record when it completed the journey from brussels to london in 1 hour ,  43 minutes . 
eurostar trains were suspended that day with thousands of passengers stranded in the run up to christmas
in 2015, eurostar threatened to require that cyclists dismantle bicycles before they could be transported on trains . 
in 2005, the chief executive of eurostar ,  richard brown ,  suggested that existing eurostar trains could be replaced by double-deck trains similar to the tgv duplex units when they are withdrawn from service . 
since 2010, eurostar is owned by eurostar international limited ,  a company jointly owned by sncf  -lrb-  55%  -rrb-  ,   -lrb-  cdpq  -rrb-   -lrb-  30%  -rrb-  ,  hermes infrastructure  -lrb-  10%  -rrb-  and sncb  -lrb-  5%  -rrb-  . 
on 16 may 2006, eurostar set a new record for the longest non-stop high-speed journey ,  a distance of from london to cannes taking 7 hours 25 minutes . 
eurostar's passenger numbers initially failed to meet predictions . 
in june 2009 london and continental railways ,  and the eurostar uk operations they held ownership of ,  became fully nationalised by the uk government . 
on 11 april 2006, a house collapsed next to a railway line near london which caused eurostar services to have to terminate and start from ashford international instead of london waterloo . 
in 2008, eurostar announced that it would be carrying out a mid-life refurbishment of its class 373 trains to allow the fleet to remain in service beyond 2020.
by 2008, eurostar's environmental credentials had become highly developed and promoted . 
on 8 january 1996, eurostar launched services from a second uk railway station when ashford international was opened . 
the history of eurostar can be traced to the 1986 choice of a rail tunnel to provide a cross-channel link between britain and france . 
during the december 2009 european snowfall ,  four eurostar trains broke down inside the channel tunnel ,  after leaving france ,  and one in kent on 18 december . 
in march 2016 in an interview with bloomberg ,  eurostar's chief executive expressed interest in operating a direct train service between london and bordeaux ,  but not before 2019.
high speed 1  -lrb-  hs1 -rrb- ,  formerly known as the channel tunnel rail link  -lrb-  ctrl  -rrb-  ,  is a high-speed railway line running from london through kent to the british end of the channel tunnel . 
a number of technical incidents have affected eurostar services over the years ,  but there has only been one major accident involving a service operated by eurostar ,  a derailment in june 2000.
this effectively freed the way for siemens to build the new eurostar trains ,  the first of which were expected to enter service in late 2015.
the channel tunnel used by eurostar services holds the record for having the longest undersea section anywhere in the world ,  and it is the second-longest rail tunnel in the world . 
in the first quarter of 2009, 96% of eurostar services were punctual ,  compared with rival air routes' 76% . 
built between 1992 and 1996, eurostar's fleet consists of 38 emu trains ,  designated class 373 in the united kingdom and tgv tmst in france . 
on 14 november 1994, eurostar services began between waterloo international station in london ,  gare du nord in paris and brussels-south railway station in brussels . 
with this definition ,  the day is longer than the night at the equinoxes:
in the northern hemisphere ,  the equinox in march is called the vernal or spring equinox; the september equinox is called the autumnal or fall equinox . 
the equinoxes are the only times when the solar terminator  -lrb-  the `` edge '' between night and day  -rrb-  is perpendicular to the equator . 
on the day of an equinox ,  daytime and nighttime are of approximately equal duration all over the planet . 
the subsolar point crosses the equator moving northward at the march equinox and southward at the september equinox . 
also on the day of an equinox ,  the sun rises everywhere on earth  -lrb-  except at the poles  -rrb-  at about 06:00 and sets at about 18:00  -lrb-  local solar time  -rrb-  . 
because the julian year is longer than the tropical year by about 11.3 minutes on average  -lrb-  or 1 day in 128 years  -rrb-  ,  the calendar `` drifted '' with respect to the two equinoxes — so that in ad 300 the spring equinox occurred on about 21 march ,  and by ad 1500 it had drifted backwards to 11 march . 
an important discovery wigner made during the project was the wigner effect . 
they had two children ,  david wigner and martha wigner upton . 
on religious views ,  wigner was an atheist . 
princeton did not rehire wigner when his contract ran out in 1936.
in the late 1930s ,  wigner extended his research into atomic nuclei . 
at princeton in 1934, wigner introduced his sister manci to the physicist paul dirac ,  whom she married . 
near the end of his life ,  wigner's thoughts turned more philosophical . 
wigner was disappointed that dupont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors ,  not just their construction . 
wigner did not regret working on the manhattan project ,  and sometimes wished the atomic bomb had been ready a year earlier . 
the corresponding gauge bosons are the three w bosons of weak isospin from `` su -lrb-  2 -rrb- ''  -lrb-  `` w ,  w '' ,  and `` w ''  -rrb-  ,  and the `` b '' boson of weak hypercharge from `` u -lrb-  1 -rrb- '' ,  respectively ,  all of which are massless . 
 ''u '' -lrb-  1 -rrb- and `` u '' -lrb-  1 -rrb- are different copies of `` u '' -lrb-  1 -rrb-; the generator of `` u '' -lrb-  1 -rrb- is given by `` q '' = `` y ''/2 + `` t '' ,  where `` y '' is the generator of `` u '' -lrb-  1 -rrb-  -lrb-  called the weak hypercharge  -rrb-  ,  and `` t '' is one of the `` su '' -lrb-  2 -rrb- generators  -lrb-  a component of weak isospin  -rrb-  . 
where is the `` weak mixing angle '' . 
reinhold catalogued a large number of stars . 
his name has been given to a prominent lunar impact crater that lies to the south-southwest of the crater copernicus ,  on the mare insularum . 
the longest earthquake ruptures on strike-slip faults ,  like the san andreas fault  -lrb-  1857, 1906 -rrb- ,  the north anatolian fault in turkey  -lrb-  1939 -rrb- and the denali fault in alaska  -lrb-  2002 -rrb- ,  are about half to one third as long as the lengths along subducting plate margins ,  and those along normal faults are even shorter . 
this difference in stress regime in the three faulting environments can contribute to differences in stress drop during faulting ,  which contributes to differences in the radiated energy ,  regardless of fault dimensions . 
in addition ,  there exists a hierarchy of stress level in the three fault types . 
aftershocks are formed as the crust around the displaced fault plane adjusts to the effects of the main shock . 
there are three main types of fault ,  all of which may cause an interplate earthquake: normal ,  reverse  -lrb-  thrust  -rrb-  and strike-slip . 
massive earthquakes tend to occur along other plate boundaries ,  too ,  such as along the himalayan mountains . 
these stresses may be sufficient to cause failure along existing fault planes ,  giving rise to intraplate earthquakes . 
many earthquakes are caused by movement on faults that have components of both dip-slip and strike-slip; this is known as oblique slip . 
earthquakes often occur in volcanic regions and are caused there ,  both by tectonic faults and the movement of magma in volcanoes . 
where plate boundaries occur within the continental lithosphere ,  deformation is spread out over a much larger area than the plate boundary itself . 
the word `` tremor '' is also used for non-earthquake seismic rumbling . 
this is so because the energy released in an earthquake ,  and thus its magnitude ,  is proportional to the area of the fault that ruptures and the stress drop . 
the zipingpu dam is believed to have fluctuated the pressure of the fault away; this pressure probably increased the power of the earthquake and accelerated the rate of movement for the fault . 
earthquakes are not only categorized by their magnitude but also by the place where they occur . 
tectonic earthquakes occur anywhere in the earth where there is sufficient stored elastic strain energy to drive fracture propagation along a fault plane . 
currently ,  the emperor of japan is the only head of state in the world with the english title of `` emperor '' . 
until 1912, the emperors of japan were usually buried in kyoto . 
the emperor of japan is the head of the imperial family and the head of state of japan . 
the emperors traditionally had an education officer . 
from the taishō emperor onward ,  the emperors have been buried at the musashi imperial graveyard in tokyo . 
the position of emperor is a territory-independent phenomenon—the emperor is the emperor ,  even if he has followers only in one province  -lrb-  as was the case sometimes with the southern and northern courts  -rrb-  . 
before emperor meiji ,  the names of the eras were changed more frequently ,  and the posthumous names of the emperors were chosen differently . 
fujiwara daughters were thus the usual empresses and mothers of emperors . 
in the early 7th century ,  the emperor had begun to be called the  . 
article 4 also states that these duties can be delegated by the emperor as provided for by law . 
there are two japanese words equivalent to the english word `` emperor '': `` tennō ''  -lrb-   ,  `` heavenly sovereign ''  -rrb-  ,  which is used exclusively to refer to the emperor of japan ,  and `` kōtei ''  -lrb-  皇帝 ,  the title used for all other foreign emperors  -rrb-  ,  which is used primarily to describe non-japanese emperors . 
the emperor's birthday  -lrb-  currently december 23 -rrb- is a national holiday . 
the emperor's powers are limited only to important ceremonial functions . 
in english ,  the use of the term for the emperor was once common ,  but is now considered obsolete . 
in recent times ,  emperor taishō had count nogi maresuke ,  emperor shōwa had marshal-admiral marquis tōgō heihachirō ,  and emperor akihito had elizabeth gray vining as well as as their tutors . 
the reign of emperor kinmei  -lrb-   – 571 ad  -rrb-  ,  the 29th emperor ,  is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; however ,  the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as `` traditional '' until the reign of emperor kanmu  -lrb-  737–806 -rrb- ,  the 50th sovereign of the yamato dynasty . 
although the emperor has been a symbol of continuity with the past ,  the degree of power exercised by the emperor has varied considerably throughout japanese history . 
as of 2017, akihito ,  the present emperor ,  has an estimated net worth of us$40 million . 
according to the traditional account of the nihon shoki ,  japan was founded by emperor jimmu in 660 bc . 
the current emperor on the throne is typically referred to as `` tennō heika ''  -lrb-   ,  `` his  -lrb-  imperial  -rrb-  majesty the emperor ''  -rrb-  ,  `` kinjō heika ''  -lrb-   ,  `` his current majesty ''  -rrb-  or simply `` tennō '' ,  when speaking japanese . 
some instances ,  such as emperor go-toba's 1221 rebellion against the kamakura shogunate and the 1336 kenmu restoration under emperor go-daigo ,  show the power struggle between the imperial court and the military governments of japan . 
unlike most constitutional monarchs ,  the emperor is not even the `` nominal '' chief executive . 
the emperor's other duties are laid down in article 7 of the constitution ,  where it is stated that `` the emperor ,  with the advice and approval of the cabinet ,  shall perform the following acts in matters of state on behalf of the people . `` 
the role of the emperor of japan has historically alternated between a largely ceremonial symbolic role and that of an actual imperial ruler . 
other honorifics used by the roman emperors have also come to be synonyms for emperor:
both emperors and kings are monarchs ,  but emperor and empress are considered the higher monarchical titles . 
the first austrian emperor was the last holy roman emperor francis ii . 
these later roman `` byzantine '' emperors completed the transition from the idea of the emperor as a semi-republican official to the emperor as an absolute monarch . 
the last emperor to be crowned by the pope was charles v; all emperors after him were technically `` emperors-elect '' ,  but were universally referred to as `` emperor '' . 
the emperor of japan is the only currently reigning monarch whose title is translated into english as emperor . 
on 31 october 1721, peter i was proclaimed emperor by the senate . 
the `` emperor '' of the romans' title was a reflection of the `` translatio imperii ''  -lrb-  `` transfer of rule ''  -rrb-  principle that regarded the holy roman emperors as the inheritors of the title of emperor of the western roman empire ,  despite the continued existence of the roman empire in the east . 
after his death he was succeeded by his son frederick iii who was only emperor for 99 days . 
napoleon relinquished the title of emperor of the french on 6 april and again on 11 april 1814.
by the end of the 20th century ,  japan was the only country with an emperor on the throne . 
the sanskrit word for emperor is `` samrāj '' or samraat or `` chakravartin '' . 
in 1801, george iii rejected the title of emperor when offered . 
iranian rulers were typically regarded in the west as emperors . 
in the late 3rd century ,  by the end of the epoch of the `` barracks emperors '' in rome ,  there were two britannic emperors ,  reigning for about a decade . 
empress matilda  -lrb-  1102–1167 -rrb- is the only english monarch commonly referred to as `` emperor '' or `` empress '' ,  but she acquired her title through her marriage to henry v ,  holy roman emperor . 
in western europe ,  the title of emperor was used exclusively by the holy roman emperor ,  whose imperial authority was derived from the concept of ``  '' ,  i . e . 
the last two kings of its astur-leonese dynasty were called emperors in a contemporary source . 
japanese monarchs were given their official title by the chinese emperor . 
the trebizond emperor formally submitted in constantinople in 1281, but frequently flouted convention by styling themselves emperor back in trebizond thereafter . 
in general usage ,  the byzantine imperial title evolved from simply `` emperor ''  -lrb-  `` basileus ''  -rrb-  ,  to `` emperor of the romans ''  -lrb-  `` basileus tōn rōmaiōn ''  -rrb-  in the 9th century ,  to `` emperor and autocrat of the romans ''  -lrb-  `` basileus kai autokratōr tōn rōmaiōn ''  -rrb-  in the 10th . 
the term 帝  -lrb-  `` mikado '' ,  emperor  -rrb-  is also found in literary sources . 
however ,  the russian emperors are better known by their russian-language title of tsar even after peter the great adopted the title of emperor of all russia in 1721.
the first latin emperors of constantinople on the other hand had to be present in the newly conquered capital of their empire ,  because that was the only place where they could be granted to become emperor . 
in fact ,  through much of japanese history ,  the emperor has been little more than a figurehead . 
one important distinction between the post constantine i  -lrb-  reigned ad 306–337 -rrb- emperors and their pagan predecessors was cesaropapism ,  the assertion that the emperor  -lrb-  or other head of state  -rrb-  is also the head of the church . 
the subdivisions and co-emperor system were formally abolished by emperor zeno in 480 ad following the death of julius nepos last western emperor and the ascension of odoacer as the `` de facto '' king of italy in 476 ad . 
after alfonso vii's death in 1157, the title was abandoned ,  and the kings who used it are not commonly mentioned as having been `` emperors '' ,  in spanish or other historiography . 
the title has not been used in russia since the abdication of emperor nicholas ii on 15 march 1917.
the importance and meaning of coronation ceremonies and regalia also varied within the tradition: for instance holy roman emperors could only be crowned emperor by the pope ,  which meant the coronation ceremony usually took place in rome ,  often several years after these emperors had ascended to the throne  -lrb-  as `` king ''  -rrb-  in their home country . 
after the turbulent year of the four emperors in 69, the flavian dynasty reigned for three decades . 
in 221 bc ,  ying zheng ,  who was king of qin at the time ,  proclaimed himself `` shi huangdi ''  -lrb-  始皇帝  -rrb-  ,  which translates as `` first emperor '' . 
in general ,  an emperor would have one empress  -lrb-  `` huanghou '' ,  皇后  -rrb-  at one time ,  although posthumous entitlement to empress for a concubine was not uncommon . 
napoleon's infant son ,  napoleon ii ,  was recognized by the council of peers ,  as emperor from the moment of his father's abdication ,  and therefore reigned  -lrb-  as opposed to ruled  -rrb-  as emperor for fifteen days ,  22 june to 7 july 1815.
some specifically focused egalitarian concerns include communism ,  legal egalitarianism ,  luck egalitarianism ,  political egalitarianism ,  gender egalitarianism ,  racial equality ,  equality of outcome and christian egalitarianism . 
it is generally accepted by egalitarians that feminism falls under egalitarianism and that some feminists identify themselves as egalitarian which under the broadly understood definition of the word is equality for both men and women . 
roemer concludes that egalitarians must reject socialism as it is classically defined in order for equality to be realized . 
the declaration of independence of the united states is an example of an assertion of equality of men ,  the wording of `` men '' and `` man '' is a reference to both men and women i . e . 
the sikh faith was founded upon egalitarian principles ,  reaffirming the notion of equality not only based upon race ,  but also between the genders . 
modern egalitarianism is a theory that rejects the classic definition of egalitarianism as a possible achievement economically ,  politically and socially . 
egalitarianism  -lrb-    -rrb-  – or equalitarianism – is a school of thought that prioritizes equality for all people . 
common forms of egalitarianism include political and philosophical . 
anti-egalitarianism or elitism is opposition to egalitarianism . 
the results of these experts are then compared to those by the experts of the parties . 
it is also possible to change a non-testifying expert to a testifying expert before the expert disclosure date . 
in all cases ,  fees paid to an expert may not be contingent on the outcome of the case . 
the forensic expert practice is an ancient profession . 
this allows other parties to effectively cross-examine the expert . 
the non-testifying expert can be present at the trial or hearing to aid the attorney in asking questions of other expert witnesses . 
the expert's professional fee ,  plus his or her related expenses ,  is generally paid by the party retaining the expert . 
the federal court of australia has issued guidelines for experts appearing in australian courts . 
in the u . s .  ,  a party may hire experts to help them evaluate a given case . 
the expert has a great responsibility ,  and especially in penal trials ,  and perjury by an expert is a severely punished crime in most countries . 
their testimony may be rebutted by testimony from other experts or by other evidence or facts . 
the decision by the english court to allow for an expert to provide contextual background and detail on a case is often cited as the root of modern rules on expert testimony . 
in the majority of cases ,  the expert's personal relation to the defendant is considered and irrelevant . 
endocytosis is a cellular process in which substances are brought into the cell . 
study  in mammalian cells confirm a reduction in clathrin coat size in an increased tension environment . 
from 1872 until his death he was bussey professor of new testament criticism and interpretation in the harvard divinity school . 
ezra abbot  -lrb-  april 28, 1819, jackson ,  mainemarch 21, 1884, cambridge ,  massachusetts  -rrb-  was an american biblical scholar . 
abbot was elected a fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1861.
edwin abbott abbott was the eldest son of edwin abbott  -lrb-  1808–1882 -rrb- ,  headmaster of the philological school ,  marylebone ,  and his wife ,  jane abbott  -lrb-  1806–1882 -rrb- . 
abbott was hulsean lecturer in 1876.
edwin abbott abbott  -lrb-  20 december 1838 – 12 october 1926 -rrb- was an english schoolmaster and theologian ,  best known as the author of the novella `` flatland ''  -lrb-  1884 -rrb- . 
abbott herself became known among americans as 'the people's prima donna' . 
on february 23, 1877, abbott made her american operatic début in new york ,  once again portraying marie . 
emma abbott was born in 1850 in chicago ,  illinois ,  the daughter of the struggling chicago musician seth abbott and his wife almira  -lrb-  née palmer  -rrb-  . 
in 1872 abbott went abroad to study with antonio sangiovanni in milan . 
kanmu disapproved of  ,  daughter of fujiwara no tadanushi; and kanmu had her removed from his son's household . 
kanmu's personal name  -lrb-  `` imina ''  -rrb-  was  . 
kanmu had 16 empresses and consorts ,  and 32 imperial sons and daughters . 
during kanmu's reign ,  this apex of the `` daijō-kan included:
kanmu was an active emperor who attempted to consolidate government hierarchies and functions . 
elizabeth was born at greenwich palace and was named after her grandmothers ,  elizabeth of york and elizabeth howard . 
in may 1548, elizabeth was sent away . 
elizabeth's succession seemed assured . 
elizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive . 
as elizabeth aged her image gradually changed . 
in government ,  elizabeth was more moderate than her father and half-siblings had been . 
elizabeth confronted mary about the marriage ,  writing to her:
the more elizabeth's beauty faded ,  the more her courtiers praised it . 
on 17 november 1558, mary died and elizabeth succeeded to the throne . 
elizabeth i  -lrb-  7 september 1533 – 24 march 1603 -rrb- was queen of england and ireland from 17 november 1558 until her death on 24 march 1603.
as she grew older ,  elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity . 
elizabeth's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity . 
elizabeth was the daughter of henry viii and anne boleyn ,  his second wife ,  who was executed two-and-a-half years after elizabeth's birth . 
elizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a catholic crusade against heretical england . 
elizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects ,  but others were relieved at her death . 
from the start of elizabeth's reign ,  it was expected that she would marry and the question arose to whom . 
england's defeat of the spanish armada in 1588 associated elizabeth with one of the greatest military victories in english history . 
recent historians ,  however ,  have taken a more complicated view of elizabeth . 
for this reason alone ,  it was never in serious doubt that elizabeth would embrace protestantism . 
the period after the defeat of the spanish armada in 1588 brought new difficulties for elizabeth that lasted until the end of her reign . 
elizabeth's personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars . 
elizabeth's first policy toward scotland was to oppose the french presence there . 
sir walter raleigh claimed after her death that elizabeth's caution had impeded the war against spain:
trade and diplomatic relations developed between england and the barbary states during the rule of elizabeth . 
marriage negotiations constituted a key element in elizabeth's foreign policy . 
in the spring of 1559, it became evident that elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend robert dudley . 
both the kojiki and the nihon shoki give jimmu's name as  . 
jimmu is recorded as japan's first ruler in two early chronicles ,  `` nihon shoki ''  -lrb-  721 -rrb- and kojiki  -lrb-  712 -rrb- . 
the last of these ,  kamu-yamato iware-biko no mikoto ,  became emperor jimmu . 
according to the `` kojiki '' ,  jimmu died when he was 126 years old . 
in 1781, boudinot returned to the congress ,  for a term lasting through 1783.
in 1760, boudinot was admitted to the bar ,  and began his practice in elizabeth ,  new jersey . 
elias boudinot was born in philadelphia on may 2, 1740.
elisha boudinot became chief justice of the supreme court of new jersey . 
in november 1777, the new jersey legislature named boudinot as one of their delegates to the second continental congress . 
in 1805, elias ,  hannah and susan moved to a new home in burlington ,  new jersey . 
they had two children ,  maria boudinot ,  who died at age two ,  and susan vergereau boudinot . 
for most of history ,  visible light was the only known part of the electromagnetic spectrum . 
passing white light through a prism splits it up into the several colors of light observed in the visible spectrum between 400 nm and 780 nm . 
the wavelength of uv rays is shorter than the violet end of the visible spectrum but longer than the x-ray . 
the electromagnetic spectrum is the range of frequencies  -lrb-  the spectrum  -rrb-  of electromagnetic radiation and their respective wavelengths and photon energies . 
electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength between 380 nm and 760 nm  -lrb-  400–790 terahertz  -rrb-  is detected by the human eye and perceived as visible light . 
the last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was filled in with the discovery of gamma rays . 
above infrared in frequency comes visible light . 
spectroscopy can detect a much wider region of the em spectrum than the visible range of 400 nm to 700 nm . 
terahertz radiation is a region of the spectrum between far infrared and microwaves . 
the modulation is similar to that used with radio waves . 
the region of the spectrum where a particular observed electromagnetic radiation falls ,  is reference frame-dependent  -lrb-  due to the doppler shift for light  -rrb-  ,  so em radiation that one observer would say is in one region of the spectrum could appear to an observer moving at a substantial fraction of the speed of light with respect to the first to be in another part of the spectrum . 
generally ,  electromagnetic radiation is classified by wavelength into radio wave ,  microwave ,  terahertz  -lrb-  or sub-millimeter  -rrb-  radiation ,  infrared ,  the visible region that is perceived as light ,  ultraviolet ,  x-rays and gamma rays . 
after uv come x-rays ,  which ,  like the upper ranges of uv are also ionizing . 
uv can also cause many substances to glow with visible light; this is called `` fluorescence '' . 
the wavelength of gamma rays can be measured with high accuracy through the effects of compton scattering . 
in the 1980s ,  expert systems proliferated . 
an expert system is an example of a knowledge-based system . 
research on expert systems was also active in france . 
in artificial intelligence ,  an expert system is a computer system that emulates the decision-making ability of a human expert . 
an expert system is divided into two subsystems: the inference engine and the knowledge base . 
by 1571, de vere was a court favourite of elizabeth's . 
de vere was banished from court until june 1583.
de vere was the only son of john de vere ,  16th earl of oxford ,  and margery golding . 
de vere's financial situation was steadily deteriorating . 
de vere's stepfather ,  charles tyrrell ,  died in march 1570.
in the summer of 1578 de vere attended the queen's progress through east anglia . 
in 1563 de vere's older half-sister ,  katherine ,  then baroness windsor ,  challenged the legitimacy of the marriage of de vere's parents in the ecclesiastical court . 
in november 1569, de vere petitioned cecil for a foreign military posting . 
de vere refused on the grounds that he `` would not give pleasure to frenchmen '' . 
de vere was born heir to the second oldest earldom in england at the de vere ancestral home ,  hedingham castle ,  in essex ,  north-east of london . 
de vere was estranged from her for five years after he refused to acknowledge her first child as his . 
in 1586, de vere petitioned the queen for an annuity to relieve his distressed financial situation . 
on 12 april 1571, de vere attained his majority and took his seat in the house of lords . 
the specific cause is not known ,  but in january 1580 de vere wrote and challenged sidney; by the end of the month de vere was confined to his chambers ,  and was not released until early february . 
cecil later wrote that he attempted to have the jury find for de vere's acting in self-defence . 
de vere was a champion jouster and travelled widely throughout italy and france . 
de vere was styled viscount bulbeck and raised in the protestant reformed faith . 
in 1577 de vere invested £25 in the second of martin frobisher's expeditions in search of the northwest passage . 
some time before october 1563 de vere's mother married charles tyrrell ,  a gentleman pensioner . 
to guarantee payment ,  de vere entered into bonds to the court totalling £11,000, and two further private bonds for £6,000 apiece . 
de vere left england in the first week of february ,  and a month later was presented to the king and queen of france . 
edward de vere ,  17th earl of oxford  -lrb-  ; 12 april 155024 june 1604 -rrb- was an english peer and courtier of the elizabethan era . 
the following summer de vere planned to travel to ireland; at this point ,  his debts were estimated at a minimum of £6,000.
in ancient greek religion and mythology ,  the erinyes  -lrb-  ; sing . 
the erinyes persist as a theme that appears in modern literature as well as the subject of scholarly pursuits of mythology and ancient greek culture . 
tantalizing myth fragments dealing with the erinyes are found among the earliest extant records of ancient greek culture . 
in `` the eumenides '' ,  orestes is told by apollo at delphi that he should go to athens to seek the aid of the goddess athena . 
the erinyes live in erebus and are more ancient than any of the olympians deities . 
the sixth earl of aberdeen was succeeded by his younger brother ,  the seventh earl . 
the third earl was succeeded by his grandson ,  the fourth earl ,  who was the eldest son of george gordon ,  lord haddo . 
the hon . 
the hon . 
the hon . 
east coast swing is a rhythm dance that has both 6 and 8 beat patterns . 
east coast swing  -lrb-  ecs  -rrb-  is a form of social partner dance . 
from mid-1935 kaltenbrunner was head of the illegal ss abschnitt viii in linz and was considered a leader of the austrian ss . 
also in 1938, he was appointed high ss and police leader  -lrb-  `` höherer ss- und polizeiführer ''; hsspf  -rrb-  for donau ,  which was the primary ss command in austria  -lrb-  he held that post until 30 january 1943 -rrb- . 
all the children survived the war . 
unnerved by wolff's demands ,  himmler backed down ,  and hitler sent wolff back to italy to seek better terms with the u . s .  forces . 
in mid-april 1945, three weeks before the war ended ,  himmler named kaltenbrunner commander-in-chief of those remaining german forces in southern europe . 
he also said gestapo chief heinrich müller had illegally affixed his signature to numerous documents in question . 
in harry turtledove's `` colonization '' series kaltenbrunner serves as the third führer of the greater german reich ,  following the deaths of hitler ,  and himmler ,  respectively . 
four days later ,  kappler's ss and police units began rounding up and deporting jews by train to auschwitz concentration camp . 
experts have examined the seal and believe it was discarded in the final days of the war in may 1945.
out of a population of 6.5 million ,  approximately 500,000 austrians were present at dollfuss’ burial in vienna . 
engelbert dollfuss  -lrb-   ,  ; 4 october 1892 – 25 july 1934 -rrb- was an austrian christian social and patriotic front statesman . 
dollfuss' majority in parliament was marginal; his government had only a one-vote majority . 
dollfuss finished his studies and obtained the doctor of law degree in 1922.
at the outbreak of world war i ,  dollfuss had difficulty gaining admission into the austro-hungarian army as he was only tall . 
he was born in texing in lower austria to unmarried mother josepha dollfuss and her lover joseph weninger . 
dollfuss was eventually accepted and joined the tyrolean `` landesschützen '' regiment at brixen and by the end of 1914 was sent to the italian front . 
hoffmann died of syphilis in berlin on 25 june 1822 at the age of 46.
hoffmann's ancestors ,  both maternal and paternal ,  were jurists . 
the next fifteen months were some of the worst in hoffmann's life . 
ernst theodor amadeus hoffmann  -lrb-  commonly abbreviated as e .  t .  a .  hoffmann; born ernst theodor wilhelm hoffmann; 24 january 177625 june 1822 -rrb- was a german romantic author of fantasy and gothic horror ,  a jurist ,  composer ,  music critic and artist . 
the ballet `` coppélia '' is based on two other stories that hoffmann wrote ,  while schumann's `` kreisleriana '' is based on hoffmann's character johannes kreisler . 
that same day hoffmann was surprised to meet hippel ,  whom he had not seen for nine years . 
they arrived on 23 may ,  and hoffmann started work with seconda's orchestra ,  which he found to be of the best quality . 
during the period from 1819 hoffmann was involved with legal disputes ,  while fighting ill health . 
the situation deteriorated ,  and in early may hoffmann tried in vain to find transport to leipzig . 
in 1794, hoffmann became enamored of dora hatt ,  a married woman to whom he had given music lessons . 
on 25 february hoffmann quarrelled with seconda ,  and the next day he was given notice of twelve weeks . 
this was one of the few good times of a sad period of his life ,  which saw the deaths of his uncle j .  l .  hoffmann in berlin ,  his aunt sophie ,  and dora hatt in königsberg . 
later versions of the greek new testament by others ,  but based on erasmus's greek new testament ,  became known as the `` textus receptus '' . 
erasmus had been working for years on two projects: a collation of greek texts and a fresh latin new testament . 
erasmus also translated the latin text into greek wherever he found that the greek text and the accompanying commentaries were mixed up ,  or where he simply preferred the vulgate’s reading to the greek text . 
but by first calling the final product `` novum instrumentum omne ''  -lrb-  `` all of the new teaching ''  -rrb-  and later `` novum testamentum omne ''  -lrb-  `` all of the new testament ''  -rrb-  he also indicated clearly that he considered a text in which the greek and the latin versions were consistently comparable to be the essential core of the church's new testament tradition . 
in the earlier phases of the project ,  he never mentioned a greek text:
while his intentions for publishing a fresh latin translation are clear ,  it is less clear why he included the greek text . 
discovery in 1506 of lorenzo valla's `` new testament notes '' encouraged erasmus to continue the study of the new testament . 
in a way it is legitimate to say that erasmus `` synchronized '' or `` unified '' the greek and the latin traditions of the new testament by producing an updated version of either simultaneously . 
… among the latin fathers he edited the works of st jerome ,  st hilary ,  and st augustine; among the greeks he worked on irenaeus ,  origen and chrysostom . `` 
the information and the delay allowed erasmus to request a `` publication privilege '' of four years for the greek new testament to ensure that his work would be published first . 
martin luther's movement began in the year following the publication of the new testament and tested erasmus' character . 
he obtained it in 1516 from both pope leo x ,  to whom he'd dedicate his work ,  and emperor maximilian i .  erasmus's ' greek new testament to be published first ,  in 1516, forcing the spanish team of cisneros to wait until 1520 to publish their complutensian polyglot . 
erasmus's reputation and the interpretations of his work have varied over time . 
much like the brethren of the common life ,  he wrote that the new testament is the law of christ people are called to obey and that christ is the example they are called to imitate . 
according to ernest barker ,  `` besides his work on the new testament ,  erasmus laboured also ,  and even more arduously ,  on the early fathers . 
erasmus’s `` sileni alcibiadis '' is one of his most direct assessments of the need for church reform . 
one of erasmus's best-known works ,  inspired by `` de triumpho stultitiae ''  -lrb-  written by italian humanist faustino perisauli  -rrb-  ,  is `` the praise of folly '' ,  published under the double title `` moriae encomium ''  -lrb-  greek ,  latinised  -rrb-  and `` laus stultitiae ''  -lrb-  latin  -rrb-  . 
it is said that he never seemed to have actively worked as a priest for a longer time ,  and certain abuses in religious orders were among the chief objects of his later calls to reform the church from within . 
his friendship with fisher is the reason he chose to stay at queens' while lecturing in greek at the university . 
to philip melanchthon in 1524 he wrote:
nevertheless ,  his reception is demonstrable among swiss protestants in the sixteenth-century: he had an indelible influence on the biblical commentaries of ,  for example ,  konrad pellikan ,  heinrich bullinger ,  and john calvin ,  all of whom used both his annotations on the new testament and his paraphrases of same in their own new testament commentaries . 
these ,  like all of his writings ,  were published in latin but were quickly translated into other languages ,  with his encouragement . 
in 1502, spain ,  cardinal francisco jiménez de cisneros had put together a team of spanish translators to create a compilation of a bible in four languages ,  greek ,  hebrew ,  aramaic and latin . 
he also wrote `` on free will , ``  `` in praise of folly '' ,  `` handbook of a christian knight '' ,  `` on civility in children '' ,  ``  '' ,  `` julius exclusus '' ,  and many other works . 
he also ignored much older and better manuscripts that were at his disposal . 
only when he had mastered latin did he begin to express himself on major contemporary themes in literature and religion . 
in some cases it is sally and not encyclopedia who figures it out because ,  as she tells encyclopedia ,  `` you are a boy . `` 
encyclopedia brown is a series of books featuring the adventures of boy detective leroy brown ,  nicknamed `` encyclopedia '' for his intelligence and range of knowledge . 
each book in the `` encyclopedia brown '' mystery series is self-contained in that the reader is not required to have read earlier books in order to understand the stories . 
the encyclopedia brown series has spawned a comic strip ,  a tv series ,  and compilation books of puzzles and games . 
the german empire  -lrb-  1871–1918 -rrb- ,  another `` heir to the holy roman empire '' ,  arose in 1871.
in china of the axial age ,  the era of the warring states ended in 221 bc with the universal conquest of qin . 
the first empire comparable to rome in organization was the neo-assyrian empire  -lrb-  916–612 bc  -rrb-  . 
throughout history ,  the major powers of the world constantly seek to conquer other parts of the world . 
the fall of the roman empire in the west is seen as one of the most pivotal points in all of human history . 
'empire' and 'colonialism' are used to refer to relationships between powerful state or society versus a less powerful one . 
in 30 bc rome annexed ptolemaic egypt . 
circa 1500 bc in china rose the shang empire which was succeeded by the zhou empire circa 1100 bc . 
likewise ,  with the collapse of the holy roman empire in 1806 during the napoleonic wars  -lrb-  1803–1815 -rrb- ,  the austrian empire  -lrb-  1804–1867 -rrb- emerged reconstituted as the empire of austria–hungary  -lrb-  1867–1918 -rrb- ,  having `` inherited '' the imperium of central and western europe from the losers of said wars . 
the legal systems of france and its former colonies are strongly influenced by roman law . 
and renamed their states as `` the empire of  .  .  . ``  . 
the sikh empire  -lrb-  1799–1846 -rrb- was established in the punjab region of india . 
in the 15th century bc ,  the new kingdom of ancient egypt ,  ruled by thutmose iii ,  was ancient africa's major force upon incorporating nubia and the ancient city-states of the levant . 
in the 7th century ,  maritime southeast asia witnessed the rise of a buddhist thallasocracy ,  the srivijaya empire ,  which thrived for 600 years and was succeeded by the hindu-buddhist majapahit empire that ruled from the 13th to 15th centuries . 
the british established their first empire  -lrb-  1583–1783 -rrb- in north america by colonising lands that made up british america ,  including parts of canada ,  the caribbean and the thirteen colonies . 
in india during the axial age appeared the maurya empire—a geographically extensive and powerful empire ,  ruled by the mauryan dynasty from 321 to 185 bc . 
later ,  the empire was divided into a confederacy of states which ,  in 1818, were lost to the british during the anglo-maratha wars . 
the ashanti empire  -lrb-  or confederacy  -rrb-  ,  also asanteman  -lrb-  1701–1896 -rrb- ,  was a west african state of the ashanti ,  the akan people of the ashanti region ,  akanland in modern-day ghana . 
even rights of citizenship and authority to rule were granted to people not of roman or italian birth . 
the roman catholic church ,  founded in the early imperial period ,  spread across europe ,  first by the activities of christian evangelists ,  and later by official imperial promulgation . 
the final solution  -lrb-    -rrb-  or the final solution to the jewish question  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  was a nazi plan for the genocide of jews during world war ii . 
the term `` final solution '' was a euphemism used by the nazis to refer to their plan for the annihilation of the jewish people . 
for longerich ,  to see mass killing as the final solution was an acknowledgement by the nazi leadership that there would not be a german military victory over the ussr in the near future . 
in his monograph ,  `` the origins of the final solution: the evolution of nazi jewish policy ,  september 1939 – march 1942 '' ,  christopher browning argues that nazi policy toward the jews was radicalized twice: in september 1939, when the invasion of poland implied policies of mass expulsion and massive loss of jewish lives; and in spring 1941, when preparation for operation barbarossa involved the planning of mass execution ,  mass expulsion ,  and starvation – to dwarf what had happened in jewish poland . 
the assembled functionaries were told that the nazi state policy was `` the extermination of the jewish people '' as such . 
by the end of december 1941, before the wannsee conference ,  over 439,800 jewish people had been murdered ,  and the final solution policy in the east became common knowledge within the ss . 
cesarani notes that by 1943, as the military position of the german forces deteriorated ,  the nazi leadership became more openly explicit about the final solution . 
david cesarani emphasises the improvised ,  haphazard nature of nazi policies in response to changing war time conditions in his overview ,  `` final solution: the fate of the european jews 1933–49 ''  -lrb-  2016 -rrb- . 
after the end of world war ii ,  surviving archival documents provided a clear record of the final solution policies and actions of nazi germany . 
historians disagree as to when and how the nazi leadership decided that the european jews should be exterminated . 
this period was the peak of nazi victories against the soviet army on the eastern front ,  and ,  according to browning ,  the stunning series of german victories led to both an expectation that the war would soon be won ,  and the planning of the final destruction of the `` jewish-bolshevik enemy '' . 
given that poland was home to the largest jewish population in the world ,  and that ,  in a couple of years ,  it would house the extermination camps ,  this is remarkable . `` 
the nazi invasion of the soviet union codenamed operation barbarossa ,  which commenced on 22 june 1941, set in motion a `` war of destruction '' which quickly opened the door to systematic mass murder of european jews . 
the outbreak of war and the invasion of poland brought a population of 3.5 million polish jews under the control of the nazi and soviet security forces ,  and marked the start of a far more savage persecution ,  including mass killings . 
the nature and timing of the decisions that led to the final solution is an intensely researched and debated aspect of the holocaust . 
peter longerich argues that the search for a finite date on which the nazis embarked upon the extermination of the jews is futile ,  in his book `` holocaust: the nazi persecution and murder of the jews ''  -lrb-  2011 -rrb- . 
for his seventh labour ,  heracles captured the cretan bull . 
for the tenth labour ,  he stole the cattle of the giant geryon ,  which eurystheus then had sacrificed to hera . 
for his second labour ,  to slay the lernaean hydra ,  heracles took with him his nephew ,  iolaus ,  as a charioteer . 
when eurystheus found out that heracles' nephew had helped him he declared that the labour had not been completed alone and as a result did not count towards the ten labours set for him . 
for his sixth labour ,  heracles had to drive the stymphalian birds off the marshes they plagued . 
to extend what may have once been ten labours to the canonical dozen ,  it was said that eurystheus didn't count the hydra ,  as he was assisted ,  nor the augean stables ,  as heracles received payment for his work . 
an effects unit is also called an `` effect box '' ,  `` effects device '' ,  `` effects processor '' or simply `` effects '' . 
effects built into guitar amplifiers were the first effects that musicians used regularly outside the studio . 
an effects unit or effects pedal is an electronic or digital device that alters the sound of a musical instrument or other audio source . 
bass effects are electronic effects units that are designed for use with the low pitches created by an electric bass or for an upright bass used with a bass amp or pa system . 
while guitar effects are most frequently used with electric or electronic instruments ,  effects can also be used with acoustic instruments ,  drums and vocals . 
a pedal keyboard uses pedals ,  but it is not an effect unit; it is a foot-operated keyboard in which the pedals are typically used to play basslines . 
the stompbox that simulates this effect is the uni-vibe pedal . 
dynamics effects were among the first effects introduced to guitarists . 
a guitarist switching from rhythm guitar to lead guitar for a guitar solo may use a boost to increase the volume of his or her solo . 
an `` effects chain '' or `` signal chain '' is formed by connecting two or more stompboxes . 
some stompbox-style vocal pedals contain multiple effects ,  such as reverb and pitch correction . 
the earliest sound effects were strictly studio productions . 
pedals such as the boss df-2 and fb-2 use an internally generated signal matched to the pitch of the guitar that can be sustained indefinitely by depressing the pedal . 
pitch/frequency effects modify pitch by altering the frequency of a sound wave or sound signal or adding new harmonies . 
other modulation effects split an instrument's audio signal in two ,  altering one portion of the signal and mixing it with the unaltered portion . 
occasionally ,  acoustic-electric and electric guitars will have built-in effects ,  such as a preamp or equalizer . 
simulators: simulators enable electric guitars to mimic the sound of other instruments such as acoustic guitar ,  electric bass and sitar . 
audio feedback: audio feedback is an effect produced when amplified sound is picked up by a microphone or guitar pickup and played back through a guitar amplifier ,  initiating a `` feedback loop '' ,  which usually consists of high-pitched sound . 
musicians ,  audio engineers and record producers use effects units during live performances or in the studio ,  typically with electric guitar ,  bass guitar ,  electronic keyboard or electric piano . 
many compressor pedals are often also marketed as `` sustainer pedals '' . 
since the 2000s ,  guitar amplifiers began having built-in multi-effects units or digital modeling effects . 
common effects include distortion/overdrive ,  often used with electric guitar in electric blues and rock music; dynamic effects such as volume pedals and compressors ,  which affect loudness; filters such as wah-wah pedals and graphic equalizers ,  which modify frequency ranges; modulation effects ,  such as chorus ,  flangers and phasers; pitch effects such as pitch shifters; and time effects ,  such as reverb and delay ,  which create echoing sounds . 
rockabilly and surf guitar are two genres that make heavy use of reverb . <br> reverb effects: electro-harmonix holy grail ,  fender reverb unit . 
 ''fortune '' named enron `` america's most innovative company '' for six consecutive years . 
at the end of 2001, it was revealed that enron's reported financial condition was sustained by institutionalized ,  systematic ,  and creatively planned accounting fraud ,  known since as the enron scandal . 
enron corporation was an american energy ,  commodities ,  and services company based in houston ,  texas . 
eusebius of alexandria is an author to whom certain extant homilies are attributed . 
the discourses belong probably to the fifth or sixth century ,  and possibly originated in alexandria . 
the epistle is a downright renunciation of berengar in case he should still maintain his view . 
he first appears in the historical record as bishop of angers at the synod of rheims in 1049, and for a long time had been an adherent of berengar's doctrine of the lord's supper . 
by the 3rd century ,  caesarea had a population of about 100,000.
through the activities of the theologian origen  -lrb-  185/6–254 -rrb- and the school of his follower pamphilus  -lrb-  later 3rd century – 309 -rrb- ,  caesarea became a center of christian learning . 
little is known about the life of eusebius . 
soon after pamphilus settled in caesarea  -lrb-  `` ca '' . 
in caesarea ,  origenist thought was continued in the generation after his death by theotecnus ,  bishop of the city for much of the late 3rd century and an alumnus of origen's school . 
eusebius of caesarea  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` eusébios tés kaisareías '';  260/265 – 339/340 -rrb- ,  also known as eusebius pamphili  -lrb-  from the  ,  was a historian of christianity ,  exegete ,  and christian polemicist . 
on his deathbed ,  origen had made a bequest of his private library to the christian community in the city . 
some scholars have questioned the eusebian authorship of this work . 
eusebius got his information about what texts were accepted by the third-century churches throughout the known world ,  a great deal of which origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels ,  from the library and writings of origen . 
the work as a whole has been lost in the original greek ,  but it may be reconstructed from later chronographists of the byzantine school who made excerpts from the work ,  especially george syncellus . 
in the 290s ,  eusebius began work on his `` magnum opus '' ,  the `` ecclesiastical history '' ,  a narrative history of the church and christian community from the apostolic age to eusebius' own time . 
this means that his death occurred some time between the second half of 339 and early 340.
and if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer ,  we must refer to a third doctor ,  and so on  -lrb-  also see the third man  -rrb-  . 
hume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: `` relations of ideas '' and `` matters of fact ''  -lrb-  see also kant's analytic-synthetic distinction  -rrb-  . 
this idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the stoic school . 
john locke ,  george berkeley ,  and david hume were the primary exponents of empiricism in the 18th century enlightenment ,  with locke being normally known as the founder of empiricism as such . 
berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism . 
hume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable . 
his method of argument in arriving at this view ,  however ,  still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today . 
a central concept in science and the scientific method is that it must be `` empirically '' based on the evidence of the senses . 
bonaventure  -lrb-  1221–1274 -rrb- ,  one of aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents ,  offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the platonic idea of the mind . 
the notion of `` tabula rasa ''  -lrb-  `` clean slate '' or `` blank tablet ''  -rrb-  connotes a view of mind as an originally blank or empty recorder  -lrb-  locke used the words `` white paper ''  -rrb-  on which experience leaves marks . 
thus ,  ideas in dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known `` a posteriori '' . 
british empiricism ,  though it was not a term used at the time ,  derives from the 17th century period of early modern philosophy and modern science . 
it is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on `` a priori '' reasoning ,  intuition ,  or revelation . 
the estampie  -lrb-   ,  occitan and  ,    -rrb-  is a medieval dance and musical form which was a popular instrumental and vocal form in the 13th and 14th centuries . 
also according to grocheio ,  the repeating sections in both the vocal and instrumental estampie were called `` puncta ''  -lrb-  singular `` punctus ''  -rrb-   ,  in the form:
the term experimental cancer treatment could thus be substituted for `` non fda approved cancer treatment . `` 
cam use is common among people with cancer . 
tumor treating fields is a novel fda-approved cancer treatment therapy that uses alternating electric field to disturb the rapid cell division exhibited by cancer cells . 
epigenetics also has the factor of reversibility ,  a characteristic that other cancer treatments do not offer . 
this treatment is still in very early development stages for many types of cancer . 
medical research for cancer begins much like research for any disease . 
according to the american cancer society ,  `` there is no reliable clinical evidence that quercetin can prevent or treat cancer in humans '' . 
it has been tested in humans with skin papillomas and bladder cancer . 
clinical trials are the study of treatments in humans . 
experimental cancer treatments are non-medical therapies intended to treat cancer by improving on ,  supplementing or replacing conventional methods  -lrb-  surgery ,  chemotherapy ,  radiation ,  and immunotherapy  -rrb-  . 
in other cases ,  the proposed treatment for cancer is already in use for some other medical condition ,  in which case more is known about its safety and potential efficacy . 
however ,  without a large controlled trial it is impossible to say whether the drug is truly effective against cancer . 
most complementary and alternative medicines for cancer have not been rigorously studied or tested . 
