valdivia became the first governor of the captaincy general of chile . 
from 1817 to 1823, bernardo o'higgins ruled chile as supreme director . 
after 20 years ,  chile went in a new direction with the win of center-right sebastián piñera ,  in the chilean presidential election of 2009–2010.
the territory of chile has been populated since at least 3000 bc . 
chile was the least wealthy realm of the spanish crown for most of its colonial history . 
in 1990, chile finally made a peaceful transition to democracy . 
on 17 december 2017, sebastián piñera ,  was elected president of chile for a second term . 
san martín then led his argentine and chilean followers north to liberate peru; and fighting continued in chile's southern provinces ,  the bastion of the royalists ,  until 1826.
chile's first experiment with self-government ,  the `` patria vieja ''  -lrb-  `` old republic '' ,  1810–1814 -rrb- ,  was led by josé miguel carrera ,  an aristocrat then in his mid-twenties . 
chile won its formal independence when san martín defeated the last large spanish force on chilean soil at the battle of maipú on april 5, 1818.
the `` portalian state '' was institutionalized by the chilean constitution of 1833.
the founder of the pos and its best-known leader ,  luis emilio recabarren ,  also founded the communist party of chile  -lrb-   – pcch  -rrb-  in 1922.
chileans elected a new president and the majority of members of a two-chamber congress on december 14, 1989.
san martín considered the liberation of chile a strategic stepping-stone to the emancipation of peru ,  which he saw as the key to hemispheric victory over the spanish . 
in 1982–1983 chile witnessed a severe economic crises with a surge in unemployment and a meltdown of the financial sector . 
the portalian president was general joaquín prieto ,  who served two terms  -lrb-  1831–1836, 1836–1841 -rrb- . 
in its ``  '' ,  on august 22, 1973, the chamber of deputies of chile asserted that chilean democracy had broken down and called for `` redirecting government activity '' ,  to restore constitutional rule . 
chile was governed during most of its first 150 years of independence by different forms of restricted government ,  where the electorate was carefully vetted and controlled by an elite . 
in addition ,  nixon gave instructions to make the chilean economy scream ,  and international financial pressure restricted economic credit to chile . 
after this initial excursion there was little interest from colonial authorities in further exploring modern-day chile . 
the first european to sight chilean territory was ferdinand magellan ,  who crossed the strait of magellan on november 1, 1520.
chile also temporarily resolved its border disputes with argentina with the puna de atacama lawsuit of 1899, the boundary treaty of 1881 between chile and argentina and the 1902 general treaty of arbitration ,  though not without engaging in an expensive naval arms race beforehand . 
o'higgins's opponents also disapproved of his diversion of chilean resources to aid san martín's liberation of peru . 
as a result of the war of the pacific with peru and bolivia  -lrb-  1879–1883 -rrb- ,  chile expanded its territory northward by almost one-third and acquired valuable nitrate deposits ,  the exploitation of which led to an era of national affluence . 
the `` concertación '' coalition has continued to dominate chilean politics for last two decades . 
chile's constitution established that in 1988 there would be another plebiscite in which the voters would accept or reject a single candidate proposed by the military junta . 
immediately after the election ,  the united states expressed its disapproval and raised a number of economic sanctions against chile . 
about 10,000 years ago ,  migrating native americans settled in the fertile valleys and coastal areas of what is present day chile . 
o'higgins ,  carrera and many of the chilean rebels escaped to argentina . 
the araucanians ,  a fragmented society of hunters ,  gatherers ,  and farmers ,  constituted the largest native american group in chile . 
in august 1828, pinto's first year in office ,  chile abandoned its short-lived federalist system for a unitary form of government ,  with separate legislative ,  executive ,  and judicial branches . 
chile's legal system is civil law based . 
chile's government is a representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of chile is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a formal multi-party system that in practice behaves like a two-party one ,  due to binomialism . 
the current senate composition is as follows: 20 seats are held by the coalition of parties for democracy  -lrb-  cpd  -rrb- : six christian democrats  -lrb-  pdc  -rrb-  ,  eight socialists  -lrb-  ps  -rrb-  ,  three party for democracy  -lrb-  ppd  -rrb-  and three social democrat radical party  -lrb-  prsd  -rrb- ; 17 by the alliance for chile  -lrb-  apc  -rrb- : nine independent democratic union  -lrb-  udi  -rrb-  and eight national renewal  -lrb-  rn  -rrb- ; and one independent leaning right . 
chile's congressional elections are governed by a unique binomial voting system that rewards coalition slates . 
chile's monetary authority is the central bank of chile  -lrb-  cboc  -rrb-  . 
2006 was a record year for chilean trade . 
chile's total trade with china reached u . s .  $8.8 billion in 2006, representing nearly 66% of the value of its trade relationship with asia . =
chile's trade talks with malaysia and thailand are also scheduled to continue in 2008.
the mining sector in chile is one of the pillars of chilean economy . 
exports to asia increased from us $15.2 billion in 2005 to us $19.7 billion in 2006, a 29.9% increase . 
chile is the second largest producer of salmon in the world . 
more recently ,  chile has also been an active participant of deeper plurilateral trade agreement negotiations . 
chile unilaterally lowered its across-the-board import tariff for all countries with which it does not have a trade agreement to 6% in 2003.
during 2006, chile imported us $26 billion from the americas ,  representing 54% of total imports ,  followed by asia at 22% ,  and europe at 16% . 
chile's overall trade profile has traditionally been dependent upon copper exports . 
total trade with europe also grew in 2006, expanding by 42% . 
chile is strongly committed to free trade and has welcomed large amounts of foreign investment . 
as of 2006, chile invested 0.6% of its annual gdp in research and development  -lrb-  r&d  -rrb-  . 
in the 1830s chile consolidated under the ideas of diego portales as a stable state open to foreign trade . 
gdp expanded by 5.1% in 2007.
internal government of chile figures show that even when factoring out inflation and the recent high price of copper ,  bilateral trade between the u . s .  and chile has grown over 60% since then . 
tourism in chile has experienced sustained growth over the last decades . 
through chile's trade agreements ,  its agricultural products have gained access to a market controlling 77% of the world's gdp and by approximately 2012, 74% of chilean agribusiness exports will be duty-free . 
the government of chile continues to pay down its foreign debt ,  with public debt only 3.9% of gdp at the end of 2006.
many of the most visited attractions in chile are protected areas . 
transport in chile is mostly by road . 
gen .  jorge rojas avila heads 11,000 strong chilean air force . 
the current commander-in-chief of the chilean army is `` general de ejército '' sr .  ricardo martínez menanteau . 
chile's senate speaker sergio romero has said that chile does not recognize western sahara's independence ,  but chile's ministry of foreign relations website includes western sahara as an independent country with which chile has no diplomatic relations . 
now the anthem is played in c major during sign-on and sign-off . 
this first hymn was sung until 1828, when it was replaced with what is sung today . 
the `` national anthem of chile ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  also known as `` canción nacional ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  ,  was adopted in 1828.
below are the lyrics of the most played version; it corresponds to verse v of the full version and the chorus: full national anthem according to chilean constitution  -lrb-  only verse v and the chorus are played officially as the national anthem decree 260 -rrb-
in the celebrations marking the return of democracy in march 1990 at santiago's estadio nacional julio martínez prádanos ,  the anthem was played in its present melody ,  raised to f major  -lrb-  the royal musical official version of the anthem  -rrb-  which is the original melody of the second anthem by carnicer ,  but using the 1847 lyrics as text ,  save for the original chorus of the 1819 anthem . 
the island is about in greatest length and in breadth . 
additionally ,  there is a bahá'í centre on the island . 
in october 1945, re-occupied christmas island . 
the territory of christmas island is an australian external territory comprising the island of the same name . 
as of the 2016 australian census ,  the population of christmas island is 1,843.
christmas island had a population of 1,843 residents  ,  the majority of whom live in settlements on the northern tip of the island . 
the land crabs and seabirds are the most noticeable fauna on the island . 
australia's christmas island act was passed in september 1958 and the island was officially placed under the authority of the commonwealth of australia on 1 october 1958.
the first attempt at exploring the island was in 1857 by the crew of the `` amethyst '' . 
christmas island is well known for its biological diversity . 
some 86 migrant bird species have been recorded as visitors to the island . 
the island is a focal point for seabirds of various species . 
the first european to sight the island was richard rowe of the `` thomas '' in 1615.
the first european to sight the island was richard rowe of the `` thomas '' in 1615.
captain daniel beeckman of the `` eagle '' passed the island on 5 april 1714, chronicled in his 1718 book ,  `` a voyage to and from the island of borneo ,  in the east-indies '' . 
this discovery led to annexation of the island by the british crown on 6 june 1888.
they tried to reach the summit of the island but found the cliffs impassable . 
six species of butterfly are known to occur on christmas island . 
in early 1986, the christmas island assembly held a design competition for an island flag; the winning design was adopted as the informal flag of the territory for over a decade ,  and in 2002 it was made the official flag of christmas island . 
phosphate ,  deposited originally as guano ,  has been mined on the island since 1899.
the island is the flat summit of an underwater mountain more than high ,  which rises from about below the sea and only about above it . 
goos labelled the island `` mony '' or `` moni '' ,  the meaning of which is unclear . 
clipperton is about south-east of socorro island in the revillagigedo archipelago ,  which is the nearest land . 
the presence of this rock means that technically clipperton is not an atoll but an island with a barrier reef . 
when snodgrass and heller visited in 1898, they reported that `` no land plant is native to the island '' . 
when the independence of algeria in 1962 threatened french nuclear testing sites in the african nation ,  the french ministry of defence considered clipperton island as a possible replacement . 
clipperton island  -lrb-   or ;   -rrb-  is an uninhabited coral atoll in the eastern pacific ocean off the coast of central america . 
an april 2015 dx-pedition using callsign tx5p was conducted by alain duchauchoy ,  f6bfh ,  concurrent with the passion 2015 scientific expedition to clipperton island ,  and engaging in research of mexican use of the island during the early 1900s . 
the atoll is south-west of mexico ,  west of nicaragua ,  west of costa rica and north-west of the galápagos islands ,  ecuador ,  at  . 
the story of the mexican colony has been the subject of several novels ,  including ivo mansmann's `` clipperton ,  schicksale auf einer vergessenen insel ''  -lrb-  `` clipperton ,  destinies on a forgotten island ''  -rrb-  in german ,  colombian writer laura restrepo's `` la isla de la pasión ''  -lrb-  `` passion island ''  -rrb-  in spanish ,  and ana garcia bergua's `` isla de bobos ''  -lrb-  `` island of fools ''  -rrb-  ,  also in spanish . 
clipperton has had no permanent inhabitants since 1945.
the island was discovered on good friday ,  3 april 1711 by frenchmen martin de chassiron and michel du bocage ,  commanding the french ships `` la princesse '' and `` la découverte '' . 
other refuse has been left over after the occupation by the americans in 1944–45, the french in 1966–69 and the 2008 scientific expedition . 
the island was abandoned by the end of world war ii after being briefly occupied by the us from 1944–45.
in 1981, the academy of sciences for overseas territories recommended that the island have its own economic infrastructure ,  with an airstrip and a fishing port in the lagoon . 
the islands have been called the `` cocos islands ''  -lrb-  from 1622 -rrb- ,  the `` keeling islands ''  -lrb-  from 1703 -rrb- ,  the `` cocos–keeling islands ''  -lrb-  since james horsburgh in 1805 -rrb- and the `` keeling–cocos islands ''  -lrb-  19th century  -rrb-  . 
the population of the islands is approximately 600.
the territory consists of two atolls made up of 27 coral islands ,  of which only two – west island and home island – are inhabited . 
the islands were annexed by the british empire in 1857.
the capital of the territory of cocos  -lrb-  keeling  -rrb-  islands is west island while the largest settlement is the village of bantam  -lrb-  home island  -rrb-  . 
the territory's dual name  -lrb-  official since the islands’ incorporation into australia in 1955 -rrb- reflects that the islands have historically been known as either the cocos islands or the keeling islands . 
on 23 november 1955, the islands were transferred from the united kingdom to the commonwealth of australia . 
in the 1970s ,  the australian government's dissatisfaction with the clunies-ross feudal style of rule of the island increased . 
in 1901 a telegraph cable station was established on direction island . 
the form `` cocos  -lrb-  keeling  -rrb-  islands '' ,  attested from 1916, was made official by the cocos  -lrb-  keeling  -rrb-  islands act 1955.
sign boards on the island also feature malay translations . 
cocos  -lrb-  keeling  -rrb-  islands residents who are australian citizens also vote in federal elections . 
in 1878, by letters patent ,  the governor of ceylon was made governor of the islands ,  and ,  by further letters patent in 1886, responsibility for the islands was transferred to the governor of the straits settlement to exercise his functions as `` governor of cocos islands '' . 
the islands were made part of the straits settlement under an order in council of 20 may 1903.
the territory of cocos  -lrb-  keeling  -rrb-  islands is an australian external territory in the indian ocean ,  comprising a small archipelago approximately midway between australia and sri lanka and closer to the indonesian island of sumatra . 
 ''sydney '' spotted the island and `` emden '' at 09:15, with both ships preparing for combat . 
after the fall of singapore in 1942, the islands were administered from ceylon  -lrb-  sri lanka  -rrb-  ,  and west and direction islands were placed under allied military administration . 
the territory was transferred to australia in 1955, although until 1979 virtually all of the island's real estate still belonged to the clunies-ross family . 
home island and west island have medical clinics providing basic health services ,  but serious medical conditions and injuries cannot be treated on the island and patients are sent to perth for treatment ,  a distance of  . 
a conspiracy theory may take any matter as its subject ,  but certain subjects attract greater interest than others . 
lance dehaven-smith suggested that the term entered everyday language in the united states in 1964, a year in which `` the new york times '' ran five stories with mention of the term . 
conspiracy theories are widely present on the web in the form of blogs and youtube videos ,  as well as on social media . 
the `` oxford english dictionary '' defines `` conspiracy theory '' as `` the theory that an event or phenomenon occurs as a result of a conspiracy between interested parties; `` spec . `` 
the coral sea islands were first charted in 1803.
the islands are all very low . 
the outer edge of the great barrier reef is the boundary between queensland and the coral sea islands territory . 
the coral sea islands territory is an external territory of australia which comprises a group of small and mostly uninhabited tropical islands and reefs in the coral sea ,  northeast of queensland ,  australia . 
the coral sea islands became an australian external territory in 1969 by the `` coral sea islands act ''  -lrb-  prior to that ,  the area was considered part of queensland  -rrb-  and extended in 1997 to include elizabeth reef and middleton reef nearly 800 km further south ,  already in the tasman sea . 
football is the most popular sport in costa rica . 
over 840 species of birds have been identified in costa rica . 
costa rica also comprises several islands . 
costa rica also has progressive environmental policies . 
the university of costa rica has been awarded the title `` meritorious institution of costa rican education and culture '' . 
in total ,  costa rica comprises plus of territorial waters . 
costa rica has developed a system of payments for environmental services . 
costa rica is home to a rich variety of plants and animals . 
costa rica also possesses the greatest density of species in the world . 
the literacy rate in costa rica is approximately 97 percent and english is widely spoken primarily due to costa rica's tourism industry . 
with more than 2,000 dead ,  the resulting 44-day costa rican civil war was the bloodiest event in costa rica during the 20th century . 
costa rica has been cited as central america's great health success story . 
since 2012, smoking in costa rica is subject to some of the most restrictive regulations in the world . 
costa rica is an observer of the organisation internationale de la francophonie . 
costa rica hosts many refugees ,  mainly from colombia and nicaragua . 
more recently ,  pre-columbian costa rica has also been described as part of the isthmo-colombian area . 
the sovereign state of costa rica is a unitary presidential constitutional republic . 
costa rica has a long-term disagreement with nicaragua over the san juan river ,  which defines the border between the two countries ,  and costa rica's rights of navigation on the river . 
costa rica has free trade agreements with many countries ,  including the us . 
costa rica is the most visited nation in the central american region ,  with 2.9 million foreign visitors in 2016, up 10% from 2015.
costa rica is an active member of the united nations and the organization of american states . 
costa rica was the point where the mesoamerican and south american native cultures met . 
costa rica was described as `` the poorest and most miserable spanish colony in all america '' by a spanish governor in 1719.
like the rest of central america ,  costa rica never fought for independence from spain . 
costa rica's seasons are defined by how much rain falls during a particular period . 
agriculture became evident in the populations that lived in costa rica about 5,000 years ago . 
costa rica is among the latin america countries that have become popular destinations for medical tourism . 
in november 2017, national geographic magazine named costa rica as the happiest country in the world . 
students who finish 11th grade receive a costa rican bachillerato diploma accredited by the costa rican ministry of education . 
because costa rica is located between 8 and 12 degrees north of the equator ,  the climate is tropical year round . 
costa rica was sparsely inhabited by indigenous peoples before coming under spanish rule in the 16th century . 
that date is still celebrated as independence day in costa rica even though ,  technically ,  under the spanish constitution of 1812 that had been readopted in 1820, nicaragua and costa rica had become an autonomous province with its capital in león . 
costa rica was facing a market liquidity crisis in 2017 due to a growing debt and budget deficit . 
costa rica has successfully managed to diminish deforestation from some of the worst rates in the world from 1973 to 1989, to almost zero by 2005.
in 1502, christopher columbus made landfall in costa rica . 
costa rica shares a border with nicaragua to the north  -lrb-  313 km long border  -rrb-  and with panama to the south  -lrb-  348 km long border  -rrb-  . 
it borders both the caribbean sea  -lrb-  to the east  -rrb-  and the north pacific ocean  -lrb-  to the west  -rrb-  ,  with a total of 1,290 km of coastline  -lrb-  212 km on the caribbean coast and 1,016 km on the pacific  -rrb-  . 
in  ,  costa rica had a population of  . 
costa rica's main universities are the university of costa rica ,  in san pedro and the national university of costa rica ,  in heredia . 
costa rica's emigration is among the smallest in the caribbean basin . 
costa rica's immigration is among the largest in the caribbean basin . 
costa rica also has several small private universities . 
costa rica's emigration is the smallest in the caribbean basin and is among the smallest in the americas . 
according to cia factbook ,  costa rica has white or mestizo population of the 83.6% . 
the following listing is taken from a publication of the costa rica 2011 census:
voting is compulsory in costa rica but it is not enforced . 
the pusc obtained 19 seats ,  pln 17 seats ,  pac 14 seats ,  pml 6 seats and prc one seat . 
the president of costa rica has limited powers ,  particularly in comparison to other latin american presidents . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated costa rica as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
the 1986 presidential election was won by óscar arias of the pln . 
also involved in scandals has been josé maría figueres ,  former president from pln and former head of the world economic forum . 
this provides the single most important power versus congress that any costa rican president has . 
the politics of costa rica take place in a framework of a presidential ,  representative democratic republic ,  with a multi-party system . 
in the february 1998 national election ,  pusc candidate miguel ángel rodríguez won the presidency over pln nominee josé miguel corrales bolaños . 
by 2015, costa rica's agricultural exports totalled us$2.7 billion . 
in 2015, exports totalled us$12.6 billion while imports totalled us$15 billion for a trade deficit of us$2.39 billion . 
with a $1.92-billion-a-year tourism industry ,  costa rica was the most visited nation in the central american region ,  with 2.42 million foreign visitors in 2013.
costa rica's infrastructure has suffered from a lack of maintenance and new investment . 
total imports in 2015 were us$15 billion ,  somewhat higher than the total exports of a us$12.6 billion ,  for a negative trade balance of us$2.39 billion . 
costa rica has sought to widen its economic and trade ties ,  both within and outside the region . 
in terms of the 2012 environmental performance index ranking ,  costa rica is 5th in the world ,  and first among the americas . 
costa rica's outward foreign direct investment stock is small ,  at about 3 percent of gdp as of 2011, and mainly concentrated in central america  -lrb-  about 57 percent of the total outward direct investment stock  -rrb-  . 
the estimated gdp for 2017 is us$61.5 billion ,  up significantly from the us$52.6 billion in 2015 while the estimated 2017 per capita  -lrb-  purchasing power parity  -rrb-  is us$12,382.
mere decades ago ,  costa rica was known principally as a producer of bananas and coffee . 
costa rica's economy was historically based on agriculture ,  and this has had a large cultural impact through the years . 
a 2016 report by the u . s .  government report identifies other challenges facing costa rica as it works to expand its economy by working with potential foreign investors:
the world travel & tourism council's estimates indicate a direct contribution to the 2016 gdp of 5.1% and 110,000 direct jobs in costa rica; the total number of jobs indirectly supported by tourism was 271,000.
according to transparency . org ,  costa rica had a reputation as one of the most stable ,  prosperous ,  and among the least corrupt in latin america in 2007.
costa rica has over 50 wildlife refuges ,  32 major national parks ,  more than 12 forest reserves and a few biological reserves . 
most parts of the country are accessible by road . 
the road system in costa rica is not as developed as it might be expected for such a country . 
costa rica maintains police guard forces . 
on december 1, 1948, president josé figueres ferrer of costa rica abolished the military of costa rica after victory in the civil war that year . 
the museum `` museo nacional de costa rica '' was placed in the `` cuartel bellavista '' as a symbol of commitment to culture . 
regional political integration has not proven attractive to costa rica . 
costa rica also participated in the multinational partnership for democracy and development in central america . 
costa rica is an active member of the international community and ,  in 1983, claimed it was for neutrality . 
on jan .  1 2008 costa rica started its third year term on the security council . 
theoretical approaches to the structure of languages have also been developed . 
work has also been done in making computers produce language in a more naturalistic manner . 
the ability of infants to develop language has also been modeled using robots in order to test linguistic theories . 
without a computational approach to the structure of linguistic data ,  much of the information that is available now would still be hidden under the vastness of data within any single language . 
speech recognition and speech synthesis deal with how spoken language can be understood or created using computers . 
attempts have been made to model the developmental process of language acquisition in children from a computational angle ,  leading to both statistical grammars and connectionist models . 
it is important to note that this information could only have been empirically tested using a computational approach . 
in order to translate one language into another ,  it was observed that one had to understand the grammar of both languages ,  including both morphology  -lrb-  the grammar of word forms  -rrb-  and syntax  -lrb-  the grammar of sentence structure  -rrb-  . 
without the computational approach to this question ,  the vastly complex information present in discourse data would have remained inaccessible to scientists . 
initial attempts at understanding spoken language were based on work done in the 1960s and 1970s in signal modeling where an unknown signal is analyzed to look for patterns and to make predictions based on its history . 
as our understanding of the linguistic development of an individual within a lifetime is continually improved using neural networks and learning robotic systems ,  it is also important to keep in mind that languages themselves change and develop through time . 
similar approaches were employed in early speech recognition attempts starting in the late 70s at ibm using word/part-of-speech pair probabilities . 
theoretical efforts like these set the direction for research to go early in the lifetime of a field of study ,  and are crucial to the growth of the field . 
the cavalla river drains the western border area of the ivory coast and eastern liberia . 
the sassandra river forms in the guinea highlands and drains much of the western part of the ivory coast east of the cavalla river . 
the bandama river is the longest river in the ivory coast with a length of some draining the east central part of the country . 
the komoé river originates on the sikasso plateau of burkina faso ,  and briefly follows the border between burkina faso and ivory coast before entering ivory coast . 
the climate of ivory coast is generally warm and humid ,  ranging from equatorial in the southern coasts to tropical in the middle and semiarid in the far north . 
the proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 40.9% ,  55.3% was between 15 and 65 years of age ,  while 3.8% was 65 years or older
the judicial system culminates in the supreme court of ivory coast . 
ivory coast is a one party dominant state with the rally of the republicans in power . 
parliament of ivory coast will be a bicameral body composed by the national assembly and the senate of ivory coast . 
after the second ivorian civil war ,  alassane ouattara is currently the president of ivory coast . 
ivory coast's 1959 constitution provides for strong presidency within the framework of a separation of powers . 
ivory coast road network spreads over 85 000 km consisting of 75 000 unpaved ,  65 000 km ,  and 224 km highways . 
as of 2004, the railway network consisted of a state-controlled 660 km section of a 1,146 km narrow gauge railroad that ran north from abidjan through bouaké and ferkéssédougou to ouagadougou ,  burkina faso . 
the nation's railway system is part of a 1 260 km long route that links the country to burkina faso and niger . 
the french retaliated by launching a follow-up operation to destroy the ivorian air force . 
the ivorian army had three infantry battalions ,  an armoured battalion ,  an artillery battery ,  and seven specialist companies in 1993.
in march 2011, a rebel coalition ,  the `` forces nouvelles de côte d'ivoire '' ,  launched a renewed offensive on the south with french support ,  sparking a second civil war . 
the ivorian military has its roots in the colonial armed forces of french west africa ,  which were headquartered in dakar ,  senegal but possessed bases in several distinct military regions . 
the republican forces of côte d'ivoire  -lrb-  ; `` frci ''  -rrb-  is the current name of the armed forces of ivory coast . 
croatia has no official religion . 
there are more than 400,000 active sportspeople in croatia . 
 ,  registered unemployment rate in croatia was 15.3% . 
there are 314 newspapers and 2,678 magazines published in croatia . 
the two largest political parties in croatia are the croatian democratic union and the social democratic party of croatia . 
literacy in croatia stands at 99.2 per cent . 
more than half of croatia's trade is with other european union member states . 
croatia has established diplomatic relations with 181 countries . 
croatia has an area of and a population of 4.28 million ,  most of whom are roman catholics . 
croatia was first subdivided into counties in the middle ages . 
croatia  -lrb-   ,  ;  ,    -rrb-  ,  officially the republic of croatia  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a country at the crossroads of central and southeast europe ,  on the adriatic sea . 
there are 37,000 known species in croatia ,  but their actual number is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000.
the overall life expectancy in croatia at birth was 78.20 years in 2016.
croatia can be subdivided between a number of ecoregions because of its climate and geomorphology . 
tourism dominates the croatian service sector and accounts for up to 20% of croatian gdp . 
with its estimated population of 4.19 million in 2016, croatia ranks 125th by population in the world . 
the name of croatia derives from medieval latin `` croātia '' . 
architecture in croatia reflects influences of bordering nations . 
as tensions rose ,  croatia declared independence on 25 june 1991.
length of a tourist stay in croatia averaged 4.9 days in 2011.
croatia is classified as a high-income economy by the united nations . 
croatian is the official language of croatia ,  and became the 24th official language of the european union upon its accession in 2013.
besides the architecture encompassing the oldest artworks in croatia ,  there is a long history of artists in croatia reaching the middle ages . 
the freedom of the press and the freedom of speech are guaranteed by the constitution of croatia . 
the republic of croatia is a unitary state using a parliamentary system of governance . 
the area known as croatia today was inhabited throughout the prehistoric period . 
croatia is located in central and southeast europe ,  on the coast of the adriatic sea . 
croatia's economy is dominated by service and industrial sectors and agriculture . 
stated aims of croatian foreign policy include enhancing relations with neighbouring countries ,  developing international co-operation and promotion of the croatian economy and croatia itself . 
croatia's security service is the security and intelligence agency  -lrb-  soa  -rrb-  . 
in total ,  there are 55 institutions of higher education in croatia ,  attended by more than 157 thousand students . 
the political aspirations of the partisan movement were reflected in the state anti-fascist council for the national liberation of croatia ,  which developed in 1943 as the bearer of croatian statehood and later transformed into the parliament of croatia in 1945, and avnoj—its counterpart at the yugoslav level . 
according to the 2013 united nations report ,  17.6% of croatia's population were foreign-born immigrants . 
the population decrease was also a result of the croatian war of independence . 
in the eurostat eurobarometer poll of 2005, 67% of the population of croatia responded that `` they believe there is a god '' . 
in accordance with its immigration policy ,  croatia is trying to entice emigrants to return . 
croatia was affected by the european migrant crisis in 2015 when hungary's closure of its borders with serbia forced over 700,000 migrants to use croatia as a transit country on their way to western europe . 
the busiest motorways are the a1, connecting zagreb to split and the a3, passing east–west through northwest croatia and slavonia . 
there are hundreds of healthcare institutions in croatia ,  including 79 hospitals and clinics with 23,967 beds . 
the area was formally re-integrated into croatia by 1998.
after being incorporated in yugoslavia for most of the 20th century ,  croatia regained independence in 1991.
croatia became a member of the council of europe in 1996.
on 25 june 1991 the croatian parliament declared independence from yugoslavia . 
croatia became a world trade organization  -lrb-  wto  -rrb-  member in 2000 and started the accession of croatia to the european union in 2003.
croatia first appeared as a duchy in the late 7th century and then as a kingdom in the 10th century . 
tomislav was the first ruler of croatia who was styled a king in a letter from the pope john x ,  dating kingdom of croatia to year 925.
on 22 april and 7 may 1990, the first free multi-party elections were held in croatia . 
the area known today as croatia was inhabited throughout the prehistoric period . 
croatia was a socialist republic part of a six-part socialist federative republic of yugoslavia . 
this croatia included a part of bosnia ,  most of herzegovina and the city of dubrovnik and the surroundings . 
in 2011, the accession agreement was concluded ,  giving croatia the all-clear to join . 
in the croatian presidential election ,  2014–15, kolinda grabar-kitarović went to become the first croatian female president . 
on 2 may 1991 the croatian parliament voted to hold a referendum on independence . 
following the ratification of the treaty of accession 2011 and the successful croatian european union membership referendum ,  2012, croatia joined the eu on 1 july 2013.
in yugoslavia ,  the people of croatia were guaranteed free healthcare ,  free dental care ,  and secure pensions . 
as the turkish incursion into europe started ,  croatia once again became a border area . 
during 1992 and 1993, croatia also handled an estimated 700,000 refugees from bosnia ,  mainly bosnian muslims . 
opposition to the claim led to a war and personal union of croatia and hungary in 1102, ruled by coloman . 
armed conflict in croatia remained intermittent and mostly on a small scale until 1995.
ottoman croatia initially was part of rumelia eyalet ,  and later was parts of budin eyalet ,  bosnia eyalet and kanije eyalet . 
after the bihać fort finally fell in 1592, only small parts of croatia remained unconquered . 
the kingdom underwent a crucial change in 1921 to the dismay of croatia's largest political party ,  the croatian peasant party  -lrb-  hrvatska seljačka stranka  -rrb-  . 
separate coronation as king of croatia was gradually allowed to fall into abeyance and last crowned king is charles robert in 1301 after which croatia contented herself with a separate diploma inaugurale . 
for the next four centuries ,  the kingdom of croatia was ruled by the sabor  -lrb-  parliament  -rrb-  and a ban  -lrb-  viceroy  -rrb-  appointed by the king . 
upon retirement ,  a popular plan was to return to live in croatia  -lrb-  then yugoslavia  -rrb-  to buy a more expensive property . 
empress maria theresa of austria was supported by the croatians in the war of austrian succession of 1741–1748 and subsequently made significant contributions to croatian matters . 
croatia's border with hungary was inherited from yugoslavia . 
there are also land border disputes between croatia and serbia . 
62% of croatia's territory is encompassed by the black sea drainage basin . 
there are 444 protected natural areas in croatia ,  encompassing 8.5% of the country; there are about 37,000 known species in croatia ,  and the total number of species is estimated to be between 50,000 and 100,000.
most of croatia is lowlands ,  with elevations of less than above sea level recorded in 53.42% of the country . 
the permanent population of croatia by the 2011 census reached 4.29 million . 
croatia was first subdivided into counties in the middle ages . 
croatia is inhabited mostly by croats  -lrb-  89.6%  -rrb-  ,  while minorities include serbs  -lrb-  4.5%  -rrb-  and 21 other ethnicities  -lrb-  less than 1% each  -rrb-  recognised by the constitution of croatia . 
croatia's adriatic sea mainland coast is long ,  while its 1,246 islands and islets have a further of coastline . 
croatia's territory covers  ,  making it the 127th largest country in the world . 
the pannonian basin and the dinaric alps ,  along with the adriatic basin ,  represent major geomorphological parts of croatia . 
the pannonian basin and the dinaric alps ,  along with the adriatic basin ,  represent major geomorphological parts of croatia . 
the populations of split and rijeka exceed 100,000, and five more cities in croatia have populations over 50,000.
the former ftt's yugoslav part was partitioned between croatia and slovenia ,  largely conforming to the area population's ethnic composition . 
croatia's territorial waters encompass ; its internal waters located within the baseline cover an additional  . 
karst topography makes up about half of croatia and is especially prominent in the dinaric alps . 
the longest cave in croatia ,  kita gaćešina ,  is at the same time the longest cave in the dinaric alps at  . 
the geography of croatia is defined by its location—it is described as a part of central europe and southeast europe ,  a part of the balkans and mitteleuropa . 
literacy in croatia is 98.1 percent . 
with a population of 4,154,213 in 2016 croatia ranks 126th in the world by population . 
in 2009, a total of 22,382 marriages were performed in croatia as well as 5,076 divorces . 
croatia is in the fourth or fifth stage of the demographic transition . 
according to the 2011 census ,  95.60% of citizens of croatia declared croatian as their native language ,  1.23% declared serbian as their native language ,  while no other language is represented in croatia by more than 0.5% of native speakers among the population of croatia . 
in 2014, there were 39,566 live births in croatia ,  comprising 20,374 male and 19,192 female children . 
since january 2016, the minimum wage in croatia is 3,120 kuna before tax  -lrb-   400 euro  -rrb-  . 
there are approximately 500 homeless persons in croatia ,  largely living in zagreb . 
in total ,  there are 132 institutions of higher education in croatia ,  attended by more than 145 thousand students . 
the croatian language is the official language of croatia ,  and one of 24 official languages of the european union since 2013.
according to the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  ,  croatia ranks around the 50th in the world in terms of life expectancy . 
scientists from croatia include inventors and nobel prize winners . 
the figure pertains only to those persons who would have been recorded by the 1991 census as living in croatia . 
the parliament of croatia  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a unicameral legislative body . 
there are other specialised courts in croatia; commercial courts and the superior commercial court ,  misdemeanour courts that try trivial offences such as traffic violations ,  the superior misdemeanour court ,  the administrative court and the croatian constitutional court  -lrb-    -rrb-  . 
croatia was first subdivided into counties  -lrb-    -rrb-  in the middle ages . 
croatia became a member state of the european union on 1 july 2013.
croatia has a three-tiered ,  independent judicial system governed by the constitution of croatia and national legislation enacted by the sabor . 
croatia is a unitary democratic parliamentary republic . 
the last parliamentary election was held on 11 september 2016 in croatia and on 10 and 11 september 2016 abroad . 
the politics of croatia are defined by a parliamentary ,  representative democratic republic framework ,  where the prime minister of croatia is the head of government in a multi-party system . 
the economist intelligence unit has rated croatia as `` flawed democracy '' in 2016.
there are fifteen county courts and sixty-seven municipal courts in the country . 
in 1994 croatia introduced the kuna as its currency . 
between 2003 and 2007, croatia’s private-sector share of gdp increased from 60% to 70% . 
croatia's total imports were $9,043,699,000, 56% of which originated from the eu . 
throughout the 1950s croatia experienced rapid urbanization . 
industrial sector is responsible for 25% of croatia's gdp ,  with agriculture ,  forestry and fishing accounting for the remaining 5% of croatian gdp . 
length of a tourist stay in croatia averages 4.9 days . 
croatia joined the european union on 1 july 2013 as the 28th member state . 
in 1997 around 60 percent of croatia's external debt was inherited from former yugoslavia . 
tourism is a notable source of income during the summer and a major industry in croatia . 
croatia's currency is the kuna ,  which was implemented in 1994 and has remained stable since . 
in 2000 croatia generated 5,899 billion kunas in total income from the shipbuilding sector ,  which employed 13,592 people . 
during the 19th century the kingdom of croatia had a high ratio of population working in agriculture . 
the economy of croatia is a service-based economy with the tertiary sector accounting for 70% of total gross domestic product  -lrb-  gdp  -rrb-  . 
croatia joined the world trade organization in 2000, nato in 2009 and became a member of the european union on 1 july 2013.
transport in croatia relies on several main modes ,  including transport by road ,  rail ,  water and air . 
iasa category 1 rating and that croatian air carriers are authorized croatia to the us . 
for example ,  1995 croatian defence budget stood at 12.4 billion croatian kuna or just over 12% of gdp ,  which was also the highest defence expenditure rate ever . 
the croatian military budget for the past 6–7 years was kept below 2% of gdp ,  a vast difference from the 1990s when defence expenditure represented a major stake in croatian budgetary expenditure due to the croatian war of independence . 
the republic of croatia armed forces  -lrb-   – osrh  -rrb-  is the military service of croatia . 
croatian foreign policy has focused on greater euro-atlantic integration ,  mainly entering the european union and nato . 
major croatian advances in foreign relations during this period have included:
the accession process was also complicated by the insistence of slovenia ,  an eu member state ,  that the two countries' border issues be dealt with prior to croatia's accession to the eu . 
the ratification process was concluded on 21 june 2013, and entry into force and accession of croatia to the eu took place on 1 july 2013.
at the time of croatia's application to the european union ,  three eu members states were yet to ratify the stabilization and association agreement: united kingdom ,  the netherlands and italy . 
croatia has established diplomatic relations with 174 countries . 
the u . s .  administration was undecided on cuba's future status . 
cuba failed to prosper before the 1760s ,  due to spanish trade regulations . 
as of 2015, cuba remains one of the few officially socialist states in the world . 
in 1940, cuba conducted free and fair national elections . 
blaine's vision did not allow the existence of an independent cuba . 
the second occupation of cuba ,  also known as the cuban pacification ,  was a major us military operation that began in september 1906.
moreover ,  cuba's health service was remarkably developed . 
the anti-castro archivo cuba estimates that 4,000 people were executed . 
at the same time ,  cuba removed its troops from the republic of the congo and ethiopia . 
on 6 november 1965, cuba and the united states agreed to an airlift for cubans who wanted to emigrate to the united states . 
at the height of its operation ,  cuba had as many as 50,000 soldiers stationed in angola . 
by 1902, american companies controlled 80% of cuba's ore exports and owned most of the sugar and cigarette factories . 
after the ten years' war ,  possession of weapons by private individuals was prohibited in cuba . 
although corruption was rife under batista ,  cuba did flourish economically during his regime . 
the spanish established sugar and tobacco as cuba's primary products ,  and the island soon supplanted hispaniola as the prime spanish base in the caribbean . 
in secret negotiations in 1896, spain turned down the united states' offers to buy cuba . 
cuba's labour regulations ultimately caused economic stagnation . 
on 11 april 1898, mckinley asked congress for authority to send u . s .  troops to cuba for the purpose of ending the civil war there . 
by the 1970s ,  the standard of living in cuba was `` extremely spartan '' and discontent was rife . 
in 2012, cuba abolished its requirement for exit permits ,  allowing cuban citizens to travel to other countries more easily . 
tourism has furthermore become a significant source of prosperity for cuba . 
as soon as spain opened cuba's ports up to foreign ships ,  a great sugar boom began that lasted until the 1880s . 
cuba's earliest known human inhabitants colonized the island in the 4th millennium bc . 
however ,  prior to the abolition of slavery ,  cuba gained great prosperity from its sugar trade . 
although the u . s .  president had no objection to cuba's eventual independence ,  u . s .  general william r .  shafter refused to allow cuban general calixto garcía and his rebel forces to participate in the surrender ceremonies in santiago de cuba . 
the amendment provided for a number of rules heavily infringing on cuba's sovereignty:
starting from the mid-1980s ,  cuba experienced a crisis referred to as the `` special period '' . 
the cubans adopted the name with pride . 
the united states recognized the castro government on 7 january 1959, six days after batista fled cuba . 
immediately after the war ,  there were several serious barriers for foreign businesses attempting to operate in cuba . 
as early as 1961, cuba supported the national liberation front in algeria against france . 
the cause of the explosion has not been clearly established to this day ,  but the incident focused american attention on cuba ,  and president william mckinley and his supporters could not stop congress from declaring war to `` liberate '' cuba . 
domestic economic reforms are also beginning to modernize cuba's socialist economy . 
although cuba remained spanish politically ,  economically it became increasingly dependent on the united states . 
after the last spanish troops left the island in december 1898, the government of cuba was temporarily handed over to the united states on 1 january 1899.
in 1662, english admiral and pirate christopher myngs captured and briefly occupied santiago de cuba on the eastern part of the island ,  in an effort to open up cuba's protected trade with neighbouring jamaica . 
however ,  the spanish–american war resulted in a spanish withdrawal from the island in 1898, and following three-and-a-half years of subsequent us military rule ,  cuba gained formal independence in 1902.
the island of cuba was inhabited by various mesoamerican cultures prior to the arrival of the spanish explorer christopher columbus in 1492.
the battle of santiago de cuba ,  on 3 july 1898, was the largest naval engagement during the spanish–american war ,  and resulted in the destruction of the spanish caribbean squadron . 
the spanish began to create permanent settlements on the island of hispaniola ,  east of cuba ,  soon after columbus' arrival in the caribbean ,  but the coast of cuba was not fully mapped by europeans until 1509, when sebastián de ocampo completed this task . 
as early as september 1959, valdim kotchergin ,  a kgb agent ,  was seen in cuba . 
all this reinforced castro's distrust of the us ,  and set the stage for the cuban missile crisis . 
with american corporate interests firmly rooted in cuba ,  the u . s .  tariff system was adjusted accordingly to strengthen trade between the nations . 
this led to disappointment in britain ,  as many believed that florida was a poor return for cuba and britain's other gains in the war . 
 ''even though he did not have a clear blueprint of the cuba he wanted to create ,  castro dreamed of a sweeping revolution that would uproot his country's oppressive socioeconomic structure and of a cuba that would be free of the united states '' . 
war was declared on 20/21 april 1898.
in march 2012, the retired fidel castro met pope benedict xvi during the latter's visit to cuba; the two men discussed the role of the catholic church in cuba ,  which has a large catholic community . 
colonial cuba was a frequent target of buccaneers ,  pirates and french corsairs seeking spain's new world riches . 
the sandinista insurgency in nicaragua ,  which led to the demise of the somoza dictatorship in 1979, was openly supported by cuba . 
it has also been argued that the main reason the united states entered the war was the failed secret attempt ,  in 1896, to purchase cuba from a weaker ,  war-depleted spain . 
the approved program authorized us to support elements in cuba opposed to the castro government while making castro's downfall seem to be the result of his own mistakes . `` 
cuba's involvement in the angolan civil war began in the 1960s ,  when relations were established with the leftist movement for the popular liberation of angola  -lrb-  mpla  -rrb-  . 
cuba had the fourth-highest literacy rate in the region ,  at almost 80% according to the united nations higher than that of spain at the time . 
cuba has a small retail sector . 
from an economic standpoint ,  cuba relies much more on venezuela than venezuela does on cuba . 
venezuela is cuba's primary source of oil . 
cuba's average tariff rate is 10 percent . 
in 2002 cuba defaulted on $750 million in japanese loans . 
as of 2018, the dual currency was still being used in cuba . 
in the 1950s ,  most cuban children were not in school . 
cuba began courting foreign investment in the special period . 
in 1986 cuba defaulted on its $10.9 billion debt to the paris club . 
the energy revolution is a program executed by cuba in 2006.
after the ussr and cuba reestablished their diplomatic relations in may 1960, the ussr began to buy cuban sugar in exchange for oil . 
cuba had a one-crop economy  -lrb-  sugar cane  -rrb-  whose domestic market was constricted . 
cuba retains high levels of healthcare and education . 
as of 2009, cuba had $47.08 billion in revenues and $50.34 billion in expenditures with 34.6% of gdp in public debt ,  an account balance of $513 million and $4.647 billion in reserves of foreign exchange and gold . 
cuba has a planned economy dominated by state-run enterprises . 
more than 40 percent of the cuban workforce in 1958 were either underemployed or unemployed . 
in 2003 cuba's biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry was gaining in importance . 
in 2014 cuba's economic freedom score was 28.7, making its economy one of the world's least free . 
cuban social indicators suffered less . 
during the revolutionary period cuba was one of the few developing countries to provide foreign aid to other countries . 
the overall tax burden is 24.4 percent of gdp . 
however ,  the cuban economy began to boost again following a rapid improvement in trade and diplomatic relations between cuba and venezuela following the election of hugo chavez in venezuela in 1998, who became cuba's most important trading partner and diplomatic ally . 
in 2007, cuba produced an estimated 16.89 billion kwh of electricity and consumed 13.93 billion kwh with no exports or imports . 
in total ,  industrial production accounted for almost 37% of cuban gdp ,  or us$6.9 billion and employed 24% of the population ,  or 2,671,000 people ,  in 1996.
of these overhead wire systems were adopted in havana ,  guanabacoa ,  matanzas ,  cienfuegos ,  camagüey and santiago de cuba . 
cuba built the first railway system in the spanish empire ,  before the 1848 start in the iberian peninsula . 
cuba's present foreign minister is bruno rodríguez parrilla . 
the earliest attested reference to `` cyprus '' is the 15th century bc mycenaean greek  ,  `` ku-pi-ri-jo '' ,  meaning `` cypriot ''  -lrb-  greek:   -rrb-  ,  written in linear b syllabic script . 
the classical greek form of the name is  -lrb-  `` kýpros ''  -rrb-  . 
the earliest known human activity on the island dates to around the 10th millennium bc . 
the sbas are located on the southern coast of the island and together encompass 254 km ,  or 2.8% of the island . 
cyprus is an island in the eastern basin of the mediterranean sea . 
geopolitically ,  the island is divided into four segments . 
coastal lowlands ,  varying in width ,  surround the island . 
in much of the island ,  access to a year-round supply of water is difficult . 
the turkish invasion of cyprus in 1974 de facto partitioned the island into two political areas: 99.5% of greek cypriots now live in the republic of cyprus while 98.7% of turkish cypriots live in northern cyprus  -lrb-  of other nationalities ,  99.2% live in the greek cypriot area in the south  -rrb-  . 
before the dispute started in 1964 the peoples of cyprus  -lrb-  then 78% greek cypriots ,  17% turkish cypriots ,  5% other communities ,  including armenians and maronites  -rrb-  were dispersed over the entire island . 
in addition to many of the greek cypriot refugees  -lrb-  a third of the population  -rrb-  ,  many turkish cypriots also moved to the uk . 
turkey ,  which does not recognise the republic of cyprus ,  and the turkish cypriot administration of the northern part of the island ,  do not accept the republic's rule over the whole island and refer to it not by its international name ,  but as the `` greek cypriot administration of southern cyprus '' . 
un-sponsored negotiations to develop institutional arrangements acceptable to the greek cypriot and turkish cypriot communities began in 1968; several sets of negotiations and other initiatives followed . 
the results of early negotiations between the greek and turkish politicians resulted in a broad agreement in principle to reunification as a bicameral ,  bi-zonal federation with territory allocated to the greek and turkish communities within a united island . 
its territory ,  a result of the turkish invasion of 1974 and whose status remains disputed ,  extends over the northern third of the island . 
after the 1974 invasion following a greek junta-based coup attempt ,  makarios secured international recognition of his greek cypriot government as the sole legal authority on cyprus ,  which has proved to be a very significant strategic advantage for the greek cypriots in the decades since . 
none of the greek cypriot parties has been able to elect a president by itself or dominate the 56-seat house of representatives . 
assistance from turkey is the mainstay of the turkish cypriot economy . 
the tourism sector also contributes substantially into the economy . 
this encourages transfers from turkish cypriots living abroad . 
fitch said cyprus would need an additional € to support its banks and the downgrade was mainly due to the exposure of bank of cyprus ,  cyprus popular bank and hellenic bank  -lrb-  cyprus's 3 largest banks  -rrb-  to the greek financial crisis . 
in june 2012 the cypriot finance minister ,  vassos shiarly ,  stated that the european central bank ,  european commission and imf officials are to carry out an in-depth investigation into cyprus' economy and banking sector to assess the level of funding it requires . 
even so ,  the eu continues to be the second-largest trading partner of northern cyprus ,  with a 24.7% share of total imports and 35% share of total exports . 
in november 2012 international lenders negotiating a bailout with the cypriot government have agreed on a key capital ratio for banks and a system for the sector's supervision . 
the cypriots are among the most prosperous people in the mediterranean region ,  with nominal gdp per capita exceeding $25,000 in 2017.
fluctuation in the turkish lira ,  which suffered from hyperinflation every year until its replacement by the turkish new lira in 2005, exerted downward pressure on the turkish cypriot standard of living for many years . 
tourism is an important factor of the island state’s economy ,  culture ,  and overall brand development . 
in 2016, moody's investors service changed its outlook on the cypriot banking system to positive from stable ,  reflecting the view that the recovery will restore banks to profitability and improve asset quality . 
they also set a core tier 1 ratio - a measure of financial strength - of 9% by the end of 2013 for banks ,  which could then rise to 10% in 2014.
the remaining €2.7 billion of the esm bailout was never dispensed ,  due to the cypriot government's better than expected finances over the course of the programme . 
of the 12,118 km of roads in the areas controlled by the republic of cyprus in 2006, 7,850 km were paved ,  while 4,268 km were unpaved . 
since the last railway was dismantled in 1952, the only remaining modes of transport are by road ,  by sea ,  and by air . 
cyprus has been a member of the european union since 2004 and in the second half of the 2012 it held the presidency of the council of the european union . 
the 1974 invasion of the turkish army divided the island nation into two . 
to fulfil its commitment as a member of the european union ,  cyprus withdrew from the non-aligned movement on accession ,  retaining observer status . 
the republic of cyprus maintains diplomatic relations with 178 states  -lrb-  including the holy see and palestinian national authority   -rrb-  and is united nations ,  union for the mediterranean and european union full member . 
the cretaceous  -lrb-   ,    -rrb-  is a geologic period and system that spans 79 million years from the end of the jurassic period million years ago  -lrb-  mya  -rrb-  to the beginning of the paleogene period mya . 
as with other older geologic periods ,  the rock beds of the cretaceous are well identified but the exact age of the system's base is uncertain by a few million years . 
the cretaceous period is usually abbreviated k ,  for its german translation `` kreide ''  -lrb-  chalk ,  `` creta '' in latin  -rrb-  . 
the cjd prion is dangerous because it promotes refolding of native prion protein into the diseased state . 
people can also develop cjd because they carry a mutation of the gene that codes for the prion protein  -lrb-  `` prnp ''  -rrb-  . 
about 15% of people with cjd survive for two or more years . 
a negative biopsy does not rule out cjd ,  since it may predominate in a specific part of the brain . 
brain mri is most useful imaging modality for changes related to cjd . 
as of 2018 evidence suggest that while there may be prions in the blood of individuals with vcjd ,  this is not the case in individuals with sporadic cjd . 
all types of cjd are transmissible irrespective of how they occur in the patient . 
creutzfeldt–jakob disease  -lrb-  cjd  -rrb-  ,  also known as classic creutzfeldt–jakob disease ,  is a fatal degenerative brain disorder . 
two years later ,  the law was revisited when parkinson's new books ,  `` parkinson's law and other studies in administration '' and `` parkinson's law: or the pursuit of progress '' were published in 1957.
parkinson ,  and parkinson's law ,  continued to find its way into singapore newspapers through the decades . 
parkinson started teaching at the university of malaya in singapore at the beginning of april 1950.
cyril northcote parkinson  -lrb-  30 july 1909 – 9 march 1993 -rrb- was a british naval historian and author of some 60 books ,  the most famous of which was his best-seller `` parkinson's law ''  -lrb-  1957 -rrb- ,  in which parkinson advanced parkinson's law ,  stating that `` work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion '' ,  an insight which led him to be regarded as an important scholar in public administration and management . 
in january 1955 parkinson formed university of malaya's archaeological society and became its first president . 
it was not ,  however until november 1960, that parkinson's vision was realised ,  when the new library ,  free and for all ,  was completed and opened to the public . 
and singapore continued with its subscription library and was without a free public library as envisioned by parkinson . 
parkinson's law ,  which provides insight into a primary barrier to efficient time management ,  states that ,  `` work expands so as to fill the time available for its completion '' . 
sponsored by the seremban branch of the historical society of malaya ,  parkinson spoke on tin mining at the king george v school ,  seremban . 
on 22 may 1953, parkinson convened a meeting at the british council ,  stamford road ,  singapore ,  to form the singapore branch of the malayan historical society . 
in singapore ,  where he was teaching at the time ,  this began a series of talks where he addressed diverse audiences in person ,  in print and over the airwaves on 'parkinson's law' . 
in march 1952, parkinson proposed a central public library ,  for singapore ,  as a memorial to king george vi ,  commemorating that monarch's reign . 
in april 1956 it was reported that 'for the first time ,  a long-needed standard history of malaya is to be published for students . '
as j .  d .  scott ,  in his review of parkinson's book two weeks later ,  notes ,  `` of course ,  parkinson's law ,  like all satire ,  is serious — it wouldn't be so comic if it weren't — and because it is serious there will be some annoyance and even dismay under the smiles . `` 
g .  g .  thomson ,  the government's public relations secretary informed the straits times that the committee would have official and non-government representation and added that ,  apart from parkinson's suggestion of a free public library ,  a polytechnic had also been suggested . 
the report noted that ,  as at that time ,  parkinson and his wife had already released two books on history for junior students ,  entitled `` the heroes '' and `` malayan fables . `` 
on thursday 10 september 1959, at 10 p . m .  ,  radio singapore listeners got to experience his book ,  `` parkinson's law '' ,  set to music by nesta pain . 
the government got involved ,  and a government spokesperson spoke to the straits times about this on 16 may ,  saying that the singapore government welcomed proposals from the public on the form in which a memorial to king george ought to take ,  whether a public library ,  as suggested by parkinson ,  or some other form . 
canals with sources of water at a higher level can deliver water to a destination such as a city where water is needed . 
the roman empire's aqueducts were such water supply canals . 
canals ,  or navigations ,  are human-made channels ,  or artificial waterways ,  for water conveyance ,  or to service water transport vehicles . 
in order to have a description of what constitutes intelligent behavior ,  one must study behavior itself . 
one way to view the issue is whether it is possible to accurately simulate a human brain on a computer without accurately simulating the neurons that make up the human brain . 
brain imaging is often used in cognitive neuroscience . 
these methods allow us to understand how intelligent behavior is implemented in a physical system . 
 -lrb-  see  .   -rrb- 
research in learning and development aims to explain the mechanisms by which these processes might take place . 
brain imaging involves analyzing activity within the brain while performing various tasks . 
cognitive science is the interdisciplinary ,  scientific study of the mind and its processes . 
the ability to learn and understand language is an extremely complex process . 
research methods borrowed directly from neuroscience and neuropsychology can also help us to understand aspects of intelligence . 
there is some debate in the field as to whether the mind is best viewed as a huge array of small but individually feeble elements  -lrb-  i . e . 
memory is also often grouped into declarative and procedural forms . 
this approach is known as `` symbolic ai '' . 
behavioral choices are when a person selects between two or more options  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  voting behavior ,  choice of a punishment for another participant  -rrb-  . 
approaches to cognitive modeling can be categorized as:  -lrb-  1 -rrb- symbolic ,  on abstract mental functions of an intelligent mind by means of symbols;  -lrb-  2 -rrb- subsymbolic ,  on the neural and associative properties of the human brain; and  -lrb-  3 -rrb- across the symbolic–subsymbolic border ,  including hybrid . 
this helps the mind having the ability to experience or to feel a sense of self . 
many ,  but not all ,  who consider themselves cognitive scientists hold a functionalist view of the mind—the view that mental states and processes should be explained by their function - what they do . 
