celebrities often have fame comparable to royalty . 
even when their fame arises from a particular talent or action on their part ,  the term will sometimes still apply if their fame is perceived as disproportionate to what they earned through their own talent or work . 
celebrity status is often associated with wealth  -lrb-  commonly referred to as `` fame and fortune ''  -rrb-  ,  while fame often provides opportunities to earn revenue . 
live in obscurity and only a small percentage achieve fame and fortune . 
some elements are associated with fame ,  such as appearing on the cover of `` time '' ,  being spoofed in `` mad '' ,  having a wax statue in `` madame tussauds '' ,  or receiving a star on the `` hollywood walk of fame . `` 
a brazilian actor might be a b-list action film actor in the u . s .  ,  but an a-list star in portugal . 
celebrities may be resented for their accolades ,  and the public may have a love/hate relationship with celebrities . 
scandal can also unwillingly make certain politicians famous ,  even among those who are not particularly interested in politics . 
often ,  the generalization extends to someone who falls short of mainstream or persistent fame but who seeks to extend or exploit it . 
people may also become celebrities due to media attention on their lifestyle ,  wealth ,  or controversial actions ,  or for their connection to a famous person . 
celebrity is the fame and public attention accorded by the mass media to individuals or groups or ,  occasionally ,  animals ,  but is usually applied to the persons or groups of people  -lrb-  celebrity couples ,  families ,  etc .   -rrb- 
for instance ,  david letterman is well known for branching into late night television as a talk show host while honing his skills as a stand-up comedian ,  barbra streisand ventured into acting while operating as a singer ,  or clint eastwood ,  who achieved even greater fame in hollywood for being a film director and a producer than for his acting credentials . 
the screen actors guild ,  a union representing actors and actresses throughout hollywood reports that the average television and film actor earns less than us$50,000 annually; the median hourly wage for actors was $18.80 in may 2015.
the population within a cluster should ideally be as heterogeneous as possible ,  but there should be homogeneity between clusters . 
an example of cluster sampling is area sampling or geographical cluster sampling . 
cluster sampling methods can lead to significant bias when working with a small number of clusters . 
the main difference between cluster sampling and stratified sampling is that in cluster sampling the cluster is treated as the sampling unit so sampling is done on a population of clusters  -lrb-  at least in the first stage  -rrb-  . 
in two-stage cluster sampling ,  a random sampling technique is applied to the elements from each of the selected clusters . 
baudelaire is one of the major innovators in french literature . 
 ''the will to work must dominate ,  for art is long and time is brief . `` 
 ''les fleurs du mal '' has a number of scholarly references . 
baudelaire was an active participant in the artistic life of his times . 
charles pierre baudelaire  -lrb-   ,  ; ; april 9, 1821 – august 31, 1867 -rrb- was a french poet who also produced notable work as an essayist ,  art critic ,  and pioneering translator of edgar allan poe . 
gautier and even byron . `` 
 ''in this regards ,  my friend ,  you're like the public ,  to whom one should never offer a delicate perfume . 
in gratitude for their friendship and commonality of vision ,  baudelaire dedicated `` les fleurs du mal '' to gautier . 
his mother died on august 16, 1871, outliving her son by almost four years . 
other works in the years that followed included `` petits poèmes en prose ''  -lrb-  `` small prose poems ''  -rrb- ; a series of art reviews published in the `` pays ,  exposition universelle ''  -lrb-  `` country ,  world fair ''  -rrb- ; studies on gustave flaubert  -lrb-  in `` l'artiste '' ,  october 18, 1857 -rrb-; on théophile gautier  -lrb-  `` revue contemporaine '' ,  september 1858 -rrb-; various articles contributed to eugene crepet's `` poètes francais ''; `` les paradis artificiels: opium et haschisch ''  -lrb-  `` french poets; artificial paradises: opium and hashish ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  1860 -rrb-; and `` un dernier chapitre de l'histoire des oeuvres de balzac ''  -lrb-  `` a final chapter of the history of works of balzac ''  -rrb-   -lrb-  1880 -rrb- ,  originally an article `` comment on paye ses dettes quand on a du génie ''  -lrb-  `` how one pays one's debts when one has genius ''  -rrb-  ,  in which his criticism turns against his friends honoré de balzac ,  théophile gautier ,  and gérard de nerval . 
in the poem `` au lecteur ''  -lrb-  `` to the reader ''  -rrb-  that prefaces `` les fleurs du mal '' ,  baudelaire accuses his readers of hypocrisy and of being as guilty of sins and lies as the poet:
nadar remained a stalwart friend right to baudelaire's last days and wrote his obituary notice in `` le figaro '' . 
in 1847, baudelaire became acquainted with the works of poe ,  in which he found tales and poems that had ,  he claimed ,  long existed in his own brain but never taken shape . 
baudelaire next worked on a translation and adaptation of thomas de quincey's `` confessions of an english opium eater '' . 
in 1860, he became an ardent supporter of richard wagner . 
his most famous work ,  a book of lyric poetry titled `` les fleurs du mal ''  -lrb-  `` the flowers of evil ''  -rrb-  ,  expresses the changing nature of beauty in modern ,  and rapidly industrializing paris during the mid-19th century . 
some of the poems had also previously appeared as `` fugitive verse '' in various french magazines during the previous decade . 
 ''casey at the bat: a ballad of the republic sung in the year 1888 '' is a baseball poem written in 1888 by ernest thayer . 
thayer ,  who wrote `` casey '' in 1888, covered the san francisco leg for the `` san francisco examiner '' . 
a month after the poem was published ,  it was reprinted as `` kelly at the bat '' in the `` new york sporting times '' . 
sportswriter leonard koppett claimed in a 1979 article that the published poem omits 18 lines penned by thayer which change the entire theme of the poem . 
thayer ,  in a letter he wrote in 1905, mentions kelly as showing `` impudence '' in claiming to have written the poem . 
koppett said the full version of the poem takes the pitch count on casey to full as his uncle arnold stirs up wagering action in the stands before a wink passes between them and casey throws the game . 
this is the complete poem as it originally appeared in `` the daily examiner '' . 
a rivalry of sorts has developed between two cities claiming to be the mudville described in the poem . 
in 1946, walt disney released a recording of the narration of the poem by jerry colonna ,  which accompanied the studio's animated cartoon adaptation of the poem  -lrb-  see below  -rrb-  . 
the classical guitar  -lrb-  also known as the nylon-string guitar or spanish guitar  -rrb-  is a member of the guitar family used in classical music . 
a guitar family tree may be identified . 
the term `` modern classical guitar '' is sometimes used to distinguish the classical guitar from older forms of guitar ,  which are in their broadest sense also called `` classical '' ,  or more specifically ,  `` early guitars '' . 
after lewis returned to oxford university ,  he received a first in honour moderations  -lrb-  greek and latin literature  -rrb-  in 1920, a first in greats  -lrb-  philosophy and ancient history  -rrb-  in 1922, and a first in english in 1923.
in 1958 he spent his honeymoon there at the old inn ,  crawfordsburn ,  which he called `` my irish life '' . 
lewis was schooled by private tutors until age 9, when his mother died in 1908 from cancer . 
lewis's own mother had died when he was a child ,  and his father was distant ,  demanding ,  and eccentric . 
lewis experienced a certain cultural shock on first arriving in england: `` no englishman will be able to understand my first impressions of england , ``  lewis wrote in `` surprised by joy '' . 
clive staples lewis was born in belfast ,  ireland ,  on 29 november 1898.
he had an elder brother ,  warren hamilton lewis  -lrb-  known as `` warnie ''  -rrb-  . 
in december 1917, lewis wrote in a letter to his childhood friend arthur greeves that jane and greeves were `` the two people who matter most to me in the world '' . 
from boyhood ,  lewis had immersed himself in norse and greek mythology ,  and later in irish mythology and literature . 
the tile set contains two each of eleven civil suit tiles  -lrb-  6-6, 1-1, 4-4, 1-3, 5-5, 3-3, 2-2, 5-6, 4-6, 1-6, 1-5 -rrb- and one each of ten military suit tiles  -lrb-  3-6, 4-5; 2-6, 3-5; 2-5, 3-4; 2-4; 1-4, 2-3; 1-2 -rrb- . 
however ,  the ranking of combination tiles is slightly different in pai gow and tien gow . 
chinese dominoes are used in several tile-based games ,  namely ,  tien gow ,  pai gow ,  tiu u and kap tai shap . 
each tile pattern in the chinese domino set is made up of the outcome of a throw of two six-sided dice . 
the paleocene epoch lasted from 66 million to 56 million years ago . 
the oligocene epoch spans from 33.9 million to 23.03 million years ago . 
the neogene spans from 23.03 million to 2.58 million years ago . 
the eocene epoch ranged from 56 million years to 33.9 million years ago . 
the pliocene epoch lasted from 5.333 to 2.58 million years ago . 
the paleogene spans from the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs ,  66 million years ago ,  to the dawn of the neogene ,  23.03 million years ago . 
the cenozoic era  -lrb-    -rrb-  meaning `` new life '' ,  is the current and most recent of the three phanerozoic geological eras ,  following the mesozoic era and extending from 66 million years ago to the present day . 
the miocene epoch spans from 23.03 to 5.333 million years ago and is a period in which grass spread further ,  dominating a large portion of the world ,  at the expense of forests . 
the continents also moved into their current positions during this era . 
the new life movement in the early 20th century was also influenced by confucianism . 
confucian ethical codes are described as humanistic . 
a confucian revival began during the tang dynasty  -lrb-  618–907 -rrb- . 
ever since europeans first encountered confucianism ,  the issue of how confucianism should be classified has been subject to debate . 
in late 2015 many confucian personalities formally established a national holy confucian church  -lrb-  孔聖會/孔圣会 `` kǒngshènghuì ''  -rrb-  in china to unify the many confucian congregations and civil society organisations . 
the idea of a `` confucian church '' as the state religion of china has roots in the thought of kang youwei ,  an exponent of the early new confucian search for a regeneration of the social relevance of confucianism ,  at a time when it was de-institutionalised with the collapse of the qing dynasty and the chinese empire . 
in contemporary china ,  the confucian revival has developed into various interwoven directions: the proliferation of confucian schools or academies  -lrb-  `` shuyuan '' 书院  -rrb-  ,  the resurgence of confucian rites  -lrb-  `` chuántǒng lǐyí '' 传统礼仪  -rrb-  ,  and the birth of new forms of confucian activity on the popular level ,  such as the confucian communities  -lrb-  `` shèqū rúxué '' 社区儒学  -rrb-  . 
further analysis suggests ,  however ,  that women's place in confucian society may be more complex . 
more recently ,  some scholars have also begun to discuss the viability of constructing a `` confucian feminism . `` 
also ,  the hong kong confucian academy ,  one of the direct heirs of kang youwei's confucian church ,  has expanded its activities to the mainland ,  with the construction of statues of confucius ,  confucian hospitals ,  restoration of temples and other activities . 
the most enthusiastic new confucians proclaim the uniqueness and superiority of confucian chinese culture ,  and have generated some popular sentiment against western cultural influences in china . 
in confucianism ,  the sage or wise is the ideal personality; however ,  it is very hard to become one of them . 
another modern proponent of the institutionalisation of confucianism in a state church is jiang qing . 
many confucians also realised that loyalty and filial piety have the potential of coming into conflict with one another . 
confucianism ,  also known as ruism ,  is described as tradition ,  a philosophy ,  a religion ,  a humanistic or rationalistic religion ,  a way of governing ,  or simply a way of life . 
strictly speaking ,  there is no term in chinese which directly corresponds to `` confucianism '' . 
confucianism revolves around the pursuit of the unity of the individual self and the god of heaven  -lrb-  `` tiān '' 天  -rrb-  ,  or ,  otherwise said ,  around the relationship between humanity and heaven . 
at the same time ,  a proper confucian ruler should also accept his ministers' advice ,  as this will help him govern the realm better . 
since the 2000s ,  there has been a growing identification of the chinese intellectual class with confucianism . 
a key confucian concept is that in order to govern others one must first govern oneself according to the universal order . 
confucianism is concerned with finding `` middle ways '' between yin and yang at every new configuration of the world . 
 ''rén ''  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the confucian virtue denoting the good feeling a virtuous human experiences when being altruistic . 
confucianism `` largely defined the mainstream discourse on gender in china from the han dynasty onward . `` 
traditionally ,  confucius was thought to be the author or editor of the five classics which were the basic texts of confucianism . 
heaven is not some being pre-existing the temporal world . 
in later dynasties ,  a number of women took advantage of the confucian acknowledgment of education to become independent in thought . 
in 2005, the center for the study of confucian religion was established ,  and `` guoxue '' started to be implemented in public schools on all levels . 
after confucianism had become the official 'state religion' in china ,  its influence penetrated all walks of life and all streams of thought in chinese society for the generations to come . 
confucianism influenced gottfried leibniz ,  who was attracted to the philosophy because of its perceived similarity to his own . 
 ''confucian businessmen ''  -lrb-  儒商人 `` rúshāngrén '' ,  also `` refined businessman ''  -rrb-  is a recently rediscovered concept defining people of the economic-entrepreneurial elite who recognise their social responsibility and therefore apply confucian culture to their business . 
in the late twentieth century confucian work ethic has been credited with the rise of the east asian economy . 
confucianism holds one in contempt ,  either passively or actively ,  for failure to uphold the cardinal moral values of `` rén '' and `` yì '' . 
this school was particularly important in japan . 
new confucianism is an intellectual movement of confucianism that began in the early 20th century in republican china ,  and revived in post-mao era contemporary china . 
buddhism until the 4th century a . d had it little impact on china but in the 4th century its teachings hybridized with those of taoism . 
the school of naturalists or the school of yin-yang  -lrb-  陰陽家/阴阳家; `` yīnyángjiā ''; `` yin-yang-chia ''; `` school of yin-yang ''  -rrb-  was a warring states era philosophy that synthesized the concepts of yin-yang and the five elements; zou yan is considered the founder of this school . 
around 500 bce ,  after the zhou state weakened and china moved into the spring and autumn period ,  the classic period of chinese philosophy began . 
this high approval of confucianism can be seen through the reverence of confucius in modern-day china . 
chinese philosophy originates in the spring and autumn period and warring states period ,  during a period known as the `` hundred schools of thought '' ,  which was characterized by significant intellectual and cultural developments . 
confucianism and taoism became the determining forces of chinese thought until the introduction of buddhism . 
from then on ,  buddhism lost much of its influence . 
of the many schools founded at this time and during the subsequent warring states period ,  the four most influential ones were confucianism ,  daoism  -lrb-  often spelled `` taoism ''  -rrb-  ,  mohism and legalism . 
what has been termed by some as the intrastate realpolitik of the warring states period was highly progressive ,  and extremely critical of the confucian and mohist schools . 
confucianism was particularly strong during the han dynasty ,  whose greatest thinker was dong zhongshu ,  who integrated confucianism with the thoughts of the zhongshu school and the theory of the five elements . 
in this period also started the penetration of western culture ,  but most chinese thought that the westerners were maybe more advanced in technology and warfare ,  but that china had primacy in moral and intellectual fields . 
there was also human and animal sacrifice . 
xuanxue was a philosophical school that combined elements of confucianism and taoism to reinterpret the `` yijing , ``  `` daodejing , ``  and `` zhuangzi . `` 
in confucius's time ,  the state of lu was headed by a ruling ducal house . 
confucius's political thought is based upon his ethical thought . 
the `` shiji '' stated that the neighboring qi state was worried that lu was becoming too powerful while confucius was involved in the government of the lu state . 
in 1055, emperor renzong of song first bestowed the title of `` duke yansheng '' on kong zongyuan of the 46th generation . 
traditional accounts of confucius's life relate that kong he's grandfather had migrated the family from song to lu . 
confucius's family ,  the kongs ,  have the longest recorded extant pedigree in the world today . 
during the southern song dynasty ,  the duke yansheng kong duanyou fled south with the song emperor to quzhou in zhejiang ,  while the newly established jin dynasty  -lrb-  1115–1234 -rrb- in the north appointed kong duanyou's brother kong duancao who remained in qufu as duke yansheng . 
the leader of the southern branch is 孔祥楷 kong xiangkai . 
confucius's favorite disciple was yan hui ,  most probably one of the most impoverished of them all . 
soon after confucius's death ,  qufu ,  his home town ,  became a place of devotion and remembrance . 
he left the state of lu without resigning ,  remaining in self-exile and unable to return as long as viscount ji huan was alive . 
in the modern era confucian movements ,  such as new confucianism ,  still exist ,  but during the cultural revolution ,  confucianism was frequently attacked by leading figures in the communist party of china . 
according to the `` zuozhuan '' ,  confucius returned home to his native lu when he was 68, after he was invited to do so by ji kangzi ,  the chief minister of lu . 
women are now included for the first time . 
qiguan and confucius would later have two daughters together ,  one of whom is thought to have died as a child . 
during the revolt by gongshan ,  zhong you had managed to keep the duke and the three viscounts together at the court . 
confucius's principles have commonality with chinese tradition and belief . 
under the succeeding han and tang dynasties ,  confucian ideas gained even more widespread prominence . 
following the victory of han over chu after the collapse of qin ,  confucius's thoughts received official sanction and were further developed into a system known in the west as neo-confucianism ,  and later new confucianism  -lrb-  modern neo-confucianism  -rrb-  . 
yang hu ,  who was a subordinate of the ji family ,  had dominated the lu government from 505 to 502 and even attempted a coup ,  which narrowly failed . 
whatever the situation may have been ,  gongshan was considered an upright man who continued to defend the state of lu ,  even after he was forced to flee . 
the attackers retreated after realizing that they would have to become rebels against the state and their lord . 
these efforts spread confucian ideals to students who then became officials in many of the royal courts in china ,  thereby giving confucianism the first wide-scale test of its dogma . 
confucius desired to return the authority of the state to the duke by dismantling the fortifications of the city—strongholds belonging to the three families . 
for example ,  is a complex number . 
the real number is called the `` real part '' of the complex number ; the real number is called its `` imaginary part '' . 
the real part of a complex number is denoted by or ; the imaginary part of a complex number is denoted by or  . 
in these cases complex numbers are written as or  . 
based on the concept of real numbers ,  a complex number is a number of the form  ,  where and are real numbers and is an indeterminate satisfying  . 
a complex number is a number that can be expressed in the form  ,  where and are real numbers ,  and is a solution of the equation  . 
a real number can be regarded as a complex number whose imaginary part is 0.
this leads to the polar form of complex numbers . 
the `` absolute value ''  -lrb-  or `` modulus '' or `` magnitude ''  -rrb-  of a complex number is if is a real number  -lrb-  that is ,  if   -rrb-  ,  then  . 
anthropologist jeb j . 
it was originally founded in the 1950s by zoologists bernard heuvelmans and ivan t .  sanderson . 
while biologists regularly identify new species ,  cryptozoologists often focus on creatures from the folklore record . 
media coverage of purported `` cryptids '' often fails to provide more likely explanations ,  further propagating claims made by cryptozoologists . 
as a field ,  cryptozoology originates from the works of bernard heuvelmans ,  a belgian zoologist ,  and ivan t .  sanderson ,  a scottish zoologist . 
the term `` cryptozoology '' dates from 1959 or before – heuvelmans attributes the coinage of the term `` cryptozoology ''  -lrb-  'the study of hidden animals'  -rrb-  to sanderson . 
from january until november 2014, charles also broadcast the funk and soul show live on bbc radio 2, immediately after his 6 music show . 
confuse '' for his albums 'feel the fire'  -lrb-  2008 -rrb- ,  'do you realize'  -lrb-  2012 -rrb- and 'only a man'  -lrb-  2018 -rrb- regarding to his work as a music presenter for `` the craig charles funk and soul show '' on bbc radio 6 music . 
in 2000, he performed the show `` craig charles and his band '' at the edinburgh festival . 
he is best known for playing dave lister in the science fiction sitcom `` red dwarf '' and lloyd mullaney in the soap opera `` coronation street '' ,  as a funk and soul dj on bbc radio 6 music and bbc radio 2, and as the presenter of the gladiator-style game show `` robot wars '' from 1998 to 2004.
charles was a guest on programmes including janice long's radio 1 show ,  and was a regular panellist on ned sherrin's chat show `` loose ends ''  -lrb-  1987–88 -rrb- on bbc radio 4.
charles has hosted `` the craig charles funk and soul show '' on bbc radio since 2002, and performs dj sets at numerous clubs and festivals ,  nationally and internationally . 
from 16 april 2016, charles presents the house party on saturday nights on bbc radio 2, with the show airing between 10pm and midnight . 
charles returned to hosting his 6 music show from november 2006 and filming `` coronation street '' from january 2007.
since 2002, charles has been a dj on bbc radio 6 music presenting `` the craig charles funk and soul show '' ,  on air on saturday evenings 6pm to 9pm ,  where he plays a diverse range of funk and soul music ,  from classic tracks to the latest releases ,  and provides publicity for less familiar bands . 
charles presented the virtual reality game show `` cyberzone ''  -lrb-  1993 -rrb- on bbc2; the late-night entertainment show `` funky bunker ''  -lrb-  1997 -rrb- on itv; the reality show `` jailbreak ''  -lrb-  2000 -rrb- on channel 5; the discussion show `` amazing space: the pub guide to the universe ''  -lrb-  2001 -rrb- on national geographic; and the late-night current affairs chat show `` weapons of mass distraction ''  -lrb-  2004 -rrb- on itv . 
charles first appeared on television as the resident poet on the arts programme `` riverside '' on bbc2 and on the day-time bbc1 chat show `` pebble mill at one '' . 
he followed these with a `` craig charles funk and soul classics '' album of 3 cds in 2015.
as well as his early appearances on shows such as radio 4's `` loose ends ''  -lrb-  1987–88 -rrb- ,  and `` kaleidoscope '' ,  in the early 1990s ,  charles could be heard on the london radio station kiss 100  -lrb-  kiss fm  -rrb-  as the breakfast show presenter . 
in may 2015, craig announced he would be leaving `` coronation street '' for `` red dwarf . `` 
charles is also known for narrating the comedy endurance show `` takeshi's castle '' . 
agricultural land is therefore more productive in the east than in the west . 
mayo county council  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the authority responsible for local government . 
county fermanagh  -lrb-   ;   -rrb-  is one of the thirty-two counties of ireland and one of the six counties of northern ireland . 
with the creation of northern ireland's district councils ,  fermanagh district council the only one of the 26 that contained all of the county from which it derived its name . 
for the purposes of elections to the uk parliament ,  the territory of fermanagh is part of the fermanagh and south tyrone parliamentary constituency . 
agriculture and tourism are two of the most important industries in fermanagh . 
fermanagh is by far the smallest of northern's ireland's six counties in terms of population ,  with just over one-third of the population of northern ireland's next smallest county ,  armagh . 
fermanagh is one of four counties of northern ireland to have a majority of its population from a catholic background ,  according to the 2011 census . 
between the cordillera central and the cordillera oriental flows the magdalena river . 
the cordillera central is the loftiest of the mountain systems . 
the cordillera occidental in the west ,  the cordillera central in the center ,  and the cordillera oriental in the east have different characteristics . 
the cordillera occidental is separated from the cordillera central by the deep rift of the cauca valley . 
despite this `` the world factbook '' makes no difference between amazon region of colombia  -lrb-  predominantly jungle  -rrb-  and the orinoquia region of colombia  -lrb-  predominantly plains  -rrb-  . 
the cordillera occidental is relatively low and is the least populated of the three cordilleras . 
snowfields and glaciers in colombia are limited to the highest peaks and ranges in the cordillera central and cordillera oriental and above the 4,700-meter elevation on the sierra nevada de santa marta . 
this cross section of the republic does not include two of colombia's regions: the caribbean coastal lowlands and the sierra nevada de santa marta ,  both in the northern part of the country . 
colombia usually classifies its geography into five natural regions ,  from the andes mountain range ,  a region shared with ecuador ,  venezuela; the pacific ocean coastal region shared with panama and ecuador; the caribbean sea coastal region ,  shared with venezuela and panama; the `` llanos ''  -lrb-  plains  -rrb-  ,  shared with venezuela; to the amazon rainforest region shared with venezuela ,  brazil ,  peru and ecuador . 
the caribbean plains at the north and the pacific plains at the west . 
about 86% of the country's total area lies in the hot zone . 
many of the numerous large rivers of eastern colombia are navigable . 
the insular region is considered by some as a geopolitical region of colombia which comprises the areas outside the continental territories of colombia and includes the san andrés y providencia department in the caribbean sea and the malpelo and gorgona islands in the pacific ocean . 
after the two cordilleras converge ,  the cauca valley becomes a deep gorge all the way to the caribbean lowlands . 
the caribbean region merges next to and is connected with the andean highlands through the two great river valleys . 
the caribbean lowlands consist of all of colombia north of an imaginary line extending northeastward from the golfo de urabá to the venezuelan frontier at the northern extremity of the cordillera oriental . 
in the eastern region ,  there is the serranía de la macarena and there are formations belonging to the guyana shield . 
other mountains in the caribbean plain include the montes de maría and the serranía de san lucas . 
toward its northern end ,  this cordillera separates into several branches that descend toward the caribbean coast . 
colombia's bicameral congress consists of a 102-member senate of colombia and a 161-member chamber of representatives of colombia . 
the politics of colombia take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic ,  whereby the president of colombia is both head of state and head of government ,  and of a multi-party system . 
congress meets twice a year ,  and the president has the power to call it into special session when needed . 
petroleum is colombia's main export ,  making over 45% of colombia's exports . 
colombia is projected to have over 15 million tourists by 2023.
the number of tourists in colombia grows by over 12% every year . 
from 1533 to 1600, europeans began expeditions into the interior of current colombia . 
the economy slowed ,  and by 1998 gdp growth was only 0.6% . 
until 1997, colombia had enjoyed a fairly stable economy . 
colombia is latin america's fourth largest and middle america's second largest economy measured by gross domestic product . 
colombia also has one of the largest shipbuilding industries in the world outside asia . 
colombia telecom accounted for only about 31 percent of these lines; 27 other operators accounted for the rest . 
telefónica of spain acquired 50 percent plus one share of the company in 2006.
colombia's mobile market is one of the fastest-growing businesses in the country . 
the colombian military has its roots in the independence war against the spanish empire . 
the colombian constitution  -lrb-    -rrb-  includes two overlapping definitions of what could be defined as 'armed forces' in english:
on august 7, 1998, andrés pastrana was sworn in as the president of colombia . 
as the federation of gran colombia was dissolved in 1830, the department of cundinamarca  -lrb-  as established in angostura  -rrb-  became a new country ,  the republic of new granada . 
bolívar was elected the first president of gran colombia and santander ,  vice president . 
colombia's relations with venezuela have fluctuated due to the ideological differences between both governments . 
in 1549, the institution of the spanish royal audiencia in bogotá gave that city the status of capital of new granada ,  which comprised in large part what is now the territory of colombia . 
during his visit to colombia ,  pope francis paid tribute to the victims of the conflict . 
in 1863 the name of the republic was changed officially to `` united states of colombia '' ,  and in 1886 the country adopted its present name: `` republic of colombia '' . 
that year ,  the congress of angostura established the republic of gran colombia ,  which included all territories under the jurisdiction of the former viceroyalty of new granada . 
the territory that became colombia was first visited by europeans when the first expedition of alonso de ojeda arrived at the cabo de la vela in 1499.
in august 1538, quesáda founded santa fe de bogotá on the site of muisca village of bacatá . 
not withstanding the country's commitment to democratic institutions ,  colombia's history has also been characterized by widespread ,  violent conflict . 
the m-19 and several smaller guerrilla groups were successfully incorporated into a peace process as the 1980s ended and the 1990s began ,  which culminated in the elections for a constituent assembly of colombia that would write a new constitution ,  which took effect in 1991.
the history of colombia includes the settlements and society by indigenous peoples ,  most notably ,  the muisca confederation ,  quimbaya civilization ,  and tairona chiefdoms; the spanish arrived in 1499 and initiated a period of conquest and colonization ,  most noteworthy being spanish conquest of the muisca; ultimately creating the viceroyalty of new granada ,  with its capital at bogotá . 
although the farc and eln accepted participation in the peace process ,  they did not make explicit commitments to end the conflict . 
the new president's program was based on a commitment to bring about a peaceful resolution of colombia's longstanding civil conflict and to cooperate fully with the united states to combat the trafficking of illegal drugs . 
colombia has signed free-trade agreements with chile ,  mexico ,  and venezuela . 
under the uribe administration ,  colombia's relations with the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  have been cordial . 
in 1969, colombia formed what is now the andean community along with bolivia ,  chile ,  ecuador ,  and peru  -lrb-  venezuela joined in 1973, and chile left in 1976 -rrb- . 
colombia is engaged in a broad range of narcotics control activities . 
under the pastrana administration ,  plan colombia was developed and implemented with u . s .  backing . 
gaining all 186 votes ,  colombia served on the u . n .  security council from 2011-2012 representing latin american and the caribbean . 
eu aid to colombia has mainly consisted of social ,  economic and development investments . 
colombia subsequently withdrew some of its reservations ,  most notably a reservation on extradition . 
the united states helps colombia secure favorable treatment from the imf . 
the geography of the czech republic is quite varied . 
the political system of the czech republic is a multi-party system . 
both houses together make up the parliament of the czech republic . 
the supreme administrative court is the third arm of the czech judiciary . 
the president is the head of state ,  but the prime minister is the head of government . 
the czech republic is a unitary parliamentary constitutional republic ,  in which the president is the head of state and the prime minister is the head of government . 
the president of the czech republic is elected by a direct vote  -lrb-  no more than two consecutive  -rrb-  for five years . 
in 2012, czech government increased vat . 
in august 2015, czech gdp growth was 4.4% ,  making the czech economy the highest growing in europe . 
in 2014, gdp in the czech republic increased by 2% and is predicted to increase by 2.7% in 2015.
now completed ,  the program has made czechs ,  who own shares of each of the czech companies ,  one of the highest per-capita share owners in the world . 
from the financial crisis of 2007–2010, czech republic is in stagnation or decreasing of gdp . 
on 29 may 2015, it was announced that growth of the czech economy has increased from calculated 3,9% to 4,2% . 
the czech republic has a well-educated population and a well-developed infrastructure . 
as of 2016, the czech republic has the second lowest poverty rate of oecd members only behind denmark . 
the czech healthcare system ranks 13th in the 2016 euro health consumer index . 
dividends worth czk 289 billion were paid to the foreign owners of czech companies in 2016.
in 2016, for first time since 1995, czech republic had budget surplus 61 billion czk . 
the czech republic has ,  in total ,  of roads . 
the czech republic has a total railway length of  . 
as defined by the czech law no . 
four czech and slovak-manned raf squadrons were transferred to czechoslovak control in late 1945.
59 machine gun were of czechoslovak design . 
from 1954 until 1990, the army was known as the czechoslovak people's army  -lrb-  čsla  -rrb-  . 
the army of the czech republic  -lrb-   ,  ačr  -rrb-  ,  also known as the czech army or czech armed forces ,  is the military service responsible for the defence of the czech republic in compliance with international obligations and treaties on collective defence . 
czech republic has an embassy in sofia and an honorary consulate in varna . 
as a result ,  liechtenstein did not diplomatically recognize the existence of the czech republic as a new state  -lrb-  and ,  for that matter ,  also that of the slovak republic  -rrb-  until 2009.
ami communications also received  -lrb-  without a formal selection procedure  -rrb-  a government contract to persuade czechs to support us radar base . 
this goal was rapidly met with great success ,  as the nation joined nato in 1999 and the european union in 2004, and held the presidency of the european union during the first half of 2009.
the continuity ira has its origins in a split in the provisional ira . 
like the real ira ,  the continuity ira still retains some weapons some of its members stole from provisional ira dumps after they defected . 
thus ,  similar to the claim put forward by the provisional ira after its split from the official ira in 1969, the continuity ira claims to be the legitimate continuation of the original irish republican army or `` óglaigh na héireann '' . 
the cira is not as big and has not been as active as the real ira and there have been a number of splits within the organisation since the mid-2000s . 
the continuity ira and rsf perceive themselves as forming a `` true '' republican movement . 
like the provisional ira before it ,  the cira sees itself as the direct continuation of the original irish republican army and styles itself as `` the irish republican army '' in english or `` óglaigh na héireann ''  -lrb-  volunteers of ireland  -rrb-  in irish . 
the continuity irish republican army ,  usually known as the continuity ira  -lrb-  cira  -rrb-  is an irish republican paramilitary group that claims to be the armed forces of the irish republic that was proclaimed in 1916.
it was only after the provisional ira declared a ceasefire in 1994 that the continuity ira became active ,  announcing its intention to continue the campaign against british rule . 
much of its weaponry is believed to be mostly of provisional ira origin such as the romanian akm rifles the provisional ira imported from libya . 
it is believed that the continuity ira still holds some of the arms that got through . 
the leadership of the continuity ira is believed to be based in the provinces of munster and ulster . 
the imc also blamed the cira for the killings of two former cira members in belfast ,  who had stolen cira weapons and established a rival organisation . 
this feature is known as wave function collapse . 
the copenhagen interpretation is an expression of the meaning of quantum mechanics that was largely devised from 1925 to 1927 by niels bohr and werner heisenberg . 
werner heisenberg had been an assistant to niels bohr at his institute in copenhagen during part of the 1920s ,  when they helped originate quantum mechanical theory . 
there is no uniquely definitive statement of the copenhagen interpretation . 
according to howard ,  wave function collapse is not mentioned in the writings of bohr . 
because it asserts that a wave function becomes 'real' only when the system is observed ,  the term `` subjective '' is sometimes proposed for the copenhagen interpretation . 
there have been many objections to the copenhagen interpretation over the years . 
in the book's preface ,  heisenberg wrote:
the term copenhagen interpretation is not well defined when one asks about the wave–particle dilemma ,  because bohr and heisenberg had different or perhaps disagreeing views on it . 
bohr once distanced himself from what he considered to be heisenberg's more subjective interpretation . 
max born speaks of his probability interpretation as a `` statistical interpretation '' of the wave function ,  and the born rule is essential to the copenhagen interpretation . 
alternatives to the copenhagen interpretation include the many-worlds interpretation ,  the de broglie–bohm  -lrb-  pilot-wave  -rrb-  interpretation ,  quantum bayesianism ,  and quantum decoherence theories . 
a customs union was defined by the general agreement on tariffs and trade as a type of trade bloc which is composed of a free trade area with a common external tariff . 
the best known body of the council of europe is the european court of human rights ,  which enforces the european convention on human rights . 
the organisation is distinct from the 28-nation european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  ,  although it is sometimes confused with it ,  partly because the eu has adopted the original european flag which was created by the council of europe in 1955, as well as the european anthem . 
the headquarters of the council of europe are in strasbourg ,  france . 
the council of europe works in the following areas:
while the member states of the european union transfer part of their national legislative and executive powers to the european commission and the european parliament ,  council of europe member states maintain their sovereignty but commit themselves through conventions/treaties  -lrb-  international law  -rrb-  and co-operate on the basis of common values and common political decisions . 
the council of europe was founded on 5 may 1949 by the treaty of london . 
other major coe bodies include the european directorate for the quality of medicines and the european audiovisual observatory . 
the general secretariat of the council of the european union ,  also known as `` council secretariat '' ,  assists the council of the european union ,  the presidency of the council of the european union ,  the european council and the president of the european council . 
the development of the council has been characterised by the rise in power of the parliament ,  with which the council has had to share its legislative powers . 
the eu's legislative authority is divided between the council and the parliament . 
under the merger treaty of 1967, the ecsc's special council of ministers and the council of the eaec  -lrb-  together with their other independent institutions  -rrb-  were merged into the council of the eec ,  which would act as a single council of the european communities . 
in 1965 the council was hit by the `` empty chair crisis '' . 
the european council was declared a separate institution from the council ,  also chaired by a permanent president ,  and the different council configurations were mentioned in the treaties for the first time . 
under this procedure ,  the commission presents a proposal to parliament and the council . 
its european council counterpart is the euro summit formalized in 2011 and the tscg . 
the council of the european union ,  referred to in the treaties and other official documents simply as the council is the third of the seven institutions of the european union  -lrb-  eu  -rrb-  as listed in the treaty on european union . 
in a few limited areas the council may initiate new eu law itself . 
under the council's present rules of procedures the council can ,  in extraordinary circumstances ,  hold one of its meetings outside brussels and luxembourg . 
in addition to the budget ,  the council coordinates the economic policy of members . 
by a decision of the european council at edinburgh in december 1992, the council has its seat in brussels but in april ,  june ,  and october ,  it holds its meetings in luxembourg city . 
especially in germanic studies ,  `` continental '' refers to the european continent excluding the scandinavian peninsula ,  britain ,  ireland ,  and iceland . 
in both great britain and ireland ,  `` the continent '' is widely and generally used to refer to the mainland of europe . 
derivatively ,  the adjective `` continental '' refers to the social practices or fashion of continental europe . 
 ''the continent '' may sometimes refer to the continental part of italy  -lrb-  excluding sardinia ,  sicily ,  etc . 
the study of group homomorphisms then provides a tool for studying general properties of groups and consequences of the group axioms . 
a basic example of a category is the category of sets ,  where the objects are sets and the arrows are functions from one set to another . 
if one axiomatizes relations instead of functions ,  one obtains the theory of allegories . 
a functor associates to every object of one category an object of another category ,  and to every morphism in the first category a morphism in the second . 
instead of focusing merely on the individual objects  -lrb-  e . g .  ,  groups  -rrb-  possessing a given structure ,  category theory emphasizes the morphisms – the structure-preserving mappings – `` between '' these objects; by studying these morphisms ,  one is able to learn more about the structure of the objects . 
basic constructions ,  such as the fundamental group or the fundamental groupoid of a topological space ,  can be expressed as functors to the category of groupoids in this way ,  and the concept is pervasive in algebra and its applications . 
as a result ,  this defines a category `` of categories and functors '' – the objects are categories ,  and the morphisms  -lrb-  between categories  -rrb-  are functors . 
atrioventricular conduction disturbances  -lrb-  av block; primary av block ,  secondary type i av block ,  secondary type ii av block ,  tertiary av block  -rrb-  may result from impaired conduction in the av node ,  or anywhere below it ,  such as in the bundle of his . 
in general ,  two types of problems result in bradycardias: disorders of the sinoatrial node  -lrb-  sa node  -rrb-  ,  and disorders of the atrioventricular node  -lrb-  av node  -rrb-  . 
for infants ,  bradycardia is defined as a heart rate less than 100 bpm  -lrb-  normal is around 120–160 -rrb- . 
a ventricular bradycardia ,  also known as ventricular escape rhythm or idioventricular rhythm ,  is a heart rate of less than 50 bpm . 
beta-blocker medicines also can slow the heart rate and decrease how forcefully the heart contracts . 
the clinical relevance pertaining to av blocks is greater than that of sinoatrial blocks . 
canada day  -lrb-    -rrb-  is the national day of canada . 
in 1946, philéas côté ,  a quebec member of the house of commons ,  introduced a private member's bill to rename dominion day as `` canada day '' . 
although canada existed prior to 1867, within both the french and british empires ,  canada day is often informally referred to as `` canada's birthday '' ,  particularly in the popular press . 
with the granting of royal assent ,  the holiday's name was officially changed to canada day on october 27, 1982.
canada day also coincides with quebec's moving day ,  when many fixed-lease apartment rental terms expire . 
canadian expatriates will often organize canada day activities in their local area on or near the date of the holiday . 
the novels were written in the late 19th century in collaboration with colette's first husband ,  the writer henry gauthier-villars ,  better known by his nom-de-plume `` willy '' . 
this decision however was overturned after her death ,  as willy's son from a prior relationship ,  jacques gauthier-villars ,  successfully sued to have his father's name restored . 
an x-ray of the chest and blood tests may be performed . 
a diet high in fruits and vegetables decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease and death . 
risk factors include high blood pressure ,  smoking ,  diabetes ,  lack of exercise ,  obesity ,  high blood cholesterol ,  poor diet ,  depression ,  and excessive alcohol . 
evidence also suggests that the mediterranean diet and a high fiber diet lower the risk . 
up to 90% of cardiovascular disease may be preventable if established risk factors are avoided . 
limitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia  -lrb-  cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen  -rrb-  of the heart's muscle cells . 
coronary artery disease  -lrb-  cad  -rrb-  ,  also known as ischemic heart disease  -lrb-  ihd  -rrb-  ,  involves the reduction of blood flow to the heart muscle due to build up of plaque in the arteries of the heart . 
dietary cholesterol does not appear to have a significant effect on blood cholesterol and thus recommendations about its consumption may not be needed . 
for reasons that are not well understood ,  women are more likely than men to have it; however ,  hormones and other risk factors unique to women may play a role . 
the world health organization  -lrb-  who  -rrb-  recommends `` low to moderate alcohol intake '' to reduce risk of coronary artery disease while high intake increases the risk . 
there is tentative evidence that intake of menaquinone  -lrb-  vitamin k  -rrb-  ,  but not phylloquinone  -lrb-  vitamin k  -rrb-  ,  may reduce the risk of cad mortality . 
the primary smaller-scale commercial compounds of caesium are caesium chloride and nitrate . 
in 1882, he produced caesium metal by electrolysing caesium cyanide ,  avoiding the problems with the chloride . 
caesium metal is highly reactive and very pyrophoric . 
alternatively ,  caesium metal may be obtained from the purified compounds derived from the ore .  caesium chloride and the other caesium halides can be reduced at with calcium or barium ,  and caesium metal distilled from the result . 
the chemistry of caesium is similar to that of other alkali metals ,  in particular rubidium ,  the element above caesium in the periodic table . 
caesium is the softest element  -lrb-  it has a hardness of 0.2 mohs  -rrb-  . 
most of the mined caesium  -lrb-  as salts  -rrb-  is directly converted into caesium formate  -lrb-  hcoocs  -rrb-  for applications such as oil drilling . 
in vacuum applications ,  caesium dichromate can be reacted with zirconium to produce pure caesium metal without other gaseous products . 
the largest present-day use of nonradioactive caesium is in caesium formate drilling fluids for the extractive oil industry . 
a stoichiometric mixture of caesium and gold will react to form yellow caesium auride  -lrb-  csau  -rrb-  upon heating . 
caesium hydroxide  -lrb-  csoh  -rrb-  is hygroscopic and strongly basic . 
caesium forms alloys with the other alkali metals ,  gold ,  and mercury  -lrb-  amalgams  -rrb-  . 
more so than the other alkali metals ,  caesium forms numerous binary compounds with oxygen . 
the caesium ion is also larger and less `` hard '' than those of the lighter alkali metals . 
caesium has 39 known isotopes ,  ranging in mass number  -lrb-  i . e . 
the metal can also be isolated by electrolysis of fused caesium cyanide  -lrb-  cscn  -rrb-  . 
caesium is mined mostly from pollucite ,  while the radioisotopes ,  especially caesium-137, a fission product ,  are extracted from waste produced by nuclear reactors . 
due to its large ionic radius ,  caesium is one of the `` incompatible elements '' . 
1900 was the last year of the 19th century  -rrb-  . 
the astronomical year numbering and iso 8601 systems both contain a year zero ,  so the first century begins with the year zero ,  rather than the year one . 
informally ,  years may be referred to in groups based on the hundreds part of the year . 
cardiff city f . c . 
the 1958 commonwealth games were hosted by cardiff . 
cardiff hosted the national eisteddfod in 1883, 1899, 1938, 1960, 1978 and 2008.
in the ensuing century cardiff was at peace . 
in westminster ,  cardiff is represented by jo stevens  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff central ,  anna mcmorrin -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff north ,  stephen doughty  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff south and penarth and kevin brennan  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff west . 
in the assembly cardiff is represented by jenny rathbone  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff central ,  julie morgan  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff north ,  vaughan gething  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff south and penarth and mark drakeford  -lrb-  labour  -rrb-  in cardiff west . 
cardiff  -lrb-  ;   -rrb-  is the capital of wales ,  and its largest city . 
annual events in cardiff that have become regular appearances in cardiff's calendar include sparks in the park ,  the great british cheese festival ,  cardiff mardi gras ,  cardiff winter wonderland ,  cardiff festival and made in roath . 
a twice-weekly boat service between cardiff and bristol was established in 1815, and in 1821, the cardiff gas works was established . 
since the 1980s ,  cardiff has seen significant development . 
ladies ,  cyncoed ladies and cardiff city . 
cardiff's professional ice hockey team ,  the cardiff devils ,  play in the 3000-seater ice arena wales in the cardiff international sports village . 
cardiff has many cultural sites varying from the historical cardiff castle and out of town castell coch to the more modern wales millennium centre and cardiff bay . 
since local government reorganisation in 1996, cardiff has been governed by the city and county council of cardiff ,  which is based at county hall in atlantic wharf ,  cardiff bay . 
cardiff is also famous for cardiff castle ,  st david's hall ,  llandaff cathedral and the wales millennium centre . 
cardiff is home to four major institutions of higher education: cardiff university ,  cardiff metropolitan university ,  university of south wales and the royal welsh college of music & drama . 
for local government purposes ,  cardiff is divided into communities . 
several out-of-town retail parks exist ,  such as newport road ,  culverhouse cross ,  cardiff gate and cardiff bay . 
following a period of decline during the 1970s and 1980s ,  cardiff's population is growing . 
cardiff's only american flag football team are the hurricanes . 
in 1905, cardiff was made a city and proclaimed the capital of wales in 1955.
on 1 march 2004, cardiff was granted fairtrade city status . 
cardiff experiences less rainfall than the average for wales . 
the aquabus water taxi runs every hour between the city centre  -lrb-  taff mead embankment  -rrb-  and cardiff bay  -lrb-  mermaid quay  -rrb-  ,  and between cardiff bay and penarth cardiff bay barrage . 
there are regular bus services linking the airport with the cardiff central bus station as well as a train service from rhoose cardiff international airport railway station to cardiff central . 
cardiff claims to have the largest concentration of castles of any city in the world . 
the ons estimated as of june 2018, 75,600  -lrb-  21.8%  -rrb-  of cardiff's population could speak welsh . 
cardiff city council adopted a 5-year welsh language strategy in 2017 in order to increase the number of welsh speakers  -lrb-  aged 3+  -rrb-  in cardiff by 15.9% ,  from 36,735 in 2011 to 42,584 residents by the 2021 census . 
cardiff has numerous smaller clubs including bridgend street a . f . c .  ,  caerau  -lrb-  ely  -rrb-  a . f . c .  ,  cardiff corinthians f . c .  ,  cardiff grange harlequins a . f . c .  ,  and ely rangers a . f . c . 
cardiff hosted eight football matches of the london 2012 olympics . 
cardiff has walks of special interest for tourists and ramblers alike ,  such as the centenary walk ,  which runs for within cardiff city centre . 
cardiff has 1518 hours of sunshine during an average year  -lrb-  wales 1388.7 hours  -rrb-  . 
the university of south wales's cardiff campus ,  atrium ,  is home to the cardiff school of creative & cultural industries and is located in the city centre . 
throughout the year ,  cardiff waterbus sail between the pierhead on the waterfront and the penarth end of the cardiff bay barrage with short sightseeing cruises . 
domestic and international air links to cardiff and south & west wales are provided from cardiff airport  -lrb-  cwl  -rrb-  ,  the only international airport in wales . 
cardiff has a long association with boxing ,  from 'peerless' jim driscoll—born in cardiff in 1880—to more recent ,  high-profile fights staged in the city . 
cardiff is the county town of the historic county of glamorgan  -lrb-  and later south glamorgan  -rrb-  . 
in 1404, owain glyndŵr burned cardiff and took possession of the castle . 
this route passes through many of cardiff's landmarks and historic buildings . 
cardiff has a strong nightlife and is home to many bars ,  pubs and clubs . 
tall buildings have been built in the city centre and cardiff bay ,  and more are planned . 
the lsoa with the highest percentage of welsh speakers in the entirety of cardiff is found in whitchurch at 26% . 
the modern cardiff accent is distinct from that of the nearby south wales valleys . 
as the capital city of wales ,  cardiff is the main engine of growth in the welsh economy . 
though the population of cardiff is about 10% of the welsh population ,  the economy of cardiff makes up nearly 20% of welsh gdp and 40% of the city's workforce are daily in-commuters from the surrounding south wales area . 
the welsh government has its headquarters in cardiff's cathays park where most of its civil servants are based ,  with smaller numbers in other locations in the city centre ,  cathays ,  canton ,  and cardiff bay . 
industry has played a major part in cardiff's development for many centuries . 
the anglicised form `` cardiff '' is derived from  ,  with the welsh `` f '' borrowed as `` ff ''  ,  as also happens in `` taff ''  -lrb-  from welsh   -rrb-  and `` llandaff ''  -lrb-  from welsh   -rrb-  . 
dickens's novels were ,  among other things ,  works of social commentary . 
dickens's serialisation of his novels was not uncriticised by other authors . 
it was dickens's personal favourite among his own novels . 
dickens's literary success began with the 1836 serial publication of `` the pickwick papers '' . 
 ''oliver twist '' ,  published in 1838, became one of dickens's better known stories ,  and was the first victorian novel with a child protagonist . 
museums and festivals celebrating dickens's life and works exist in many places with which dickens was associated . 
huffam is thought to be the inspiration for paul dombey ,  the owner of a shipping company in dickens's novel `` dombey and son ''  -lrb-  1848 -rrb- . 
dickens's talent was to incorporate this episodic writing style but still end up with a coherent novel at the end . 
this and `` david copperfield ''  -lrb-  1849–50 -rrb- mark a significant artistic break in dickens's career as his novels became more serious in theme and more carefully planned than his early works . 
he also bequeathed £19 19s to each servant in his employment at the time of his death . 
in the uk survey the big read ,  carried out by the bbc in 2003, five of dickens's books were named in the top 100.
as he recalled to john forster  -lrb-  from `` the life of charles dickens ''  -rrb- :
in his will ,  drafted more than a year before his death ,  dickens left the care of his £80,000 estate to his longtime colleague john forster and his `` best and truest friend '' georgina hogarth who ,  along with dickens's two sons ,  also received a tax-free sum of £8,000  -lrb-  about £800,000 in present terms  -rrb-  . 
charles john huffam dickens  -lrb-  ; 7 february 1812 – 9 june 1870 -rrb- was an english writer and social critic . 
dickens was the most popular novelist of his time ,  and remains one of the best-known and most-read of english authors . 
dickens's biographer claire tomalin regards him as the greatest creator of character in english fiction after shakespeare . 
a pioneer of serialised fiction ,  most of dickens's major novels were first written in monthly or weekly instalments in journals such as `` master humphrey's clock '' and `` household words '' ,  later reprinted in book form . 
in june 1862, he was offered £10,000 for a reading tour of australia . 
at about this time ,  he was made aware of a large embezzlement at the firm where his brother ,  augustus ,  worked  -lrb-  john chapman & co .   -rrb-  . 
dickens's novels were initially serialised in weekly and monthly magazines ,  then reprinted in standard book formats . 
during this time he was also the publisher ,  editor ,  and a major contributor to the journals `` household words ''  -lrb-  1850–1859 -rrb- and `` all the year round ''  -lrb-  1858–1870 -rrb- . 
he also wrote a religious work called `` the life of our lord ''  -lrb-  1849 -rrb- ,  which was a short book about the life of jesus christ ,  written with the purpose of inculcating his faith to his children and family . 
the time in hampstead was the occasion for a growing bond between dickens and john forster to develop and forster soon became his unofficial business manager ,  and the first to read his work . 
another important impact of dickens's episodic writing style resulted from his exposure to the opinions of his readers and friends . 
after living briefly in italy  -lrb-  1844 -rrb- ,  dickens travelled to switzerland  -lrb-  1846 -rrb- ,  where he began work on `` dombey and son ''  -lrb-  1846–48 -rrb- . 
dickens's public readings secured sufficient funds for an endowment to put the hospital on a sound financial footing—one reading on 9 february 1858 alone raised £3,000.
the word is a shortened form of `` karabinerhaken ''  -lrb-  or also short `` karabiner ''  -rrb-  ,  a german phrase for a `` spring hook '' used by a carbine rifleman ,  or carabinier ,  to attach items to a belt or bandolier . 
they are usually rated for a safe working load of 5 kn or more  -lrb-  equivalent to a weight in excess of approximately 500kg  -rrb-  . 
visual errors are instant `` discontinuities '' occurring in visual media such as film and television . 
an example of an editing error can be seen in the film `` it's a mad ,  mad ,  mad ,  mad world ''  -lrb-  1963 -rrb- ,  where a scene of people climbing a slope at the start is seen from below and then replayed from above . 
editing errors can occur when a character in a scene references a scene or incident that has not occurred yet ,  or of which they should not yet be aware . 
yet another glaring example of poor continuity occurs in the disney film `` pete’s dragon ''  -lrb-  filmed in 1976 -rrb- . 
though visual continuity errors are logically confined to visual media ,  parallel mistakes can occur in text . 
rather `` loose '' plots and a lack of continuity editing made most early films rife with such errors . 
film production companies use various techniques to prevent continuity errors . 
the death penalty was banned in china between 747 and 759.
south africa abolished the death penalty in 1995.
the philippines re-introduced the death penalty in 1993 after abolishing it in 1987, but again abolished it in 2006.
the romans also used death penalty for a wide range of offences . 
the death penalty also targeted sexual offences such as sodomy . 
a 2016 gallup poll shows that 60% of americans support the death penalty ,  down from 64% in 2010 65% in 2006 and 68% in 2001.
the united states is the only western country to still use the death penalty . 
in the united states ,  michigan was the first state to ban the death penalty ,  on 18 may 1846.
despite the wide use of the death penalty ,  calls for reform were not unknown . 
in japan ,  emperor saga abolished the death penalty in 818 under the influence of shinto and it lasted until 1156.
since world war ii ,  there has been a trend toward abolishing the death penalty . 
the most recent country to abolish the death penalty was burkina faso in june 2018.
the public opinion on the death penalty varies considerably by country and by the crime in question . 
the death penalty in the united states remains a contentious issue which is hotly debated . 
in medieval and early modern europe ,  before the development of modern prison systems ,  the death penalty was also used as a generalized form of punishment . 
the use of the death penalty is becoming increasingly restrained in some retentionist countries including taiwan and singapore . 
this trend has been followed by some african and middle eastern countries where support for the death penalty remains high . 
some countries have resumed practising the death penalty after having previously suspended the practice for long periods . 
during hassan rouhani's current tenure as president of iran since 2013, at least 3,602 death sentences have been carried out . 
capital punishment ,  also known as the death penalty ,  is a government-sanctioned practice whereby a person is killed by the state as a punishment for a crime . 
although many are executed in the people's republic of china each year in the present day ,  there was a time in the tang dynasty  -lrb-  618–907 -rrb- when the death penalty was abolished . 
takayuki otsuki ,  who was convicted of raping and strangling a 23-year-old woman and subsequently strangling her 11-month-old daughter to death on 14 april 1999, when he was 18, is another inmate sentenced to death ,  and his request for retrial has been rejected by the supreme court of japan . 
this current article covers western ,  notably european and american cultural movements . 
yet for historical perspective ,  some rough date ranges will be provided for each to indicate the `` height '' or accepted time span of the movement . 
the four lightest chalcogens  -lrb-  oxygen ,  sulfur ,  selenium ,  and tellurium  -rrb-  are all primordial elements on earth . 
isotopes with nuclear spins are more common among the chalcogens selenium and tellurium than they are with sulfur . 
his version included a `` group b '' consisting of oxygen ,  sulfur ,  selenium ,  tellurium ,  and osmium . 
oxygen ,  along with sulfur ,  selenium ,  tellurium ,  and later polonium would be grouped in `` group via '' ,  until the group's name was changed to `` group 16 '' in 1988.
oxygen ,  sulfur ,  and selenium are nonmetals ,  and tellurium is a metalloid ,  meaning that its chemical properties are between those of a metal and those of a nonmetal . 
all of the chalcogens form hydrides . 
many of these contain sulfur but some ,  such as nabse contain selenium instead . 
sulfur has more than 20 allotropes ,  oxygen has nine ,  selenium has at least five ,  polonium has two ,  and only one crystal structure of tellurium has so far been discovered . 
most sulfur produced is transformed into sulfur dioxide ,  which is further transformed into sulfuric acid ,  a very common industrial chemical . 
sulfur's oxidation states are −2, +2, +4, and +6.
after 1869, dmitri mendeleev proposed his periodic table placing oxygen at the top of `` group vi '' above sulfur ,  selenium ,  and tellurium . 
oxygen's crystal structure is monoclinic ,  sulfur's is orthorhombic ,  selenium and tellurium have the hexagonal crystal structure ,  while polonium has a cubic crystal structure . 
gaseous sulfur is a mixture of diatomic sulfur  -lrb-  s  -rrb-  and 8-atom rings . 
sulfur has over 20 known allotropes ,  which is more than any other element except carbon . 
selenium's oxidation states are −2, +4, and +6.
chalcogens also form compounds with halogens known as chalcohalides . 
sulfur and tellurium can bond with organic compounds containing both silicon and phosphorus . 
sulfur has been known since antiquity ,  and oxygen was recognized as an element in the 18th century . 
halogens and chalcogens can also form halochalcogenate anions . 
selenium has at least five known allotropes . 
there are only 5 parts per billion of tellurium in the earth's crust and 15 parts per billion of tellurium in seawater . 
polonium-209 is also toxic ,  and can cause leukemia . 
tellurium is not known to have any allotropes ,  although its typical form is hexagonal . 
many sulfur compounds ,  such as hydrogen sulfide  -lrb-  hs  -rrb-  and sulfur dioxide  -lrb-  so  -rrb-  are highly toxic . 
chalcogen compounds form a number of interchalcogens . 
oxygen is generally extracted from air and sulfur is extracted from oil and natural gas . 
selenium can protect against heavy metal poisoning . 
in organisms carbonic acid production is catalysed by the enzyme ,  carbonic anhydrase . 
carbon dioxide also causes ocean acidification because it dissolves in water to form carbonic acid . 
carbon dioxide is soluble in water ,  in which it reversibly forms  -lrb-  carbonic acid  -rrb-  ,  which is a weak acid since its ionization in water is incomplete . 
the hydration equilibrium constant of carbonic acid is formula_1  -lrb-  at 25 °c  -rrb-  . 
hence ,  the majority of the carbon dioxide is not converted into carbonic acid ,  but remains as molecules ,  not affecting the ph . 
being diprotic ,  carbonic acid has two acid dissociation constants ,  the first one for the dissociation into the bicarbonate  -lrb-  also called hydrogen carbonate  -rrb-  ion  -lrb-  hco  -rrb- :
