one common example involving centripetal force is the case in which a body moves with uniform speed along a circular path . 
the magnitude of the centripetal force on an object of mass `` m '' moving at tangential speed `` v '' along a path with radius of curvature `` r '' is:
the actual procedure which yields the checksum from a data input is called a checksum function or checksum algorithm . 
with this checksum ,  any transmission error which flips a single bit of the message ,  or an odd number of bits ,  will be detected as an incorrect checksum . 
by themselves ,  checksums are often used to verify data integrity but are not relied upon to verify data authenticity . 
the valid received messages  -lrb-  those that have the correct checksum  -rrb-  comprise a smaller set ,  with only 2 corners . 
the city university of new york  -lrb-  cuny   -rrb-  is the public university system of new york city ,  and the largest urban university system in the united states . 
cuny ,  however ,  is located in only new york city ,  while suny is located in the entire state ,  including new york city . 
cuny is the third-largest university system in the united states ,  in terms of enrollment ,  behind the state university of new york  -lrb-  suny  -rrb-  ,  and the california state university system . 
when considering computational problems ,  a problem instance is a string over an alphabet . 
an example of a decision problem is the following . 
for this reason ,  complexity theory addresses computational problems and not particular problem instances . 
it is tempting to think that the notion of function problems is much richer than the notion of decision problems . 
notable examples include the traveling salesman problem and the integer factorization problem . 
to measure the difficulty of solving a computational problem ,  one may wish to see how much time the best algorithm requires to solve the problem . 
for instance ,  in the problem of finding whether a graph is connected ,  how much more time does it take to solve a problem for a graph with 2 ''n '' vertices compared to the time taken for a graph with `` n '' vertices ? 
if the input size is `` n '' ,  the time taken can be expressed as a function of `` n '' . 
camelot lends its name to the musical `` camelot '' ,  which was adapted into a film of the same title ,  featuring the castle of coca ,  segovia as camelot . 
camelot is a castle and court associated with the legendary king arthur . 
the romancers' versions of camelot drew on earlier descriptions of arthur's fabulous court . 
camelot has become a permanent fixture in interpretations of the arthurian legend . 
despite this ,  cadbury remains widely associated with camelot . 
in american contexts ,  camelot refers to the presidency of john f .  kennedy . 
arthur's court at camelot is mentioned for the first time in chrétien's poem `` lancelot ,  the knight of the cart '' ,  dating to the 1170s ,  though it does not appear in all the manuscripts . 
the name's derivation is uncertain . 
in the fiscal year 1984, the u . s .  congress approved $24 million in contra aid . 
u . s .  officials were active in attempting to unite the contra groups . 
in front of the international court of justice ,  nicaragua claimed that the contras were altogether a creation of the u . s . 
by 1989 the us backed contra war and economic isolation had inflicted severe economic suffering on nicaraguans . 
during the time the us congress blocked funding for the contras ,  the reagan government engaged in a campaign to alter public opinion and change the vote in congress on contra aid . 
the us promised to end the war and the economic embargo should she win . 
the reagan administration's support for the contras continued to stir controversy well into the 1990s . 
supporters of the contras tried to downplay these violations ,  particularly the reagan administration in the us ,  which engaged in a campaign of white propaganda to alter public opinion in favor of the contras ,  while covertly encouraging the contras to attack civilian targets . 
according to the london spectator ,  u . s .  journalists in central america had long known that the cia was flying in supplies to the contras inside nicaragua before the scandal broke . 
nevertheless ,  the case for support of the contras continued to be made in washington ,  d . c .  ,  by both the reagan administration and the heritage foundation ,  which argued that support for the contras would counter soviet influence in nicaragua . 
the united states began to support contra activities against the sandinista government by december 1981, with the cia at the forefront of operations . 
the us government viewed the leftist sandinistas as a threat to economic interests of american corporations in nicaragua and to national security . 
in his affidavit to the world court ,  former contra edgar chamorro testified that `` the cia did not discourage such tactics . 
after a cutoff in u . s .  military support ,  and with both sides facing international pressure to bring an end to the conflict ,  the contras agreed to negotiations with the fsln . 
this led many commentators to conclude that nicaraguans voted against the sandinistas out of fear of a continuation of the contra war and economic deprivation . 
largely financed ,  trained ,  equipped ,  armed and organized by the u . s .  ,  it emerged as the largest and most active contra group . 
in 1987, virtually all contra organizations were united ,  at least nominally ,  into the nicaraguan resistance . 
the term `` contra '' comes from the spanish `` contra , ``  which means `` against '' but in this case is short for  ,  in english `` the counter-revolution '' . 
venter was fired by celera in early 2002.
venter was born in salt lake city ,  utah ,  the son of elizabeth and john venter . 
in august 2018, venter retired as chairman of the board ,  saying he wanted to focus on his work at the j .  craig venter institute . 
venter is currently the chief executive officer of the j .  craig venter institute ,  a nonprofit which conducts research in synthetic biology . 
venter's effort won him renown as he and his team at celera corporation shared credit for sequencing the first draft human genome with the publicly funded human genome project . 
while an employee of the nih ,  venter learned how to identify mrna and began to learn more about those expressed in the human brain . 
venter was passionate about the power of genomics to radically transform healthcare . 
venter is the author of two books ,  the first of which was ostensibly an autobiography titled `` a life decoded '' . 
john craig venter  -lrb-  born october 14, 1946 -rrb- is an american biotechnologist ,  biochemist ,  geneticist ,  and businessman . 
the human reference genome browser is a web application for the navigation and analysis of venter's recently published genome . 
carl was the fourth of their six children . 
carl ransom rogers  -lrb-  january 8, 1902 – february 4, 1987 -rrb- was an american psychologist and among the founders of the humanistic approach  -lrb-  or client-centered approach  -rrb-  to psychology . 
he and his followers have demonstrated a humanistic approach to conducting therapy and a scientific approach to evaluating therapy need not be incompatible . `` 
he later became an atheist . 
in 1945, he was invited to set up a counseling center at the university of chicago . 
in quantum field theory ,  the casimir effect and the casimir–polder force are physical forces arising from a quantized field . 
the causes of the casimir effect are described by quantum field theory ,  which states that all of the various fundamental fields ,  such as the electromagnetic field ,  must be quantized at each and every point in space . 
thus it can be interpreted without any reference to the zero-point energy  -lrb-  vacuum energy  -rrb-  of quantum fields . 
the vacuum expectation value of the energy of the electromagnetic field in the cavity is then
any medium supporting oscillations has an analogue of the casimir effect . 
however ,  even the vacuum has a vastly complex structure ,  so all calculations of quantum field theory must be made in relation to this model of the vacuum . 
casimir's observation was that the second-quantized quantum electromagnetic field ,  in the presence of bulk bodies such as metals or dielectrics ,  must obey the same boundary conditions that the classical electromagnetic field must obey . 
the casimir effect can be understood by the idea that the presence of conducting metals and dielectrics alters the vacuum expectation value of the energy of the second quantized electromagnetic field . 
the first coins were developed in iron age anatolia around the 7th and 6th centuries bc . 
exceptions to the rule of face value being higher than content value also occur for some bullion coins made of copper ,  silver ,  or gold  -lrb-  and ,  rarely ,  other metals ,  such as platinum or palladium  -rrb-  ,  intended for collectors or investors in precious metals . 
the earliest coins are mostly associated with iron age anatolia ,  especially with the kingdom of lydia . 
porcelain  -rrb-  have been used to produce coins for circulation ,  collection ,  and metal investment: bullion coins often serve as more convenient stores of assured metal quantity and purity than other bullion . 
the practice of using silver bars for currency also seems to have been current in central asia from the 6th century bc . 
a classical kuiper belt object ,  also called a cubewano  -lrb-   `` qb1-o ''  -rrb-  ,  is a low-eccentricity kuiper belt object  -lrb-  kbo  -rrb-  that orbits beyond neptune and is not controlled by an orbital resonance with neptune . 
u . s .  foreign policy and foreign aid have been the subject of much debate ,  praise and criticism ,  both domestically and abroad . 
despite two wars with european powers—the war of 1812 and the spanish–american war in 1898—american foreign policy was mostly peaceful and marked by steady expansion of its foreign trade during the 19th century . 
the main trend regarding the history of u . s .  foreign policy since the american revolution is the shift from non-interventionism before and after world war i ,  to its growth as a world power and global hegemony during and since world war ii and the end of the cold war in the 20th century . 
congress also has power to regulate commerce with foreign nations . 
trump has numerous aides giving advice on foreign policy . 
the `` new york times '' reported on the eve of his first foreign trip as president:
in poland ,  christmas eve is a day first of fasting ,  then of feasting . 
the day of saint nicholas on 6 december is the unofficial beginning of the festive season in poland . 
a traditional wigilia supper in poland includes fried carp and borscht  -lrb-  beetroot soup  -rrb-  with uszka  -lrb-  ravioli  -rrb-  . 
on the night of christmas eve ,  so important is the appearance of the first star in remembrance of the star of bethlehem ,  that it has been given an affectionate name of `` the little star '' or gwiazdka  -lrb-  the female counterpart of st .  nicholas  -rrb-  . 
christmas in poland is a major annual celebration ,  as in most countries of the christian world . 
christmas eve ends with `` pasterka '' ,  the midnight mass at the local church . 
the modern glass workshops and manufacturers tend to be localized in the southern regions of poland . 
 ''oklahoma ! `` 
hammerstein wrote of this suggestion in 1945,
hammerstein later stated that if this point had not been won ,  `` we could never have made `` carousel '' . `` 
following the spectacular success of the first rodgers and hammerstein musical ,  `` oklahoma ! `` 
hammerstein wrote that molnár became a regular attendee at rehearsals after that . 
ferenc molnár's hungarian-language drama ,  `` liliom '' ,  premiered in budapest in 1909.
carousel is the second musical by the team of richard rodgers  -lrb-  music  -rrb-  and oscar hammerstein ii  -lrb-  book and lyrics  -rrb-  . 
richard rodgers later wrote that `` carousel '' was his favorite of all his musicals . 
glazer ,  in introducing the english translation of `` liliom '' ,  wrote of the play's appeal:
 ''liliom '' was a tragedy about a man who cannot learn to live with other people . 
two young female millworkers in 1873 maine visit the town's carousel after work . 
on his return to earth ,  liliom encounters his daughter ,  louise ,  who like her mother is now a factory worker . 
hammerstein wrote that molnár's advice ,  to combine two scenes into one ,  was key to pulling together the second act and represented `` a more radical departure from the original than any change we had made '' . 
christian alternative rock is a form of alternative rock music that is lyrically grounded in a christian worldview . 
some critics have suggested that unlike ccm and older christian rock ,  christian alternative rock generally emphasizes musical style over lyrical content as a defining genre characteristic ,  though the degree to which the faith appears in the music varies from artist to artist . 
barker is an author of horror/fantasy . 
barker would later allude to valentin in many of his stories . 
clive barker  -lrb-  born 5 october 1952 -rrb- is an english writer ,  film director ,  and visual artist . 
in 2003, barker received the davidson/valentini award at the 15th glaad media awards . 
barker was born in liverpool ,  merseyside ,  the son of joan ruby  -lrb-  née revill  -rrb-  ,  a painter and school welfare officer ,  and leonard barker ,  a personnel director for an industrial relations firm . 
the term `` low fantasy '' is used to represent other types of fantasy ,  however ,  so while comic fantasies may also correctly be classified as low fantasy ,  many examples of low fantasy are not comic in nature . 
it has also been used in the movie ``  '' . 
clu does not perform implicit type conversions . 
clu supported type parameterized user-defined data abstractions . 
for instance ,  here is the clu syntax for a cluster that implements complex numbers:
another key feature of the clu type system are `` iterators '' ,  which return objects from a collection serially ,  one after another . 
a cluster also defines a type that can be named outside the cluster  -lrb-  in this case ,  `` complex_number ''  -rrb-  ,  but its representation type  -lrb-  rep  -rrb-  is hidden from external clients . 
why didn't the soviet union collapse in 1980 then ? 
the history of the soviet union from 1982 through 1991 spans the period from leonid brezhnev's death and funeral until the dissolution of the soviet union . 
on 1 december 1988, the supreme soviet amended the soviet constitution to allow for the establishment of a congress of people's deputies as the soviet union's new supreme legislative body . 
this undermined the faith of the public in the soviet system and eroded the communist party's social power base ,  threatening the identity and integrity of the soviet union itself . 
the principal elements of the old soviet political system were communist party dominance ,  the hierarchy of soviets ,  state socialism ,  and ethnic federalism . 
ultimately ,  gorbachev could not forge a compromise among these forces and the consequence was the dissolution of the soviet union . 
to restructure the soviet administrative command system and implement a transition to a market economy ,  yeltsin's shock program was employed within days of the dissolution of the soviet union . 
in all ,  the positive view of soviet life long presented to the public by the official media was rapidly fading ,  and the negative aspects of life in the soviet union were brought into the spotlight . 
the war in afghanistan ,  often referred to as the soviet union's `` vietnam war '' ,  led to increased public dissatisfaction with the communist regime . 
by 1982, the stagnation of the soviet economy was obvious ,  as evidenced by the fact that the soviet union had been importing grain from the u . s .  throughout the 1970s ,  but the system was so firmly entrenched that any real change seemed impossible . 
the soviet union also began experiencing upheaval as the political consequences of `` glasnost '' reverberated throughout the country . 
 ''gorbachev actually put the sort of final blow to the resistance of the soviet union by killing the fear of the people . 
tensions between the superpowers increased during this time ,  when carter placed trade embargoes on the soviet union and stated that the soviet invasion of afghanistan was `` the most serious threat to the peace since the second world war . `` 
the dramatic drop of the price of oil in 1985 and 1986 profoundly influenced actions of the soviet leadership . 
the process was characterized by many of the republics of the soviet union declaring their independence and being recognized as sovereign nation-states . 
the rise of nationalism under `` freedom of speech '' soon re-awakened simmering ethnic tensions in various soviet republics ,  further discrediting the ideal of a unified soviet people . 
the dissolution of the soviet union was a process of systematic disintegration ,  which occurred in the economy ,  social structure and political structure . 
the soviet union finally collapsed in 1991 when boris yeltsin seized power in the aftermath of a failed coup that had attempted to topple reform-minded gorbachev . 
under this provision ,  cooperative restaurants ,  shops ,  and manufacturers became part of the soviet scene . 
by 1995, an estimated 65 percent of islanders had some degree of proficiency in corsican ,  and a small minority ,  perhaps 10 percent ,  used corsican as a first language . 
varieties of corsican are spoken ,  and to some extent written ,  on the islands of corsica  -lrb-  france  -rrb-  and sardinia  -lrb-  italy  -rrb-  . 
as for corsican ,  a bone of contention is whether it should be considered an italian dialect or its own language . 
the use of corsican language over french language has been declining . 
the corsican language is a key vehicle for corsican culture ,  which is notably rich in proverbs and in polyphonic song . 
unesco classifies corsican as a `` definitely endangered language . `` 
only a fraction of the population at either time spoke corsican with any fluency . 
while 90 percent of the population is in favor of a corsican-french bilingualism ,  3 percent would like to have corsican as the only official language in the island ,  and 7 percent would prefer french in this role . 
for example ,  one might read from some scholars that corsican either belongs to the `` centro-southern italian dialects '' along with tuscan and the tuscan-based standard italian ,  neapolitan and others or that it is `` closely related to the tuscan dialect of italian '' . 
in the end ,  the amiga computer outlasted the atari . 
the atari st was technology-wise almost out ,  however the amiga was out sooner . 
in 1992, commodore released the amiga 1200 and amiga 4000 computers ,  which featured an improved graphics chipset ,  the aga . 
commodore faced the problem ,  when marketing the amiga ,  of still being seen as the company that made cheap computers like the 64 and vic . 
during development in 1981, amiga had exhausted venture capital and was desperate for more financing . 
commodore failed to update the amiga to keep pace as the pc platform advanced . 
throughout the life of the st and amiga platforms ,  a ferocious atari-commodore rivalry raged . 
cost was $1000-$1300.
seeing a chance to gain some leverage ,  tramiel immediately used the contract to counter-sue commodore through its new subsidiary ,  amiga ,  on august 13.
instead ,  tramiel returned with the new idea to produce electronic calculators ,  which were just coming on the market . 
the advent of pc games using 3d graphics such as `` doom '' and `` wolfenstein 3d '' spelled the end of amiga as a gaming platform ,  due to mismanagement . 
in 1983, tramiel decided to focus on market share and cut the price of the vic-20 and c64 dramatically ,  starting what would be called the `` home computer war '' . 
other companies develop operating systems and manufacture computers for both commodore and amiga brands as well as software . 
this was intended ,  in effect ,  to bar tramiel from releasing his new computer . 
but tramiel had beaten commodore to the punch . 
it is a one-star rank and has essentially the same rank insignia as the british air commodore . 
many air forces use the rank of air commodore . 
it is the equivalent rank to the navy rank of `` commodore '' ,  and the army ranks of brigadier and brigadier general . 
commodore is a rank in the royal netherlands air force . 
commodore ,  in spanish `` comodoro '' ,  is a rank in the argentine air force . 
the argentine rank below commodore is the rank of vice-commodore  -lrb-  spanish `` vicecomodoro ''  -rrb-  equivalent to a lieutenant-colonel in the argentine army ,  and a lieutenant-colonel or wing commander in other air forces . 
it is often regarded as a one-star rank with a nato code of of-6  -lrb-  which is known in the u . s .  as `` rear admiral  -lrb-  lower half  -rrb- ``   -rrb-  ,  but whether it is regarded as a flag rank varies between countries . 
the following articles deal with the rank of commodore  -lrb-  or its equivalent  -rrb-  as it is employed of-6 one-star flag officer rank in various countries . 
this is not true for real differentiable functions . 
typically `` u '' and `` v '' are taken to be the real and imaginary parts respectively of a complex-valued function of a single complex variable  ,   . 
holomorphy is the property of a complex function of being differentiable at every point of an open and connected subset of c  -lrb-  this is called a domain in c  -rrb-  . 
topol appeared in more than 30 films in israel and abroad . 
his autobiography ,  `` topol by topol '' ,  was published in london by weindenfel and nicholson  -lrb-  1981 -rrb- . 
topol estimated that he performed the role more than 3,500 times . 
in israel ,  topol acted in and produced dozens of films and television series . 
topol both sang and acted with the group ,  doing both `` loudly '' . 
topol married galia finkelstein in october 1956.
topol's first film appearance was in the 1961 film `` i like mike '' ,  followed by the 1963 israeli film `` el dorado '' . 
topol's performance received positive reviews . 
topol was a recipient of israel's kinor david award in arts and entertainment in 1964.
topol's hobbies include sketching and sculpting . 
chaim topol  -lrb-   ,  born september 9, 1935 -rrb- ,  also spelled haym topol ,  mononymously known as topol ,  is an israeli theatrical ,  film ,  and television actor ,  singer ,  comedian ,  voice artist ,  film producer ,  author ,  and illustrator . 
the `` central fellowship '' in north america is still often referred to today as the `` amended fellowship '' . 
the majority of christadelphians today  -lrb-  around 60,000 -rrb- belong to what is commonly known as the `` central fellowship '' . 
as a result of these debates ,  several groups separated from the main body of christadelphians ,  most notably the suffolk street fellowship and the unamended fellowship . 
other fellowships which openly identify themselves as christadelphians will have various numbers ranging from as few as 10 to over 200 members . 
the `` old paths fellowship '' was formed in 1957 by those in the `` temperance hall fellowship '' who held that the reasons for separation from the `` suffolk street fellowship '' and its sympathising communities remained . 
christadelphian fellowships have often been named after ecclesias or magazines who took a lead in developing a particular stance . 
due to a proportionally large number of members in the uk joining the central fellowship in and around 2014, their numbers have reduced to around 250 members in total  -lrb-  around 100 members in the uk ,  and around 150 in australasia  -rrb-  . 
the christadelphian body consists of a number of `` fellowships '' – groups of ecclesias which associate with one another ,  often to the exclusion of ecclesias outside their group . 
by the end of the 1950s ,  most christadelphians had united into one community ,  but there are still a number of small groups of christadelphians who remain separate . 
to expand beyond 12 channels ,  non-standard `` midband '' channels had to be used ,  located between the fm band and channel 7, or `` superband '' beyond channel 13 up to about 300 mhz; these channels initially were only accessible using separate tuner boxes that sent the chosen channel into the tv set on channel 2, 3 or 4.
similarly ,  a local vhf station could not be carried on its broadcast channel as the signals would arrive at the tv set slightly separated in time ,  causing `` ghosting '' . 
although early  -lrb-  vhf  -rrb-  television receivers could receive 12 channels  -lrb-  2-13 -rrb- ,  the maximum number of channels that could be broadcast in one city was 7: channels 2, 4, either 5 or 6, 7, 9, 11 and 13, as receivers at the time were unable to receive strong  -lrb-  local  -rrb-  signals on adjacent channels without distortion . 
as equipment improved ,  all twelve channels could be utilized ,  except where a local vhf television station broadcast . 
before being added to the cable box itself ,  these midband channels were used for early incarnations of pay tv ,  e . g . 
the bandwidth of the amplifiers also was limited ,  meaning frequencies over 250 mhz were difficult to transmit to distant portions of the coaxial network ,  and uhf channels could not be used at all . 
not scrambled as standard tv sets of the period could not pick up the signal nor could the average consumer `de-tune' the normal stations to be able to receive it . 
a `` cable channel ''  -lrb-  sometimes known as a `` cable network ''  -rrb-  is a television network available via cable television . 
some operators as in cornwall ,  ontario ,  used a dual distribution network with channels 2-13 on each of the two cables . 
once tuners that could receive select mid-band and super-band channels began to be incorporated into standard television sets ,  broadcasters were forced to either install scrambling circuitry or move these signals further out of the range of reception for early cable-ready tvs and vcrs . 
however ,  once all 181 allocated cable channels had been incorporated ,  premium broadcasters were left with no choice but to scramble . 
cholera is an infection of the small intestine by some strains of the bacterium `` vibrio cholerae '' . 
cholera has been nicknamed the `` blue death '' because a person's skin may turn bluish-gray from extreme loss of fluids . 
large calderas may have even greater effects . 
some calderas are known to host rich ore deposits . 
more than 80 of these large shield volcanoes have summit calderas averaging across . 
a caldera is a large cauldron-like hollow that forms following the evacuation of a magma chamber/reservoir . 
the summit of the mountain has six nested calderas . 
the compton-belkovich volcanic complex on the far side of the moon is thought to be a caldera ,  possibly an ash-flow caldera . 
for instance ,  the caldera atop fernandina island collapsed in 1968 when parts of the caldera floor dropped  . 
this would be the first in a line of construction related calculators . 
the first soviet programmable desktop calculator iskra 123, powered by the power grid ,  was released at the start of the 1970s . 
the first mainframe computers ,  using firstly vacuum tubes and later transistors in the logic circuits ,  appeared in the 1940s and 1950s . 
the first graphing calculator was the casio fx-7000g released in 1985.
the first soviet `` scientific '' pocket-sized calculator the `` b3-18 '' was completed by the end of 1975.
the first soviet union made pocket-sized calculator ,  the `` elektronika b3-04 '' was developed by the end of 1973 and sold at the start of 1974.
this led the way to the first credit-card-sized calculators ,  such as the casio `` mini card lc-78 '' of 1978, which could run for months of normal use on button cells . 
the first solid-state electronic calculator was created in the early 1960s . 
one of the first low-cost calculators was the sinclair cambridge ,  launched in august 1973.
the first calculator capable of symbolic computing was the hp-28c ,  released in 1987.
the first desktop `` programmable calculators '' were produced in the mid-1960s by mathatronics and casio  -lrb-  al-1000 -rrb- . 
by 1970, a calculator could be made using just a few chips of low power consumption ,  allowing portable models powered from rechargeable batteries . 
the first american-made pocket-sized calculator ,  the bowmar 901b  -lrb-  popularly termed `` the bowmar brain ''  -rrb-  ,  measuring  ,  came out in the autumn of 1971, with four functions and an eight-digit red led display ,  for $240, while in august 1972 the four-function sinclair executive became the first slimline pocket calculator measuring and weighing  . 
the first truly pocket-sized electronic calculator was the busicom le-120a `` handy '' ,  which was marketed early in 1971.
the first known tools used to aid arithmetic calculations were: bones  -lrb-  used to tally items  -rrb-  ,  pebbles ,  and counting boards ,  and the abacus ,  known to have been used by sumerians and egyptians before 2000 bc . 
the following keys are common to most pocket calculators . 
meanwhile ,  hewlett-packard  -lrb-  hp  -rrb-  had been developing a pocket calculator . 
sharp put in great efforts in size and power reduction and introduced in january 1971 the sharp el-8, also marketed as the facit 1111, which was close to being a pocket calculator . 
the first handheld calculator was a prototype called `` cal tech '' ,  whose development was led by jack kilby at texas instruments in 1967.
although these early hand-held calculators were very costly ,  these advances in electronics ,  together with developments in display technology  -lrb-  such as the vacuum fluorescent display ,  led ,  and lcd  -rrb-  ,  led within a few years to the cheap pocket calculator available to all . 
it had 35 buttons and was based on mostek mk6020 chip . 
these models appear to have been sold only for a year or two . 
however ,  the efforts in integrated circuit development culminated in the introduction in early 1971 of the first `` calculator on a chip '' ,  the mk6010 by mostek ,  followed by texas instruments later in the year . 
a cash drawer is usually a compartment underneath a cash register in which the cash from transactions is kept . 
some modern cash drawers are individual units separate from the rest of the cash register . 
cash registers use bitmap characters for printing . 
cash registers include a key labeled `` no sale '' ,  abbreviated `` ns '' on many modern electronic cash registers . 
a cash register's drawer can only be opened by an instruction from the cash register except when using special keys ,  generally held by the owner and some employees  -lrb-  e . g . 
currently ,  many cash registers are individual computers . 
the cash register is also usually attached to a printer ,  that can print out receipts for record keeping purposes . 
some cash drawers are flip top in design ,  where they flip open instead of sliding out like an ordinary drawer ,  resembling a cashbox instead . 
processor design is the design engineering task of creating a processor ,  a component of computer hardware . 
traditionally ,  carinatae were defined as all birds whose sternum  -lrb-  breast bone  -rrb-  has a keel  -lrb-  `` carina ''  -rrb-  . 
an alternate definition was provided in 2001, naming carinatae an apomorphy-based clade defined by the presence of a keeled sternum . 
there is a lack of clarity on the origins of cocktails . 
but by the 1860s ,  a cocktail frequently included a liqueur . 
mixed drinks without alcohol that resemble cocktails are known as `` mocktails '' or `` virgin cocktails '' . 
several authors have theorized that cocktail may be a corruption of cock ale . 
with wine and beer less readily available ,  liquor-based cocktails took their place ,  even becoming the centerpiece of the new cocktail party . 
the oxford dictionaries define cocktail as `` an alcoholic drink consisting of a spirit or spirits mixed with other ingredients ,  such as fruit juice or cream '' . 
the coptic orthodox church of alexandria regards itself as having been misunderstood at the council of chalcedon . 
the coptic orthodox church of alexandria  -lrb-    -rrb-  is an oriental orthodox christian church based in egypt ,  africa and the middle east . 
in 1998, the eritrean orthodox tewahedo church gained its autocephaly from the coptic orthodox church when its first patriarch was enthroned by pope shenouda iii of alexandria . 
there are about 20 million coptic orthodox christians in the world . 
this is however a misnomer ,  since both the ethiopian and the eritrean churches ,  although daughter churches of the church of alexandria ,  are currently autocephalous churches . 
some accounts regard members of the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church  -lrb-  roughly 45 million  -rrb-  ,  the eritrean orthodox tewahedo church  -lrb-  roughly 2.5 million  -rrb-  ,  as members of the coptic orthodox church . 
these three churches remain in full communion with each other and with the other oriental orthodox churches . 
in this respect they follow the same practices as all other oriental orthodox churches ,  as well as all of eastern orthodox churches . 
the two churches remain in full communion with each other and with the other oriental orthodox churches ,  although the coptic orthodox church of alexandria ,  along with the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church does not recognize the deposition of the third patriarch of eritrea ,  abune antonios . 
the liturgical calendar of the coptic orthodox church is the coptic calendar  -lrb-  also called the alexandrian calendar  -rrb-  . 
in 1959, the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church was granted its first own patriarch by pope cyril vi . 
in 1959, the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church was granted autocephaly or independence . 
almost the entire egyptian population rejected the terms of the council of chalcedon and remained faithful to the native egyptian church  -lrb-  now known as the coptic orthodox church of alexandria  -rrb-  . 
now it can be done in only one church and be recognized by both . 
the coptic language is a universal language used in coptic churches in every country . 
in other words ,  the patriarchates of ethiopia and eritrea are daughter churches of the holy apostolic patriarchate of alexandria . 
the number of coptic orthodox christians in the diaspora is roughly 2 million . 
after the byzantines appointed proterius of alexandria as patriarch to represent the chalcedonian church ,  the coptic church appointed their own patriarch timothy aelurus and broke from the chalcedonian communion . 
although under the jurisdiction of the coptic orthodox church ,  these adherents are not considered copts ,  since they are not ethnic egyptians . 
traditionally ,  the coptic language was used in church services ,  and the scriptures were written in the coptic alphabet . 
although the coptic church did not disappear ,  the umayyad tax policies made it difficult for the church to retain the egyptian elites . 
from that point onward ,  alexandria would have two patriarchs: the non-chalcedonian native egyptian one ,  now known as the coptic pope of alexandria and patriarch of all africa on the holy apostolic see of st .  mark ,  and the melkite or imperial patriarch ,  now known as the greek orthodox patriarch of alexandria . 
sometime during the 2nd millennium ad ,  the leadership of the church ,  including the pope ,  moved from alexandria to cairo . 
the non-chalcedonian party became what is today called the oriental orthodox church . 
both the patriarchate of addis ababa and all ethiopia ,  and the patriarchate of asmara and all eritrea do acknowledge the supremacy of honor and dignity of the pope and patriarch of alexandria on the basis that both patriarchates were established by the throne of alexandria and that they have their roots in the apostolic church of alexandria ,  and acknowledge that saint mark the apostle is the founder of their churches through the heritage and apostolic evangelization of the fathers of alexandria . 
the founder of the movement ,  david brandt berg  -lrb-  1919–1994 -rrb- ,  was a former christian and missionary alliance pastor . 
kelly took the title of `` king peter '' and became the face of tfi ,  speaking in public more often than either david berg or karen zerby . 
the code of hammurabi is a well-preserved babylonian code of law of ancient mesopotamia ,  dated back to about 1754 bce  -lrb-  middle chronology  -rrb-  . 
the code of hammurabi was one of the only sets of laws in the ancient near east and also one of the first forms of law . 
likewise ,  the museum of the ancient orient ,  part of the istanbul archaeology museums ,  also has a `` code of hammurabi '' clay tablet ,  dated to 1790 bc ,  in  -lrb-  room 5, inv # ni 2358 -rrb- . 
the code is inscribed in the akkadian language ,  using cuneiform script carved into the stele . 
various copies of portions of the code of hammurabi have been found on baked clay tablets ,  some possibly older than the celebrated basalt stele now in the louvre . 
the rum and coke is very popular; bacardi estimates that it is the world's second most popular alcoholic drink . 
rum and coke quickly spread from cuba to the united states . 
rum and coke ,  or the cuba libre  -lrb-  ;  ,  `` free cuba ''  -rrb-  ,  is a highball cocktail consisting of cola ,  rum ,  and in many recipes lime juice on ice . 
rum and coke achieved a new level of popularity during world war ii . 
with cuban-made rum unavailable in the u . s .  and coca-cola largely unavailable in cuba ,  it became difficult to make a rum and coke with its traditional ingredients in either country . 
however ,  lime is frequently included even in orders for `` rum and coke '' . 
in collagen ,  the collagen helix ,  or type-2 helix ,  is a major shape in secondary structure . 
the two conjectures are mathematically independent ,  as there exist spacetimes for which weak cosmic censorship is valid but strong cosmic censorship is violated and ,  conversely ,  there exist spacetimes for which weak cosmic censorship is violated but strong cosmic censorship is valid . 
to preserve `` cosmic censorship '' ,  the black hole is restricted to the case of formula_7.
the weak and the strong cosmic censorship hypothesis are two conjectures concerned with the global geometry of spacetimes . 
cosmic censorship is not merely a problem of formal interest; some form of it is assumed whenever black hole event horizons are mentioned . 
by `` catholic church '' ignatius designated the universal church . 
 -lrb-  see catholic church  -lrb-  disambiguation  -rrb-  for more uses .   -rrb- 
the term `` catholic '' is commonly associated with the whole of the church led by the roman pontiff ,  the catholic church . 
the term has been incorporated into the name of the largest christian communion ,  the catholic church  -lrb-  also called the roman catholic church  -rrb-  . 
for instance ,  the roman catholic ,  eastern orthodox ,  oriental orthodox churches ,  and church of the east ,  each maintain that their own denomination is identical with the original universal church ,  from which all other denominations broke away . 
all of the three main branches of christianity in the east  -lrb-  eastern orthodox church ,  oriental orthodox church and church of the east  -rrb-  are continuing to identify themselves as `` catholic '' in accordance with apostolic traditions and the nicene creed . 
they are however ,  by definition ,  not recognised by the catholic church . 
the eastern catholic churches ,  while united with rome in the faith ,  have their own traditions and laws ,  differing from those of the latin rite and those of other eastern catholic churches . 
the orthodox churches share some of the concerns about roman catholic papal claims ,  but disagree with some protestants about the nature of the church as one body . 
the contemporary catholic church has always considered itself to be the historic catholic church ,  and consider all others as `` non-catholics '' . 
recent historic ecumenical efforts on the part of the catholic church have focused on healing the rupture between the western  -lrb-  `` catholic ''  -rrb-  and the eastern  -lrb-  `` orthodox ''  -rrb-  churches . 
the catholic church ,  led by the pope in rome ,  usually distinguishes itself from other churches by calling itself the `` catholic '' ,  however has also used the description `` roman catholic '' . 
non of the eastern churches ,  orthodox or oriental ,  have any intention to abandon ancient traditions of their own catholicity . 
most reformation and post-reformation churches use the term `` catholic ''  -lrb-  often with a lower-case `` c ''  -rrb-  to refer to the belief that all christians are part of one church regardless of denominational divisions; e . g .  ,  chapter xxv of the westminster confession of faith refers to the `` catholic or universal church '' . 
crystal and her brother max eastman were influenced by this progressive tradition . 
crystal eastman was born in marlborough ,  massachusetts ,  on june 25, 1881, the third of four children . 
eastman graduated from vassar college in 1903 and received an m . a . 
max was the youngest ,  born in 1882.
crystal catherine eastman  -lrb-  june 25, 1881 – july 8, 1928 -rrb- was an american lawyer ,  antimilitarist ,  feminist ,  socialist ,  and journalist . 
in 1883 their parents ,  samuel elijah eastman and annis bertha ford ,  moved the family to canandaigua ,  new york . 
the design principles are differentiation and adaptation . 
the life's work of alexander is dedicated to turn design from unselfconscious behavior to selfconscious behavior ,  so called design science . 
there have been critical reconstructions of alexander's design studio based on the theories put forward in `` a new theory of urban design '' . 
the greatest influence of `` a pattern language '' in computer science is the design patterns movement . 
alexander has designed and personally built over 100 buildings ,  both as an architect and a general contractor . 
his life's work or the best of his works is the nature of order on which he spent about 30 years ,  and the very first version of the nature of order was done in 1981, one year before this famous debate with peter eisenman in harvard . 
alexander is known for many books on the design and building process ,  including `` notes on the synthesis of form ,  a city is not a tree ''  -lrb-  first published as a paper and recently re-published in book form  -rrb-  ,  `` the timeless way of building ,  a new theory of urban design , ``  and `` the oregon experiment . `` 
during the same period he worked at mit in transportation theory and computer science ,  and worked at harvard in cognition and cognitive studies . 
 ''a new theory of urban design ''  -lrb-  1987 -rrb- coincided with a renewal of interest in urbanism among architects ,  but stood apart from most other expressions of this by assuming a distinctly anti-masterplanning stance . 
awarded  -lrb-  `` in absentia ''  -rrb-  the vincent scully prize by the national building museum ,  2009; awarded the lifetime achievement award by the urban design group ,  2011; winner of the global award for sustainable architecture ,  2014.
alexander's work has also influenced the development of agile software development . 
 ''the nature of order: an essay on the art of building and the nature of the universe ''  -lrb-  2003–04 -rrb- ,  which includes the `` phenomenon of life '' ,  `` the process of creating life '' ,  `` a vision of a living world '' and `` the luminous ground '' ,  is alexander's most comprehensive and elaborate work . 
if a word is challenged ,  the player who played the word must then name an acceptable word that anagrams to the tiles played . 
the name derives from the fact that the words clabbers and scrabble form an anagram pair . 
the eye of rhynn allows corum to see into an undead netherworld where the last beings killed by corum exist until summoned by the hand of kwll . 
corum also hears the prophecy of a seeress ,  who claims corum should fear a brother  -lrb-  who will apparently slay him  -rrb-  ,  a harp and above all ,  beauty . 
corum is then killed with his own sword by his animated silver hand ,  thereby fulfilling the prophecy . 
in the united states the first trilogy has been published as `` corum: the coming of chaos '' . 
shool then explains that corum's ill fortune has been caused by the chaos god arioch ,  the knight of the swords . 
corum decides not to return his own world ,  and is attacked by his clone ,  whom he defeats with the aid of a spell placed on his silver hand by medhbh . 
cisc does not even need to have complex addressing modes; 32 or 64-bit risc processors may well have more complex addressing modes than small 8-bit cisc processors . 
the terms cisc and risc have become less meaningful with the continued evolution of both cisc and risc designs and implementations . 
contrary to popular simplifications  -lrb-  present also in some academic texts  -rrb-  ,  not all ciscs are microcoded or have `` complex '' instructions . 
per byte or bit  -rrb-  is higher for a cisc than a risc processor ,  which may give it a significant advantage in a modern cache based implementation . 
internal microcode execution in cisc processors ,  on the other hand ,  could be more or less pipelined depending on the particular design ,  and therefore more or less akin to the basic structure of risc processors . 
for instance ,  the pdp-8, having only 8 fixed-length instructions and no microcode at all ,  is a cisc because of `` how '' the instructions work ,  powerpc ,  which has over 230 instructions  -lrb-  more than some vaxes  -rrb-  ,  and complex internals like register renaming and a reorder buffer ,  is a risc ,  while minimal cisc has 8 instructions ,  but is clearly a cisc because it combines memory access and computation in the same instructions . 
a few toothed whales ,  such as some killer whales ,  feed on mammals ,  such as pinnipeds and other whales . 
baleen whales split from toothed whales around 34 million years ago . 
the parvorder of odontocetes – the toothed whales – include sperm whales ,  beaked whales ,  killer whales ,  dolphins and porpoises . 
baleen whales have bristles made of keratin instead of teeth . 
the film includes these two tales as well as the `` miller's tale '' ,  the `` summoner's tale '' ,  the `` wife of bath's tale '' ,  and the `` merchant's tale '' . 
the `` tales '' reflect diverse views of the church in chaucer's england . 
even the oldest surviving manuscripts of the `` tales '' are not chaucer's originals . 
the most respected of the tales was at this time the knight's ,  as it was full of both . 
 ''the canterbury tales '' was written during a turbulent time in english history . 
these emendations included various expansions of the `` cook's tale '' ,  which chaucer never finished ,  `` the plowman's tale '' ,  `` the tale of gamelyn '' ,  the `` siege of thebes '' ,  and the `` tale of beryn '' . 
the tale comes from the french tale `` bérinus '' and exists in a single early manuscript of the tales ,  although it was printed along with the tales in a 1721 edition by john urry . 
chaucer uses the same meter throughout almost all of his tales ,  with the exception of `` sir thopas '' and his prose tales . 
 ''the canterbury tales '' is generally thought to have been incomplete at the end of chaucer's life . 
again ,  however ,  tales such as the `` nun's priest's tale '' show surprising skill with words among the lower classes of the group ,  while the `` knight's tale '' is at times extremely simple . 
no other work prior to chaucer's is known to have set a collection of tales within the framework of pilgrims on a pilgrimage . 
the canterbury tales  -lrb-    -rrb-  is a collection of 24 stories that runs to over 17,000 lines written in middle english by geoffrey chaucer between 1387 and 1400.
the `` tales '' constantly reflect the conflict between classes . 
there are actually two versions of `` the plowman's tale '' ,  both of which are influenced by the story `` piers plowman '' ,  a work written during chaucer's lifetime . 
although no manuscript exists in chaucer's own hand ,  two were copied around the time of his death by adam pinkhurst ,  a scribe with whom he may have worked closely before ,  giving a high degree of confidence that chaucer himself wrote the `` tales '' . 
pier paolo pasolini's 1972 film `` the canterbury tales '' features several of the tales ,  some of which keep close to the original tale and some of which are embellished . 
chaucer wrote in a london dialect of late middle english ,  which has clear differences from modern english . 
chaucer's works may have been distributed in some form during his lifetime in part or in whole . 
 ''the decameron '' by giovanni boccaccio contains more parallels to `` the canterbury tales '' than any other work . 
christine de pizan was born 1364 in venice ,  italy . 
christine de pizan  -lrb-  also seen as de pisan; ; 1364 – c .  1430 -rrb- was an italian and french author . 
pizan's political writings received some attention too . 
pizan specifically sought out other women to collaborate in the creation of her work . 
in 1379 christine de pizan married the notary and royal secretary etienne du castel . 
pizan's book `` le dit de la rose ''  -lrb-  `` the tale of the rose ''  -rrb-  was published in 1402 as a direct attack on jean de meun's extremely popular book `` romance of the rose '' which characterised women as seducers . 
the 1979 artwork `` the dinner party '' features a place setting for christine de pizan . 
in 1405 pizan published `` le livre de la cité des dames ''  -lrb-  `` the book of the city of ladies ''  -rrb-  and `` le livre des trois vertus ''  -lrb-  `` book of three virtues '' ,  known as `` the treasure of the city of ladies ''  -rrb-  . 
in `` the book of the city of ladies '' pizan created a symbolic city in which women are appreciated and defended . 
pizan is believed to have died in 1430, before arc was trialled and executed by the english . 
in 1402 pizan became involved in a renowned literary controversy ,  the `` querelle du roman de la rose '' . 
among some groups of cathars there were more women than there were men . 
the term `` pays cathare '' ,  french meaning `` cathar country '' ,  is used to highlight the cathar heritage and history of the region where catharism was traditionally strongest . 
but in spite of the wholesale massacre of cathars during the war ,  catharism was not yet extinguished and catholic forces would continue to pursue cathars . 
in 1147, pope eugene iii sent a legate to the cathar district in order to arrest the progress of the cathars . 
dominic met and debated with the cathars in 1203 during his mission to the languedoc . 
the idea of two gods or principles ,  one good and the other evil ,  was central to cathar beliefs . 
after the suppression of catharism ,  the descendants of cathars were at times required to live outside towns and their defences . 
the cathars spent much of 1209 fending off the crusaders . 
these areas have ruins from the wars against the cathars which are still visible today . 
the inquisition was established in 1233 to uproot the remaining cathars . 
despite women having an instrumental role in the growing of the faith ,  misogyny was not completely absent from the cathar movement . 
a landmark in the `` institutional history '' of the cathars was the council ,  held in 1167 at saint-félix-lauragais ,  attended by many local figures and also by the bogomil `` papa '' nicetas ,  the cathar bishop of  -lrb-  northern  -rrb-  france and a leader of the cathars of lombardy . 
cathars who refused to recant were hanged ,  or burnt at the stake . 
cathars believed that one would be repeatedly reincarnated until one commits to the self-denial of the material world . 
academic books in english first appeared at the beginning of the millennium: for example ,  malcolm lambert's `` the cathars '' and malcolm barber's `` the cathars '' . 
the cathars also refused the sacrament of the eucharist saying that it could not possibly be the body of christ . 
because of this belief ,  the cathars saw women as equally capable of being spiritual leaders ,  which undermined the very concept of gender as held by the catholic church . 
any use of the term `` cathar '' to refer to people after the suppression of catharism in the 14th century is a cultural or ancestral reference ,  and has no religious implication . 
while women perfects rarely traveled to preach the faith ,  they still played a vital role in the spreading of the catharism by establishing group homes for women . 
in 1215, the bishops of the catholic church met at the fourth council of the lateran under pope innocent iii; part of the agenda was combating the cathar heresy . 
there followed twenty years of war against the cathars and their allies in the languedoc: the albigensian crusade . 
at first innocent tried peaceful conversion ,  and sent a number of legates into the cathar regions . 
there is about 125–150 ml of csf at any one time . 
cerebrospinal fluid  -lrb-  csf  -rrb-  is a clear ,  colorless body fluid found in the brain and spinal cord . 
csf occupies the subarachnoid space  -lrb-  between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater  -rrb-  and the ventricular system around and inside the brain and spinal cord . 
a sample of csf can be taken via lumbar puncture . 
csf is derived from blood plasma and is largely similar to it ,  except that csf is nearly protein-free compared with plasma and has some different electrolyte levels . 
hockett proposes that `` no physical system is well-defined '' . 
in appreciation of the hocketts' hard work and dedication to the ithaca community ,  ithaca college established the charles f .  hockett music scholarship ,  the shirley and chas hockett chamber music concert series ,  and the hockett family recital hall . 
hockett and his wife shirley were vital leaders in the development of the cayuga chamber orchestra in ithaca ,  new york . 
outside the realm of linguistics and anthropology ,  hockett practiced musical performance and composition . 
as a result ,  when several different methods agree ,  this is strong evidence that `` none '' of the methods are in error and the conclusion is correct . 
when results from different strong methods do appear to conflict ,  this is treated as a serious problem to be reconciled . 
for the same reason ,  different dating methods in geochronology should concur ,  a result in chemistry should not contradict a result in geology ,  etc . 
historical evidence also converges in an analogous way . 
a similar way to state this is that to ask for one `` particular '' piece of evidence in favor of a conclusion is a flawed question . 
consilience has also been discussed in reference to holocaust denial . 
if the scientific understanding of the properties of lasers were inaccurate ,  then the laser measurement would be inaccurate but the others would not . 
clarence brown was married four times . 
clarence leon brown  -lrb-  may 10, 1890 – august 17, 1987 -rrb- was an american film director . 
brown moved to universal in 1924, and then to mgm ,  where he stayed until the mid-1950s . 
born in clinton ,  massachusetts ,  the son of larkin harry brown  -lrb-  1866–1942 -rrb- a cotton manufacturer and katherine ann brown  -lrb-  née gaw  -rrb-   -lrb-  1865–1954 -rrb- ,  brown moved to tennessee when he was 11 years old . 
parties in such cases are required to undergo conciliation proceedings and may only bring their case to court once conciliation has failed . 
depending on the nature of the case ,  non-judge experts  -lrb-  doctors ,  appraisers ,  actuaries ,  and so on  -rrb-  may be called by the court as conciliators to help decide the case . 
the most common forms are civil conciliation and domestic conciliation ,  both of which are managed under the auspice of the court system by one judge and two non-judge `` conciliators . `` 
japanese law makes extensive use of in civil disputes . 
there are functions ,  such as codice_36 which can be used to avoid such problems ,  but these functions are not standard with every implementation of ansi c .  the cyclone version of codice_31 is not so different from the c version:
cyclone implements three kinds of pointer: the purpose of introducing these new pointer types is to avoid common problems when using pointers . 
take for instance a function ,  called codice_17 that takes a pointer to an int:
take for instance a simple  -lrb-  and naïve  -rrb-  codice_31 function ,  written in c:
a johnson counter  -lrb-  or switch-tail ring counter ,  twisted ring counter ,  walking ring counter ,  or möbius counter  -rrb-  is a modified ring counter ,  where the output from the last stage is inverted and fed back as input to the first stage . 
each pulse applied to the clock input increments or decrements the number in the counter . 
for example ,  bit 1 toggles when bit 0 is logic high; bit 2 toggles when both bit 1 and bit 0 are logic high; bit 3 toggles when bit 2, bit 1 and bit 0 are all high; and so on . 
see the article on counter machines for a proof . 
a decade counter is one that counts in decimal digits ,  rather than binary . 
a decade counter is one that counts in decimal digits ,  rather than binary . 
a counter circuit is usually constructed of a number of flip-flops connected in cascade . 
the number is usually displayed as an inline digital image or in plain text or on a physical counter such as a mechanical counter . 
in synchronous counters ,  the clock inputs of all the flip-flops are connected together and are triggered by the input pulses . 
the seven problems are:
in recognition of major breakthroughs in mathematical research ,  the institute has an annual prize — the clay research award . 
the institute is best known for establishing the millennium prize problems on may 24, 2000.
treatment depends on the location and size of the avm and whether there is bleeding or not . 
a common method of grading cerebral avms is the spetzler-martin  -lrb-  sm  -rrb-  grade . 
grade 4 and 5 avms are not usually surgically treated . 
avms are an abnormal connection between the arteries and veins in the human brain . 
preventive treatment of as yet unruptured brain avms has been controversial ,  as several studies suggested favorable long-term outcome for unruptured avm patients not undergoing intervention . 
surgical elimination of the blood vessels involved is the preferred curative treatment for many types of avm . 
the main risk is intracranial hemorrhage . 
therefore ,  english and german are considered to belong to a different subgroup ,  the germanic languages . 
english and latin `` do '' exhibit a regular correspondence of `` t- '' : `` d- ''  -lrb-  where the notation `` a : b '' means `` a corresponds to b ''  -rrb- ; for example , 
the comparative method was developed over the 19th century . 
mere phonetic similarity ,  as between english `` day '' and latin `` dies ''  -lrb-  both with the same meaning  -rrb-  ,  has no probative value . 
during the late 18th to late 19th century ,  two major developments improved the method's effectiveness . 
verner solved the puzzle by comparing the germanic voicing pattern with greek and sanskrit accent patterns . 
relation is deemed certain only if at least a partial reconstruction of the common ancestor is feasible ,  and if regular sound correspondences can be established—with chance similarities ruled out . 
in 1710 and 1723 lambert ten kate first formulated the regularity of sound laws ,  introducing among others ,  the term root vowel . 
for instance ,  the latin suffix `` que '' ,  `` and '' ,  preserves the original `` *e '' vowel that caused the consonant shift in sanskrit:
first ,  it was found that many sound changes are conditioned by a specific `` context '' . 
the acts of the council were not made public until 1442, at the behest of the council of basel; they were printed in 1500.
a second goal of the council was to continue the reforms begun at the council of pisa  -lrb-  1409 -rrb- . 
the council did not make any political decisions . 
the council of constance is the 15th-century ecumenical council recognized by the catholic church ,  held from 1414 to 1418 in the bishopric of constance . 
it was concluded that the disputes would be mediated by the council of constance . 
the council is important for its relationship to ecclesial conciliarism and papal supremacy . 
gregory xii's cardinals were accepted as true cardinals by the council ,  but the members of the council delayed electing a new pope for fear that a new pope would restrict further discussion of pressing issues in the church . 
the council ended the western schism by deposing or accepting the resignation of the remaining papal claimants and by electing pope martin v . 
the council's main purpose was to end the papal schism which had resulted from the confusion following the avignon papacy . 
each member communion voted to join cuic over the next few years . 
cuic is the successor organization to the consultation on church union  -lrb-  cocu  -rrb-  ,  which had been founded in 1962.
in 2007, the african methodist episcopal zion church and the african methodist episcopal church withdrew from cuic . 
the nine churches which inaugurated cuic in 2002 were joined by the moravian church ,  northern province . 
cuic released the seventh and final draft of the mrmrm document in june 2005.
some canadian congregations have continued to be members of both the cuc and uua ,  while others are members of only the cuc . 
and also since 2002, some canadian congregations have continued to be members of both the uua and cuc while others are members of only the cuc . 
the canadian unitarian universalist youth of the day disapproved of the 2002 change in relationship between the cuc and uua . 
while the name of the organization is the canadian unitarian council ,  the cuc includes congregations with unitarian ,  universalist ,  unitarian universalist ,  and universalist unitarian in their names . 
